The Apostolic Fathers, Part 1 (J.B. Lightfoot, 1889)
==========================================================
Lightfoot's 1889 Apostolic Fathers — the definitive English edition of Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp, part 1. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Pacific Christian College Library 


, 
* 
Lightfoot AN 
The apostolic fathers © ~ 
$ 


STRE PITT C 2 ERTE 


For Reference 


Not to be taken from this room 


Hurst Memorial Library 
Pacific Christian College 
Long Beach, Calif. 


Vy u 


sae 


dus 
— LET 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


SECOND PART 


VOL. II. 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


PART Il. 


S. IGNATIVS. 
SERO TY GEATRID: 


REVISED TEXTS 


WITH INTRODUCTIONS, NOTES, DISSERTATIONS, 
AND TRANSLATIONS. 


Hurst Memorial Library 
Pacific Christian College 


Long Beach, Calif. 
BY 


EE PICI TFOOT D.D. DCL CED 


BISHOP OF DURHAM. 


SECOND EDITION. 


VOL. Il. 


Dondon: 
MACMILLAN AND CO. 
AND NEW YORK. 

1889 


[All Rights reserved.| 


Cambridge : 


PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


JA we Vi 


EABLCE SOL ACONTENTS) 


SECOND VOLUME. 


GENUINE EPISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

-(r) Circumstances of writing and order of the Epistles; (2) Au- 
thorities for the text. Exceptional position of the Letter to the Romans. 
Previous editions. Principles of the text and apparatus criticus of the 
present edition. Symbols used. 


INEO THE EPHESIANS 
Introduction 
Text and Notes 
Excursus on yevynros e d/yévveros Š 7 


2. TO THE MAGNESIANS 
Introduction 
Text and Notes 


3. LO THE TRALLIANS 
Introduction 
Text and Notes 


4. TO THE ROMANS 
Introduction 
Text and Notes 


PAEZ ORTAE PAILADELPHIANS: 
Introduction ¿ > 
Text and Notes 


6. TO THE SMYRNÆANS 
Introduction 
Text and notes 


LERVZIOEZOL YA JA P. 
Introduction 
Text and Notes 


PAGE 
EB 


5r 94 
I5—20 
21—89 
90 9x 


935—140 
97—104 


. I05—140 


141—182 


143—149 
. 150—182 


183—234 


. 185—188 
- 189—234 


235—282 


«231—247 
. 248—282 


283—326 
288, 286 


. 287—326 


327—360 
329, 330 


. 331—360 


vi TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


ACTS OF MARTYRDOM. 


PAGE 
INTRODUCTION. 363—474 
1. Different forms: (i) Amtiochene Acts, Greek, Latin, and Syriac; 
(ii) Roman Acts, Greek and Coptic; (iii) Bollandist Acts; (iv) Armenian 
Acts; (v) Acts of Metaphrast [363—368]. 
2. Mutual relations. The Antiochene and Roman Acts independent. 
Their contents. The other Acts composite [368—377]. 
3. Historic credibility, place, and date of the Roman Acts [377—382]. 
The same questions as regards the Antiochene Acts: internal evidence 
[383—386]; external testimony (Chrysostom, Evagrius, the Menzea) [386— 
389]. Possible nucleus of truth [389—391]. 
4. Chronology of Trajan's reign. Tables [391—398]. Reckoning of 
tribunician years [398—404]. Notes on the tables with special reference 
to Trajan’s Eastern campaigns [404—418]. 
5. The festival of Ignatius. (1) Oct. 17, the original day [418—422]. 
(2) Dec. 20, the later day with the Greeks [422, 423]. (3) July 1, the 
Egyptian festival [423—428]. (4) Feb. r, the Latin commemoration 
[428—430]. Lessons for his day [439, 431]. Translations of the reliques 
[431—434]. 
6. The year of the martyrdom. Pearson’s disquisition [435, 436]. 
Volkmar’s theory that he was martyred at Antioch [436]. The testimony 
of John Malalas examined [437—447]. Statement of the Syriac Chronicle 
[447]. Authorities for the gth year of Trajan [448]. Chronicon of Eu- 
sebius [448—452]. Harnack’s theory examined [452—471]. Results of 
the investigation [471, 472]. 
7. Authorities for the texts of the Antiochene and Roman Acts. Pre- 
vious collations and editions [473, 474]. 
A. ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 
Text and Notes + 411—495 
B. ROMAN ACTS. 
Text and Notes - 496—540 
TRANSLATIONS. 
1. GENUINE EPISTLES OF S. IGNATIUS - 843—574 
2. ACTS OF MARTYRDOM. 
Antiochene Acts x 
- 575— 
Roman Acts . É BS. 
ADDENDA. . = 
m + 589—398 
INDEX. 


- 599—619 ` 


Petal a GN LEE BISIIAS. 


I. 


HE REASONS for accepting as genuine the Seven Epistles in 

the form in which they were current in the age of Eusebius have 
been stated already. Only a few additional words will be necessary 
to explain the principles which have been followed in the arrangement 
of the epistles and in the construction of the text. 

These seven epistles were written in the early years of the second 
century, when the writer was on his way from Antioch to Rome, having 
been condemned to death and expecting to be thrown to the wild 
beasts in the amphitheatre on his arrival. They fall into two groups, 
written at two different halting-places on his way. ‘The letters to the 
Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, and Romans, were sent from Smyrna, 
while Ignatius was staying there and was in personal communication 
with Polycarp the bishop. The three remaining letters, to the Philadel- 
phians, to the Smyrnzans, and to Polycarp, were written at a subsequent 
stage in his journey, at Alexandria Troas, where again he halted for a 
time, before crossing the sea for Europe. The place of writing in every 
case is determined from notices in the epistles themselves. 

The order in which they are printed here is the order given by 
Eusebius (Z.Z. iii. 36). Whether he found them in this order in his 
manuscript, or whether he determined the places of writing (as we 
might determine them) from internal evidence and arranged the epistles 
accordingly, may be questioned. So arranged, they fall into two groups, 
according to the place of writing. The letters themselves however 
'contain no indication of their chronological order in their respective 
groups; and, unless Eusebius simply followed his manuscript, he must 
have exercised his judgment in the sequence adopted in each group, 
e.g. Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, and Romans. 


IGN. II? I 


2 THE GENUINE EPISTLES 


The two groups, besides having been written at different places, are 
separated from. each other by another distinctive feature. All the 
epistles written from Smyrna are addressed to churches which he had 
not visited in person but knew only through their delegates. On the 
other hand all the epistles written from Troas are addressed to those, 
whether churches (as in the case of the Philadelphians and Smyrnzeans) 
or individuals (as in the case of Polycarp), with whom he had already 
` held personal communication at some previous stage in his journey. 

It has been seen that at some point in his journey (probably 
Laodicea on the Lycus), where there was a choice of roads, his 
guards selected the northern road through Philadelphia and Sardis 
to Smyrna. If they had taken the southern route instead, they would 
have passed in succession through Tralles, Magnesia, and Ephesus, before 
they reached their goal. It is probable that, at the point where the 
roads diverged, the Christian brethren sent messengers to the churches 
lying on the southern road, apprising them of the martyr’s destination ; 
so that these churches would despatch their respective delegates without 
delay, and thus they would arrive at Smyrna as soon as, or even before, 
Ignatius himself. 

The first group then consists of letters to these three churches, 
whose delegates had thus met him at Smyrna, together with a fourth to 
the Roman Christians apprising them of his speedy arrival among 
them—this last probably having been called forth by some opportunity 
(such as was likely to occur at Smyrna) of communicating with the 
metropolis. ‘The three are arranged in a topographical order (Ephesus, 
Magnesia, Tralles) according to the distances of these cities from 
Smyrna, which is taken as the starting-point. 

The second group consists of a letter to the Philadelphians whom he 
had visited on his way to Smyrna, and another to the Smyrnzans with 
whom he had stayed before going to Troas, together with a third to his 
friend Polycarp closing the series. 

The order however in the Greek ms and in the versions (so far as 
it can be traced) is quite different, and disregards the places of writing. 
In these documents they stand in the following order : 


I. Smyrnzans 5. Philadelphians 
2. Polwearp 6. Trallians' 
3. Ephésians 7. Romans. 


4. Magnesians 


* The Armenian Version however transposes Trallians and Philadelphians. 


OF_S. IGNATIUS. 3 


This sequence is consistent with the supposition that we have here 
the collection of the martyr’s letters made at the time by Polycarp, 
who writing to the Philippians says ‘The Epistles of Ignatius which 
were sent to us by him, and others as many as we had with us, we send 
to you, even as ye directed: they are subjoined to this letter’ (§ 1 3) 
But though this order, which is given in the documents, has high claims 
for consideration as representing the earliest form of the collected 
epistles, I have substituted the chronological arrangement of Eusebius 
as more instructive for purposes of continuous reading. 


2. 


Of the data for the text an account has been given already. Our 
documents are as follows. 

1. The Manuscript of the Greek Original (G). If this Ms had 
been, as Turrianus described it, * emendatissimus ^, we should have had 
no further trouble about the text. But since this is far from being the 
case, the secondary authorities are of the highest moment in settling the 
readings. 

2. Among these the Za Version (L) holds the first place, as 
being an extremely literal rendering of the original. It exhibits a much 
purer form of the text, being free from several corruptions and a few 
interpolations and omissions which disfgure the Greek. At the same 
. time however it is clear, both from the contents of the collection and 
from other indications (as described previously), that this version was 
translated from a Greek Ms of the same type as the extant Greek ms; 
and therefore its value, as a check upon the readings of this ws, is 
limited. Whenever GL coincide, they must be regarded as one witness, 
not as two. 

3. The Syriac Version (S) would therefore have been invaluable as 
an independent check, if we had possessed it entire, since it cannot 
have been made later than the fourth or fifth century, and would have 
exhibited the text much nearer to the fountain-head than either the 
Greek or the Latin. Unfortunately however only a few fragments 
(S S, S.) belonging to this version are preserved. But this defect is 
made up to a considerable extent in two ways. First. We have a 
rough Abridgment or Collection of Excerpts (X) from this Syriac Version 
for three epistles (Ephesians, Romans, Polycarp) together with a frag- 
ment of a fourth (Trallians), preserving whole sentences and even 


DEZ 


4 THE GENUINE EPISTLES 


paragraphs in their original form or with only slight changes. Secondly. 
There is extant also an Armenian Version (A) of the whole, made from 
the Syriac (S). This last however has passed through so many vicissi- 
tudes, that it is often difficult to discern the original Greek reading 
underlying its tertiary text. It will thus be seen that AX have no inde- 
pendent authority, where S is otherwise known, and that SA must be 
regarded as one witness, not as three. ; 

4. There is likewise extant a fragment of a Coptic Version (C), in 
the Sahidic (Thebaic) dialect of the Egyptian language, comprising the 
first six chapters of the Epistle to the Smyrnzeans, besides the end of the 
spurious Epistle to Hero. ‘The date of this version is uncertain, though 
probably early; but the text appears to be quite independent of our 
other authorities, and it is therefore much to be regretted that so little 
is preserved. 

s. Another and quite independent witness is the Greek Text of 
the Long Recension (g) of the Ignatian Epistles. The Zazzm Version (1) 
of this Long Recension has no independent value, and is only import- 
ant as assisting in determining the original form of this recension. 
The practice of treating it as an independent authority is altogether 
confusing. The text of the Long Recension, once launched into the 
world, had its own history, which should be kept quite distinct from 
that of the genuine Epistles of Ignatius. For the purpose of determining 
the text of the latter, we are only concerned with its original form. 

The Long Recension was constructed, as we have seen, by some 
unknown author, probably in the latter half of the fourth century, from 
the genuine Ignatian Epistles by interpolation, alteration, and omission. 
If therefore we can ascertain in any given passage the Greek text of 
the genuine epistles which this author had before him, we have traced 
the reading back to an earlier point in the stream than the direct Greek 
and Latin authorities, probably even than the Syriac Version. This 
however it is not always easy to do, by reason of the freedom and 
capriciousness of the changes. No rule of universal application can be 
laid down. But the interpolator is obviously much more given to 
change at some times than at others; and, where the fit is upon him, 
no stress can be laid on minor variations. On the other hand, where 
he adheres pretty closely to the text of the genuine Ignatius, as for 
instance through great parts of the Epistles to Polycarp and to the 
Romans, the readings of this recension deserve every consideration. 

Thus it will be seen that though this witness is highly important, 
because it cannot be suspected of collusion with other witnesses, yet it 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 5 


must be subject to careful cross-examination, before the truth under- 
lying its statements can be ascertained. 

6. Besides manuscripts and versions, we have a fair number of 
Quotations, of which the value will vary according to their age and 
independence. A full account of these has been given already. 

From the above statement it will be,seen that, though each authority 
separately may be regarded as more or less unsatisfactory, yet, as they 
are very various in kind, they act as checks one upon another, the 
one frequently supplying just that element of certainty which is lacking 
to the other, so that the result is fairly adequate. Thus A will often give 
what g withholds, and conversely. Moreover it will appear from what 
has been said that a combination of the secondary and capricious 
authorities must often decide a reading against the direct and primary. 
For instance, the combination Ag is, as a rule, decisive in favour of a 
reading, as against the more direct witnesses GL, notwithstanding that 
A singly, or g singly, is liable to any amount of aberration, though in 
different directions. 


The foregoing account applies to six out of the seven letters. 
The text of the Zpistle to the Romans has had a distinct history and is 
represented by separate authorities of its own. This epistle was at 
an early date incorporated into the Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom, 
and thus disconnected from the other six. In its new connexion, it 
was disseminated and translated separately. It so happens that the 
only extant Greek ms which contains this epistle (the Colbertine) 
is even less satisfactory than the sole Greek Ms of the other six (the 
Medicean); but on the other hand we have more than compensation 
for this inferiority in the fact that the Acts of Martyrdom (with the 
incorporated epistle) were translated independently both into Syriac 
(Sm) and into Armenian (Am); and these two versions, which are ex- 
tant, furnish two additional authorities for the text. Moreover the 
Metaphrast, who compiled his Acts of Ignatius from this and another 
Martyrology, has retained the Epistle to the Romans in his text, 
though in an abridged and altered form. 

From this account it will be seen that the authorities for the Epistle 
to the Romans fall into three classes. 

(1) Those authorities, which contain the epistle as part of the 
Martyrology. These are the Greek (G), the Latin (L), the Syriac 
(Sm), and the Armenian (Am), besides the Metaphrast (M). ‘These 
authorities however are of different values. When the epistle was first 


6 THE GENUINE EPISTLES 


incorporated in the Acts of Martyrdom, it still preserved a compara- 
tively pure form. When it has arrived at the stage in which it appears 
in the extant Greek ms (G), it is very corrupt. In this last form, 
among other corruptions, it exhibits interpolations and alterations which 
have been introduced from the Long Recension (g). The ms used by 
the Metaphrast exhibited a text essentially the same as that of G. 

(2) The independent Syriac Version (S) of which only a few 
fragments remain, but which is represented, as before, by the Syriac 
Abridgment (2) and the Armenian Version (A). 

(3) The Long Recension (g), which in great parts of this epistle 
keeps close to the text of the original Ignatius. 


Though the principles on which a text of the Seven Epistles should 
be constructed are sufficiently obvious, they have been strangely over- 
looked. 

The first period in the history of the text of the genuine Ignatius 
commences with the publication of the Latin Version by Ussher (1644), 
and of the Greek original by Isaac Voss (1646). The Greek of the 
Epistle to the Romans was first published by Ruinart (1689). The text 
of Voss was a very incorrect transcript of the Medicean ws, and in this 
_Tespect subsequent collations have greatly improved on his editio princeps. 
^ But beyond this next to nothing was done to emend the Greek text. 
Though some very obvious corrections are suggested by the Latin 
Version, these were either neglected altogether by succeeding editors 
or were merely indicated by them in their notes without being intro- 
duced into the text. There was the same neglect also of the aid 
which might have been derived from the Long Recension. Moreover 
the practice of treating the several mss and the Latin Version of the 
Long Recension independently of one another and recording them 
co-ordinately with the Greek and Latin of the genuine Ignatius (instead 
of using them apart to ascertain the original form of the Long Recen- 
sion, and then employing the text of this Recension, when thus 
ascertained, as a single authority) threw the criticism of the text into 
great confusion. Nor was any attention paid to the quotations, 
which in several instances have the highest value. Hence it happened 
that during this period which extended over two centuries from Voss to 
Hefele (ed. 1, 1839; ed. 3, 1847) and Jacobson (ed. 1, 1838; ed. 3, 
1847) inclusive, nothing or next to nothing (beyond the more accurate 
collation of the Medicean ms) was done for the Greek text. 

The second period dates from the publication of the Oriental 


OF S. IGNATIUS. " 


versions—the Syriac Abridgment with the Syriac Fragments by 
Cureton (1845, 1849), and the Armenian Version by Petermann (1849). | 
New materials of the highest value were thus placed in the hands of ` 
critics ; but, notwithstanding the interest which the Ignatian question 
excited, nearly thirty years elapsed before any proper use was made 
of them. In some cases the failure was due, at least in part, to a false 
solution of the Ignatian question. The text of Bunsen (1847), Cureton” 
(1849), and Lipsius (1859), which started from the assumption that 
the Syriac Abridgment represented the genuine Ignatius, must neces- 
sarily have foundered on this rock, even if the principles adopted had 
been sound in other respects. Petermann and Dressel (1857) however 
maintained the priority of the Seven Epistles of the Vossian text to the 
Three of the Curetonian; and so far they built upon the true basis. 
But Petermann contented himself with a casual emendation of the text 
here and there from the versions; while Dressel neglected them 
altogether. Jacobson (ed. 4, 1863) and Hefele (ed. 4, 1855) also, 
in their more recent editions which have appeared since the Oriental 
versions were rendered accessible, have been satisfied with recording 
some of the phenomena of these versions in their notes without apply- 
ing them to the correction of the text, though they also were un- 
hampered by the false theory which maintained the priority of the 
Curetonian Abridgment. It was reserved for the most recent editors, 
Zahn (1876), and Funk (1878), to make use of all the available materials 
‘and to reconstruct the text for the first time on sound and intelligible 
principles. sore 

~ The text which I have given was constructed independently of both 
these editions, and before I had seen them, but the main principles are 
the same. Indeed these principles must be sufficiently obvious to those 
who have investigated the materials with any care. In the details 
however my views frequently differ from theirs, as must necessarily be 
the case with independent editors; and in some respects I have had 
the advantage of more complete or more accurate materials than were 
accessible to them. 


REACH EE i cct r 


In the apparatus criticus, which is appended to the text, I have 
been anxious not to overload my notes with matter which would be 
irrelevant to the main issue. ‘Thus for instance, those divergences in 


1 The editio princeps of the Armenian was published at Constantinople in 1783; 
but this version was practically unknown to scholars until Petermann's edition ap- 


peared. 


8 THE GENUINE EPISTLES 


the several versions which, however interesting and instructive in them- 
selves, cannot be supposed to represent various readings in the Greek 
text, are carefully excluded. On the other hand it has been my aim 
to omit nothing which could reasonably be thought to contribute to 
the formation of a correct text. 

In carrying out this principle, the following rules have been ob- 
served. 

r. The various readings of the Greek Manuscripts of the genuine 
Ignatius (G), ie. of the Medicean ms in the Six Epistles, and of the 
Colbertine in the Epistle to the Romans, are given zz full. ‘This is 
also the case with the fragment of the Epistle to the Ephesians (G’) 
which is found in another Paris ms. I have not however thought it 
worth while to record differences of accent, or such variations as 
ôr àv for drav, ovdé pia for ovdeuia, etc., except where they had some real 
interest. All these mss I have myself collated anew for this edition. 

2. The readings of the Latin Version (L) are generally given from 
the ultimate revised text, as it is printed in the Appendix. This text 
is founded on a comparison of the two mss of the version, modified by 
other critical considerations which will be explained in their proper 
place. It did not seem necessary to give here the various readings of 
these two Mss (L, Lj), except in very rare cases. Where such varia- 
tions occur, I have held it sufficient to call attention to the fact, refer- 
ring the reader to the Appendix itself. As the Latin Version is strictly 
literal, every variation which remains in the wltimaze Latin text (i.e. the 
text as restored to the condition in which presumably it left the hands 
of the translator) is recorded, because every such variation represents, 
or may have represented, a corresponding variation in the Greek ms 
which the translator used. 

3. In like manner the various readings of the different mss 
(Sp X, 2) of the Syriac Abridgment (S) are not generally given. 
They will be found in the Appendix, where this version is printed at 
length with an apparatus criticus of its own and a translation. In 
admitting or rejecting divergences which this abridgment exhibits, 
I have been guided by the considerations already alleged. The few 
fragments which survive of the original unabridged Syriac Version (S) 
are also printed in the Appendix. In the case of this and all the 
other Oriental versions Latin renderings are given in the critical notes 
for the sake of convenience and uniformity. 

4. The Armeniam Version (A) has been described in the proper 
place. From the description it will have appeared that only a small 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 9 


proportion of its many divergences deserves to be recorded as bearing 
on the Greek text. In giving its various readings I have found Peter- 
mann’s Latin translation of the greatest service; but I have myself 
consulted the Armenian original as printed by him, in order that, so 
far as my slender knowledge of the language served me, I might not be 
misled by the necessary distortion produced in passing through the 
medium of another language. 

5. The fragment of the Cofto-Thebaie Version (C) will be found 
in the Appendix, where it is published for the first time. It is ancient 
and literal enough to be an important authority as far as it goes, and I 
have therefore given all its variations. 

6. The Armenian and Syriac Versions of the Epistle to the 
Romans in the Acts of Martyrdom (Am, Sm), having been translated 
separately and directly from the Greek, are independent of each other 
and of the above-mentioned versions (A, S) in these languages. I have 

*freely used Petermann's translation of the one and Moesinger's of the 
other, but not without satisfying myself by consulting the originals. 

- 7. The text of the Metaphrast (M) for this same epistle is never 
quoted, unless supported by some other authority. In other cases his 
mode of compilation deprives his text of any weight. The mss of the 
Metaphrast are very numerous; the readings of some of these are given 
by Cotelier, Dressel, Zahn, and others. 

8. The Greek of the Long Recension (g) wil be found with its 
own apparatus criticus in the Appendix. The limits within which it is 
necessary for my purpose to quote its text as an authority have been 
already indicated (p. 4). In citing this recension I have given the 
critical text at which I have myself arrived, without (as a rule) re- 
ferring to the variations of the several mss or of the Latin Version (1). 
These will be found in their proper place. 


For convenience of reference I give the following recapitulation of 
the symbols : 


G. Greek Original (Medicean and Colbertine mss). 
G’. Paris fragment of the Epistle to the Ephesians. 

L. Latin Version. 

L,, L,, the mss of this Version. 

Armenian Version. 

Syriac Version. 

S, S, S, being the several collections of fragments belonging 
to this version. 


n 


10 THE GENUINE EPISTLES 


C. Coptic Version. 

X. Abridgment of the Syriac Version. 

g. Greek Original of the Long Recension. 
l Latin Version of the Long Recension. 


For the Epistle to the Romans alone : 


Am. Armenian Version in the Martyrology. 
S,. Syriac Version in the Martyrology. 
M. Acts of the Metaphrast. 


The Greek and Latin quotations from the fathers are given by the 
volumes and pages of the standard editions ; the Syriac quotations by 
the pages of Cureton's Corpus Zgnatianum. 


The following marks and abbreviations are also used. 


add. Where a word or words are added or prefixed in the 

praef. } authority subjoined. 

al. Where the divergence is so great in a version or recension, 
that no inference can be drawn as to the reading which the 
author of the version or recension had before him. This will 
also include passages which are so corrupt as to be worth- 
less for determining a reading. 

app. Apparently. 

def. When the context, in which the word or words should occur, is 
wanting either from designed or accidental omission or from 
the imperfection of the Ms or Mss. 

om. When the context is there, but does not contain the word or 
words in question. 

dub. Where a word or expression is so translated or paraphrased, 
that the reading which it represents is uncertain. 

marg. When the reading is found in the margin of the authority in 
question. 

5. Attached to an authority signifies that the reading of such 
authority is not given on express testimony, but may be inferred 
from the sZezce of collators, 


txt. When the authority quoted supports the reading adopted in the 
text. 
edd. When an authority is given as generally quoted, or as it stands 


in the common editions, though some mss may be known or 
suspected to have it otherwise. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. II 


[ ] An authority is included in square brackets thus [g], in all cases 
where it is discredited by some special circumstances: e.g. (1) 
where the grammatical forms are so close-as to be easily 
confused, as in the case of the singular and pluralin the Syriac ; 
or (2) where the context in a version or recension is so altered 
as to impugn the fidelity of the author or the scribe at this 
particular point; or (3) where a passage may have been modified 
in the process of quotation by the influences of the context. 

() The words included in brackets of this form have reference to 

the authority which has immediately preceded and which they 

explain or qualify in some way. 
An asterisk after an authority (e.g. L*) refers the reader to the 

Appendix for particulars as to the reading of the authority 

which is so distinguished. 


naim 


AT EE 1 yid 
sorte sikay baie aie wa ay 
Miner sd LE tuti oq74. atd Gr). do bien 

I dos dpi mes ss qo vae otaf edi E reat aic ks 

i a! White tv eruit (fot mtr. cont ai Dobretin did 


D. LM bit iso veniri and dide api 


x ts m 


tiae 
š ay ee at a 
M AAT PET Ç m ë 70 
G+ SQ CL ke) Orbit n ode fern a 
43 Bilin 5 uel oo! ¿ú wed Dum 151 xm 
¥ d o vids 


T 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


Hose ELE SEP EELS EAINGS: 


HE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS belongs to the gtoup 

of four letters written by the saint from Smyrna (§ 21). He 
had not himself visited Ephesus on his way; but the Ephesians had 
been apprised of his journey and had sent delegates to meet him at 
Smyrna ($$ 1, 2, 21). The probable manner in which this information 
was conveyed to the Ephesians has been suggested above (p. 2). 

Ephesus was the nearest to Smyrna of those cities which are 
recorded to have sent their delegates thither, the distance between the 
two places being about 4o miles (Strabo xiv. p. 632 Tpiakosiot eikoct 
oradır). We are therefore prepared to find that the Ephesian delegacy 
was more numerous than that of any other church. The bishop 
Onesimus was there in person; and he was accompanied by four others 
who are mentioned by name, Burrhus, Crocus, Euplus, and Fronto 
(Š r, 2) Of the two last the names only are given. On the other 
hand Crocus is singled out in this letter for special praise as having 
greatly ‘refreshed ' the saint and is mentioned also in affectionate terms 
in the Epistle to the Romans ($ ro); while Burrhus the deacon is 
valued so highly by him that he requests the Ephesians to allow him 
to remain in his company. ‘This request was granted; and we find 
Burrhus with him at Troas, where he acts as his amanuensis (see the 
note on § 2). 

Altogether Ignatius appears to have had much satisfaction in the 
presence of these Ephesian delegates, whom he mentions in all his 
other letters written from Smyrna (Magn. 15, Trall. 13, Rom. 10). Of 
his intercourse with Onesimus their bishop more especially he speaks in 
terms of grateful acknowledgment. He describes him as ‘unspeakable 


16 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


in love’ (§ 1) He says that in a very brief space of time they had held 
much spiritual communion (§ 5). 

But not only was he moved by gratitude to write this letter. He was 
also deeply impressed with the previous history of the Ephesian Church. 
He speaks of it as ‘renowned unto all ages’. He himself is the devoted 
slave of such a church (§ 8). He does not venture to set himself up 
as their teacher: he is content to be their fellow-disciple. Nay, he will 
even look upon them as his trainers in the athletic contest for the 
martyr’s crown which awaits him (§ 3). Above all, he remembers their 
companionship with Apostles; and remembering this, he is constrained 
to dwell on his own weakness as contrasted with their strength. They 
had escorted the blessed Paul on the way to martyrdom—Paul who 
never tires of commemorating them in his letters; and he himself would 
fain tread in the same path (§ 12). 

Of the character of this church he speaks most favourably. Onesimus 
himself had commended them in the highest terms (vreperawet). No 
heresy had found a lodgment among them. They were steadfast in 
maintaining doctrinal purity and good order (§ 6). They were spiritually 
minded in all things (§ 8). They owned no other rule of life but God 
(§ 9). Thus the Ephesian Church appears to have sustained the cha- 
racter and profited by the warning which it received on the last occa- 
sion when it is directly mentioned in the Apostolic writings ; ‘I know 
thy works and thy labour.and thy patience, and how thou canst not 
bear them which are evil, and didst try them that call themselves 
Apostles, though they are not, and didst find them liars, and thou hast 
patience and didst bear for My Name’s sake and hast not fainted. 
Nevertheless I have this against thee, that thou didst leave thy first 
love. Remember therefore from whence thou hast fallen and repent 
and do the first works (Rev. H. 2—5).’ 

But, though heresy had not found a home among them, it was 
hovering in their outskirts. Certain persons who came from a distance 
had attempted to sow the seeds of error among them, but had been 
repulsed (§ 7). These were doubtless the docetic teachers, who are 
denounced in his other epistles. Hence the emphasis with which he 
dwells on the ‘reality’ of the Passion in the opening salutation (¿v zd <, 
adnfw). Hence also the prominence which he gives to the true 
humanity of our Lord, where he has occasion to mention His two 
natures (§§ 7, 18, 19, 20). False teachers are described as ‘violators 
of the temple’ in the worst sense, and as such condemned to the 
severest vengeance (§ 16). 


TO THE EPHESIANS. iy 


As a safeguard against the inroads of this heresy, the saint gives the 
Ephesians some practical advice. They must assemble themselves 
together more frequently than hitherto for congregational worship (88 5, 
13) No man can eat the bread of God, if he keeps aloof from the 
altar (§ 5). More especially they must adhere to their bishop, as the 
personal centre of union ($$ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). The silent modesty of 
Onesimus renders this warning the more necessary (§ 6). Unity will 
thus be secured, and unity is the overthrow of Satan (§ 13). 

While enforcing these duties, Ignatius indulges in several metaphors, 
always vigorous, but sometimes extravagant, after his wont. One such 
metaphor more especially demands attention, as containing a vivid 
appeal to the local experiences of an Ephesian audience. In the reign 
of Trajan a munificent Roman of high rank, Gaius Vibius Salutaris, a 
citizen of Ephesus, gave to the temple of Artemis a large number of 
gold and silver-gilt images. Among them are mentioned several statues 
of Artemis herself, one representing her as the Huntress, others 
as the Torchbearer; images of the Roman Senate, of the Ephesian 
Council, of the Roman People, of the Equestrian Order, of the Ephe- 
beia, etc. One of the ordinances relating to his benefactions bears the 
date, February in the year of the Consuls Sextus Attius Suburanus 11 
and Marcus Asinius Marcellus (A.D. 104)—the same year in which, 
according to one Martyrology, Ignatius was put to death.  Salutaris 
provided by an endowment for the care and cleaning of these images ; 
and he ordered that they should be carried in solemn procession from 
the temple to the theatre and back again on the birthday of the 
goddess (6th Thargelion), on the days of public assembly, and at such 
other times as the Council and People might determine. They were 
to be escorted by the curators of the temple, the victors in the sacred 
contests, and other officers who are named. The procession was to 
enter the city by the Magnesian gate and leave by the Coressian, so 
as to pass through its whole length. On entering the city it was to 
be joined by the Ephebi who should accompany it from gate to gate. 
The decrees, recording the acceptance of these benefactions on the 
conditions named, were set up on tablets in the Great Theatre, 
where they have been recently discovered (Wood's Discoveries at 
Ephesus Inscr. vi r sq.) The practice of carrying the images and 
sacred vessels belonging to the temple in solemn procession on the 
festival of the goddess and on other occasions doubtless existed long 
before; but these benefactions of Salutaris would give a new impulse 
and add a new splendour to the ceremonial. At such a time the 


IGN. U, 2 


18 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


metaphor of the saint would speak with more than common directness 
to the imagination of his Ephesian readers, when, alluding to these pagan 
festivals, he tells them that as Christians they all alike are priests and 
victors, for they carry, not in their hands, as the votaries of Artemis 
carry their images and treasures, but in their hearts, each his God, his 
Christ, his shrine ; that they too are duly arrayed for their festivities, 
not indeed in ornaments and cloth of gold, but in the commandments 
of Jesus Christ which are their holiday garments (see the notes on 
Š 9). 

The Epistle to the Ephesians is the longest and most elaborate of 
the extant letters of Ignatius. This fact may be explained by his close 
relations with the Ephesian delegates, as well as by his respect for the 
past history and present condition of the Ephesian Church, as already 
mentioned. Towards the close he enters upon what looks like a 
systematic discussion of the doctrine of the Incarnation ($ 19). But 
he breaks off abruptly, promising, if it be God's will, to send them a 
second tract (BiBdidvov) wherein he will continue the subject upon 
which he has entered, ‘the economy relating to the new Man Christ 
Jesus’ (§ 20). This promise he seems never to have fulfilled. At least 
no such second letter or treatise has ever been heard of. The hurry 
of his subsequent movements (Polyc. 8), perhaps also the direct inter- 
ference of his guards (Rom. 5), may have prevented his carrying out his 
intention. 


The following is an analysis of the epistle : 


‘IGNATIUS to the CHURCH or EPHESUS, which was blessed by God 
and predestined to glory through a true Passion, hearty greeting in. 
Christ.’ 

* You have acted in a manner congenial to your nature, in sending 
your delegates to comfort me on my way to martyrdom. In welcoming 
Onesimus I welcomed you all. You are indeed happy in your bishop, 
and should love him as he deserves ($ 1). I thank you for sending 
Burrhus also, and I trust you will let him remain with me. Your other 
delegates too, Crocus more especially have greatly refreshed me. 
Glorify Jesus Christ by unity and submission to your bishops and 
presbyters ($2). I do not say this, as if I had a right to command. 
Indeed it were much more fit for me to learn of you. But love will 
not let me be silent. The bishops represent the will of Jesus Christ 
($3) Your presbyters are to your bishop as the strings to the lyre. 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 19 


Let one harmonious chant rise up to heaven, as from one chorus singing 
in accord. Union is fellowship with God ($ 4). If my brief intercourse 
with your bishop has been so blessed, what blessing will not attend 
your unbroken communion with him ! The united prayer of the bishop 
and the congregation is all powerful. He that stands aloof brings 
God's condemnation upon himself ($ 5). If your bishop is silent, he 
only claims from you the more respect. The delegate of the Master 
must be received as the Master Himself I rejoice to hear so good an 
account of you from Onesimus. He tells me that heresy has found 
no home among you ($ 6) Still certain persons are going about 
teaching false doctrine. Shun them, as you would wild beasts. There 
is only one Physician who can heal their wounds; and He is flesh, as 
well as spirit, Man as well as God (§ 7). Be not deceived, but put 
away all evil desires. I am devoted to the renowned Church of 
Ephesus. The things of the flesh and things of the Spirit are exclusive 
the one of the other. With you even the things done in the flesh are 
the promptings of the Spirit ($ 8). I have learned that certain persons 
coming from a distance attempted to sow the seeds of false doctrine 
among you: but you stopped your ears and would not listen. You are 
stones raised aloft to be fitted into the temple of God. You are holiday- 
makers, bearing your sacred things in festive procession ; and I rejoice 
that I am permitted to take part in your festivities (§ 9). Pray for the 
heathen, since repentance is still possible for them. Teach them by 
your conduct; by your gentleness, your humility, your prayers, your 
steadfastness in the faith. Requite them not in like kind, but imitate 
the Lord in your forbearance. In this way show that you are their 
brothers. Be chaste and modest (Š 10). 

‘The world is drawing to a close. If we value not the present 
grace, let us at least dread the coming wrath. One way or another let 
us be found in Christ Jesus, in whom I also hope to rise from the dead 
and to have my portion with the Christians of Ephesus, the scholars of 
Apostles (§ 11). I cannot compare myself with you—you who were 
associates in the mysteries with Paul, who are mentioned by him in 
every letter (§ 12). Meet together more frequently for eucharistic 
service. These harmonious gatherings will be the overthrow of Satan. 
There is nothing better than peace (§ 13). This ye yourselves know. 
Cherish faith and love—the beginning and the end of life. Where 
these exist, all else will follow. The tree is known by its fruits. 
Christianity is not a thing of profession but of power (§ 14). Doing 
with silence is better than not doing with speech. The silence and 


2— 2 


< ~ 


20 THE. EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS. T 


the speech alike of the great Teacher were operative. Whosoever 
understands His word will understand His silence also. Nothing is 
hidden from the Lord. In all our doings let us remember that we are 
His temples (§ 15). No violators of the temple shall inherit God’s 
kingdom. To those that violate the faith by corrupt doctrine the 
warning is especially addressed. They and their hearers shall go into 
unquenchable fire (§ 16). The Lord was anointed with ointment that 
He might breathe incorruption upon His Church. Shun the foul 
odour of false doctrine. Why should we perish in our folly, by refusing 
the grace of God ($ 17)? Iam the devoted slave of the Cross, which 
is a scandal to the unbeliever. Away with the wisdom of this world! 
Our God Jesus Christ was born a Man (§ 18). This economy was 
hidden from the Prince of this world, until it was accomplished—this 
threefold mystery, the virginity of Mary, her child-bearing, and the 
death of Christ. It was revealed by a star of unwonted brightness. 
All the powers of heaven were dismayed at its appearing; for the 
Incarnation of God was the overthrow of the reign of evil. This was 
the beginning of the end. The dissolution of Death was at hand 
(§ 19). If it please God, I will write again and say more of this 
economy. Only be steadfast in the faith; preserve the unity of the 
body ; render obedience to the bishop and presbyters ($ 20). 

‘My affectionate devotion to you and your delegates. I write this 
from Smyrna. Remember me and pray for the Church in Syria, of 
which I am a most unworthy member. Farewell in God and Christ 


(8 21) 


WU Cuba? E C LO YC 


ITNATIOC, 6 Kat Ocodópos, Tjj evNoynuern év ueyé- 


Tpoc edecioyc] màs é$eolovs tyvdrios G (with y in the marg.) ; Tod aúroÜ 
€rirToNI) mpos Epectous g* (with «a in the marg.); ignatius ephesiis L; [ejus] secunda 


quae ad ephesios È 5 ad ephesios A. 


I ó kal] GLg; gaz est Z (1, and so Rom., Polyc.) A (and so always, except 


Hero, where it is gaz et). 


‘IGNATIUS, called also Theopho- 
rus, to the CHURCH OF EPHESUS, 
which is greatly blessed of God and 
was foreordained from the beginning 
to eternal glory, united and elected 
in the power of a real Passion through 
the will of the Father and of Christ ; 
hearty greeting in Christ. 

I. ó kai Oeojópos] This word would 
be equally appropriate to the true 
Christian, whether taken in its active 
sense (Geopdpos, bearing God, clad 
with God) or in its passive sense 
(@eopopos, borne along by God, in- 
spired by God); Clem. Alex. Strom. 
vii. 13 (p. 882) 6eios dpa ó yvworikos 
xai 709 dyus, Oeohopay kai eo- 
popovpevos; comp. Strom. vi. I2 
(p.792). There can however be little 
doubt that it should here be taken 
actively and accentuated Oeodópos; 
for (1) We have the authority of 
Ignatius himself below, $ 9, where 
the connexion of  6eojópo with 
vaopopot, xpioropopor, dyiodópor, fixes 
its meaning; see also the analogous 
words capkodoópos, vexpopopos, Smyrn. 
5. (2) It is so interpreted universally 
till a very late date, e.g. by the Syriac 
translator who renders it ‘clad with 
God. See also the altercation in 
Mart. Ign. Ant. 2, where in answer 


peyé0e] ueyét? G. 


to the question of Trajan xal ris 
€éorw Oeopopos; Ignatius answers 
“O Xpuróv xov ev arépvow. (3) The 
metaphor of ‘bearing God,’ ‘bearing 
Christ,’ is frequent in early Christian 
writers; e.g. Iren. iii. 16. 3 ‘portante 
homine et capiente et complectente 
filium Det, v.8. 1 ‘assuescentes capere 
et portare Deum’ (quoted by Pearson 
on Smyrna. inscr.). See also the Latin 
reading in 1 Cor. vi. 20 ‘glorificate 
et portate (tollite) Deum in corpore 
vestro'; comp. Tert. de Resurr. 10, 
16, de Pudic. 16, Cypr. Test. iii. 11, 
Dom. Orat. 11. Hence Tertullian 
elsewhere, adv. Marc. v. 7, Quomodo 
tollemus Deum in corpore perituro?’ 
Compare also Clem. Alex. Exc. Theod. 
27 (p. 976) ró Ocopdpov yiverOau rov 
avOpwmov Tpogexas evepyoupevov UTO 
roð Kuplov kal kañdmep oGpma avrov 
ywópevov. (4) Even in later writers 
and in other connexions this active 
sense prevails: e.g. Greg. Naz. Est. 
102 (II. p. 96, Caillau)ró dety rpookuvety 
u) avOpwrov Ocopdpoy adda Ocóv 
capkopdpoy, and below pi odpka 
Oecopspov dÀÀà Oeóv dvÓpemodópov. 
See other examples in Pearson V. Z. 
p. 521 sq, Suicer Thes. s.v. Similarly 
xpurroQópos seems to be always 
active (see Phileas in Euseb. Z. Z. 


20 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


^ ^ , \ 
Oc. Ocov apos TANPWMATL, TH T7pocpicévu po 


r mNypópuari] Gg* (with a v.1.) ; perfectione A; et plenitudine L; et perfectae D: 


see the lower note. 


viii. 10 of xptorodopot páprvpes) ; while 


on the other hand zveuuaródopos is 
commonly used in such a sense as to 
suggest a passive meaning, ‘inspired, 
borne along by the Spirit, e.g. Hos. ix. 
7 (LXX), Presbyt. in Iren. v. 5.1, Herm. 
Mand. 11, Theoph. ad Autol. i. 9, ii. 
22, Dionys. Rom. in Athanas. Of. I. 
p. 182, and frequently. But even 
here we are perhaps deceived, and 
the idea of inspiration may be derived 
equally well from the active mvevpa- 
topopos ‘a vehicle of the Spirit’; e.g. 
in Herm. Mand. 11 (a reference 
already cited) the word may be ex- 
plained by an expression which occurs 
in the neighbourhood, Zxev ev éaur@ 
Ovvapwy mvevpares Oeiov. Comp. Iren. 
iv. 20, 6 ‘videbitur Deus ab homi- 
nibus qui portant Spiritum ejus? 
The passive word ĝeopópnros, which 
is also classical, is found occasionally 
in early Christian writers, e.g. Hippol. 
Fragm. 123 (p. 193 Lagarde), and 
several times in Philo, e.g. de Somn. 
1. 43, ii. I (I. pp. 658, 659). The idea 
involved in the word Oeoddpos is 
found also in contemporary Stoic 
writers; e.g. Epictet. Déss. ii. 8. 12, 
I3 Ocov mepidépeis...év cavt@ 
pépets avrov Kr.. (comp. ii 16. 
33), Lucan Phars. ix. 563 ‘Ille Deo 
plenus, tacita quem mente gerebat? 
The active sense therefore must be 
adopted, but the alternative of *bear- 
ing God’ and ‘wearing God’ still 
remains. All the passages quoted 
however seem to show that the former 
is the sense of Geopdpos here, though 
the Syriac renders it ‘God-clad, and 
S. Pauls metaphor of ‘putting on 
Christ' might suggest this meaning. 
The former sense indeed is impe- 
ratively demanded below, $ 9. 


Tfj] txt GLZ[A]; add. «ai g. 


Itis more probable that this sur- 
name was adopted by Ignatius himself, 
as a token of his Christian obligations, 
than that it was conferred upon him 
by others, as a title of honour. For 
supposed references to it in the body 
of his epistles, see the notes on Magn. 
I, Trall. 4, Smyrn. 5. It occurs in 
the opening of all his genuine epi- 
stles; and in this he is imitated by 
the Pseudo-Ignatius. The epithet 
however is not confined to him, but 
is applied freely to later fathers, espe- 
cially to those assembled at any of 
the great councils, as Nicaea; see 
Pearson V. /.1.c. In his case how- 
ever it has the character of a second 
name or surname, as the mode of 
introduction, ó kal Geopdpos, shows; 
comp. Acts xiii. 9 ZaUAos, ó kal Ilav- 
Aos. This form of expression is ex- 
tremely common in inscriptions; e.g. 
Boeckh C. Z. G. 2836 'ApusrokAgs ó kai 
Znvov, 2949 M. Avp. IIerpavios KéAaos 
6 kal Mévurmos, 3282 Kaortpikios Apre- 
pidepos ó kai [ Ap |ucavos, 3309 Eppetas 
6 kai Airopis, 3387 Praovia Tpvdawa 
7 kal “Poddmn, 3550 Mevéorparov róv 
kal Tpvpwva, 3675 Taios Tatou ó kai 
Ilícros, 3737 Maģípa rj kai “Hdovn, 
4207 'EAXévy 1j kai" Adguoy, and so fre- 
quently. From this epithet arose the 
tradition that Ignatius was the very 
child whom our Lord took up in 
His arms (Mark ix. 36; comp. Matt. 
xvii. 2, Luke ix. 47), the passive 
0cópopos being substituted for the 
active Oeopdpos and a literal sense 
being attached to the word. 

The groundless suspicion of Dus- 
terdieck (p. 89), Bunsen (B. p. 33, 
Z. v. A. p. 38), Renan (Les Evangiles 
p. xxvii) and others, that eojópos 
is a later insertion, has been refuted 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


by Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 69 sq). It goes 
directly in the teeth of all the evi- 
dence. Daillé founded an objection 
to the genuineness of the epistles on 
the use of this surname, urging that it 
arose out of the legend. He is re- 
futed by Pearson (V. Z. p. 520 sq), who 
shows that the converse was the case. 
Tj «vAoynpern k.r.A.] This opening 
address contains several obvious re- 
miniscences of Ephes. i 3 sq. ó 
Ocós kal mar jp...ó evroynoas ruas 
ev maoy eUAoyíg...kaÜàs é£eXéÉaro 
nds ...7po KataBodrjs 
cîvaı ypás...dpuo p ovs...mpoopícas 
7Mas...karà THY evdokiay Tov ÓeAÀj- 
patos...dta Tov atparos aro... 
Tpoopta Üévres...karà THY Bovdyy TOD 
OeAnparos avrod...eis TO evar us 
els émawov S0&ns avrov. See also 
the notes on màņpøparı below, and 
on puunral óvres Oeo) Š 1, and for mpó 
airov comp. Ephes. iii. II kata mpó- 
eow róv aidvov. Though S. Paul's 
so-called Epistle to the Ephesians 
was probably a circular letter, yet 
even on this hypothesis Ephesus was 
the principal Church addressed, and 
there was therefore a special pro- 
priety in the adoption of its language. 
'This is analogous to the references 
in the Roman Clement ($ 47) to the 
First Epistle to the Corinthians, and 
in Polycarp (§ 3, comp. 9, 11) to the 
Epistle to the Philippians, where 
these fathers are writing to the same 
two Churches respectively. The di- 
rect mention of the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, which is supposed to occur 
at a later point in this letter ($ 12 
IlajAov...09 êv maon émioToAn uvnpo- 
veve, vor), is extremely doubtful (see 
the note there); but the acquaintance 
- of Ignatius with that epistle appears 
from other passages besides this ex- 
ordium, e.g. Polyc. 5. 
èv peyéüa] ‘in greainess. The 
péyeOos describes the moral and 
spiritual stature of the Ephesian 


KOO MOV, 


23 


Church itself; comp. Smyrn. 11 
améhaBov rò idiov péyeOos, Rom. 3 
peyé8ovs ostiv 6 xpwrriavwuós. These 
are the only other passages in Ig- 
natius where péyeOos occurs, and in 
both it refers not to God, but to the 
Church. We might be tempted by 
the parallel, Rom. inscr. èv peyañeró- 
TTL Tatpos viorov, to connect é 
peyéGec with Oeo) marpds, but this 
would oblige us to interpret mnpo- 
pare ‘fully,’ ‘richly’ (as Zahn Z. v. A. 
P. 415, while ad loc. he compares 
Rom. xv. 29 êv mAnpopare evAoyias) ; 
an interpretation which cannot, I 
think, stand. 


cov marpós mAnpopari] ‘through 
the plenitude of God the Father, 
where ZZeroma is used, as by S. 
Paul and S. John, in its theological 
sense, to denote the ZoZaZ£y of the 
Divine attributes and powers: see 
the excursus on Colossians p. 257 
sq. The dative case is instrumental. 
To participation in the Pleroma 
of God, or of Christ, we are in- 
debted for all the gifts and graces 
which we possess; John i. 16 èx ro 
mÀgpeparos avTovU reis mayTes eNd- 
Bopev k.T... The expression before 
us should be compared especially 
with Ephes. iii. 19 iva zAgpe6fre eis 
mav TO TAnpwpa roð Oeod, a passage 
which Ignatius probably had in his 
mind, as this same epistle of S. Paul 
is present to his thoughts through- 
out his opening salutation. See also 
Ephes. i. 23, where the mAyjpepa is 
regarded as transfused wholly into 
the Church. Ignatius again uses 
this term in its technical sense, Trall. 
inscr. 7» kal domdfopa ev rà TANPO- 
par. For the prominence of the 
pleroma in the Valentinian theology 
see Colossians p.265 sq. For similar 
instances of phraseology, which was 
afterwards characteristic of Valenti- 
nianism or of other developments of 
Gnosticism, in these epistles, see the 


24 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


5. 4 “ON M A > , , af 
aiwvwv evar dia mavTos eis Óo£av vrapauovov, ATpET- 


2 hvoudery kal éxrereypéery] nvouéevny kai ¿KN eXeyndymy GLg; but ZA refer the 
words to the Church, and seem therefore to have read the datives: see the lower 
note. Their renderings are e (i.e. guae ecclesia) perfecta et electa B; quae perfecta 


est (om. kal ékNeNeyuévg) A. 


notes on Š I @vce, Rom. 6, Magn. 8, 
Trall. 1. 

The sentence would be simplified, 
if we could venture on the reading 
xai mAnpopart. In this case uéye0os, 
like zAjpopa, would be attributed to 
God; and here again a Valentinian 
tinge would be given to the language 
of Ignatius, for péyeĝos appears to 
have had a technical sense with this 
school: comp. Iren. i. 2. 2 da ro 
péyeOos tov BáÜovs kai rò dve£vyvi- 
agrov rot matpos, and esp. Anon. in 
Epiphan. Hær. xxxi. 5 (see Stieren’s 
Irenæus, p. 916 sq) yv rwwes "Evvoiav 
épacay, érepou Xdpw oikeiws, dia TÓ 
emukexopnynkévat avtny Onoavpicpara 
TOU peyéÜovs rois ek TOU peyéOous, 
oi è dAnOevoavres Seynv mpoonyd- 
pevoay, Ore Ov evOvpnoews yopis Aóyov 
Ta mavra TO meyeOos éreNelogeyt ws 
o)» mpoeurov,  apbapros [aiwvia} 
BovdnOcioa Seopa péar eOnduve rò 
péyeOos em opéËe, dvamaiaews ajro0; 
comp. the Valentinian use of peyéOn 
for ‘powers’ in Iren. i. 13. 6, i. 14. 4, 
and see also i. 13. 3. I find more- 
over that in Syriac ‘the greatness’ 
(Xm) was used absolutely to 
signify the Divine Majesty. To the 
passage from Ephraem Syrus (Of. 
Syr. 1. p. 68), quoted by Michaelis 
(Castell. Lex. Syr. s. v. p. 843) for 
this use, add two examples from the 
Syriac of Clem. Recogn. p. 21 1. 28, 
p. 26 1. 7 (ed. Lagarde), both which 
passages are altered in the Latin of 
Ruffinus, perhaps because he did 
not understand this sense of uéye6os. 
Itispossiblethereforethatthisreading 
kai mAnpepate is correct; but in the 
extant authorities which have it the 


In Z the word NODWN) e perfecta is the same which 


kai must be regarded as a later (and 
very obvious) insertion, and if it 
existed in the original copy, it must 
have dropped out at a date anterior 
to any existing texts. The original 
form of the Syriac was not tebu 
‘and perfected ( fulfilled); as it stands 
in the Curetonian Mss, but "3221122 
‘in (or by) the perfection (fulness), 
or some similar expression, as the 
Armenian rendering shows (see 
Petermann ad loc.) The word 
ww is the rendering of mAjpepa 
in Rom. xi Q2 Ephes ik 23 iya 
The substitution would be the more 
easy, because the former word occurs 
in the immediate context as the 
rendering (or loose paraphrase) of 
jvopévy. 

I. eis] For the construction etvat 
eis ‘to be destined for, reserved for’ 
comp. Ephes. i. 12 eis rò etvat eis érat- 
vov K.T.N., Acts viii 23 eis yoAnv mi- 
kpías...0opd ce Ovra, I Cor, xiv. 22 ai 
YÀ oat eis onpetoy ela. 

vapágovov ürpemrov] ‘abiding and 
unchangeable,” Both adjectives must 
be connected with 8o£av, even though 
we should read jv@perny K.T.. after- 
wards; comp. Clem. Al. .SZrozt. vii. 
IO (p. 866) écópnevos, às eire, POs 
écràc kal pévov idios, mavtn müvros 
drpemrov. For mapápovos comp. 
Philad. inscr. xapà aidmos kai mapa- 
povos; for drpemros, which is used es- 
pecially of the unchangeable things 
of eternity, see e.g. Clem. Hom. xx. 5 
arperrov yap [ó Oeòs] kai dei dv, Philo 
Leg. All. i. 15 (I. p. 53) dzotov adrov 
[róv Gedy] eivai kai dpOaprov kai árpem- 
TOV. 

2. mvepévp k..A.] I have ventur- 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 26 


e £ \ 2 , > ^ > 
TOV, nvwpevn Kat ékNeNeyuevn év mabet dXnuÜwo èv 


has occurred just before as the rendering of szXwpóuari, and there is probably 
therefore some corruption, as it does not represent hvwpévy. Cureton (1845) sug- 


gested that X read 7wucuéymv. 
lower note. 


ed to substitute datives for accusa- 
tives, as the change is slight. But 
if the accusatives be retained, they 
must still be referred to the Church, 
and not connected with dofay. As 
coming after the infinitive, eîvar 
[avrny]...nvepévny x.7.A., they are jus- 
tifiable: comp. Winer Gramm. Š xliv. 
p. 402, lxvi. p. 782, Kühner II. p. 
590 sq. But in the present instance 
they are especially awkward, as 
being interposed between datives 
before and after, and also as being 
liable to confusion with the accusa- 
tives immediately preceding. For the 
frequency of évovy etc. in Ignatius see 
the note on § 4. 

ev malei] This should probably be 
connected with both the preceding 
words. ‘The ‘passion’ is at once the 
bond of their union and the ground 
of their election. For the former idea 
comp. PAz/ad. 3 «i tis èv dAXorpía 
yvópgy mepurarei, oUros TS malet ov avy- 
kararí(Qera,.; for the latter, Trall. 11 
ev TO malet avtov mpockaAeira, vpas. 
This latter relation it has, because 
in foreordaining the Sacrifice of the 
Cross God foreordained the call of 
the faithful. Thus their election was 
involved in Christ's passion. 

This word has a special promi- 
nence in the Epistles of Ignatius. 
In Christ's passion is involved the 
peace of one Church (Trall. inscr.) 
and the joy of another (P/Zz/ad. 
-inscr.). Unto His passion the peni- 
tent sinner must return (Syra. 5); 
from His passion the false heretic 
dissents (PZz/ad. 3) ; into His passion 
all men must die (Magn. 5); His 
passion the saint himself strives to 


év má0«] GLAg; zz signo Z: see the 


imitate (Rom. 6); the blood of His 
passion purifies the water of baptism 
(Ephes. 18); the tree of the passion 
is the stock from which the Church 
has sprung (Smyrn. 1); the passion 
is a special feature which distin- 
guishes the Gospel (Phz/ad. 9, Smyrn. 
7) In several passages indeed it is 
coordinated with the birth or the 
resurrection (Ephes. 20, Magn. 11, 
Smyrn. 12, etc.) ; but frequently, as 
here, it stands in isolated grandeur, 
as the one central doctrine of the 
faith. 

Hence the importance that the 
Passion should have been real (dA7- 
wór), and not, as the Docetic teach- 
ers held, a mere phantom suffering 
and death. On the opposition of 
Ignatius to these Docetic views, see 
the note on Trall. 9. As this is the 
only passage referring to Docetism 
in the Curetonian letters, and as the 
Syriac MSS here read gats ‘in 
signo, the fact has been pressed as 
arguing the priority of these letters 
to the Vossian. Cureton at first 
supposed that it was a corrupt 
reading for exw ‘in passione, 
but afterwards was persuaded that 
it was genuine and represented the 
Greek év mpobéce:, which (as he sup- 
posed) had been changed into êv máĝer 
by the Vossian interpolator to con- 
trovert the Docetz, whose errors are 
combated elsewhere in the Vossian 
letters, ‘or perhaps indeed the Phan- 
tasiastze of a later period’ (C. Z. G. 
p. 276 sq). An argument in favour 
of Cureton's reading is, that it pro- 
duces another coincidence with S. 
Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, i. 


26 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


GeAjuatt ToU marpos Kat "Ino Xpirtou tov OcoU 


e ^ ^ 5 y. ^ > y ^ ” > 
npoVy, TH ekkAnola TN a£iopakaplta'To Ty ovon €V 


1 700 marpds kal I. X. rod Ocod hur] GL; 0c00 maps kai kuptov uv 'I.X. 700 
cwrhpos hav g; patris iesu christi dei nostri È; dei et domini nostri iesu christi 


[A] (omitting év Oerńuarı) : see the lower note. 


transposes the whole clause) g ; om. 2. 
gZA; xdpour GL: see the lower note. 


II mpoopicbévres karà mpoberw k.r.À. 
This view accordingly has been a- 
dopted by several later writers, e.g. 
Bunsen (Hippolytus Y. p. 94, ed. 2), 
Lipsius (echt. p. 24, S. T. p. 153), and 
others. Nevertheless Cureton's for- 
mer view was unquestionably correct. 
The telling facts are these. (1) The 
word ea) is not in itself a suit- 
able rendering of mpoOeors, and as a 
matter of fact is never so employed 
in the Peshito. As denoting a ‘sign,’ 
‘mark,’ it denotes an aim or purpose 
(ckomós), but this is somewhat- dif- 
ferent from mpó6ecw. (2) On the 
other hand the Greek text has év 
mae, which is exactly represented 
by rms. (3) The two words 
are not unfrequently confused in the 
Syriac texts. Even in these Igna- 
tian Epistles, the Armenian transla- 
tor found this error twice in the 
Syriac text which he had before him, 
in Smyrn. Y amò ro) mabouvs rendered 
a signo (see Petermann p. xix), and 
in Trall. 11 v rà male rendered 
signo. The Syriac of this latter 
passage is preserved (C. 7. p. 200), 
rwo. I may add a third in- 
stance from the Syriac Version of 
the Clementines p. 74, l. 25 (ed. La- 
garde), where one MS (the older of 
the two and the earliest known 
Syriac MS, dated A.D. 411) has 
vr xa3a and the other mrs, the 
latter being correct, as appears from 
the Latin of Ruffinus (Clem. Recogn. 
ii, 58); and a fourth from Sexti Sen- 
tentiae pp. 26, 27 (ed. Gildemeister), 


3 Ths’ Actas] GL[A] (which 
kal] GLg ; om. ZA. 4 xep&] 
5 " Amoüctáuevos] Gg* ; acceptans L; 


where there is the same interchange 
between the two words Iss, 
méyais, in the MSS, As a very 
slight knowledge of Syriac literature 
has enabled me to collect these in- 
stances, it may be presumed that the 
confusion is common. Indeed the 
traces of the letters so closely re- 
semble each other that it naturally 
would be so. (4) The Armenian 
Version actually has zz passione here, 
so that e xs» must have stood in 
the Syriac text from which it was 
translated. 

I. ToU Oeo) uov] Where the 
Divine Name is assigned to Christ 
in these epistles, it is generally with 
the addition of the pronoun, ‘our 
God, ‘my God,’ as below Š 18 ó Oeòs 
ón “Incovs 6 Xpioros exvopopy6n 
K.T.N., Rom. inscr, 3 ó Oeós muov 
*L X, Polyc. 8 èv OcQ uv L X. 
ebxopat, Rom. 6 punrhy eivar tov Tå- 
Üovs rod Oeod pov; or it has some 
defining words as in Smyrn. Y Ao£d- 
(w I, X. róv Gedy Tov otras upas ropi- 
cavra, Ephes. 7 èv dvÓpóme Oeós. 
The expression just below § I év 
aipatt cov can hardly be regarded as 
an exception (see the note there). 
In the really exceptional passages 
there is more or less doubt about 
the reading or the connexion; Trall. 
7, Smyrn. 6, 10. The authority for 
the omission of «ai here is quite in- 
adequate; but, even if kai were gen- 
uine, rod cod juv must be taken 
with 'I. X., and not (as Bunsen Zr. p. 
85) with rod marpós. 


5 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


27 


Ev LUE CA 7zAciG Ta év ‘Incou Xpirrw kai 


év duw uw xap xaipew. 
T 


quoniam acceptum mihi (supra me) > 


à 


"ArodeEauevos [uv] év Oca TO moNvayarn- 


; quoniam acceptabilis est apud me A. There is 
no authority (except a worthless v.l. in g) for dredezdunv. 


jv] g; cov (after 


modvayarynrov) GL; vestrum DA, but there is nothing to show in what position 


jud» stood in their text, or whether it stood there at all: 


see the lower note. 


mohvayanntov] G; moXvmróOnrov g; multum dilectum LX[A]. 


2. dÉwpaxaplaTo] ‘worthy of feli- 
citation.” Comp. Š 5 moo@ paddov 
Upas uakapi(e. The compound occurs 
again Š 12, om. inscr, ro. It is 
hardly classical, and its occurrence 
in Xenophon AZo/. 34 has been al- 
leged as an argument against the 
genuineness of that treatise. Onthe 
fondness of Ignatius for compounds 
of á£wos see the notes on dévovdpacrov 


$ 4 below. 
3. ths 'Aeías] i.e. the Roman 
province. With very much hesita- 


tion I have put the words in brackets, 
as a possible though not a probable 
interpolation, since they are wanting 
in the Syriac. With a place so well 
known as Ephesus the specification 
is a little startling. It occurs how- 
ever in Iren. iii. I. I "Ieávvgs...ev 
'Edéoo ths 'Acías ÓiarpiBov ; and is 
added also in the addresses of the 
letters to Smyrna, Tralles, and Phila- 
delphia, cities only less famous than 
Ephesus, while in the letter to the 
Magnesians it is only suppressed to 
give place to another geographical 
definition r7 mpós Maiáv0pe. The 
case of 'Avrióxeia ths Suptas (Philad. 
10, Smyrn. 11, Pol. 7) is different, 
for several important cities bore that 
name. The other places called Ephe- 


| sus were quite too obscure to come 


into competition (Steph. Byz. s.v. 
čari kai" Edecos voos ev T9 New, on 
the authority of Hecatzeus); and the 
addition here must be explained by 
the formal character of the address. 


See also Xen. Anab. ii. 2. 6 e£ 'Eqx- 
gov rijs 'Iovías. 

4. êv duóuo xapü] Comp. Magn. 
7 êv TH xapà TH apøpo. If the read- 
ing had been left doubtful by the ex- 
ternal authorities, this parallel would 
have decided it. For duopos, duodpos, 
in the openings of these epistles, see 
Rom. inscr., Smyrn. inscr., Trall. 1, 
Polyc. 1: comp. also $ 4 (below), 
Trall, 13. 

mAeigra...xaípew] This form of 
salutation runs through six of the 
seven Ignatian letters, sometimes 
with words interposed as here and 
Rom., sometimes in juxtaposition as 
Polyc., Magn., Trall., Smyrn. The 
exception is Pilad., where the open- 
ing salutation runs on continuously 
into the main subject of the letter, so 
that there is no place for such words 
or any equivalent. The commonest 
form of salutation in the opening of 
a Greek letter is xaípew; and it is 
occasionally strengthened, as here, 
by sAeicra. Of the Apostolic Epi- 
stles however S. James alone (i. 1, 
comp. Acts xv. 23) has xaípew in 
the opening salutation. 

I. *I heartily welcomed you in God. 
Your name is very dear to me; for 
your character for love and faith with 
right judgment is not accidental, but 
natural to you; and inflamed by 
Christ's blood you did but fulfil the 
dictates of your nature, in imitating 
the loving-kindness of God. For 
when you heard that I was on my 


28 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 1 


» D f: , E ^ N 1 , 
Tov Ovoua, Ó kékTnole Quae [év yvøun dpb; kai | dicate 
kara mioTw kal ayarny èv Xpio To ' nooo TH TwTHpL 


I $éce...Owalga] natura (in) voluntate recta et justa 2 ; revera immaculata volun- 


tate A; $íce dixalg (omitting the other words) GLg. 
èv X. 71. TẸ corp, quar] gL; év I, X. r9 wrp tuv G; 


praef. atque etiam È, 


iesu christi salvatoris mostri DA: see the lower note. 


way from Syria, a prisoner for the 
Name of Christ our common hope, 
expecting to fight with wild beasts 
in Rome and so to claim a place as a 
disciple, you were eager to visit me. 
Gladly then have I received you all 
in the person of Onesimus your loving 
bishop and delegate. And I pray 
that you may love and imitate him ; 
for God has indeed been good to you 
in giving you such a man for your 
bishop.’ 

'Amoüe£ágevos] ‘Having wel- 
comed'; comp. Polyc. 1, Trall. 1. 
He had welcomed them in the person 
of Onesimus: see Zva/. 1. The 
sentence thus begun is never finished, 
being lost in a succession of subor- 
dinate and parenthetical clauses. 
The subject is at length resumed in 
a different form, émei oiv...dme(Anda 
x... The opening of the letter to 
the Romans fares in the same way. 
See also similar phenomena in 
Philad. 1, Smyrn. 1; comp. Magn. 


Tei 
I. Ovopa] ‘name; here equiva- 
lent to ‘personality, ‘character,’ 


‘worth’; comp. Clem. Rom. I déa- 
yannrov óvoua vpov. A marginal 
gloss to the Latin translation (L,) 
supposes that there is a play on the 
word édeors ‘appetite, desire, ‘Ephe- 
sis Greece, desiderium Latine. Ephesii 
desiderabiles dicuntur’; and this 
explanation has been adopted by 
some editors. Such a reference how- 
ever, besides being too obscure in 
itself, is rendered improbable by such 
parallel passages as Rom. 10 Kpoxos 


2 Kata] txt. GLAZ3¢ ; 
3 muntat] Gg; 


TÓ moĝnróv pov óvopa (see also the 
note on "AAkgw, Smyrn. 13) The 
various readings suggest the omis- 
sion of the pronoun with Ovoga. At 
allevents cov can hardly stand. The 
Latin translation here again has a 
gloss (Lj), ‘Dicit autem singulariter 
tuum nomen, et continuo pluraliter 
fossedistis, insinuans multitudinis in 
fide et charitate unitatem; but this 
is too ingenious. I am disposed to 
think that a transcriber, finding no 
pronoun,carelessly inserted cov,which 
appears in Polyc. 1. Otherwise I 
should adopt the reading of the Long 
Recension tyov év Ge@ TÒ k.r.À., as 
this pronoun occupies the same 
early place elsewhere in the opening 
addresses of Ignatius, Magn. 1, Rom. 
1,220781 

ise] ‘dy nature? and not by 
accident or use or education. Here 
again the expression has a Gnostic 
tinge: see the note on Trall. 1 "A- 
Popov Õıávorav...čyvov pâs Éxovras, 
ov karà xpjow ada kara vov. 

ev yvópg opOn Kai] I have inserted 
these words from the Syriac, which 
is loosely followed by the Armenian. 
They must have fallen out at an age 
prior to any of our Greek authorities. 
The epithet dccaia is altogether un- 
suited to $óce; and, if the Greek 
text could be regarded as entire, I 
should suggest oike(a; comp. Euseb. 
de Laud. Const. 15, p. 652 và Ovnrov 
Tis oikeias rjAevÜépov piceas, ib. p. 
653 eis &Xeyxov rijs oikeias iocos, 
Clem. Alex. Stvom. ii. 3 (p.433) éevradoa 


` € ^ ` , 35 ` 
pvotkny yooOyra, rv miorw of au, 


I] TO THE EPHESIANS. 29 


e DE Ni 3f ^ 
"pov: iurat ovTes OcoU, dvaCwrupioavres ¿v aluarı 


quia imitatores L; the anacoluthon is obviated in SA by conversion into a finite 


verb with a connecting particle eZ estis imitatores. 


dvatwruphoarres| 


Gg* [Sev-Syr 172, 174]; & reaccendentes L; et incalescentes estis...et 2; def A 


(see the next note). 


Baoweidnv...€rt hac of audi Bası- 
Aeidnv míoTw Gua kai exoyiy oikeiav 
5 

€Lvat. 

2. mioti kat ayanny| A very 
frequent combination in this writer; 
e.g. Š 14, 20, Wagn. 1, 13, Rom. inscr. 
(v. 1), PAzlad. 11, Smyrn. inscr, 1, 
13. He explains himself on this 
point, Š 14 apyx7 Cans kal réAos, dpx) 
pev miotis TéXos 0€ dyámy, Smyrn. 6 
Tò yap dAov eotly miotis kal ayarn. 
See the simile in $ 9. In Trall. 8 
faith and love are said to be the flesh 
and blood of Christ respectively. 

êv Xpiot@ “Inoov x.r.A.] The read- 
ing of the Syriac and Armenian may 
be explained by the interchange of a 
single letter in the Syriac, 4 for 4; 
see Clem. Rom. 60 (p. 292). Other- 
wise the following reasons are in its 
favour. (1) It has an exact parallel 
in Rom. inscr. kata míoTw kal ayanny 
"Ico? Xpiotod ; comp. below $ 20 ev 
Th avro) mire: kal év TH avroU dám. 
(2) It is more difficult than the other 
reading, and would therefore lend 
itself more easily to correction. 

3. papnrai óvres Oeo)] i.e. “in 
benevolence and love.’ So also 
Trall, 1; and see below $ ro, where 
the point of pupnrai rov Kupiov is 
émceikevca, The expression is borrow- 
ed from S. Paul, Ephes. v. 1, thus 
exhibiting another coincidence with 
this same epistle: see the note on 
inscr. rj evAoynuévy. Comp. Clem. 
- Hom. xii. 26 xpr róv piravOperiay 
doxotvra pupntyy elvat Tod Ocoó, 
eVepyeroüvra Sixaiovs xai aðikovs, os 
aùròs ó Oeòs mácw év TO viv kócpo 
Tov re HALoy kal robe Verobs ajroV Tapé- 
xov. 'The same is the point here, 


The interpolator brings it out by 
writing juuyrai óvres Oeoü pav- 
0pm ías. 

This sentence, uupzrai...drrnprícare, 
was apparently intended to be paren- 
thetical, stating merely by the way 
that the Ephesians had been true to 
their nature and had exhibited their 
character in action : but it leads inci- 
dentally by a series of subordinate 
clauses to the main topic, the visit 
of Onesimus, and so breaks up the 
grammar of the sentence. This very 
disjointedand ungrammatical preface 
is explained by the unfavourable cir- 
cumstances under which the letter was 
dictated: Rom. 5. Thegrammar would 
be partially relieved, if there were au- 
thority enough for the insertion of «al 
before xara miotw, for the parentheti- 
cal sentence would then begin less 
abruptly with xai xara mícrw; but 
the Syriac without the Armenian is 
valueless. Otherwise the kai might 
easily have dropped out in our main 
authorities owing to the repetition of 
the same letters—KAIlAKAIKATA. 

dva(cervpraavres] ‘ kindled into liv- 
ing fire, in an intransitive sense, i.e. 
‘stimulated to activity.’ The intran- 
sitive use is not uncommon; e. g. 
Gen. xlv. 27, 1 Macc. xiii. 7, the 
only passages where it occurs in the 
LXX. So also Clem. Rom. 27, Plut. 
Mor. p. 695 A, p. 888 F dva(ervpeiv 
vükrop, kaðárep Tovs avOpakas, etc. 

ev aiparı Oeod] Tertull ad Uxor. 
ii. 3 "sanguine Dei.’ See also Acts 
xx. 28 ryv éxkAnolav Tov Ocotd Hv 
mepiezroujaaro Ota roU ataros Tov idiov, 
where Qeod is most probably the 
correct reading ; and comp. Rom. 6, 


30 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


^ l4 , ^ , P 
Ocov, TO cuyyevikov Epyov TENEiws dTNPTITATE akov- 
5 \ / ` ^ ^ 

cavres yap OeO0euévov amo Cupias Umép Tov kouvou 
/ ^ ^ € ^ 

óvouaTOs kai éATL00S, éNmriCovra Tij Mpocevxn Ujuov 


r Oeo] GL*Z Sev-Syr 2, 3; def. A (but this defect witnesses to 6o, 
the whole clause having dropped out owing to the homeeoteleuton) ; xpuroU g. 


TeMelos] GLg Sev-Syr 2, 3; celeriter (as if raxéws) 2; 
amnpticare] g*LZA Sev-Syr 2, 3; dmapricare G. 
0e8euévov] GL; pe dedenévoy g; dub. ZA. 

4 émuruxety] GLg ; om. ZA: see the lower note. 


Z*A. 
syria A ; ab operibus 2, 


Z; cum amore A. 


2 yàp] GLg*; om. 
amd Zuplas] GLg ; in 


did Tov émiruxely] per potiri L*; per id quo dignor Zi ; quando hoc dignor et perfero 
A; Sia Tov uaprvplov g; dud ToU uaprvplov érirvxeiv G: see the lower note. 


For similar modes of expression in 
early Christian writers, see the notes 
on Clem. Rom. 2 rà maĝýpara auro0 
(with the Appendix, p. 402). It does 
not follow because a writer uses ‘the 
blood of God’ and ‘the blood of 
Christ’ as convertible expressions, 
that he would therefore speak of 
Christ as ‘God’ absolutely. This 
passage is therefore no exception to 
the rule as to the Ignatian usage 
laid down above on inscr. roô Ocod 
npov. The ‘blood of God’ is the 
incentive which fans the natural 
benevolence of their character into a 
flame. On the energizing action of 
the blood of Christ, see the note on 
Philad. inscr. 

I. ovyyenkov] ‘natural? literal- 
ly ‘connate, ‘congenital’; comp. 
Plut. Mor. p. 561 F xakias ónotórnra 
ovyyekny ev véo BXaarávovsav 50e. 
So scvyyeukóv vóogpa, Plut. Vit. 
Pericl. 22. Here it refers back to 
ô kékrgaOe ice. The Ephesians had 
perfected in action the disposition 
which they possessed by nature. 
Zahn translates it fraternum, adding 
fquod decebat vos prestare erga 
eum qui eidem genti a Christo re- 
dempti [redemptze?] vobiscum :ad- 
scriptus est? But this, though a 
possible sense, does not suit either 
the context or the general usage of 
the word so well as the other, 


2. amo Zvpías| A condensed ex- 
pression in place of ‘hearing that I 
was come in bonds from Syria ; 
see Winer Gramm. Š lxvi p. 776 
(Moulton), Kühner II. p. 469 sq. For 
other similar constructions of prepo- 
sitions comp. e.g. below, Š 12 rév 
cis Ocóy dvaipovpévov, Š I4 eis Kado- 
kayaiav ákóXovÓd stw, § 17 aypa- 
orion...€k ro)...(5v, and not unfre- 
quently in Ignatius. For the par- 
ticular expression here see Smyrn. 
II ó6ev Oe0euévos (comp. below, 
$ 21). 

ToU kowoU Ovóparos] i.e. the Name 
of Christ which we all bear in com- 
mon. For this application of rò 
övopa see the note on Š 3 below. 

3. éXmióos] So Š 21 èv 'Igoo 
Xpior@ Tj kowy éXmibu jóv, Philad. 
II: comp. PZZ/ad. 5. For 7 éXmis 
nav, applied to Christ, see the note 
Magn. 11. 

4. émwvxeiv] A very common and 
characteristic expression in Ignatius. 
It occurs most frequently in the 
connexion émirvyxávew Oeo; see 
the note on Magn. 1. His mar- 
tyrdom was ¿Ze success, Z/ triumph, 
to which he looked forward ; see 
esp. Rom. 8 airnoacbe mepi epo, tva 
emurúxo : comp. also Polyc. 7, Tall, 
12, 13. So Mart. Ign. Ant. 5 rod 
areavov Ths dOAnoews émurúxn. 

dia rod émwvyeiv| The genesis of 


1] TO THE EPHESIANS. 31 


3 ^ , e , ^ / ` ^ 5 
emituyely év `Poum Onpiouayjoa, iva did tov émuru- 
^ ^ A ° e ^ 5 
5 xetv OurvnOe pants civar, LO TOQQGaL ÈOTOVÒATATE. 
> \ > \ / ^ 5 3 ^ > 
ETEL ovv Tyv 7roNu7 Detay uav év dvouaTtt Ocot drel- 


5 pa05r1s elvai] L ; add. dei ZA ; add. rod ùmèp quay éavróv dveveykdvros (-véykav- 
Tos v. l. in g) 0e@ mpospopàv kal volay Gg (from E2A. v.2; 1 completes the quotation 
by adding zz odorem bonae suavitatis): see the lower note. isropoat srov- 
ddcare] videre (leg. visere ?) festinastis L; studuistis ut veniretis et videretis me Z; vos 
studuistis recreare me A (as if it had read *333r!yn for *3331hn); om. Gg. Cureton 
supplies the missing words, je (det éorrovdd tere; Pearson, Petermann, Lipsius, Zahn, 


and Funk, ióetv écovóácare: see the lower note. 
(òè) Z; enim (as if rhv yàp moduvmdAjOeav) L; ergo A. 


the corruptions in the text is as 
follows. (1) The interpolator of the 
Long Recension has substituted àià 
ToU paprupicu for dia ToÜ émuruxeiv 
to save a needless repetition ; and 
he has also helped out the paĝnrýs, 
which appeared to him bare and 
unmeaning, with the addition of 
ToU Omép pôv éavróv dveveykóvros 
Ged mporhopay kal Óvaíav, borrowed 
from S. Paul, Ephes. v. 2. Both 
these changes are after his usual 
manner. But in doing so he has 
carelessly thrust out the end of the 
sentence, ioropjaa eorovdacare, and 
thus left dkovcavres without any finite 
verb. (2) The genuine Ignatius has 
been corrupted from the text of the 
interpolator ; but the work has not 
been done thoroughly, and the word 
émirvxeiv has been allowed to stand. 
For a similar instance of interpola- 
tion in the Greek Ms from the Long 
Recension see $ 2 after xarnpriopévo.. 
In both cases however we have the 
alternative of supposing conversely 
that the interpolation was made first 
in a MS of the genuine Ignatius and 
so passed into the Long Recension, 
but this is not probable. The Latin, 
Syriac, and Armenian Versions, when 
correctly read and interpreted, sug- 
gest the true restoration of the text, 
which however has been overlooked 
by the editors generally. 


6 ¿mel otv] Gg* ; quia autem 
TmohumAnGear] g*; 


5. paO0grjs] ‘a learner? This 
also is an idea which has taken 
possession of Ignatius, and is repeat- 
ed again and again by him. He 
does not set himself up as a teacher 
of others; at present he himself is 
only beginning to be a learner : see 
esp. Š 3 viv yàp adpxnv eyo rod 
padnreverOar; comp. Trall. 5, Rom. 5 
(quoted below), and see Mart. Ten. 
Ant. x pyro...<padpevos...r7s reA€las 
Tov pabnrov rá£eos. His discipleship 
will then only be complete, when he 
is crowned with martyrdom, Rom. 4; 
comp. Magn. 9, Polyc. 7. Hence he 
uses pa@ntjs elsewhere, as here, ab- 
solutely : Trall. 5 ov...mapa roro jòn 
kal padnrys cipi, Rom. 5 viv apyoua 
pabntys etva. The Greek interpolator 
and the Syriac translator, not under- 
standing this absolute use, have sup- 
plied genitive cases in different ways. 
This eipeveía of Ignatius has a pa- 
rallel in Socrates, who always pro- 
fessed himself merely a learner: see 
Grote’s Plato 1. p. 239. 

icropgca.] Comp. Gal. i. r8 (with 
the note) In restoring the Greek 
from the Versions, I have chosen 
this word, because the Syriac render- 
ing seems to point to something more 
expressive than i9eiv, which is gene- 
rally supplied. 

6. emel ovv k.rA.] A resumption 
of the original sentence 'AmoOe£dpevos 


32 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


Anpa èv Orn tu TO ÈT ayarn diuryriro, Uudv ð 
[en capki] éziokóme* dv ebxopat kara *Inoouy Xpiorov 


úuás cya àv, Kal TAaVTAS UGS aur €v OMOLOTNTL civa 


ToNum)m0[ay G (so it reads certainly, though the word is written in a slovenly way ; 
there is no authority for rodvm\nplay which has got into the common texts): see the 


lower note. 


altered to conform to the following êv sapr?) G ; 
om. ZA (so that they take dOupygre with dary). 
'Igroü» Xpwróv] GLEA ; xpicrdv incotv g. Add. 


ZAg: see the lower note. 
dominum nostrum È; om. GLAg. 
similitudine esse L; 


&.T.A. ; see the note there. This new 
sentence itself is never finished, but 
is lost in a crowd of subordinate 
clauses. In this respect it is an 
exact parallel to Magn. 2, which 
begins in the same way ére) oiv 
0 £u 0v k.r.À. 

modumAnOecav] ‘your numerous 
body; * your large numbers’; comp. 
2 Macc. viii. 16 rjv eOvav moXvmMj- 
cav, Valentinus in Epiph. Her. 
xxxi 6 Gy THY moiuriýÂerav mpos 
dpiÜpóv e&eurety oùk dvaykaiov, The 
expression is an incidental testimony 
to the flourishing condition of the 
Ephesian Church in the beginning 
of the second century. The word 
occurs occasionally in Classical wri- 
ters, being found as early as So- 
phocles Fragm. 583; comp. Arist. 
Hist. An. v. 4 (p. 562) Tyv modumAn- 
Ozan avry. It is written both mov- 
mAnOeca and moAvrAgÓía. The former 
is more largely supported by ana- 
logy ; but for the latter comp. Soph. 
Fragm. 342 xvuxdet dé mücav oikeray 
mapmAnOiav, which however, as a po- 
etical passage, does not go far to 
establish a prose usage. 

dreitnpa] The martyr received 
the whole Church, when he received 
Onesimus, their representative ; see 
Magn. 6 Tpoye- 
ypappévow mpocomots Tò müv mÀñ00os 


> ` . > ^ 
ETEL OUV EV TOLS 


amelt\npa] GLAg; suscepimus 2. 


r ém'] g; év (probably 
dub. ZA. 86] GLg ; 
2 év capki] GL; om. 


in J; 


3 abrQ £v Ouoiórgri elvat] G; ipsi in 


èv ópoubuari. adrot elvac g; sitis in similitudine ejus È; 


ededpnoa èv miorer k.t.A. Comp. also 
below, Š 2 ô? &v mávras pâs xarà 
dyámqv «idov, Magn. 2 n&dOnv ideiv 
)pás Oia Aap k.r.A., Trall. 1 dore pè 
TO mâv TAnOos dpav ëv avrà leopar. 

I. év 'Ovgcíuog] This Onesimus 
seems to be a distinct person alike 
from S. Paul's convert the slave of 
Philemon, who, if still living, would 
be too old at this time, and from his 
later namesake the friend of Melito 
(Euseb. ZZ. Æ. iv 26), who belonged 
to another generation and was ob- 
viously a layman. Chronologically 
this notice stands about mid-way 
between the two, being separated 
from each by about half a century. 
On the name Onesimus and the 
persons bearing it, see the introduc- 
tion to the Epistle to Philemon in 
Colossians etc. p. 310 sq. The name 
occurs in an Ephesian inscription 
Boeckh C. 7. G. no. 2983. 

2. èv oapki] See the note on 
Rom. 9 tH 086 tH karà rapra. But 
the words v capa) here are highly 
suspicious, both as being absent 
from some authorities and as being 
unmeaning in themselves. They may 
have been added to relieve the ap- 
parent awkwardness of the connexion 
jpáv 0é. There is no reason to sup- 
pose that the Syriac translator had 
not the dé in his text, because he 


1] TO THE EPHESIANS, 33 


E \ \ e , ^ / > ^ 
evAoynTos yap O Xapu-auevos Upiv d£iow vow Toi0U- 


y ^ 
5 TOV ÉTiGOkO7OV kekT5oÜat. 


LI. 


similes-estote et A. 


4 á£los] GLZA; rovovros g. 


\ \ ^ ^ 
[lepi è ToU auvdovAov uov Bovppou ToU kara 


otc] oet Gs. 


5 kekrfja8a«] GL; kekrfjo0atév xporQ g; om. ZA. Similar omissions in Z occur Row, 
1 elvat, Polyc. 6 exei (Éxew). The translator probably had xexrfjo@a in his text here 
but declined to translate it as a pleonasm. Z stops here and resumes again § 3 dAN’ 


émel k.T.^. 


6 pov] GLA; quay g. A read evuflotXov for avv8obNov. 


Boppov] G; burdo A (a confusion of the Syriac letters q and $, Zand »). For the 


variations in the first vowel in Lg see Appx. 
See also the notes on Smyrn. 12, Philad. 11. 


in the consonants here. 


has not translated it. This free 
handling of connecting particles is 
habitual with him. If ë> sapr) be 
genuine, it would seem to imply a 
contrast to the great émíokomos 
in heaven (Magn. 3). But such a 
contrast is out of place here, and 
Ignatius was not likely to speak of 
a bishop as a carnal officer. Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 254) explains it other- 
wise; Onesimus belongs to all alike 
by virtue of love (év ayamn), though 
externally (èv sapxi) he was connected 
with the Ephesians alone. But this 
antithesis is not suggested by the 
first clause. For úpðv 8é see Phil. 
il, 25 úpðv O6 dmóerolov; comp. 
Herod. vii. 8 Apiorayopy TS MiXgato 
8ovAo ĉe rZuerépe. Onesimus had 
two recommendations in the eyes of 
Ignatius; he was beyond praise for 
his love, and he was ZAezr chief 
pastor. 

kata 'Igcoóv Xpiróv] ‘after the 
standard of Christ) ie. ‘with a 
Christian love’; comp. Rom. xv. 5 


TÓ aùrò dpoveiv év adAndows Kara 
Xpicrov Too. 
ce aan 5 , 
3. arg] i.e. 'Ovgseíue. For the 


dative after opodrns, comp. Plat. 
Phæd. 109 A ijv ópotórrra ro) ovpavov 
avrod éavrQ, Phedr. 253 C els ópow- 
Tyra arois kal rQ OcQ...dyew : and for 
this case with substantives generally 


IGN, II, 


All the authorities, except A, agree 


see Kühner Gramm. IL. p. 372 sq. 
The interpolator has substituted a 
simpler construction and order, èv 
Opol@pare avTod. 

4. d£ios ojcw] A favourite ex- 
pression in Ignatius; $ 2, Magn. 
I2, 14, Trall. 4, 13, Rom. 9, Smyrn. 
9, II, Polyc. 8. So also ios Oeo 
$$ 2, 4, Rom. 10; comp. Ephes. 15. 

II. *As touching Burrhus the 
deacon, I entreat that he may be 
allowed to remain with me. Crocus 
too has refreshed me much, and I 
pray that God may refresh him. 
These, together with Euplus and 
Fronto, have been very welcome to 
me as your representatives. May I 
have joy of you always, if I deserve 
it. Ye ought therefore to glorify 
Jesus Christ, who glorified you, by 
submission to your bishop and pres- 
byters, that ye may be perfectly 
sanctified,’ 

6. avvdovhov| This expression 
is with great propriety confined in 
Ignatius to deacons, since the func- 
tion which the bishop had in common 
with them was ministration; Magn. 
2, Philad. 4, Smyrn. 12. Similarly 
it was customary for bishops to 
address presbyters as ‘compresby- 
teri’; see Philippians p. 228. So 
too Constantine was accustomed to 
speak of himself as a avvOepázov of 


3 


34 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


A , € ^ \ 5 ^ ° , x” 

Ocov dtakovov uwv [kai] év Tac evNoYNMEVOU, EVYOMat 
^ M 2 ` ^ \ ^ > / 
Tapapeivat aUTOV Els TIUNV UUwY KAL TOU ÉTlGKOTOV. 
^ 3} \ e ^ A 

kal Kpoxos ðè d Oeo dfios Kal Vpev, ov éEep- 
I kal] Ag; om. GL. 3 kal Kpókos 06] GL; kpókos 06 g; et mar- 
cum (= for p, m for k) A. éfeumAápiov] GL; ws é&eumddpioy g; 


secundum similitudinem A (omitting however àv, and adding ewm at the end of the 
sentence). 4 àméNaBov] GLA; àmeráßouev g. 6 ávaxi£au] 


bishops, Euseb. V. C. ii. 69, iii. 12, 
17, Socr. ZZ. E. i. 9. For the relation 
of the Ignatian usage of evvOovAos 
to S. Paul's see the note on Col. 
iv. 7. The limitation observed by 
Ignatius is not regarded in other 
early writers ; e.g. Clem. Hom. Con- 
test. 5, Ep. ad Iac. 2, 17, where 
presbyters and others are so address- 
ed by a bishop. 

Bovppov] This person is mentioned 
again Philad. 11, Smyrn. 12. He 
was the amanuensis of both those 
letters, which were written from 
Troas ; and is there represented as 
bearing a joint commission from the 
Churches of Ephesus and Smyrna 
to attend the saint. The request 
therefore which Ignatius prefers 
just below (evxoua: mapapetvar) was 
granted; and he accompanied him 
when he left Smyrna, whence the 
present letter was despatched. In 
the Syriac Decease of Saint Fohn 
(Wrght's Apocryphal Acts M. p. 64) 
the Apostle is represented as giving 
his latest commands to one Birrus 
(Byrrhus). As the scene takes place 
at Ephesus, it is not improbable that 
the person intended was the same 
who is mentioned by Ignatius. The 
Greek copy however substitutes the 
name Evruy7 tov kai Ovjpov (Tisch- 
endorf Act. Apost. Apocr. p. 274). 
In the corresponding passage of 
pseudo-Abdias (45. Hist. v. 23) the 
name is Byrrhus, as in the Syriac. 

2. els tynv| A common Ignatian 


phrase, more especially with Geot 
etc. (see examples in the note on 
§ 21 below); comp. also Polyc. 5 
els Tuy THs capkòs TOU Kupiov. 

3. Kpókos] mentioned likewise in 
the letter to the Romans $ 10, which 
also was written from Smyrna, as 
To moÜQróv pot voua. It is a rare 
name. 

Oeod és ka ópóv] The same 
expression occurs also Rom. 10. For 
Oeod d£ws see the note on Š 1 d£(ois 
ovow. 

e&eumAdpuov | a pattern) not 
merely ‘a sample” The Latin ‘ex- 
emplar, ‘exemplarium, is properly 
a copy, not in the sense of a thing 
copied from another, but a thing 
to be copied by others; Hor. Ef. 
i. I9. 17 'Decipit exemplar vitiis 
imitabile | As a law term, it de- 
noted one of the authoritative origi- 
nals where a document was written 
in duplicate; see Heümann-Hesse 
Hand-lexicon des Römischen Rechts 
s.v. Hence Arnob. adv. Nat. vi. 13 
‘Phryna...exemplarium fuisse per- 
hibetur cunctarum que in opinione 
sunt Venerum, i.e. the original of 
all the statues of Venus held in 
repute. The older form is ‘exem- 
plar’ (‘exemplare,’ Lucr. ii. 124); but 
even this would become é£euzAdpiov 
in Greek, just as Apollinaris becomes 
'AmoNMwáptos. The word occurs 
again Trall. 3 rò éfeumMápuov rìs 
ayanns )pv, Smyrn. 12 &&eumddpioy 
Oeo duakovias. It was natural that 


ç 


n] TO THE EPHESIANS. 35 


2 


E ^ , > e ^ > , 
TXapi0v THs ad’ (jv dyarns dzéXa[dov, Kata mdvra 


22 e \ A - 
5 ME averravoev, ws Kal avTOV d TATP 'Inoov Xpio-roU 


> £ [74 $ 
avayvEa, dua “Ovnoiuw kal Bovppw kal Eriw kal 
t 


, 5: fe. , e ^ \ 5 > 
Ppoovtwu, Òt wv mayTas uas kara ayarny eidoy' dval- 


GL; ávayó£et g (but refrigeret 1); dub. A. 
explained by the confusion of similar letters in the Syriac). 

Hirde] G; emot g*; euplo L; euphathe A. 
óvalugv] avatunv G. 


in the first vowel as before. 
7 Spóvrewi] ópóvrov G. 


a provincial, like Ignatius, should 
adopt from the Latin a word which 
was a law-term, just as he elsewhere 
adopts others which are military 
terms (Polyc. 6; see the note). 

4. Kara mávra k.T...] The phrase 
kara mavra dvamavew occurs several 
times in Ignatius; Magn. 15, Trall. 
12, Rom. 10, Smyrn. 9, 12 (comp. 
Smyrn. 10) The word dávamavew 
is similarly used by S. Paul of the 
‘refreshment’ arising from the kind- 
ly offices of another: 1 Cor. xvi. 18, 
Philem. 7, 20. 

5. ws kai avtov...avayyvEa] A remi- 
niscence of 2 Tim. i. 16 moAAákts pe 
dvevéev [ó Ovnaidopos| kal ru dhuow 
oUk emnoxvvOn...dgn avrQ 6 Kips 
evpev x.t-A. The Latin translator 
. of the interpolated letters has been 
So possessed with this parallel, that 
he has added the words * et catenam 
meam non erubuit? here, and sub- 
stituted ‘ Onesiphoro’ for * Onesimo? 
just below. Ignatius exhibits another 
reminiscence of this context of S. 
Paul in Smyrn. io và deopd pov à 
ovx ... emnoxvvOnre’ ovde vpas emak 
axwonoerar 5j TeÀe(a mioris, "Incovs 
Xpiwrós, a passage which in thought 
closely resembles the one before 
us. For avayvyew comp. also Trati. 
12. 

6. Eŭro] The name Evmovs is 
found occasionally in the inscrip- 
tions, as is also the feminine Evm)oia. 
In Boeckh C.7. 1211 we have the 


Botppo] G; cendaro A (to be 
L*g* have variations 


coincidence of names, EjzXovs ’Ova- 
cíuov. The other form of the dative 
EümAoi, which appears in the Mss 
of the interpolated epistles, is also 
legitimate, as mods is frequently 
declined roô mods, rH mAoi, in later 
writers; see Lobeck Paral. p. 173 
sq, Phryn. p. 453. In Alciphr. EJ. 
i. I8 I find it written EvrAóe. This 
Euplus and Fronto are not mentioned 
again by name, though they are 
probably included among the *many 
others? who are mentioned together 
with Crocus, as being in the saint's 
company at Smyrna, in Rom. ro. 
All these Ephesians, with the excep- 
tion of Burrhus, appear to have 
parted from Ignatius at Smyrna, as 
they are not mentioned in the epis- 
tles written from Troas. 

7. 0t ov] i.e. ‘as your repre- 
sentatives.’ For the general sense 
see the note on ameidnda Š 1, and for 
da comp. Magn. 2 iüeiv úpâs dia 
Aapa. 

óvaipy»] Again a Pauline phrase, 
Philem. 20 (see the note there). In 
Ignatius it occurs several times in 
this same phrase or in similar con- 
nexions, Magn. 2, 12, Polyc. 1, 6; 
comp. Rom. 5. The clause occurs 
again almost word for word in 
Magn. 12. The spurious Ignatius 
has caught up this expression and 
repeats it, Mar. 2, Tars. 8, ro, Ant. 
14, Hero 6, 8, Philipp. 15. There 
may possibly be a play on the name 


cna 


36 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


^ \ , , 3 m 
unv uv oid mavrós, éavrrep &%ios w. 


, 2 
7rpe7rov OUy 


- \ 
¿oru kara mavra tpomov dogaCew “Incotv XpıoTov 


^ [74 ^ e^ , 
Tov Ookdcavra pás’ iva v jud UroTa'yn KATNPTIO ue 


e ^ / \ - , 
VOL, UTOTATTOMEVOL TW ÊTLOKOTW Kat TW mper BuTELY, 


/ ao , 
KATA TAVTA NTE NYylacpeEvol. 


I mpérov oüy] txt GL; add. buds g; add. vobis A. 


3 KaTnp- 


rispevot] L; Fre karnpricpévor TG abri vot kal rH air] "yvópg kal Tò abrd Xéygre 


mdvres Tepl Too av’rod lva Gg (from r Cor. i. ro). 


This addition is wanting not 


only in L, but also in A, where however the syntax is rearranged; perfectos fieri 


in omni submissione; ergo submissi estote episcopo etc. 


'Orjewos here, as there seems cer- 
tainly to be in S. Paul ; but this is 
not probable. 

I. eavrep dos 6] This doubt 
about his ‘ worthiness’ is common in 
Ignatius; Magn. 12, 14, Trall. 4, 13, 
Rom. 9, Smyrn. 11. See also the 
note on g£&6v, Magn. 2. 

mpémov...eorw| This phrase ap- 
pears again, Magn. 3, 4, Rom. 10, 
Phitlad. 10, Smyrn. 7; while mpére 
occurs in $ 4 below, Magn. 3, Trail. 
12, Smyrn. 11, Polyc. 5, 7. 

2. Oo£d(ew...róv Oof£ácavra] See 
Philad. 1o So€doa Tò Óvopa...kal dpeis 
do€acOnoecbe. For similar turns of 
expression see the note on Smyrn. 
5 pGAXov oe K.T.À. 

3. Katnpticpévot] ‘joined toge- 
ther, ‘settled’; comp. Philad. 8 
els Evaow Katnpticpévos, Smyrn. 1 
KaTnpTiopevous ey ákunjre miore The 
Latin translator has rendered it here, 
as elsewhere, by ‘perfecti which 
would be danpricpévor. The promi- 
nent idea in this word is ‘fitting to- 
gether’; and its force is seen more 
especially in two technical uses. (1) 
It signifies ‘to reconcile factions, 
so that a political umpire who ad- 
justs differences between contending 
parties is called xarapriorip ; e.g. 
Herod. v. 28 +) Minrtos...vooncaca és 
rà pahiota order péxpe oÓ pav Mápior 
KaTHpTLoay To/rovs yàp karapTu- 


4 broraccbmevot] 


Tripas èk mávrov "EAMjvev eidovto oi 
Mugs: (2) It is a surgical term 
for ‘setting bones’: e.g. Galen Of. 
XIX. p. 461 (ed. Kühn) karaprıo pós 
esri petaywyn ómroU 7) ócTGv ek ToU 
mapa pvow Tómov eis Tov kata piow. 
The use of the word here recalls its 
occurrence in I Cor. i. 10 wa ro avo 
héynre mávres, kal py 7 ev vpiv axía- 
para, 7jre 8€ karnpriopévot év TO avrà 
voi kai èv TH aùr) yvopp. From 
this passage of S. Paul the Ignatian 
interpolator has introduced the words 
which I have here spaced into our 
text (see the upper note); and from 
the interpolated epistles they have 
passed into the Greek Ms of the 
genuine epistles. The versions are 
our authorities for ejecting them. 
For a similar instance see the note 
on Š I 8a rod érirvyeiv. 

4. mpeoBvrepío] This is a com- 
mon word in Ignatius; see below, 
$$ 4, 20, Magn. 2, 13, Trall 2, 7, 
13, Philad. 4, 5, 7, Smyrn. 8, 12. 
In the Apostolic writings it occurs 
only once of a Christian presbytery, 
jt Wien, dv LA 

III. ‘I do not venture to use the 
tone of authority. I am only a 
learner with you. I need to be train- 
ed by you for the contest. Never- 
theless love would not allow me to 
be silent. I could not refrain from 
urging obedience to your bishop. 


ur] TO THE EPHESIANS, 


37 


> , ^ e ” > 
IIL Où àraocouat vpiv, ws àv Te el yàp kai 
, 2 ^ De ana » 5 , , ^ 
dédenar év TH ÓOvOuaTi, oUmw dmüpricon év “Inco 
A ^ M > \ » S 
Xpwr&* viv [yap] doxrv exw Tov pabnteverOa kal 
~ € A~ e > 
Tpoghahw vulv ws cuvdiWacKadiTals our épé yap ede 
gLA; émraccbueva G. 6 Tr] gA; ms GL. 7 év TQ óvógari] 
G; in nomine (iesu) christi L*; dia 7d övoua g* (add. adrod vulg.); propter veri- 
tatis nomen A. It may be a question whether we should read ¿y r@ évduare or 


dua Tó dvoua, but without doubt the words CAristi, veritatis, are glosses: see the 
lower note. 8 yap] Gg; autem L; om. A. 


of Christ. The Name is again used 


The bishops abide in the mind of 
Christ, just as Christ is the Mind of 
the Father.’ 

6. Ov dvatracoopa K.T.A.] Trall. 3 
tva dy Karaxpiros os dmócgToÀos Upiv 
dvatdoowpat, Rom. 4 ovx œs IIérpos 
kat IlavAos- diaragcopar piv. For 
the general sentiment comp. Barnab. 
I eyo 86 ovx ws diddoKados GN’ as 
eis. eé úpðv vrodciEw oAlya k.r.A., 20. 
4 époró jpás os eis e£ úpðv dv, and 
again ovx ws didackados ddd’ os 
mpémer ayaravte...ypapew eorovdaca, 
mepiynua ópàv, Polyc. Phil. 12 ‘nihil 
vos latet; mihi autem non est con- 
cessum modo.’ For the reading ri, 
rather than ris, comp. I Cor. iii. 5, 7, 
ri oüv srw 'AmoAAOs; Ti Óé éoTw 
IíaQAos;...00re ó  Qwrevev éorív Te 
k,T.À., where similarly, rís...rís is sub- 
stituted for ri...7i in some copies; 
see also Gal. ii. 6, vi. 3, etvaí 71, and 
I Cor. xiii. 2, 2 Cor. xii. II, ov0€v eipa. 

xai 8éüepa:] ‘Even my bonds do 
not perfect me; even my bonds do 
not make me a full disciple, much 
less a teacher’; comp. Magn. 12 
el yap kal 0c0épat, mpós eva rv XeXv- 
uévov úpôv ovk eiui, Trall. 5 ka yàp 
éyà où kaÜór. dedéua...mapa TOUTO 
Ñn kal paðnrýs elmi, modà yap juw 
Nemea Kr. For the additional 
dignity and authority which are con- 
ferred by his bonds, see the notes on 
§ rr below, Magn. 1. 

7. é rR Ovópani] ‘the Name, i.e. 


absolutely below Š 7 ró õvopa mepi- 
Qépew, Philad. 10 Sogaca ró dvopa; 
comp. Acts v. 41 vmép Tov Ovóparos 
dripacÓjva, 3 Joh. 7 mép rod 
óvóparos ééjA6av. So too [Clem. 
Rom.] ii. Š 13 rò dvopa àv jpàs p) 
Brachnpjra...Bracpnpeira Tò Ovopa, 
Hermas Sim. viii. 10 rò óvopa ndéws 
éBdoracay, ix. 13 àv TÓ Óvopa povoy 
AdBys, ib. éàv rò Bvoua opps, tb. To 
pev dvona epdpecav, ix. 28 oi más- 
xovres évekev roð óvóparos, Apollon. 
in Euseb. Æ. Z. v. 18 xékperat,..ov 
dia rò voua, dÀÀAà OC as eroApnoe 
Agoreías, Clem. Alex. Strom. iii. 6 
(p. 532). There is a tendency in 
later transcribers, who did not un- 
derstand this absolute usage, to 
supply a genitive: e.g. adrod in Acts 
v. 41; Christi, bonorum, in $ 7 below; 
Domini, etc., in Philad. 10; TOU Ku- 
plov, Tod Xpiorov, in [Clem. Rom.] ii. 
I3. Similarly the versions interpo- 
late here. 

8. pabnreverOar] ‘of becoming a 
learner?’ For the idea see the note 
on Š 1 pabnri)s etvav; for the verb, the 
note on Š IO pa8zrevÓrjva:. 

9. cvvdWackariras pov] ‘my school- 
fellows? I cannot find either d.dac- 
kadirns or ovvdidackadirns elsewhere ; 
but there is a close analogy in com- 
pedagogita or conpedagogita which 
appears in some Latin inscriptions 
(Fabretti Zuscr. Ant. p. 361 sq, Orelli 


38 


THE. EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[1 


vm ^ n / e A 
Up uav VrarepOjvar Tio'et, vovÜecía, úmopovh, pa- 


kpoOupia. 


5 ama M e 5 f ? ^ ^ \ 
XXX ETEL N Ayan ovK €Q ME CLWTAV TEPL 


^ ` - l4 ^ ep m e 
UMOV, Ola TOUTO mpoeNa (ov TapakaNely VMAS, OTTWS 


1 $9? duav] G; wap’ ouv [g]. 


Inscr. Lat. 2818, 2819), and which 
points to the meaning. These com- 
pedagogite are the slaves trained 
under the same pedagogus or in the 
same fedagogium, and are called 
elsewhere pueri compedagogit (see 
Fabretti l.c.) The word is a mongrel 
(con-maiaywyirns), like sullibertus 
(cvy-libertus) which also is found in 
some inscriptions. Similarly curàótr- 
Sackadirac are those who have had 
the same 6idackados or didacKaXia or 
0.0ackaAetov. Their common 6.dac- 
Kados, contemplated here, is not S. 
Paul or any Apostle, but Christ; see 
Š 15 eis otv OiáckaXos k.t.. Some 
would explain the word *7ozzz-ZeacA- 
ers’ (comp. August. Cozf. i. 9 ‘con- 
doctore suo’), and this meaning cer- 
tainly suits the following vzaAeiu6fvat 
well (comp. Plut. Vit. Pericl. 4 rà 8€ 
Tlepexhet owvviv, kaÜámep aOAnTn, Tov 
moNrikôv adelmtns Kat SiSacKados); 
but it seems to be inadmissible on 
several grounds. (1) There is no 
reason why Ignatius should not have 
used ovvdidacKados, which occurs in 
Cyril Alex. Æp. lxvii (X. p. 336, ed. 
Migne). (2) Analogy shows that the 
termination -irns signifies ‘one who 
has to do with’ anything, e.g. ’Apeo- 
mayitns, eykpatirns, ómXírgs, moXitns, 
copirns, rexvirns, rañarorpirns (Maca. 
Magn. iii. 26), mpwroxabedpirns (Her- 
mas Vis. ii. 9) etc. So oupdo- 
Aakitns, not ‘a fellow-jailor, but ‘a 
fellow-prisoner'; ev(vyírgs ‘a yoke- 
fellow, husband’ (evévyía) ; cuvopirns 
‘a neighbour’ (cuvopia); cuvodirns ‘a 
fellow-traveller’ (cuvodia); etc. (3) 
The øw- would be pointless other- 


brarepOfvar] G; suscipi (VrorynpOjva) L; 
accipere a vobis fidem etc. A; úmouymo vat g. 


2 Gdn’ ¿mel k.T.M.] Z has 


. wise; since there is no reason for re- 


presenting the Ephesians as a doard 
or council of teachers. 

euè yap ée] This sentence must 
be connected with ov O:ráccopat 
Üpiv k.r.A., not with the words imme- 
diately preceding, if cvvd:dacKaXirats 
is rightly interpreted ‘school-fellows’ ; 
and to such a connexion the im- 
perfect ex ‘it were meet! (not det) 
points. See the language of Ignatius 
to the Romans § 3. 

I. vmareupOnva] ‘to have been a- 
nointed, as an athlete preparing for 
the contest. Compare the metaphor 
in Polyc. 2, 3, vie, os Oeod abAnrijs 
..TÓ Oéua adpOapoia...ueyadov eotiv 
aOdntrod rò OépeoÓa. kai vixâv. For 
the meaning of tmadeipew see Com. 
in Plut. Vet. Pomp. 53 œs Grepos 
mpos Tov Érepov vmradeiherar TA xeipe 
@ omokovíera.. This duty of oiling 
the athlete fell to the trainer, hence 
called ddeimrns (see e.g. Epict. Diss. 
ili. IO. 8, ill. 20. 10, iii. 26. 22); and 
Ignatius here says that the Ephesians 
were the proper persons to perform 
this office for him. The metaphor 
is variously applied: e.g. ézaAeiqew 
eri Tua ‘to incite against a person,’ 
Polyb. ii. 51. 2 (see Wesseling on 
Diod. Sic. 11. p. 138) ; deie mpés ru, 
adeihew èri ru ‘to educate to a thing? 
Philo Leg. ad Caz. 24 (1t. p. 569), 
Quis ver. div. her. 24 (1. p. 490), 
Clem. Alex. Stvom. ii. 15 (p. 436). 
For its application to a moral and 
godly life generally, see Philo Omz. 
prob. lib. 12 sq (U. p. 458 sq) rò 
iOcKov eù paña Siarovovow, dA e [rT aus 
Xpdpevos rois marpious vópots. ..TOLOU- 


ur] 


K ue TH 'yvop oU Oeog. 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 39 


kat yap *Incous Ape 


OTOS, TO dSudxpurov "uv nv, ToU TATPOS Å yvwun, 


this one sentence, but nothing afterwards till 8 8 ray yap K.T.À. 


reið) g. 
idiom). 


tous 7 Oixa mepiepyeias Anika 
óvouárov dOdnras dperis dmrepyá(erat 
procogia *yupvacpatra mporibeica 
Tas éraweràs mpá£ew (speaking of the 
Mosaic law), Epict. Dzss. i. 24. I ó 
eds oe, às ddelmtns, k.r.A., Clem. 
Alex. Strom. vii. 3 (p. 839) o$ros ó 
aOdyrNs adn bas ò ev TH peyaro 
craüíg TO KANG kócuo THY adnOuny 
vixny Kata TrüvrOV orepavovpevos 
TOV Taday.. .Tepuylverat 6 metOnvios TO 
dAXeímwvg yevouevos; comp. zó. vii. II 
(p. 872) ú a@yamn adreihbovca kai 
Yupvacaca karackevá(eu tov  iOtov 
antv. But it came to be applied 
more especially, as here, to the 
struggle for the martyr’s crown. 
Hence the vision of Perpetua on the 
eve of her martyrdom, Act. SS. Per. 
et Fel. 10 (Ruinart p. 84) ‘et cœ- 
perunt me fautores mei o/eo defrigere 
quomodo solent zz agonem, Tertull. 
ad Mart. 3 ‘Christus Jesus...vos 
spiritu zzz¿£ et ad hoc scamma pro- 
duxit, So too Basil. ZZ. clxiv (1r. 
p. 255, Garnier) ó OTe pevTot eiSopey Tov 
dX) Tv, epaxapioapey avrov Tov 
dAeímrgv Oç mapa T@ Stkaio Kpiry 
«7A. And in later writers this ap- 
plication becomes common. S. 
Chrysostom, in his homily on Ig- 
natius, repeats the saints own 
metaphor; Of. I. p. 598 B (ed. 
Bened.) ai yap xara rjv 000v modes 
cwrpéyovcai mávroÜev $Aeupov Tov 
dÓAgrrv Kal perà moAAGv éfémeumov 
Tv epodiov. 

3. mpoéAafov] i.e. “I did not wait 
for you,’ ‘I took the initiative, ‘I lost 
no time) For the infinitive after 
` mpoħaußávew comp. Mark xiv. 8. 

4. ovvrpéxnte] ‘concur, combine, 


ere] G; 


wept )udv] Gg; pro vobis L; de vobis A; a vobis Z (a Syriac 
5 hua] LA; tua G; al. g. 


agree, and below $ 4; as eg. Clem. 
Hom. xx. 22 cvvéüpauov avrod T@ 
BovAnpart (comp. i. 10). The sense is 
not uncommon in later writers. 

7j yvópu Tov Oco?] This expression 
is characteristic of Ignatius: Rom. 8, 
Smyrn. 6, Polyc. 8. So too youn 
Inoov Xpicrov here and PZz/ad. inscr. 

5. adidxprrov] ‘inseparable’ ; comp. 
Magn. 1 "Incod Xpioroð rod dua 
mayros ņpðv (jv. The word has va- 
rious meanings, In the active sense 
it signifies; (1) ‘Unhesttating, un- 
wavering, single-minded, steadfast’ ; 
e.g. James iii. 17 5 dvwbev coda... 
adudkpitos, dvvmókpvros, where it is 
best explained by a previous ex- 
pression, i. 6 pndev óuakpwópevos. So 
elsewhere in these epistles, Magn. 
I5 kekrnpévoi dütákpvrov mveüpa, Trall. 
I Gpopov diavoray Kal ddidkpirov; 
comp. Heracleon in Orig. zz Joann. 
xii. Š IO (IV. p. 220) thy dë@dkpuroy 
kai KaTaAAnAoy TH Uaec éaurñs mioty, 
Clem. Alex. Ped. ii. 3 (p. 190) dôa- 
kpit@ miorer: see the note on dôa- 
kptras Rom. inscr. (2) * Undiscriminat- 
ing, indiscriminate, indiscreet, reck- 
less’; e.g. Clem. Hom. ii. 5 Tots dia 
TÓ dOwikpvrov addyos dors mapet- 
kacbeiat. (3) ‘Zmparizal, e.g. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. ii. 18 (p. 474) ayámm... 
dpépugrós srw ev maou, aOuaKptros, 
kowovký. So the adverb, Zest. Duod. 
Patr. Zab. 7 ad.axpires mace amayx- 
vi(ópevou edeare. Its passive senses 
are; (4) ‘Inseparable, inseparate, as 
here; comp. Aristot. de Somn. 3 
(p. 458) dua Ôe rò yiveoða advaxpt- 
T@TEPOY TO aipa pera TÀ» TS Tpopis 
mpoopopay ó varvos ylverat, ews av 
Sarpi roð aiparos TO pev raba- 


40 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[i 


` ` , e , > 
Ws Kal OL émloKOTOL Ol KATA TA TEpAaTa opua Üévres Èv 


'InooU Xpiorovu Yvan e.g tv. 


VS 


TOU yvæøun 


öTep kal TOULELTE. 


“Oev TOSTE úuîv WUR EE Th TOU TIOKO- 


TO yap dtiovóuaorov 


e C [d ^ m ZA [74 "n Tal 5 
úuðv 7peaQvrépiov, TOU Oeov à£iov, ovrws c'uympuoo: 


r év Inco Xpwro0 yvibun] G; in iesu christi voluntate A; iesu christi sententia 
L, where the omission of 7 (= zz) was easy between determinati and*desu; al. g. 


3 mpére vuiv] G; decet vos L; Kal vuiv mpére [g]; e£ vos decet A. 


perepov eis rà dvo Td Óë ÜoXepórepov 
eis rà karo. (5) Indistinguishable, 
as Athenag. Resurr. 2 Kav mavu 
map dvOpdmos dðiákpırov eivat Ookjj 
TOTO Tavtl mau, mpocbuós jvopévor : 
and so ‘confused, unintelligible, 
Polyb. xv. 12. 9 dàdkpuroy ben. 
(6) ‘Miscellaneous, Prov. xxv. 1 (LXX) 
ai maporpiat (madetad Sodopavtos at 
adiakpitot. (7) ‘Undecided’ (of a con- 
test), Lucian Jup. Trag. 25 (11. p. 671) 
os dmoÜávg anrrntos, audnpiotoy “rL 
kai áütákpvrov Karadurey Toy Aoyor. 

ñv] For this substantival use of 
the word, see the note on Š 11. 

7 yropj| This term here takes the 
place of the more usual Aóyos or 
copia, as describing the relation of 
Christ to the Father. On this ac- 
count yvøuy is employed in the one 
clause, and v yvóug in the other; 
though some authorities obliterate 
the distinction. 

I. rà mépara] ‘the farthest parts) 
i.e. of the earth: comp. Rom. 6 ouóéy 
pot eiae Tà mépara TOU Koo pou, tb. 
Bacthevew TOV mepárav Ths yns. The 
expression [ra] mépara used absolutely 
as here occurs, Ps. Ixv (lxiv). 9 of 
karotkoÜvres TA mépara: comp. also 
Philo Leg. ad Cat. 3 (p. 548) oí pépi 
Tepárov, 2b. 27 (p. 571) dmà mepároy 
avray, Celsus in Orig. c. Ces. viii. 
72 äxpt Tepårov veveuņpévovs. Ignatius 
would be contemplating regions as 
distant as Gaul on the one hand and 
Mesopotamia on the other. The 


5 únor] 


bishops, he says in effect, however 
wide apart, are still united in the 
mind of Jesus Christ; see Liturg. D. 
Marc. p. 16 (Neale) rijs éexAnotas tis 
dmó ys mepárov péxpt Tay mepdroyv 
airs, comp. Liturg. S. Basil. p. 164. 
Zahn objects that rà mépara cannot 
mean rà mépara Tis yis, and himself 
conjectures rà moipvua (Z. v. A. p. 564) 
or ràv srárepa (ad /oc.), and Markland 
suggests tiv xápvra ; but the passages 
which I have quoted amply justify 
the absolute use of [rà] vépara. Zahn 
rightly objects (Z. v. A. p. 299) to 
Pearson'sinterpretation episcopatum 
fuisse ab apostolis ex voluntate 
Christi institutum" (V. Z. p. 271), a- 
dopted also by Rothe and Uhlhorn. 
Ignatius is speaking here, not of 
episcopacy as instituted by Christ, 
but of the bishops themselves as 
sharing the mind of Christ. 

IV. ‘Act in concert with your 
bishop, as you are now doing. Your 
presbytery stands in the same rela- 
tion to the bishop, as the strings to 
the lyre. The theme of your song 
is Jesus Christ. The several members 
of the Church will form the choir. 
God will give the scale. Thus one 
harmonious strain will rise up from 
all and reach the ears of the Father. 
He will recognise your good deeds; 
and by your union among yourselves 
you will unite yourselves with him.’ 

4. Omep kai mowire] See for simi- 
lar expressions elsewhere in Ignatius, 


iv] TO THE EPHESIANS. 41 


SE) , e ` , 
TO EMLTKOTH WS XopOal E 


dla TOUTO ÉV T! Óuo- 


vola Uuwv Kal cvuQoevo dyarmy ‘Incovs XpıorTos erat. 
kai ol Kat’ dvdpa dé xopos viverOe, iva ouppevor OvTES 
év Omovoia, ypwua Ocot NaBovtes, év évornTt aonTe év 


GL [A]; om. [g]. 
should read éylvecOe or éyévecde. 


Trall, 2, Smyrn. 4, Polyc. 1, 4. 

dfuovóuacrov] ‘worthy of record; 
‘worthy of fame’ The fondness of 
Ignatius for the word d&os, which 
has been already remarked (note on 
§ 2), extends to its compounds also. 
Thus we have d&:ayarnros, akéiayvos, 
dÉiémawos, d£iemírevkros, déroĝavpa- 
Gros, déróĝcos, d£wopakápwg Tos, détó- 
muros, á&imAokos, a&tompenns, in these 
epistles. Some of these must have 
been coined for the occasion. 

6. os xopdai kiápa] See another 
application of this metaphor in 
Philad. 1 ovvevpúð piorar [6 émiakomos] 
rais évrohais, œs xopdais KiOapa. 
Comp. Clem. Al. Pvrotr. (p. 5) 
Ó TOU Oco0 Aóyos...róv avOparov, ruxnv 
Te Kal cópa avro), ayío mvevpare 
dppoodpevos, padre TO Oe Oud 
Tov ToAUH@VOV ópyávov kal Tpos- 

-ddet Tovro TÊ Opyávo TO av0pómo' 
ad yàp €t k.Üápa k.r.À. 

dua roüro] ‘owing to this adjust- 
ment, this relation? 

8. oi kar avdpal ‘ the individual 
members’ of the Church, who are to 
‘form themselves’ (yiveoOe) into a 
band or chorus. Forthe characteristic 
Ignatian expression of kar’ ävôpa 
comp. below § 20, Trall. 13, Smyrn. 
Ree Oly Cal. 

xopos] So Rom. 2 wa év dya] 
xopós yevopevoe donre TO marpi ev 
XpiorS Inso: comp. Clem. Alex. 

. Strom. vii. 14 (p. 885) ý exkAnoia 
Kupíov 6 mvevpatixos &ytos xopos. 
9. xpépa Oeo] ‘the scale of 


Tod Oco décor] GL; d£tov ôv rod Geod [g]; al. A. 
8 ylvecGe] G; yéveobe [g]; facti estis L; estote (or facti estis) A. 


Possibly we 
9 ddnre] ddere G. 


God’: comp. eg. Antiphanes in 
Athen. xiv. p. 643 émewa và péAn 
p.eraBoXais kai xpdpacw ws eù kékparat, 
Plato Resp. x. p. 601 ème) yupvobévra 
ye TOY THS povoltkns xpopárov rà Tov 
TOUNTaY, avrà ep avróv eyopueva k.T.À. 
(see also Legg. ii. p. 655). The term 
xpópara ‘hues’ applied to sounds is 
only one illustration of the very com- 
mon transference, by analogy, of 
ideas derived from one sense to 
another (see Farrar Chapters on 
Language p. 297 sq) The word 
xpôpa then, as a musical term, de- 
signated an interval between two full 
tones; comp. Aristid. Quint. p. 18 
as yap TO pera£U AevkoU Kal peAavos 
xXpOpa Kadeira, ota kai TO dia pécoy 
dupotv Oewpovpevoy xpápa mpoceipnrat. 
Hence it gave its name to the 
chromatic scale, which was called 
Xpeparikóv yévos, Or xpópa simply, 
as distinguished from the two other 
scales used by the Greeks, the da- 
tonic (Swarovixoy yévos or QOurovov) 
and enharmonic (évapuówwov yévos Or 
appovia); see Aristoxenus Harm. pp. 
19, 23 sq, 44, Euclid. Zz£r. Harm. 
P. 534 (ed. Gregory), Dion. Halic. 
de Comp. Verb. 19, Plut. de Mus. 11, 
22 Sd (Mor DD UU34 NN LIA288Sq)s 
Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vi. p. 366, 
Vitruv. Arch. v. 4, Macrob. Somn. 
Scip. ii. 4. Seeon this subject West- 
phal Harmonik u. Melopoie der 
Griechen pp. 129 sq, 141 sq, 263 
sq, Marquardt on Aristoxenus Harm, 
p. 246 sq and elsewhere. Of the 


42 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[iv 


Qu pud dia *Iyoov XpwrTov TO us tva d Kai 


dkova1 Kal émruytya rk], ov OV cÙ TAT OSES [ov üvTas 


TOU viov QUTOU. 


ipu OUV ÊO TlV ure êv ped Le 


EVOTNTL eivat, iva kal OcoU mavrToTe METEXNTE. 


> M > M E] ^ / , , 
V. € yap yw êv puxp@ xpóveo TolavTny ovv- 


D ^ > > £ 
Ociav éoyov mpos Tov Émíokomov UMwWY, OUK advOpwrivny 


r da] GL; om. A (attaching ’Inood Xpwroó to the following words and render- 
ing patri domini nostri iesu christi: the omission may be owing to homceoteleuton 


(MIAÀIA). 


kal TQ dyyammuévq vig aúroo I. X. KTA. 


chromatic scale itself there were three 
recognised modifications ; Aristox. 
Harm. p. $0 rpeis 06 ypoparıkai, 7j 
Te ToU paAakoÜü xpoparos kal rj TOU 
nptodiou kai 1) ToU roviatov (comp. Aris- 
tid NO uIDntS pO SEx EMP 1365 
Euclid. l. c. p. 537 sq). Such sub- 
divisions or modifications of any of 
the three great yóm were called 
xpoa, ‘colorations’ or 'shadings' ; 
e.g. Aristox. Harm. p. 24 xarà ra 
yen Te kal Tas xpóas (see Marquardt's 
note), comp. ib. p. 69 kaf éxdorny 
xpóav ef ékáavov yévovs. These sub- 
divisions (ypóa) of the xpópa were 
also themselves called ypøpara : 
see Euclid. l.c. Ignatius may have 
been led to choose a term which 
pointed chiefly to the chromatic 
scale, because this scale was espe- 
cially adapted to the instrument 
which suggested this elaborate meta- 
phor, the «idápa : comp. Philochorus 
in Athen. xiv. p. 637 sq AicavOpos 
ó ZXwvdwos KiOapiotis mpáros peré- 
ornoe Tv WoroxBaprorexny . . . Xpó- 
pará re eÜxpoa mpóros èrbápire K.T.À., 
Plut. Mor. p. 1137 E ró xpoparud 
yever... kiÜápa . . . é£ d apxns expnoaro: 
see Westphal p. 131 sq. The Latin 
translator here roughly renders ypópa 
by melos. 

ev évornrt] The phrase occurs again 
$8 5, 14 below, Philad. 2, 5, Smyrn. 


The paraphrase in g is év évórgre ëv *évqo0e TH cvuQovig TO 0eQ Tarp 


2 émvyw ek] cognoscat LA ; 


12, Polyc. 8. The words évotc6a., 
évórgs, ous, are frequent in these 
letters, as might have been antici- 
pated from their general purport. 

2. & ov eù mpáccere] ‘through 
your good actions, as in $ 14 8¢ dv 
mpaccovow opénoovra; comp. Š 15 
dv dv Made? mpacon K.r.X. There is no 
ground for the conjectural reading 
9v óv. The Latin has not per guem 
(as it has hitherto been read), but 
per qua; and the Armenian trans- 
lates zz bonis laboribus vestris. For 
ev mpadooev in the sense, not of 
‘faring well,’ but of ‘acting well,’ 
comp. Smyrn. II. 

pé] ‘members, as Trall. 11 bvras 
péAn avro) (see the note there). 
There is no play here, as Markland 
and others have supposed, on the 
other meaning of the word, ‘songs.’ 
Such an allusion would confuse the 
metaphor hopelessly, and would be 
unmeaning in itself. 

V. ‘1 myself have found much 
happiness in my brief intercourse 
with your bishop ; much more then 
must you, who are closely united 
with him, as the Church is with 
Christ, and as Christ is with the 
Father. Let no man deceive him- 
self. None shall eat the bread who 
stand apart from the altar. The 
united prayers of the bishop and 


LO 


v] TO THE EPHESIANS. 43 


orav dXAa aon TOW MGAAov UMas pakapiw 
TOUS Beak Baa oUTws, ws 5 ékkAgoía 'Inooü Xpt- 
STO Kal ws 'lnooUs Xpirros TO TaTpl, iva Tavra èv 
EVOTHTL cU ova ñ. pnoels abt: av pn Tis 
7 €évrOs TOU Üvciao-rnpiov, Va-repevrai TOU dpTov [ rou 


emiywookwy G; al. g. 4 peréxnre] ueréxere G. 8 robs 
dvakekpauévovs] g* (but vv.ll); rods èvkekpapévovs G; qui mixti estis A; con- 


junctos L: see the lower note. otrws] GL; aùr [g]; cum eo [A]. 


II Ñ évrós] G Dam-Rup r; sit intra L; évrós Ì g. 


Tov Oeo] GLg Dam-Rup; om. A. 


the whole Church are all powerful. 
Whosoever comes not to the con- 
gregation is self-willed, and falls 
under the condemnation of the 
Scriptures. Let us obey our bishop, 


- if we would be God's people.’ 


* not world- 
*not after the ordinary ways of 


6. ovK avOparivny | ie: 
ly, 


‘men’; see the note on Š 9 kar 


dy0pómov fiov. 

8. dvakekpapévovs] * closely attach- 
ed? to him. This, rather than éy- 
Kekpauévovs, seems to be the proper 
word, when attachment, friendship, 
is meant. See Pollux Ozom. v. 113 
emitnoel@s  dvakékpauau. mpós avrov, 
where he gives cvykékpaua: as a 
synonyme, but not éyxéxpayar; and 
so again, viii. I51 : comp. also Bekker 
JOE p. 391 '"AvakpaÜévres dvake- 
paa6évres, oho Wiyas KkoAA@pevor. For 
this use see Epict. Dzss. iv. 2. I 
un more dpa rQv mporépav cvwüÜov 7 
pov dvakpaÓgs tut ottas dore 
k.T.\., M. Antonin. x. 24 mpooretnkos 
kai dvakekpapévov r6 capkiie, Clem. 
Flom. ix. 9 th Yvy) dvakípvavrat 
(comp. $$ 1r, 13, 15), Clem. Alex. 
Exc. Theod. 36 (p. 978) rà én rà òr 
juàs pepurÜévr.  dvakpaÉópev, Orig. 
c. Cels. viii. 75 dvakpadoot T@ ToU Oeod 
Aóyo, Euseb. V. C. iii 12: comp. 
Philo de Praem. et Poen. 16 (IL p. 
424), Plut. Vit. Rom. 29, Vit. Cat. 
25, and the words in Eur. (pp. 253 


t = ‘ ^ 
voTepetrat] vorepeire G. 


Xp yàp petplas eis ddAndous iX (as 
Ovnroùs ávakípvaa Oat (with Valck- 
naer’s note). 

IO. pndels mÀavdcÓo] As Smyrn. 
6. So too the Apostolic phrase 
(S. Paul and S. James) u mAaváoQe, 
Š 16 below, Magn. 8, Philad. 3 
(see the note). 

II. tov Ovovactnpiov] The same 
expression occurs again Z74a/. 7 
6 évrós OvoLtactnplov àv Kabapos 
cor kr... The dvovacrypiov here is 
not the altar, but the enclosure in 
which the altar stands, as the pre- 
position évrós requires. This meaning 
is consistent with the sense of the 
word, which (unlike Bépos): signifies 
‘the place of sacrifice’; and it is 
supported also by examples of its 
use as applied to Christian churches; 
e.g. Conc. Laod. Can. 19 póvow egov 
eivat rois feparikois eig ua, eis TÒ 
Bvoiaorýpiov (i.e. the sacrarium), com- 
pared with Can. 44 où det yvvaîkas 
èv rà Ovovacrnpio eioépxeoOat 
(Labb. Cone. I. pp. 1533, 1537, ed. 
Colet.). This seems also to be its 
sense in Rev. xi. I pérpņoov Toy vaòv 
ToU Oeod kal rò OvovacTipioy kal Tovs 
mpookuvoovras év avT@, kal TV avAnY 
rijv eEwbev roù vao &kBaXe &Eabev, kai 
p) a)r)v perprjags, €600n Tots 


a 
OTL 


S 1 + 
čðveow; comp. xiv. 17, 18 dddos 
äyyeħos éfgAÓev ék roð vaod... kat 


dAXos dyyedos [e&jAdev] èk roð Ovora- 


44 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


Ocot]. ei yap évós kal Óevrépov mpocevyn TOGCQUTIV 
ioxuy Exel, zrómw MaANOV Ñ TE TOU émirkomou Kal md- 
ons THs ékKAnoias. ó ovv ur épyóuevos Ti TO QUTO 
oûros non UmepnQavei Kal éavrOv Oiékpivev" yéypamrat 


, € + € ` > , 
yap, YTEPHMANOIC O Oeoc ANTITACCETAI. 


2 te] Gg Dam-Rup; om. LA. 


irepndavel] vrepipave? G, and so vrepipdvors just below. 
dvaxplvee Dam-Rup; condemnavit L; al. g; def. A. 


otnpiov. (For the vads, as confined to 
the holy place and distinguished 
from the court of the altar, see Clem. 
Rom. 41.) 

The reference here is to the plan 
of the tabernacle or temple. The 
dvovacrnpiov is the court of the con- 
gregation, the precinct of the altar, 
as distinguished from the outer court. 
The application of this imagery, 


which Ignatius had in view, appears ` 


from the continuation of the parallel 
passage already quoted, Trall. 7 ó 9€ 
ékrós Ouovagrnplov àv o) Kabapds éarw, 
TOUTEOTW, Ò xwpls emuokómou Kal mpea- 
Burepiou 
otros od kaÜapós stw Tj cwveibüoet. 
The man who separates himself from 
the assembly of the faithful, lawfully 
gathered about its bishop and pres- 
byters, excludes himself, as it were, 
from the court of the altar and from 
the spiritual sacrifices of the Church. 
He becomes as a Gentile (Matt. xviii. 
17); he is impure, as the heathen is 
impure. See esp. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
vii. 6 (p. 848) gore yoðv ro map ñutuy 
O@vovacrypioy évraüÜa rò émiyeov TÓ 
dÓpowpa rGv raîs evxais dvakewpevor, 
plav domep €xov ov rv kowijv ka 
play yvopunv K.T.. (with the whole 
context). Thus Âvoiaorýpiov, being 
at once the place of sacrifice and the 
court of the congregation, was used 
metaphorically for the Church of 
Christ, the Ovoraorýpiov euuxov, as 
S. Chrysostom terms it. Somewhat 


kat OLakóvov mpdccwv Ty 


o7rovea- 


4 obros] GA ; sic (otrws) L; al. g. 
Oékpwev] G; 
5 yáp] GLA; ðè 


similarly in Polyc. PAZ 4 yweoekovcas 
Ore eiciv ÓvaiaoTüjpiov Ocob, it is ap- 
plied to a section of the Church, the 
body of ‘widows’; see also AZost. 
Const. iii. 6, 14, iv. 3. 

Thus S. Ignatius does not here 
refer to a literal altar, meaning the 
Lord's table. Too much stress per- 
haps has been laid on the fact that 
the early Christians were reproached 
by the Gentiles with having no 
temples and no altars, and that the 
Apologists acknowledged the truth 
of the charge, explaining that their 
altars, temples, and sacrifices alike 
were spiritual: e.g. Minuc. Fel. Oct. 
32, Orig. c. Cels. vill. 17. But, inde- 
pendently of this, the literal inter- 
pretation willnot stand here, because 
the place for the Christian laity would 
not be évrós ro? Ovovacrnpiov. In fact 
the imagery here is explained by 
the following words, where ó risko- 
mos kai müga 7 ekkAnoia corresponds 
to @vovacrnpiov, while ú mpocevxr) is 
the spiritual sacrifice therein offered ; 
as e.g. Clem. Al. Z¿. 5 6veía ris 
exkAnalas Aóyos amd Tay dylav Nrvxóàv 
dvabupidpevos, Orig. Z. c. ávaméyrerat 
adnOas kal vonrós eíd0rn Ovpiduara aí 
mpocevxal ard ovverdnoews kaÜapás. 
For the prayers of the Christians, as 
taking the place which the sacrifices 
held under the old dispensation, see 
the note on Clem. Rom. 44 mpocevey- 
kóvras rà 0ópa. In Philad. 4 6vataar1j- 
piov seems to be used (see the note 


vi] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


aS 


> \ E $, ^ e 
Swuev ovv wr avrvrac ceo Oa TW TITKOT, iva pev 


Oco úrorassouevoi. 


VI. 


Dam-Rup; al. g. 


K \ / , ^ D. va 
al Ocoy BNéret Tis olywvTa É€TLlGOKOTOV, 


6 ofv] GLS,; om. A [Dam-Rup 5] [Anton 3]; al. g. 
&vrirácoec0ai] LA L, S, Dam-Rup Anton; ávrerdocecóe G; al. g. 
G; 0eë Dam-Rup Anton; deo LS,; dub. A; al. g. 


7 9eo0] 
8 xai ócov] G Dam-Rup 


Anton; e? quantum L; Soy otv [g]; e? quando A; quia quantum (quanto) She 
érloxorov] G Dam-Rup; róv émíekomov [g] Anton. 


there) as here and in Zva//. 7 (already 
quoted). For other applications of 
the term, likewise metaphorical, see 
Magn. 7, Rom. 2. These five are 
the only passages in which it occurs 
in the Epistles of Ignatius. 

„TOU Gprov Tov Oeod] i.e. ‘the spiritual 
Sustenance which God provides for 
- His people. There is probably a 

reference to the eucharistic bread 

here, as there is more plainly in 

Rom. 7 (see the note there). The 

eucharistic bread however is not ex- 

clusively or directly contemplated, 
but only taken as a type of the 

Spiritual nourishment which is dis- 

pensed through Christ. This re- 

ference (like Rom. 7) seems to be 
inspired by Joh. vi 31 sq, where 
also the eucharistic bread furnishes 
the imagery, while at the same time 

a larger application is contemplated, 

0 (pros Tov Oeo srw ó karaBatvev 

êk ToU ovpavov k.r.. If so, the 

metaphor reverts ultimately to the 
manna, and thus harmonizes with 
the preceding Ovovacrnpiov. The 
manna was the bread provided by 

God for the congregation of Israel. 

For a more direct reference to the 

eucharistic bread, or at least to the 

agape, see below § 20; and for a dif- 
ferent application and meaning of 
üpros, Rom. 4. It will be seen from 
the authorities that the words roù 

Ocoü are somewhat doubtful. Per- 

haps they should be omitted: see an 

exactly parallel case, om. 4 xabapos 


dpros [cov], with the note. 

I. ei yap évós x.r..] An allusion to 
our Lord's promise, Matt. xviii. I9, 
20, éàv Ovo cvpudoovüjsovow é£ vpov 
K.T.À. ! 

4. avrov Oékpwev] ‘separates him- 
self then and there? He pronounces, 
as it were, the sentence of excommu- 
nication on himself. For this force 
of the aorist see Gal. v. 4 (note), and 
comp. Winer Gramm. xl p. 345 
(Moulton). The Latin condemnavit 
does not imply a different reading 
karékpwev (as Zahn), but is a mere 
mistranslation, just as this same 
version renders xarnpriopévor per- 
Jecti (S 2), as if it were dmnpricpévor, 
and ddudkpirov (Š 4) incomparabile, as 
if it were dovyKptrov. 

5. ‘Yaepnpavors k.r.A.] A quotation 
from Prov. iii 34. It is quoted also 
1 Pet. v. 5, James iv. 6, Clem. Rom. 
30; see the note on the last passage. 
In all alike [ó] Oeòs is substituted for 
Kupus of the LXX; but Ignatius is 
alone in placing vmrepnpavors first. 

6. duev Oeod k.T...] ‘Swe may be 
God's by our subjection’; comp. § 8 
Aor üvree Oeod, Magn. 10 ovk &orw 
ToU Oeod, Philad. 3 ómov OcoU eio... 
oro. Oeo égovrau Rom. 7 por (v. l 
epo) yiverOe, rovréorw Tov Oeo. 
The substitution of the dative was 
so obvious, and almost inevitable, 
that I have adopted the genitive 
against the preponderance of autho- 
rities. 


Vl. ‘Ifa bishop is silent, he only 


THE EPISTER"ORSIGNATIUS [vi 


46 


mXeióvos. aitov poBeicbw. — mávra yàp Ov méume ó 
oikoüearÓTHs cis iðlav oikovoutav, OVTWS El más avTov 
déxerOat, wis aitov TOv vréuxravra. Tov otv érriakorrov 
SyAovore ws aùròv Tov Kupiov Set poo ÜA émeuv. QuTos 
pev ovv ’Ovnoipos Vmeperraivel UpuGv ryv v Oeo ev- 


e , ` n [4 S eR 5 Ere 
ra£íav, 0r mavTes kaTa adAnOevav (re kai OTL év utv 


r mTÀevos] G (written aXeióvosavràv); mAelov [g]; -Aéov Dam-Rup 5 Anton 


véure] GLg Dam-Rup 5 Anton; à» méumy Dam-Rup r; mittet AS 


2 oUTWS 


de? ju&s aroy] GL Anton; ojres qus ôe? Dam-Rup r; otros ôe? ûuâs Dam-Rup 5; 


oŭrws aùròv ÕE qus g. 
Dam-Rup 1; recipere L. 
Rup 5 Anton; dub. LA. 


deserves the more reverence. The 
master’s steward must be received as 
the master, the bishop as Christ. 
Onesimus himself praises you. He 
tells me that no heresy has a home 
among you and that you will not 
listen to one who speaks of anything 
else but Christ.’ 

ovyévra| Ignatius returns to this 
subject again § 15, without how- 
ever mentioning the bishop. Simi- 
larly he commends the quiet and 
retiring disposition of the bishop of 
Philadelphia (Az/ad. 1), who is not 
named; and he deprecates any one 
presuming on the youth of Damas the 
bishop of Magnesia (Magn. 3). 

2. 0 oikoüeamórys] Apparently an 
allusion to the parable in Matt. xxi. 
33 sq. The words eis rv idiav oiko- 
vouiay are a condensed expression for 
eis THY oikovouíav rod ¿(ou otkov (or 
durehavos), 

ojres det Kk.r.À.] Comp. John xiii. 
20 ó Aaufávev dv twa méuyo eye 
AapBaver, 6 06 cue AauBdvov Aay/dver 
Tov mépYravrá pe, together with Matt. 
X. 40 0 dexdpevos ús eve S€éxerat, kai 
ó éué Oexópevos dSéxerar rbv. ámocrel- 
Aavra pe. 


3 béxecOa] Gg Dam-Rup s Anton; vmoüé£ac6at 
méupavra] Gg Dam-Rup r; méymovra Dam- 
oĉv] Gg Anton, and so S,A; yodv Dam-Rup 5. 
4 Ondovért] GLS,; om. A Anton Dam-Rup. 
Dam-Rup, and so LS,A; mpoBdérew G. 


mpocAérew] g Anton 
5 pev otv] GL; atque igitur A; 


7. karowei] ‘has iis permanent 
abode’; see the note on Clem. Rom. 
inscr. At the same time though no 
one had sez//ed here, Ignatius speaks 
of certain heretics as mapodevoavras 

9. 

8. mepik.z.A.] I have ventured so to 
emend the text, as the Armenian 
Version suggests, and as the sense 
seems to require, substituting nrre- 
puincoy for HrmrepiHcoy; see the 
faulty reading of A, womep for as 
cepi, in [Clem. Rom.] ii. $ 1. Com- 
pare Philad. 6 éàv 8€ dpdórepo, m epi 
'cIncoó Xpioroð pn AaAóGocuiv, oro 
epot orijAa( elo k.r.A, and simi- 
larly Trall. 9 ked$oe059re oiv, órav 
jpiv xopis '1gco0 Xpioroð adj tis. 
Another simple emendation would be 
'cIncoüy Xpwróv: comp. Magn. Io 
áromóv écTw 'lgcoüv Xpioròv AaAeiv 
kai iovOat(ew, Rom. 7 pr AaAeire 
'Incoüv Xpisróv Koopoy dé émiOupeire. 
The Latin aliguem amplius quam 
Jesum. Christum loguentem is ambi- 
guous, and might represent the ac- 
cusative as well as the genitive. 

VII. ‘Certain false teachers are 
going about, who profess the Name 
of Christ in guile. Avoid them, as 


, 


Io 


Vu] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


47 


> , [4 ^ 
ovOepía aipeois kacoiket*. dAN’ ovdée dkoveré Tivos mAéov 
N 3? ^ ^ ^ y 
n mepi ‘Incov Xo ToU XaXoÜvros év addy ela. 


VII. 


> 7 n 2 ^ es, 
Eiwbaciw ydp tives OON vrovnpo TO dvoma 


, Yi \ 4 5 ^ e ^ 
7repipepew, aKa TWA Trpaaaovres dva£ia Oeo oüs Sei 
È ^ e $ 5 // > ^ 
Umas ws Onpia ékkMivew* eioiv yap kúves NVTTWVTES, 

^ e a ^ » 
AaÜpoórkrai, oùs Set úuâs Guraccec Oat üvras Ova lepa- 


, 
7r€v'T OUS. 


uévro [g]. 


E > 4 H \ 
EÍS LATPOS EOTLY, G'apkiKOs Kal TVEUMATLKOS, 


8 Ñ mepl] guam (iprep) L; Ñ uóvov g (a paraphrase); elrep G. 


In A the sentence is translated et non audiatis quemquam, si non in veritate de iesu 


christo loquatur vobiscum. 


See the lower note. 


9 Tò bvoua] txt GLg (Mss, 


but 1 adds christz); add. bonorum A; add. xpioroô Dam-Rup r. See 8 3 for similar 


glosses. 


10 àXÀa Twa] So app. most Mss of g*, and Dam-Rup (Lequien) ; 
ard twa (sic) G; sed (dda) quaedam L; et revera (om. Twa) A. 
dnxta] G Dam-Rup; AaPpodnxra g (MSS). 

Theodt Gelas Sev-Syr 5, 6; add. yàp Anon-Syr,; al. g. 


I2 Aa6po- 
13 eis] txt GLA Athan 
capkwos] txt 


[L] [A] Athan Gelas Theodt Sev-Syr (twice) Anon-Syr,; add. re G; al. g. 


wild beasts. They are like mad 
dogs, whose bite is hard to heal. 
There is only one sure Physician, 
flesh and spirit, create and increate, 
God in man, Life in death, the Son of 
Mary and the Son of God, passible 
first and then impassible, even Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

9. Tà óvopa k.r..] Comp. Polyc. 
Phil. 6 rév WevdaderApav kai tdv èv 
dmoxpice. epdvtay TO Ovoua Tov 
Kupiov. For the absolute use of rò 
dvoua see above Š 3. 

IO, Gdda twa] ‘certain other things’ 
It seems necessary to read 4AAa, 
since the oppositive conjunction 
dAAà would be quite out of place 
after d6A@ movnpa. 

11. Onpia] So Smyrn. 4 rpopvddoow 
dé yas dro Të Onpiov ràv dvÓperopóp- 
gov «rr. In Philad. 2 they are 
called ‘wolves.’ 

12. Aadpodjxrac] Various forms of 
the word occur, Aa6poórjkrgs, as here, 
being the commonest, comp. Chrysost. 
Hom. in Ephes. xv. xabarep oi Xa0po- 
SyKrae TOY KYVdY oi TOY pèv mpogtóvra 
ovdey jAakroüauv k,T.A. (Of. XT. p. 115 


A); Aa0po8gkros (?) in the correspond- 
ing passage of the Pseudo-Ignatius : 
Aabpoddakrns Pallad. Vit. Chrys. (Chrys. 
Of. XIII. p. 21); Aa0paw0nkros, Photius 
in Oecum. ad Phil. iii. 2 ; XaÓpo8ákvgs, 
Antiphanes in Anthol, Grac. I. p. 
189 (Jacobs); Aabpodakvos (?), Nilus 
Epist. i. 309, p. 196 A (Migne). The 
recognised classical equivalent was 
Aaidapyos (Aabapyos), e.g. Arist. Eg. 
1068. Phrynichus (Bekker Anecd. p. 
50) on AdÓapyos Kev says, roüro Oe oi 
moo} rapadetpavres Xadpo8r]krrv Ka- 
Aovow. 

dvaGeparevrovs| i.e. ‘their madness 
is a virulent disease which is hard to 
cure and which they communicate to 
others by their bite’: comp. Soph. 
Ajax 609 dvadepamevros Alas...0eia 
pavia Evvavios. 

I3. is iarpós] ‘There is only one 
physician who can cope with it’: 
comp. Clem. Alex. Quis div. salu. 29 
(p. 952) rovrev 8€ róv rpavuárev póvos 
larpós "Ygoots kr., Orig. c. Cels. ii. 
67 (I. p. 438) 7A6e ecerüp ó Kúpios 
piv paddov as iarpos dyaÓós K.T.À. 
For the connexion of larpòs and 


48 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vir 


if , 5 , 
eevviyrós kal dyévyntos, év avOpwrw Oeos, év Üavavo 
Cor) adnOun, kai ék Mapias kai ék Oeo, mrpavrov za05- 


> ^ A , € ^ 
Tos kal TOTE arrabys, 'Inaoís Xpwros ó Kvpios ruv. 


I yevyntds kal dyévyyros] G, and so app. Athan (though some Mss and the 
edd. read yevnrds kal dyévyros); genitus et ingenitus L; factus et non factus A 
Gelas Sev-Syr (twice) Anon-Syr,; yervnròs èg dvyevvíov Theodt. The words 
substituted in g are ó pdvos dAnOuwds Beds ó dyévynTos...To0 dé povoryevods Taryp 
kal yervirwp. See the excursus at the end of this epistle. év avOpamy 
Ocós] Athan Theodt Gelas Sev-Syr (twice) Anon-Syr,; deus et filius hominis 
[A] (reading rx 31 ‘filius hominis! for ed x 3e in homine; see Peter- 
mann); év capki yevduevos 0e0s GL; al. g. év Üayárq wù &Xm0um] Athan 
Theodt Sev-Syr (twice) Anon-Syr,; vera vita et im morte vivus [A]; in morte 
vita aeterna Gelas; èv d0avatw (wi àNy0wíj (the dative is intended, for this Ms 


Onpiov see Clem. Hom. Ep. Clem. 2 
Tov mpoxabeCopevoy Set larpoð Tómov 
éméxew, où Onpiov dddoyou Oupov “yeu. 
Compare Š 15 ets oov 0i0do kaAos. 

capkikós kT.A.]] The antithesis of 
capkwós and mvevparikós is intended 
to express the human and the Divine 
nature of Christ respectively; comp. 
Smyrn. 3 ds capkwkós, kaimep mvevpa- 
TLKOS z|vop.évos TO TaTpl. 

For the constant recurrence of the 
combination sapé and mvebpa in Ig- 
natius in various relations, see the 
note on Š ro below. The expressions 
capkikós, yevyntos, v dvOpómo, èv 
lavár, èk Mapías, maOnrés, here are 
introduced to emphasize the reality 
of Christ's humanity against the 
phantom theory of the Docetics: see 
the note on Trall. 9. For the use 
of mveüpa in early Christian writers, 
as opposed to sapé and expressing 
the Divine nature of Christ as the 
Aóyos, see 2 Clem. $ 9 Xpioros ó 
Küpios...Óv pev TÒ mpórov mvedpa, 
eyévero capé, with the note. The 
alternative is that oapkixds k.T.À. 
should be taken closely with iarpds 
‘a physician for flesh and spirit a- 
like’; but the antitheses which follow 
seem to require the other explanation. 

For this sentence of antitheses 
compare Polyc. 3 Tov dóparov, róv 0c 


Has Óparóv, róv aynrddnror, [róv ÓC 
nas Wyradnrov], róv áma6$, rov OV 
nas mradnrov Kk.r.ÀN. See also Tertull. 
de Carn. Chr. 5 ‘Ita utriusque sub- 
stantiz census hominem et Deum 
exhibuit, hinc natum, inde non natum, 
hinc carneum, inde spiritalem, hinc 
infirmum, inde preefortem, hinc mori- 
entem, inde viventem, a passage 
which too strongly resembles the 
words of Ignatius to be independent. 
It is worth while observing that in 
the immediate context Tertullian 
quotes the incident from Luke xxiv. 
39, which Ignatius elsewhere (.Szzyzz. 
3) gives from another source. Comp. 
also Melito Fragm. 13 (ed. Otto) 
*judicatum esse judicem [et incom- 
prehensibilem prehensum esse] et in- 
commensurabilem mensuratum esse 
et impassibilem passum esse et im- 
mortalem mortuum esse et caelestem 
sepultum esse. Dominus enim noster 
homo natus...mortuus est, ut vivifi- 
caret, sepultus est, ut resuscitaret’; 
Fragm. 14 ‘quum sit incorporeus, 
corpus ex formatione nostra texuit 
sibi..a Maria portatus et Patre suo 
indutus, terram calcans et caelum 
implens, etc.’ 

I. -yevyntos kai àyévvgros] ‘generate 
and ingenerate, i.e. ‘generate as re- 
gards His human nature and ingene- 


viii] TO THE EPHESIANS. 


49 


M > ^ 
VIII. My oiv Tis úuâs eEaratatw, wamep ovce 


> ^ e“ 7 ^ 
5 é£avraáa0e, Grou Ovrec Oeo. Stray yao unòeuia ém- 


, 2A , COTL / ^ 
Oupia évipewrat év vutv Å Quvaudyn vuas Bacavioca, 


does not write the iota subscript) G; zz immortali vita vera Taleo 2 kal 
ék] GLA Athan Theodt Sev-Syr 5; èk (om. xal) Sev-Syr 6 Gelas Anon-Syr, ; 
al. g. 3 'Iycoós Xpwrüs ó Kúpos huðv] A Theodt Sev-Syr (twice) 
Anon-Syr,; dominus noster iesus christus Gelas; dominus christus noster L; om. G : 
al. g. 5 Órav yàp] = commences again here and continues to the end of 
the chapter. émiüvuta] ZA g; ¿pus GL, see below. 6 évnpeorac] 
plantata est ZA; complexa est (évelpyrou?) L; évelpw ra. G; vrdpxn [g*]. The 
impossible word évelpcra: is retained even by the latest editors (e.g. Hefele, 
Jacobson, Cureton, Dressel, Petermann, Lipsius, etc.), except Zahn and Funk. 


Dressel has accidentally transposed the words, évelpicrar pis, in his text. 


rate as regards His deity? The 
words yevynris kai ayévynros are here 
used to signify ‘create and increate,’ 
in which sense the more careful 
dogmatic language of a later age 
would have employed in preference 
the forms yevgrós. kal dyévgros with 
the single ». See the excursus at the 
end of this epistle. 

ev dvÜpóme Geos| This reading is 
demanded alike by the great pre- 
ponderance of authorities and by the 
antithetical character of the sentence. 
The substitution èv capkl yevópevos 
Oeós may have been due to the fear of 
countenancing the Apollinarian doc- 
trine that the Logos took the place 
of the human voids in Christ. 

ev Óaváro k.r...] For His death is 
our life, His passion is our resurrec- 
tion; comp. e.g. Smyrn. 5 To malos 
0 écrw nu» dvacraots. Here again 
there is reference to His two natures. 
He died as man: He lives and gives 
life as the Eternal Word. 

2. ék Mapías] See below $ 18, 
Trall. 9, and comp. Smyrn. 1. 

mpérov] He might have said with 
equal truth mpórov d7aÓ6/s kal róre 
maÜgrós, as in Polyc. 3 (already 
quoted) róv dza6f), róv bv jus mabnrov, 
but in these antitheses he commences 
with the humanity, as being the point 
attacked by the Docetic teachers. 


IGN, II, 


VIII. ‘Suffer not yourselves to 
be led astray ; for now ye are wholly 
given to God. So long as ye are 
free from any evil craving, ye live 
after God. I would gladly devote 
myself for the renowned Church of 
Ephesus. Carnal men are incapable 
of spiritual things, as spiritual men 
are incapable of carnalthings. With 
you, even the things done after the 
flesh are spiritual, for they are done 
in Christ. 

5. pres Oeo] See the note on 
Š 5 tva ópev Oeo. 

émtOupia| The combination of 
authorities leaves no doubt that 
this is the correct reading; comp. 
Ephes. iv. 22 xara tas emiOupias rhs 
dmárgs. For the connexion of unre- 
strained desire (émOupia) with false 
teaching see 2 Tim. iii. 6 aiyuaXorev- 
ovres yuvarkdpia... dydpeva | emiÜuptaus 
rouxiias, 2 Pet. ii. 18 SeAedfovow èv 
éntOvplas capkós (comp. ver. 10), Jude 
16, 18. The reading épis, though not 
inappropriate in itself (comp. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. vii. 16, p. 894, pw nv èv 
rais aipéoeot mpokpiréov) must be 
rejected here. It may have found its 
way into the text from a marginal 
note attempting to give a derivation 
of eveipiorat. 

6. éwjpewrad] ‘is inherent, is 
fixed? So it is necessary to read 


4 


50 


apa kara Ocóv (ire. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vri 


mepíNnua vuav kal ayviGopat 


A , ^ , ^ IA 
Uuwov "Ederiwy éxkAnolas THs diaBontouv Tots alway. 


1 dpa] dpa G (so certainly). 


meplynua vuov kal dyvifoua| G (but 


with a smooth breathing d-yvltomat); peripsima vestri et castificer (i.e. ayvifwpat, but 
thé mss castificet).a vestra etc. L*; gaudeo in vobis et supplico pro vobis ZA. In 


for éveipwora,, in which the editors 
generally have acquiesced, but which 
they do not attempt to justify. The 
frequent itacisms in the MS render 
the change obvious. Bunsen (Z7. p. 
88) saw that évetpwrrat was impossible, 
but substituted évepyrra.. Zahn first 
introduced the correct word into the 
text. For évepe(8ew (-0en0a)) comp. 
Dioscorid. ii. 23 (p. 367, Kühn) rév 
évgpewórov oTondxo kal ko (g yoro- 
dév, a use that would be appropriate 
to the metaphor at the close' of the 
preceding section; see also Plut. 
Mor. p. 327 B BéXe« awd ro€ov ro 
orépvov évepewrÜévru, 2b. p. 344 C rois 
mepi Tov pagrüv évepewgÜévros daréois 
kai karazayévros. Comp. Clem. Alex. 
Strom. ii. 20 (p. 487) ámárg evvexós 
évamepeiDouévg TH Pux, whence eva- 
mepeiopata ‘impressions’ in the con- 
text. For the form of the perfect see 
Lobeck Phryn. p. 33, Veitch Greek 
Verbs s. v. épeido; and for the indica- 
tive with órav, Winer xlii. p. 388 sq. 
Merx would read eppi{@ra: or éveppi- 
Cora: (p. 41), because the Syriac and 
Armenian have ‘plantata est,’ but 
this seems to be only a loose render- 
ing of évipeuwrar. 

I. mepi oua )póv] sc. eiu... For the 
omission of the substantive verb, and 
for the general form of the sentence, 
comp. Rom. 4 dmedevbepos "Inoo 
Xpuorrot (Sc. £copat) kal dvaorrjcopat èv 
Otherwise we might 
read mepimuá cip dpov, as eim in 
this position might easily have drop- 
ped out amidst the recurrence of 
similar letters. 

IepüJmua, literally ‘filth, scum, 
offscouring, was used like xá6appa, 


avT@ edevOepos. 


mepixdbappa, especially of those crim- 
inals, generally the vilest of their 
class, whose blood was shed to expi- 
ate the sins of the nation and to 
avert the wrath of the gods. Photius, 
Lex. s.v., Says otras éméAeyov TO 
kar éeviavtov éuBaddopevo tH ÓaXác on 
veavia émi dmaAAayg TOY Gwvexóvrov 
kakGv Iepinpa hpv yevod, rot 
coT)pía Kal dmoÀórpeocui, Kal ores 
évéBaNov 7j Oardoon, wravet TO Io- 
cedar. Ovolay admorivyuyvtes: COMP. 
Amphiloch. cxxxiii. (Of. I. p. 731, ed. 
Migne), where Photius well explains 
the force of the word as used by S. 
Paul In Athenian language these 
persons were called apyakoi, Arist. 
Ran. 731 kai movņpoîs Kak movgpóv eis 
dmavra xpope0a, vorarois aduypévor- 
ow, otaw 1) mós mpd Tov ovðè happa- 
koiciv eik) padios eypnoar ay. On 
these human victims see Hermann 
Griech. Alterth. Gottesdienst. S 60. 
Hence the idea in the word as used 
here is twofold: frst, ‘I am as the 
meanest among you,’ and secondly, 
‘I devote my life for you.’ For its 
biblical use see Jer. xxii. 28 (Symm.) 
pn mepirmua d$a)Xov kai dmóf8Agrov ó 
dvÓpemos; Tobit v. 20 (LXX) åpyúpıov 
.. mepipnpa ToU madiov nv yévouro, 
I Cor. iv. I3 ds mepikaÜáppara ToU 
kómpov éyevüünuev, mávrov mepünua 
Zes dptt. See also below Š 18 mepi- 
Vua Tó pòv mveÜga tod ocravpob, 
Barnab. 4 ypdpew éeomovdaca éyà 
mepinua pð, tb. 6 éyà mepinua ris 
dyarns úuðv. Hence Origen zz Joann. 
xxvii. § 14 (IV p. 393), explaining 
the prophecy of Caiaphas, applies 
the term to our Lord with an apology 
for so using it. In the middle of the 


viri] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 5I 


e \ ` ` , > 
OL TaPKIKOL Ta mvevuaTıka Tpaooew ov Ovvavrai OSE 


e \ \ Z [74 > e ^ 
OL TVEVUATIKOL TA OAOKLKA, WOTED OUOÉ 4 TioTIs TA THS 


5 , joe e 5 Z \ ^ y 
aTLOTLAS OVOE N ATLIOTIA Ta TNS WLOTEWS. 


d O€ kal 


g it is altered into replynua tudv kal ris dyvordrns ¿ó. éxkd. See the lower 


note. 
oi yap capxixol 2 [Antioch 12]. 
Tew g. 


GLA; yap Z. 


third century, as appears from Dio- 
nysius of Alexandria (Euseb. H.E. 
vii. 22), mepinua cov had become a 
common expression of formal com- 
pliment ‘your humble and devoted 
servant! (see Heinichen on Euseb. 
l. c. Melet. xv.). This expression, he 
says, which with others was a mere 
form of speech, had been actually ful- 
filled in the case of those devoted 
Christians who had caught the plague 
and died, while nursing others into 
health. Thus mepinua is closely al- 
lied in meaning to àvrivyov, which 
is also a favourite Ignatian word (see 
below 8 21), but superadds to the idea 
of ‘self-devotion,’ which is common 
to both, the further idea of 'abase- 
ment, vileness.’ 
dyvi(oguat k.T.A.] ‘Z am devoted to 
your Church’; comp. Trall. 13 ayi- 
Cera [ayvitere MS] tpar To épóv mved- 
pa. It appears to mean literally ‘I 
make myself a dywopa, a piacular 
offering, for your Church.’ The verb 
&yvi(ew sometimes means ‘to sacri- 
fice,’ ‘to devote’ (see esp. ehayvitew, 
kaÜayvi(ew) ; and adyvopa is ‘an expi- 
atory victim, e.g. /Esch. Fum. 315. 
Of the genitive case after ayví(ogat 
I càn find no other instance: but it 
might fall under the category of 
"verbs of admiration, affection, and 
the like ; and, as rptyeoOat, émurigeo- 
6a, etc., are found with this case (see 
Kühner 11. p. 324), it can hardly be 
considered out of place after ayvi- 
¢ecOa, when this secondary sense 
predominates. Several corrections 


3 of capkwol] GLAg (but 1 adds enim) Dam-Vat 5 Dam-Rup 7; 
Tpáccev] G Antioch Dam-Vat-Rup; mpdr- 
ovdé] Gg Dam-Reg-Rup Antioch; odre Dam-Vat. 


5 06] 


have been suggested; e.g. the sub- 
stitution of dyuopa for dyvitowa, or 
the insertion of vd’ or of úrép before 
)uóv. But, as Trall. 13 (already 
quoted) agrees in the same expres- 
sion, it is highly improbable that the 
scribes should have made the same 
error and introduced the same diffi- 
culty in both passages. A much 
more easy change than any hitherto 
proposed would be àrázomai for 
ărnízomài; but no correction seems 
to be required. 

2. éxkAnolas] governs vuov, and 
does not stand in apposition with it, 
as the article before duaBonrov shows. 

StaBonrov k.r.À.] ‘renowned through 
all ages, literally ‘bruzted about by 
the ages. The word occurs Clem. 
Alex. Exc. Theod.75 (p. 986), Orig. c. 
Celso Lm EUSeD. 77. lle ET 
which last passage it is used of Ig- 
natius himself, ó mapa mÀe(oTots elo- 
ére viv SuaBontros "Lyvárwos. It is 
found also occasionally in late classi- 
cal writers, e.g. Plutarch and Dion 
Chrysostom. Compare also mepi9óg- 
ros, Clem. Rom. 1, 47. For the 
dative see Xen. Ephes. i. 2 7» be 
SuaBonros Tots Üecopévows dmacw k.r.A. 
The alves are here ‘future genera- 
tions,’ and the dative is one of the 
agent. 

3. oi capkikol K.T.À.] 
cence of 1 Cor. ii. 14. sq. 

5. à Që kai k,r.A.] Le. ‘even your 
secular business is exalted into a 
higher sphere, is spiritualized, by your 
piety.’ 


A reminis- 


4—2 


52 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vim 


^ , , ^ 5 
Kara c'dpka TPATOETE, TAUTA MVEVMATIKA EOTLV €v 


^ ^ , 
'IncoU yap Xp TavTa Tpaccere. 


a af 
IX. “Eyre 96 rapodevcavrds Twas éket0ev, €xov- 


e »/ ^ > e ^ 
TOAS KaKNY IP yv OUS OUK ELAT ATE OTELPQL ELS VMAS, 


r mpáccere] GAg; fecistis X; operata sunt (mpáccera) L. And so again 


just below, except g, in which the passage is quite changed. 


GL; ô? uv [g]; ad vos A. 


3 ékeitev] 
6 mponrowacpévor] mpo hroruaopévot G 


(written rpo, not mpos, as stated by Markland and others); fatris, parati L; 
patris vestri del, parati A; 0¢05...yromacuéevos [Antioch 1]; Z parati estis [27] 


IX. *At the same time I learn 
that certain false teachers from a 
distance have been passing through 
your city; but ye stopped your ears 
and did not suffer them to sow the 
seeds of evil in you. For ye are 
stones of a temple, prepared for the 
building of God, hoisted up by the 
Cross of Christ, the Spirit being 
the rope and your faith the engine, 
while love is the way leading to God. 
Ye all take your part in the holy pro- 
cession, bearing each his God and 
his Christ, his shrine and his sacred 
things, dressed in the festive robes 
of Christ's precepts, while I by letter 
am permitted to share your rejoicing 
and to congratulate you on your un- 
alloyed love of God.’ 

3. mapoOejvcavras] sc. tiv”Edecor. 
They had taken Ephesus on their 
way, though they had not settled 
there; see Š 6 êv ópiv otdepuia aipears 
karore? (with the note). These are 
the itinerant false-teachers who are 
described in Š 7 as 8óÀe movnpĝ rò 
óvoua mepipépovres. The inter- 
pretation of Baur (Z. B. p. 29) and 
Hilgenfeld (p. 191), who take mapo- 
devoavras metaphorically, ‘taking a 
by-path, ‘going out of the direct 
way, cannot stand. The word al- 
ways signifies ‘to pass by,’ ‘to pass 
through on the way,’ e.g. Plut. Mor. 
p. 973 D rois cvv5Üos mapodevovor 
róv rómov, Lucian Scyth. 10 cuen 
Tapodevoas TyAukavTny mów. It is 


used several times in the LXX, and 
always in this sense: Ezek. xxxvi. 
34, Wisd: i. 8, ii. 7, v. 15, Vie 245 
x. 8. See also the note on Rom. 9 
srapo8evovra. 

ékeifev] ‘from yonder’; comp. Mart. 
Polyc. 20 rois émékewa adedpois. The 
martyr uses the same reticence here 
as regards place, which he uses else- 
where as regards persons; Smyrn. 5 
Tà dé òvópara avTay, Óvra Amita, OUK 
&Bo£év por eyypawat, GAA pnde vyévovró 
Mot pyguovevew K.T.. But what place 
is meant? Bunsen (Z. v. A. p. 38) says 
‘from Smyrna, translating it ‘from 
here’; but exe;0ev could not have this 
sense. Baur (Z. B. p. 29) answers 
‘from Ephesus’; and this, if I under- 
stand him rightly, is the view of 
Zahn also (Z. v. A. pp. 258 sq, 356 
sq, and ad /oc.), who takes the whole 
sentence to mean ‘I learnt that cer- 
tain persons passed through where I 
was (at Philadelphia) from Ephesus. 
But neither again could a writer well 
use ékeiQev of the place to which he 
addressed his letter. The reference 
in éxeiOey therefore must remain un- 
certain: but, if it were necessary to 
name any place, Philadelphia would 
answer the conditions. It appears 
from notices in the Epistle to the 
Philadelphians (see the introduction), 
that Ignatius had passed through 
their city on his way to Smyrna, 
so that he would know the facts; 
and we also gather from the same 


Ix] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 53 


, M 2 5 \ 
5 Bvcavres Ta WTA eis TO pn 7apaOé£ac at Ta OTELO- 


@ 3 5 A e af 7 ^ , 
HEVA UT aUT(V' (S OvTES Alor VaOU TT PONT OLMAG MEVOL 


> > ` Lad 
eis oikoðouny Ocot maTpos, avaepouevor eis Tà Un dua 


^ ^ 5 ^ ^ e 
Ths pnxavns “Incov  Xpw rov, ös srw oTavpOS, Tyowiw 
£ 


(all the previous part of $ 9 being omitted); al. g: see the lower note, 2 
commences again here and continues to 7j dvadépouca eis Ocdy, omitting the last 


part of the chapter. 
templi spiritualis A. 
crux L; dub. Z; al. Ag. 


letter, that heresy had been busy 
there (§§ 2, 3, 6, 7, 8). The substi- 
tutions for ékeifev in the Armenian 
Version and in the interpolator's 
text are mere expedients to get rid 
of an obscure expression. 

4. omepaj See the metaphor of 
Borayn below, Š 10. Here the ‘sowing’ 
is regarded as taking place through 
the ear. 

5. Búcavres rà otal Ps. lvii. (lviii). 
4 domidos keodfjs kal Bvovons rà ora 
ars. It was an action expressive 
of horror, when any blasphemy was 
uttered; Acts vii. 57 ovvécyov rà ra 
avrà», Iren. in Euseb. Z. Æ. v. 20 
euppáćas rà æra avro) (of Polycarp, 
when he heard any heresy talked), 
lren. Her. iii. 4. 2 ‘si aliquis annun- 
tiaverit ea qua ab hereticis adin- 
venta sunt...statim comcludentes aures 
longo longius fugient, Clem. Recogn, 
ll. 37 ‘aures continuo oóc/udens, velut 
ne blasphemia polluantur’ (comp. 20. 
li. 40, 52). In Clem. Alex. Protr. 10 
(PP: 73, 83) droBtew rà dra is used of 
resisting good influences; comp. 
Clem. Hom. i. 12 Buovres rav røges- 
Oat OeXovtwy ras axoas. For the pur- 
port comp. Trall. 9 køpøðnre ody 


^ K.T.À. 


6. iĝo vaod] The metaphor, and in 
part even the language, is suggested 
by Ephes. ii 20—22; comp. 1 Pet. 
ii. 5. The metaphor is elaborately 
carried out in Hermas Sz. ix. See 
below $ 15 (note). The transition in 


. 7 9eo0 rarpós] GLE Antioch; 6eíav marpós [g]; 
8 0s] G; ó Antioch; fer machinam...que est 
exowio] G; exotvo [g] [Antioch]. 


the metaphor is violent, after the 
manner of Ignatius. It can hardly 
be bridged over, I think, by a re- 
ference to the idea of seed sown on 
rocky ground (Matt. xiii. 4), as Zahn 
suggests. 

mpontrotpacpévo.] So I have ven- 
tured to substitute for marpòs 7To- 
pacpévou i.€. TTPOHTOIMACMENO! for 
TIPCHTOIMACMENO!. This was Mark- 
land’s conjecture, but it had occurred 
to me without knowledge of the fact. 
Certainly marpos is awkward, where 
@cod marpos follows so closely; while 
mponrormacpévoe gives another coinci- 
dence with the same Epistle of S. 
Paul (Ephes. ii. 10 ois mponroiuacey o 
cds, comp. Rom. ix. 23 eken 
édéous à mponroiuacey eis óav) which 
has so largely influenced this letter, 
and more especially this context. 
An alternative correction would be 
to substitute mvs for mps, mvevparos 
for marpós; see the note on Smyrn. 
I3. For vaol mveúparos comp. 1 Cor. 
vi 19. But the mention of the Spirit 
comes in properly at a later stage. 

8. ugxavfjs] See Hippol. de Antichr. 
59 (p. 31 Lagarde) «Xtya£ ev airy eis 
tos dváyovra émi rò Képas eikóv 
onpetov máÜovs Xpioroð, €Akovca roUs 
mioroùs eie avaBacw ovpavey (comp. 
Clem. Rom. 49 rò dwos eis 0 aváye 
ý dyámn k.r.A.), Method. de Sanci. 
Cruc. 1 (p. 400, ed. Migne) pnyavi dv 
js of els olkodopny eüBeroüvres Tis €k- 
kKÀno [as káro ev Alov rerpaydvov Sixny 


54 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[1x 


f ^ / ^ e / ^ e ` £ e ^ , it 
XPWMEVOL TW 7VevuaTt TW AYLW” N 0€ TWLOTIS Ujuov ava 


A [: \ > , 5 / 
ywyevs Uma, 1j 0€ ayann Oóos n dvapepovra ets Oecov. 


1 TQ rvedpart TO åyly] G; r@ arly mvevuare Ë; spiritu sancto L; qui est spiritus 


sanctus X5 7G mveúparı [Antioch]; def. A. 
Rup 6, and so in the next line; al. g Antioch. 


dvyéAkovra,, evappooOnoipevor TH Ocio 
Aóye (speaking of the cross), Chrysost. 
Hom. 3 in Ephes. (Op. X1. p. 19) do- 
mep Otd rivos €Akov pnxavis eis 
Bos adriy [rv ékkAgaíav] dvýyaye 
péya. 

és| by attraction for 7; see on 
Magn. 7, and Winer § xxi. p. 206 sq. 

I. avaywyeds| ‘a lifting engine.” No 
other example of this sense of the 
word is given in the lexicons earlier 
than Eustath. Opusc. p. 328 (ed. Tafel) 
"Apyov...ov Tj momroð masrik) eis 
mohAovs Yvorgev opOadpovs Kal Bpveuw 
orep modais eémomoey oweow, eis 
popía Oppara Katatpnoaca, os Ouappeiv 
oUT@ TO OmTLKOY TOU OÀov c'óparos, os 
bre moduTpyrov Twos avaywyéws Vdap 
modvppovy éÉakovrí(era., This com- 
parison to the many eyes of Argus 
seems to show that the dvaywyevs 
described by Eustathius is, as a 
friend suggests to me, an engine like 
Barkers Mill. The dvaywyeds con- 
templated by Ignatius may not have 
been of the same kind, for the word 
itself is not special; but there would 
be no anachronism in this identifica- 
tion, since (as I am informed on com- 
petent authority) the principle of Bar- 
ker’s Mill was known before his time. 
I have not found the word in the 
Mathematict Veteres, where it might 
have been expected to occur. 

The metaphor is extravagant, but 
not otherwise ill-conceived. The 
framework, or crane, is the Cross of 
Christ; the connecting instrument, 
the rope, is the Holy Spirit; the 
motive power, which sets and keeps 
the machinery in motion, is faith ; 
the path (conceived here apparently 


judv| GLE; om. A; huv Dam- 
dvaywyevs] G Dam-Rup; 


as an inclined plane), up which the 
spiritual stones are raised that they 
may be fitted into the building, is 
love. 

3. éoré obv x.r...] The mention of 
the ‘way’ suggests a wholly different 
image to the writer. The members 
of the Ephesian Church are now 
compared to a festive procession, in 
which each person bears some 
sacred vessel or emblem, a statue of 
a god, a model of a shrine, and the 
like; comp. Epist. Jer. 4 vum de 
bWerbe èv BafvAówi Ócovs dpyupovs 
kdi xpvcoüs kai €vAivous ém dois 
aipouévovus. How large a place these 
religious festivities occupied in the 
life of a Greek may be inferred from 
Aristoph. Lys. 641 sq émrà pev € 
yeyoo eJ0)s 9ppndoopovv...kákavg- 
$ópovv mor ovaa mais Kady k.r.À. 
Hence such words as ávOodópos, ðq- 
Soopos, eppnpopos, Óvpsodqópos, kavy- 
dópos, Kiotopopos, Awvodópos, mar- 
ToQópos, vopopopos, etc. At Ephesus 
itself the saint’s imagery would have 
an especially vivid illustration in the 
fact that treasures belonging to the 
temple of Artemis were solemnly 
borne in procession into the city by 
one road and taken back by another 
at stated times, as we learn from a 
recently found inscription: see Wood’s 
Discoveries at Ephesus lnscr. vi. 1, 
PP. 32, 34, 42 (see above, p. 17 sq). 
A description of such a procession 
in Ephesus at an émiydpios éoprn of 
Artemis is given also in Xenoph. 
Ephes. i. 2, mapyecay è karà oríyov 
of mopmevovres: mpOrov pev Tà iepà kai 
dades kai Kava kal Ouvpudwara, émi dé 
ToúÚrots immot Kal kÜves kal okedn kvvg- 


ix] TO THE EPHESIANS. 55 


> M > \ , , 
émTé OVW kai GUYOdK mavTes, Qceobódpo, Kai vaoQopoi, 


paraphrased micrer dvaryouévous [g]; dywyevs [Antioch]; dux L; pracparator A. 
2 ávaoépovca] G Antioch; referens L; dvw $épovca Dam-Rup; dub. ZA; al. g. 


els] G; eis ròv Antioch; mpós Dam-Rup; mpés Tov [g]. 


3 vaopdpor] GLg; 


om. A; paraphrased vaós Oeo by Antioch. 


yerixa «A. Accordingly elsewhere 
(C. Z. G. no. 2963 c) we read of oi 
Ty...kócuov Baocrd|(ovres] tis peyd- 
Ans Oeâs ['Apréji]Bos mpd móA[eo]s 
iepeis [xai ieploveixaz. Again there is 
a mention in another inscription 
(Wood's Discoveries Inscr. vi. 19, p.68) 
of a Oeurvodoopiak!) opm in this same 
city. Again we read of yet another 
Ephesian festival, the karayeyia, in 
which persons went along pómaAá re 
erupepdpevor kai elkóvas edor (Mart. 
S. Timoth. in Ducange Gloss. Graec. 
p. 607: see Lobeck Aglaoph. p. 177). 
But indeed this was not character- 
istic of one or two special occasions. 
At all the great festivals of Ephesus, 
the Taípea, in honour of Poseidon, 
the "AufBpóc:a, in honour of Dionysus, 
etc., the same sight would probably 
be seen. 

Ignatius is not the only writer, to 
whom this characteristic feature of a 
heathen religious ceremonial suggests 
the image in the text: comp. Philo 
Leg. ad Cat. 31 (II. p. 577) év rais 
Wvxais dyahpatogopovar ras rv 
Sareraypévov eikóvas, i.e. they carry 
the commandments in their souls, as 
the pagans bear the images of their 
gods on their shoulders. So again 
de Mund. Opif. 23 (1. p. 16) mpos éva 
Tov TOV ÓXov ékeivov, OS àv dpxérvmov, 
ó èv éxdotm [vots] róv xarà pépos 
dmewovioÓg, rpómo» Twa Geos dv roO 
$épovros kai dyakpatopopovrtos 
abrop, ib. 47 (1. p. 33) otkos yàp 1) yeas 
iepòs érexraivero Wuxijs doyeiis nv 
čuu dyadpatopopycery, dyan- 
párev To Oeoerdéorarov, and so fre- 
quently in Philo, who however in 
some passages attaches also a 


secondary meaning to dyahpa, ‘an 
image’ or ‘representation’ in its 
philosophical sense. From Philo 
the application of ayadparodopety is 
borrowed by the Christian fathers. 
See also Epictet. Diss. ii. 18. 12 sq 
Ocdy mepiépers, Taras, kal dyvocis: 
Soxeis pe Aéyew apyvpody Twa 7) xpu- 
coüv eabev; ev savr dépes avrov 
«7d. Similarly Clem. Alex. Protr. 
4 (p. 53) ripeis yap, jets eoper oi TV 
eikóva Tod Oeod mepupépovres ev TO 
Cévre kal kiwovpévo TovT@ dydAparu 
TQ dvÜpómo K.TA. See also the note 
on ayiopdpos below. 

atvodo| ‘companions on the way. 
This word occurs several times in 
Epictetus, Déss. ii. 14. 8, iil. 21. 5, 
iv. 1. 97 (and so it should be writ- 
ten in iii. I3. I3. Similarly mápoðos 
*a wayfarer LXX 2 Sam. xii 4, 
Ezek. xvi. 15, 25; mpóo0os ‘a pre- 
cursor, Clem. Hom. iii. 58, viii 2, 
xvi 18, xx. I3, 14, 18; @Podos “a 
patrol e.g. Polyb. vi. 36. 6. 

bcopdpor x.r.A.] i.e. Seach carrying 
his God, his shrine, his Christ, his 
holy things.’ On this word 6codópos 
see the note, inscr. above. 

yaopopot| ‘shrine bearers’ The 
metaphor is taken from the portable 
shrines (containing the image of 
some patron deity), which were 
made either to be carried about in 
processions, or to be purchased by 
pilgrims to any famous sanctuary 
as reminiscences of their visit and 
worn about the person as amulets. 
For the former see e.g. Herod. ii. 
63 rò dé dyalua cov èv m pukpó 
Evdiv@ karakexpuva'opévo mpoekKkopi- 


Cover &.rÀ., Diod, Sic. i. 97 rà» vadv 


56 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[1x 


\ , , 5 
XpioTrodopot, dy.opopot, KATA TWaVTAa KEKOOMNHMEVOL EV 


- - ^ < \ , ° , 
évroAais 'InooU XpiaToU* ois kat ayaNAt@pevos n£wOnv, 
n ^ ^ \ ^ cf 
Ov wv ypapw, TpoTomAHTal Vpiv, Kal TvyXapHvat OTL 


r xpicropspo.] G; et christiferi L; om. A [g]; recognized by Antioch, who has 
0eodópos ġyoðv xpwro$ópos (the whole being transferred into the singular). 


åyioġópa] GLAg; Antioch has dyodpépos. 
Kexoounuevor] kekoopauévou G. ér] 
L; om. G; & rais [g]; (in) omnibus [A]. 


mávra Antioch; e£ omnino [A]. 


kara mávra] GLg; kal rà 


2 ayarrNudpevos 7£«09v] 


L [g]; dyaspat dre QË 602 G. A begins a new sentence ‘exulto quod dignus 
factus sum loqui vobiscum, et gaudeo in eo quod scripsi ad vos (thus strangely 


dyakopiCouévov | dudorépev eis pos 
K.T.À., XX. 14 émepwNrav Që kal roUs èk 
TOV iepG» xpvaovs vaoùs rois aidpv- 
pact mpos Trjv ikegiav. Of the latter 
the miniature representations of the 
shrine of the Ephesian Artemis fur- 
nish the best illustration, and we 
may suppose that Ignatius had these 
more or less in mind; see Acts 
xix. 24 (with the passages collected by 
commentators) Comp. Amm. Marc. 
xxi. I3 ‘deae caelestis argenteum 
breve figmentum, quocumque ibat, 
eferre solitus. See also the con- 
jectural reading of Wordsworth on 
the Scholiast of Aristides, Athens 
and Attica p. 108 IlaAAatov...róv 
srepavroiópov kadoupévay. The appli- 
cation of the metaphor is to the body 
of the Christian, as the shrine of 
the Spirit; see below Š 15 tva dyer 
avrov vaoi (with the note). 

i Xpwrrodópoi] Comp. 2 Cor. iv. 
IO gávrore THY vékpocuv TOU "Inco0 ev 
TO cópart m epub épovr es, Magn. 12 
'"Ipcoüv yap Xpioròv čyere èv sare 
The saint himself is called xpurrodé- 
pos in Mart. Ign. Ant. 5. So Phileas 
in Euseb. H. Z. viii. 10 oí xpurroQó- 
pot paprupes. Other compounds of 
Xpwrós in Ignatius are ypicrouabla 
Philad. 8, xpvaróvouos Rom. inscr. 

aysopdpo) ‘bearers of holy things, 
such as sacred treasures, votive offer- 
ings, and the like, which it was cus- 
tomary to carry in procession. They 


are the divinarum bajuli caeremo- 
niarum, Firmic. Matern. Astron. 
iii. II. 9. The word occurs again, 
Smyrn. inscr.; comp.  íepojópos 
C. Z G. 1793 b, tepadopos 20. 
2384 b (Appx.) So too the Latin 
‘sacra ferre! (e.g. Virg. £7. iii. 19) 
of priests. But see esp. Plut. Mor. 
352 B rois dÀAyÜGs kal Ówaios tepa- 
$ ópois kal iepooróÀots mpoodyopevas 
pévors: ovrou é elow oi Tov iepòv Ad- 
yov...€v tH puxn Qépovres, damep 
êv n kai mepwgréANovres (with 
Wyttenbach's note) Virg. Georg. ii. 
476 ‘Quorum sacra fero ingenti 
percussus amore’; in both which 
passages the image is applied as 
here. 

kexoopnpevor] ‘adorned, decorated, 
as with festive robes, chaplets, trink- 
ets, and the like; comp. 1 Pet. iii. 3 
Gv égro oux 0 čéwlev eumdokis piv 
kat mepiÜégeos xpuciov 9 évOvceos 
ipariev kóg pos KTA, I Tim. ii. 9 sq 
pera aidods kai ropporúvns koc pety 
éavràs.. Ôe épyav ayabdv. See Xenoph. 
Ephes. i. 2 eeu è mopmevew mácas 
ras émixopíovs mapÜévovs kekoopn- 
pévas moAureAós xal robs édrBous, 
describing a sacred procession at 
Ephesus. Mention is made of certain 
officers as xpvaodopobvres in connex- 
ion with these festive processions in 
honour of Artemis; Wood’s Dis- 
covertes Inscr. vi. pp. 32, 34 (comp. 
iii. p. 20) This seems to mean 


IX] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


57 


Kar. a 0 7 Bi Ya > ^ $ A » M 
y pormev LOV OUVOEV AYATATE, El un pgovov Tov 


5 Ocov. 


\ M ^ p 
X. Kai UT€Q Tøv dXXwv Õe avOpwrwy adiaNelrrws 


deranging the connexion of the words). 


4 kar’ dvOpdrwv Blov k.T.d.] 


kar’ &dov Blov k.r.X. GL; see the lower note. My conjecture is supported by 
the paraphrase in g ovdé xarà cápka dyamare ddd karà Ocóv. The text was early 
corrupted, as appears from the confused rendering of A, alium quendam non diligitis 


sed eum qui secundum deum vivit. 


6 kai vrép rv Mwy 80] GLg ; e£ pro 


aliis A; super omnibus È. 2 commences again here and continues as far as 40erm07. 
adiaelrrws] GLg; om. ZA. See the lower note. 


‘decorated with gold ornaments or 
wearing gold embroidery’; comp. 
Wesseling on Diod. Sic. iv. 83 xpvco- 
Qopeiv Tj '"Adpoüírg. The fondness 
of the Ephesians for fine dresses 
is commemorated by the Ephesian 
Democritus quoted in Athenzeus xii. 
p- 525; it is rebuked by S. Paul, 1 
Tim. ii 9, 10. The interpretation of 
Hilgenfeld (A. V. p. 250), ‘durch die 
Gebote Christi organisirt, geordnet, 
seems to me quiteimpossible, whether 
the preposition ev be retained or not. 

2. ois kal k.r...] ‘wherein also 
rejoicing T was permitted to associate 
with you by letter, and to congratu- 
late you, that ye love nothing after 
the common life of men, but God 
only” The reading dyaddidpevos 
should probably be adopted on the 
ground of external authority ; and if 
so, ois is more naturally taken as a 
neuter with dya\\idpevos. It may 
however be a masculine governed 
by mpocomAjoa and explained after- 
wards by vpiv: see Winer Gramm. 
§ xxii. p. 184 sq. For the whole 
expression comp. Magn. 1 dyahhis- 
pevos mpoeiddunv êv mioret Iyoo 
Xpicrov mpoodadjoa ópiv* karaÃiobets 
yàp k.T.A.; and for d£iobo at, a cha- 
racteristic expression of Ignatius, the 
note on Magn. 2. 

4. kar dvOpdrev Bíov] So I have 
ventured to emend, ANWN for &AAON; 
or perhaps read aNINON = dvÜporivov; 


comp. Rom. 8 o)kéri éw kara dv- 
Opemovs (cv, Trall. 2 aiverOé por 
ov karà dvÜpomovs (dvres. In this 
case ei uj will be ‘dut only” In 
other words it will not refer to the 
whole of the foregoing sentence, but 
to ovdéy dyamáre alone ; comp. Matt. 
xii 4, Luke iv. 26, 27, etc., and see 
the note on Gal i. 19. The com- 
mentators fail to make anything of 
kar áAXov fiiov. Zahn accepts Mark- 
land's conjecture kað’ óAov fov, but 
this is a violent change and does not 
yield a very good sense. 

X. ‘Pray also for unbelievers. 
There is hope of their repentance. 
Let them learn from your deeds, if 
they will learn from nothing else. 
Requite them with good for evil; 
with meekness for their wrath, with 
humility for their boastfulness, with 
prayers for their revilings, with 
staunchness in the faith for their 
errors, with gentleness for their 
wrath. Show yourselves their bro- 
thers by your conduct. Imitate not 
them but the Lord. Vie with each 
other who shall suffer rather than 
do the most wrong. Let no rank 
weed of the devil spring up in you ; 
but live in chastity and soberness,’ 

6. dOuaAe(mros] See 1 Thess. v. 17, 
where also we have the expression 
dOuaAeirros mpocevyeoOe; comp. Her- 
mas Sizu. ix. 1I. The same adverb 
occurs also Rom. 1.9, 1 Thess. i. 3, 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


2232 80, oru yap [év] avrots éXmis Mere es 


58 


tva Ocov TUYWOLW, emeTpeyare OUV QU'TOLS Kav ÈK TOV 


čpywv viv F Qi Du mpos TAS opyas QUTOV VUES 
7rpaeis, ps Tas peyaXopnpogivas GUTUOV Vets TATELWO- 
pores, mpos Tas Pracpnpias avTWY Uis Tas TpPOTEV- 


1 mpocedxerbe] mpoceóxec0a. G. Add. deum L; add. ut redeant ad deum A; 
txt GZg év] GL: om. ZAg (Mss, but inserted in 1). 2 émirpéware 
xTM] The whole of this passage is loosely translated in Z ex operibus vestris magis 
discipuli-fiant ; contra verba eorum dura in humilitate animi placabiles-estote et in 
lenitate; contra blasphemias eorum vos estote precantes ; et contra errorem eorum arme- 
mini in fide; et contra ferocitatem eof utn. estote pacifici et tranquilli et ne admiremint 
cos, where however the word HONN admiremini, is probably an error of 
transcription for PONN imitemini. The Armenian substantially follows the 
Greek. émitpéware] G; monete L; rogate A; emwrpéyare g; om. È. 
ot»] GLg; om. ZA. 8 d8eAol...d0erg05] In place of these words 


Z has simus autem imitatores domini nostri in humilitate et eius qui magis injurias- 


ii. I3, in connexion with prayer and 
thanksgiving. See also Polyc. 1 mpos- 
evxais oxóXa(e dáOuaAetmrow. The 
Syriac and Armenian have simply 
‘pray’ here and simply ‘be constant 
in prayer’ in PoZyc. I. In the passage 
before us therefore the d8uaAeímros 
is highly suspicious, and may easily 
have been inserted from St Paul. 
In Polyc. I it is not quite so clear 
that the word is unrepresented in 
the text of the Syriac translator 
(followed by the Armenian), because 
the Syriac ars died’ ‘be constant’ 
might be intended to cover both 
oxodage and dOuAeimrow. On the 
other hand, supposing that the word 
was in the Greek text used by the 
Syriac translator, he may have re- 
jected it on account of its apparent 
extravagance. 

I. €orw yap k.r.À.] Comp. Herm. 
Sim. vii. 7 kai ri, $neiv, čorw èv 
avrois eAmis peravoías (comp. 2d. Š IO), 
quoted by Zahn. 

2. Kav KTA] ‘at all events from 
your works, if they will not listen to 


your words? This use of xà» is 
elliptical for kày ... . padnrevddow : 
comp. Mark vi. 56, Acts v. 15, 2 Cor. 
xi. 16,2 Clem. i127, 16, Sce Winer 
Gramm. § lxiv. p. 730 (Moulton). 

3. piv padnrevOjvar| ‘to be your 
disciples) ‘to go to school to you’; 
a legitimate and not uncommon 
construction with padnrevew (-ec au), 
e.g. Plut. Mor. 832 B pa€ntevoas ro 
marpií, ñv yap codiorns, ó Kal "AAKkt- 
Biadnv pasiv ert aida Ovra dbourñcau, 
ib. 837.C, 840 F, Orig. c. Cels. iii. 29 
ai...XpugrQ  paOnrevÓcica, exkAnoiat, 
Euseb. H. E. v. 13 pa6grevÓcis emi 
‘Pøuns, os avrós íoropei, Tarıav& 
(speaking of Rhodon), V. C. iii. 47 
TQ Kow corpi uepa8nreUo Oa. 
this verb see the note Rom. 3. 

mpos tas opyas k.rA.] See Matt. 
v. 44, Luke vi. 27, 28, Rom. xii. 
14 sq. Comp. also 1 Pet. ii. 21, 22, 
where our Lord’s example is dwelt 
upon as here. 

5. Bracdnpias] Not ‘dlasphemies, 
but ‘slanderings, ‘railings’; comp. 
Luke l. c. rpocedxerbe rèp ray emn- 


Š 


On 


IO 


x] 
f \ ` P 5 ^ e m~ c ^ 

yas, moos TNV mwAaVHY Twv UES éhpaloi TH "nicrel 
\ ` ” E] ^ e ^ [74 M 

Tpos TO aYPLOV aúTwv UMELS nuepov pn orrovdaCovTes 

> , 5 

avryupnoacba aúTovs. 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 59 


Hu . A ^ ^ 
aüeNQoi avtay evpebwopey Tn 
$ AE \ \ “= , D ⁄ 
émuetkeia’ jurat 96 Tov Kupiov orovðaÇwpev civar, Tis 


, 5 ^ , > w > ^ t ^ 
mAéov adixnOy, Tis dzroc-repnOn, Tis abeTnOn tva un ToU 
t 


patietur et opprimetur et defraudabitur. After à0erm00 it omits everything till the 
last sentence of 8 14 où [yàp viv] ¿maryyeMas k.r.ħ. The corresponding words in 
A are sed (in) mansuetudine state et similes dei studeamus fieri, the sentence tls 
mréov...dbernO, being omitted. The Syriac Version (S) was probably corrupted 
at an early date, and hence the aberrations of ZA. evpeOw@pev] So 
G. Dressel prints evpn9Guev (after other editors) and does not notice any variation 
from his text in G. 9 Tod Kuplov] GZ; rà» kóptor g (with a different con- 
struction); de LA (comp. § 1). 
aSucnOel...dmocrepndet...abernbet G injustum patiatur ... Jraudetur ... contemnatur 
L; def. A. The construction is changed in [g], but the words aduxnOels, amoare- 
- pn0ü, abernOn appear. The rendering of 2 (see above) points to the reading 


10 ducy03. ..arocrepu0T...à0erq07] 


adopted iri the text. 


pea(óvrev vpas. For this mean- 
ing of BAaocdpnpia, which indeed 1s 
more common than the other in 
the N.T., see the note on Col. iii. 8. 

ras mposevxás] The interpolator 
has supplied this ellipsis by dvrira- 
Éare; the Syriac translator has ren- 
dered it by a verb ‘be ye praying.’ 
For the elliptical sentence, which is 
much more forcible, see Winer lxiv. 
p. 734 sq, A. Buttmann p. 337 sq. 

6. éSpaioe r riore] Comp. Col. i. 
23 et ys émipévere TH mígTet telepe- 
Aropévor kai éƏpajo, x.7-A. (comp. 
1 Cor. xv. 58), Polyc. Phzl. 10 ‘firmi 
in fide et immutabiles So too 
Smyrn. 13 ébpacba miaret. 

8. dvryupioacdu] ! reguite them 
by imitating their conduct to you, 
ie. ‘retaliate? a rare word. It oc- 
curs Appian Bell. Civ. v. 41; comp. 
dvriplprois, Thuc. vii. 67. 

dSeAol arv «.t.d.] jem he 
right way of showing our brother- 
hood with them is not by imitating 
their conduct, but by evincing our 
regard. Our imitation must be of 


Christ, not of them.’ The word 
émieikeia, as denoting the spirit of 
concession and forbearance, which 
contrasts with strict justice, strict 
retaliation, is highly appropriate here ; 
see the notes on Phil. iv. 5, Clem. 
Rom. 59 (p. 284). It was moreover 
especially characteristic of Christ 
(2 Cor. x. D, whose example is en- 
forced here. 

9. tis xr.A.] This describes the 
proper aim of their rivalry. They 
should try to imitate Christ and 
show ‘who can suffer more wrong 
than his neighbour.’ The words are 
dependent on pupyrai; comp. $ 19 
rapayj...móÜev k.r.A. For the con- 
junctive in indirect questions, see 
Kühner $ 394 (I p. 187) It is 
unnecessary to emend the sentence 
ris mAéov r8udg Kr.. (Markland), 
or ris mdéov ddiucndels (Hefele), or ov 
ris wréov adixnO7 (Pearson), or Kav TLS 
mdéov adixnO_ (Dressel). The whole 
passage is a reminiscence of 1 Cor. 
vi. 7 Stari ovxt padAov ddixeta Oe 3 Sart 
ovyl paddov droarepeinbe ; x.T.À. 


60 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


^ ^ , E , / 
SiaBorov Boravn tis evpeOn év Upiv: aXX ev maoy 
e^ 5 PA 
dyvela kai cwhpooivyn uévere v Xpiot@ "Ineov capkt- 


^ \ ^ 
KWS KAL TTVEUMATLKWS. 


XI. 


Eoyaro. kapoi. — Novróv airxvvOapev, pon- 


a uévere] G; maneatis L; ut stetis A; as if they had read pévyre, which is 


perhaps correct; al. g. 


Xpur@ 'lgeo0 A [g]; inood xpwrQ GL. 


4 "Ecxaroi kapol. Nourdy k.T.M.] So it seems to be taken in Dam-Rup 4 ësxarot 
Kapol, ddedpol, Aorròv alcxvvOauev, and this is apparently the connexion intended 


in L extrema tempora de cetero etc. 


ésxaro. kupol Novróv. elow; in A it is omitted. 
poBnbapuev] Gg Dam-Rup ; e£ timeamus L; 
5 wa] GL; om. Dam-Rup; al. g. 


aloxwOauev. See the lower note. 


om. A. 


I. forá»wj] ‘weed? “Though the 
word is quite neutral in itself and is 
often used in a good sense (e.g. Heb. 
vi. 7), yet it has a tendency to take a 
bad meaning, ‘a rank or noxious 
herb, ‘a weed’; e.g. Hermas Sim. v. 2 
eldev TOY dpumeAdva Boravëv mNjpy öv- 
Ta...kal maras tas Bordvas Tas oUcas 
ey TO apmehave é&ériNNev. k.T.A., 20. ix. 
26 ds yàp dumeXos...ómó ràv Boravóv 
épnpovra k.T.A.; comp. Clem. Hom. 
xix. I5, 20, Borávaı Oaydotpot, kakaí, 
Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 7 (p. 770) 
äypıaı Bordvar. Hence Boravitew ‘to 
weed,’ e.g. Theophrast. C. P. iii. 20. 
9. This sense it gets, because its 
leading idea is the absence of culture. 
On the other hand Aáxava is used 
more especially for ‘garden herbs,’ 
‘vegetables.’ Accordingly Bord, as 
a metaphor, is especially applied, as 
here, to vice or to heresy; comp. 
Trall. 6, Philad. 3. It is opposed to 
the Planting, the $vreía tod marpós 
(Trall. 11, PAz/ad. 3). It is the rank 
growth which springs up of itself in 
the soil of man's unregenerate na- 
ture; or it is the malicious sowing 
of the devil, as here, where there is 
probably a reference to the parable 
in Matt. xiii. 25. 

2. ayvela kal copoorivy| The same 
combination is found in Clem. Rom. 


In g Xouróv is connected with what precedes 


In G there is no stop till after 
qv els kpîua] G (kpiua) L; 


58 (see the note p. 169). 

capkukós k.r.A.] Comp. 2 Cor. vii. I 
kaÜapíccepev éavro)s amo mavrós po- 
Avopod capkós kai mve)paros. This 
conjunction of ‘flesh and spirit,’ as 
comprehending the whole nature of 
man, is very common in Ignatius ; 
Magn. 1, 13, Trall. inscr., 12, Rom. 
inscr., Smyrn. 1, 12, 13, Polyc. 1,.5. 
But see esp. Polyc. 2 8a rovro cap- 
kikòs et kai Tvevparikós k.T.A. In one 
place only there is a triple division 
Philad. 11 sapxi, Yuy, mvevpare. See 
also the note on $ 7, above. 

XI. ‘The end of all things is at 
hand. Let us therefore stand in awe 
of the judgment, or, if we do not 
fear the coming wrath, let us value 
the present grace. From the one 
motive or the other may we be found 
inJesus Christ. In Him I wear these 
bonds ; these jewels in which I hope 
also to be decorated at the resurrec- 
tion through your prayers. This is 
my hope ; that I may be united in one 
destiny with the glorious Church of 
Ephesus, which was ever a devoted 
follower of the Apostles.’ 

4. foxaro. kapoi) See 1 John ii. 
18 éexárn dpa éarív, and esp. 1 Cor. 
vii. 29 ó katpós avvecraApévos. éoTiv TÒ 
Aouroy tva k.t.d. So also Magn. 6 èv 
TEEL earn. 


x1] TO THE EPHESIANS. 61 


5 Owpev nv uakpoÜOvuíav Tod Oco, iva un) "v ets kpiua 
vyévurat. ÑN yap TNV uéXNovaav Opesnv $ofn0cyuev ñ 
THY €veo To ay xapw dyarnowpev, êv Tov Svo- póvov v 
Xpia re Iyoo evpeÜrvai eis +ó addnOvov (v. xwpls 


, \ ^ , ^c 
TOVTOV pnoev Upiv mpoeréTw, èv w Ta Occyua 7repuépa, 


els kplua ut» Dam-Rup; vobis...in judicium A; al. g. 7 xápw] GLA 
Dam-Rup; xapà» g* (Mss, but 1 has gratiam). êv trav úo] GL; év r@ viv 
Bie g Dam-Rup. Something like this may have been the reading of A which trans- 
lates rv éveoraoay xápw K.T.À. gratiam quam habemus in hoc mundo; unless indeed 
in hoc mundo represents éveorcav, but if so ëv Tay úo is omitted. Perhaps ë rdv 
dvo was first corrupted into & rd viv, and Bim added afterwards as a gloss; see the 
lower note. 8 evpeOfvac] G, and so too g (but inserting words éorw 8ë x.r.^. 
to help out the construction); invenitur L*; e(pe8Guev Dam-Rup; inveniamur A. 


áNy80vàv] GLA; àAq6wós [g]. 


"Aouróv] ‘for what remains, and so 
‘henceforth’; comp. Smyrn. 9 evo- 
yóv écrw Xowrüv dvaviraw. For the 
occurrence of Aouróv or rò Aouróv at 
the beginning of the sentence see 
PE Gore pe Phil einer. iv. 8, 
@ebbess. iii, 1,2) Lim. iv. 6, Clem. 
Rom. 58; and it should probably be 
taken with what follows in 1 Cor. l.c. 
So too I have punctuated it here, as 
this is by far the most usual position 
of Aowov and the most forcible in 
this place. 

5. kpipa] For the accent of this 
word, see the note on Gal. v. Io. 
The Greek MS however accentuates 
it xpipa here. 

6. yémra,] ‘it turn, sc. y pakpo- 
Gupta Tov OcoQ. 

7. év tov Sto] See Phil. iii 13 
êv O€, Ta uév Omiow k.t.A.; compare 
the classical use of dvoty Oarepoy, and 
for examples of similar constructions 
see Kiihner IL p. 244 sq, Winer 
Š lxvi. p. 774. See also Magn. I ró 
dé Kupidtepov, Magn. 3 rd 0€ rovrov. 
The reading é rà viv Big is shown 
from the authorities to have been as 
early as the 4th century, but cannot 
be correct. 


9 & @] Lg; cujus causa A; èv TO G. 


povoy K.r.À.] i.e. povov [odt@ TomTo- 
pev Qoare] evpeOnva. For similar 
elliptical uses of the infinitive see 
Kühner II. p. 590. There is a ten- 
dency to ellipsis with povoy: comp. 
Rom. 5 povov tva "1nco0 Xpiorov èr- 
TÚX@, Smyrn. 4 povov év TO Ovópari 
"Ingo? Xpiorod x.r.À., and see the note 
on Gal. ii. ro. 

8. qv] ‘Ze’; the infinitive being 
treated as a substantive, as above, 
Š 3, and below, Š 17, Magn. 1, 5. This 
very phrase rò aAnOwoy (jv occurs in 
Trall. 9, Smyrn. 4. 

9. Tovrov] i.e. Incod Xpicrod. 

vpiv mpeméro] ‘glitter in your 
eyes, i.e. ‘have any attraction for 
you SB AS Ss JRun IAW, NETS 
meipovte O6 kal yxpvods ev flacávo 
mpeémet kai vóos opÓos. The word is 
thus a preparation for the imagery of 
‘the spiritual pearls? which follows. 
Ignatius would say ‘Do not value 
any decoration apart from Christ.’ 

mepipépo| He uses the same word 
of his bonds again, Magn. 1, Trall. 
12. It suggests the idea of ostenta- 
tion. He is proud of this decora- 
tion, with which his Sovereign has 
invested him. On the prominent 


62 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


` / á 
TOUS TVEUMATLKOUS eee 


[xi 


fe , Z 5 
êv ois Toca per ava- 


OTHVAL TH Tpocevxr VMAV; s yevorTo uoi del pergo? 
eivai, Yva èv KANPw Cien iom evpe0w «av Xpwrriavav, ot 
kal Trois dmooróňois mavrore Guvwüvecav Èv duvapet 


"Incov Xpwrro. 


i 3 &] Lg; él G; al. A; see Æphes. 20 for a similar confusion of év, évl, in G. 
4 cwyjvecav] GL; cuvĝoav gA. The testimony of A shows that the corruption 


(if it be such) was very early. 


place given to his ‘bonds’ by Igna- 
tius, as by S. Paul, see the notes on 
§ 3, above, Magn. 1. 

I. Tos mvevpartkods K.r.X.| Clem. 
Hom. xiii. 16 tipiovs pnpyapiras mept- 
Kkeirat, roUs a'odpoviCovras Xóyovs. See 
also a similar image in Polyc. PAZ. 
I, where, referring apparently to Ig- 
natius and his companions, he says, 
Tos eveiAnpévous rois dyiorperéot Seo- 
pois, arwa eorw Siadjpara rv ANg- 
Os tro OcoÜ kal roð Kupíov ruv 
éxedeypevav. So too in the Ezs/e 
of the Gallican Churches, Euseb. 
H. E. v. Y dore kai rà Seopa Koopov 
evmpenh mepiketa a, avtois, os wúnQ 
kekoopnpévņn v KpOTT@TOIS Xpucols 
memrouktAmevois, Cyprian. Epist. 76 (p. 
829, Hartel) ‘ornamenta sunt ista, 
non vincula, nec Christianorum pe- 
des ad infamiam copulant sed clari- 
ficant ad coronam, Victor Vit. de 
Pers. Vand. iii. ad fin. ‘rigentium 
pondera catenarum quasi quaedam 
monilia pervidebat, quia non fuerunt 
illa vincula, sed potius ornamenta; 
see Cotelier ad /oc., Pearson V. Z. p. 
588, and comp. Magn. 1 (note). 

dvacrjva]] He can hardly mean 
that he desired literally to rise in his 
chains ; but that he hoped through 
the prayers of the Ephesians to re- 
main steadfast to the end, and so to 
appear at the resurrection invested 
with the glory of discipline and suf- 
fering, of which his chains were the 
instrument and the symbol For 


8 mdpodds ore] GL; rapadobels ye 


other references to his condition at 
the resurrection see Rom. 4, Polyc. 7 
(v. 1). 

3. e jpg] Comp. Philad. 5 
iva èv à kMjpe HrenOnv émurúxo, Ef. 
Vienn. § 7 in Euseb. ZZ. E. v. 1 [ev] 
TO KANP® TOY paprüpev mpoceréOn. 
Voss, followed by some later editors, 
reads évi (for èv), but this poetic form 
would hardly be possible in a writer 
like Ignatius. 

4. Tots dmooTÓAow] S. Paul and 
S. John primarily, for these resided 
and taught at Ephesus ; possibly S. 
Peter as well, for he corresponded 
with the Churches of Asia Minor, if 
he did not visit them (1 Pet. i. 1); 
perhaps also S. Andrew and S. Philip, 
whom early tradition represents as 
living in these parts; see Colossians 
p. 44 sq. The interpolator names 
Paul, John, and Timothy; but Timo- 
thy was not an Apostle: see Gala- 
tians p. 96. 

cvvjvecav| I have, with some hesi- 
tation, preferred this reading to evv$- 
cav, only because letters were more 
likely to have dropped out than to 
have been inserted. 

XII. ‘I know that it ill becomes 
me to address such exhortations to 
you. I am only a weak criminal, 
while ye have obtained mercy and 
are strong in the faith. Ye have ever 
escorted the martyrs on their way to 
death. Ye were fellow-students of 
the mysteries with Paul the blessed, 


XII] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


63 


XIIL Oa ris cim Kal tiow ypapw. “ya kard- 


° ^ 5 y; > 5 M \ , ^ 
Kprros, vuets nAENMEVOL’ yw vro kivovvov, vues ¿o-Tn- 


py uévot. 


J ðo 3 ^ 5 \ E] 4 
TAPO OS EOTE TWV ELS Ocov AVALOOUMEVOY, 


/ £ ^ , ^ 
llavXov TUMPUTTAL TOU Nyiar évov, TOU puepaprvpn- 


g* (Mss). 
qui propter deum martyres-fiunt. 
as stated in Dressel. 


in whose footsteps I would fain 
tread, and who makes mention of 
you in all his letters.’ 

6. éyà x..A.] See a similar pas- 
sage in Rom. 4 Ovx os Ilérpos kai 
IlaUÀos ĝiarádosopat ékeivot 
dmócTOÀot, €yà karákpiros k.r.A., and 
comp. Trall. 3 iva àv kardkpuros 
es dzócroAos jpiv Siardooopa. In 
all these passages his civil status, 
as kardkpiros, is an emblem of his 
spiritual status: *I am under sen- 
tence of condemnation; while ye 
have obtained mercy and are par- 
doned.’ 

7. úrò kivdvvov] Comp. Trall. 
I3 Z yap vd kívüvvóv eip. He 
alludes to the danger of his flinching 
before the terrors of death, or other- 
wise yielding to the allurements of 
the world. 

8. mapoðós sre] ‘ye are a way of 
transit” They had escorted S. Paul 
first, and now they were escorting 
Ignatius on his way to martyrdom. 
Their spiritual position, he seems 
to say, corresponds to their geogra- 
phical position. As they conducted 
the martyrs on their way in the 
body, so they animated their souls 
with fresh strength and courage. 
The reference to S. Paul will hardly 
be satisfied by the interview with the 
Ephesian elders in Acts xx. I7 Sq, 
for he was not then on his way to 
death, if (as is most probable) he was 
liberated from his first captivity: but 
the notices in the Pastoral Epistles 
show that he was again at Ephesus 


piv" 


The reading mdpodos underlies the rendering in A ad vos viatores 


9 Tywcuévov] So G; not dyacuévov 


shortly before his final trial and mar- 
tyrdom (1 Tim. i. 3, 2 Tim. i. 18). 
Probably Ignatius was thinking of 
other martyrs also of whom we know 
nothing. See e.g. Polyc. Phil. 1 
cuvexapny piv mporéupacw . . 
everAnevous rois dyuompeméo, Seopois 
K.T.À., and 26. 9 dekeiv macay troporny 
7v kat edere kar dpOadrpors, où pdvov 
êv rois pakapíow "Lyvarío Kal Zecíuo 
kai ‘Pode x.r.À. 

Tov els Gedy k.r.A.] ‘who are slain 
unto God, a condensed expression 
for *who are put to death and thus 
conducted to God’; comp. $ I dede- 
pévov amò Supias (with the note). The 
word dvaipoupévev is a mapa mpocdo- 
kíav, where we should look for some 
such expression as mpomepmopevay. 

9. Hav/Aov cuppvorat] i.e. ‘ fellow- 
recipients, fellow - students, of the 
mysteries, with Paul) For the word 
see Orig. zz Jes. Naue Hom. 7 
(II. p. 413) ‘ Paulum nobis commu- 
niter adhibeamus magistrum ; ipse 
enim est symmystes Christi,’ Hippol. 
in Daniel. p. 174 (Lagarde) és ovp- 
pócra, kal OcoceBeis dvOpes (i.e. co- 
religionists), Constantine in Theodt. 
H.E. i. I9 ó Ths rvpavvudjs @porntos 
cvppicTys. This was signally true 
of the Ephesians, among whom 
S. Paul resided for an exceptionally 
long time (Acts xix. Io sq, xx. 31), 
with whom he was on terms of the 
most affectionate intimacy (Acts xx. 
18 sq, 36), and who were the chief, 
though probably not the sole, recipi- 
ents of the most profound of all his 


` 
. TOUS 


64 
, E / € 
pevov, a€topakapiaTou, ou 


epistles. The propriety of the lan- 
guage here is still further enhanced 
by the fact that S, Paul, in the 
Epistle to the Ephesians more es- 
pecially, dwells on the Gospel dis- 
pensation as pvorrjptor (i. 9, iii. 3, 4, 
9, V. 32, vi. 19). Elsewhere (Phil. iv. 
12) he speaks of himself as pepun- 
pévos. In later ecclesiastical lan-- 
guage the words pvornpior, porns, 
pvotikds, üuvaTos, dpvrros, Etc., were 
used with especial reference to the 
sacraments, more particularly to the 
eucharist (Bingham Christ. Ant. I. 
iv. 2). But there is no trace of this 
meaning in Ignatius, who still uses 
these terms, as they are used by 
S. Paul, of the doctrines and lessons 
of Christianity. For the force and 
significance of this use in the Apo- 
stle, see the notes on Col. i. 26. 

If it be asked why S. John also 
is not mentioned here, the answer is 
simple. Ignatius is speaking of the 
relations of the Ephesians with 
martyrs (ràv eis Oeóv dvatpovpévov) ; 
but S. John died peaceably in extreme 
old age at Ephesus. He is doubtless 
included in the árócroAo. mentioned 
before; but here there is no place 
for him. It should be added also, 
that the life of S. Paul had a peculiar 
attraction for Ignatius, owing to the 
similarity of their outward circum- 
stances. He too, like Paul, had been 
an ék«rpopa; he too, like Paul, was 
journeying from Asia to Rome, 
there to win the crown of martyrdom. 
If Ignatius shows a full knowledge 
and appreciation of the Zeaczzg of 
S. John, his heart clings to the er- 
ample of S. Paul. 

Tov pepaprupguévov] ‘attested, and 
hence ‘approved, ‘of good report’ ; 
as e.g. Acts vi. 3, x. 22, xvi. 2, xxii. 
5,1 Tim. v. 10. So Clem. Rom. 47 
dmocTÓhots pepaprvpnuévows; see also 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xi 
, ue CoN x Df. 
YEVOLTO Mot VTO TA LXVH 


Clem. Rom. 17 (note), 18, 19, 44, and 
Philad. 5,11. It must not however 
be confined to the opinion of the 
Church, but will refer rather to the 
testimony of God as given in S. 
Paul’s own life and work: comp. 
Heb. xi. 2, 4, 5, 39 paprupnbevres did 
ths mioreos. Thus indirectly it may 
refer to his martyrdom; because this 
is God's chief act of aZZesZafzoz. But 
the Anglo-Latin translator is wrong 
in rendering it martyrizatz, i.e. ‘put 
to death as a martyr’; because the 
passive is not used in this sense 
even in very late Greek. ‘To be 
a martyr’ is not paprupeioba, but 
paprupeiv ‘to bear testimony.’ Even 
in Latin the passive martyrizar¢ 
is a solecism, though a common 
one; and martyrizare is the more 
correct word. On the use of these 
words, paprus, uaprupeiv, etc. as re- 
ferring especially to the testimony 
borne by the death of the witness, 
see the note on Clem. Rom. 5. 

I. d&wopakapíarov] See the note on 
this word above, inscr. 

vró rà yvy] Comp. r Pet. ii. 21, 
and esp. Mart. Polyc. 22 YoAvkapmos 
o0 yévouro ey TH BaatXeí(a "Ina o9 Xpiorod 
mpos rà (xvm eópeOfva. jpàs. In the 
Mart. Ignat. Ant. $ 5 it is related 
that the saint on his journey to 
Rome desired to follow in the A- 
postle's foot-prints, not only figura- 
tively, but literally also, kar" tyvos 
Baói(ew €6€Xwv ro) drooróNou Tavdov; 
but adverse winds prevented him 
from landing at Puteoliand so enter- 
ing Rome by the Appian Way as 
S. Paul had done. ‘Yrò rà Lam here 
stands for the more usual xara rà 
tyvn or èv rois tyveow. With the accu- 
sative vmod often signifies ‘close to,’ 
e.g. Thuc. v. 10 tro rus TvXas, 
Soph. E. 720 vm auth eoxarny 
arnAny (see the note on Urevavríos, 


xir] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 65 


guoetuar, Tav Oto! émitixw: ds év maon TIETONA 
pvnpovevei Uv év Xpwerg ` [no-og. 


3 Ky nuoveter] GLg; uvnuoveúw A. 


Col. ii. 14); but the instances are 
very rare in which, as here, its local 
meaning is preserved while yet the 
idea of subjacence has altogether 
disappeared; comp. Plut. Viz. Pelop. 
I6 puxpoyv 86 vd rà Eùn veds éovw 
'AmóAAevos. It almost universally 
refers to objects which are more or 
less raised. Comp. Ov. Met. iii. 17 
* subsequitur pressoque legit vestigia 
gressu? The Armenian translates 
vo rà ¿yun ‘under his footstool.’ 
2. O«o0 émw/xyo] A phrase used 
especially of his martyrdom ; see the 
note onZ/ag. I. 
- ev maon émwroAg] ‘in every epis- 

tle” Besides the epistle which 
bears their name, S. Paul refers to 
Ephesus and the Ephesian Chris- 
tians, either alone or with others, 
in Romans (xvi. 5), 1 Corinthians 
(xv. 32, xvi. 8, 19), 2 Corinthians 
(i. 8 sq), and the two Epistles to 
Timothy. These references would 
be quite sufficient to explain the 
hyperbole in the text ; comp. e.g 
I Thess. i. 8 é mavri rome, Col. i. 23 
èv don krise TH úmò TOY o)parvóv. 
But, as Ignatius must have been 
born before the Apostle's death, it 
is not improbable that he had oral 
information respecting the Apostle's 
relations to the Ephesian Church, 
which has not come down to us and 
by which his language here is colour- 
ed. Others would translate ë> ydo 
émw rolg ‘throughout his letter; 
supposing him to refer to the 
‘Epistle to the Ephesians’; e.g. 
Pearson V. Z. p. 487 sq, and ad Joc. 
But for the omission of the definite 
article with mas in this sense no 
example has been produced which 
is analogous. The instances alleged 


IGN. II. 


are either proper names, as Matt. ii. 3 
maca 'lepocólvpa, Rom, xi. 26 mâs 
'IcpajÀ (quoted by Hefele); or they 
are highly poetical passages,as Eurip. 
Med. 114 mâs Sopos čppor (quoted by 
Jacobson); or they are false readings, 
as Ephes. 5 kai maons ékkAgaías (quoted 
by Pearson V. 7. p. 488, who has taken 
the incorrect text of Voss, the MS 
having kal maons tis ékkAgoías); or 
they are misinterpreted, as 2 Tim. 
li. 16 vaca ypa (quoted also by 
Pearson V. 7. l.c. and wrongly ex- 
plained ‘tota scriptura’); or they 
illustrate wholly different uses of 
mas, as Soph. A7. 275 xeivos re Avry 
mas eM]Nara, kaki (again quoted by 
Pearson, l c); or they are false 
Latin analogies, as e.g. Cicero’s 
‘omne corpus’ which might stand 
quite as well for mâv rò eópa as for 
wav oôpa, and which therefore fails 
in the main point (quoted also by 
Pearson, l.c) It is strange that 
no one has adduced Ephes. ii. 21 
where gzáca oikodopn is the best sup- 
ported reading; but even though 
this reading be accepted, the context 
(esp. gvvorkoĝopeioðe) shows that 
many oikoĝopai are required to make 
up the one temple (comp. Matt. xxiv. 
1, Mark xiii. 1, 2), and that therefore 
‘every building’ is the right render- 
ing. 

3. punpovever| ‘makes mention. 
This would be singularly unmeaning, 
if not untrue, supposing the reference 
to be to the Epistle to the Ephesians. 
Hence Valois and others would im- 
port into the word more than it 
contains, ‘vos cum laude memorat.’ 
The interpolator has changed what 
seemed to him a very awkward ex- 
pression, and substitutes ôs márrore 


E 


? 


66 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xi 


5 , > 
KL. CrovóaCere OUY TUKVOTEPOV ouvépxer Oat Eis 


- , e/ M ^ 2 \ 
evyapirtiav OcoU kai eis dofav' orav yap Tukvws ET 


= ° / ^ ^ 
TO ato vylveo Oe, Kabaipotvrat ai Quvauets TOU Carava, 


\ , Q XM 5 ^ E ^ ° / < ^ £x 
kal NveTat 0 OXeÜpos avToU év TH OÖ OVO UMwY TNS 


° st > / u R ^ / 
TIOTEWS. OUVOEV éa rw AMELVOY ELONnYNS, EV N TAS TONEMOS 


^ Z \ / 
KATAPYELTAL ETOUPAVIWY kat ETTLYELWY. 


2 Oco0] here, GLg (Mss, but 1 has ad eucharzstiam et gloriam dei); after 0ó£av 


[Si]; om. A. 
Rup 4: crebro L; cvvexós g; al. A. 
L; yévnode (v. 1. ylvnobe) g. 


els 0ó£av] GLS,A; ddEay (om. eis) g. 


mukvôs] G Dam- 
3 ylvecbe] G Dam-Rup; convenitis 


Kabacpodvra ai vvdpeis] Gg; kabarpoðvrat 


övrdpeıs Dam-Rup; destruuntur potentiae L; diruitur vis $45 infirmatur vis A. 


4 kal] GLA; om. Dam-Rup; al. g. 


6] G; om. Dam-Rup; al. g. ÜNeOpos 


aùroî] GL Dam-Rup; aroU...0^e0pos [g]; S, has cra3xss ee imperium ejus, but 


this is probably a corruption of ea3342v exitium ejus. 


shows another corruption, memoria ejus = M3350]. 


ev rais Senoeow avTov pynpovever var. 
An anonymous critic (see Lardner 
Credibility Pt. ii. c. 5) conjectured 
pynpovevo; and this is now found to 
be the reading of the Armenian 
Version. This would be true to 
fact, for Ignatius does mention the 
Ephesians in five of the six remain- 
ing epistles, Magn. 15, Tradl. 13, 
Rom. 1o, Philad. 11, Smyrn. 12. 
But the parallelism of the clauses, 
as well as the general tenour of 
sentence, shows that S. Paul, not 
Ignatius, is the subject here. 

XIII. ‘ Gather yourselves together 
more frequently for eucharistic praise. 
By your frequent gatherings the 
powers of Satan are frustrated. The 
concord of your faith is their ruin. 
Nothing is better than peace, which 
vanquishes the antagonism of all 
enemies, spiritual and carnal.’ 

I. rukvórepov] As Polyc. 4 vrvkvórepov 
ouvaywyat y:wéa Óocav, | Clem. Rom. ]ii. 
17 TUKVOTEPOY mrpoaepxóp.evot Treipadpeba 
mpoxorrew k.r.À., Doctr. A post. 16 muk- 
vas è cvvaxOnoecbe; see also Magn. 
4 &ià Tò uù) BeBaiws kar evrodny ovva- 


The rendering of A 
5 ovdévy] GLS,Ag 


OpoiterOa (with the note). Compare 
for similar injunctions in early times, 
Heb. x. 25 py eyxatadelrovtes Trjv 
émigvvayoyrnv éavróv, Barnab. 4 emt 
TO avTO cvvepxopevot avv(rreire K.T.À., 
Clem. Hom. iii. 69 mpo òè mávroev, et 
kal Oct tiv Aéyew, o'uyexéoTrepoy ovv- 
épxeo0e. The meaning of svkvórepov 
is not ‘in larger numbers,’ as it is 
taken by some (e.g. Pearson, here and 
on Polyc. l.c.; Zahn Z. v. A. p. 345, 
and ad /oc.), but ‘more frequently,’ 
which sense is demanded alike by 
the passage Polyc. l.c. and by the 
common usage of the adverb in later 
Greek (e. g. Acts xxiv. 26). The 
former rendering would have been 
more correct, if the reading had been 
TUKVOTEPOL, 

2. eUxapwrriav] ‘thanksgiving? The 
word is quite general in itself, but 
doubtless refers indirectly to the 
Holy Communion, which was the 
chief evyapioria of the Church, and 
which elsewhere Ignatius regards as 
the special bond of union ; PAz/ad. 4 
(see the note there). The genitive 
Qcov must be supplied also with 8ó£a. 


5 


xiv] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 67 


"e M ^ 5 
XIV. “Wy ovàëv AavOdver Ups, dav TeNe[oçs eis 


> ^ M » \ / \ t 
Inooüv Xpio-TOv ÉynTe THY TrlaTww Kal THY ayarnY HT 


5 \ 5 \ ^ N Z \ \ 
ETTLY dox Cwns Kal TÉNXos dpxr MEV Tous, TéNos Që 


Odd : \ \ RE edo cae? / M 
toayann: ta de duo év évoTnTt yevoueva Oceós oru, Ta 


(but 1 adds ezzz:) [Dam-Vat 1] [Dam-Rup 2] [Anton 2]; add. yàp S,. 


TOS 


TóNeuos] Gg Dam-Vat Dam-Rup ; mâs 6 móAegos Anton; dub. LS,S,A. 
6 Karapyetrat] g Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; xarapyetre G; evacuatur L; Kkaraddberac 


Anton; impediuntur A; frustrantur S,S,. 
eis] GLg Dam-Rup; om. S,A. 


Rup 6. 
xporòv inootv Dam-Rup; xptorov [g]. 
L; sunt A (om. Trus). 


...ayarn] Gg; h 7loT:s...7] ayarn Dam-Rup. 
Oeds écrw] LS4,A Dam-Rup; Oeot éorw G; Oeov dvOpwrov drrorexet g. 


Rup. 


3. Kabaipodyrat...dverar] See Š 19, 
where the words are similarly con- 
nected. 

ai Suvdpers] i.e. ‘the hosts, the forces 
of Satan, whether they are evil an- 
gels (€movpavior) or wicked men (én- 
yeu). 

4. 6 OdeOpos aùroð] i.e. ‘the de- 
struction which he is preparing for 
others.’ 

5. mâs móňepos k.r.A.] i.e. ‘every 
antagonism which wars against the 
Church.’ It is not the war between 
the powers of heaven and the powers 
of earth, but the war of his spiritual 
(émovpáwo:) and his carnal (émiyevor) 
enemies alike against the Christian, 
of which Ignatius speaks. For ézov- 
pdvuct, as applied to the powers of 
evil, comp. Ephes. vi. 12 mpós rovs 
koc pokpáropas Tov akórovs roUTov, mpós 
rà mvevparikà THs movnpias ev Tots 
émovpavíows, a passage which the 
interpolator has introduced into his 
text here. 

. XIV. ‘All these warnings will be 
needless, if you abide in faith and 
love. Faith is the beginning of life, 
and love is the end. Where these 
two coexist, there is God. Faith 
cannot err, and love cannot hate. 
The tree is known by its fruits: pro- 
fession is tested by practice, The 


9 fws] GLg Dam-Rup; al. Sy; om. A. 


7 Tedelws] GLS,Ag; om. Dam- 

8 'Igcotv Xpwróv] GLS4[A]; 
diris écriv] GSye Dam-Rup; guae sunt 
Tloris 
IO yevoueva] Gg; ywóueva Dam- 


work to which we are called consists 
not in empty profession, but in an 
effective and abiding faith.’ 

7. oùĝèv AavÜdve| Comp. Polyc. 
Phil. 12 ‘nihil vos latet.’ 

8. Aris écrw] An irregularity of 
construction for airweés elow. This 
leaves an ambiguity, which is cleared 
up by the explanatory clause apx? 
pev K.T.À. 

9. dpx) Cons «7A.] See Clem. 
Alex. Strom. vii. Io (p. 864) du$o 
86 ó Xpuoros, Ó re Ücu&Nos ñ] Te emotr- 
koBojuj, Õe ov kai ý apxn kai rà TENN... 
Ú re apx) kai rò Tédos, míoTis eyo, 
kal ý dydnn k.rA.; comp. 2. ii. 13 
(p. 458) mponyeirar pev mou, oos 
8€ olkoSopet, recto? è ý dyarmy. See 
also the confused passage in Barnab. 
1 in the Greek MSS, where the con- 
fusion has perhaps arisen partly from 
the insertion of some such passage 
as this, written originally as an 
illustration in the margin. For the 
second clause comp. I Tim. i. 5 rò 
8e réAos Tis mapayyeAlas eotiy ayárn. 

IO. Oeós éovw] Comp. Trall. 11 
Tod Oeo évoow émayyeAAopevov Js 
éorw aírós. See also a similar 
expression in Magn. 15 Kexrnpévor 
ddudxpirov mveðpa, os’ eorw "lycos 
Xpwrós. The combination of autho- 
rities leaves no doubt about the 


5—2 


68 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


, lg [6 X) 
86 ANa ravra eis KaNokayabiay dkoNovOa. stw. 


[xiv 


E 
OU- 


, , 29 A , , 
Sels mior érayyeAAOMevos duapTaver ovde ayamnv 


, ^ 
KEKTHMEVOS MOEL, 


ANEPON TO AENAPON ATO TOY KAPTIOY 


^ e € , ^ a se c 
aYrof" oUTws ot émayyeAAouevor XotoToU  eivat, ov cv 


y. > 0 n 
TPT TOV o0noovrau. 


, M ^ > , \ 
OU yap vuy émayyeAlas TO 5 


” 5 re es) , £ af € 05 5 , 
epyov, aAX ev duvaper TigTEws éav Tis eUpeUn eis TENOS. 


I éorw] Gg; elow Dam-Rup. 
&xew A Dam-Rup. 


2 émayyeddopevos] GLSyg Antioch 6; add. 
o080] GLS,g Antioch, and so prob. A; ovdels Dam-Rup. 
3 Kextnuévos] GLS,Ag Dam-Rup; éxwy Antioch. 
add. yap [Antioch]; praef. guoniam A; al. g. 

om. aŭro [g] (changing the whole context); yivera: (om. avro?) Antioch. 


gpavepov| GLS, Dam-Rup; 
4 avrov] GLS,A Dam-Rup; 


E] 
OUTWS 


ol érayyeddsuevor] GL Dam-Rup; ita e£ gui promittunt A; ot érayyeddduevot [g] 
(om. odrws); ó oU» émayyeNNóuevos [Antioch], substituting the singular throughout. 


Xpwro0] gA Dam-Rup Antioch; xpuwrtavol GL. 
again here and continues as far as AaAourra wh elvat Š 15. 


reading. The interpolator has sub- 
stituted an easier expression for a 
more difficult one. 

I. eic kaXokayaÜíav k.t.A.| i.e. ‘at- 
tend upon these and lead to per- 
fection.’ For this pregnant use of 
the preposition see the note on Š I 
OeOepévov aro Supias. The word kado- 
xayaOia does not occur in the LXX or 
N. T., but seems here to denote 
Christian perfection (reAeiórgs, Heb. 
vi. 1). 

3. davepóv k.r.A.] Matt. xii. 33 èk 
yap ToU kapmo0 rò Oévüpov ywookera ; 
comp. Luke vi. 44. 

5. ov yap viv k.r.A.] ‘for now (i.e. 
in these evil times, in this season of 
persecution) the Work zs not a mere 
matter of profession? For this abso- 
lute use of rò fpyov, meaning ‘the 
preaching and practice of the Gospel,’ 
comp. Rom. 3 ot mew ovis Tó épyov 
dÀÀà peyéÜovs eotly ò xprotianopds, 
Grav puorjrat vd kócpov, a passage 
which explains the force of viv here. 
See also Acts xv. 38, Phil ii. 30 
(with the note) Similarly we have 
rò Óvoua (see note Š 3 above), [rò] 
Onua (see note § 20 below), ý xápis 


5 ot k.T.A.] È commences 
yàp viv] 


(e.g. Smyrn. 12), and the like. 

6. aX èv Suvaper k.rT.A.] ‘but is 
realised only ¿f a man be found in 
the power of faith (with an effective 
faith) Zo the end.’ The words ëv dvuva- 
pet míoTeos are sometimes attached 
to the preceding clause, and morós is 
understood with e9pe05; but the con- 
struction which I have adopted seems 
simpler. It is not uncommon to 
throw some of the dependent words 
forward with ¿à and similar 
particles, for the sake of emphasis ; 
e.g. John x. 9 à” uod edv tis elacA6g, 
I Cor. vi. 4 Buerikà uev oiv kpirýpia 
eav €xnte, Xi. I5 yuy) Öè av Kopa. 
The connexion evpeO7 eis réAos how- 
ever is possible in itself (comp. 
Rom. 2 eipeOnvar eis Úc). 

XV. ‘Itis better to keep silence and 
to be, than to talk and not to be. The 
great Teacher never spoke without 
doing: and even His silence is of 
the Father. He, who apprehends 
the word of Jesus, understands also 
His silence. With a man so taught 
speech is action and silence is ar- 
ticulate. Even our most secret 
thoughts lie open before the Lord. 


Io 


xv] TO THE EPHESIANS. 


69 


XV. “Auewov éotw ciwy kal eivat 7 XaXoUvra 
pn civar kañov TO Oi04ckew, av ò Néywv vow. eis 
oùv Oi0dGkaNOs, OS eÎnmen Kai éréNeTo' Kal a avyáv de 
meToinkey d£ua coU Tatpos stw. ó Xoyov “Inco 
kekrnuévos aAnOws ðvvaraı Kal THS ñouyxtas aUToU 
dkovew, iva créXevos sy. iva OL wy NaNe? sroáaon kai OV 


GL Rup; om. [Z][A]; al. g. 6 AW év] GL; ddd Rup; al. Ag. 
7 AaXoüvra] GL2S,A ; XaXotvras [Antioch 4]; al. g. 8 uh elvar] The 
next sentences are omitted in Z, and the words iva ô? Gv...ovygà ywoouyra follow 


immediately. After these it omits everything till the beginning of § 18. 


ó Aéywv] GLg Antioch; guod dicit (6 Néyer) S,84; al. A. 

G; 6 àiüáckaNos Antioch; dub. LS,A; al. g. 

à] GL Antioch; om. S4A; al. g. The same authorities omit 
ro 'Ieo00] GLA; add. xpwrob Antioch; al. g. 

12 rédevos $] G [L]; 2 réXetos Antioch; al. g. 


(ed.); al. g. 
éorw in the next line. 


Narn mpdoce G; al. g. 


Let us remember therefore that we 
are His temple, and He dwells in 
us. This is so now, and it will 
hereafter be made manifest.’ 

7. "Apewóv x.T.À.] Iren. ii. 30. 2 ovk 
èv rà Xéyew, GAN èv TG eivai, Ò kpeírrov 
OelkvuaÜa. óeihe: comp. Rom. 3 
iva pù povov Aéyo adda kai Oéro, and 
see the note on Clem. Rom. 38. This 
is an indirect defence of their bishop 
Onesimus, on whose quiet and retiring 
disposition men were apt to presume : 
see above § 6. 

9. kal éyévero] ‘and it came to pass, 
taken from Ps. xxxii (xxxiii). 9, where 
the LXX has etzev kai eyevOnoar, but 
éyévero would be a more literal trans- 
lation of the original. Thus Ignatius 
says in effect, ‘It is true of Christ's 
work on earth, as the Psalmist says 
of God's work in the universe, that 
the word was equivalent to the deed’; 
comp. Euseb. Z. Z. x. 4 (P. 469). 


This reference explains the following 


clause; ‘The effects of His silence 
also, not less than of His speech, are 
worthy of the Father.’ 

à ovyóv 86 kr.A.] ‘yea, and what 
He hath wrought by His silence, etc. 


9 Oi0áckaNos] 
ôs] GLS,A; ws Antioch 


ade? rpdcon] Antioch; 


i.e. His retirement in childhood and 
youth, His refusal to allow His 
miracles or His kingship to be pub- 
lished, His withdrawal for the pur- 
pose of prayer, His silence before 
His accusers, and the like; in short, 
the passive side of our Lord’s life. 
The impression which His silence 
at His trial more especially made on 
His followers may be inferred from 
Matt. xxvi. 63, xxvii. 14, Luke xxiil. 
9, John xix. 9, Acts viii. 32, r Pet. ii. 
23. There is no reference here to 
the silence before the Incarnation, 
as in § 19. The silence here con- 
templated relates not to the counsels 
of God, but to the life of Christ. 

IO. ó Aóyov k.t-A.] i.e. ‘He, who has 
truly mastered the spoken precepts 
of Christ, is best able to appreciate 
and copy His silence.’ *AdAn@ds is 
best taken with kexrnpévos. 

I2. va OU àv Aare x.r.A.] Le. ‘that, 
when he has thus appropriated both 
the word and the silence of Christ, his 
speech may be as operative as action 
and his silence as significant as 
speech.’ For the latter clause comp. 
Clem. Al. Ped. ii. 7 (p. 202) ó de 


79 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [xv 


^c ^ > X [4 \ / 5 X 
QV Guy vywoeoknrat. ovbev AavOave: Tov Kupiov, aXXa 
t L^ 

\ ` \ e ^ > \ > ^ > , 5 
kal Ta KpUTTa nv eyyus avTQ éoTu. TAVTA OVV 
5 ^ 5 € x ^ [14 F > m 
Zote, WS AUTOU ÈV UTV KATOLKOUYTOS, iva. cou€V aUTOU 


\ \ > \ > eon o y x e/ Au s, ` is 
VaOL KAL AUTOS EV MLV EOS OTEP Kal €OTLY KAL Qavr 


1 ywóckgrai] G; ywwoxera Antioch (ed.) ; al. g. 


Ag; add. yàp Antioch. 
Gg; elow Antioch. 
4 aùròs] txt gL; add. 7 G [S,][A]. 


€pós vids, exeivoy Aéyo Tov cwemóvra, 
où maverat Nady. Somewhat simi- 
larly Clem. Rom. 21 rò émuukës Ths 
yAecogs avróv dia tis avyfjs pavepov 
Toumoatwoay. See thenoteon Pilad.. 
The meaning of Philo Quis rer. div. 
53 (I. p. 511) quoted by Zahn, ó mpor- 
Tys, kal ómóre Aéyew Ooket, mpós àXj- 
Gevav novxater, is somewhat different, 
‘When he seems to speak, it is God 
who speaks and not himself’ The 
force of ywaoxnra seems to be ‘way 
be recognized, understood by others, 
as if he were speaking.’ Otherwise 
ywookynra might refer to recognition 
by God (a meaning suggested by the 
words following ovdév NavOaver k.7.À.) ; 
but this is hardly so appropriate. 

I. ovdev x«.7.A.] Clem. Rom. 27 
mávra éyy)s aùr egTu...7ráyra eyva- 
mov avrov eigiw kai ovdev AéANOev THY 
BovAny avrov. 

2. avrà] For the dative with 
eyyvs comp. Ps. cxliv (cxlv). 18, Acts 
ix. 38, xxvii. 8, Clem. Rom. l.c., Herm. 
Vis. ii. 3; see Bleek ZZeóráerór. 11. 2. 
p. 209. The genitive is the more 
usual case, and in classical Greek 
the dative is very rare; Kühner 1. 
p. 357. The authorities leave no 
doubt about the reading here. 

4. vao] Comp. 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17, 
vi. 19, 2 Cor. vi. 16; and PAz/ad. 7 
THY capka vv Gs vaüóv Oeod TNPELTE, 
Barnab. 16 va ó vaós rod Kupiou 
evdogws oikodounOy...d10 èv T karor- 
knTypio ruv GdnOas ó Ocós karowei èv 


2 aùr®] Gg*; abro Antioch. 
3 aùroô vaot] GLg; templum ejus A; templa det Ss. 


oùôèr] txt GL [Ss] 
éorw] 


Ocós] txt gS,; add. quay GLA 


jpiv, Tatian ad Grac. 15 el pev ws 
vaós jj, karoweiv év aùr jovAera, Ocós 
dia roO mpecBevovros mve)paros. See 
on Mart. Ant. 2. 

Oeós] ‘as God’; i.e. ‘that He may 
be the God of this spiritual temple 
in which He dwells, just as the image 
is the god of the material shrine in 
which it is placed’: the word @¢ds 
being part of the predicate, and not 
the subject to karowet. ‘Hpv, which 
is added in some texts, interferes 
slightly with the sense. See the note 
on Š 9 éoré oiv x.r.A. above. 

Ómep Kal €oTw k.r.A.] i.e. ‘It is the 
case that God dwells in us now, and 
this fact will be made clearly mani- 
fest to our eyes hereafter from our 
deeds of love towards Him’; comp. 
Š 14 ò? dv mpdcoovow od6rjcovrat. 

5. Oates] ‘rightly, ie. ‘as in 
duty bound’; comp. Magn. 9 ov 
dukaiws dvépevov, 1 Cor. xv. 34 exvnpare 
duxaiws. Hence it sometimes signi- 
fies ‘truly’; see Lobeck on Soph. 
Aj. 547. 

XVI. ‘Be not deceived. To vio- 
late the house of God is to forfeit 
the kingdom of heaven. If those 
who desecrated the temple of their 
bodies were punished with death, 
what fate must await such as defile 
the temple of the faith, for which 
Christ died? They are filthy in- 
deed, and will go into unquenchable 
fire—they and their disciples.’ 

7. My mdavacbe] See the notes 


xvi] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 71 


M " e ^ E] (e ^ 
Serat TPO TpCTWTOV nv, EE wv Óvalos ayaTapmeEV 


avTov. 
XVI. 


BaciAeian Oeo$f oy 


KAHPONOMHCOYCIN. 


Mù mravacbe, adeAoi pour oi oikopOopor 


5 A e \ 
€L OUV OL KaTa 


, ^ if > / ^ 5 
c'apka TAUTA TOATTOVTES dzéÜavov, moaw padXov éav 
n 


(but A omits év qui). 
homeeoteleuton); al. g. 


érep...4av] GL; om. S,A (perhaps owing to 
7 oi] GS,Ag; om. Dam-Rup r. 
covres aréBavov] GLS, A ; mdoxovTes ümé8vnokor Dam-Rup; al. g. 


9 Tpác- 
tàr] G 


Dam-Rup; gui (plur.) S,A (omitting éà»); 5 guis L; al. g. 


on Š 5 pndels rAavácOo above, and on 
PAzlad. 3. 

of oikoj0ópoi] The whole pas- 
sage is founded on S. Paul's lan- 
guage in the First Epistle to the 
Corinthians; comp. iii 16 ov« ot- 
dare bru vaós O«o0 éore, 
mvedpa ToU Oeod oikei ev pir; e 
Tis Tov vaóv Tov Oeo POciper, 
POepei robrov ó Oeós, combined with 
vi./9, IO, 19, jJ) mÀavücÓe' ovre 
TrÓDVOL. ..... ore poLxot...... Bacureiay 
cod KAnpovopyoovery...ovK oldare 
őri TÓ oôpa vuav vaós Tov év vty 


` ` 
kat TO 


áylov mveúparós éorw; Hence oiko- 
Oépos must be interpreted from S 
Paul It denotes those who violate 
the temple of their hearts and bo- 
dies, which is God’s house, by evil 
thoughts or evil habits. In classical 
Greek oixopOdpos, otxopOopety, oiko- 
Oopia, commonly refer to the squan- 
dering of property, e.g. Plato Pea. 82 
C; but occasionally they designate the 
ruin of a house by offences of another 
kind, as in Plut. Mor. 12 B yyvratkóv 
oikopOopiar yaperóv, and perhaps in 
Orac. Sibyl. ii. 258 ddduot 7° olko6ópot 
aivol; comp. Orig. ¢. Ces. vii. 63 
vobevew Thy ómó TOY vópov érépo mpo- 
karaXg$ cima» ‘yuvaika xai j Ocipeuv 
tov dddov dvÓpémrov otkov. Whence 
Hesychius explains oiko$6ópot by por- 
xoi. The word therefore would lend 
itself easily to the application which 
Ignatius here makes Oly it E, the 


explanation which I have adopted be 
correct, the following dmé@avoy will 
probably refer to the incident in 
Numbers xxv. I—9, to which also S. 
Paul alludes in the same epistle, x. 8 
nde mopve/epev, kaÓde Twes a)ràv 
émópvevaav, kai érecav x.r.A. The in- 
terpolator has got altogether on a 
wrong track, for he paraphrases ei € 
of robs dvÜpcemrivous oixovs OtadÓeipov- 
res Üaváro karaDikaCovrat, mó0Q 


padrdov of tiv  XpwroÜ éxkAnoiay 
K.T.À. 
8. Baca Oeo x.r.M] See 


I Cor. vi. 9, 10, Gal. v. 21; comp. 
Philad. 3, Polyc. Phil. 5. 

el oy of kara sapka x«.r..] Comp. 
Clem. Hom. Ep. ad lac. 7 modvd yàp 
Sewody Ú porxela TogroÜTov Tov ra Óev- 
repeia čyew arv Ths Kohavews: emel 
rà mpareia rois èv mAávy ovow dro- 
SiSora, Kav codpovacw, 20. xvi. 20 
potxelas svevpariki)s TNS karà cápka 
xeípovos vmapxovons. This last 'pas- 
sage illustrates the force of xarà 
cápka in the text. The excuse for 
such language lies in the fact that the 
early heresies, which these writers 
combat, were in many cases highly 
immoral in their tendency, maintain- 
ing in direct terms the indifference of 
sins of the flesh. See the note on 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. 9, where also the 
sanctity of the bodily temple is 
maintained against such pernicious 
teaching. 


72 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xvi 


~ 5 ^ , if e \ a E ^ 
miatiw Ocot év kakoðiðaokaria pletion, UTEP ns Inoous 


Xpo ròs ¿oraupe 0. 


e ^ \ / 5 
Ò TOLOUTOS Du7apos YEVOMEVOS ELS 


^ , 7 e / \ [3 5 If 
TO mvp TO ao Bea Tov XwWONTEL, O OLWS KAL O AKOUWY 


QaUTOU. 


XVII. Ara Toro uvpov édaBev émi THs keQaAfs 5 
> ^ e / e/ , teu / 5 0 7 \ 
[avrov | ó Kvpios, tva mvén TH éxkAnola aplapotayv. pun 


I mlorw Oeo0] GLA; fidem veram S,; om. Dam-Rup; al. g. 
Dam-Rup; kak askata G; al. g: comp. Philad. 2. 


kako8.0ackaAMa] 
See Trall. 6, where in a 


similar case Dam-Rup alone has preserved the correct reading xatagvomuorevopevor. 


$0c(py] G; Pepe? Dam-Rup; al. g. 
al. Ag. 


maxuvOels, he would seem to have read rpvóepós. 


I. miorw Oeo] ‘the faith of God; 
ie. ‘the teaching of the Gospel.’ 
For this objective sense of miseris see 
Galatians p. 155, and the notes on i. 
23, ill. 23, vi. 10. This use is so fully 
recognised when Ignatius writes, that 
the definite article is dispensed with, 
as e.g. in ÓcAgpa (see the note on 
$ 20). 

pbeipn| ‘any one corrupt. This 
omission. of tis in classical writers is 
not unfrequent ; see Kühner II. p. 32 
sq, Jelf § 373. 6. 

2. pvmapós| ‘He, not less than 
the other, is defiled with filth.’ 

3. Tò müp TO adoBeorov| See Matt. 
ii. 12, Luke iii. 17, and esp. Mark 
ix. 43. 

XVII. ‘The Lord's head was per- 
fumed with ointment, that He might 
shed the fragrance of incorruptibility 
on the Church. Suffer not your- 
selves to be anointed with the foul 
odour of the teaching of the Prince 
of this world. We have received the 
knowledge of God, which is Jesus 
Christ. How then shall we ignore 
His grace bestowed upon us, and 
perish in our folly?’ 

5. Ava rovro} to be connected with 
the following tva, as in 2 Cor. xiii. ro, 
2 Thess. ii. 11, 1 Tim. i. 16, Philem. 


2 6 ro.oüros] GL; 671 oros Dam-Rup; 


pvrapós] GL Dam-Rup; al. A. As g paraphrases AuravOels kal 


6 airov] Gg; suo LA; 


15, comp. Magn. 9; though d1a roóro ` 
sometimes refers to the preceding 
clause, when followed by wa, e.g. 
Eph. vi. 13. 

popov éAagev| A reference to 
the incident in the Gospels; Matt. 
xxvi. 7 sq, Mark xiv. 3 sq, [Luke vii. 
37 sq], John xii. 3 sq. As on that 
occasion ‘the whole house was filled 
with the odour of the ointment, so 
to all time the Church is perfumed 
with the fragrance of incorruptibility 
shed from the Person of Christ. 
Somewhat similarly Clem. Alex. 
Paed. ii. 8 (p. 205), speaking of this 
same incident, says dvvara 0€ rodro 
avpBorov eivat ths SiSackadias THs 
kuptakns «al roô máÜovs aùroð` pipe 
yap «vader adeiopevor kt... where 
Clement explains the anointed feet 
of the Lord to mean the Apostles 
who received the fragrant chrism of 
the Holy Spirit. Comp. Clem. Hom. 
xiii. I5 5 cdpov yuy] thy ékkAgoía» 
ayab Tw pupicer, Orig. c. Cels. 
Vi. 79 émei Xpioròs kepar) éarw ris 
ékkAgaías, às eivat ëv copa Xpurróv kal 
THY ékkAgoíav, TO püpov amd kedaAjs 
karaßéßnkev x.r.A. (with the whole con- 
text), Macar. Magn. AZocr. iii. 14 (p. 
23) Tò ovpanov púpov (said of Christ, 
in reference to the incident at Beth- 


10 


xvii] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


3 


EJ , - 
aXetbeo'0e dvowdiav Tis diWacKaNias Tob apxovros TOU 


2^4 £ \ > i? ° = 5 A 
ALWVOS TOUTOV, UN ax ua Xo La UAS EK TOU Tpoketuévov 


Gv. 


< ^ [4 > 
Ocot yvwow, Ó éoTw 


` , \ 5 £ 
dia Ti O€ où mavrtes povio yivoueba aBovTes 
‘Incots XpioTós; ri pwpws 


5 Z ^ \ , € 
&ToAXXvueÜa deyvooUvres TO Xxapuo ua Ó 7 émoudev an- 


vs 6 Kvpios ; 


om. g Antioch 2. 


ddepécOw... àyla Tod 0eoU éexxAnola [g*]. 
[g]; doctrinae L; amorlas Antioch; zmiquztatzs A. 


dub. A ; al. g. 
jectures xpicgua. 


There is a v. 1. xápw ua for xptoua in r Joh. ii. 27. 


un arelpecbe] GLA; pnéels ov adepéoOw [Antioch]; u? 


7 rhs SidackaNlas] G; didacKkadtas 
Io 6] G; gui (ôs) L; 


II xápıoua] GL[g]; xépw [Antioch]; dub. A. Zahn con- 


méemouper | 


GL; mérovĝev A Antioch (who paraphrases, úmèp 7s mémovĝev GX0n0Qs 6 kúpuos) ; al. g. 


any). Zahn truly remarks that the 
allusion here implies a knowledge of 
S. John’s Gospel ( dé oikía emAnpwOn 
K.T.A.), as well as of S. Matthew’s 
(karéxyeev émi rs Kehadns avrov) or 
S. Mark’s (karéxeev avrov ris keaAÍfjs). 

6. avrod| not avrot; see the notes 
on Col: i20, 22; 

apOapoiay| ‘tncorruptibility, ra- 
ther than ‘immortality, here, as the 
preceding $6eí(pg requires; comp. 
Ephes. vi. 24, and so prob. Magn. 6 
eis Témov kal didaynv apOapoias. At 
least the former idea must be promi- 
nent here, though the latter may not 
be absent. Zahn quotes Iren. iii. 11. 8 
mavrayóĝðev mvéovras Tfjv apGapoiav 
said of the Gospels (so too i. 4. I 00- 
uù apOapaias, i. 6. 1 mvo) djGapaías). 
Comp. Apost. Const. vii. 27 evxapio- 
roÜgév Gol...kKal vmép THs ev@dias ToU 
pópov kal vmép Tov dÓavárov aióvos 
xA. See Harnack in Zeitschr. f. 
Kirchengesch. M. p. 295. 

7. dvowdiav] Liturg. D. Fac. p. 40 
evadlacoy judy rà ÓvadOes THs Wuxis 
kai tod adparos; comp. Ef. Vienn. in 
Euseb. ZZ. E. v. I rjv evodiay ddo- 
Oóres ápa mv Xpiorod dore evious 
Soga kal pip@ kocpukà Kexpio at aù- 
Tovs, oi O€ Karnpeis Kal ramewol kai 
duceideis kai máogs doxnpoovrns dvá- 
mAcor k.t., where perhaps we should 


read dvoaders for Ovoeiüets. See also 
Magn. Yo amo tis dopis éAeyxOrjaeo6c. 

Tov dpxovros k,r.A.] The same ex- 
pression occurs below Š 19, Magn. 
I, Trall. 4, Rom. 7, Philad. 6; comp. 
John xii. 31, xiv. 30, xvi. II, 6 dpyov 
Tov kócpov rovrov, I Cor. ii. 6, 8, oí 
dpxovres Tov aidvos rovrov (this later 
phrase however apparently being used 
by S. Paul of earthly powers). 

8. p) alxparorion K-T.) ‘lest he 
lead us captive and carry us away 
from the life etc? For the condensed 
expression aixpaXori(ew ék TOU K.T.À., 
see the note on Š I OeÓeuévov amo 
Supias. For aixpahorion comp. Phz- 
lad. 2 Amm Tous Ücoüpópovs, 
2 Tim. iii 6 aiypaAeríi(ovres yuvar- 
kápia rene Le reading). 

TOU mpokeuuévov Gv] ‘the life DER 
is set before us, i.e. ‘for us to pursue.’ 
For this sense of mpoke(uevos comp. 


Heb. vi. 18, xii. 1, 2. For the sub- 
stantival use of (jv see the note on 
§ 11 above. 


9. Aafévres] ‘dy receiving? It 
might however be translated ‘seeing 
that we received, but the words in 
the following clause, papas, dyvooty- 
res, point to the former inter pretation. 

10. ő eorw K-T-À-] Comp. Magn. IO 
peraBahea be els véav Conny Ó éoTw 
"Ingots Xpwrós, Col. ii. 2 emlyvacwy 


74 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


XVIII. 


[XVIII 


\ 5 M ^ ^ ^ 
[lepi pnya To uov 7veUua TOV a'-Tavpov, 


t > ^ > ^ OL CS ` / 
ö €O TlV oKavoaNov TOLS ATLOTOUVOGLV, MLV e OWTHOLA 


\ \ 9; sf. 
kal (wr atovuos. 


^ " ^ , 
TOY comdc; MOY CYZHTHTHC; WOU Kau- 


^ ses M \ . ^ 
xno Tdv Aeyouévev acwerov; O yap Oeos nuwv 


1 meplympua k.r.X.] È begins again here and continues to fw) aldwos. 
the rest of the chapter and commences again with $ 19. 
GLZA; crucis tuae Anon-Syrs; al. g. 
crux=06s) L; dub. ZA Anon-Syr,;; al. g. 

July 06 D; sed vobis fidelibus A; rots 08 mworTois [g]. 
GLAg; in salutem et in vitam aeternam È Anon-Syrs. 


GLA Tim-Syr 2; ówaràv g. 


GG’ Theodt; èx [g]; ex L; dub. A Tim-Syr. 


ToU pvoTnpiov Tov Oeo0, Xpioroð èv à 
elow mavres oí Onoavpol ths copias Kal 
yvooews aroxpuvpo (the correct read- 
ing). The knowledge of God is co- 
extensive with Jesus Christ. For 6, 
where we should expect 77s, see the 
note on Col. iii. 14 Trv ayamny ô éorw 
aivüea gos THs TeAcLoTnTos (the correct 
reading). It is not uncommon in 
these epistles; Magn. l.c., Trall. 7, 
Rom. 7. The reading however is 
doubtful here; see the upper note. 

XVIII. ‘I am the devoted slave 
of the Cross. It is a scandal to the 
unbeliever, but salvation and life to 
us. In it the boast of this world’s 
wisdom comes to nought. Such was 
God’s scheme for our redemption. 
Jesus Christ our God was born as a 
man. He was Himself baptized that 
by His passion.He might cleanse the 
waters of baptism for us.’ 

I. Tepivnual ‘the offscouring’ ; see 
the note on § 8. Here also the idea 
is twofold, abasement and self-sacri- 
fice; ‘My spirit bows itself at the foot 
of the Cross,’ and ‘My spirit devotes 
itself for the sake of the Cross.’ ‘I 
am content,’ Ignatius would say, ‘to 
give up everything, and to become 
myself as nothing, for that Cross in 
which others find only a stumbling- 
block.’ Zahn points out a passage 


It omits 
ToU oTavpov] 

2 ô] G; quae (i.e. 

tty 6€] GL Anon-Syrs; 
cwrnpla...aisveos] 

4 cvverGv] 

ó] G; om. G' Theodt ; al. g. iro] 


Mapías] txt GLAg 


in Ephraem Syrus Of. Syr. MI. p. 
494 E ‘crucem tuam adoravi which 
seems to be a reminiscence of the 
Syriac version of mepümpua Tó égóv 
mvevpa Tov aravpoü here, ‘adorat spi- 
ritus meus crucem tuam.’ 

2. 6 éotw oxavdarov] A reminis- 
cence of I Cor. 1. 18, 23, 24; comp. 
Gal v. rr. The Cross was still a 
stumblingblock, as it had been in 
the Apostolic age; but the persons 
who stumbled at it were different. 
The stumblers, to whom Ignatius 
seems especially to allude in oxav- 
8aXov here, are the Docetics ; see on 
Phitad. 8, and 1. p. 359 sq, 568 sq. 

3. mod coQós k.T...] An inexact 
quotation from I Cor. i. 20 o? rogos; 
TOU ypappareUs; mov cvuv(QrQr)s TOU 
aióvos rovrov; which words them- 
selves are a free paraphrase of Isaiah 
xxxii. 18. The following clause, moô 
Kavxnois Tov Aeyopuévov acuveràv, is 
Ignatius’ own; but it is suggested by 
the quotation from Isaiah xxix. 14, 
dzoÀó rjv cojíav ràv copay kai rjv 
c)vecw TÓv cvveràv abetnow, which 
S. Paul introduces into his context 
(i. 19), combined with other expres- 
sions of the Apostle in this neigh- 
bourhood (i. 31 6 kavxópevos ev Kupio 
kauxdo Qo, a condensed quotation of 
the passage in Jeremiah ix. 23, 24, 


xvii] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 75 


5 A e \ e E 
s Ino ovs ó Xpia-ros ékvoQopr On UTO Mapías Kat’ oikovo- 


, ° , Xx \ / . 
Mi&v, ék omepuatos mev Aaveld mvevuaros òè dqylou' 


A > e ^ 
os éyevynOn kai Barrion iva TO mabe TÒ Vowp 


kaÜapian. 


Tim-Syr; add. ris map0évov G’. 


> 
kar’ oikovoulay] karowovoutav G. 


oikovoníav] g*; add. dei patris [A] (the whole sentence being in brackets); add. 


dei GG'L Theodt Tim-Syr 


6 Aaveld] ôa GG’. 


TV Ev LAT Os | 


GG'Lg* (with a v.l.); êk mvevuaros Theodt, and so prob. Tim-Syr; dub. A. For 
uev,..6€ Tim-Syr has a simple connecting particle e semine dauid et e spiritu sancto. 
7 Va...ka0apley| GG'L; ut aguas passibiles purgaret Tim-Syr, so that his trans- 
lator apparently read roô ma6etv for TY måler; ut purgaret aquae corruptionem A; 
iva Trò Ovnrov tov ka0apw05 Theodt; al. g. 


pn kavxáaÜo 6 codes èv TH copia avrod 
k.r.A. and elsewhere (Rom. iii. 27 
Tov ovy ý) kaUxnats 5). 

4. ó yap Geos juv] See the note 
on this expression in inscr. above. 

5. ékvoQopr6n] ‘was borne in the 
womb? For the word comp. Clem. 
Rom. 20. It is found once in the 
LXX, Eccles. xi. 5, and occurs several 
times in late classical writers. 

vró Mapías] See above, § 7. 

kar oikovopiav) ‘according to a 
dispensation. The word oikovopia 
came to be applied more especially 
to the Incarnation (as here and below 
$20 $e npédunv oikovopías k.T.À.), be- 
cause this was par excellence the 
system or plan which God had or- 
dained for the government of His 
household and the dispensation of 
His stores. Hence in the province 
of theology, oikovopía was distinguish- 
ed by the fathers from @eodoyia 
proper, the former being the teaching 
which was concerned with the Incar- 
nation and its consequences, and the 
latter the teaching which related to 
the Eternal and Divine nature of 
Christ. The first step towards this 
special appropriation of oikovouía to 
the Incarnation is found in S. Paul; 
e.g. Ephes. i. 10 eis oikovogíav ToU 
mAnpoparos TQ» kapóy. See the note 


on that passage, where the history of 
the word is more fully traced. In 
this passage of Ignatius it is more- 
over connected with the ‘reserve’ of 
God (Š 19 èv $evxía Geo?  érpáx6n). 
Thus ‘economy’ has already reached 
its first stage on the way to the sense 
of ‘dissimulation, which was after- 
wards connected with it, and which 
led to disastrous consequences in the 
theology and practice of a later age. 

6. èk omépparos Aaveió] This is 
the way in which Ignatius delights 
to represent the human nature of our 
Lord; comp. Š 20 below, Trall. o, 
Rom. 7, Smyrn. 1. It is generally 
counterbalanced by a reference to 
His Divine nature, as here (ó Geós 
NOV, Tvevpatos aylov); except where, 
as in Trall. 9, his object is merely to 
assert the reality of the human na- 
ture against the Docetics. See esp. 
Tertull. Carn. Chr. 21. 

7. eyevw]0n] not ‘begotten, but 
‘born, as in Trall. 9; comp. Smyrn. 
Tee So Luke i 1371573 Xxiii. 20, 6:6. 

iva TQ rade x.r..] The baptism of 
Christ might in a certain sense be 
said, in the language of our liturgy, 
to ‘sanctify water to the mystical 
washing away of sin' (comp. Tertull. 
adv. Jud. 8, de Bapt. 9); but it was 
the death of Christ which gave their 


76 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xix 


3i 3 ^ ^ , 
XIX. Kal éXa0ev tov apyovTa TOU alwYOsS TOUTOU 


r kal] GG'LAg Orig (Gk, but omitted in Jerome’s version) Euseb Andr- 


Cret Tim-Syr; sed Anon-Syr,; om. 2. 
GL etc.; add. rijs devrap0évov kal Qeorókou G'. 


purifying effect to the baptismal wa- 
ters. The baptism was only the in- 
auguration of this sanctifying process. 

XIX. ‘This divine economy was 
hidden from the prince of this 
world. The virginity of Mary, her 
child-bearing, the death of the Lord 
—these three mysteries, though des- 
tined to be proclaimed aloud, were 
wrought in the silence of God. The 
announcement was first made to all 
the ages by the appearance of a star, 
which outshone all the celestial 
lights, and to which sun and moon 
and stars did obeisance. They were 
terrified at this strange apparition. 
Magic vanished before it; ignorance 
was done away; the ancient kingdom 
of evil was destroyed, when God ap- 
peared in the form of Man. Thus 
the eternal counsel of God was inau- 
gurated. And the whole universe 
was confounded because the disso- 
lution of death was purposed.’ 

I. Kat édaOev x.r.A.| This passage 
is more frequently quoted by the 
fathers than any other in the Igna- 
tian Epistles. It is cited or referred 
to by Origen (Hom. in Luc. vi, Of. 
III. p. 938 A), by Eusebius (Quaest. ad 
Steph. 1, Op. IV. p. 881, ed. Migne), 
by Basil (Hom. in Sanct. Chr. Gen. 
3, Of. Il. p. 598 B), by Jerome 
(Comm. in Matt. i. § 1, Op. vit. p. 
12 B), by Jovius Monachus (Ze Oecoz. 
vii, in Phot. B7 ccxxii, p. 622), 
by Andreas Cretensis (Hom. in 
Nat. B. Virg.n, in Pearson V. J, 
p. 87), and by an anonymous Mono- 
physite writer preserved in a Syriac 
version (Cureton C. Z. p. 219; see 
76. p. 359), besides Timotheus of 
Alexandria (Cureton C. Z p. 211) 


2 Mapías] txt 
rokeros] GG'g etc.; 


who has quoted also the previous 
context. Of these writers however, 
Basil and Jerome have obviously 
taken the reference, not from Igna- 
tius himself, but from Origen, whose 
comment they mix up with the state- 
ment of Ignatius, as Cotelier has 
pointed out. The passage was appa- 
rently also in the mind of the com- 
mentator who bears the name of 
Theophilus of Antioch (zz Evang. i, 
p. 280 Otto) of Ephrem Syrus 
(Hymn. 19, quoted by Merx, p. 74 
sq), of S. Ambrose on Luke i. 27 
(Op. 1. p. 1281 ‘ut virginitas Mariæ 
falleret principem mundi’), of Cyril- 
lonas the Syrian poet (Bickell Consp. 
Rer. Syr. Lit. pp. 34, 35, quoted by 
Zahn 7. v. A. p. 187), of Anastasius 
(de Rect. Ver. Dogm. quoted by Pear- 
son V. Z. p. 81), and certainly of a 
Syrian Commentator on S. John 
(Cureton C. Z. p. 285; this was either 
Harith-bar-Sisin, or Lazarus of Beth- 
Kandasa; see Wright Catal. Syr. 
Manuscr. Brit. Mus. pp. 608, 610). 
The idea that the Deceiver was 
himself deceived by God’s mysterious 
reserve is found in many connexions 
in the early fathers; see for instance, 
besides the passages already quoted, 
Justin Martyr in Iren. v. 26. 2 Xa- 
Tavas...undém@ eiðs avTov THY kará- 
kpiow, Hippol. Of. p. 38 (Lagarde) 
idod 6 Kuptos mapayiverae Aurés, póvos, 
yupvos, dmposrárevros, evdupa č%ov 
TO dvÜpómivov capa, kpomrov dé TÓ 
ths Oedrnros agiopa iva AXáÓg Tod 
Ópdkovros Tò mavovpynpa...dAAà kai aç 
dvÓpemos Avrós kal vmóxpees dpaprióv 
exwev r]v kepaXjv avtod Bam ria 6$- 
vat K.T.À. (a passage which may have 
been suggested by the words of 


xix] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


Dy) 


e , J \ ` ^ e 
5» maphevia Mapias kal 6 Tokeròs aurís, Omolws Kal Ó 


TÓKos Andr-Cret. 


atris...6 0dvaros] GG'LZ, (which omits óuoles) A 


(which has verum etiam for ómolos kal) g Euseb Andr-Cret Tim-Syr Anon-Syr 
(comp. Jov kal rj» cravpwoww); om. Z: see the lower note. 


Ignatius), Z0. p. 146 roro 86 oiko- 
vopuía Tov mveUparos éyivero, tva pn 6 
OidBoAos cvvíy rà vad rv mpodmróv 
ev mapafgoXais AeAaAguéva k.r.A. So 
too Greg. Nyss. Orat. Catech. 26 (11. 
p. 68 Migne) ázarárav yap kai ajrósg 
TG ToU ávÜpémov mpoß\ýuarıe 6 mpo- 
aratnoas Tov ávÓpemov r@ Ths jovis 
dehedopatt, and for other passages 
in writers of the fourth and later 
centuries see Baur Christl. Lehre 
v. d. Versöhnung p. 73 sq. 

2. opoiws kai k.r.A.] For this mode 
of connexion see § 16, 772. 13: 
similarly àcaíreos kai Clem. Rom. 43. 

In one of the two MSS (Z;) of the 
Curetonian text this clause is omitted, 
and the words run 'the virginity of 
Mary and the birth of our Lord and 
the three mysteries of a cry.’ Thus 
the three mysteries are dissociated 
from the virginity and child-bearing. 
This reading has been adopted by 
Cureton (C. 7. p. 284 sq), Lipsius 
(Aechi. p. 128 sq, S. T. pp. 9, 36, 194), 
and others, as the text of the original 
Ignatius; and is adduced as an argu- 
ment for preferring the Curetonian 
letters to the Vossian. The reasons 


urged in favour of this view are two- , 


fold. (1) It is said that the earliest 
writers who quote or refer to the 
passage (Origen and Theophilus of 
Antioch) stop short of the death of 
Christ. The answer is, that they 
were speaking of the virginity of 
Mary and the birth of Christ alone, 
and therefore quoted, or referred to, 
just so much only of Ignatius’ words 
as served their purpose. In the case 
of Origen the argument is suicidal ; 
for he ends with 7 map6evía Mapías, 
so that the testimony of his silence 


would be equally valid against 6 ro- 
keTOs avrís as against ó Ódvaros Tov 
Kvpíov. Again Theophilus of An- 
tioch (if indeed we could venture to 
consider this commentary his genuine 
work) does not directly refer to the 
passage at all, and therefore any allu- 
sion to the death would be altogether 
out of place. Eusebius, the next 
writer in point of time who quotes 
the passage, quotes the clause kal ó 
Óávaros k.r.A. also. Cureton alleges 
likewise the Pseudo-Ignatius (Phz- 
lipp. 8), who mentions the virginity 
and birth alone as being hidden from 
Satan; but bere again the answer is 
the same. This writer is not con- 
cerned at all with the death of Christ. 
Moreover this very instance shows 
the fallacy of the argument from si- 
lence; for this Ignatian forger cer- 
tainly had «ai ó Oavaros rot Kupioy in 
his text here, as his own recension 
shows. (2) It is urged that the state- 
ment involved in ó Oavaros rod Kupiou 
is false; for, since Satan is repre- 
sented in the Gospels as prompting 
Judas to the betrayal (Luke xxii. 3, 
John xiii. 2), he could not have been 
ignorant of the death. Nor is the 
answer given by Uhlhorn (p. 48) and 
Hefele, that this ignorance of Satan 
applied to the predeterminate counsel 
of God and not to the historical 
event, satisfactory. It is not how- 
ever the fact of the death, but the 
significance and effects of the death, 
to which Ignatius refers. The prince 
of this world instigated the death of 
Christ, not knowing that it was or- 
dained to be the life of mankind. 
Thus the deceiver was himself de- 
ceived. See esp. 1 Cor. ii. 7 sq àa- 


78 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


Aoünev Oeo cohiay èv pvo Tpi, THY 
dmokekpupuévgv, HY mpodpiev ó Oeòs 
mpd róv aidver eis Oófav quay, tv 
ovdels TGV apxóvrov TOV aiàvos 
rovrov Cyvokev el yap &yvacar, ovK 
àv tov Kúpiov ris ddéns éeoravpwecay 
x.r.A., where, as here, the reference 
is to the mystery of the atonement 
through the cross of Christ, and on 
which passage Chrysostom says rò 9€ 
Ovk @yvacav épol doxei ov mept Xprorod 
évravda eipfjo0a. AAAA mept aurñs ToU 
mpaypatos Tis oikovopías, otov, TÍ 
éBovdero ó Ódvaros kal ó aravpós, 
oix iJüewav. As Ignatius has quoted 
the context of this passage of S. Paul 
just before, we must suppose that he 
had the Apostle's words in his mind 
here. Itis probable indeed that by 
of Gpxovres Tod aidvos rovrov S. Paul 
means earthly rulers, such as Pilate 
and Herod; but very many ancient 
commentators (e.g. Marcion in Ter- 
tull. adv. Marc. v. 6 ; Origen Sel. zz 
Psalm. ii, II. p. 538 ; reves in Chry- 
sost. on I Cor. ii. 6; Ambrosiaster 
ad loc), and some modern, have 
interpreted the words of spiritual 
powers, and Ignatius is likely to 
have done the same. Even if he 
did not, he would still regard the 
earthly rulers as acting under ZZe 
dpxev Tov aidvos rovrov in this crime. 
Indeed the mention of the 'death 
of Christ! is required by the context. 
Here, as elsewhere in Ignatius, the 
máÜos is the centre round which his 
thoughts revolve. The Incarnation 
has its importance mainly in the 
fact that it leads up to the Passion. 
It is only the deginning of the end 
(dpxnv 96 éAápBavev) The whole 
passage opens and closes with the 
death of Christ. It opens with the 
mention of the ‘Cross’ which is 
- ‘salvation and life eternal’ ($ 18 be- 
ginning); it closes with the reference 
to the ‘dissolution of death’ through 
the sacrifice of Calvary ($ 19 end). 


[xix 


Both these passages, it will be ob- 
served, appear in the Curetonian 
letters themselves. And, while the 
mention of Christs death is thus 
suggested by the parallel in S. Paul 
and required by the context of Ig- 
natius himself, this mode of regarding 
it entirely accords with the language 
of other fathers, who speak in the 
same way of Satan's ignorance re- 
specting it; e.g. Orig. Sel. in Psalm. 
xxxiv. 8 (commenting on the words 
€AÓéro a)rois mayis jv ov ywweoKover 
k.T.A., Of. II. p. 650) vouio epi roô 
cTavpoU Aéyew a/róv, eis Ov éumémrokev 
ó OtaBortos dyvooy K.T., Comm. in 
Matt. T. xiii § 6, Of. III. p. 583 (comp. 
Comm. in Matth. T. xiii $ 9, Op. Ul. 
p. 583, lv of rapaXaBóvres avrov...€k TOU 
Kupiov expuktnpicbadcw, cis karáXv- 
ov tis dias Bactdelas kai ápxrs mapa 
mpoodokiay mapadaBovres...d0 Oy év 
Kkauvornte (wns mepuratovpev). The 
Marcionites used similar language 
of the demiurge, Adamant. Dial. de 
Rect. Fid. à ò 8nprovpyos...emeBov- 
Aevoev adT@, p) celdas dre 6 Odvaros 
Tov dyaov carnpia avOparwy éyévero. 
See also the references in the pre- 
vious note on the idea of the De- 
ceiver deceived. 

On the other hand the shorter 
reading, which omits the reference 
to the death, is condemned alike on 
grounds of external and internal 
criticism. (1) Though one of the 
two MSS (3,) of the Syriac has the pas- 
sage as given above, the other (3,) 
reads it *the virginity of Mary and 
her child-bearing and the death of 
the Lord (ahaa eoa 
33) and the three mysteries of 
crying,’ thus only differing in sense 
from the Greek text by the insertion 
of ‘and’ before ra rpia pvorýpia (an 
insertion which a thoughtless tran- 
scriber would readily make). It is 
said indeed, that this MS (3,) must 


xix] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 79 


, ^ £ y ^ ° 5 
Oavatos ToU Kvptov* Tia Avo "pu Koavyns, atwa Èv 


1 Tod Kupíov] GG'LZAg Tim-Syr Anon-Syr; rot! xpwToU Euseb Andr-Cret. 
Tpla pvorńpa] GG'LA (which adds mirabilia) g Euseb Andr-Cret Tim-Syr; et 


tria mysteria X425. 
lower note. 


have been corrected from the Greek 
text. But such a solution is highly 
improbable in itself; for elsewhere 
z, follows the Curetonian text closely 
in all the omissions and divergences 
from the Greek. In the only other 
passage of importance in which it 
exhibits a variation, Rom. 9 xai yàp 
ai p) mpoojKovoai por TÜ óð, where 
with the Greek it retains the nega- 
tive un, which 3, omits, it clearly 
preserves the original reading (see 
the note there), Even in smaller 
matters it is not uncommonly more 
correct than Z; (see Zahn 7. v. A. 
p. 187). Again the Armenian Ver- 
sion, which was translated from the 
Syriac, has the clause here as in the 
Greek ; and it is quoted or referred 
to in Syriac writers (see the re- 
ferences given above), who were 
scarcely likely to have got it from 
the Greek. Moreover the omission 
in Z, is readily explained. The eye 
of the transcriber would be confused 
between words differing so slightly 
as onana ‘and her child-bear- 
ing,’ and {mhana ‘and the death 
of, so that the latter word might 
easily drop out; and as a matter of 
fact this same confusion is actually 
made in Rom. 6, where rmokerós is 
rightly translated in the Curetonian 
text dolores partus, but an extract 
elsewhere preserved gives it with 
the corrupt reading ram for 
raza, and accordingly the Ar- 
menian version has dolores mortis 
(see the notes on the passage) (2) 
The reading of Z) which distin- 
guishes the three mysteries from 


xpavyjs] GG'LZ etc; $purà Andr-Cret; see the 
ärva] GG'LZ etc; om. A. 


what has gone before, has never yet 
been adequately explained. What 
in this case are the ‘three mys- 
teries of crying’? Cureton altogether 
evades this difficulty when he says 
(C. Z. p. 286) that they may ‘refer to 
the song of the angelic host,’ Luke 
ii. 14; for there is nothing in this 
song which explains such a reference. 
Ritschl (Entstehung p. 578, ed. 1) 
and Lipsius (echt. p. 133) agree 
that two of the three were (1) the 
voice at the baptism, (2) the voice at 
the transfiguration. For the third 
Lipsius suggests the angelic an- 
nouncement of the conception as 
made either to Joseph (Matt. i. 20) 
or to the Virgin herself (Luke i. 26); 
while Ritschl supposes that Ignatius 
used some other Gospel containing 
a third proclamation similar to the 
two others. But, if the transfigura- 
tion is allowed a place here, why 
not thedeath ? And again, in what 
sense can the announcements of 
Matt. 1920)» Luke 1. 26 be called 
kpavyfs, seeing that they were strictly 
private? Volkmar (see Lipsius S. 
T. p. 9 sq) finds all the three puory- 
pia kpavyrs in S. Mark, explaining 
them of the voice at the baptism, 
the voice at the transfiguration, and 
the exclamation of the centurion at 
the ‘crucifixion (Mark xv. 39). As 
he includes this last, it is difficult 
to see on what grounds he rejects ó 
Oavaros roð Kupíov. 

I. kpavyjs] ‘of crying, of pro- 
clamation, a stronger word than 
xnpvéeas : see Athenag. Suppl. II 
érirpépare évraüÜa Tov Aqyou é£akov- 
oTov perà T 0ÀÀfs kpavyrs yeyo- 


80 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


| Xix 


a A Ld , ^ 3^ A 
5"ovxia Oeov éerpaxOn. TWS OUV EpavepwOn TOTS ALWOL § 
é 


5 ¿a of \ / A , ^ 
adorn év oUpavo éAXauwev vzep vavras TOUS AOTEPAS, 


1 Qe00] GG'LZA Euseb Andr-Cret Tim-Syr; om. g. 


mis otv ...a rots] 


In place of all this Z has merely a Jatere (a Syriasm for drò or ék or ap) stellae. 


vóros emt mappraoíav dvayayeiv ws émi 
Baowtéov gitoodpay amodoyovpevov 
(comp. Luke i. 42 kpauy9 peyadn, 
probably the correct reading). Comp. 
also Philad. 7 ekpaúyaca, with the 
note. Here xpavyy is the corre- 
lative to novyia, as revelation is to 
mystery. ‘These mysteries,’ Igna- 
tius would say, ‘were foreordained 
and prepared in silence by God, that 
they might be proclaimed aloud to 
a startled world) It is an exag- 
gerated expression of the truth stated 
in Rom. xvi. 25 rò krpvypa 'Igco 
XpigroU Kara dmokáAvyyw pvornpíiov 
xpovois aiovíois ceavynpévov þa- 
vepwOévros de viv K.T., Ephes. iii. 
9 TOU pvoTnplov ToU dmokekpup- 
pévov amò TOY aióvov ev rà OcQ 
..iva yvopucÓ; viv rais dpxais kal 
rais eLovolats ev rois érovpaviots. k.r.À. 
(with the parallel passage Col. i. 26 
sq); comp. also 1 Cor. ii. 7 sq (already 
quoted), 2 Tim. i. ro. For the use 
of pvorýpiov in S. Paul as suggesting 
the idea of revelation, see the note 
on Col. i. 26. The expression pv- 
oTnpia Kpavyns involves a studied 
contradiction in terms; for, as Chry- 
sostom says (Of. II. p. 375), &v6a pv- 
oTHpia, TOAAN ovyr. 

The substitution of $purà for kpav- 
yüs in Andreas Cretensis is not to 
be explained with Merx (p. 76) as 
a corruption of xpuymra, this again 
being corrupted from xpavyfs. It is 
merely the substitution, in a loose 
quotation, of a common epithet of 
pvotnptov (occurring in the liturgies) 
for a not very intelligible expression. 
The epithet gpixrdv is found with 
pvorýpiov, e.g. Joseph. B. Tilt Gs 
Hippol p. 17 (Lagarde), Lit. D. 


Marc. p. 16, Lit. S. Basil. p. 164 
(ed. Neale). So in Chrysostom the 
pvoriüpia (i.e. the eucharist) are styled 
ppixra, ppixady, Of. VII. p. 310, VIII. 
p. 273, X. p. 393, and elsewhere. 
Bunsen would read évapyt for kpav- 
Yas: 

èv jovyia...empax6n| Comp. Magn. 
8 ó havepdoas éavróv dia Incod Xpiorov 
To) vioð avtov, és srw avrov Aóyos 
dmó oys mpoeAÓGv (with the note). 
On this silence of God compare 
Dionys. Areop. de Div. Nom. xi mepi 
pév ody arts, Ó Te moré éoTu THS 
Geias eipnyns kal novxias k.r.A. See 
also the language of Marcellus of 
Ancyra quoted on Magn. 8. 

I. tots aidow] ‘to the ages’ past 
and future, which are here personi- 
fied. It seems probable that in S. 
Pauls expression, puornpiov droke- 
kpvupévov ard Tov aidvev (Eph. iii. 9, 
Col. i. 26), the preposition should be 
taken as temporal (see the note on 
the latter passage); but Ignatius 
may have understood it otherwise. 
At all events this personification of 
‘the aeons’ is a step towards the 
Valentinian phraseology, and affords 
another illustration of the Gnostic 
tinge which colours the language of 
Ignatius. 

2. dorpp] In the evangelical nar- 
rative (Matt. i. 2 sq) the incident 
of the star is very simply told; but 
this simplicity was early overlaid by 
gross exaggerations. So we find it 
treated in the Protevangelium, § 21 
ciSopev dgrépa mraupeyéOn Aduayarta èv 
Tois Gatpois rToúrois Kal auBddVvovra 
avtovs, date Tovs dorépas uù) haiver Oat. 
[I may here mention by way of 
caution, that Lipsius (Aecht. p. 135) 


` 


xix] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 


81 


Kal TO Qus QUTOU Septimum d HU, kai E uds 


XEV 5 KALVOTNS QUTOU* Ta ðe Aora TAVTA o Tp ¿ua 


erroneously quotes after Cureton as 
a separate authority, though closely 
allied, an extract from the Ms, Brit 
Mus. Add. 14, 484, which Coen 
himself correctly gives as a Syriac 
translation of this passage in the 
Protevangelium (C. Z. p. 286). See 
the account of the MS in Wright’s 
Catal. p. 99.] Compare also Clem. 
Alex. Exc. Theod. 74 (p. 986) dwé- 
TeiAev Éévos dor] p kai katvós, KaTa- 
Auer rjv maXaiw doTpoÜcaíav, kawd 
Qori où kocpikQ Aaumópevos, ó Kawas 
0000s kal cwrnpious rpemópevos, avrós 
ó Kúpios dyÜpomov odnyos k.r.A., where 
the resemblances to this passage of 
Ignatius are perhaps too great to be 
accidental Stil more extravagant 
is the extract which Cureton (C. Z. 
p. 287) gives from the Syriac work 
called the Cave of Treasures, wrong- 
ly ascribed to Ephrem: ‘For two 
years before the birth of Christ the 
star appeared to the magi; for they 
beheld the star in the firmament of 
heaven, which shone with a light, 
the appearance of which was greater 
than all the stars; and there was a 
girl in the midst of it holding a boy, 
and a crown was placed upon his 
head, etc.’ This extract is taken from 
the Ms Brit. Mus. Add. 25, 875: see 
Wrights Catal. p. 1064. A similar 
account of the appearance of the 
virgin and child in the star is found 
also in the ZEthiopic Conflict of 
Adam and Eve, of which the Syriac 
Cave of Treasures is apparently only 


another recension (see Dillmann Das 


Christliche Adambuch des Morgen- 
landes p. 9 sq, in Ewald's Fahr- 
bücher no. v), but nothing is there 
said of the two years. The star how- 
ever is there stated, as here, to have 
‘shone in the heavens zz the midst 


IGN. II. 


of all the other stars? (Dillmann 1. c. 
p. 135). Whether Ignatius derived 
his statement from some written nar- 
rative or from oral tradition, it would 
be impossible to say. In the only 
other passage where he seems to step 
outside of the Canonical Gospels, 
Smyrn. 3, either hypothesis is ten- 
able. 

In the Curetonian letters the 
whole passage, mds ov...) àvópows 
avrois, is abridged into these words 


cana ca Te ea fa latere 


stellae; which if it had been trans- 
lated from the Greek, would pro- 
bably represent amd Tov aocrépos. 
But even if it be rendered ‘from the 
time of the stars appearing’ with 
Weiss, Lipsius (echt. p. 132), and 
others (see below, III. p. 90), no good 
sense is attained. Bunsen boldly 
substitutes éxnpvy6@n for émpáx60n; but 
what is the meaning of èv novyia 
cov ékgpóxO0n? Cureton does not 
attempt to explain the words. 

3. avexdadntrov| Not a common 
word; see I Pet. i. 8, Iren. i. 14. 5. 

Eenopov|] ‘amazement, perplexity, 
as arising from a sense of strange- 
ness; comp. I Pet. iv. 12 py Éevi- 
Ceabe tH èv ópiv mupeoe, mpós met- 
pacpóv vpiv ywopévg, oe £évov vpiv 
ovpBaivoyros, which explains the 
meaning. See the note on enoAy- 
covra. [Clem. Rom.] su Hmc 
substantive occurs occasionally else- 
where in the sense which it has here; 
e.g. Polyb. xv. 17. I ovykwet mos 
éxaorov nuav ó evo pós. 

4. rà Əë Nowra x.r-A.] The conception 
here is obviously taken from Joseph’s 
dream, and it may therefore be a 
question how far Ignatius intended 
this as a description of actual phy- 


6 


82 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xix 


1 NLo Kal ceva Xopos éyévero TO deep autos òè m nv 
vmepBadrAwy TO pws auTOU UTED TavTa: TAapaxn TE nV 


1 xopds] G’; xwpds G (but with a blot which may be intended as a correction 


into xopós). 
3 00ey] GG’; ëvber [g]. 


éyévero] GG’; évytvovro g. 
From this point 2 reads etiam adhuc in manifestatione filii 


2 re] GG'Ag; autem (86) L. 


coepit. abolert magia et omnia vincula evanuerunt et regnum vetus et error malitiae 


destruebatur. 


inde commota sunt simul omnia et dissolutio mortis excogitata est, et 


erai initium illi quod in deo (apud deum) perfectum est, where the epistle ends, so 


that 88 20, 21 are omitted. altogether. 


édvero...drepOelpero, Oeo k.r.À.] 


¿Mero maou payela (uayla), kal ras 6eo pios Apavigfero kaklas, ğyvora kaOmpeiro (ka0m- 
pfjro), madara Bacirela dvepOelpero, Oeo0 k.r.X. GG'L, and so it is universally read by 


the editors. 


the punctuation will be readjusted accordingly, as is done in the text. 


But I am disposed to think that diepGelpero ought to be omitted, and 


With perhaps 


the exception of Severus, I cannot find any trace of dvepOelpero in our other authori- 


ties: 


(r) g paraphrases éuwpalvero copia Koopixy, "yonrela U0Nos Tv kal yédws Ù 


A , iah ; 
payela, mas Oecuos kaklas hApavifero, dyvolas ¢ópos Oweckeüüvrvro, kal Tupayyvukh 


apxy kaÜmpeiro, Oeo x.7.A., where Tupayyukh dpx» is the substitute for mada 
Bactdela: (2) A has et hinc solvebatur omnis incantatio astrologorum (= ¿Mero Tica 
payela kai mâs espòs) et deceptiones mali finiebantur (npavlgero kaklas dyvoia) et 
vetus regnum destruebatur (kaOnpetro madara Baorela) per revelationem. dei etc. 


sical phenomena. The parallel pas- 
sage of the Excerpta ex Theodoto 
already quoted shows how the 
symbol and the thing symbolized 
might be blended together: see also 
Ephrem Syrus, Of. .Syr. Iv. p. 416 
‘A star shone forth suddenly with 
preeternatural light, less than the 
sun and greater than the sun. It 
was less than the sun in manifest 
light; it was greater than he in 
secret strength by reason of its 
mystery. A star in the east darted 
its rays into the house of darkness, 
etc’; Marcellus in Euseb. c. Marc. 
ii. 3 (p. 48) oros yap 7v ó tnvKatra 
Qaveis dornp 6 pépav re kai ÓgAGv THY 
"Lépav Tois páyow, explaining Ps, 
cix(cx) 3. Thereis the same contra- 
distinction as here, between dorpa 
‘the constellations’ and derjp ‘the 
single star,’ in Profev. 21 (quoted 
above). 

I. xopós éyévero] Comp. Š 4, Rom. 
2. 

2. VmepBaMev k.r..] ‘surpassing 


all in its light? where rò $ós is pro- 
bably the cognate accusative, de- 
scribing the thing in which the excess 
took place; as eg. Aristot. H. A. 
ix. 29 (p. 618) tiv ðeiav orepBáAXe: 
Touro TO Opveov. At least I do not 
remember any instance where dmep- 
BáXXew signifies ‘to make to exceed.’ 
In 2 Macc. iv. 24 wmepfaAà» tov 
"Iácova* ráXavra dpyvpiov Tpiakógua, 
the second accusative is one of 
quantity (see Grimm a4 /oc.). | 

rapaxij re HY] i.e. ‘there was trouble, 
perplexity, to know whence came 
this strange appearance which was 
so unlike ae ' For kaworns comp. 
Orig. c. Cels. i. 58 (1. p. 373) rov 
opdévra dorépa èv TH dvaroMj kawov 
eivat vopiopev kai pndevl rv cvvnÓóv 
mapamAnotoy k.T.À. 

3. 60ev édvero] The critical note 
will explain the diplomatic grounds 
on which I have placed àid$6eípero 
in brackets, as probably a later and 
spurious addition. The gain to the 


sense is great and obvious. Aeopds 


xix] TO THE EPHESIANS. 83 


, e / e Ld ea ^ D 2 ^ 
7roÜev N KALVOTHS N Q&QVOMOLOS auTots. oGev €NVETO MTATA 


Z \ ^ £ p , , » 
Mayela Kat mås Oeo pos, npaviCeTo Kaklas ayvola, kaÜn- 


(3) The sentence is much tumbled about in Z (as given above), and retrans- 
lated into the Greek it would run thus, é\Wero payela kal mâs 0ecuós pavlfero 
kal ka8mpe?ro madara Baoirela kal kaklas ayvora. From a comparison of the two 
last it seems to follow that the Syriac Version, of which X is a tumbled abridg- 
ment and.from which A is a corrupt text of a secondary translation, must have 
run somewhat thus; solvebatur omnis magia et omme vinculum. et error malitiae 
Jiniebatur et regnum vetus destruebatur, etc. The scribe of the ancestral Ms of 
GG'L, having begun with a wrong punctuation, found when he got to the end of 
the sentence that he had no verb for radaud Baowdela and inserted ôrephelpero 
accordingly. Sev-Syr 5 quotes only the latter part of the sentence, Zgmoraztia 
dissipabatur, regnum vetus corrumpebatur (destruebatur), where the last verb 
nn ssannp is a natural rendering of dvepGelpero, which was perhaps already 


in his text. 4 payela] payta G’. 0ecuós] GG'LE; espòs [g]; 
al. A. ka0mpetro] g; destruebatur A; KaOnpiro GG'; ablata est L. 


Oeo dvOpwrlvws Qavepovuévov] GG'L; quum. deus homo manifestaretur Sev-Syr; 
Oeo ws àv0pómov davepovuévov g (treating the whole context paraphrastically) ; 
per revelationem dei qui incarnatus est A; in manifestatione filii È (in an earlier 


place in the sentence; see above). 


is thus connected with éAvero, and 
BaciXeía with xkaOnpetro, to which 
they have respectively a natural 
affinity ; whereas in the common 
text they are separated. For the 
connexion of Avew with decpos see 
Philad. 8; for the connexion of kaĝ- 
aipeiv. with power and sovereignty, 
see above § 13. 

4. payeia] The idea that magic 
was overthrown by the Advent of 
Christ is frequent in the fathers, and 
this overthrow was commonly con- 
nected, as here, with the visit and 
worship of the magi, as the symbol 
and assurance of its defeat. Seee.g. 
Tertull. de Idol. 9, Orig. c. Ces. i. 60 
(I. p. 374 sq) ka@atpotvrat ai r&v 
Sayovey évépyewa py Suvdpevar ávrt- 
Breau Td ris Oedrnros ari, with 
other references given by Cotelier. 
The same too is said in Clem. Alex. 
Exc. Theod. 72 sq (p. 986) more es- 
pecially of astrology; comp. Tertull. 
l c. ‘attamen cum magia punitur, 
cujus est species astrologia, utique 


et species in genere damnatur. The 
large space which magic, witchcraft, 
astrology, and the like, occupied in 
the popular religion of the heathen, 
may be seen from the denunciations 
of the Christian fathers; e.g. Justin 
Apol. i. 14, Tertull. Apolog. 23, etc. 
See the account of Hadrian in Orac. 
Szbyll. viii. 56. The lapse of Julian 
into paganism was connected with 
magical rites; Eunapius Vt. Soph. 
p. 89 sq (comp. Greg. Naz. Orat. 4, 
I. p. 102) For the prevalence of 
magic at Ephesus see Acts xix. 19. 
mâs Seopos| ‘every spell’; comp. 
Porph. Ep. ad Aneb. p. 5 (ed. Gale) 
decpew Te íepoós twas Seopods kal 
dew roúrous. As I have connected 
the words, Seopos will refer especially 
to witchcraft, incantations, and the 
like, though it need not be confined 
to these, but will extend to any spell 
which the powers of evil exert over 
a man (see Philad, 8). For other 
examples of this sense of 9eiv, deopos, 
etc., see Asch. Hum. 303 tyvov Ó 


6—2 


84 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xix 


peiro zraXaia. [BaaiXeta, [ SuepOeipero |, Ocou dyfporlvos 


QGyepoUMeyou eis kaiNóTHTA diOlOU zo Ñ C` doxnv de ENGS 


Bavev TO mapa Oeo darnprio uévov. 


évOev Ta Tavra 


^ £ 
c'vvekweiro dia TO pereTarOa Qavarou KaTadvoW. 


2 es... funs] GG'L Sev-Syr; ad vitam novam aeternitatis A; om. Dsval gs 


didlov] devdlov G'. 


drove. róvOe Oéayuov céOev (comp. ver. 
318), Plat. Resp. ii. p. 364 C rayo- 
yais Tu kal karaüécpow ; comp. 
Justin ZzaZ. 85 (p. 311 C) é£opkt(ovot 
Kal Ovpidpace kai Katadéopors ypavrat, 
Tertull de Spect. 2 ‘vis homicidium 
ferro, veneno, magicis devinctiontbus 
perfici? Euseb. Z.C. 13 Š 4 caradéopors 
TLOÀV dmetprpuévgs yorreías. 

I. mada Baowdeia] The ancient 
kingdom of the Evil One was re- 
placed by the BacwWeia Oeod. The 
visit of the magi was regarded from 
the earliest times as the inauguration 
of a new kingdom, this being implied 
in Matt. ii.2. Their gifts were the 
offerings of subjects to their sove- 
reign. Compare Justin Dral. 78 (p. 
304 D)'oi yàp payot, otrwes éakvXev- 
pévot Yoav mpos maras kakas mpá£ew 
Tas évepyoupévas vd Tov Satpoviov 
€ketvov, éAÓovres kai mpoakvvijcavres TO 
Xpiotd daívovra. dmoorávres THs a'kv- 
Aevodons avroUs Óvvápeos exetvns, Iren. 
ii. 16. 4, Tertull. adv. Fud. 9, adv. 
Mare. iii. 13, etc. 

O«o0] i.e. ‘when God thus appeared 
as a man to claim His own King- 
dom.’ The substitution of ‘at the 
revelation of the Son’ for @eod dv- 
Opemives davepovpévov in the Cure- 
tonian text seems to be a capricious 
alteration made by the epitomator, 
who has abridged and transposed 
freely throughout this passage. This 
is shown by the reading of the 
Armenian, which follows the Greek. 

2. eis kawórgra k.r...] ie. ‘so as 
to introduce a new order of things, 
which is everlasting life,’ ¢œñs being 


ápxy...karáNvow] GG’ (the latter reading éxwetro for 


the genitive of apposition; comp. 
Winer § lix. p. 666. See Rom. vi. 
4, where also xawórgs (ans means 
‘the new state which is life,’ as op- 
posed to the old state which was 
death. Comp. Magn. 9 eis kauórnra 
eros. 

dpyjv è x.r.A.] ie. ‘the economy 
which had been perfected in the 
counsels of God long before began to 
take effect.’ The appearance of the 
star was the beginning of the end. 

3. rà mavra k.r.A.] These words 
may be compared with a passage 
in the Protevangelium, of striking 
power, but in its dramatic character 
singularly unlike the representations 
of the Canonical Gospels, where not 
the universal disturbance, but the 
universal hush, of nature is the con- 
sequence of this birth of the Victor 
of Death; Š 18 kal dvéBde Wa eis Tov 
dépa kai eiôov Tov dépa ékOapBov xai 
dvéBÀAeyra eis Tov modov Tod ovpavod 
kai elôov adrov ot Gra kr... So too . 
Milton, ‘The stars with deep amaze 
Stand fixt in stedfast gaze.’ 

4. Oavárov karaddkvow]| Comp. 1 Cor. 
xv, 26 €cxaros éxÓpós Karapyeirar ó 
@avaros. The actual destruction of 
death is the last scene of all; but 
the appearance of the star was the 
signal for the commencement of the 
war destined so to end. 

XX. ‘If God permits me, I in- 
tend to write to you a second treatise, 
in which I will complete the subject 
thus begun, God’s economy in the 
Passion and Resurrection of Jesus 
Christ; more especially, if it should 


xx] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 85 


XX. Cav pe Karagwon "Incots Xpirros èv TH 
mporeuxy vuv, Kal OéAnpua 7 N, ev TO Sevrepy BiBrSte, 
Ó péAw paper Jura Aoao ENNIE UMIV 1S "p£aunv 
oikovouias eis TOV Kaivóv avOpwrov 'Inao!üv. Xpiróv, èv 


cvrekwetro) LAg Sev-Syr; the order of the two sentences, dps» 8ë x.r.M. and 


&vOev «.7.X., is transposed in >, 


please the Lord to reveal it to me. 
Only let me hear that you all meet 
together in one in the faith of Jesus 
Christ, who is both Son of God and 
Son of Man, and that you are obe- 
dient to your bishop and presbyters, 
breaking one bread, which is the 
medicine of incorruptibility and the 
antidote against death.’ 

5. xaraíióoy] A favourite Igna- 
tian word; Magn. 1, Trall. 12, Rom. 
2, Philad. 1o, Smyrn. 11, Polyc. 1, 
7,8 

ev 7j mpoceux vpor| i.e. ‘through 
your prayers.’ The same expression 
occurs in a similar context, Phzlad. 
8, Smyrn.11. Altogether the ‘prayers’ 
of his correspondents occupy a very 
prominent place in the letters of Ig- 
natius. He either asks their prayers 
for himself (§ 1, 11, Wagn. 14, Philad. 
5, 8, Smyrn. 11) or for the Church at 
Antioch (Rom. 9, Trall. 13); or he 
gratefully acknowledges the effects 
of their prayers on behalf of the latter 
(Philad. 10, Smyrn. 4, Polyc. 7); 
or he gives them general injunctions 
respecting prayer (Š 5, Io, Magn. 7, 
Trall. 12, Smyrn. 6, Polyc. 1). 

6. OédAnpal i.e. ‘the Divine will? 
It is used thus absolutely several 
times in Ignatius, either with the 
definite article (Polyc. 8 ws rò O€Anpa 
“mpooracoet) or, as here, without it 
(Rom. Y édymep OeAnpa 5j Tov aEwwOjvai 
pe K.T.À., Smyrn. I vióv cod xarà 
OeAnpa kai Svvapuy, 2b. 11 Kara O€Anua 
8é karņnérwðnv). Examples of both 
kinds appear also in S. Paul, Rom. 


of ^ > ^ ^ + 
mi wg sd kavxyacau ev Oe ruo 
oxets TO OéÀNnua, I Cor. xvi. I2 ravras 


ovk nv Oédnpa iva viv On; though 
in the former passage the fact is 
obscured by the proximity of Oeó, 
and in the latter @éAnpa is almost 
universally misunderstood as apply- 
ing to Apollos himself. So too Clem. 
Alex. Strom. vi. 18 (p. 826) OeAnpare 
OéAgua kai TO ayia mve)pari TÒ Qytoy 
mvevpa Oewpetv ebigovres. On the other 
hand of the devil Heracleon said that 
he y) &yew 0é)nua, GAN emiñuntas, Orig. 
in loann. xx. Š 20 (IV. p. 339). The 
translators and transcribers of Igna- 
tius however, not understanding this 
absolute use, have in several instances 
supplied genitive cases: see the 
critical notes on Rom. I, Smyrn. I, 
II. Compare the absolute use of 7 
xapts, TO övopa, etc. 

êv rQ Sevtép@ x.t.A.] There is no 
reason to think that this design was 
ever fulfilled: see above, p. 18. 

7. mpocdnrtooo k.r.A.] ‘Z will go 
on to expound the economy (of the 
Incarnation) upon which I com- 
menced? See the note on $ 18 kar 
otkovopiay. 

8. els róv kawóv k.r.A.] “° referring 
to the new Man, Fesus Christ, the 
words being closely connected with 
olxovopias. The xawós dvÓpemos of 
Ignatius is equivalent to the čryaros 
Addu, the devrepos avOpwmos, of S. 
Paul (1 Cor. xv. 45,47). The Apostle 
himself seems to use ó kawos dvOpo- 
aos in a different sense, Ephes. iv. 24 
evdvoac ba: tov kawóv avOperror, though 


86 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [xx 


TH aUTOU TITTEL kal év Th avTOU dyarmy, €v mabe: avTou 

kal dvactacel, uaN Ta av ó Kúpiðs Mot dsrokaNXvn' 
aOLT óvopaTos 

törit oi kar avdpa kowtj zravres év yapıtı EE dvom 


\ 


cvvépxea0e ëv jug mioter kai évi [nooo Xpiorw Tw 


\ , 5 / [Ó ^ cn * 0 , \ en 
kara gapoka €K ty€vous Aavei 3 TW ULw Qv po7rov Kal Uto 


3 ör] GL[A]; ef rı Theodt; om. Gelas (treating evvépxec0e as an impera- 


tive convenite); al. g: 
Theodt. 


it is quite possible that Ignatius’ 


took this to mean evdtcacGa 
Xpuorov. 

ev rj avro) k.r.A.] ‘consisting zz 
Jaith towards Him and love towards 
Him. This again must be closely 
connected with oikovouías ; comp. 
I Tim. i. 4 olkovoplay Ocoü tv èv 
mistet TO O€ TéAOS THS TapayyeAlas 
eotly dyamn. For the genitive case 
see the note on fom. inscr. So 
again the following èv maOei x.r.A. 
must be similarly connected. This 
latter clause describes the objective 
element, as the former described the 
subjective element, which are the 
essential characteristics of the dis- 
pensation. 

3. Foret xTM]. for ye all meet 
together in common—every indi- 
vidual of you. If the reading be 
correct, this must be the grammar 
and connexion of the clause. He- 
fele however follows Uhlhorn (p. 52) 
in connecting ór, with dmoxadiwy ‘i 
the Lord reveal to me that etc.,’ but 
this gives a sense altogether un- 
worthy of the writer and entirely 
opposed to his mode of speaking 
elsewhere (e.g. §§ 3, 6, 9, 11, 12). 
But the reading is rendered sus- 
picious by the fact that Theodoret 
has € ri, while Gelasius treats ouvép- 
xeoGe as an imperative. Moreoverthe 
dependent eis ro vraxovew úpâs points 
to a preceding imperative or condi- 


see the lower note. 
4 &] Theodt; i uno Gelas; év GL, and so S, (which has 


` 
TOV . 


xdpire] Gig]; 79 xdpere 


tional statement. Zahn (Z. v. A.p. 569) 
for ór, suggests Zru or (as preferable) 
simply tz, which he reads in his text, 
connecting it with the preceding 
words. This latter conjecture has 
much to recommend it. For oí kar 
dvépa, ‘each individually, see the 
note on § 4, where it stands in the 
same relation to xopós as it does to 
kowi) müvres here; comp. Smyrn. 12 
ToUs kar avdpa kal Kown mávras. In 
this passage it is further strengthened 
by eé óvóparos ‘name by name, 
‘severally’; comp. Polyc. 4 (with the 
note), 8 

4. él 'Igoo?] or perhaps évévi leo. 
The recurrence of the same letters 
ENENIIHCOY would account for the 
omission. Comp. Magn. 7 eis écriv 
'"Imcoüs Xpiwrós, ZO. cvvrpéxere...émi 
éva “Incotvy Xpioróv, Clem. Rom. 46 
i ovxl...€xouev...€va Xprorév; in which 
passages the application is the same 
as here. It is equivalent to S. Paul's 
appeal in r Cor. i. 13 pepépuora ó 
Xpwós ; Here, as in Š 12, Zahn sug- 
gests the impossible form évi. 

TQ kata capka k.r.A.] This is in- 
serted as a protest against Docetic 
error by which their unity was 
threatened. But this emphatic men- 
tion of the human nature requires a 
counterbalance. Hence he adds that 
Christ is not only ‘Son of man,’ but 
also ‘Son of God’: see above, the 
note on Š 18 êk omépparos Aaveisd. 


xxi] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 87 


^ E) Noe , e ^ ^ , ^ 
OcoU, eis TO Urrakovew UMas TQ ÉrriGKkOT( Kal TW TPES- 
4 


£ > A / [74 af ^ € 
Burepiw depo rao«o Ouavola* eva &prov kNovres, ó 


> , , , , / ^ > ^ 
€O TLV Qapuakov aÜavacias, avriðorTos TOU un a7roÜavetv 


dXXa Gv èv 'InooU Xpw ro Qua vravTOS. 


XXI 


5 lA € ^ H , \ "e 
Avtivuyov uov yw, Kal wv éméupare 


in una fide in iesu christo); al. Ag. See the converse error, Ephes. 11. 


TQ] G; om. Theodt; al. g. 


Oco0] G; Tod avOpdrov...rov 0co0 Theodt; al. g. 
6] gL; 6s G; dub. A. 


KA@yTos G. 


7. dmepwmáoro] ‘undistracted’ ; 

Wisd. xvi 11, Ecclus. xli. r. So 
dmepuzmáoTos, 1 Cor. vii. 35. The 
words are not uncommon in classical 
writers of the age of Polybius and 
later, more especially in Stoic circles ; 
e. Epict. i. 29. 52, il. 21. 22, etc., 
M; Antonin. iii. 6. 
— &a dprov kdéyres] The refer- 
ence will be to the agape, but more 
especially to the eucharistic bread, 
in which the agape culminated, and 
which was the chief bond of Chris- 
tian union; comp. PAz/ad. 4 emov- 
8dcare oÜv pia eU xapia ría xprjioOav 
pla yap càp£ roO Kuplov K.T., Smyrn. 
8 rods pepiopoùs devyere...éketv pe- 
Bala evxapiotia ñye(o0o, j vo Tov 
émickorov obca...oUk e&ov otiw xopis 
ToU émwkómov ote famri(ew oÚre 
dyámmv moreîv (see the note there). 
For «dav dprov comp. Acts ii. 46 
(comp. ver. 42), xx. 7, 11, 1 Cor. x. 16, 
where it occurs as à synonyme for 
celebrating the eucharistic feast, ap- 
parently in all cases in conjunction 
with the agape. 

8] The right reading rather than ds. 
The 6 may refer either to the whole 
preceding clause, ‘this concord and 
unity in breaking bread,’ or to dpros 
alone by attraction with ddáppakov. 
The latter is the more probable; see 
Irenzeus iv. 18. 5, v. 2. 3 (passages 
quoted by Jacobson), who argues 
that our fleshly bodies must inherit 


5 Aaveld] dad G. dvOpórrov... 


7 kAvres] GLA; 
ro àv] g (but 1 has guem); dv GLA. 


eternal life, because they partake of 
the eucharistic bread. We need not 
however suppose that Ignatius had 
this very material conception in view. 

8. dvriSoros}] This word, when 
used as a substantive, is either 7 
dvridoros (sc. dSvvamis, e.g. Strabo iii. 
4. I4 dvribórois trot Óvvápeci; see 
E. A. Sophocles Lex. s. v.) or ró 
dvridoroy (sc. $dppakov, e.g. Anthol. 
Ad. 8o, Ill. p. 166, robro yap éL 
kakv þáppakov avridoroy) ; but never 
apparently ó dvrídoros. The femi- 
nine is the more common, e.g. Clem. 
Hom. xi. 9. The dependent geni- 
tive commonly describes the thing 
counteracted and not, as here, the 
result of the counteraction. 

XXI. ‘I am devoted to you and 
your representatives at 5myrna, from 
which place I write. Remember 
me, and so will Christ remember 
you. Pray for the Church in Syria, 
whence I was carried in bonds to 
Rome, though all unworthy of the 
glorious destiny which awaits me. 
Farewell in God the Father and in 
Jesus Christ. 

10, "Avridrvxov] So too Smyrna. 10, 
Polyc. 2, 6. The interpolator has 
caught up the phrase, as character- 
istic of Ignatius, and introduces it 
freely, Tars. 8, Ant. 7, 12, Hero 9, 
Philipp. 14. " Avrijrvxov is properly 
‘a life offered for a life, ‘a vicarious 
sacrifice’; as[Joseph.] Macc. 6 Mews 


88 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xxi 


s ^ , e M th € `= 5 
eis Ocovd Tyunv eis Cuvpvav 00€v kat ypadw Upiv euxa- 
^ ^ > ^ A \ e m 
porav T@ Kupiw, dyarewv lloNékapzov ws Kat vpas. 
4 é 


e \ ^ ^ JA 
uvnuoveveré prov, ws Kal vuv 'Inoaovs Xo Tos. 


mpos- 


=e - e 
eUxeaÜe rèp Tis ékkNnoias THs èv Cupia, ó0ev Qeóe- 


3 kal] GAg; om. L (the omission of z after z£ being easy). 


yevoU...kaÜápciov a)róv moja, TÒ 
épgóv aipa, kai dvr(vxov (v. l. avri 
WVvxóàv) arv Maße ryv pv Yox, 
ib. ver. 17 domep aytipuxoy yeyovóras 
Ths tov eOvouvs duaprias: comp. I 
Kings xx. 39 xai era, r yvy) ood 
dvri ths Wrvxis avrov, 20. ver. 42, 2 
Kings x. 24, Clem. Rom. 49. Hence 
S. Athanasius uses it of our Lord in 
a sense nearly equivalent to dvrí- 
Avrpov, e.g. de Zncarn. Verb. 9 (1. p. 
44); comp. I John iii. 16 ékeivos vmép 
7uóv rjv yuxu avroð éÜnkev kal nuets 
ódelXopev úrèp rv adeApay Tas Jrvxàs 
0civa... The Syriac translator of Ig- 
natius has employed the same phrase, 
*[ will be instead of thy soul, which 
is found in the Peshito in the pas- 
sages of the O. T. The expression 
means therefore properly ‘I give my 
life for you,’ ‘I devote myself for 
you, and is closely allied to mepi- 
nya in meaning (see the note on 
§ 8); but the direct idea of a vi- 
carious death is more or less ob- 
literated, and the idea of devotion 
to and affection for another stands 
out prominently. We cannot there- 
fore press the allusion to his ap- 
proaching martyrdom. See the 
similar Jewish use of m455 (Bux- 
torf’s Lex. s. v. p. 1078, to which 
Jacobson refers here), It is in a 
different sense that Anselm said of 
Osbern (ZZsf. i. 4, p. 313) ‘anima 
ejus anima mea est,' and that Horace 
calls Maecenas *meze partem anime.’ 
Even if there were any authority for 
this sense of åvríiyvyov ‘another self,’ 
we should expect not dvrirvxov úv 
eyo, but dvrijyvxóv pov úpeîs. 


év] ie. éxeivay oùs, referring to 
Onesimus, Burrhus, Crocus, Euplus, 
Fronto, and others; see S$ 1, 2. This 
is clearly the right reading, in place 
of which ov would easily be sub- 
stituted by careless transcribers: for 
(1) The earlier part of the epistle 
mentions several representatives of 
the Ephesian Church; (2) The gram- 
mar of óv would be extremely harsh 
as well as ambiguous, since it might 
stand for either ékeivov òv Or éketvos 
ôv, and indeed the latter would be 
the more natural construction. (3) 
In the other letters written from 
Smyrna the Ephesian delegates are 
spoken of in the plural; Magn. 15, 
Trall. 13, Rom. 10. 

I. els Oeod rijv] As just below. 
So too Smyrn. II, Polyc. 5; comp. 
Magn. 3, Trall. 12. 

edxaptotov| One chief subject of 
his thanksgiving is obviously his in- 
tercourse with Polycarp, for whom 
he entertains a strong affection (dya- 
mav IIoAskaprrov k.r.A.). 

3. pynuoveveré uov]i.e. èv rais mpos- 
evxais úuðv ; see Magn. 14, Trall. 
13, Rom. 9. 

"Insoüs Xpioros| sc. pynpovedoes or 
prnpoveiaete: see the note on Smyrn. 
9. 

mpooevxeaOe] The same request is 
made in all the other letters written 
from Smyrna ; Magn. 14, Trall. 1 3, 
Rom. 9. 

4. Glev 8e0enévos] As Smyrn. 11; 
see also above § 1. 

5. amayoua| The word is com- 
monly used of criminals led to trial 
or execution ; comp. e.g. Matt. xxvii. 


xxI] 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 89 


, 3 e , , , » t) ^ ^ ^ 
5 pevos ets ' Pony drayouat, ETXATOS WY TOV EKEL rig T Gv, 
[74 , Tu 5 \ ^ e ^ » , 
worep nEwOnv eis uum Oeo? evpeOnva. "“Eppwobe èv 

^ M A 3c 5 ^ ^ ^ ^ > e ^ 
Oeo rapi kai év noo XpiwTo TH kowi EXTOL HOV. 


7 Arto judy] txt GL; add. év mvetuare yle" [Ëopec e] dy: [ù xáps] g*; 


add. gratia vobiscum; amen A. 


There is no subscription in GLA. For Zg see the Appx. 


2, Acts xii 19, in which latter pas- 
sage for the correct reading dray67- 
va, D has amokravÓrjvat. 

TOv eka] i.e. èv Zvpía; comp. 
Trall. 13 ris èv Zupía, 00ev kai oUk 
aéıós cipi À éyeo bar àv eoxaros éketvov. 
Heuses similar language also, Magn. 
14, Smyrn. 11, Rom. 9. 

6. domep| To be connected with 
dedepevos...amdyouat. 

"Eppoobe] This was a common 
salutation at the close of a letter, as 
xaípew was at the commencement ; 
Artemid. Ozezr. iii. 44 ttov yap maons 
émícroAjs TO Xaipew Kai To "Eppeco 
(quoted by Pearson on Smyrn. inscr.). 


They correspond to the Latin Salve 
and Vale respectively. "Eppoeco (ép- 
poobe), like vyiave, was regarded 
as essentially a parting salutation, 
‘Farewell’; 2b. i. 82 ov yap mposi- 
ovres dANQAois...raüra Aéyouou, äv- 
porou, dXX dmaXAarrópevoi: comp. 
e23 Boeckh Cy G. 559329583899» in 
letters. The parting salutation in 
all the seven epistles takes this 
form; the attached words however 
varying, e.g. év Kupio, év xdpire Oo, 
etc. 

7. Tj kown K.T. | See the notes 
Š r, Magn. 11. 


go THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


Excursus on yervntos kai dyévvqros Š 7. 


Tue Son is here declared to be yevvgrós as man and ayevvyros as 
God, for this is clearly shown to be the meaning from the parallel 
clauses. Such language is not in accordance with later theological 
definitions, which carefully distinguished between yevytos and yevvyros, 
between ayévņros and dyévvqros; so that yevyrds, ayévyros, respectively 
denied and affirmed the eternal existence, being equivalent to xricrés, 
axzioros, while yevvqrós, dyévvytos, described certain ontological rela- 
tions, whether in time or in eternity. In the later theological language 
therefore the Son was yevvytés even in His Godhead. See esp. Joann. 
Damasc. de Fid. Orth. i. 8 (1. p. 135 Lequien) xo? yap «idévar dre TO 
dyévqgrov, dia Tod évós v ypadópevov, TO dkrwrrov Ù TO jw) yevópevov 
onnaiver, TO Oe dyévvirov, dua vv Oo vv ypaddpevov, 99Xot Tò pH yevvm0év 
«.r.À.; whence he draws the conclusion that pdvos ó marp dyévvytos, 
and povos o vids yevvytos. 

There can be little doubt however that Ignatius wrote yevvyros kai 
ayévvytos, though his editors frequently alter it into yevyrós kai ayé- 
vytos. For (1) The Greek ws still retains the double v, though the 
claims of orthodoxy would be a temptation to scribes to substitute the 
single v. And to this reading also the Latin genitus e£ ingenitus points. 
On the-other hand it cannot be concluded that translators who give 
factus et non factus had yevqrós kai ayévyros ; for this was after all what 
Ignatius meant by yevvqrós x.r.A., and they would naturally render his 
words so as to make his orthodoxy apparent. (2) When Theodoret 
writes yevvirós è¢ dyevvýrov, it is clear that he, or the person before him 
who first substituted this reading, must have read yevvyròs koi ayévvyros ; 
for there would be no temptation to alter the perfectly orthodox 
yevyntos kal ayévytos, nor (if altered) would it have taken this form. 
(3) When the interpolator substitutes 6 movos adnOuvos Oeds ó ayévvytos... 
Tov dé jLovoyevoUs marp kal yevvijrop, the natural inference is that he too 
had the forms in double v, which he retained, at the same time altering 
the whole run of the sentence so as not to do violence to his own doc- 
trinal views; see Bull Def. Fid. Nic. ii. 2 $ 6 (Works v. p. 114 sq). 
(4) The quotation in Athanasius is more difficult. The mss vary, and 
his editors write yevyrós kal dyévyros. Zahn too, who has paid more 
attention to this point than any previous editor of Ignatius, in his 
former work (gn. v. Ant. p. 564) supposed Athanasius to have read and 
written the words with a single v, though in his subsequent edition of 


TO THE EPHESIANS. OI 


Ignatius (p. 338) he declares himself unable to determine between the 
single and double v. I believe however that the argument of Athanasius 
decides in favour of the vv. Elsewhere he insists repeatedly on the 
distinction between xrí£ew and yevváv, justifying the use of the latter 
term as applied to the divinity of the Son, and defending the statement 
in the Nicene Creed yevvqróv ëk THs ouc(as Tod rarpos ròv viov Omoovctov 
(De Synod. 54, 1. p. 612). Although he is not responsible for the lan- 
guage of the Macrostich (De Synod. Š 3, 1. p. 590), tov warépa podvoy 
dvapxov Ovra Kal ayevvntov yeyevvykévat avedíkros kal a&ow AKOTAAÝTTOS 
otdapev’ TOv O& viv yeyevvijoOa. mTpo aidvey kal pyKére opotws TO Tarpt 
dyévvgrov elvar kal avróv, aÀX' dpyyv éxew Tov yevvijcavra marépa, and 
would have regarded it as inadequate without the ójoovatov, yet this use 
of térms entirely harmonizes with his own. In the passage before us, 
ib. S$ 46, 47 (p. 607), he is defending the use of ópoovcwos at Nicza, 
notwithstanding that it had been previously rejected by the Council 
which condemned Paul of Samosata, and he contends that both Coun- 
cils were orthodox, since they used óuooúcuos in a different sense. Asa 
parallel instance he takes the word ayévvqgros, which, like ojoovoos, is 
not a scriptural word, and like it also is used in two ways, signifying 
either (1) rò dv pév, pyre 02 yevvnGev pare drws &xov TOV airvov, or (2) Tò 
àkrwzrov, In the former sense the Son cannot be called &yévvqros ; in 
the latter He may be so called. Both uses, he says, are found in the 
fathers. Ofthe latter he quotes the passage in Ignatius as an example; 
ofthe former he says, that some writers subsequent to Ignatius declare 
êv rò ayévvqrov 6 var)p, kal eis ò ¿Š avrod vids yvijovos, yévvypa adnOwov 
«.t-d. [He may have been thinking of Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 7, which 
I shall quote below.] He maintains that both are orthodox, as having 
in view two different senses of the word ayévvyrov; and the same, he 
argues, is the case with the Councils which seem to take opposite 
sides with regard to dpoovows. It is clear from this passage, as Zahn 
truly says, that Athanasius is dealing with one and the same word 
throughout; and, if so, it follows that this word must be ayévvyrov, 
since dyévytov would be intolerable in some places. I may add by 
. way of caution that in two other passages, de Decret, Syn. Nic. 28 (1. 
p. 184), Orat. c. Arian. i. 30 (1. p. 343), S. Athanasius gives the various 
senses of dyévyrov (for this is plain from the context), and that these 
passages ought not to be treated as parallels to the present passage 
which is concerned with the senses of dyévvņrov. Much confusion is 
thus created, e.g. in Newman's notes on the several passages in the 
Oxford translation of Athanasius (pp. 51 sq, 224 sq), where the three 
passages are treated as parallel, and no attempt is made to discriminate 


92 THE EPISTLE COP IGNATIUS 


the readings in the several places, but ‘ingenerate’ is given as the 
rendering of àyévgrov and dyévvgrov alike. If then Athanasius also 
read yevrqrós kal dyévvyros in Ignatius, there is absolutely no authority 
for yevntds koi adyévytos. The earlier editors (Voss, Ussher, Cotelier, 
etc.) printed it as they found it in the ms; but Smith substituted the 
forms with the single v, and he has been followed more recently by 
Hefele, Dressel, and some others. In the Casanatensian copy of the 
MS a marginal note is added, dvayvworéov dyévgros robr ort pu) 
rombe’s. Waterland (Works 111. p. 240 sq, Oxf. 1823) tries ineffect- 
ually to show that ayévyyros was invented by the fathers at a later date 
to express their theological conception. He even ‘doubts whether 
there was any such word as dyévvgros so early as the time of Ignatius.’ 
In this he is certainly wrong. ) 
The wss of early Christian writers exhibit much confusion between 
yevntos and yevvgrós, ayévqros and ayévvqros: see e.g. Justin Dial. 2 
(p. 218) with Otto’s note; Athenag. Suppl. 4 with Otto’s note ; Theophil. 
ad Autol. ii. 3,4; lren. iv. 38. 1, 3; Orig. c. Ces. vi. 66; Method. 
de Lib Arbitr. p. 57 Jahn (see Jahns note rp. 122); Maximus in 
Euseb. Praep. Ev. vi. 22; Hippol. Haer. v. 16 (from Sibylline Oracles); 
Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 14, pp. 702, 718; and very frequently in later 
writers. Yet notwithstanding the confusion into which later transcribers 
have thus thrown the subject, it is still possible to ascertain the main 
facts respecting the usage of the two forms. The distinction between 
the two terms, as indicated by their origin, is that ayévyros denies she 
creation, and ayévvqros the generation or parentage. Both are used at 
a very early date; e.g. ayévyros by Parmenides in Clem. Alex. Strom. 
V. 14 (p. 716) os ayévyntov ðv kai avóX«0póv stw, and by Agathon in 
Arist. £th. Nic. vi. 2 (p. 1139) adyévyta rovely doo àv 7 merpaypéva 
(comp. also Orac. Sibyll, prooem. 7, 17); and dyéwmros in Soph. 
Trach. 61 ka ayevvijrov apa pio Karas mimrovow (where it is equivalent 
to Óvoyevóv). Here the distinction of meaning is strictly preserved, 
and so probably it always is in Classical writers ; for in Soph. Zrach. 
743 70 yap havOev ris dy õóvarr &yévvntov owiv we should after Porson 
and Hermann read dvvair’ av ayévqrov ovv with Suidas. In Christian 
writers also there is no reason to suppose that the distinction was ever 
lost, though in certain connexions the words might be used convertibly. 
Whenever, as here in Ignatius, we have dyévvņros where we should 
expect ayévytos, we must ascribe the fact to the indistinctness or 
incorrectness of the writer's theological conceptions, not to any ob- 
literation of the meaning of the terms themselves. To this early 
father for instance the eternal yévvgeus of the Son was not a distinct 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 93 


theological idea, though substantially he held the same views as the 
Nicene fathers respecting the Person of Christ. The following pas- 
sages from early Christian writers will serve at once to show how far 
the distinction was appreciated, and to what extent the Nicene concep- 
tion prevailed in Antenicene Christianity; Justin 4707. ii. 6 (p. 44) óvopa 
0€ 7G mávrov map Üeróv, a-y evvijro ovrt, OUK éariw...0 BE vids exelvov 6 
póvos Aeyópevos Kupiws vids, 0 Aóyos mpd TÓv Topdrov koi ouvóv kal 
yevvepevos k.r.A., comp. Zb. Š 13 (p. 51); Athenag. Suppl. 10 eva tov 
ayévyTov kai aiütov...0$. oU yeyévyntat TÒ wav dia Tod avroð Aóyov...épó 
dia Bpaxéwy [tov viðv] tpaGrov yévvynpa eivat TO carp ovx os yevo- 
pevov k.r.À. (comp. 2. 4); Theoph. ad Aut. ii 3 «i ydp éyévvov kat 
éyevvádvro [Oeo], 8Xov ore éxpyv Kat čws Tod detpo yiverOar ÓOco)s 
yevvnrtovs «.7.A.; Tatian Orat. 5 o Aóyos èv apx) yevvndeis avre- 
yévvqoe rjv kaf nds roiņow (with the context); Rhodon in Euseb. 
H. E. v. 13 tò 8& was éore pia apyy, py ywdokev &Xeyev...py] èri- 
otacbar Tas eis eorw dyévvyros Beds; Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 7 (p. 769) 
êv uiv tò d yévvqrov Ó Tavtokpatup Oeds, êv dé Kal rò mpoyevvuOiv OV 
0$ ta mávra éyévero K.T.À. ; Orig. c. Cels. vi. 17 (p. 643) orte yap Tov 
dyévqrov koi maons yevqrí]s pvoews mporórokov kar agiay «idévar Tus 
Osvaro,, Os ó yevvyoas avróv TaTýp K.T.A., ib. vi. 52 Tepl pèv yevérews 
Koopov Kat dÜopás, i) ws ayévntos Kal dpOapros, 1) ws yevmros pev ádÜapros 
8 «.7.A.; Concil. Antioch. (A.D. 269) in Routh Rel. Sacr. 111. p. 290 dru o 
@cds ayévyros, eis, dvapxos, K.r.À...... ToUrov Oë Tov viov yevvyróv, po- 
voyevij vióv x.7.A.; Method. de Creat. 5 (p. ror Jahn) yevqróv TO pa) 
yevérews éxov apxyv pains dv; ov Ofjra: ei yap jj vrorinte yeverews 
apxf, èé dvdykns ayévytov stiv: «i Që yéyovev, x... In no early 
Christian writing however is the distinction more obvious than in 
the Clementine Homilies, x. 10 tod povov dyevijrov, bre Ta Norra TavTa 
yevnta tvyxdve ws ov Tod dyevýrov Qv TO Oeds eiva, ovros may 
Gtiobv yevóp.evov Oeds TE dvTL ovK éoTw, XVI. 16 TOU TaTpos TO pa ye 
yevvijaOat éotw, viod 8& TO yeyevvpobat: yevvnròv 88 dyevvýtr ù koi 
aùroyevvýro où ovyxKpiverau k.r.X. (where the distinction is employed 
to support the writers heretical theology): see also viii. 16 eire ayalo 
elre kakol od yevvdpeba adda ywópeÜo, and comp. xix. 3, 4, 9, 12. The 
following are instructive passages as regards the use of these words 
where the opinions of other heretical writers are given ; Saturninus, 
Iren. i 24. r, Hippol. Ze. vii. 28 ; Simon Magus, Hippol. Haer. vi. 
17, 18; the Valentinians, Hippol. Haer. vi 29, 30, the Ptolemæus in 
particular, Ptol. ZZ. ad Flor. 4 (in Stieren’s Irenæus p. 93 5); Basilides, 
Hippol. Haer. vii. 22; Carpocrates, Hippol. Haer. Sao. 

From the above passages it will appear that Antenicene writers were 


04 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS TO THE EPHESIANS. 


not indifferent to the distinction of meaning between the two words ; 
and when once the orthodox Christology was formulated in the Nicene 
Creed in the words yevnPevta, ov mou0évra, it became henceforth im- 
possible to overlook the difference. The Son was thus declared to 
be yevvyrós, but not yevgrós. I am therefore unable to agree with 
Zahn (Marcellus pp. 40, 104, 223, Zen. von Ant. p. 565) that at the 
time of the Arian controversy the disputants were not alive to the 
difference of meaning. See for example Epiphanius, Maer. lxiv. 8 
(p. 531) ws ydp vwes [i.e. the Arians] yyds BovrAovrar codpilerOar koi 
Aéyew (mov TO yevqróv ctvar TH yevvyTd, ov wapadenréov Õè et Oeod 
Aéyew, GAN d) ¿zl vd Kricpata pdvov: črepov yap oTi yeviróv kal érepóv 
¿ou yevvntov, k.r.À.; where he is arguing against a passage of Origen 
which ran (at least as Epiphanius read it) cQ matpt vOv oXov Oe dia 
TOD corpos: wv koi apxtepéos yevytod @eotd «.7.A. But it had no 
special interest for them. While the orthodox party clung to the 
opoovowos as enshrining the doctrine for which they fought, they had 
no liking for the terms ayévvyros and yevvntos, as applied to the Father 
and the Son respectively, though unable to deny their propriety, be- 
cause they were affected by the Arians and applied in their own way. 
To the orthodox mind the Arian formula ovk v mpiv yevvnOAva, or 
some Semiarian formula hardly less dangerous, seemed always to be 
lurking under the expression @eds yevvgrós as applied to the Son. 
Hence the language of Epiphanius ZZaez. lxxiii. ro (p. 866) éav oi kawot 
atperukoi mpoodiadreyopevor dyévvnrov Aéyovat Kal yevvyTov, époüpev avrois, 
"Emer5 Kaxoupyjoavres Tò THs ovcías ðvopa èv ypýoet vois TaTpdow 
umapxov ws aypapov ov OéxeoÓe, ovde nuets TO ayévvnrov dypadov ov 
defoueba «.7.X., 1. e. ‘As you refuse to accept our opoovatos because, though 
used by the fathers, it does not occur in the Scriptures, so will we 
decline on the same grounds to accept your a@yévvyros.’ Similarly Basil 
c Hunom, i (i p. 215 sq, p. 227 sq, p. 235), iv (p. 281), and 
especially 7. iv (p. 283 sq) in which last passage he argues at 
great length against the position of the heretics, eb dyévyrtos, $acív, 
Ó aqp, yevvqros è ó vids, où THs aùris ovcías. See also the argu- 
ments against the Anomceans in [Athan.] Dial. de Trin. ii passim 
(Op. n. p. 423 sq). This fully explains the reluctance of the orthodox 
party to handle terms which their adversaries used to endanger the 
opoovgtos. But, when the stress of the Arian controversy was removed, 
it became convenient to express the Catholic doctrine by saying that 
the Son in His Divine nature was yevvyrds but not yevqrós. And this 
distinction is staunchly maintained in later orthodox writers, e. g. John 
of Damascus (quoted above p. 9o). 


27 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


FTER leaving Ephesus, says Strabo, the first city is Magnesia 

(xiv. r, p. 647 mporn 9 éotly èg "EQécov Mayvysia). The 

sequence in the Ignatian Epistles is the same as the sequence in the 
geographer's itinerary. 

Magnesia by the Meander was said to have been originally a. settle- 
ment of the Magnesians from Thessaly (Strabo xiv. 1, p. 636; Plin. 
JV. H. v. 31). The site of the city was well chosen. The valley of the 
Cayster on the north is separated from that of the Mzeander on the south 
by a mountain chain running for the most part nearly due east and 
west, but taking a more southerly direction in its western extremity and 
terminating in the promontory of Mycale opposite Samos. Indeed the 
lofty island of Samos itself is only a prolongation of this same mountain: 
range which is broken by the intervening channel of the sea. ‘There is 
a very marked depression in the chain towards its western extremity. 
'The long range eastward of this depression, bounding the valley of the 
Meander on the north during the greater part of its course, bore the 
name of Messogis ; the shorter range to the west or seaward was called 
Mount Mycale. A few miles to the north of this depression in the 
valley of the Cayster stood the famous city of Ephesus; while to the 
south, immediately below the pass, on the ground overhanging the valley 
of the Mæander Magnesia was built. It thus commanded the pass 
through which ran the high road connecting the fertile and populous 
valley of the Meeander with the metropolis of Asia Minor. 

Magnesia is occasionally designated the ‘ Asiatic’ in earlier times to 
distinguish it from the Thessalian district of the same name; but in 
later writers, from Aristotle downwards, it is specified as * Magnesia by' 
or ‘on the Meander’, in contradistinction to another Asiatic city of 


IGN. II. 7 


98 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


the same name, which had risen meanwhile into importance, ‘ Mag- 
nesia under’ or ‘against Sipylus’ (see the references given below p. 106). 
It was not however situated directly on the banks of the Mzander, 
as this name would suggest, but on a tributary, the Letheus, at a 
distance of some four miles (61 kilometres, Texier Asie Mineure 11. 
p. 41) from the larger river; comp. Strabo xiv. r, p. 647, Mayvyota TÓ)us 
AloXs, Xeyouévg 88 ext Maudvüpov: mAnolov yap owroU idputa’ voÀ) 0€ 
mAnovatrepov 6 Anbatos éj[BGAXov eis tov Maiavdpov. Hence Pausanias 
persistently speaks of Magnesia or the Magnesians ‘on the Letheeus’ 
(i. 35. 6, v. 21. 10, vi. 17. 3, X. 32. 6; comp. Nicander in Athen. xv. p. 
683 AnOatov Mayvyntos éd vdacw). But in coins, inscriptions, and all 
public documents, as well as in common parlance, it was designated by 
the nobler stream. 

Farlier travellers (Smith, Chandler, Pococke, and others) had identi- 
fied Magnesia ad Maandrum with the modern town of Güzel-Hissar. 
Its true site was pointed out by W. R. Hamilton in 1803. Its modern 
representative is Inek-Bazar, or more properly Eyineh-Bazar (W. J. 
Hamilton’s Researches in Asia Minor 1. p. 535); whereas Giizel-Hissar, 
otherwise known as Aidin, is close to the site of the ancient Tralles, some 
eighteen miles from Magnesia. These latter identifications alone agree 
with the distances recorded in ancient books of travel, and they are 
rendered absolutely certain by inscriptions found on the respective sites 
(see Leake's Asia Minor p. 242 sq). The scenery and ruins of Mag- 
nesia are described in Arundell Seven Churches p. 58 sq; in Texier Asie 
Mineure 111. p. 35 sq, p. 9o sq, and in some respects more fully in his 
smaller work of the same name in Didot’s series Z Univers p. 346 sq; in 
Murray's Handbook for Turkey in Asia p. 305 sq; in Hamilton's Asia 
Minor Y. p. 538 sq; and elsewhere. It stands on the right bank of the 
Lethzeus and is built partly on the side of Mount Thorax, a spur or 
buttress of the main range, and partly in a plain girt with a back- 
ground of hills (Strabo xiv. 1, p. 647, Ketrar 8 èv wedim mpos dpe 
kahoupevy Ovdpaxt 7] mods; comp. Diod. Sic. xiv. 36). The theatre, 
as usual, is situated on the hill-side; the principal ruin in the plain is 
the temple of Artemis Leucophryene’. The ravine of the Lethzus to 


1 Though the question respecting the 
relation of Leucophrys and Magnesia has 
no direct bearing on my subject, I ven- 
ture to discuss it briefly in a note, as 
this will give me an opportunity of call- 
ing attention to a passage in an ancient 


author which seems to have been alto- 
gether overlooked, but which neverthe- 
less contains the key to the solution of 
the difficulty. 

The facts are these. (r) Xenophon (ZZeZ/. 
iii. 2. r4), speaking of the campaign of 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


99 


the east of the city, as it descends from its sources in Messogis to join 
the Mzander, is described as singularly beautiful. 


Dercyllidas (B. c. 396) in Asia Minor, 
states that, a parley having been agreed 
upon between the generals of the contend- 
ing armies, the Persians retired to Tralles 
and the Greeks ‘to Leucophrys where 
was a temple of Artemis of peculiar 
sanctity (és Aevxoppuy tvOa nv ’Apréusdos 
lepóv uáXa dyiov) and a lake more than 
a stadium (in length), sandy and peren- 
nial, of warm water fit to drink’. In a 
later passage (/5. iv. 8. 17), where he is 
giving an account of the campaign of 
Thimbron (B.C. 391) in this same region, 
he speaks of his setting out from Ephesus 
and from 'the cities in the plain of the 
Maeander, Priene and Leucophrys and 
Achilleion. [This last by the way cannot 
be the place bearing the same name in 
the Troad, as commentators seem to 
assume.] In neither passage does he 
mention Magnesia, though Magnesia had 
existed for centuries. (2) Strabo (xiv. 1, 
p. 647), speaking of the temple of the 
Mother of the Gods built by Themisto- 
cles, writes, ‘Now however the temple 
does not exist (ov« crc Tò icpóy), because 
the city has been removed (merwxlo@ar) 
to another place; but in the present city 
(êv 0€ rp vOv mÓA«) there is the temple of 
Artemis Leucophryene’ etc. 

Boeckh (C. 7. G. 11. p. 582) discerns 
the true solution. The city of Magnesia 
stood originally on another site, but was 
afterwards transferred to Leucophrys, so 
that the ancient temple of Artemis of 
Leucophrys was now within the city of 
Magnesia itself. 'This may perhaps be 
also the meaning of Texier (Z Univers 
Pp- 349, 350), but I am not quite sure 
that I understand him. When then did 
this removal take place? Texier (p. 350) 
says, when it was rebuilt after its destruc- 
tion by the Treres, a Cimmerian people 
(see Strabo lc.) But this is quite im- 
possible, as Boeckh had already pointed 


out (II. p. 700): for, though the age of 
this invasion of the Treres is doubtful, it 
certainly took place long before the time of 
"Themistocles, and yet Magnesia was still 
on its ancient site in his time. Boeckh 
continues ‘Addo eam (i.e. translationem) 
factam videri ante medium tertium sae- 
culum Christianam praecedens epocham, 
nam vs. 84 nostri foederis Dianae Leuco- 
phryenae templum Magnesiae ad Maean- 
drum tribuitur’. [The words of the 
treaty (about B.C. 244) are éu Mayvyola 
TH Tpds TQ Maucvdpw ¿y TQ THs " Apréjudos 
ths Aevkoppuńvns.] But indeed we are 
not dependent on conjecture, where direct 
evidence is forthcoming. He and others 
have overlooked a passage in Diodorus 
(xiv. 36) which gives the fact. Diodorus, 
speaking of an earlier campaign (B.C. 
399) of the same Thimbron in these re- 
gions, says that, having taken Magnesia 
and made an unsuccessful attack on 
Tralles, he retired to Magnesia, ravrns 
0' otons drevx(arov, kal dua Toro poBov- 
pevos uh more Xwpicbévros avrod kvpiebam 
THs móňews 6 "Tuwcaóépyms, uer Qkio ev 
aüTr)v mpòs TÒ wrnaolov Ópos 6 ka- 
Aost Ocpaka. Here then is the whole 
account of the matter. The position 
chosen by Thimbron exactly corresponds 
to the site of the later city as described 
by Strabo. In its original position it 
was defenceless and had been exposed 
to successive captures; but he removed it 
nearer to the hill-side, as the term Aeó- 
koppus, ‘White-brow’ or ‘ White-cliff’, 
itself suggests, so as at once to incor- 
porate the ancient temple of Artemis 
and to make Mount Thorax serve as a 
natural fortress. A few years later (B.C. 
391), during Thimbron’s second cam- 
paign, Xenophon can still speak of Leu- 
cophrys, because the migration was still 
recent, perhaps was not yet complete; 
and the name of the old fortress had not 


7—2 


IOO THE EPISTCE OF SIGNAITUS 


Magnesia rose to very considerable importance at an early date. 
Its connexion with Themistocles, as his place of residence during his 
exile (Thuc. i. 138; Diod. Sic. xi. 57 ; Strabo xiv. 1, p. 647; Athen. i. p. 
29; Plut. Vit. Them. 30, 31, 32 ; see Grote's History of Greece v. p. 385 
sq), has given it a special renown. His descendants, one of whom bore 
his own name, enjoyed exceptional honours there even as late as the 
age of Ignatius (Plut. Vit. Them. 32). A more speaking testimony to 
its importance is the fact that the Persian satraps appear at one time 
to have chosen it as their place of abode (Herod. iii. 122, Diod. Sic. 
xiv. 36). Indeed, considering the advantages of its situation and the 
fertility of the country, the surprise is not that it was a considerable city 
but that it did not attain to even greater distinction. During the 
Roman period it appears to have declined somewhat in importance 
(Tac. Ann. iv. 55); but it continued to strike coins as late as the reign of 
Gallienus A.D. 260—268 (Mionnet Supplement vu. p. 256). Among the 
famous men, who were natives of Magnesia, Strabo especially mentions 
the orator Hegesias the founder of the florid Asiatic style of eloquence, 
and Simus the inventor of a licentious form of lyric poetry called 
Simodia after him, each in a different way the corruptor of his respective 
art (Lc. p. 648). Altogether its literary reputation did not redound 
much to its credit. 

Themistocles is said to have erected at Magnesia a temple to the 
Mother of the Gods under the name Dindymene (of which his 
daughter or his wife became priestess), in consequence of an epiphany 
of this goddess which saved his life (Plut. Vit Them. 30; Strabo 
xiv. 1, p. 647) ; but this temple no longer existed when Strabo wrote. 
The patron goddess of the city was Artemis Leucophrys or Leuco- 
phryne or Leucophryene, for the epithet is written in all these ways. 


yet been merged in the name of Mag- 
nesia. 

The name Aevxogpus, I cannot doubt, 
refers primarily to the natural features of 
the ground (see Texier Z’ Univers p. 350), 
just as Tenedos was called AXeíxoópus 


or Aevxoppivn, but sometimes Aeíkoópvs 
(Nicander in Athen. xv. p. 683, and fre- 
quently on coins, Mionnet III. p. 147 sq, 
Supplement V1. p. 236 sq). From being 
the name of the place it was transferred 
to the goddess, as we say S. Christopher- 


(Strabo xiii. 1, p. 604; Diod. Sic. v. 
83; Plin. M.A. v. 39 (31); Pausan. x, 
I4. 3; Hegesianax in Athen. ix. p. 393). 
This account of the name seems far 
more probable than Boeckh's hypothesis 
(11. p. 582) that the worship of Artemis 
was imported hither from Tenedos. The 
goddess was properly called Aevkojpvijvg 


le-Stocks, S. Peter-le-Cheap, S. John 
Lateran, etc. The story of the nymph 
Leucophryne who was buried at Mag- 
nesia (Zeno Myndius in Clem. Alex. 
Protr. 3, p. 39; comp. Arnob. vi. 6) is 
of course a legend founded on the name 
of the place. 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. IOI 


Her name and effigy occur constantly on the coins (Mionnet ur. p. 
147 Sq, Supplement VI. p. 236 sq); and her priestesses are mentioned 
in extant inscriptions (Boeckh C. Z. G. 2914). She is commemorated 
also in Anacreon Fragm. 1 (Bergk) Séomow’ "Apreja Onpdv ý kov viv 
éxt AnÜa(ov divyot Opacvxapdiov dvOpdv éoxatopas vow xaípovo x.r.A. 
The Ionic temple dedicated to her was one of the most famous in 
Asiatic Greece (Strabo xiv. 1, p. 647; Pausan. i. 26. 4; Tac. Ana. 
MO ye C1.) G.3137- i. 84, 1. D. 697; Vitruv. Archit iil. 1, vli 
pref). Strabo (l c.) commends it as exceeding in size all the 
temples in Asia but two, those of Ephesus and Didymi (Branchide); 
and, though inferior to the former in magnitude and in the costli- 
ness of its offerings, yet superior in the proportions and design of 
its cell, Very considerable ruins of this edifice still remain, which will 
be found described in Leake's Asta Minor p. 245, p. 349 sq, Texier 
Asie Mineure XU. p. 40, p. or sq, L Univers p. 350 sq. The site was 
excavated under the direction of Texier in 1836, when the sculptures 
of the friezes were removed to the Louvre’. 

In the Epistles of S. Ignatius the Ephesians and Magnesians appear 
in close connexion (Magn. 15). This is accounted for by their near 
neighbourhood. The distance between Ephesus and Magnesia is 
given by Artemidorus (Strabo xiv. 2, p. 663) as 120 stadia (so too 
Diod. Sic. xiv. 36), by Pliny (JV. Z. v. 31) as 15 Roman miles. The 
distance between the modern railway stations of Ayasoulouk and 
Balachik, which are near to the sites of Ephesus and Magnesia respec- 
tively, is stated to be somewhat under 14 English miles. Owing to this 
proximity, the southern gate of Ephesus bore the name of the Magnesian 
Gate (Mayvýriðes TíAa, Pausan. vil. 2. o; Mayvyrua] 709, Wood's 
Discoveries at Ephesus Inscr. vi. 1, pp. 32, 42) As an illustration of 
the saying oùðèv yewovías xaXemórepov (Arist. Rhet. ii, 21) we find 
the Ephesians and Magnesians at warin early ages (Strabo xiv. 1, 
p. 648; Hermippus in Diog. Laert. i. 117 ; ZElian V. HZ. xiv. 46, WV. H. 
xi. 27; comp. Arist. Pod. ii. 3, p. 1289) ; and this state of things ended 
for the time in the Ephesians taking possession of the Magnesian 
territory (Strabo 1. c., Athen. xii p. 525). At a later date, under the 
Romans, we find the two cities making up their differences and striking 
coins to commemorate their friendly relations, with the legend 

"MA[NHTON Kal edecioN oMoNoiA (Mionnet Supplement vi. p. 242). 
Among the not very numerous inscriptions recently discovered in the 


1 While the sheets for this second edi- Revue Archéologique Dec. 1887, giving an 
tion were passing through the press, a account of further very recent discoveries 
paper by De Villefosse appeared in the on the site of this temple. 


102 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


temple of Artemis at Ephesus, at least two record services rendered 
to the Ephesians by individual citizens of Magnesia (Wood's Dis- 
coveries etc. Inscr. ii. 3 '"AsoAAcwios Kóvovos Mayvys, 20. 12 @pacvpaxos 
ILoceióoviov Máyvys). 

'This proximity of the two cities also answers another question. 
How and when was the Gospel first preached in Magnesia? When 
we read that during S. Paul's three years' residence in Ephesus (A. p. 
54—57), ‘all those who dwelt in Asia (the proconsular province) heard 
the word of God' (Acts xix. 10, comp. ver. 26), when we find the 
Apostle towards the close of his sojourn sending salutations to distant 
correspondents from ‘the Churches of Asia’ (r Cor. xvi. 19), when we 
learn that within two or three years of this date there were Christian 
congregations even in the comparatively distant towns of Hierapolis and 
Laodicea and Colosse, we can hardly doubt that Magnesia, the nearest 
city of any importance, lying within four hours’ walk of Ephesus, 
must have been among the earliest of these recipients of Christianity. 
If we were to hazard a conjecture regarding the agent in its conver- 
sion, we might.mention Tychicus. The name Tychicus seems to have 
been especially common at Magnesia; see Boeckh C. Z. G. 2918, 
Mionnet Ill. pp. 153, 154, 155, 157, Supplement VI. pp. 236, 245, 250, 
255. The Apostles companion bearing this name was a native of 
proconsular Asia (Acts xx. 2), and apparently of some place not far from 
Ephesus, if not of Ephesus itself (2 Tim. iv. 12). But, though less 
common than some of the New Testament names, it is not so rare 
that any great stress can be laid on the coincidence. ‘The omission 
of any mention of Magnesia in the Apocalypse presents no difficulty 
on the supposition that this church had been founded during S. Paul's 
residence at Ephesus. The seven letters are addressed only to the prin- 
cipal churches in the respective districts. Ephesus was the centre of one 
district comprising Magnesia and Tralles and Miletus, just as Laodicea 
was the centre of another comprising Hierapolis and Colosse ; and ot 
the subordinate churches no mention is made in either case. Another 
link of connexion with S. Paul was the fact that the Pisidian Antioch, where 
` he preached, was a colony of this Magnesia (Strabo xii. 8, p. 577). 

At all events the Church of Magnesia seems to have been a 
flourishing community in the early years of the second century when 
Ignatius wrote. The Magnesians, like the Ephesians, had heard of 
his projected visit to Smyrna ; and, like their neighbours, they had sent 
delegates to meet him there (S$ r, 2, 6, 15). The Magnesian delegacy 
was an adequate representation of the Church. It comprised all 
orders of the ministry—the bishop Damas, the presbyters Bassus and 
Apollonius, the deacon Zotion ($ 2). It was in acknowledgement of the 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 103 


attention which the Magnesians had thus shown to him that he wrote 
this letter. 

The main theme of the epistle is the exhortation to unity (88 r, 
2—4, 6, 7, 13). The bond of unity is obedience to the bishop and to 
the other officers of the ministry. A warning is the more needed in 
their case, because some might be tempted to presume upon the youth 
of the bishop (§ 3). 

The object of this exhortation appears in another part of the letter. 
Unity is the best safeguard against the intrusion of heresy ($8 8—11). 
The heresy in question is described as a return to the old and un- 
profitable fables, the stale and sour leaven, of Judaism (88 8, 10). He 
expresses the substance of his warning to his correspondents in the 
exhortation not to ‘sabbatize,’ but to ‘live after the Lord's day’ (§ 6). 
It appears however from incidental expressions, that he is not con- 
templating Judaism of a pure Pharisaic type, for he affirms with em- 
phasis the reality of Christ's birth, passion, and resurrection ($$ 9, 11), 
obviously having these same teachers in view. ‘The heresy therefore is a 
Docetic Judaism. He acquits the Magnesians of any complicity therein 
as yet; but, while this false doctrine is abroad, he feels that the warning 
is not superfluous, and he counts on their obedience ($$ rr, 12, 14). 

The Church of the Magnesians. was not famous in later ecclesiastical 
history. The martyrdom of a certain Quadratus is said to have occurred 
at Magnesia, presumably the city on the Meeander ; and one form of the 
legend identifies him with the celebrated Apologist bearing this name, 
who presented his defence of Christianity to the emperor Hadrian But 
it seems more probable that the martyr in question suffered during the 
persecution of Decius, if indeed the story of the martyrdom is not 
altogether a fiction (see Act. SS. Boll. 26 Maii, and comp. Tillemont 
Mémoires 11. p. 236 sq, 589 sq) In the succeeding centuries we 
hear of the Magnesian Church from time to time, as represented by her 
bishops at the great Councils of the Church (see below p. 105), though 
they do not occupy any very distinguished position on these occasions. 
But, if we might assume that the Macarius, whose work has been 
recently recovered and published’, owed his surname to this city, the 
Church of Magnesia is not left without a representative in the field of 
theological literature. 


The following is an azaZyszs of the epistle. 
t IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF MAGNESIA ON THE MJEANDER, 


abundant greeting in the Father and in Jesus Christ.’ 


1 Makaplov Md-yvyros, ’Amoxpurukos | Movoyevýs, ex inedito codice ed. C. Blondel, 
Paris 1876. 


104 IGNATIUS TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


‘Knowing your harmony and love I was glad to hold converse with 
you. I glorify all those churches which preserve unity. Abiding in 
love, you will resist the assaults of the Evil One (§ 1). I rejoiced 
therefore to see you in the person of your bishop Damas, of your 
presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, of your deacon Zotion ($ 2). Let 
no man presume on the youth of your bishop. The presbyters recog- 
nise his wisdom and obey him. He who deceives his bishop plays 
false with God (§ 3). You must be Christians in reality and not in 
name only. It is not honest to be always talking of the bishop and 
yet always acting without him ($ 4). All things come to an end. The 
choice is between death and life. There are two coinages—the stamp 
of the world and the stamp of God. We must die into Christ’s passion, 
if we would live in His life (§ 5). Having met you through your 
representatives, I intreat you to act in concert with the bishop, the 
priests, and the deacons. Allow nothing to make divisions among you 
(§ 6). As Christ did nothing without the Father, so do ye nothing 
without your bishop and presbyters. Let there be one prayer, one 
mind, one hope. You have one temple even God, and one altar even 
Christ (§ 7). Go not astray after the antiquated tales of Judaism. 
The prophets themselves bore witness to Christ. They were inspired 
so as to convince the unbelievers that there is one God who manifested 
Himself through His incarnate Word (8 8). If those who were brought 
up in the old ordinances forsook them for Christ, how can we live apart 
from Him, of whom the prophets themselves were disciples ($ 9)? Let 
us not despise His goodness, nor forsake our Christianity. Put ye 
away the sour leaven, and be ye salted in Him. Jesus Christ and 
Judaism cannot exist side by side ($ 10). I say this to warn you against 
the snares of false doctrine. Be ye fully convinced that Christ was born 
and died and rose again in reality; for this is your only hope (§ 11).’ 

‘I am not worthy to be compared to you. I say this, knowing that 
my praise will not puff you up, but rather put you to shame (§ 12). 
Stand steadfast, one and all, in the teaching of the Lord and His 
Apostles. Be obedient to your bishop and to one another ($ 13). A 
brief exhortation will suffice.’ 

‘Pray for me and for the Syrian Church. We need your united 
prayer (§ 14). The Ephesians send greeting from Smyrna whence I 
write. So does Polycarp. The other Churches salute you. Farewell, 
and be united in Christ ($ 15). 


MPOC TOYC EN MATNHCIAI. 


"INATIOC, 6 xai Ocodopos, T5 e/Xowynuévm èv 
xapırı Ocot matpos év Xpwo à ` InooU To cwrnpr [rijv], 


TTPOC TOYC EN MerNHciai] ad illos qui in magnesia Sev-Syr 2, 7; ToU 
aŭro mpds uayvnolovs (being numbered y) g*; payvyoetow Uyvários G; ignatius 
magnestis L*5 ad magnesios A. See the lower note for other authorities. 


2 XpwTQ 'lgcoU] Lg; inoot xpwrQ G; def. A. 


' def. A. 


TpÓóc TOYC èn MearNHcía] The 
proper Greek adjective correspond- 
ing to Mayvgeía is neither Mayyy- 
ctevs (the form in the MS of the gen- 
uine epistles) nor Mayvjows (the 
form in the MSS of the interpo- 
lated epistles), but Mdyvns, the femi- 
nine being sometimes Mayviris (e.g. 
C. I. G. 3381), sometimes Mdyynoca 
(e.g. Theocr. xxii. 79), sometimes Máy- 
vnois (Parthenius in Steph. Byz.). 
This is equally the case whether the 
Magnesia intended be the town on 
the Mzeander or its namesake under 
Sipylus. Steph. Byz. s. v. Mayvrgcía 
says explicitly, ó roAírgs M d yvy s óuo- 
vipws TQ oikw rf. This statement is 
confirmed by all ancient remains. 
The legend of the coins is universally 
MAPNHTEC OF MA['NHTON : See Mion- 
net III. p. 142 sq, Suppl. VI. p. 231 sq, 
for the city on the Meander, and 
Mionnet IV. p. 68 sq, Suppi. VII. p. 
371 sq, for the city under Sipylus. 
The same is also the form which 
occurs in the inscriptions (C. Z. G. 
2913, 2919 b Appx., 2933; Wood's 


iuar] GL; om. g*; 


Discoveries at Ephesus Inscr. ii. 3, 
I2). It alone is found in classical 
writers of all ages (e.g. Herod. iii. 9o, 
Arist. Pol. iv. 3, Strabo xii. 8, p. 577, 
xiv. I, p. 647 sq, Plut. Vit. TAemist. 
32, Appian. Mithr. 21, Paus. i. 20. 5, 
i. 26. 4, Julian Orat. vii. p. 210). 
Even in ecclesiastical writings down 
to a very late date I have not met 
with any other form: see e.g. Labb. 
Conc. Il. p. 85 (ed: Colet.) róv Mayvy- 
Tov TróAeos ermiokoros jv ovóparı Maká- 
pios (at the Oak Synod A.D. 403; a 
document in Photius £77. 59); zd. VII. 
p. 1072 Iarpíktos eX ée Oeo emíakomros 
ris Mayvjrev mepi MaíavOpov modeos 
ris "Acuavàv émapxías (comp. 20. p. 
1100; at the third Council of Con- 
stantinople, A.D. 680). In the Para. 
Rufef. pp. 779, 785 (ed. Lequien), a- 
scribed to John of Damascus, mpós 
Mayyyngiovs occurs, but the present 
text of this collection of extracts else- 
where has also the impossible form 
mpos BiradeApiovs. The form May- 
ynoiovs also appears to underlie the 
Syriac translation of Timoth. Alex. 


106 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


UU NL Š \ 7 \ > 2 / 
év © doraCouat TNV exkAnolay THY ovaav €V Mayvnoia 
^ \ , \ DA 2 ^ i \ Nes 
TH mpos Maavopw, kat evxouae év Oed maTpt kai éV 


> ^ ^ ^ / 
Inoov Xpio TO 7Xeiora yaipew. 


2 mpós Masdvdpw] mpormedvdpw (sic) G. 
v. 1.) ; xpior@ inood (om. èr) [g]; al. A. 


(Cureton C. Z. p. 211). Nothing can 
be inferred from Jagnisoyg in a 
quotation from the Syriac Version 
(Cureton C. Z. p. 197; comp. p. 200), 
or from Magnisiatzis in the head- 
ing of the epistle in the Armenian 
Version, as these forms follow the 
analogy of the respective languages. 
The Greek translator of Jerome Vir. 
Jil. 16 has Mayynowavovs, but this 
simply is a transliteration of Je- 
rome's Latin. The proper form in 
Latin is Magnes, following the Greek 
(e: OA VAA Ol, ac. Anns ie 
47) but Jerome writes ad Magne- 
stanos. In an ancient inscription 
(Boeckh C. 7. G. 3137), about B.C. 
244, recording a treaty between the 
Smyrneeans and Magnesians (pro- 
bably of the city aZ Szpylum, see 
Boeckh p. 698), while the former are 
always Spvpvaio, the latter are oí èv 
(written eu) Mayvgaía or oi èk (written 
also y or éxy) Mayvgoías or oí dé 
Mayvgoías, Similarly in two different 
passages of Severus of Antioch pre- 
served in Syriac versions (Cureton 
C. I. p. 213, Land Anecd. Syr. 1. p. 
32) this epistle is entitled ‘to those 
who (are)in Magnesia.’ The fact is the 
more remarkable, because in quoting 
the other epistles he writes ‘to the 
Ephesians,’ ‘to the Trallians, etc. 
If therefore Ignatius or any early 
transcriber had prefixed a title to this 
epistle, he would probably have 
written either rrpoc TOYC EN MarNH- 
CIà! OF TIPOC TOYC MarNHTac. At 
all events the facts alleged seem to 
show that the extant title payynou- 
cow Lyvários must date long after 


èv “Inootd XpwrQ] GL* (with a 


the time when the epistle (on any 
showing) was written. | 

‘IGNATIUS, called also Theopho- 
rus, to the CHURCH OF MAGNESIA 
ON THE MAANDER, blessed through 
the grace of God in Christ, hearty 
greeting in Christ.’ 

Th evdoynpéevyn| sc. excAnoia, but the 
form of the sentence is changed as 
it proceeds, and the missing sub- 
stantive becomes the accusative to 
domü(opat. 

2. Th mpós Matavdpo] This city 
was called frequently ézi [r6] Maiáv- 
dp, Arist. Pol. iv. 3, Strabo xiv. I 
(p. 647), Diod. Sic. x. 57, Athen. iv. 
p. 173, or emi rod Maiávüpov, Athen. 
2b. but more commonly, as here, 
mpos [ró] Madvdpo, C. 7. G. 2910, 
3137, Strabo xii. 8 (p. 577), Athen. 
Xii. p.525, Labb. Conc.. YIL Ap: 
IIOO, Ptol. v. 2. Sometimes it is 
simply Maavdpov, Labb. Conc. III 
p. 1088, IV. p. 506, 858, 894, VIII. p. 
687; and occasionally mepi Maíavpov, 
2b. VIL. p. 1072, comp. [ZEschines] 
Epist. x. 8. Herodotus describes it 
(iii. 122) as 9 ómép MaidvOpov morapoð 
oikguévy. These designations were 
adopted to distinguish it from Mag- 
nesia in Thessaly, of which it was 
reported to be a colony, but more 
especially from its near neighbour un- 
der mount Sipylus, which was called 
Mayynoia mpos 2urúÀe Or vmó BuTIh@ 
Or rò SurvAov, and its inhabitants 
Mayvynres amò ZurúÀou (see C. Z. G. 
2933, 3381, Mionnet IV. p. 68 sq, 
Suppl. Vit. p. 371 sq). The two places 
are mentioned in the same context, 
Liv. xxxvii. 44, 45, Ptol. v. 2. Wes- 


1] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


IO7 


\ e E `Ë , ^ 
I. [voùs pav TO soAve/rakrov ths kara Ocóv 
5 4 > , , E] ^ 
asas, aeyaXAwuopnevos mpoeAauny v ricte 'ljoo 


Xpia ToU moocdadyjoa vpiv. karaEuoÜels yap dvouatos 


5 Mpoevduny] g; mpoewrdunv G. 


seling ZZzz. p. 658 states that it is 
called 7 IIperopatavOpovmoAus ; and 
the writer in Smith's Dict. of Geogr. 
s. v. says ‘Later documents seem to 
imply that at one time it bore the 
name Mezandropolis.’ Both quote 
as their authority ‘Concil. Constan- 
tin. iii. p. 6662 This however is 
merely a corrupt text, mporopatav- 
SpouroAews for pos Te Maiávüpo 
qóAeos: see Labb. Conc. VII. p. rroo. 
The Meeandropolis mentioned by 
Pliny W. H. v. 29 is a different place, 
though identified with Magnesia by 
Spanheim de Usu e£ Praest. Numm. 
ix. p. 889. When Phlegon, as quoted 
by Steph. Byz. s. v., says Macavdpov- 
solus, Mayyvgaías modus, he means that 
it belonged to the territory of Mag- 
nesia. Our Magnesia is also desig- 
nated 7 'Aciavij (Thuc. i. 138), and its 
inhabitants are Méyvrres of êv 75 "Act 
(Herod. iii. 90), to distinguish them 
from their Thessalian namesakes. 
It is placed in Caria, Diosc. Mat. 
Med. v. 130 (131). 

I. ‘Knowing your orderly de- 
meanour and godly love, I am de- 
sirous of conversing with you by 
letter. For decked out in these 
honorable chains, I sing the praises 
of the churches, and pray for their 
unity in the spirit and in the flesh, 
a unity consisting of faith and love, 
and centering in Jesus and in the 
Father. If we abide in Christ, we 
shall escape all the assaults of the 
Evil One and shall find God.’ 

4. Tvovs] ‘Having learnt, i.e. 
probably from the reports of Damas 
their bishop and the other Magnesian 
delegates mentioned in § 2. 


6 karaġıwðels] G; déwHels [g]. 


TO molvevrakrov| ‘the abundant 
good order’; comp. Ephes. 6 vmepe- 
mawe? úv Tv ev Oecd evrakiav. I 
have not found an example of this 
word elsewhere; but comp. soAvev- 
emAayxvos Clem. Alex. Quis div. salv. 


39 (p. 957). The Lexicons also give 
moAvev(wia, moAveumperns, as late 
words. Here, as in other churches, 


it is the harmony and submission to 
authority in the Magnesians which 
secures the admiration of Ignatius: 
comp. Ephes. 6, 20, Tradl. 1, 2, Polyc. 
6, etc. 

karà Oeóv] ‘in the way of God’, 
a somewhat favourite Ignatian ex- 
pression: comp. $13, Trall. 1, Philad. 
4, Polyc. 5. So too xarà “Incotv 
Xpicróv, Š 8 below, PAilad. 3. This is 
a favourite preposition with Ignatius 
in various connexions, e.g. in this 
epistle, $ 3 xarà ugóeuíav vmdxpiow, 
Š 4 kar évroNjv, Š 6 Kara odpka, Š 8 
Kata iovOaicuóv, Š 9 Kata kupiakmv, 
Š IO Kara xpioriavicpov, §§ 8, 15, karà 
mavra. 

5. poet) dun, ] “Z determined’, as e.g. 
Prov. xxi. 25 (LXX) oV yàp mpoatpodr- 
Tat ai xeipes avro0 Troteiv Tt, 2 Cor. ix. 
7. The ordinary sense of the sub- 
stantive mpoaipects, ‘choice, purpose,’ 
points to the meaning of the verb. 
The word does not imply any refer- 
ence of the Magnesians over others, 
as some commentators explain it. 

ev miotes k,.A.] ie. fas a Chris- 
tian speaking to Christians, to con- 
verse with you (by letter).’ For 
mpogAaAeiv OÍ ‘addressing’ by letter 
comp. Ephes. 3. 

6. odvouatos]| What is this name? 
Is it, as some say, the name of Christ 


108 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


5 fe ^ af ` 
Gcorpereatatov, év ois mepipepw Seopois adw Tas 


, š > Ce NE ` ARA ig 
exkAnoias, ÈV ais Evwow evXOMaL TAPKOS kat MVEVMATOS 


> ^ ^ a ` ` eon ^ / , 
Incot Xpiotov Tov dia mavros rnv (nv, via-rews TE 


2 tvwow] &voow G. 


GL*; om. A [Antioch 1]; al. g. 


(but this must be a misprint or misreading). 


(see the note on Æpkes. 1)? The 
epithet Oeompereorarov would be 
hardly adequate here for this name 
of names, though in another con- 
nexion it is used of Christ Himself, 
Ong e Ge/smillwrAROLÓPiSSTCRthe 
designation of Oeopdpos, as Pearson 
(V. Z.p.523) and others after him (e.g. 
Hilgenfeld 4. V. p. 193) maintain? 
This designation however seems to 
have been self-assumed, and not con- 
ferred upon him by others as a title 
of honour, as Pearson supposes. Or 
again is it the appellation of ‘mar- 
tyr’, as Lipsius (Aecht. p. oo) and 
others believe? But elsewhere Ig- 
natius shrinks from any such boast- 
ful title (see the note on Trall. 4). 
I think that the reference here is 
best supplied by the words which 
follow, év ois mepupépo Secpois. Ig- 
natius rejoices, as S. Paul had re- 
joiced before him, that he is Óée pros 
Xpiorov (Ephes. iii. 1, iv. 1, Philem. 
1,9). This is his proudest distinc- 
tion. 

I. Ocompenectarov] The word 
occurs again, .SZzy7z. inscr., II, 12, 
Polyc. 7. It is found as early as 
Diodorus (xi. 89, xvii. 75) and ap- 
pears in Philo (Vzt. Moys. ii. 3, p. 
137). Compare the similar Ignatian 
words, Oeodpopuos, Oeopakapiorés, 0eo- 
mpeoBurns. 

ev ois K.T.À.] ie. èv vois Seopois à 
mepipépw. He compares himself to 
some gay reveller; his fetters are 
his holiday decoration; the burden 
of his song is the praise of the 
churches. For this conception of 


3 hur] GA; huâs (?) L*; al. g. Té] 


4 48] GLA; al. g; eis [Antioch] 
7 revidueba] G (certainly); 


his bonds see Aes. 11 rà Seopa 
Tepipépa, Tors mvevparikobs papyapiras 
(with the note) See also the notes 
on Philem. 9, 13, for the correspond- 
ing idea in S. Paul. For the meta- 
phor in ddev see Ephes. 4, Rom. 2, 
with the notes on both places. The 
words ¿v ois «.7.A. are best taken with 
the following clause. Zahn has not 
improved the passage by his reading. 
In his earlier work (Z. v. A. p. 569) 
he boldly alters the words thus, xara- 
Evwbels yap Óc Ovouárov Ocompemeorá- 
Tov, ev ots mepipépw Secpors, ideiy Tas 
exkAnolas k.r.A.; but in his subse- 
quent text he contents himself with 
substituting ióà» for ade, retaining 
the other words and explaining óvopa 
Ocompemécrarov to refer to Damas 
the bishop. The lively and charac- 
teristic image of Ignatius is thus 
obliterated. 

2. évecw k.r...]] ‘I pray that 
there may be unity in their flesh and 
in their spirit, which are Fesus 
Christ’s. It seems best so to explain 
the words, rather than ‘union with 
the flesh and spirit of Fesus Christ, 
or ‘union in flesh and spirit with 
Fesus Christ’, because (among other 
reasons) we thus avoid an unmean- 
ing and awkward repetition which 
otherwise arises out of the subse- 
quent words, ro Óé kupidrepov, 'Ina o0 
K.T.À. For evoow oapkos kal Tvevpa- 
ros comp. Rom. inscr. kara gápka kai 
mveüpa nvopevors, and below Š 13 tva 
€vegis Ñ capku Te kai mwvevparuaj. 
These passages seem to show that 
capkós kai mvevparos must refer to the 


1] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


109 


\ > / *e PEN /, N 
Kal dyamns, rs oUO€v mpokékpiTat, TO 0€ KUpLGT€QOV, 
5 ^ ` , > © , ` ^ > 
5 Incov kai ratpos* év @ Urouévovres THY mácav mýpeiav 


Us. 4 ^ IA 
TOU &pXovros TOU aiwvos TOVTOV Kal SiadpuyovTes Ocot 


Tevéopueba. 


potimur L; refugimus ad (confidimus in) A (the word does not imply a different 


reading gevidueOa); al. g. The earlier edd. after Voss print $ev£óue0a. 


Voss 


gave $ev£óue0a as the reading of the MS, and offered rev£óue0a as a conjecture. 


churches and not to Christ. The 
flesh and the spirit denote the secular 
and the spiritual sides of life respec- 
tively. 

On the frequency of these words 
évobo bat, etc. in Ignatius see the note 
on Ephes. 4. The difference between 
€vecis and évórgs is the difference 
between ‘union’ and ‘unity’, between 
the process and the result. For the 
genitive 'Igco? Xpwro), as I have 
taken it, comp. Polyc. 5 eis ruv ris 
vápkós roð Kvpíov (the correct read- 
ing), and see 1 Cor. vi. 20 (as read in 
the received text) dofacare 97 Tov 
Ocóv év TH copate )udv kai EV TO 


mvedpate Up», Tiva OTW ToU 
Oeo. According to this construc- 


tion évecis here takes three sets of 
genitives; (1) Of the subject, which 
possesses the unity, capkós kai mvev- 
paros: (2) Of the matter in which 
the unity shows itself, míoreds re kal 
dyámqs : (3) Of the personal centre 
in which the unity resides, 'Iyoo? 
xai rarpés. For this threefold refer- 
ence comp. Š 13 «arevoüo7re capki 
kal mvevpari, míoTeL kal aydrn, ev vid 
Kal marpl K.T.À. 

3. ToU dia mavrós KTA] four 
never-failing life’; comp. Ephes. 3 
"Inrots Xpioros, Tò dütákpvrov jay Chr, 
Smyrn. 4 Incovs Xpiorós, TÓ aAnOwov 
jpav čv. For this substantival use of 
(v see the note on Ephes. 11. There 
is no sufficient reason for adopting 
the ill-supported reading jas here 
with Zahn (see 7. v. A. p. 570), who 


compares Æphes. 20. The sense is 
rather injured than improved by the 
change, which introduces an irrele- 
vant clause. 

4. ts ovdey K.T] ‘than which 
(i.e. love) sothing is preferable’: 
comp. Smyrn. 6 mlotis kai ayarn, àv 
ovdeév mpokékpirat. For mpokékpirat, 
comp. Xen. Cyr. ii. 3. 8, Mem. iii. 5. 19. 

TÓ Që Kupidrepov kK.r.À.] ‘and what 
is more important than all, a union 
in Fesus and the Father—in Jesus, 
in whom if we endure etc.’; where 
é à must be connected with “Inood, 
as the sense requires. For vocis 
"Inood kai marpós comp. John xvii. 21. 

5. Hv mücav émüpeav] ‘all out- 
rage. For the emphatic position of 
the article preceding was, and thus 
denoting the whole range of possi- 
bility, comp. r Tim. i. 16 ryv dracav 
paxpoOvpiav, Hermas Mand. v. 1 Tv 
mücav eAmida, and see the note on 
Gal v. 14. For émüpeav comp. 
Apost. Const. vii. 8 rìs mayidos roO 
8iaBóNov kai Ths émpeías ràv Oauuóvov 
(comp. 26. Š 11), Lucian Pro Laps. 
int. Salut. Y xademov pév, avOpwrov 
dvra, Saipovos Tivos enmnpecav Siadvyety, 
Philostr. Æpíst. 18 (p. 349) avoia 
parrov i) emnpeia Õaruóvov yevopeva; 
and so it is used elsewhere of the 
wanton injury inflicted by super- 
human agencies. 

6. tov dpxovros Kw.r.X.] See the 
note on Ephes. 17. 

Gcod revédpeOa} The phrase rvyxa- 
yew Oeo occurs again Ephes. 10, 


IIO 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


IL "Enel ov HEwOnv ¿óe (gas dia Aaya ToU 


À a , ^ , 
a£iÜéov vuwv émurkoTou kai pea Qvrépav a£iev Bao- 


I Aagu&] Sdua G. 


Smyrn. 9. More common still is 
émirvyxávew Oeod, below Š 14, Ephes. 
123) LAU 127 135 Roms 1, 25 *4, 9; 
Smyrn. 11, Polyc. 2, 7; and so also 
"Inood Xpicrod emirvyxavey, Rom. 5. 

II. ‘I have seen you in the per- 
son of your bishop Damas, of your 
presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, 
and of your deacon Zotion, whose 
submission to the bishop and the 
presbyters is a great joy to me.’ 

I. “Emel oiv n&i@Onv x.rA.] The 
sentence, thus commenced, is never 
completed. The protasis is length- 
ened out in recording the obedi- 
ence of the deacon Zotion (o? éyà 
...Incod Xpiorov), and this record 
suggests a general injunction to the 
Magnesian Church at large (kai vpiv 
0e mpémetk.t.A.), Which again branches 
off into subsidiary topics occupying 
three chapters (§$ 3, 4, 5), the apo- 
dosis being meanwhile forgotten. At 
the beginning of the 6th chapter the 
original protasis is again resumed, 
erel ov ev rois mpoyeypapiévows mpoa- 
mois Kk.r., and the long-suspended 
apodosis follows, mapawô ëv ópovoía 
Oeod kr, doubtless modified in 
form and substance by the ideas 
which have intervened. For a simi- 
lar sentence similarly broken see 
Ephes. Y èrme oiv thy modvirAnOeay 
K.T.À. 

7&d0nv| A favourite word of Ig- 
natius when speaking of himself; 
Ephes. 9, 21, Rom. 1. The com- 
pound xarafwicGa also occurs 
several times in this connexion; see 
$ 1 above, Trall. 12, Smyrn. 11, 
Polyc. Y (comp. Ephes. 20, Rom. 2). 
See also the note on Zes. 2 édvrep 
dévos o. 


2 á£iev] GLA; 0eoü á£lwv g. 


uà] ‘in the person of.’ For dua comp. 
Ephes. 2 00 dv mávras tpas...€idov, 
Mart. Ign. Ant. 3, 4; and for the idea 
see the note on Epkes. I ameihnha. 

Aapa] This name occurs several 
times in the inscriptions, e.g. Boeckh 
C.I.G. 2880 Mápkov OvAmiov [Sra] Bia- 
vod Aapa at Didymi; 2869 mrpodyrns 
KAaj0tos Aapâs also at Didymi; 3507 
Mapkov OvAmiov Aapá mapaddéov kal 
Kavidias Baoons Óvyarépa at Thyatira; 
3902 1 rà dvdpt ^aug at Eumenia; 
3983 OJVávafos Aapâs réxv@ dolpo] 
Aapa[d]. at Philomelium. See also 
nos. 284, 2562, 3860 and Wood’s 
Ephesus iv. 3 (p. 6, Bull. de Corr. 
Hell. Vil. p. 311. So too on Milesian 
coins in the time of Nero, em. Ti. 
Aama, Mionnet III. p. 168, Suppl. VI. 
p.272. In the inscriptions the name 
is commonly declined Aapas Aaya. 
[In one instance however (no. 3983, 
already given) it is declined Aapas 
Aapados, if Keil and Franz are right 
(see Boeckh Vol. 111. p. 1107) ; and in 
Latin inscriptions (C.Z. L.. V. 1636, XIV. 
1349) we have a dative DAMATI.] 
On the other hand we find Adpas 
Aápavros (like Oavpas Oabpavros) in 
Suidas s.v. 'AAkudy. The two forms 
however seem to represent different 
names, as Zahn rightly supposes. 
Aayüs (gen. Aaya) is probably a con- 
tracted name, like "Emadpás, Znvas, 
etc. For these contracted names 
in às see the note on Col iv. 15. 
Assuming this to be the account of 
the word, I have accentuated it 
Aapa, as it appears in the editions of 
interpolated epistles, rather than 
Adua, as it is written frequently, 
even by the same editors (e. g. Cure- 
ton, Dressel), in the genuine Ignatius. 


ir] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


III 


A ous , \ tan 
cov kat “ArroANwviov kai Tod cuvSovNov uov Šiakóvov 


£ < ed) \ > , 74 , ^ 
Lwriwvos, où yw óvalugv, Tt Umordcgeroi TG èm- 
t 


3 ‘ArohAwviov] drohwvlov G (not åmoħovtov, as given in Dressel), 
4 Lwrlwvos| Gg; sotionem A; zononem L* (an obvious miswriting for zotionem). 


On this hypothesis, it is worth men- 
tioning that among the names occur- 
ring on coins, inscriptions, etc., rela- 
ting to Magnesia are Aņuýrpos (Mion- 
net III. p. 143), Anuoverkos (Zó. III. p. 
156, Suppl. VI. p. 252), Anuoarparos 
(20. III. p. 157; comp. p. 148), and 
Anpoxapts (Boeckh C. 7. G. 2911, of 
the date A. U. C. 850); that the name 
of the same person is written Aa- 
meoy and Anmeoy on different coins 
of Magnesia (Mionnet Suppl. VI. p. 
252); and that our Damas is called 
Anpas in the spurious epistle 4 z/zocA. 
I3. The name Damas occurs alsoin 
Latin inscriptions; e.g. C. 7. LZ. VI. 
149912516722, X. 2263, 6164, XIV. 
2061. It is probably therefore the 
same with the common slave-name 
Dama (Hor. Saz. i. 6. 38, ii. 5. 18, 101, 
Hien 5 Sers. S ZA Va O 79, C, el re 
Il. 5042, V. 4087, etc), just as we 
have in Latin the forms.Apella, Her- 
ma, Heracla, etc. Basil Æzsź. 252 
(111. p. 388) mentions one Aayas 
(Aauas?) as a famous martyr of a 
later date. Euseb. ZZ. Æ. iii. 36, 
speaking of the Epistle to the Mag- 
nesians, refers to this passage, emi- 
cxómov Aapâ puñuy meroinra. Da- 
mas is mentioned twice in the 
spurious epistles, Antioch. 15, Hero 
8. 

2. d£w0éov] Applied again to a 
bishop in Smyrn. 12. On the word 
generally see the note on 77a//. inscr. 

d£lev] Comp. Ephes. 4 mpeaBvré- 
piov ToU OcoU d£ov. 

Bdooov «.7.A.] Apparently not an 
uncommon name in these parts of 
Asia Minor; see e.g. Boeckh C. Z. G. 
3112, 3148, 3151, 3493, Wood's Dis- 


covertes at Ephesus Inscr. vi. 1, 17 
(pp. 34, 66). At least two Smyr- 
neeans bearing the name appear in 
history; see Pape-Benseler Wörterdb. 
d. Griech. Eigennamen s. v. At Mag- 
nesia itself this name appears on the 
coins as borne by two persons at 
different epochs, each at the time 
recorder (ypapparevs), i.e. chief ma- 
gistrate of the city (comp. Acts xix. 
35 for the parallel case of Ephesus); 
€T! . FP . DÀ . BACCOY . MAFNHTWN 
under Caracalla (Mionnet TII. p. 151), 
erri . fp. BACCOY . MAFNHTWN under 
Maximinus (ib. Supl. VI. p. 248). 
In a Samian inscription, C. Z7. G. 
2248, the names Bassus and Apol- 
lonius occur together, as here. The 
latter is a frequent name in most 
places. One Apollonius a Magnesian 
appears in an Ephesian inscription, 
Wood's Discoveries Inscr. ii. 3 (p. 6) 
emeh "AmoAAGvios Kóvovos Mayyns 
K.T.A. ; and two others, also Magne- 
sians, are named in,a Trallian in- 
scription, Boeckh C. 7. G. 2919 b 
(p. 1123) 'AsoAAówws  'AmoXNovtov 
Mayyns. 

3. ouvdovrdov] Applied by Igna- 
tius solely to deacons ; see the note 
on Ephes. 2. 

4. Zoeríevos] The name is not 
uncommon in inscriptions, where it 
is most frequently written Zeríov, as 
in one authority here. In the same 
way in the inscriptions the same 
person is called Sérzyos and Zeros, 
Boeckh C. 7. G, 202, 205. There is 
some reason also for thinking that 
the Swras of Euseb. H. Z. v. I9 is 
the same with the Zorıkýs of the pre- 
ceding chapter. On the confusion 


II2 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


) ) ( Ocot kal TH cpoeo[üvrepie ws vójuo 
ckómw ws yapırı Oot kai TH TP pla ua 


Incotd XpiTov. 


III. Kai ipiv òè mpére un ovyxpacba Tñ Mkia 


2 Xpicrod] For the addition in L see Appx. 


of = and Z see the note on Polyc. 
inscr. 

óva(uy»] i.e. ‘enjoy his com- 
pany’; see the note on Epkes. 2. 

I. yapirt Oeo) x.r...] The bishop 
is here regarded as the dispenser of 
blessings; the presbyters as the 
representatives and guardians of 
order. Forvóuo comp. Trall. 13 vmo- 
raccópevou. TO ETLTKOT@ ds TH €vroÀg 
(with the note). The expression here 
does not mean that the presbyterate 
is itself an ordinance, an institution, 
of Christ, but that the presbyters 
order with the authority of Christ. 
For vóue Xpiro) see the note on 
Rom. inscr. xpuaróvopos; for mpeoßv- 
repío, the note on Aes. 2. 

III. *I exhort you all in like 
manner to respect the youth of your 
bishop. Follow the example of your 
presbyters, who regard not his age 
but his wisdom. Your duty towards 
God, the universal Bishop, requires 
you so to act. Whosoever fails in 
his obedience, deceives not the 
visible overseer, but the Invisible. 
His all-seeing eye nothing escapes.’ 

3. kal )piv de] ‘you the laity of 
the Church, not less than the 
deacons.’ 

avyxpacOa] ‘to presume upon, 
literally “Zo treat familiarly? The 
word occurs in the N. T. once only, 
Joh. iv. 9 o? yàp ovyxpévrat ’Iovõaîot 
Zapapetraws. The word signifies either 
(1) ‘to use together with another,’ 
as perhaps in Polyb. vi. 3. 10 svp- 
Wevdovrar kal ouyxXpóvra, mávres of 
povapxot TO THs Baciueías vóparı; 
or (2) ‘to use constantly or fully or 
familiarly,’ e.g. Epict. i. 2. 7 rais ray 


ékrós délais ovyypdpeba, Orig. Ep. ad 
Afric. 15 (I. p. 28) evyxpepévovs mpo- 
djras mpopnrõv Aóyow oxeddv avrais 
Aéfeow In this latter signification 
it has a tendency to a bad sense, 
like xataypjoOa, though not to the 
same extent. For the form -xpào ĝa, 
instead of -xpfjaÓa, see the notes on 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. 6 (pp. 195, 452), 
and comp. Herm. Sim. i. xpacat, 
though xpyog occurs in the context. 
For the sense see 1 Tim. iv. I2 pndeis 
Gov Tis veorgros karadpoveíro. 

4. kara Ovvapw k.r.A.] i.e. ‘having 
regard to the power conferred upon 
him by God the Father.’ 

5. dmovépew] ‘to pay’, as his due; 
for this is the force of the preposi- 
tion. So amovéwew Tuy, 1 Pet. iii. 
7, Clem. Rom. 1, Mart. Polyc. 10. 

6. où mpooevAnhoras| ‘not taking ad- 
vantage of’; comp. Demosth. Olynth. 
ii. p. 20 B THY ExaoT@y dvoiav del Tov 
dyvoo)vrov a/TÓv éfamaràv kai mpos- 
AauBávov ovros nv&)6n, Dion. Cass. 
lx. 2 kal avro? kai roüro mpocAauá- 
vovtes (i.e. ‘availing themselves of 
this weak point in his character’) 
ovK éAáyigra karew'yá(ovro (passages 
quoted in Steph. Thes. s. v., ed. 
Hase and Dindorf) The expres- 
sion ov mpocetAnporas has been com- 
monly explained 'zo£ regarding, i.e. 
‘overlooking’; but the parallels quo- 
ted suggest the correct interpreta- 
tion, as Uhlhorn (p. 329) and Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 303) have pointed out. 
For other untenable explanations of 
ov mpoaetAnporas see the next note. 

veatepixny Taw) ‘his youthful sta- 
tus or condition, a slightly awkward 
but intelligible expression. The uses 


IH] 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. hig 


Ó 


AE] Z 3 \ \ , os ^ 
TOV emtaKoTroU, &AXa kara Ovvayuw Ocot TATPOS TaTAV 


5 ` 5 ^ 5 , ` DA ` ` 

EVT POT HY aAUTW ATTOVEMELV, ka as EYVWV KAL TOUS aylous 
fe > , \ 

mpeo Butépous OU 7poc'euXmnooras THV patvopuevny VEWTE- 


4 Sanu] GLA; yvóum g. 


of raéis elsewhere quite justify this 
interpretation ; see esp. Aristot. Magn. 
Mor. i. 34 (p. 1194) órav jòn AdBy Thy 
ToU avdpos raéw, ‘when he has now 
arrived at man’s estate, which is an 
exact parallel: comp. also H. A. ix. 
7 (p. 612) rH mepl ròv mnàòv dyvpdoe 
Thy a/T]v ¿xet ráÉu ‘is of the same 
nature as, Avy. Gen. ii. rr (p. 761) 
Bovrerat Kara Tfjv roð mupòs eiva 
Tdéu, Magn. Mor. i. 2 (p. 1183) doa 
eis Ovváueos raéw Aker ‘pertain to 
the category of power,’ Plato PAileb. 
49 C riv TÀv yeAoíov etÀmyxe rá£w re 
kal dvow, Dion. Hal de Adm. Vi 
Dem. 40 Secpod 8é twos Q KóÀÀ nç 
rá£i...mape£opévas ‘to take the place 
of, ‘to serve the purpose of, Diod. 
Sic. i. 25 eis rjv mpotmapéacay kaĝ- 
ra&w, ‘restored to their 
former condition (of health and 
soundness of limb).’ Ignatius there- 
fore says that, though apparently 
from his years Damas belongs to 
the category of youth, yet his godly 
wisdom takes him out of this cate- 
gory. This is substantially the in- 
terpretation adopted by the Igna- 
tian interpolator, who paraphrases 
the words ov mpós rjv dawopévgv 
ddopóvras veórgra, and of the Arme- 
nian translator, who renders them 
*non spectant ad apparentem aetatem 
pueritiae ejus’; and it alone harmon- 
izes with the preceding context, un 
cvyxpüoÜa, TH Airiga roO emukómou. 
It must be noticed however that 
Ignatius says, not rjv dawoperny 
veotnta, for his vedrns was a fact, but 
Thy patvopnerny vewrepixny rá£w, for he 
was young without being youthful, 


IGN. II. 


c'rag at 


Ta&rpós] GLg; om. [A]. 


and the vecerepuc) rdéis was therefore 
only a semblance. On the other 
hand Saumaise (Appar. ad Libr. de 
Prim. Pap. p. 57 sq, Lugd. Bat. 1645) 
gave a wholly different turn to the 
passage. He supposed that vewrepixy 
rá£is meant ‘the newly created order 
or institution of the episcopate,’ and 
he rendered the sentence ‘sicut cog- 
novi presbyteros, non ut accipientes 
eam, quae nova videtur, institutionem, 
sed tanquam prudentes in Deo, ce- 
dentes ipsi? In reply to Saumaise, 
Petau (Theol. Dogm. v. 8. 5, IV. p. 
162, ed. Antv. 1700) while main- 
taining the antiquity of the episco- 
pate against him, was nevertheless 
led astray by his misinterpretation 
of où mpocesAnpéras, ‘not recognising’ 
and so ‘repudiating? and himself 
explained vewrepixn rakis ‘xovitia et 
recens ordinatio et institutio? He 
supposed that this new order of 
things which the presbyters repu- 
diated was the substitution of ap- 
pointment by superior standing for 
free election, or in other words, of 
seniority for merit. This however 
is a pure hypothesis, not resting on 
any historical basis. Both these 
interpretations of the sentence are 
refuted by Pearson (V. 7. p. 5 sq), 
and have not been reproduced lat- 
terly. But, while rejecting the general 
interpretation of the passage as given 
by Saumaise, several recent writers 
have adopted his rendering of vewre- 
puc) rá&s, ‘the newly-created office or 
order’; e.g. Rothe Anfänge, p. 436 sq, 
Uhlhorn p. 329 sq, Lipsius Clem. 
Rom. p.27. Yet itis open to the most 


8 


114 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[nr 


pexny Trá£w, avn ws Prone év Oeo a vy xupourTas 
AŬTO’ OUK QUTO dé, dAAa TO 4t. ‘Incod XpwToU Tc 


TAVTWV éziGKOTr (0. eis Top OUV €KELVOU TOU GeAnoavTos 


úuás TpÉTOV £O TiV ÜTOKOUELV KaTa unòeuiav UT OKpLG1V* 


r $povljup] sicut sapienti viro (om. èv 0e@) A; and so the paraphrase of g où mpòs 
T)» pawouévnv ádopüvras vedrnra aNd mpós Thy èv 0eQ ppóvnow; @pov[uous GL. 
3 éxelvov] GLA (which seems to have read ru» otv éxelvou [a?ro0] 0eXócavros); Oeo? 


[Dam-Rup 5]; al. g 


TQ émw komo ÙuÂv K.T.. ; as GL Dam-Rup. 


7 O 7 
4 vas] A, and so [g] rpérov otv éorw kal Ons vrakovew 


umaxovew] Dam-Rup [g]; 


obedire L; audire A; èrakoúvew G: comp. Ephes. 2, where G reads émiracobuevo 


for Umroraccógevot. 


serious objections. (1) It dislocates 
the connexion of thought. Obviously 
the words caOas...xkal rods aylous mpea- 
Burépovs x.r.^. imply that the example 
of the presbyters corresponds to the 
previous injunction, whereas this in- 
terpretation makes it refer to some- 
thing quite different. (2) The words 
wil not bear the meaning thus put 
upon them. Even though rá&s 
might stand for the ‘institution’ or 
* order? of the episcopate, the epithet 
veorepikz] cannot have the sense as- 
signed to it. It denotes either 
‘juvenile’ or ‘revolutionary,’ but 
never, so far as I am aware, ‘recent’; 
nor indeed does the form -«ós admit 
this meaning; see Pearson V. Z. p. 
7 sqa Zanu Ia Ae 1 as oo o RETE 
leaves dawopnévyy unexplained, for 
there could be no question of appear- 
ances here, seeing that the age of 
the episcopal office must have been 
a matter of fact. Zahn (p. 304 sq) 
gives an explanation of veerepua) 
Táfis, which stands midway between 
that which I have adopted and that 
which Saumaise proposed, and in- 
terprets it ‘the ordination of a young 
man. He thus brings the expression 
into a nearer connexion with the 
preceding injunction, and gives a 
possible interpretation to vecerepuey. 


5 odx ór] G; non quod A (less literally translated 


But his rendering strains the sense of 
both vewrepixy and rda&is; and the 
combined result is an awkwardness 
of expression far greater than in the 
traditional interpretation which I 
have adopted. Zahn was anticipated 
in his explanation by Bingham Azz, 
ii 1o. I, ‘He calls his ordination 
veatepixny TaÉw, a youthful ordina- 
tion.” An alternative rendering sug- 
gested by Cotelier ‘recentem illius 
ordinationem? is open to still greater 
objections. This account would not 
be complete without a reference to 
the interpretation by Bos Zverc. 
Phil. in 2 Tim. ii. 22 (p. 45), nou ad- 
sumentes ea quae manifesto juvenis 
(episcopi) szz£ munia’ 

I. $pov(ue] I Cor. iv. Io pón- 
pov ev Xpiorg. The reading which 
I have adopted from the Armenian 
Version and which is supported by 
the interpolator’s paraphrase seems 
to be required by the context. A 
reference is wanted to the prudence, 
not of the presbyters, but of Damas; 
comp. Socr. ZZ E. ii 6 dvdpa véov 
pep TH "Aula TpoBeBynkdra 8ë rats ppe- 
civ, speaking of Paulus when appoint- 
ed bishop of Constantinople. 

2. TQ TavT@v émwkóme] See the 
note on Lom. 9. Somewhat similar- 
ly Polycarp Phil. 5 Sudkovor...rropevd- 


ur] š TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


II5 

> \ 5 e7 \ 5 ig ^ M if 

ETEL OVX OTL TOV €7rlOKO7TOV TOUTOV TOV BNerouevov 
^ , X \ OHA / 

mava TIS, AAAA TOV QOpaTov 7rapaXo*vyterau: TO Òe 


^ 5 ` , j^ 
TOLOUTOV, OU Tpos G'apka ð NOYos dAd mpos Oeov Tov 


Ta Kpugua €L0OTQ. 


/ (y " ^ 
IV. [lpézov ov écrw un uóvov kaXeta8at Xpio-Tua- 


nequaquam by Petermann); zeguaquam. L (this probably does not represent any 


other Greek than oùx 07); ovi Dam-Rup; où yàp [g]. 


6 rov áóparov 


mapadoyifera] txt GL; add. 0eóv [Dam-Rup]; add. róv wh Suvdwevoy k.7.À. g. A 


has simply zzvisibilem (omitting mapadoylferat). 
however has the form row0ro); +@ dé rotor Dam-Rup; al. A. 


Tò 6€ rotoürov] GLg (which 
9 ka- 


"Nets Oa] Gg Dam-Rup 5; vocari LA; dxotew Dam-Rup ro. 


evo. kata Tyv dAjOevay Tov Kupíov, ôs 
eyevero Oud kovos mávrov. There is 
a reference here to the primary idea 
in ézíokomos ‘to Him who oversceth 
all? thus preparing the way for the 
closing words róv rà kp)q:a «idéra. 

3. eis riv] See the note on 
Ephes. 21. 

8eXrjcavros )pàs] ‘who desired you’: 
comp. Rom. 6 ékeivov 6édw, whereas 
here the object is a person. For this 
sense of óéNeuv see 26. 8 Gehynoarte tva 
kai vpets OeAn OTe, with the note. 

4. kara pndeuiay k.r.A.] The thought 
is the same as in Ephes. vi. 6, Col. 
111) 22; 

5. ovx dre] (4 will not say’; an 
ellipsis for ov Aéye dru: see Kühner 
525 (II. p. 800 sq), Winer $ lxiv. p. 
746. It is difficult to see why Zahn 
(Z. v. A. 429 and ad loc.) should prefer 
ovxi which is much less expressive. 
He speaks of rel ovy ore as not 
Greek; but the presence of ère} can- 
not in any way affect the correctness 
of the phrase ovy dru. 

6. mapaXoy((era.] ‘attempts to 
cheat) literally *imposes upon with 
false reasoning’; see the note on Col. 
ii. 4. So[Clem. Rom.] ii. 17 mapado- 
yeoapuevous Tas évroAàs "Inoo0 Xpiorov. 
In Apost. Const. vii. 11 God is in- 
voked as drapahoyiore, 


TÒ ÔÈ rotoÜToy k.r.A.] ‘utin such a 
case he will have to reckon not with 
Jesh but with God? For ró rowrov 
see the note on es. 11 êv ràv Svo. 
For the sense of 6 Aóyos and for the 
general tenour of the passage, see 
Heb. iv. 13 mavra è yuprd ... 
opOarpois avro pos ov ñiy ó Aóyos ; 
comp. Liban. Of. I. p. 201 (ed. Morel.) 
rois 0€ adikws drmekrovóci kal mpos 
Oco)s kal mpós dvÜpomovs yivera ó 
Aóéyos, and see Wetstein and Bleek 
on Heb. Z c. Similar is the expres- 
sion éerat avrà mpos rov Gedy, ‘he will 
have to reckon with the god,’ C. Z. G. 
3890, 3902 f, 3902 n, 3902 0, 3962 b, 
3980; comp. 3902 a, 3963. 

7. Tov rà kpódxa k.r.A.] Probably 
suggested by Ps. xliii (xliv). 22 avrós 
yàp ywooke. rà Kpvgia tis Kapdias: 
comp. Ephes. 15, Philad. 7. The 
exact form xpvdios does not occur 
elsewhere in Ignatius, or in the N. T. 

IV. ‘It is not sufficient to bear 
the name of Christians without the 
reality ; as some men profess respect 
for their bishop but act without re- 
gard to him. The consciences of 
such men are not upright ; for they 
absent themselves from the public 
assemblies of the Church and thus 
disobey the commandment.’ 

9. py povov kadeto Oat 


8—2 


TOÍS 


K.T.À. | 


116 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


vos GANA kal evar  domep Kai Tues émíakoTov pv 
kaXoUcww, ywpis dé avTou TavTa mpaooouou. Ol TOL- 
OUTOL [de | oUk EvoUVELONTOL mot eivai aivoyTat dua TO 
pn BeBaiws kar évtoAny cuvabpoiCer Oa. 

V. "Cmel obv 7éNos Ta TaypaTa Exel, Kal TPOKEL- 


^ eu / \ / OZ 
Tat Ta OÓvo OuoU, 6 TE Üavaros kai ý Cur], kat €kaa'TOS 


2 kaXoücw] G Dam-Rup 5; vocant L; Aéyovow [g]; al. A. ol 
rowovror 80] GL* (La, but om. 8e L4); ef qui sic cogitant A; ol yap rowÜrot [g]; 
of Totoüro. Dam-Rup. 3 eva] GL[g]; om. Dam-Rup ; dub. A. 5 kal] 
GLg; dub. A. Many editors omit it without authority for the sake of the 


grammar. 
émíkevrau G: see the lower note. 
A; al. g. 
dpxovros THs movnplas [g]. 


Comp. Rom. 8 wa ph povoy Aéyopat 
Xpworiavos, aXÀà Kal evpeda. 

I. émíokomov pev k.r.A.] ‘have the 
name of bishop always on their lips? 
But kadovow is an awkward expres- 
sion, and we ought perhaps to adopt 
Zahn’s conjecture Aadovow (Z. v. A. 
p. 302). Scribes would be tempted 
thoughtlessly to assimilate it to the 
preceding «aXeto0a, though a false 
connexion is suggested thereby. For 
this use of AaAeiv in Ignatius, see the 
note on Aes. 6. Comp. Bishop of 
London's Charge 1866 (p. 12) ‘Is it 
too much to hope that some at least 
of those, who...profess an almost in- 
ordinate respect for the Bishop’s 
office in the abstract, will listen to 
that practical exercise of its func- 
tions which warns them of the dan- 
ger of the course on which they have 
entered ?? 

3. evovveidnrot] The adjective 
occurs again PAz/ad. 6; comp. Ef. 
Vienn. et Lugd.in Euseb. H. E. v. 1, 
Apost. Const. ii. 17, 49, Clem. Al. 
Strom. vii. 7, 12, 13 (pp. 858, 879, 882), 
M. Antonin. vi. 30. So evouverdjras, 
Isidor. in Clem. AL .Szroz. iii. 1 (p. 


mpókevai] g (but 1 has adjacet); proponuntur L; posita sunt A; 


8 8 pev...d dé] L; 6 uév...ó óë G; dub. 


9 TOU kócpov rovrov] GL; principis mundi hujus SA; Tod 
Io xapakrfpa] GL; so also g, which sub- 


510), Clem. Hom. ii. 36, Clem. Al. 
Strom. vii. 13 (p. 882); edouvvedycia, 
Clem. Hom. xvi. 11. So the oppo- ` 
site dvacuverdytws, Clem. Hom. i. 5, 
ii. 38 ; Ovocuverdnoia, Clem. Hom. iii. 
14. 

4. BeBalos] ‘strictly, validly? It 
is explained by Smyrn. 8 éxeivn BeBaia 
evxaplotia 1yyetaÜc, v) Úmo TÒV éricKo- 
mov ovoa k.r.N. The presence or the 
approval of the bishop was necessary 
for the validity of these gatherings. 
The persons here denounced held 
unauthorised meetings for sectarian 
purposes. 

ovvabpoigec Oa] Great importance 
is attached in these epistles to fre- 
quent meeting together; comp. § 7 
below, Zes. 13, 20, Polyc. 4, and 
see the note on ZfZes, 13. Such 
meetings were a symbol and a guar- 
antee of harmony. The evyapirria 
was the special bond of unity in these 
gatherings: see Ephes. 5, 20, Philad. 
4, Smyrn. 6, 8. 

V. “All things come to an end. 
The great alternative of life and 
death awaits every man at last ; and 
each goes to his own place. There 


v] 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


117 


eis Tov idtoy Torov beet peus OOTED p EO TL 


vouia uaa ovo, ò uev Ocot Ó ðe Bai Kal Ekas TOV 


AUT WV idrov Arts pR ETTLKELMEVOV Exe; ol GT0TOL TOU 


tde ou TOUTOU, oi 06 morol èv ele Q Taal se Ocov 


matpos dia 'luooü Xpirtov, dv ov eav un avOaipéeTws 


stitutes dkova ëxousu must have had the accusative. 
translate zmago sunt dei patris, as if they had read XApaxTnp. 
dv ov] GLg (Mss, but 1 propter quod — ë 8); 60 bv S, (et 


GLS,A; kal g. 


On the other hand S,A 
II dud] 


st nolumus mori propter eum in passione eius) A (et si nolumus pati et mort prop- 


fer nomen eius). 


Perhaps ð? ôv is the right reading. 


Even g introduces a 


reference to martyrdom by inserting words in the latter part of the sentence, ró 


Umép adnOelas rabeîv. 
however it can hardly be correct. 


are, as it were, two coinages of man- 
kind; the unbelievers who have 
issued from the mint of this world, 
and the believers who are stamped 
with the image of God in Christ. 
We must first die to Christ's death, 
if we would rise with His life.’ 

5. Erei oóv] The apodosis to 
this protasis is lost in the subordinate 
explanatory sentence, deomep ydp 
€orw k... This explanatory sen- 
tence again is a protasis without an 
apodosis. On these anacolutha in 
the letters of Ignatius, see the note 
on Ephes. I. 

rà mpáypara] ‘ the business of life. 

mspókera.] ‘The common reading 
emíkevra,. would mean ‘are at hand,’ 
‘are at the door’: comp. Rom. 6 ó 
Tokerós pou emixerra. This reading 
however, as Zahn has seen, is the 
mechanical substitution of a scribe 
from below, where the word is used 
in a different sense. The life and 
death here mentioned are the spiri- 
tual, the eternal, life and death. 

7. Tov (toy hae So Acts i. 25, 
Hermas Sz. ix. 4, 5, 12, and simi- 
larly rov ódeUópevov rómov, Clem. 
Rom. 5, Polyc. PZz/. 9 : see also the 
note on Clem. Rom. 1. c. 


In Philad. there is a similar v. l. ô? ôv (for èv 6), where 


8. vopiopara] ‘coinages. The 
image was perhaps suggested by our 
Lord's words in Matt. xxii. 19 ézióet- 
aré pot TÒ vopicpa Tod KnvooU K..À. 
A similar contrast between the: good 
coinage (6p0ds kometat kal Kekodovic- 
pévois) and the bad (x6és re kal mpøny 
komelot TO kakíoro kóppart) appears 
in a noble passage in Aristophanes, 
Ran. 717 sq: comp. Acharn. 517. 
See also Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 4 (p. 
436) Tó re mapakeyapaypévov kai TO 
Oókuuov xepi(ew kal Ouakpivew, Philo 


de Execr. 6 (I. p. 433) mapakólras ró 


vópucpa THs evyeveias, Euseb. Z. C. 
Prol $ 5. See also Jer. vi. 30 apyv- 
piov droðeðokiuagpévov kaXécare avrovs 
K.T.À. 

Ó pev...0 0€] For rò pév...ró de: 
see Winer § xviii. p. 130. 

Q. Tod Koopov Toúrou] SC. xapak- 
thpa éxovow. The reading of the 
Syriac, rod dpxovros roU Koopov ToÚT0U, 
deserves consideration. 

IO. èv dydmn] ie. ‘the faithful 
whose faith manifests itself in love’; 
comp. Gal v. 6 miotis QO ayanns 
evepyoupern. 

II. Ova Iyoo Xpiorod| Christ is 
Himself the xyapakrjp (Heb. i. 3) of 
God, and this image is stamped upon 


118 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


^ 5 M ^ , \ 5 Gi 
éxwpev TO d7roÜaveiv eis TO aVTOU malos, TO QI avTov 


A Capa 
OUK EOTLY êv rjv. 


D , ^ , y 
VIL Erei ov év Tots vpo'yeypapuevows 7rpoo'orots 


A A ^ > , > , \ > / 
TO wav mAnOos éÜewpnoa év mioTE kat mwyammoa, 


I Éxopev] Exouev G (not éxwuev, as stated by Dressel). 
GLg; add. episcoporum scilicet et presbyterorum. et diaconorum Si. 


3 mpocwros| 
Similarly A 


translates ZZ eo quod antea scripsi de episcopo et presbyteris et diaconis. 


4 70 wav mÀ00os] GLg; add. vestrum $,A. 


dyámm); dilectione LS,A. 


jyámqea] Gg* (but v.l. 


If any alteration were made, dyam7joe would be 


better than dydry; but the versions are not of great weight in this case, where 


the alteration was obvious. 


the Christian by union with the 
Father through Him ; comp. Clem. 
Alex. Exc. Theod. 86 (p. 988) èri roo 
mpokopucÜévros vopícparos ò Kupios 
eimev...rívos 1) elkàv Kal rj émvypad ; 
ovT@s kai ó motòs émvypadmv pev éxet 
dua Xpeorod To Ovopa Tod Oeo KTA. 
On the Alexandrian interpretation 
of eikdv, as the Adyos, the dpyérumov 
mapáOevyna, in Gen. i. 27 kar eikóva 
Oco0, see the notes on Col. iii. 10. 

aj0aipéros| 2 Macc. vi. 19: so 
avOaípero, 2 Cor. viii. 3. 

I. eis TO avro malos] Comp. Ronz. 
6 ámoÜaveiv els Xpioròv "Ina otv, and see 
the note on Zes. inscr. The lan- 
guage of Ignatius is moulded on that 
of S. Paul; comp. Rom. vi. 5, viii. 17, 
29, 2 Cor. iv. 10, Phil. iii. 10, 2 Tim. 
bs dri 

VI. * Wellthen, since I have been 
permitted to see you all through your 
representatives, I exhort you to act 
together in harmony with the bishop, 
the presbyters, and the deacons who 
are entrusted with the ministry of 
Christ the eternal Son of God incar- 
nate. Conform yourselves to God, 
and love one another. Let no divi- 
sions arise among you.’ 

3. Ere oiv «.t.d.] The protasis 
which commenced with the beginning 
of Š 2 "Eme otv £v x.r.A. is here 


6 eis rómov] eis rórov GLg Sev-Syr 2; 


resumed, and at length matched with 
its long suspended apodosis, mapawé 
ev opovoia Oeod k.r.À. 

èv rois mpoyeypappévors k.r-.] “ZZ 
the persons (or rather representatives) 
already mentioned’ in Š 2: see the 
note on Æphes. 1 Ere} otv thy modv- 
mAjÂerav pov.. ameipa ev Ovncipa. 
The word mpocmoyv here signifies 
more than a ‘person’; it is a *fer- 
sonagey ‘ representative’; comp. e. g. 
Polyb. v. 107. 3 e¢jrouy nyepova kai 
mpócomOov ws íkavoi Ovres BonOeiv av- 
Tots, XXVll. 6. 4 mpoOéuevor vo To) 
Baeuées Evpévous mpóocemov (with 
other passages given in Schweighaeu- 
sers Lexicon) So in Clem. Rom. r, 
47, it is applied to the * ring-leaders’ 
(see the note on the former passage). 
Again it was used in law-courts of 
the ‘parties’ to a suit; Lobeck PAzyz. 
p. 380, and comp. Apost. Const. ii. 
47, 49, 51. In all these uses it re- 
tains something of its primary sense, 
and has not yet degenerated into 
the colourless meaning ‘ person.’ See 
also Meyer on 2 Cor. i. II. 

4. nyámqca] ‘ welcomed, embraced? 
The word here refers to external 
tokens of affection, according to its 
original meaning ; see the note on 
Polyc. 2 Tà Seopa pov à yHydrnoas. 
Though the versions favour the 


vi] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


IIQ 


fos) Q 2 Us. 
TAPALVW EV OMOVOLa Ocot orouóa ETE TAVTA mpaosew, 


^ > , ^ ^ 
vpokaÜnuévov Tov émiokórov eis TUTOv Ocot kal Tov 


/ > , , ^ 
mper vrépmv ELS TUTOV ouVvEdpiou TWV aTOCTOAW), Kal 


ND5t1D3 S (where the word thus transliterated into Syriac would naturally 
stand for rúros, not for rómos; see Payne Smith Zhes. Syr. s. v.); tanquam A 


(thus taking the Syriac word to represent ros). 
same, where the phrase recurs in the next line. 


The authorities are just the 
See the lower note. 


7 ouwedplov tev ámocróNov] GLg Sev-Syr; angelorum consilii Si; tanquam angeli 
regis A (an erroneous rendering of sop, which differently vocalized signifies rex 


or consilium). 


reading dydmy, no great stress can 
be laid on the fact, since there was 
every temptation to recur to the fre- 
quent Ignatian combination síeret 
kai dyám. 

5. é opovola Oco)] ‘in godly 
concord’; comp. Š 15, PAz/ad. inscr., 
where the same expression occurs. 
So too évórgs «o0 ; see the note on 
Philad. 8. 

6. mpokaÜgpuévov] So mpokaÜé(ea ba 
is used of the bishop, CZezz. Hom. Ep. 
Clem. 12, 16, iii. 64, 66, 70, 72. Comp. 
Apost. Const. ii. 26 ó yàp émickomos 
mpokaÜe(éaÓo vpav às Oeod aia Ter 
uņpévos, a passage obviously mould- 
ed after Ignatius (see the following 
notes). The same word mpokaĝnpé- 
vov may well be understood with 
the following rév mpeoBvrépov, as it 
is used of the presbyters just below; 
but with réyv Oiakóvev it is necessary 
to supply some other word, such as 
cvpmapóvrev, according to the sense. 
The clause memorevpévoy k.t.A. iS 
added by way of explanation, ‘see- 
ing that they have been entrusted 
etc 
` eis rómov] So it seems best on the 
- whole to read with Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 
570 sq). See the parallel passage 
Trall. 3, where the right reading is 
kai Tov émíckomov óvra mov ToU 
marpós, roUs dé mpeaBurepous ws cuvé- 
piov Oeo) kal às gúvðegpov dmogTó- 


Aev: comp. Apost. Const. ii. 26 7 Se 
Sidxovos eis rúmov ayiov mvevparos 
retyunoOw vpiv...ot è mpecBurepor eis 
TUTOY TOv røv amooTOA@Y vevo- 
picOwoav...ai te xüpa, kal OpqQavoi 
tpav eis TUmOY ToU OvotacTnpiov Ne- 
oyicdwoav. As the whole context 
in the Constitutions abounds in re- 
miniscences of this passage of Ig- 
natius (see the notes on mpoxadnpevov 
above, and on üvev rod marpós k.r.A. 
§ 7), it is another very strong con- 
firmation of the reading adopted 
(though the word rómov also occurs 
in the context, § 28, as quoted in the 
next note). Zahn quotes Barnab. 19 
Umoraynon Kupiois às TUT@ Ocob. See 
also Clem. Hom. ii. 62, where the 
povapxía of the episcopate is re- 
presented as the counterpart to the 
povapxia of God, and the people are 
bidden to honour the bishop os 
eikóva Ocot. In Apost. Const. l. c. 
the bishop is called ope» émíyews 
Geos petra Ocóv, with more to the same 
effect: comp. zd. ii. 30. He is the 
highest earthly representative of the 
spiritual power. 

7. ovvedpiov tav drooróAov] This 
comparison exactly corresponds with 
the parallel passage already quoted, 
Trall. 3, where the presbyters are 
compared to ‘the council of God 
and company (see the note on súv- 
8ecpov) of the Apostles.’ Ignatius is 


120 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


= A > n ' , 

Tov Swakovwy GV uol YAUKUTATWY, TETLOTEVMEVOV 
> ^ ^ A \ > 7 \ MEC 

Staxoviay "InooU  XpiroU, Os mTpo atwvwv Tapa TaTpL NV 


2 “y , ~ 7 
kal èv Teer Epavy. mavres oüv oponGeray Oeou Na Bov- 


5 \ \ \ / sË 
TES évrpérea Ue aA\AnAous, Kal unòeis kara TapKa Bre 
> > ^ ^ 5 , 
mérw TOV TM (O), adn év “Incov Xpiotw. aAAnXovs 5 


I Oukóve»v] GLg; add. eis rúrov rv dmosTÓMov (mbu ND51D3) S, 
(which does not continue the quotation further); add. ZZ formis apostolorum 
A (where again NDDIW is taken as standing for rúros)) Sev-Syr omits the 
clause kal rQ» ĉiakóvwv rQv éuol YyNukurdTeyv. 2 mpó aimver] G; ante 
saecula L; mpd aidvos g (but ante saecula 1); perpetuus A. Sev-Syr has a plural, 
but it depends on ribui. marp] G; rQ marpl g. 4 évrpémeo0e 
AAAHAous] évrpémec0e àXMjNow G; veneremini adinvicem L; addijovs ėvTpé- 
mec0e Dam-Rup 9; al. g: see the lower note. 5 tov] g Dam-Rup; 
Tô G. Inood Xpwrg] GSA]; xpwrG lycov g; xpwrG Dam-Rup. 
áXNjNovs ià mavrós åyarâre] GL Dam-Rup; estote inter vos omni tempore S43 


picturing to himself the gathering of 
the church, where the bishop and 
presbyters are seated on a dais, the 
bishop occupying the throne in the 
centre, and the presbyters sitting 
round (as in the Basilican arrange- 
ment) so as to form a corona; comp. 
Š 13 below déomXókou mvevparwo0 
otepavov Tov mpeoBurepiov vuar (with 
the note). See also the note on 
Philad. 8 cvvédpiov rod émurkómou, 
where again the reference is doubt- 
less to the presbytery. Comp. Apost. 
Const. i. 28 rots è mpeofvrépois... 
dumhn kal avrois apopitécb@ 1 poipa 
eis yapw TÀv Tov Kupíov dmogTOAov, 
Gv Kal tov rómov QvAdáocovcw...cort 
yàp avvéOpiov kai Bovdr) tis ékkNgoías. 
The presbytery are again compared 
to the Apostles, Trall. 2, Smyrn. 8. 
The text of the Syriac (followed by 
the Armenian) seems to have been 
altered deliberately, in order to pro- 
duce what appeared to be a more 
suitable comparison. 

2. Ovakoviay `I. X.] i.e. “q service 
under Jesus Christ, as their Kipuos : 
comp. rall. 2 rovs Oiakóvovs Ovras 
pvotnpioy lgco0 Xpwro0, Smyrn. IO 


os Stakovovs |Xpioroð] Oeo, Polyc. 
Phil. 5 bs Oeod kai Xpıoroð Sdidxovor; 
comp. 2 Cor xi- 23, Col 127, 0. S 
iv. 6. This seems the most probable 
interpretation. Otherwise it might 
be explained ‘a ministry in which 
Jesus Christ Himself. served,’ for He 
became dtakovos mávrev (Polyc. Phil. 
5); comp. Matt. xx. 28, Mark x. 45. 
For the comparison of the deacon to 
Jesus Christ, which is involved in 
this latter interpretation, see the note 
on Trall. 3. 

3. êv réie] Heb. i. 2 èr éexárov 
TOV repr rovrov, ix. 26 emt avvreAeía 
Toy aidyey: comp. I Cor. x. II eis 
oùs Ta TéAn rÓv alóvev rarývrykev. 
See also Aes. 11 éexarow xaipoi 
(with the note). Zahn quotes Iren. 
i. IO. 3 êr éexárev ràv kawpàv jj 
mapovcía ToU viov ToU Oeod, rovrécaTiv 
ev TQ TÉÀet éiár ù) apy. 

ópojberav Oeo?) ‘moral conformity 
with God’; comp. Polyc. 1 rois kar 
dvdpa karà oporGevay Oeod Addex (with 
the note) This parallel passage 
shows the meaning of the expression 
here. It is not ‘godly conformity 
among yourselves, as Zahn takes it, 


vi] TO THE MAGNESIANS. I2I 


\ \ , ^ \ DA 2 ^ e 
Qua 7r «V'TOS AYATTATE, punoev ECOTW EV Uy Ó Ovvijoerat 


Uuás pepioal, aN’ évwOnTeE TO ETLTKOTW kal Tots 7 0- 
kaÜnuévois eis TúTov Kal òrda X v apbapoias. 

VII. “Womep ovv ó Kvptos dvev too maTpos OUO€v 

10 TONT Ev [ rive uévos dv], ovre St éavroU oüre Sia TeV 


om. g (here, but it is represented in the context). A abridges the whole sentence 
åN ép... dryamüre into sed amore iesu christi. 7 TO éemirkoryw kal Tots 
mpoka0nuévois] GLS, Dam-Rup 6; TG érwkómo TË mpoxabnudry A; TQ ÉmLOKÓTQ 
g (omitting xal rots mpok. and substituting Vmoraccóuevo: ri Ceg K. T. À.). 

8 rúrov] G (but carelessly written) LS}; rómor Dam-Rup; al g. The rendering 
of A conspectum. bonum arises from a misunderstanding of the Syriac N'M, 


which differently vocalized signifies exemplar and obtutus. 
(but om. Lı) g Dam-Rup; 86 S,; & A. 


Rup [S,] [A]. 


9 otv] GL* 
ó Kipios] GLg; add. uë Dam- 


Io émoigcev] GL[S,] Dam-Rup; faciebat A; ro [g]. 


Tveuévos dv] GL; om. S,A [g] Dam-Rup. 


and as the preceding ëv opovoia Oeo 
might suggest. See also pupnrai 
cov, Ephes. 1, Trall. I. 

4. addndovs] The reading 4AMj- 
ows must be wrong, as évrpémeo0a, 
takes a genitive or an accusative (in 
Ignatius only the latter) but never 
a dative. Though aicxiveo 6a. some- 
times has a dative, it is with a differ- 
ent meaning, ‘to be ashamed az,’ or 
‘on account of’; a sense which would 
be out of place here. There is a simi- 
lar error in the Greek Ms, Trall. 7 
QvAdrreaÓe odv rois rovov Tours. 

kata capka] i.e. ‘so as to love and 
hate his neighbour by turns, from 
merely human passion.’ It is op- 
posed to Ova mavrós adyarare. 

8. eis rúrov k.r...] ie. ‘both as 
an example and as a lesson of in- 
corruptibility, In Rom. vi 17 we 
have eis rúrov didayns. The idea of 
apOapoia in Ignatius (Aes. 17, 
Philad. 9; comp. Polyc. 2) is not 
merely immortality, but moral in- 
corruption as carrying with it im- 
mortal life ; see the note on Zes. 
17j 
VII. ‘As the Lord Jesus did 
nothing without the Father, so must 


ye do nothing without your bishop 
and presbyters. Let no man study 
any private ends; but let there be 
one common prayer, one common 
mind, one common hope. Jesus 
Christ is one; be ye therefore one. 
Gather yourselves together as to one 
Temple, even God; as to one Altar, 
even Jesus Christ, who came forth 
from One and is in One, and re- 
turned to One, even the Father,’ 

9. avev rod marpós K.r.M] See 
John viii. 28 ar épavroó rod ovdév, 
a\Aa Kabds edida&&y pe 0 marp, ravra 
Aare (see Š 8 Kara mavra eùnpéornoev 
which is a reminiscence of the con- 
text of this same passage); comp. x. 37 


CINA A ; 
` el OV TOLĜ rà épya TOU marpós pov K.T.A. 


See also Afost. Const. ii. 26 ds ó 
Xpiorós, morðv a’ éavroü ovOév, rà 
dpeota mous TG marpl mávrore, li. 30 
de yàp Xpiwrrós avev Tod marpós ovdey 
morei, oUros OVE O Öıdkovos dvev TOU 
émwgkómov (passages referred to by 
Jacobson), where there is a remi- 
niscence at once of these passages 
in Ignatius and of the sayings in 
S. John's Gospel on which they are 
founded. 

IO. qveguévos dy] ‘being united with 


122 


THE EPISTLE 


OF IGNATIUS [vu 


e M ^ of m NS , \ 
ATOTTOAWY, OUTWS MNOE Ujiéts avev TOU EMLOKOTOV Kal 


Ü : oe ( . Q vreuwaonre 
Tov mpecBuTépwy unòðèv moaooeTe? pnde mean 


D 28/ eu 3 75 \ ` , M l4 
eUAoyov Tt paiverOar iSia úu GAN mi TO avto pia 


£ , / “€ ^ iy 5 , > 5 , 5 
TPOTEVXN, Mla O€nots, cis VOUS, pla ENTIS, EV aya, EV 


^ ^ FETTE , e/ 5 5 ^ / CONT 
TH x«p& TH apu, Os éoTw "InovoUs XpıoTos, ov &jiewov 


I kal rev mpecBurépwy] GLA; om. Dam-Rup [g] (but g continues pnde m peo Bu- 


Tepos, uù Ot&kovos, uh Xakós). 


2 mpáccere] mpdooera G. 


3 $alvec0ac] palvecde 


Gi Uv] txt GLA Dam-Rup (but the quotation ends here); add. seorsim ab 


episcopo S, (an accidental repetition from the preceding sentence?) ; al. g. 


5 8s] 


quod (the antecedent being gaudio) L; ë Antioch 1; els G; al. Ag: see the lower 


note. 


Him’; comp. .SSzzyrm. 3 mvevparikós 
nvepevos rà matpi, said of Christ. 

I. ovras pnde vpets k.r.A.] Apost. 
Const. ii. 27 ottws kai úpeîs avev Tod 
émwkómov pndev morire. The pre- 
cept occurs again Trall. 2,7, Philad. 
7, Smyrn. 8. 

2. pndé mepaonrte k.r.A.] i.e. ‘do 
not struggle to persuade yourselves 
that anything is right and proper 
which you do by and for yourselves.’ 
For the word eùàoyov itself, compare 
Smyrn. 9; and for the sense, Zphes. 
II X@pis rovrov pndev tpiv mpenéro. 

3. émi ro auro] SC. cuvepxopévous 
ywéc0o. The sentence is studiously 
terse, the words being thrown down 
singly, and the reader left to supply 
the connecting links. Zahn (Z. v. A. 
p. 345 sq, and ad /oc.) would connect 
dÀN emi rò aùrò with the preceding 
words; but this does not appear to 
me so forcible. A similar alternative 
as to the connexion of ézi rò aùrò 
with the preceding or following words 
presents itself in Acts ii. 47, iii. 1. 

5. TA xapa kr] See Epkes. 
inscr. êv apopo xapa. . 

ds] I have ventured to substitute 
this reading, though there is no direct 
evidence in its favour, for two reasons. 
(1) It stands mid-way between the 


duewov ov0éy éorw] GLAg (but ovdéy for ovdév); ov0év Oupnd- 


two extant readings, 6 and eis, and 
explains both. For the confusion of 
ó and ós in the text of the Ignatian 
Epistles, see below § 10, TradZ. 8, 11. 
(2) This attraction accords with the 
idiom of these epistles elsewhere ; 
see below Š 1o peraBadeode eis véav 
(pv, Os éotw “Incovs Xpurós (v. 1.), 
Š 15 €ppwcbe ey opovoia Oeo kekrgué- 
vot aQudkpurov mvedpa, os eat “Incods 
Xpwroós; comp. Trall. 11 rod Oeo) 
€vogiv. érayyehAopevov, ôs éorw aúrós 
(where however there is a various 
reading), Ephes. 9 Sua THs unxavizjs... 
ds écrw a ravpós (with the note). The 
passages, Š 15, Trall. 11, seem to 
show that the relative refers not to 
7j Xap@ TH dpópe, but to the whole 
idea of the sentence, ‘ This perfect 
unity is Jesus Christ Compare the 
still stronger expression, Æphes. 14 
dpx7) uv mistis, Tédos 0€ ayar’ Tà 0€ 
Ovo ev évórgr yevopeva Oeós TTv. 
The reading eis is part of the confu- 
sion which extends over the following 
clauses in the existing Greek text. 

6. ds eis éva x.r..] Looking at 
the authorities, there can be little 
doubt, I think, that the passage 
should be so read. (1) The word éva 
slipped out of the extant Greek text 
of the genuine Ignatius in the first 


5 


vil] 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. - 123 


wala 5 » e > e 
ouGev éa-rw. "ravres ws eis éva vaov ovvTpéexeTe tOcoit, 


€ , Qe eX , e ^ 
ws émi ev Üvoiac Tüpiov, émi éva "Inooüv XpwoTÓv TOv 
2 3E. UN ^ T e 3 
ap évos matpos zrpoeXO0vTa kai eis Eva Óvra Kal xwpn- 


OavTa. 


éorepov [Antioch]. 
LAg; add. of» G [Antioch]. 
om. G. 


6 ovév] G (not oùôév as in Dressel). 
els] GLA; ets els g. 

cuvrpéxere Oco0] GL; 0eoü cuyrpéxere g. 

A. 7 éri ëv] G (¿ml, not ézel as suggested in Dressel’s note). 


mavres| txt 
éva] LA; róv [g]; 
cot] GL[g]; om. 
érl va] g* 


. 3273 0 poe ° 2 ej 
(but v. l. òs ¿ml &a); in unum Ly (but La ut in unum); ws él iva G; om. A. 


clause, owing to the combination of 
similar letters wceicenanaon, while 
the word eis found its way by a 
reduplication (eiceic) into the text 
which the interpolator had before 
him. (2) The os before emt éva “Incoty 
Xpicrov must be rejected, as an ob- 
vious addition of the scribes in some 
copies both Greek and Latin, which 
the supposed parallelism of the clause 
would suggest, but which really de- 
stroys the meaning of the sentence. 
Jesus Christ Himself is compared to 
the one altar. I suspect however 
that a still further change ought 
to be made, and that Oeov should 
be read for Oeo ‘as Zo one shrine, 
even to God. In this case the 
shrine (vaós) would be compared to 
God the Father, and the altar or 
court of the altar (Ovoiraorýpiov) to 
Jesus Christ. Thus the image gains 
in distinctness ; for the access to the 
former is by and through the latter. 
Comp. Clem. Rom. Š 41 éumpoodev 
ToU vaod mpós TO Óvaidarrjpuov, and see 
the note on Æphes. 5. For the ĝv- 
gıasrýpiov in connexion with Christ 
see Heb. xiii. 10, where perhaps it 
signifies more definitely the Cross ; 
and for the general complexion of 
the imagery Heb. ix. 6 sq. For the 
omission of eig before Oeóv (if this 
reading be adopted) comp. Joseph. 
B. F. ii. 8. 5 kaÜámep eis div Te TÉME- 
yos mapayivovrar Tó Seunvyty prov, Clem. 


Hom. v. 21 domep Sv Opyávev rv 
NMETEPOV TATOV eis TAS TOY vonráv 
Qéperat avvovaías, Athenag. Suppl. 31 
Gs mpos oráÜugv Tov Gedy kavovi(erat, 
Orig. c. Cels. i. 55 (I. p. 370) taira 
mpopnreverOar ws mept évòs Tov ddov 
aod, Macar. Magn. iii. 13 (p. 85) os 
eis ueyaAómoXw karakA(vas THY épppov : 
and, as regards classical writers, see 
Kühner $ 451 (IL p. 479) The 
omission would assist the corruption 
of Oeov into Oeo. 

8. mpoeA0óvra] This refers not 
to the Divine generation of the Son, 
but to the mission on carth; for it 
corresponds to xeprcavra, as the 
setting out to the return; comp. 
John xiii. 3, xvi. 28 (quoted below), 
where ¢&eAdeivy answers to mpoeAÓetv 
here. See also the note on mpoehOav 
in $ 8. 

eis €va üvra] For this preposition, 
as describimg the absolute eternal 
union of the Son with the Father, 
comp. John i. 18 ó àv eis roy kóNmov 
roð marpós. See also John i. I ó 
Aóyos iv mpos Tov Ocór. 

xoprcavra] sc. eis eva. As at the 
commencement of His earthly min- 
istry He came forth from One, as 
He is eternally with One, so also 
at the close of this earthly minis- 
try He returned to One. See es- 
pecially John xvi. 28 €€jAOov ek row 
marpos kal éAjAvÓa ‘eis Tov kócpov' 
maw adinus Toy kóvpov kai T Opevo- 


124 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[viu 


a ^ \ £ 

VIII. My rAavaobe vois éreooóoE[ats unde puOev- 

^ 3: > \ , ^ 

pac Tots zraXaiots dye eXéouv ova" ei Yap Expt vuv 


^ e ^ \ 2 
kara iovðaïopov Çwuev, omodAoyoupey xapw pn ein- 


pévat. 


1 wAavacbe] mrAavacba G. 


lovõaïspov G; judaicam legem A; vomov lovdaixor [g]. 
Inootv] GLA; inoody xpwróv g Sev-Syr 2, 7. 
6 vd] G; amo g. 


évrrveomevor G. 


pac mpós TOY marépa, comp. xiii. 3 
dm Oeod éégAOev kal mpós Tov Ocóv 
vráyev; and for xoprjcavra alone, see 
John xiv. 12, 28, mopevoua mpos Tov 
marépa, xvi. IO, 16, 17, Urráyo mpos TOY 
marépa. 

VIII. *Be not seduced by false 
doctrines and antiquated fables. If 
we still live after the manner of Juda- 
ism, we avow that we have not re- 
ceived grace. Yes, the holy prophets 
themselves lived a life after Christ. 
For this they were persecuted, being 
inspired by His grace, that so in the 
time to come unbelievers might be 
convinced that there is one God who 
manifested Himself through His Son 
Jesus Christ, His Word that issued 
forth from silence and did the will of 
the Father in all things. 

I. pj mAavacde| See the note on 
Ephes. 16. 

rais erepodogias| So érepodoéeiv, 
Smyrn. 6. The words are at least as 
old as Plato (Theaet. 190 E, 193 D), 
but do not occur in the LXX or N.T. 
These are perhaps the earliest ex- 
amples in Christian writings, though 
erepodogos occurs in Philo de Sobr. 
13 (I. p. 403) and in Josephus B. F. 
fh, oS Ly 

pvdevpacw x.r.A.] Comp. r Tim. 
iv. 7 ypadders pvOovs maparo, Tit. I. 
I4 py mpoaéxovres “lovdaikots pdOors : 
and for avadpehéow see Tit. iii. 9 
popàs Oe ¢nTýoeis kai yeveadoyias kai 


€ ^ \ ` 
OL yap Üe.ora Tol mpopnTat kara Xpia- TOv 


. . rg 
3 lovdaisuor] judaismum L; vopov 
4 Xpwróv 
5 éumveduevor] 


avro] GL Sev-Syr 


€peis kal payas vopukàs mrepuarago, eigiv 
yàp dvedeAeis kai para. These pa- 
rallels are important because they 
serve to indicate the type of heresy 
which Ignatius has in his mind. It 
belongs to the same category with the 
heresy of the Colossian Church (see 
Colossians p. 73 sq), of the Pastoral 
Epistles, of the Apocalypse, of the Ca- 
tholic Epistles, and of the Cerinthians. 
It is Judaism crossed with Gnosti- 
cism. The ‘antiquated fables’ are 
probably myths relating to cosmo- 
gony and angelology: see above, 
I. p. 360 sq, and Colossians pp. 89 
sq, IOI sq, 109 sq. This account 
of the heresy here contemplated, 
which is suggested by the parallels 
above quoted from S. Paul, is also 
demanded by the context of Igna- 
tius himself. He begins here with a 
warning against érepodoéia, and he 
concludes with a similar warning 
against xevodogéia (Š 11) These two 
he connects closely together (Š 11 
ravra 06...0€Ao vpas u) eumeceiv eis 
Ta dykuorpa THs kevoOo£(as), so that he 
unquestionably has the same foe be- 
fore him from first to last. Yet in 
attacking this foe, he condemns two 
things: first ($8 8— 10), Fudaizing 
practices, i.e. the doctrine of the per- 
manent obligation of the Mosaic 
ritual, more especially the observance 
of sabbaths ($ o); and: secondly, 
Docetic views, which are directly met 


vii] 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


125 


'InooUv rau: dla TOUTO Kal E x Ünrav, 5 


UTO TÍjs gros Lavrov ] eis TO TANpopopnOjvar Tovs 
ameovvTas, bTt eis Oeds ¿su ó paleont éavTOv bia 


'Ino-oU Xpio-ToU TOU viov QUTOU, ös ÊT TUW avTou Novos 


2; om. Ag. 


Tim-Syr 2; g paraphrases Xóyos 


Aa s CI $vqua adr évepyelas OeikAs ovola YEVVNTH : 


note. 


in the words memdnpoddpynabe èv T 
yevvijaet kai re mabe r.r.. (Š 11), hav- 
ing been alluded to previously in Š 9 óv 
(Le. róv Ódvarov adrod) rives dpvobvrat. 
The foe in question therefore was 
Doceto-judaism. For the Docetic 
element see above, I. p. 363 sq, and 
on Trall. 9. 

2. péxpe viv] ‘until now, ie. 
when two or three generations have 
passed since the true doctrine of 
grace was revealed. 

3. kara iovdaicpuov] There cannot 
be much doubt about the reading 
here. The superfluous vópov in the 
extant Greek text of Ignatius is an 
obvious gloss; and the substitution 
of the ‘Jewish law? in the Arme- 
nian Version and in the interpo- 
lators text is a not less obvious 
paraphrase. Zahn however reads 
Kata vópov iovdaiopov (Gpev and is 
disposed to take iovdaicuov as a 
cognate accusative with (7»—a con- 
struction which Pearson (ad Joc.) 
suggests only to reject. For iovóai- 
cpós, denoting conformity to the 
external rites of the Jews, see the 
notes on Gal. i. 13, ii. 14. 

ópoAoyoUpev k.r.A.] Ignatius doubt- 
less had in his mind Gal. v. 4 «argp- 
yüÓgre dmó Xpiorod, otruves êv vóuo 
" GkatoUo 0e, THS xápuros ééemécare 
(comp. ii. 21 ovK dOeró rv xápw Tov 
Oeo). For xapis, as the central point 
of the Gospel dispensation, see the 
note on Col. i. 6. 

4. xarà Xpugróv “Incovv] ie. ‘in 


8 Xóyos] txt A Sev-Syr; 


add. 


ovousdns, où 


atdios o)k GL 
yap éorw 


see the lower 


pnros aN? 


expectation of a coming deliverer 
and a redemption.’ So also Philad. 
5 kai rovs mpodpiras 0€ dyarGpev did 
TO kal avTovs eis rò eVayyéAtov. karny- 
yeAxévat kat eis adrov édmitew kal adrov 
dvapévew (comp. 26.9). See too below 
Š 9 of mpoparar padnral ğvres k.r.À. 
For the expression xarà Xpioròv 
"Ineoóv (ñ comp. Philad. 3 (with the 
note); and for the preposition see 
the note on Š 1 above. 

5. Osa ToOro x.7-A.] The same 
idea which appears in Heb. xi. 16, 25, 
26, 35 (and throughout this chapter 
generally): see also Clem. Rom. 17 
ev déppacw aiyeiow Kal pndwrais me- 
piemárggav, knptvocovres thy edevow 
Tov Xpiorov. 

ed10xOncav] Zahn quotes Iren. iv. 
33. 9 'similiter ut veteres prophetae 
sustinentes persecutionem etc,’ a 
passage which closely resembles 
this. 

épmveópevo, k.r.A.] Comp. r Pet. i. 
IO sq mpodfrat oi mept rhs els vpas 
Xapitos: mpopyntevoarres, épavvavres 
eis riva 7) moiov Kaipov edndov TO é 
avTolts mvevpa Xptorov...ovx éav- 
Trois vpiv dé Ounkdvovy atra k.r.., 
where there are several ideas in 
common with this passage of Igna- 
tius; see the note on Š 9 rapav 5)yewpev 
k.T... Comp. also Barnab. 5 oí mpo- 
para, dr aŭro &xovresT?)v xápuv, 
eis avTov empodnrevoay. 

6. roùs drevOodytas| Not the con- 
temporaries of the prophets them- 
selves, but disbelievers in later ages, 


126 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vin 


- Á A , > , € 
ao ouyns vrpoeXOov, OS KATA TavTa EUNPETTNTEV TH 


, 5 / 
meup pavTı avTov. 


. . , 
r xara mávra eUnpéaTqoev] G; secundum omnia beneplacuit L; mávra kareva- 


pécrgscev g (MSS); 
Suit A. 


who could test the prophecy by the 
fulfilment and thus convince them- 
selves: see I Pet. L c. For mày- 
podQopeiv, ‘to convince, see the note 
on Colossians iv. 12. 

8. Xóyos dmó oryĝs mpoehdav] This 
reading has been altogether neglect- 
ed by editors (before Zahn), but de- 

| serves to be preferred. to the common 
| text, Aóyos didvos ovK amò avyfjs mpoed- 
0óv, for the following reasons. 

(1) It has higher authority than 
the other. It stands in the oldest 
extant form of the text, that of the 
Armenian Version, and in one of the 
earliest extant quotations, that of 
Severus (Cureton C. Z, pp. 213, 245). 
Severus even comments on the ex- 
pression; ‘This (statement) that He 
proceeded from silence means that 
He was-ineffably begotten by the 
Rather ete.) It is clean therefore 
that he had this reading before him, 
and it may be inferred from his 
silence that he was not acquainted 
with any other. This fact is the 
more important as Severus elsewhere 
(Rom. 6) mentions a various reading 
in Ignatius and compares the ages of 
different Mss. The paraphrase of 
the interpolator leaves some doubt 
about his reading: but inasmuch 
as there is nothing corresponding to 
didios, which he is hardly likely to 
have omitted, I suppose that in his 
text also didvos ok were wanting. He 
seems after his wont to have substi- 
tuted for the Ignatian language Aóyos 
dmó ovyns mpoeAÓóv, which savoured 
strongly of heresy, another expres- 
sion which squared with his ideas of 
orthodoxy. 


in omnibus placuit Tim-Syr Sev-Syr; zm omnibus gratus 


(2) This reading is better adapt- 
ed to the context. It corresponds to 
the previous ó Qavepo cas éavróv dia 
'Incoó Xpwro), which it explains; 
and it aptly introduces the words 
which follow, evnpéotnoev TO mép- 
wravre avrov. It is also more con- 
sistent in itself; for ory) and Aóyos 
are correlative terms, Aóyos implying 
a previous gry: comp. Iren. ii. 12.5 
‘impossibile est Logo praesenteSigen 
esse, aut iterum Sige praesente Logon 
ostendi; haec enim consumtibilia sunt 
invicem etc.’ 

(3) It accords entirely with the lan- 
guage of Ignatius elsewhere, where 
the period before the Incarnation is 
described as God's silence; AfZes. 
IO pvorýpia kpauyñs árwa èv o vxía 
Oeod émpáyOn* mas oiv epavepodn; 
(see the note there) There is the 
same contrast between the ‘silence’ 
and the ‘manifestation’ here. 

(4) The insertion of the words 
didvos ovk, if spurious, is much more 
easily explained than their omission, 
if genuine. A transcriber would be 
sorely tempted to alter a text which 
lent itself so readily to Gnostic and 
other heresies. The forced interpreta- 
tion which Severus (as quoted above) 
is obliged to put on dz ovyfs mpoehOadv 
shows how distasteful the expression 
would be to orthodox ears. The in- 
terpolation should, I think, be assign- 
ed tothefourth or fifth century. About 
the middle of the fourth century 
Marcellus propounded his doctrine, 
which was assailed by Eusebius as 
Sabellian. The attacks of Eusebius 
show that Marcellus expressed his 
views in language almost identical 


viii] TO THE 
with this statement of Ignatius: see 
e.g. Eccl. Theol. ii. 9 (p. 114) à Ò) 
MápkeAXos erodpa vmori£eoQat, máa 
pev Aéyov. civar Tov Ocóv Kal rwa ñ ov- 
xíav dpa T Oc )moypápov éavró, 
kar avrov ékeivov Tov Tov dÓÉéov aipe- 
cioróàv dpxnyov (i.e. Simon Magus, 
as Pearson, V. 7. p. 420, rightly sup- 
poses), os rà Wea Ooyuari(ev dmedai- 
vero Aéyov, "Hy Oeós kal ovy] perà 8€ 
THY GvyTjv kai THY rjcvxtav mpoed Oety 
TOY Àóyov TOV Oeo? ev dpxj THS Kos- 
pomouas ƏpaoTu evepyeia Kr.. It 
seems probable indeed from this and 
other coincidences (see Smyrn. 3), 
that Marcellus was acquainted with 
the Ignatian Epistles. See also on 
this procession of the Logos from 
Silence the passages quoted from 
Marcellus, z. Marcell. 11. 2 (pp. 36, 41), 
Eccl. Theol. i. 20 (p. 100), Ti. 8 sq 
(p. 112 sq), ii. 11 (p. 118), iii. 3 (pp. 
163, 166). This mode of expression 
would thus be discredited, and the 
text altered in consequence. A pa- 
rallel case is the insertion of aiios 
pev with dpyvepeds in Euseb. Quaest. 
ad Steph. Op. WV. p. goo (comp. p. 
965) to save the orthodoxy of the 
writer. 

This reading was advocated by me 
as early as 1868 in the Journal of 
Philology 1. p. 51 sq, and again later 
in the Contemporary Review, Feb- 
ruary 1875, p. 357sq. It was adopt- 
ed by Zahn in his edition (1876) 
quite independently, for he was un- 
aware of what I had written (see 
p. 201). In his previous work (Z. v. 
‘A. p. 471 sq, 1873) he had tacitly 
acquiesced in the vulgar text. The 
wonder is that a reading of such im- 
portance should have been so gener- 
ally overlooked. 

But if this be the correct reading, 
what is meant by it? Does this 
‘procession from silence’ refer to the 
Divine generation of the Word or to 
the Incarnation? Severus takes the 
former view (Cureton C. Z. pp. 213, 


MAGNESIANS. 


127 


245). This sense would correspond 
to the use of similar expressions in 
various Gnostic systems, and it is 
recommended to a certain extent also 
by the parallels in Marcellus; comp. 
also Tatian ad Graec. 5 ore kal ó 
Aóyos mpoeAOdyv ek Ths Tod marpós 
Ovváueos. But nevertheless it does 
not suit the context, nor does it 
accord with the language of Igna- 
tius elsewhere. As Logos implies 
the manifestation of Deity whether 
in His words or in His works, so 
Sige is the negation of this (see Iren. 
ii. I2. 5 quoted above). Hence the 
expression ‘ proceeding from silence? 
might be used at any point where 
there is a sudden transition from 
non-manifestation to manifestation ; 
e.g. Wisd. xviii. 14, 15, novxou yàp 
TLYHS mepiexovars rà mávra...o TAVTO- 
dvvapyos cov Adyos dr o)paváv...eis 
pécoy THs ó) e0p(as 7 Xaro yrjs, where 
the reference is to the destruction of 
the first-born in Egypt. To the In- 
carnation, as the chief manifestation 
of God through the Word, this lan- 
guage would be especially appli- 
cable; comp. Rom. xvi. 25 kara 
dmoxahuww pvotnplov xpovois aiwviors 
cearynmévov, dQavepoÜévros dé võv 
(with other passages quoted on 
Ephes. 19), and see also Clem. Alex. 
Cohort. Y (p. 9) tva ths adnOeias rò 
as, ó À oyos, TOY mpohyriKay aivrypa- 
TOY THY fVOTUKNY dmroÀúoTTa, oto, 
edayyédwov yevópevos. Since therefore 
the whole context here relates to the 
Incarnation and human life of Christ 
(ó davepdoas éavróv, TO mémjJaw, 
avrov), it is natural to refer darò 
oys mpoeAOdv to the same. See also 
the parallel passage .EfAes. 19 (al- 
ready quoted), which is strongly in 
favour of this interpretation; and 
comp. Rom. 8 “Incods Xpioros...7d d- 
wevdes oropa ev à ó maro edddnoev 
dÀgÓds. So too mpoeAÓciv has been 
used just before of the Incarnation, 
$ 7. Ignatius however does not 


128 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[1x 


IX. €i oiv oi év vaXaiots mpadyuacw  dvaopa- 


l4 / e A , 
Qévres eis KauvoTnTa éNXmi0os nAOov, unkéri aa act- 


r év] G; om. g* (the existing Mss). 


deny the pre-existence of the Word 
here, though he does not assert it. 
This was not the first time when 
the silence of God had been broken 
by the Word. Elsewhere this father 
asserts the eternity of the Son in the 
most explicit terms; e.g. § 6 above, 
Polyc. 3. 

evnpeotnoey k.T.A.] A reminiscence 
of John viii. 29. 

IX. ‘If then those who had lived 
under the old covenant attained to 
a new and higher hope by abandon- 
ing the observance of sabbaths and 
by keeping the Lord's day—the me- 
morial of Christ's resurrection, where- 
by we have found life through His 
death, which some deny but which to 
us is the ground of our faith and the 
strength of our endurance ; if, I say, 
this be so, how can we live without 
Him? Nay, even the prophets were 
His disciples, for in the Spirit they 
looked forward to Him as their 
teacher; and therefore, when He 
came, He raised them from the dead.’ 

I. of ev maAatois k.r..] i.e. ‘those 
who were brought up in the practices 
of Judaism.’ If the Jewish converts 
gave up the observance of sabbaths, 
a fortiort ought Gentile converts 
not to barter Christ for Judaic rites. 
Hilgenfeld (4. V. p. 232) refers these 
words to the post-Mosaic prophets ; 
but this, as Zahn truly says (Z. v. A. 
p. 354), would be to outbid even the 
Pseudo-Barnabas, who with all his 
hostility to Judaism does not go 
nearly so far (Š 15). Such a state- 
ment would have been quite untrue 
in itself, and altogether discordant 
with the teaching of these epistles 
elsewhere. Mbreover it is inconsis- 
tent with the language of the con- 


mpaypacw] GLA; vypáuuacw g. 


text; for (1) pnxére implies a conver- 
ston from the old to the new; and 
(2) the correct reading is unquestion- 
ably cara kvpiakr;v ‘in the observance 
of the Lord’s day,’ which could not 
possibly have been predicted of the 
prophets. Hilgenfeld has taken the 
corrupt reading xara kvpiakrv Cony. 
mpaypacw] See Orig. de Princ. iv. 
3 (I. p. 160) msdvrev trav “lovdaixay 
Tp aypárov ev ots éaépvuvro, referred 
to by Zahn. There is a slight tinge 
of depreciation in this word. It 
points to the vevxatiousness of the 
ordinances of Judaism. The read- 
ing of the interpolator’s text, ypdp- 
pacw, is tempting: comp. Rom. vii. 
6 karnpynÜnuev dmó Tod vopov...dore 
Sovrevew [pas] ev kawvórgrt mvev- 
patos kai ov TadaLornTe ypáp. aros, 
which passage may perhaps have 
suggested it. It must however be 
rejected for two distinct reasons: (1) 
The convergence of the best autho- 
rities is decidedly in favour of mpáy- 
pagu: (2) The ypáppara in this case 
would naturally refer to the Old Tes- 
tament Scriptures, and maħara must 
suggest the idea of ‘ antiquated? But 
this is not at all the language which 
meets us elsewhere in the Ignatian 
Epistles. The patriarchs and the 
lawgiver and the prophets are the 
forerunners of the Gospel; there is 
an absolute identity of interests be- 
tween them and the Gospel (Phzlad. 
5, 9, Smyrn. 7; and see also. the 
mention of the prophets in this con- 
text). Moreover the only direct quo- 
tations in these epistles are from the 
Old Testament (Prov. iii. 34 in EZes. 
5; Prov. xviii 17 in Magn. 12; Is. 
lii. 5 in Zva//. 8), and in two out of 
three passages they are introduced 


Ix] 


> M ` ` ^ E] 
Covres ada kaTa KUDLGKHV Cares, EV N Kal y 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


129 


N kal rj Con nov 


4 


3 Kupiaxiy] dominicam L; dominicam diem sanctam et primam [A]; kupiaxhy 
fec» G; al. g. See the speculations of Ussher Works XII. p- 584. 


with the common form of authorita- 
tive citation, yéypamra. The inter- 
change of ypáuua and mpaypa with 
scribes and critics is frequent: e.g. 
Plato Soph. 262 D, Polyb. ix. 40. 3, 
Xi. 6. 3, xv. 26. 4, Euseb. Z. E. ix. r. 

2. caffBari(ovres] For the abroga- 
tion of the observance of the sabbaths 
see Col. ii. 16 (comp. Gal. iv. 10); 
and for opinions in the early church 
comp. Barnab. 15, Ef. ad Diogn. 4, 
Justin Dzal. 12 sq (p. 229 sq), 19 
(p. 236), 21 (p. 238), 23 (p. 240 sq), 
29 (p. 246), Iren. iv. 16. 1, Tert. adv. 
Jud. 4. The word ocafflarí(ew is 
not found in the New Testament, 

“but occurs frequently in the LXX, 
where it bears a good sense; comp. 
caßßarıopoós in Heb. iv. 9. 

3. Kara kvpiakzv] sc. nuépav. This 
‘living after the Lord's day’ signifies 
not merely the observance of it, but 
the appropriation of all those ideas 
and associations which are involved 

. in its observance. It symbolizes the 
hopes of the Christian, who rises 
with Christ's resurrection, as he dies 
with Christ's death. It implies the 
substitution of the spiritual for the 
formal in religion. It is a type and 
an earnest of the eternal rest in 
heaven. See esp. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
vii. 12 (p. 877) otros évroXqv Thy kara 
rò evayyédvov Suampagduevos kvptakr)v 
éxelyny Th juépay arotet, bray àárofáANg 
QaüXov vónpa kal yvocrikóv mpoohaBy 
rjv év aúr@ Tod Kupíov dvácraciv do- 
£á(ev, comp. 7. vii. 10 (p. 866) 
Comp. also Barnab. 15 dpxùv ñuépas 
óy8ógs...0 eat, tdAov kócpov apx 
Sid. kal äyopev Thy nuépav Ty oySony 
eis evppoovyny, €v kal ó "Inc os avéoty 
èk vekpóv «rd. Justin Apol. i. 67 
(p. 99) ée] mpérr eotiv ripépa, ev 5 


IGN. II. 


6 eds zÓ ckóros kal THY Anv rpéWas 
Koopov émoínae, kai "Inoots Xpioròs ó 
NMEéTEpos corp TH avr] Hepa èk ve- 
kpôv avéorn, Dial. 24 (p. 241) ñ nuépa 
7) OyS6n pvorýpióv rt eye knpvoTópevov 
dua rovrov ómó Tod Ceod paddov ris 
€Bddouns x... (comp. ib. 41, p. 260). 
So Irenzeus states that the practice 
of not kneeling on the Lord’s day 
dated from Apostolic times, and ap- 
pears to have explained that it was 
cvpBorov tis dvactdcews, Ov js TOD 
Xpioroð xapure róv re ápaprgpárov Kal 
TOU er a)rQv TeÜavareyuévov Üavárov 
nrevbepoOnuev (Fragm. 7, p. 828, ed. 
Stieren); comp. Tert. de Cor. 3 ‘die 
dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, 
vel de geniculis adorare) Melito 
wrote a treatise mep} kvpiakrje (Euseb. 
H. E. iv. 26) in which doubtless he 
drew out the symbolism of the day. 
The day is commonly called pia 
[rév] caBBarwy in the New Testa- 
ment. As late as the year 57 this 
designation occurs in S. Paul (1 Cor. 
xvi. 2), where we should certainly 
have expected «vpiaký, if the word 
had then been commonly in use. 
Even in Rev. i. IO éeyevouny êv mvev- 
pate év Th kupukp nuepa the inter- 
pretation is doubtful, and there are 
good, if not conclusive, reasons for 
interpreting it of the day of judgment ; 
see Todd’s Discourses on Prophecies 
in the Apocalypse pp. 59, 295 sq. If 
so, the passage before us is the ear- 
liest example of its occurrence in this 
sense, except perhaps Doctr. Apost. 
14, where the expression is xvpcaxy 
Kupiov. In Barnab. 15 it is called 
ý "pépa 1j dydon, where however the 
writer has a special reason for dwell- 
ing on the eighth day. With Justin 
writing to the heathen it is 9 roô 


9 


130 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1x 


dvéreiNev. Š? avrou kal tov Üavdrov aŭro, bv TES 
dovoüvraw OU ov Muo-Tnpiou éAd[Bouev TO mio Teve, Kal 
Sid ToUTO Vropuévouev, iva eUpeÜGuev uanTal `'lnoo0 
XpiooU ToU uóvov Qaa kdXov rdv: mews ýmeis Ovvn- 


1 bv rwes] olrwes G; quod quidam (ë rwes) L. The paraphrase of g dv Tà 


réxva TAS Grwdelas dmapvoüvra. points to the reading öv wes. 
a à ov] GL; à [A] (apparently). 
3 Vrouévouev] LA; drouévwuev G; al. g. 


either ó wes or öv Twes; al. g. 


nriov nuépa (Apol. i. 67), but to the 
Jews, 7 pia ràv caBBdrov or n dyddn 
nuepa (Dial. 24, 41). Melito’s trea- 
tise on this day was designated mept 
kupiaxjs (Eus. H. E. iv. 26); and 
Dionysius of Corinth also calls it by 
this name, rj» onpepov ov kvpiakrv 
ayiay jpépay Ouyy&yopev, as if it were 
the familiar title (Eus. 77. £. iv. 
23). 

The insertion (wy in the Greek 
text is condemned alike by the pre- 
ponderance of authorities and by 
the following words év 7 x.r.A. 

I. dvéreev] For this metaphor 
comp. Rom. 2, where againitisapplied 
to the resurrection from the dead. 

ôv] i.e. róv Óávarov aùroð. The al- 
lusion is to Docetism, which denied 
the reality of our Lord's passion. 
See the note on Š 8 pvOevpaow x.T.À. 
for the connexion of this error with 
Judaism here, and the note on Trall. 
9 for the Docetism assailed in these 
epistles generally. In a parallel 
passage, Smyrn. 5 dv wes d'yvootvres 
dpvobvrat, the relative refers to ‘Jesus 
Christ,’ and so it might be connected 
with avrod here; but the meaning 
would hardly be so distinct, though 
the allusion to Docetism would still 
remain. The same will also be the 
allusion, if for óv we read 6, as some 
authorities suggest. In this case 6 
may be referred either (1) to the 
whole sentence y où juóv dvéreiev 
Òe avroð k.r.A, the denial of this 


A may represent 
5 ov] GLg Sev 1, 7 (Cramer’s 


truth being involved in the denial of 
the reality of the passion and resur- 
rection; or (2) to the words rov ĝa- 
varov avrov alone. For this latter 
use of à see Trall. 8 èv míare 6 eat 
càpf Tov Kupiov, Rom. 7 dprov O«oU 
..0 otw càpf Tov Xpicrov; and 
comp. Col. iii. 14, Eph. v. 5. See also 
below $ ro, where the common text 
has véav (ipunv 6 eoru 'Inaoós Xpioros. 

2. Ov ob pvornpiov| Zahn (Z. v. A. 
p. 455) quotes Justin Dza/. 91 (p. 318) 
oí ek mávrov tov éÜvàv Sia ToúTov TOU 
pvotnplov (SC. Tov oraupov) «is T 
0cocéBeuav erpamnoay k, 2b. 131 
(p. 360) otrwes dia tod é£ovÜevnuévov 
kal oveidovs peotod puotnpiov Tov 
oTavpov KAnOévres v0 ToU Oco? k.r.À. 

kai dia roðro k.r.A.] This sentence 
as far as d:dackdAov judy is paren- 
thetical, and à ro)ro is perhaps 
best connected with the following 
iva (see the note on .EfAes. 17). The 
apodosis to ei ody of èv madauois K.r.À. 
at the opening of the section begins 
with mas peis k.r.À. 

3. vmopevoper] i.e. ‘we endure per- 
secution) For this connexion be- 
tween suffering and discipleship in 
the mind of Ignatius, see the note 
on Ephes. Y padnrns. 

5. xopis avrod] This form of error 
was a separation from Christ in two 
ways; (1) In its Docetism it denied 
the reality of His death and resur- 
rection, which are our true bond of 
union with Him ; (2) In its Judaism 


Ix] 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


131 


5 cóueÜa Goa ywpis avo ; OU Kal oi mpopnra uaby- 


Tal vT D } is O10a A ITO ; 
x ES TW TVEUMATL WS 0L0n GO kaXov GÚUTOV TpOTEdOKWY. 


N \ ^ A , , 
Kal dia ToUTo, Ov Sikalws dvéuevov, Tapwy Wryetpey avrovs 


èk VEKpOV. 


Cat. in 1 Pet. iii. 19 sq; Land Anecd. 1. 32); dv A. 


6 mpoceddxwr] g Sev; mposeðókovv G. 
map’ àv, as Dressel). 


it substituted formal ordinances for 
God’s grace, and so was a disavowal 
of any part in His redemption (see 
Š 8 ópoXoyobper x.r.A.). 

6. rà mvevpari] Zahn (comp. 7. v. A. 
p. 462) attaches this to para, óvres ; 
but the connexion with the following 
words seems more natural, as well 
as more consonant with 1 Pet. i. 11 
éüjAov TO ev avrois mveüpa Xpwaro0, 
mpopaprvpóp.evov K.T.À. 

os diddcKadoy k.r.A.] For the sense 
in which the prophets expected Him 
as a teacher see the next note. The 
form mposce0ókov may be retained 
here, but zpoce8ókovv will not alter 
the sense. I mention this, because 
Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 462) separates the 
two words, translating mpoce8ókovv 
‘sie schienen ausserdem noch. For 
mpooSoxeiy, as a later alternative form 
of mpocdoxay, see Dindorf in Steph. 
Thes. s. v.; and for the interchange 
of -eo and -aw generally in some 
early dialects, and in the later Greek, 
see Kühner Š 251 (I. p. 606), Winer 
§ xv. p. 104 (ed. Moulton), A. Butt- 
mann pp. 38, 50. 

7. dixalos| ‘rightly; not ‘righteous- 
ly’; see the note on Ephes. 15. 

- mapà» iyepev KTA] ‘He came 
and raised them. This refers to the 
descensus ad inferos, which occupied 
a prominent place in the belief of 
the early Church. Here our Lord 
is assumed to have visited (mapóv) 
the souls of the patriarchs and pro- 


oi] Gg; om. Sev. 
7 Tmapüv] ap wy (sic) G (not 


phets in Hades, to have taught them 
(6s OidekaXov x.r.A.) the truths of 
the Gospel, and to have raised them 
(jyeev) either to paradise or to 
heaven; see PZz/ad. 9 aùròs àv bpa 
ToU marpos Ov 7s eloépyovra 'ABpaày, 
xai iraak kai laxa kal of mwpodfjrat 


e 


K.r.À., comp. 20. 5 ev à kal morev- 
cavres (SC. oi mpopirai) ecobnoar, 
with thenote. I have already pointed 
out (see the note on Š 8 éeumvedpevor) 
that the functions assigned to the 
prophets by Ignatius strongly re- 
semble the representations in S. 
Peter; and this reference to the 
descent into Hades also has its 
parallel in 1 Pet. iii. 19, iv. 6. Other 
passages in the N. T. which have 
been thought to refer to it are 
Ephes. iv. 9, Heb. xii. 23. This be- 
lief appears in various forms in early 
Christian writers. Justin Dial. 72 
(p. 298) quotes a passage from Jere- 
miah, 'Euvgo0g dé Kópios ó Ocós amd 
(1. &yvos with Iren.) Iopand rGv vekpáv 
avTov Tv kekorunpévov eis yu yopa- 
ros kai karéfhp mpos avrovds evayyeNi- 
cacba ajrois rò corýpiov avrov. He 
says that the Jews had cut out this 
passage from their copies; and it 
does not appear in extant MSS of the 
LXX. What may have been its his- 
tory we cannot say; but Irenæus 
quotes it several times (once as from 
Isaiah, once as from Jeremiah, and 
in other passages anonymously) and 
applies it to the descent into Hades; 


o—2 


132 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


\ > 5 ^ ^ , 5 ^ 
X. My ow avaro Onrojuev TNS XONTTOTHTOS AVTOV. 


^ \ / , , , 
dy yap tas pupnontar Kaba mpaacopev, oUkert ET MEV. 


` ^ , / ` 
Sia ToUTO, uaÜnTal avToU yevouevoi, uaOwpev kaTa ypt- 


` ~ 
oTtiavnopov Çv. 


1 dvacOnroper] G; non sentiamus L; dvaloOnro Guev g; al. A. 


Tos] xpiorórnrTos G. 


SEN iy Bey A, iV Cr 1501259. ETZ, 
v. 31. I. In the last passage he 
writes ‘tribus diebus conversatus est 
ubi erant mortui, quemadmodum 
propheta ait de eo Commemoratus 
est Dominus etc. He also relates 
(iv. 27. 2) a discourse which he had 
heard from an elder who had known 
personal disciples of the Lord, and 
who stated ‘Dominum in ea quae 
sunt sub terra descendisse, evange- 
lizantem et illis adventum suum, 
remissione peccatorum existente his 
qui credunt in eum: crediderunt 
autem in eum omnes qui sperabant 
in eum, id est, qui adventum ejus 
praenuntiaverunt...justi et prophetae 
et patriarchae etc.’ So too Tertullian 
de Anim. 55 ‘descendit in inferiora 
terrarum, ut illic patriarchas et pro- 
phetas compotes sui faceret, speak- 
ing of the three days between the 
death and the resurrection (comp. 
zb. $ 7). Hermas makes the Apostles 
and first teachers of the Gospel 
preach to the souls in Hades, Sz. 
ix. 16 orot of dmdcroAo kal of Ôd- 
okadot of Knpvéavtes TO dvopa ToU vio 
ToU Oecov...exnpvEay kal rois mpokekot- 
popévois...ékeivou S€ of mpokekowumpevot 
xT.A. These mpokekoiunpévoe have 
been described before (§ 15) as the 
prophets and ministers of God, as 
well as the first two generations of 
mankind which preceded them. Cle- 
ment of Alexandria, Strom. ii. 9 (p. 
452), quoting this passage of Her- 
mas, explains it as including right- 


2 dy yap] G; édv (om. yàp) g; si enim L; al. A. 
puponrat] huâs peujnoerar G; mos persequatur L; piyhonrar Huds g. 


À , - , 
ds yap aw dvouaT, KadetTaL TAEOY 


xpnororn- 
' ñus 
Tpác- 


eous heathens as well as Jews; but 
Hermas himself gives no hint 
whether he contemplated this ex- 
tended application or not In a 
later passage, Strom. vi. 6 (p. 763), 
Clement refers back to his second 
book, as having shown there that 
‘the Apostles, following the Lord, 
preached the Gospel to those in 
Hades’; and he maintains that, as 
our Lord preached there to the Jews, 
so the Apostles addressed themselves 
to the righteous heathen, referring 
again to the passage in the Shep- 
herd. Somewhat similarly Hippoly- 
tus de Antichr. 45 (p. 22, Lagarde) 
makes John the Baptist after his 
death preach to those in Hades, as 
a forerunner of Christ, ezpaívew pé- 
Nov kdkeige KaTeAevoeoOar TOY aoríjpa 
Aurpo)nevov Tas dyíov Wouxas k.T.A.; 
and so too Origen zz Luc. Hom. iv. 
(III. p. 917), ZZ Joann. ii. $ 30 (IV. p. 
91. Even Marcion accepted the: 
descent of Christ into Hades, though 
(unless he is misrepresented) he 
maintained that the righteous men 
and prophets under the old dispen- 
sation, as being subjects of the 
Demiurge, refused to listen to His 
preaching, and that only such per- 
sons as Cain and the other wicked 
characters of the Old Testament 
listened and were saved: Iren. i. 27. 
3, Theodt. H. F. i. 24; see Zahn 
Der Hirt des Hermas p. 425 sq. 
If this be so, it is a speaking testi- 
mony to the hold which the belief 


x] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


7. 3 ” ^ ^ 
TOUTOU, OUK eot TOU Ocov. 


P59 


° , 3i 
U7épÜeaÜe ovv THY kaki]v 


, \ ^ 2 
Cupnv Tv maXawÜetaav kal €voEicacav, kal pera- 


y > 14 e ^ 
Bareobe eis véav Çúunv, bs éotw *Incois Xpioros. 


comer] g; mpdoowpuer G. 
Rup; add. à» g. 
preef. otros gA. 


had on men's minds. For the opinion 
of the later fathers on this subject 
see Pearson Exposition of the Creed 
Art. 5. This belief was sometimes 
connected with the incident related 
in Matt. xxvii. 52 modà oopara Tov 
Kekouupévov ayiav yépÜncav x..À.; 
eo by Euseb. Jem. Ev. x. & (p. 
501), and by Severus (Land Azecd. 
Syr. I. p. 33) commenting on this 
passage of Ignatius. 

X. ‘Let us not be insensible to 
His goodness. If He were to treat 
us, as we treat Him, we should in- 
deed be lost. Therefore, as His dis- 
ciples, let us learn to live Christian 
lives. He who is called by any other 
name than Christ's, is not of God. 
Put away the sour and stale leaven 
of Judaism, and replace it with the 
new leaven of Christ. Beyesalted in 
Him, that ye may escape corruption. 
It is monstrous to name the name 
of Christ and to follow Judaism. 
Christianity did not believe in Ju- 
daism, but Judaism in Christianity, 
wherein all nations and tongues were 
gathered unto God.’ 

I. dvaaOnrdper] ‘be insensible to. 
This verb not uncommonly takes a 
genitive; e.g. Jos. Anz. xi. 5. 8, B. 
j. iv. 3. 10, Plut. Mor. p. 1062 C, 
Athenag. Suppl. 15. The word is 
at least as old as Epicurus, Plut. 
Mor. p. 1103 D. 

Ths xpnotorntos avrov] The sub- 
stitution of Judaism for Christianity 
was a rejection of God's yapis, a 


4 ðs] Gg; deris Dam-Rup 6. 
mAéov] G; mAetov g Dam-Rup. 

6 peraBddrerbe] G; weraBddreode g. 
6 G; dub. A; al. g: see the lower note. 


yàp] G Dam- 
5 ovk] GL Dam-Rup; 
7 ös] gui L; 


denial of Christs work; see above 
§ 8. 

2. àv yap k.r.A.] i.e. “if He should 
treat us with the same scorn and 
defiance with which we treat Him'; 
comp. 2 Sam. xxii. 26, 27 (Ps. xviii. 
25 26): 

4. mdéov rovrov] ‘beyond this, i.e. 
TOU xpioTiavicpov. Oris it roð dvdparos 
Tov Xpwro0? For mAéov see Polyc. 5. 

5. urmépÓea6e] ‘dispense with, lite- 
rally ‘defer’, and so postpone sine 
die. The word is used somewhat 
similarly in Prov. xv. 22. 

6. (pg k....]] From 1 Cor. v. 7 
ékkaÜápare riv maa (Cpgv K.r.À.; 
comp. Clem. Hom. vii. 17 ó ©Oeòs 
avtovs @omep kak], (Cópgv e&edelv 
eBovAero. On the metaphor gene- 
rally see the note Galatians v. 9. 

madawbeciaay| Not simply wadaap. 
See Heb. viii. 13 for this ‘anti- 
quation’ of the Judaic law and 
ritual. 

evogicacay| ‘which has gone sour. 
No other instance of the word. is 
given in the lexicons, though o£í(e 
and zapo£í((e occur elsewhere. 

7. os] I have preferred this to ô, 
because it accords with the writer's 
idiom elsewhere in this epistle, $ 15 
bs srv Incods Xpuords; see also the 
note on $ 7. On the other hand, ó 
might stand, and be referred to véay 
(ug. For this use of the neuter 
relative see the note on $ 9. The 
Gospel is spoken of as leaven in the 
parable, Matt. xiii. 33, Luke xiii. 21. 


134 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 
, ^ t ^ , eo = > \ 

déNlcOnte év avrà, iva py SiapOapy tis v vpiv, ere 
dro Tis cous éedeyxOnoecbe. atoroyv éco rw “Incouy 
> BA e M 

Xpioròv XaXeiv kai tovdaiCev. 6 yap XpurTuyuuos 
oUk eis iovdaicpov émría-revaev, GAN iovdaiopos eis xpi- 


fe ^ ^ , > \ 
TTIAVITMOV, @ TSCA FAO cca MaTEvTaTa Els Oeov cyn- 


HY OH. 


r ddloOnre] GL*; conjungamini (giving a wrong sense to the ambiguous 


aducbAre) A; a)McoOvre g. 


Tis] GE; re A; al. g. 


2 ócuis] odore 


L; spiritu (a confusion of the Syriac NAW spiritus and NM odor) A; ópuíjs 


G; al. g. 


'"Igcoüv Xpwróv] gLA; xpwróv inoody G. 


5 @...cwhxOn] in quo omnis qui credidit ad deum congregatus est So; et omnis 


I. dAicÓgre] ‘be ye salted? Here 
again is an allusion to another meta- 
phor in the Gospel parables, Matt. 
v. I3, Mark ix. 50, Luke xiv. 34 ; see 
the note on Col. iv..6. There is a 
possible reference to the injunction 
of the law, Lev. ii. 13 wav pov Ov- 
clas vtpav adil ducÓjcera. -The 
metaphor is carried out in dcapOapy 
‘ putrefy, as well as in oeufs. —— 

2. ths oopas| Comp. Ephes. 17 vo- 
e0íav tis SWacKadias ToU dpxovros 
Tov ai@vos rovrov with the note. 

3. Aareiv] ‘to profess? For the ex- 
pression AaAeiv L X. see the note on 
Ephes. 6. For the whole sentiment 
of the contradiction between Jesus 
Christ and Judaism see PAz/ad. 6. 

6 yàp xpuoruayucuos| The word oc- 
curs again Rom. 3 (v. 1), Philad. 6; 
see Marit. Polyc. 1o, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. vil. I (p. 829). The word 
xpwTiavós first arose at Antioch 
(Acts xi. 26), but at what date we are 
not told. About A.D. 60 it is repre- 
sented as used by Agrippa, Acts 
xxvi 28: and at the time of the 
Neronian persecution (A.D. 64) it was 
already a common designation of 
thembelevers; > Ta bet riy Sr6 aq, 
Ann. xv. 44 ‘quos per flagitia in- 
visos vulgus Christianos appellabat, 
Suet. Wer. 16. The derived verb 
xproriavifew, after the analogy of 


mvlayopićew, iovOai(ew, etc., would be 
coined soon after as a matter of 
course, to designate the peculiarities 
of the new sect, and with it the 
substantive ypioriavıopós. But these 
epistles furnish the earliest extant 
example of its use. In the New 
Testament the word ‘Christian’ is 
still more or less a term of reproach; 
in the age of Ignatius it has become 
a title of honour: see above § 4, 
Ephes. 11, 14 (v. l), Rom. 3, Polyc. 7 
(comp. Trall. 6). 

5. $] Governed by morevoaca. 
'This correction of the existing Greek 
text os is required by the sense and 
justified by the authorities. On the 
other hand Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 429, 
and here) reads eis ó»v with the in- 
terpolator; but this reading must, I 
think, be regarded as a paraphrase 
of the interpolator after his usual 
manner. 

Táca yAócca] i.e. ‘not Jews only, 
but every race upon earth? It was 
therefore a larger and better dispen- 
sation than Judaism ; and it approved 
itself as the true fulfilment of the 
prophecy which declared that all na- 
tions and tongues should be gathered 
to God; Is. lxvi 18 c vvayayetv 
mávra Ta čv kai tras yXAóccas 
(comp. xlv. 22, 23, Zach. viii. 23). 
The language of Ignatius is some- 


IO 


xi] TO THE MAGNESIANS. iBS 


XI. 


` 5 e ^ e » , > 
Tiwas éË UUMY OUTWS €xovras, GAN’ Ws jukpórepos UMaV 


^ , > 
Tatra Ó, dyamnroi Mou, OUK mei ëyvwv 


7 , € ^ \ > ^ 5 
(UNIS vrpoQvAac aeo 0a, Uuas MN ÉUTETELV ELS Ta ày- 
^ / 
KioTpa THs KEvodogias, aXXa memAnpopopnabe év TH 
/ \ ^ / \ ^ 5 ^ 5 
yevynoe Kal TH Taber Kal TH dvacTAaTEL TH yevouern 
B t £ t 
^ ^ € , / 
év kap® THs nyeuovias [lovríou IhXatou: mpayOévTa 
qui credit in eum ad deum congregatur A; ds...cvvijx0n G; ut...congregaretur L* 
In g the passage runs els ov wav ë0vos misretoay kal maca yNaooa éfopoNoym- 
capévn els 0cüv avvijx0n. 7 ére éyyov] GLS,A; ¿méyvov g. 


9 mpopuddocer dat] mpopuddacerbe G. 10 mem\npopopynebe] g (app., but 
with vv. ll.); wewAnpopopetoba G; ut certificemint S4; corroborati-estote As certi- 


Jicemini L. 


what hyperbolical as applied to his 
own time, but not more so than 
some expressions of S. Paul; e.g. 
Rom. i. 8, Col. i 6, 23. Compare 
the language of Justin Martyr (Dial. 
117, p. 345), and of Irenæus (i. 10. 2), 
regarding the spread of the Church 
in their own times respectively. 

XI. 'I say this, not because I 
know that you have already fallen 
into error, but because I wish you to 
be forewarned against the wiles of 
heresy. Have a firm belief in the 
Incarnation, the Passion, the Resur- 
rection of Christ. These things are 
no delusive phantoms, but real facts. 
Letno one divert you from your hope.’ 

7. Tara dé] sc. Myo. For the el- 
lipsis and the sentiment alike comp. 
Trall. 8 Oùk émà Éyvov k.r.À., where 
still more is left to be understood. 
It would be possible to treat the sen- 
tence here as complete, by making 
rabra the accusative after mpopvddo- 
cecba; but the antithesis of the 
clauses would thus be destroyed. 


"For the sentiment see also Smyrn. 4. 


Comp. Polyc. PAZ. 11 *Ego autem 
nihil tale sensi in vobis vel audivi." 
8. ds jukpórepos úpr] i.e. ‘as one 
who has no right to dictate to you’; 
comp. Ephes. 3 (with the note). For 


. suaded; the imperative. 


other expressions of self-depreciation 
see the note on Ephes. 21 rv ékei. 

9. mpopvrdccecba] ‘should be on 
your guard beforehand’ So the 
active mpopvAdccw vyuas, Trall. 8, 
Smyrn. 4. Similarly dopadifopa vpas 
Philad. 5. 

IO. xevodo€ias| ‘foolish opinion? 
The word has two senses (1) ‘vain- 
glory,’ asin Phil.ii. 3 (comp. «evóOo£os, 
Gal. v. 26), Clem. Rom. 35, P/z/ad. 1, 
and so most frequently ; (2) 'vain 
opinion, ‘error, as Wisd. xiv. 14, 
Clem. Al. Protr. 5 (p. 55) pňoropiav 
avrny Kevodoklas évekev ávei0cXorrouo0- 
ca» Trjv OM, and so here. This 
latter sense is commonly overlooked 
in the lexicons. 

memdnpopopnabe| ‘be ye fully per- 
For this 
sense of the word, and for the con- 
struction mAnpogopeic@a ev ‘to be 
convinced of a thing,’ see the note 
Colossians iv. 12. 

vj yewmíce| On the Docetism 
which denied the reality of the hu- 
man body of our Lord, and therefore 
of His Incarnation, Passion, and 
Resurrection, see the note on Trall. 9. 

I2. Ilovríov ILAárov| So again 
Trall. 9, Smyrn. 1. In all these places 
the specification of the date is in- 


136 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[x1 


ddnbws kal BeBaiws vo ’Incot  Xpia ToU, Ts éNriðos 


^ © ^ \ ^ / 
MOV, NS EKTPATHVAL unòevi uwv YEVOLTO. 


XII. 


5 , ° ^ M / 3. f: af T 
Ovaiunv UMWY KATA TAVTQA, EAVTEP aELOS (O. 


` [74 ^ , € ^ > 
ci yap Kal d€édeuat, mpos Eva ev AEAUYMEVWY UUwWY OVK 


5 , 
eut. 
éxere év éavTois, 


2 ior] GL; huv Ag* (but with a v. 1.). 
5 Xpwróv] GLA; om. g. 
ó] G; om. g. 


3 ?Ovaluny] dvatuny G. 
GLA; yéypamra (om. 67) g. 


tended to emphasize the reality of the 
occurrence. The chief motive for the 
insertion of the name in the Apostles’ 
Creed was probably the same; see 
Pearson Ox the Creed Att. iv. p. 371 
(ed. Chevallier). The mention of 
‘Pontius Pilate’ in connexion with 
the crucifixion in early Christian 
writings is of constant occurrence, 
e.g. I Tim. vi. I3, Justin Aol. i. 13 
(p. 60), Dial. 30 (p. 247); and pro- 
bably we owe to the prominence 
thus given to the name among the 
Christians themselves the fact that 
he is so mentioned also by Tacitus, 
Ann. xv. 44. 

mpaxbévra] ‘things done? The 
accusative may be regarded as stand- 
ing in apposition with the object 
involved in the preceding words, 
which are equivalent to év rà yevvg- 
Ova, kai made k.r. For various 
loose constructions of the accusative 
participle, see Kühner IL pp. 646 sq, 
667 sq, Winer $ xxxii. p. 290, lix. p. 
669. The participle, thus isolated, 
emphasizes the reality of the events. 

I. d\nOés]| See the note on Trall. 9. 

Ths edmidos juv] As in Trall. 
inscr, 2. Soalsor Tim. i. r. Comp. 
Polyc. Phil. 8 mpoekaprepópev Tjj 
exo, nuav...ds €otw Xpwrrós "Incoüs. 
For the longer expression 7 kou; 
eAmis joy see the note on Epkes. 1. 


P c 5 ^ ^ \ \ 
oida STL ov vowicbe "lucoüv yap Xpiorov 5 
kal MaAXOV, OTav mawð Vuas, oida 


yévoito] G; yévgra« g. 
7 yéyparra bre] 
9 amovddfere] G; omovdd- 


XII. ‘May I have comfort in you, 
if I am found worthy. For although 
Iam bound, I do not compare my- 
self with any of you who are free. I 
know that ye are not puffed up: for 
ye have Jesus Christ in you. Nay, my 
praise will only fill you with shame, 
for The righteous man is his own ac- 
cuser? 

3. Ovaiugr k.r...] See the note on 
Ephes. 2, where the whole clause 
occurs, as here. 

4. €i yàp kai dédenar] i.e. ‘notwith- 
standing the dignity conferred on me 
by my bonds? See the note on 
Ephes. 3, where the same phrase 
occurs. 

mpos éva k.t.d.] ‘Z am not compar- 
able to one of you who are free from 
bonds.’ For this sense of mpòs see 
Kühner Š 441 (II. p. 450); comp. e.g. 
Herod. ii. 35 &pya Aóyov ué(o mapéxe- 
Tau. mpós macav xópgv (ie. ‘in com- 
parison with any country’), Plat. 
Prot. 328 C oi IloAvkAetrov vicis... 
ovdev Tpos Tov marépa cisi, Xen. Mem. 
i. 2. 52 napot map’ avrois rovs dÀXovs 
eîvai mpos éavróv, Demosth. Symm. p. 
185 év ravry xprüpar eveotw...mpos 
dmacas Tas Adas.. TONELS. 

5. puowiebe] Trall. 4,7, Smyrn. 6, 
Polyc. 4. Sotoo 1 Cor. iv. 6, 18, 19, v. 
2, viii. I, xiii. 4, Col. ii, 18; comp. 
$vcoiecis 2 Cor. xii. 20, The word 


IO 


xu] TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


137 
e 5 , 0 d ° / e/ € ' c 

OTL €VTpeTEeGUE' WS YEYPaATTAL OTL O Aikaloc éayroS$ 

KATHTOPOC. 

, o ^ 5 ^ 

XIII. Cesovóa(ere ov BefBauoÜgvot v nois doy- 

^ P \ ^ / e , o 

paciv TOU Kupiov kai tev dzoaTOÓNov, iva nánta ÓcA 

TOILETTE KATEYOAWOHTE gapoki Kal grvevuat, TITTEL Kal 

> , 5 en \ \ \ > (A > °. ^ \ 

QYATN, EV VLW Kal TAaTPL Kal EV TVEVMATL, ÈV apxn kat 

care g. II movetre] g; more G. Kareuo0o0í)re] G; Karevodwbjcera g* ; 


prosperentur L; spendeatis A (}NOSN splendeatis for nnoxn prosperemini; see 
Petermann). capki] txt G[L][A]; add. re g. For L see the note on Zyall. 9. 


12 & mveóuari] GL* (but add. sancto Lo); add. &yle A; def. g. 


is confined to S. Paul in the N.T. 

'Ipcoür yap &.r...] 2 Cor. xiii 5 
Xpioròs “Ingots ev vpiv esT, ei pn Te 
aðókıpoi gore. They were ypiorodo- 
pot (Ephes. 9). Thus bearing Christ, 
they bore the mind of Christ, which 
was tarewodpoovyvn (comp. Phil. ii. 
5 sq). 

7. Olkatos k.r.À.] From the LXX of 
Prov. xviii. 17. In the Hebrew how- 
ever the sense is quite different ; 
‘The first man is upright in his suit ; 
then cometh his neighbour and 
searcheth him out.’ In other words 
it is necessary to hear both sides of 
a case (see Delitzsch ad loc.) Inthe 
LXX the subject and predicate of the 
first clause are transposed, and it is 
rendered Aíkatos éavro) Karnyopos èv 
mrparoXoyía. 

XIII. *Stand fast therefore in the 
ordinances of the Lord and His 
Apostles, that ye may be prosperous 
in all things, with your bishop, pres- 
byters, and deacons. Submit your- 
selves to your bishop and to one 
another, as Jesus Christ submitted 
to the Father, and the Apostles to 


| Jesus Christ and the Father, that 


there may be unity of flesh and spirit 

9. rois Soypacw] ‘precepts,’ i.e. *au- 
thoritative sayings’: see the note on 
Colossians ii. 14. For one half of the 
phrase comp. Barnab. 1 rpía otv 0óy- 


uara ëoTu Kupiov, and for the other 
Acts xvi. 4 rà Sdypara rà kekpipéva 
Umó TOY drocTóAov. 

II. karevoOo0fre] ‘ye may be pros- 
pered? an adapted quotation from 
Psalm i. 3 mavra óca àv Tot) karevoOo- 
O@noera, where this prosperity is pro- 
mised to those who take pleasure ë> r$ 
vóu% Kupiov. The compound karevo- 
dody is not uncommon in the LXX, and 
the simple word evodovy occurs four 
times in the N. T. Zahn (Z7. v. A. 
p. 434, and here) reads xarevodod7 
after the Latin version frosferentur y 
but I suspect that the Latin trans- 
lator had xarevoóoÓjrav in his text, 
which (overlooking the itacism) he 
carelessly rendered in this way, as 
if it were xarevoóo05. The remi- 
niscence of the Psalm in the Vulgate, 
which runs omnia quaecungue faciet 
prosperabuntur, and after which he 
has modelled the rest of the quota- 
tion, would assist his mistake. Zahn 
objects to the accusative after karevo- 
orla, but the Hebrew shows that 
this is most probably the construc- 
tion in the Psalm: comp. also 1 Cor. 
xvi. 2 Ogcavpí(ev 6 Tt àv evodadra. 

capki kai mvevpart] See the note 
on Ephes. 10. 

12. ep vig k.r.\.] The order is the 
same as in 2 Cor. xiii. 13. It is more- 
over a natural sequence. Through 


138 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [xii 


év TÉéNe&i, META TOU dEwvompemeo rárov EMLTKOTOU UJuov 
Kal dësomNOkou MALO c'TeQavov Tov pee uen 
piov yeu kai Tov kara Ocóy OuakOvov. vmoTaynTE TH 
émickoTw Kal dAANAOLS, ws "Incovs Xpirtos TO aas 


beoe Supel Kal ol d7OGTONOL TH AD Kal TW 


matpl, (va. évwors f capkiki TE Kal TvevpaTiKh: 
, 
XIV. Eidos dtr OcoU vyéuere, TuvTOMws TapEKa- 


2 déomNékou] txt GL; 
GLA; ó xpwrós [g]. 


dévoméxov kal g; om. A. 
5 karà capka] GL; om. Afg] (but g also omits 


4 'Igcoüs Xpwrós] 


several words which follow, app. owing to the homoeoteleuton rd carpi): see the 


lower note. 


TQ XpvrQ] GL; iesu christo A; def. g. 


kal TQ marpi] txt A; 


add. kal rg mvevuare GL: def. g (if the lacuna in g is owing to homoeote- 


leuton, it is evidence against xal Tg mveóuar). 


the Son is the way to the Father 
(Joh. xiv. 6): this union with the 
Father through the Son is a com- 
munion in the Spirit. 

I. déwmpemeorárov] See the note 
on Rom. inscr. 

2. otepavov|] Like the Latin ‘ co- 
rona, of an encircling attendance; 
comp. Apost. Const. ii. 28, where the 
presbyters are called cvpBovdo rod 
émuokómou kai THs exkAnoias orédavos. 
In the primitive assemblies of the 
Christians the bishop would sit in the 
centre, surrounded by his presbyters ; 
see the note on Š 6 cvvéOpiov. This 
sense of orépavos may be illustrated 
by such passages as e.g. Hom. ZZ xiii. 
736 mavtn yap oe mepi arépavos moAé- 
poro Oé0gev, Plut. Mor. 228 E mów 
Aris avdpact kal où mAWOos eorepa- 
vorat ‘which has its crown, its cir- 
clet, not of towers, but of men.’ The 
epithet á£iómAoxkos, ‘worthily-woven,’ 
carries out the metaphor of erédavos, 
for mAékew aTédQavov is a common ex- 
pression, e.g. Matt. xxvii. 29, etc. 

3. karà O«óv] See the note on Š 1 
above. 

TO émwkómQ k.T.A.] 1 Pet. v. 5 ved- 
Tepot Umoraynte mpeofjvrépow, müvres 


7 ewróues GLg; cum 


9€ aAXjAows, Ephes. v. 21 jroracaópe- 
vou dAAjAows : comp. Clem. Rom. 38. 

5. kara cápka| These words, if gen- 
uine, would expressly limit the sub- 
ordination of the Son to His human 
nature; see Rothe Anfänge p. 754. 
But their absence in some authori- 
ties seems to show that they are no 
part of the original text. 

kai rà marpí] I have struck out 
the addition kai rẹ mve/vparu which 
appears in the common texts, as 
suspicious in itself, and as wanting 
in one important authority. It would 
easily be suggested by the previous 
mention of the three Persons of the 
Trinity, ez vid «.... On the other 
hand its omission might be account- 
ed for by a homceoteleuton tpi and 


TINI, which are constantly confused : 


see note on Smyrn. 13. 

6. capkurj re k,T.A.] See the note 
on Ephes. IO. Comp. Ephes. iv. 4 
êv oOpma Kal êv mvedpa. 

XIV. ‘Iam brief in my exhorta- 
tions, for I know that ye are full of 
God. Remember me in your prayers, 
as also the Syrian Church. I have 
need of your united aid, that the 
Church in Syria may be refreshed 


Io 


er 3 - 
-Oot Ovres Oco. 


XIV] 


Acra Uuas. 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


139 


$ 7 ^ ^ ^ 
pvnuoveveré uov év ais 7rpoaevxais Uv, 


[74 S ut) y \ ^ > 
iva OcoÜ éritvxw, kai THs év Cupia éxkAnoias, 00ev ovK 


xf , os ^ 
&£i0s eua Ka eto Oo. 


emiðéouat yap THS Hvwpevns UMwv 


5 ^ a 370 shag! > $ g E 3 
év Oed mpocevxris Kal dyamns eis TO aEwOyvar THY èv 


Cupia éxxAnotav dia Ths é Las ÙO 7 
pia ékkNnaiav dia THs €krevetas Uuv pocio biva. 


2 y e ^ > 
XV. 'AemdátCovrai úuGs ' Epéoior dro Cuvprns, dbev 


À , [2S , ^ e 
kal ypaħpw vuiv, vapóvres eis QoEav Oeod, worep kai 


fiducia (ewróvos?) A. 
ké\evoa G. 
below; éxxAnotas GL; eira£ías [g]. 


IO kaAeto0at] Kareiobe G. 
In A the sentence runs digna fiat et ecclesia 


mapekáAeca] g; deprecatus sum L; peto A; TapE- 


12 éxrevelas] see 


syriae ut stillent in ea preces vestrae et firmitas. 


by your fervent supplications.’ 

7. Oeo yépere] They are Geopopox 
in the fullest sense: comp. Zes. 8 
So Virgil’s ‘plena 
deo.’ 

mapexddeca] A common word in 
Ignatius, more especially in the same 
connexion as here, e.g. Trall. 6, Polyc. 
7, etc. On the other hand mapake- 
Aeíew does not occur elsewhere in 
this writer or in the N. T. 

9. cod émrdxo] On this phrase 
see the note § 1 above. 

tis é Supia éekkAnoias|] See the 
note on Ephes. 21 mposeúyerðe. 

bbev oùk étos K.T.A.] See the note 
on Ephes. 21 rv ékei. 

12. ékreveías ] ‘fervency, urgency. I 
have ventured on this emendation 
for éxxAnolas, as it is suggested by the 
Armenian Version. The interpola- 
tors ejra£ías may be explained as 
the substitution of a simple for a diffi- 
cult or illegible word, according to his 
common practice. Forthe connexion 
of ékrevijs, éxrevds, exréveta, with prayer 
comp. Joel i. 14, Jonah iii. 8, Judith 
iv. 9, 12, Luke xxii. 44, Acts Zi 5p 
xxvi. 7, Clem. Rom. 34, 59; Ps-Ign. 
Ephes. 10. For the supplication 
called exrevýs in the Greek ritual see 
Clement of Rome p. 270. See esp. 


Ps-Ign. Philipp. 14 ai mpocevxat 
dpav ékraÜeinaav els Tiv ' Avrtoxeías 
ékkAgoíav Oev K.T., which would 
seem to be taken from this passage. 
The confusion between eKTENElac 
and ekkAnciac would be easy, where 
ekkAHcian had almost immediately 
preceded. The purists condemned 
these words ékrevós, ékréveta, etc.: see 
Lobeck Phryn. p. 311. 

dpootcOjva] Pearson compares 
Clem. Al. Paed. ii. 10 (p. 232) moa 
nuets oi TH xXapere Opoci(ópevot Tov 
Oco. The metaphor of course is 
much older; Deut. xxxii. 2, Prov. xix. 
I2» etc. 

XV. ‘Greeting from the Ephe- 
sians who are in Smyrna. Like your 
own delegates, they have refreshed 
me greatly. Polycarp joins in the 
greeting. So also do the other 
churches. Farewell; be of one mind ; 
be steadfast in spirit; for this is 
Jesus Christ Himself.’ 

13. "Ejéc:w:] For these Ephesian 
delegates who were with Ignatius, 
see Ephes. 1, 2 (with the notes). 

14. els dd€av Oeo] So too Rom. 
10; comp. Ephes. 13, Polyc. 4. A 
more common expression in Ignatius 


is els rj» Oeod; see the note on 


Ephes. 21. 


140 


IGNATIUS TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


[xv 


= e \ , , e , 
UMELS, ot Kara MAVTA ME AVETAUT AV, ana lloNvkapo 


"2 , / 
émickoTw Cuupvatev. 


TUA 'Inoov  XpioroU UE Uds. 


° \ , 5 
kal at Nowral de é€kKANnoLaL EV 


Meat ay 


Opovoia Oeov, KEKTN EVOL aÓtakptTov vveUua, OS éoTu 


'Inaoüs Xpirros. 


1 dvéravoav] GLA; dveravoare g. 
4 Oco] GLA; om. g. 
uévo. ddidKpirov in g); 
valete fratres; amen A. 


Suaxpurov G. 


For the subscription of G see the title to Philadelphians. 


scription. For g see the Appx. 

domep kai )peis] sc. mápeore. The 
Magnesians were present in the per- 
sons of their representatives men- 
tioned above, $ 2. 

I. xara ávra k.T.A.] For this fa- 
vourite Ignatian phrase see the note 
on Ephes. 2. 

dua HoAvkdpro] These words are 
perhaps better taken with demá(ovrat 
das, than with the clause immedi- 
ately preceding; comp. Trall. 13 
domd¢erar vas y dyámo Zpvpvaiev kal 
"Edectov. 

2. ai Normat K.T.À.] i.e. through their 
representatives, who also were with 
him: comp. Trall. 12 dua rais ovp- 
mapovcats pot ékkNgoíaue tod  OcoQ. 
The Trallians would be included 
among ai Moma here; comp. Trall. 
I. 

ev Ty K.T-A.] ie. ‘not the honour 
which is implied in the ordinary 
greetings of men, but the honour 


2 émwkómp Zpvpvalov] GLA; om. g. 


áüiákpvrov] gLA (the order being mvedua Kexry- 


5 'Igcoüs Xpwrós] txt GL; al. g; add. 


LA have no sub- 


which belongs to the sphere of, which 
springs from, Jesus Christ! Thus it 
is a fuller phrase for domdfecOa ev 
Kupi@ (e.g. 1 Cor. xvi. 19). 

3. eppwabe| See the note E/Zes. 21. 

€v 6povoia Oeo] See above $ 6 
(note). 

4. dOudkpirov] ‘unwavering, stead- 
fast’; comp. Trall. 1 äpopov ĉidvorav 
kal aĝıakpırov, and see the note on 
Ephes. 3. 

bs eotw k.T.M.] See above § 7 (ac- 
cording to the reading adopted), and 
compare thestill stronger expressions, 
Trall. 11 rod Ocob vow émayyeXXo- 
pévov, ôs eotw a)rós, Ephes. 14 và ĝè 
úo êv évóryri yevópeva. cds éomw. 
These parallels seem to show that 
the antecedent to ds is not dóuikprrov 
mvedpa, but the whole sentence, more 
especially the exhortation to concord; 
since unity is the prominent idea in 
all these passages. 


3. 


In PPS s Np No. 


Oeste LNA LIAN S. 


FTER leaving Magnesia the road leads to Tralles,’ writes Strabo 
(xiv. 1, p. 648). Here again the route of the geographer accords 
with the sequence of the Ignatian letters (see above pp. 2, 97). As we 
have followed him from Ephesus to Magnesia, so now we follow him 
from Magnesia to Tralles. Magnesia is nearly equidistant between the 
two, being about fifteen miles from Ephesus, and about seventeen or 
eighteen from Tralles (Artemidorus in Strabo xiv. 2, p. 663, «is Tpaddcs 
„elr eis Mayvyciay éxaroy rerrapákovra. [oá8voc], eis "Edecov 9 éxatov 
elkoow, els è Surdpvay tpraxdovor «ikoow). The road between Magnesia 
and Tralles runs from west to east on the right bank of the Mzeander, 
having the mountain range of Messogis to the north, and the river 
and plain to the south; ‘a broiling and dusty journey, ‘aestuosa et 
pulverulenta via,’ as it is described by Cicero (ad Att. v. 14) who 
travelled along it in the latter part of July, on his way to his province 
— about the same time of the year (Rom. ro) when the delegates of 
the churches must have been traversing it in the opposite direction 
to pay their respects to Ignatius. It is described by Artemidorus as 
‘a high-road trodden by all who make the journey from Ephesus to 
the East’ (Strabo xiv. 2, p. 663, Ko Tis 000s TérpuTTOL Grace Tols emt 
tàs avaroAds odouropotow èé “Edéoov). For a description of this road 
see Hamilton Asta Minor 1. p. 533 sq. 

The ancient city of Tralles was situated on the right bank of the 
river, at some distance from it, and occupied a square or oblong 
plateau with steep sides, a prolongation of the hills which jut out 
from the main range of Messogis. It thus formed a strong natural 
fortress Serbo xiv. I, p. 648, t dite Š 4 Hs tov Tpaddavav modus emt 
tpameliov TLVOS dkpay EXOVTOS ¿pupun Kal Tà KUKAw Ó ixavers evepxn). It 


144 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


is said to have owed its origin and its name to a colony of the Thracian 
Trallians (Strabo Z ¿ p. 649). Its modern representative is Güzel- 
Hissar or the Beautiful Castle, also designated Aidin from the province 
of which it is the capital, to distinguish it from other places which have 
the same name. Aidin Giizel-Hissar, which lies on the lower ground at 
the foot of the ancient city, is a large and flourishing town with a popu- 
lation variously estimated at from thirty-five or forty to sixty thousand 
people. It is the terminus of the Smyrna railway, and stands in the 
centre of a very fertile district, which has been described as the orchard 
of Asia Minor. Among its chief products now, as in ancient times 
(Athen. iii. p. 80), are figs and raisins for the Smyrna market. 

Owing to its natural advantages Tralles was always a wealthy place. 
Attalus, the Pergamene king, whose magnificence passed into a proverb 
(Hor. Carm. i. 1. 12), had a famous palace here (Plin. W. ZZ. xxxv. 49; 
see also the inscription on a coin, Tpad . arraAoy, Mionnet Suppl. vir. 
p. 460), which under the Romans became the official residence of the 
high-priest of Tralles for the time being (Vitruv. ii. 8; comp. Boeckh 
C. Z. G. 2934 [«p]x«eparevovros). Somewhat later Cicero, in his defence 
of Flaccus, describes this city as ‘gravis locuples ornata civitas De- 
nouncing an obscure person, one Mzeandrius, who claimed to represent 
the Trallians in their complaints against his client, he asks what had 
become of the illustrious names among their citizens; *Ubi erant 
illi Pythodori', Aetideni, Lepisones, ceteri homines apud nos noti, 
inter suos nobiles? ubi illa magnifica et gloriosa ostentatio civitatis ?’ 
If they are content to put forward such a mean representative, he 
adds, then let them abate their pride, *remittant spiritus, comprimant 
animos suos, sedent arrogantiam' (fro Flacc. 22, 23). Some years 
later Strabo speaks of Tralles as surpassed by no other city of Asia 
in the opulence of its principal inhabitants (Z ¢. evvouetrau Kadds el Tis 
dÀÀ« rdv Kata Tijv "Acíav umo évmópov avÜpormov), and in illustration of 
this fact he mentions that the Asiarchs or Presidents of the Games, 
who incurred great expenses in maintaining the splendour of their 
position, were constantly taken from its citizens. At the martyrdom 
of Polycarp the Asiarch Philippus, who presided, was a Trallian (Marz. 
Polye. 12, 21). At the same time, while the chief citizens thus enjoyed 
high distinction at home, the lower population contributed to swell 


1 This Pythodorus is mentioned also ^ Pompeius. Julius Cæsar stripped him 
by Strabo (xiv. r, p. 649). He had of his wealth in consequence, but he 
amassed a ‘princely fortune’ (Back ^ succeeded in again amassing as large a 
ovclay) of more than 2000 talents, but fortune as he had thus lost. His daughter 
unfortunately espoused the cause of was Queen of Pontus when Strabo wrote. 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 145 


the flood of greedy adventurers who sought their fortunes in the 
metropolis of the world and threatened to sweep away everything that 
was Roman in Rome (Juv. iii. 70). Altogether Tralles seems to have 
been a busy, thriving, purse-proud place, much given to display, and 
not altogether free from vulgarity. Cicero is not always as compli- 
mentary to this city, as it suited his purpose to be, when he was 
defending Flaccus’. 

When Cæsar landed in Asia after the battle of Pharsalia, the 
Trallians were not slow to pay their homage to success. A miracle 
sealed their allegiance. A statue of Cæsar had been erected in the 
temple of Victory at Tralles. A palm-tree shot up through the hard ` 
pavement at the base of the statue ; and it is even said that the goddess 
herself turned round and looked upon the effigy of the conqueror 
(Caes. Bell. Civ. ii 105, Plut. Vit. Caes. 47, Dion. Cass. xli. 61, Val. 
Max. i. 6. 12). Under Augustus, whom it regarded as its * founder? 
(Bull. de Corr. Hellén. x. p. 516), the city took the name of Cæsarea. A 
boastful inscription speaks of it as ‘the most splendid city of the 
Cesarean Trallians’ (Boeckh C. Z G. 2929 ù Aaprpotary Koucopéov 
ToaAAuavdv modus; comp. Lebas et Waddington Zzuser. 600a, Papers of 
American School at Athens 1. pp. 94,113, Bull. de Corr. Hellén. x. p. 517). 
From this time forward till the end of the first Christian century the 
coins commonly bear the legend kaicapewn . TpadAAlANwN, and some- 
times even kàicapewn alone (Mionnet Iv. p. 181 sq, Suppl. vri. p. 462 sq; 
comp. Eckhel Doctr. Num. 11. p. 125). This loyalty to the emperors 
brought its return to the Trallians. During the reign of Augustus 
(about B.C. 26—24) the city was visited by an earthquake, a catastrophe 
to which this region was and is especially liable. "The earthquakes at 
Tralles play a prominent part in the Sibylline Oracles (iii. 459, v. 287). 
On this occasion the destruction which it caused was very considerable 
(Strabo xii. p. 579 70 yvuváciov kai adda pépy cvvémecev: Agathias ii. 
17, p. 101, éocíoÓ5 re daca koi averpámy) Kal ovdev avríjs Ó TL éoéoworo : 
comp. C. Z. G. 2923). The emperor however came to its relief and 
contributed largely to the rebuilding. It seems to have. recovered 
rapidly from the effects of this calamity ; for under Tiberius we find the 
Trallians competing with other great cities of Asia for the honour of 
erecting a temple to the emperor and senate, but they were passed over 
as parum validi (Tac. Ann. iv. 55). 


1 3 Philipp.6 ‘Aricina mater. Trallia- flourishing cities of Asia Minor, such as 


nam aut Ephesiam putes dicere. Inthe Tralles or Ephesus. 
eyes of a Roman a small country-town ? 'The expression is commonly sup- 
like Aricia was far nobler than the most posed to mean insufficient wealth, but 


IGN, II, IO 


146 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 

The patron deity of the city was Zeus (C. 7. G. 2926 rijs Aaperpotarns 
róňcos...iepâs roô Ais; comp. Bull. de Corr. Hellén. x. p. 516) sur- 
named Larasius (Mionnet 1v. pp. 179, 183, Suppl. vil. pp. 462, 465, etc., 
Amer. School at Athens 1. pp. x10, 112; comp. Bull. de Corr. Hellén. 
HL. p. 468; comp. Waddington Zzser. 604), written also Larisius or 
Lariseus by Strabo (ix. p. 440, xiv. p. 649)—these latter modes of 
spelling being adopted apparently with a reference to tradition or the 
theory that Tralles was colonized from the Thessalian Larissa (Strabo 
ix. Zc. tows òè kal 6 Napíotos Zeds ékeiÜev êrwvópaorar) ; and the high- 
priest already mentioned (p. 144) was doubtless the functionary of this 
god (Strabo xiv. Zc. eywv jv iepwoúvyv rod Aws tod Aapiaiov). But 
besides Zeus, we read also of the worship of Demeter (C. Z. G. 2937 
iépera Anpnrpos), of Dionysus (C. Z. G. 2919 Atvoviow Bakxto 7G Onpoato ; 
comp. 7. 2934), and of ZEsculapius (Vitruv. vii. 1). Among the games 
celebrated at Tralles in honour of different deities are mentioned the 
Pythia (C. Z. G. 2932, 2935, Mionnet 1v. pp. 181, 192, 194; see Wad- 
dington Zzszr. 598) and the Olympia (Wood's Discoveries at Ephesus 
Inscr. vi. 14, 20, pp. 60, 7o, Mionnet Z cc. etc.), as well as those bearing 
the name of Hercules (C. I. G. 2936 civ adOAouww arapBél os] “HpaxAjjos ; 
comp. Amer. School at Athens 1. p. 110). The city boasted of several 
buildings, of whose architectural character notices have been preserved 
(Vitruv. ii. 8, v. 9, vil. r, 4). Nor was it without distinction as the 
mother of famous men. Of orators, it boasted Dionysocles and Damasus 
who was nicknamed oexópfjpos (Strabo xiv. p. 649), both doubtless 
representatives of the affected and florid Asiatic style, for which indeed 
this city was famous (Cic. Orator 234 ‘quasi vero Trallianus fuerit De- 
mosthenes’). It had also an illustrious school of physicians, of whom 
two are mentioned by name, Philippus and Thessalus (Galen Of. xir. 
P. 105, XIV. p. 684; comp. C. Z. Z. 1.1256). At the time when Ignatius 
wrote, Tralles was represented in literature by a living writer, Phlegon, 
the freedman of Hadrian, whose works have partially survived the wreck 
of time (Müller Fragm. Hist. Graec, ni. p. 603 sq), but whose fame 


this interpretation may, I think, be ques- 
tioned. When we read just below *pau- 
lum addubitatum, quod  Halicarnassii 
mille et ducentos per annos nullo motu 
terrae mutavisse sedes suas, vivogue in 
saxo fundamenta. templi adseveraverant,’ 
we are led to suspect that parum validi 
refers to the insecurity of the ground 


owing to earthquakes. Laodicea, which 


was also set aside on this occasion for 
the same reason as Tralles, is elsewhere 
commemorated for its wealth (Tac. Ann. 
xiv. 27, see Colossians pp. 6 sq, 43 sq); 
and Tralles itself must have been very 
flourishing at this time. On the other 
hand both localities were a prey to 
earthquakes. 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 147 


chiefly rests on the fact that he is quoted by Christian writers as a 
heathen witness to the przternatural darkness which shrouded the 
Crucifixion (Müller zc. p. 606 sq). At a much later date Tralles 
gave birth to an illustrious son, who has left to posterity a far more 
impressive memorial of himself than these third-rate literary efforts, 
Anthemius, the architect of S. Sophia at Constantinople (Procop. 4e 
“dif. i. 1, p. 174 ed. Bonn.) Altogether Tralles was invested with 
sufficient interest in herself and her history to induce two authors at 
different times, Apollonius of the neighbouring Aphrodisias (Müller 
Fragm. Hist. Graec. 1v. p. 310 epi TooAXéov) and Christodorus of the 
Egyptian Coptos (75. p. 360 Idrpia TpaAAéov), to take it as the subject 
of their writings. 

Of the evangelization of Tralles no record is preserved! ; but the 
hypothetical account which has been given of the foundation of the 
Church in Magnesia (p. 102) will probably hold good for this neigh- 
bouring city also. We can hardly doubt that it owed its first know- 
ledge of the Gospel to the disciples of S. Paul. Lying on the high- 
road between Ephesus and Laodicea, where flourishing churches were 
established through the agency of this Apostle almost half a century 
before Ignatius wrote, Tralles would not have been allowed for any long 
time to remain ignorant of the Gospel. This epistle however contains 
the earliest notice of Christianity in connexion with Tralles. 

*Sub idem fere tempus, writes Livy, describing the Roman con- 
quest of these regions (xxxvii. 45), *et ab Trallibus et a Magnesia quae 
super Maeandrum est et ab Epheso legati...venerunt, The words would 
apply equally well to the incidents of the Christian conquest. "These 
same three cities sent their delegates to meet Ignatius at Smyrna ; 
but, while Ephesus and Magnesia were each represented by several 
persons (see above pp. 15, 102), Tralles, as being more distant, was con- 
tent with sending a single representative, its bishop Polybius ($ r). At 
least no mention is made of any other name. The Epistle to the 
Trallians is written by the saint in grateful recognition of the attention 
thus shown to him through their bishop, whose grave and gentle de- 
meanour he praises ($$ 1, 3). 

The main purport of the letter is a warning against the poison of 
Docetism ($$ 6—11). As an antidote he recommends here, as else- 


1 The Greek books (Oct. r1) represent dation in fact, that a Philip, more pro- 
Philip the Evangelist, whom they identify bably however the Apostle than the 
with the Apostle, as the founder and first | Evangelist, resided in proconsular Asia; 
bishop of the Church of Tralles (Tpaé\\y, see Colossians p. 45 5q. 

Menza). The story has this slender foun- 


[0-2 


148 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


where, union among themselves, and submission to the bishop and 
other officers of the Church ($$ 2, 3, 7, 11, 12, 13). The denunciation 
of Docetism is fuller and more. explicit in this than in any other of 
his letters. On the other hand no allusion is made to the Judaic 
side of the heresy; but a comparison with his language elsewhere 
shows these false teachers to have been Judaizers also (see the notes, 
Magn. 8, 9, 11, Philad. inscr., 5, 8, Trall. 9). He acquits the Trallians 
indeed of any complicity in this heresy hitherto, but he writes to put 
them on their guard ($ 8). Nor would the caution be unneeded. We 
might safely have assumed that in a busy thriving city like Tralles, 
situated in a district where Jews abounded (see Colossians p. 19 sq), 
there would be a considerable Jewish population which would act as a 
conductor to this heretical teaching, even if we had no direct in- 
formation of the fact. A document published by Josephus however 
(Ant. xiv. ro. 20) mentions the opposition of the Trallians to an ordi- 
nance of the Roman governor giving permission to the Jews to keep 
their sabbaths and to celebrate other sacred rites without interruption ; 
and, whether this document be genuine or not, it is satisfactory 
evidence of their presence in Tralles in considerable numbers before 
the age of Ignatius. The interest moreover which the Sibylline Oracles 
take in Tralles (see above p. 145) points in the same direction'. 

Tralles does not occupy any prominent place in the subsequent 
history of Christianity ; but like Magnesia, it is represented from time 
to time at the great synods of the Church. At the Council of Ephesus 
the bishop of Tralles records his assent to the orthodox doctrine in 
explicit terms (Labb. Conc. 111. p. 1024 sq, ed. Colet). He signs his 
name in a way which furnishes an instructive parallel to the opening 
of the Ignatian letters; “HpaxAéwv, 6 xai @eddiros, èréypaya (ib. p. 
1080; comp. p. 1222, where the second name is written in Latin 
Theophanius: elsewhere he gives his first name only, rrj pp. 996, 
1024, IV. p. 1135). At a later meeting held at Ephesus, the notorious 
Robbers’ Synod, A.D. 449, Maximus bishop of Tralles commits himself 
to the opinions of the majority and to the heresy of Eutyches (IV. p. 
894, 1117, 1178, 1187); but he appears afterwards to have recanted, 
for his assent to the decrees of Chalcedon (A.D. 451) is attested in his 
absence by his metropolitan, the bishop of Ephesus (rv. p. 1 503). 


1 May not the unidentified xpbrw placed at m5, May not this Lud be 
(Tarlusa or Tralusa), which is men- Lydia, rather than Lydda as Neubauer 
tioned in the Jerusalem Talmud Zaamità (Géogr. du Talm. pp. 80, 268) takes it? 
iv. 8, be our Tralles? The incident Tralles is sometimes spoken of as a 
which took place at Tarlusa is elsewhere Lydian city by classical writers, 


TO THE TRALLIANS. T 99040 


Amongst the letters of remonstrance addressed to Peter the Fuller, 
and purporting to have been written a few years after the Council of 
Chalcedon, is one bearing the name of Asclepiades bishop of Tralles 
(V. p. 241 sq). At later Councils of the Church also bishops of Tralles 
were present. 


The following is an analysis of the epistle. 


*IcwaTIUS to the CHURCH OF TRALLES, which has peace through 
the Passion of Christ, an apostolic and hearty greeting.’ 

* Polybius your bishop informed me of your blameless disposition. 
Seeing him, I seemed to see you all, and I glorified God for your 
kindness in sending him ($ r). Be obedient to your bishop, if you 
would live after Christ. Submit also to the presbyters. The deacons 
too must strive to please all men and avoid offence ($ 2). Let all 
reverence the deacons in turn, as also the bishop and the presbyters. 
I am persuaded you do so; for I have received a token of your love 
in your bishop, whose gravity and gentleness must command the 
respect of all ($ 3). I fear lest I should fall through spiritual pride. 
I wish to suffer, but I know not whether I am worthy. I lack gentle- 
ness ($ 4). Though I could reveal the mysteries of the heavens, yet 
I forbear for your sakes. Notwithstanding my fetters and my know- 
ledge of heavenly things, I am not yet a disciple ($ 5). I beseech you, 
touch not the rank weeds of heresy. The cup of poison is sweetened 
with honey to deceive you ($ 6). Shun these false teachers and cling 
to Christ and to your bishop. Whosoever stands aloof from the altar 
is not pure ($ 7). I say this by way of warning. Strengthen your- 
selves with faith and love, which are Christ's flesh and blood. Give no 
occasion to the heathen to blaspheme ($ 8). Turn a deaf ear to the 
seducer. Christ was truly born, truly lived, truly died, and truly 
rose again, even as He will truly raise us ($ 9). If all this had been 
mere semblance, as these men say, why am I in bonds? Why am I 
ready to fight with wild beasts ($ 10)? Avoid these rank growths which 
are not of the Fathers planting. They are no true branches of the 
Cross. The head cannot exist without the members (Š 11). 

‘I greet you from Smyrna. I appeal to you by my bonds; be 
united and submit to your bishop and presbyters. Pray for me that 
I may attain my desire ($ 12). The Smyrneeans and Ephesians greet 
you. Pray for the Church in Syria. Once more, be obedient to your 
bishop and presbyters. I am devoted to you. I am in peril now, 
but God will answer my prayer. May you be found blameless in Him 


($ 13) 


MPOC TPAAAIANOYC. 


"IFNATIOC, 6 kai Ocopopos, jyarnuévn Oed rapi 


> ^ ^ , Z e 2 ^ ” ° , 
loot Xpirrov, éxkAnoia ayia tH ovon év Tpaddrcow 


Tpoc TPAAAIANOYC | rpaMavois Lyvdártos G (not written rpaNMavots, as given 
by Dressel); ignatius tralesiis L*; Tod abrod ériarod} mpds Tpaddnalovs (with the 
number £ in the marg.) g* (but 1 has the form ad zra//anos); ad trallianos A. 

I Oeg...Xpicrod] GL; mapa Oeod marpòs kal inood xpirot g; a deo patre et 


TIPOC TpadAlanoyc] Steph. Byz. 
S. v. says of this city rò ¢Oikov TpaA- 
avos, and the statement is fully 
confirmed by evidence of all kinds. 
It is the only form on the coins, even 
to the latest date (Mionnet IV. p. 
178 sq, Suppl. vit. p. 439 sq) It 
alone occurs in inscriptions, whether 
Greek (C: ZG 2926, 2929, 2935) or 
Latin (Orell. Zzscr. 5298, 6232) ; nor 
does any other form appear to be 
found in any classical writer, either 
Greek or Latin. Boeckh indeed sup- 
poses that there was also a form 
'ToaAXets (C. Z. G. 1I. p. 584, comp. III. p. 
30), but his own data do not bear him 
out. The form Tpaddcis is indeed 
found elsewhere (see Schmidt-Al- 
berti Hesych. Zex. IV. p. 168), but it 
refers to a Thracian people. So again 
'TodAAtov occurs (see Steph. Byz. s. v. 
TpadXia), but it denotes the inhabi- 
tants of the Bithynian town Trallium. 
Pearson again (ad loc.) is wrong in 
saying ‘Cives etiam ab antiquis Lati- 
nis Tralles dicebantur, ut a Varrone 
apud Apuleium’: Varro personifies 
the city Tralles itself, Apul. Afo/. 42 
"Trallibus de eventu Mithridatici belli 


magica percontatione consulentibus.’ 
The word is most commonly spelled 
Tpaddvavos, but it occurs sometimes 
with a single À; e.g. Mionnet IV. p. 
187, Suppl. VI. p. 472. In the edict 
of Diocletian it is written indifferent- 
ly TpaXMavós and Tpadiavos, Corp. 
Inscr. Lat. il. pp. 1191, 1193. 

On the other hand there is the 
greatest variety in the title of this 
Ignatian Epistle. The Greek of the 
genuine Ignatius and the Latin of 
the interpolator have the common 
form Tpadtavoi, Tralliani; while 
conversely the Greek of the interpo- 
lator and the Latin of the genuine 
Ignatius read instead TpaddAnjovor, 
Tralesiz, Jerome again refers to it 
as ad Trallenses (Vir. Ill. 16); in the 
Parall. Rupef., ascribed wrongly to 
John of Damascus (Of. 11. p. 772, 
Lequien), it is entitled mpos TpaAAaeis ; 
and in the Pseudo-Ignatian Epistle 
Antioch. 13 the form seems to be 
TpaAAaio Generally however the 
correct form is given. So for in- 
stance Theodt. Dza/. 1 (Iv. p. 51 ed. 
Schulze), Chron. Pasch. 1. p. 417 (ed. 
Bonn.), Sever. Ant. Fragm. (preserv- 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 


I51 


^ , , 9 ^ A , > 5 
THS Alas, exAexTy Kat dgiolew, eipnvevova év Tapki 
e t 


domini nostri iesu christi A (where et seems to be the commencement of a correction, 
preparatory to substituting the commoner form e¢ domino nostro etc., but not carried 


out). 
trallianus) A. 


ed in the Syriac; see I. p. 171). So 
too the Greek translator of Jerome 
(Vir. Ji. l c.). It is clearly also 
the form which underlies the Ar- 
menian title of the epistle. On the 
other hand the fragments of the 
Syriac Version (see III. pp. 678, 682) 
give 5 , 
€ Titiliyu2 These words are ob- 
viously corrupt; but possibly they 


stand for a NN N ‘Tralliyu, which 


cannot have been derived from TpaA- 
Acavoi and might represent TpdAAtor, 
but probably was invented by the 
Syriac transcriber or translator him- 
self. These facts show thatthe present 
heading of the Greek Ignatius, Tpa- 
Auavois ` Iyvdruos, is very much later 
than the epistle itself, and has no 
authority whatever. I have therefore 
substituted a title which conforms to 
the others. 

IGNATIUS, called also Theophorus, 
to the CHURCH OF THE TRALLIANS, 
beloved of God, and having peace 
through the passion of Christ, hearty 
greeting after the Apostolic fashion. 

I. © marpi] On this dative, 
which stands for vd Oeo marpos but 
does not, like it, directly describe 
the agent, so much as the person in- 
terested, see Winer Gramm. Š lxxxi. 
p. 274 (ed. Moulton), Kühner $ 423 
(II. p. 368 sq); comp. Neh. xiii. 26 
dyamop.evos TO OCG. 

2. é TpáAAeow] The plural form 
TpdAAew is by far the most common 
name of this city, not only in Greck, 
but also in Latin (e.g. Juv. Sav. iii. 
70; Orell. Zzscr. 321, quoted below; 
C. J. L. Wil. 144). Very rarely how- 
ever the singular TpdAA:s is found: 


2 TpáXNecw] g; rpdAeow G; tralesiis L; in tralliano (from a nom. 
3 Tis Actas] GL; urbe asiae A; om. g. 


e.g. C. Z. G. 2936 woduos & éyépnpé ue 
Ojuos Tpaddeos civ déOdowww k.r.À., 
Inscr. in Agath. Hist. ii. 17 (p. 102, 
ed. Bonn.) dpÓece TpdAAw rv rére 
kekAugévav, Orac. Sib. ili. 459 Tpadrus 
Ò 1j yeirov "Edéaov, 76. v. 289 mov- 
pare TpdX)us (see C. Z. G. II. pp. 557, 
1119), comp. Bekker Anecd. p. 1193 
TpaAXs, Tpos: and so in Latin, 
IDlin Vez /3v3420! 

3. ths 'Acías] The Roman pro- 
vince of ‘ Asia’ is meant ; comp. Orell. 
Inscr. 132 * Natus in egregiis Tralli- 
bus ex Asia, Agath. Hist. ii. 17 
(p. 100) TpddXeus 5) modus 7j ev TH Acia 
vüv Kadovpervn xopa; comp. Strabo 
xiv. I (p. 649). It is therefore a poli- 
tical designation. Ethnographically 
or topographically, Tralles was as- 
signed sometimes to Lydia (Steph. 
Byz. s. v.), sometimes to Caria (Plin. 
N. H. v. 29, Ptol. v. 2), sometimes to 
Ionia (Diod. Sic. xiv. 36, Mionnet 
Suppl. VII. p. 477). Probably this 
last was the designation which the 
Trallians most affected, as neither 
Lydians nor Carians stood in very 
high repute (Cic. fro Flacc. 27). 
For similar instances of various eth- 
nological attributions in the case of 
towns in this neighbourhood see 
Colossians p. 17 sq. The addition ris 
'Acías is not quite so superfluous 
here as in other cases (e.g. Hphes. 
inscr.; see the note there), since there 
were other places bearing similar 
or identical names, e.g. TpaAAns in 
Phrygia, TpdAÀAus in Caria, TpaAAía 
or ToáAAew in Illyria; see Benseler- 
Pape Worterb. d. Griech. Ezgenm. 
s. vv. But our Tralles was far the 
most important of them all. 

ekekrt) Used probably, as here, of 


152 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


^ ^ ^ ^ > / 
kai TvevuaTi. TO Trade “Incov Xpiotov THs éArrioos 


A 


^ ^ > \ > , \ > 7 > 
juv èv TH cis arov dvacTace hv Kal domaCopat ÈV 


^ / 2 5 > = N » 
TO TANPWMATL EV ATOTTONKW XAPAKTNPL, KAL EVXOMAL 


^ / 
TAELTTA Xatpeu. 


I mvevuat.] g; alwart GLA; see the lower note. 


TQ wader] G; et 


passione L; èv wá0e [g] (the context being much altered); om. A. 


5 ddudkpirov] GL[A]; ávvrókprrov g. 


churches in 1 Pet. v. 13 (cuvexAexrn), 
2 Joh. 1,13. So also éxdexrol, ékex- 
tov yévos, of Christians generally, 1 
Pet. i 1, ii. 9. On this meaning of 
‘election,’ as distinguished from its 
more restricted sense, see the note on 
Colossians iii. 12. 

aéo0¿o] Like other compounds of 
aéws, a favourite word with Ignatius ; 
Magn. 2, Rom. inscr., 1, SYTN. 12. 
In Rom. inscr. it is applied to a 
church as here; in all the other ex- 
amples, to individuals. 

ev capki k.t.A.| The existing Greek 
text év capki kai aiware TÔ mabe 
'Igco0 Xpicrod xK... can hardly 
stand; and I have thought it best 
to adopt from the interpolator's text 
mvevpatt for aiwart. There is the 
same confusion of mveúparı and aï- 
pare in the authorities in Smyrna. 3. 
With this reading we have the com- 
mon Ignatian combination ‘flesh and 
spirit’; see the note on Æphes. 10, 
and comp. especially the opening 
addresses in Magn. X evaow evyouat 
capkós kal mvevpatos, Rom. inscr. karà 
cápka 
Smyrn. I kaÜnpXopévovs ev TO aravpó 
...Capkí TE kai mvevpare. 

The alternative would be to omit 
r mabe, as a gloss. To this mode 
of remedy the Armenian Version 
gives countenance. In this case the 
passage might be compared espe- 
cially with PAzlad. inscr. jv dorá- 
Copa èv aipare loo Xpiorov, Smyrn. 
I 7Opacpevous ev ayarn év rQ aipare 
Xpwro?. The sentence would then 


kal mvetpa nvopévots K.T.À., 


6 xarà pvow] GL; Kara 


be directed against Docetic error, 
and would signify ‘reposing peace- 
fully in the belief in and union with a 
truly incarnate Christ’; comp. Smyrn. 
3 kpaÜévres TH capki avTov kal TÓ 
aipare (v. 1.). i 

I. TG wade] ‘through the passion. 
For the prominence given to the 
work of the Passion in these epistles, 
see the note on Aes. inscr. væ- 
pévy kai exheeypery ev wader adnOive. 

THs Arlos nuav| See the note on 
Magn. 11. 

2. ev rj «.T.A.]| To be connected 
closely with tis éAzí0os joy. These 
words define wherein Jesus Christ is 
the Christian’s hope. 

èv TÔ mAgpopari] ‘in the Pleroma,’ 
the sphere of the Divine graces. It 
is no mundane salutation which the 
writer sends; see the note on Magn. 
I5 ev tym 'Igco? Xpiorov. For the 
sense of mAnpopa see the note on 
Ephes. inscr. Other explanations, 
such as ‘in the whole body of the 
Trallian Church’ (Smith ad /oc.), or 
‘in the plenitude of Apostolic power’ 
(Bunsen Z7. p. 139, interpreting it 
by what follows), or ‘in the fulness 
of Christian good wishes’ (Zahn 
I. v. A. p. 416), seem to be excluded 
by the use of the word or by the 
grammar of the sentence. 

3. ëv ATOTTONKG k.r.A.] ‘after the 
manner of the Apostles.” It is a salu- 
tation which followed the precedent 
set in the Apostolic epistles. Another 
interpretation is ‘in my Apostolic 
character or office? e.g. Vedel. ad 


1] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


153 


af , \ y e ^ 

L “Auwpov Quvotay Kad dói&kpirOv èv varomovn 

s e ^ af 5 Nis ^ i 

€yvov VMAS €xovTas, ov kara Xeno dÀAa kara ucu: 
` > ig , , n^ 

kaÜwsc édnrwoev por MorvBis ó émiokomos UUWV, Os 


/ , ^ ^ ^ 
vapewyévero OeAnuate Oeo? Kal "'InooU XpwToU èv 


KTijow g; sagaci sapientia A. 


7 ux] GLA; om. g* (mss, but ins. 1). 


8 Geod kal 'Igcoü Xpwrob] GL; domini nostri iesu christi A; coU marpüs kal 


kuplov "I. X. k.r.A. g. 


loc. p. 18, Bunsen Br. p. 139, Lipsius 
Aecht. p. 56; but this would make 
the writer contradict himself, as Zahn 
has pointed out (Z. v. A. p. 415); 
for just below, $ 3, he disclaims 
giving them orders ws dmóorohos. 
On the other hand see Mart. Ign. 
Ant. Y amp ev rois macw drooroAwós, 
but this is not his own estimate of 
himself. 

I. “L know how blameless and 
steadfast ye are naturally. This 
knowledge I have obtained from 
your bishop Polybius, who is with 
me in Smyrna, and has so warmly 
sympathized with my bonds that in 
seeing him I have seemed to see 
you all. I heartily welcome your 
kindly interest as manifested through 
him, and I am full of thanksgiving 
that ye show yourselves thus fol- 
lowers of God.’ 

5. “Apapoy K.r...] See the eulogy 
of the Trallians in Apoll. Tyan. E. 
69 (Philostr. Of. Il. p. 364, ed. Kay- 
Ser) eis rývôe THY mpépav ouk àv €xouu 
mpokpivat TpaAMiavàv vj.Qy où AvOovs, 
oùk *Ayatovs, ovk “lavas k.r.À....vüv dé 
póvov vpas émaweiv Kaipos ävðpas Te 
TOUS Tyoupevous Vpav, ws moÀU kpeír- 
Tous Tav wap érépois dper Kal Noyo 
K.T.À. 

dõidkpirov Kk.T.À.] ‘unwavering, 
steadfast, in patient endurance. For 
dduixpuroy see the note on Ephes. 3. 
Here it is closely connected with év 
vrouovj, which probably refers to 
some persecutions undergone by 
the Trallian Church. 


6. ov Kara xpraw K.T.À. | * not from 
habit but by nature’; comp. Ephes. 
To Kékrna Oe Qcet...TÓ ovyyeviKoy 
épyov, Barnab. 1 otras éudutoy 
Oepeüs mvevparicis xápw eidndare, 
2b. 9 ó thy €udvrov Swpeay tis ddayis 
avroU Oéuevos èv óyiv. See Copes 
note on Avistot. Rhee. i. 7. 33. For 
the opposition of $e: and xpfoeus 
see Plut. Mor. 1115 F, 1116 ^; comp. 
the passages in Jahn’s Methodius p. 
I24. The same contrast is repre- 
sented elsewhere as between vous 
and doknous (Plut. Mor, 226 A); be- 
tween $c: and maðeia (Plut. Viz. 
Them. 2); between dios and eos 
(e.g. Arist. Ae. i. 11, p. 1370, Plut. 
Mor. 132 A); between dcus and 
pod») (Plat. Zim. 20 A, Legg. 961 B); 
between veu and és (Macar. 
Magn, iii: 33, 11v.726):retc: “This is 
one of those passages in which the 
language of Ignatius takes a Gnostic 
tinge; see Iren. i. 6. 4 jas per yàp 
ev xpnoer THY yapw Aaufdvew Aé- 
youor...auTous dé iÓiókTQTOv...ÉXew 
rjv xápw : comp. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
ii 3 (p. 433). The interpolator has 
«tjow, where gdvow stands in the 
text of the genuine Ignatius, and the 
passage of Irenæus might seem to 
favour this. But the alteration was 
doubtless made to obtain the com- 
moner antithesis of ypjovw and 
krjow (e.g. Philo Leg. ad Caz. 2, II. 
p. 547), ‘temporary occupation’ and 
‘absolute possession, 'zszs' and 
‘mancipium’; comp. Cic. Fam. vii. 
29 ‘sum xpyoer pèv tuus, kTýget O€ 


154 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS Ë 


Cuúpvn, kal ows por cvvexdpn Sedeuévw ev Xpwr ro 
'InaoU, doe ue TO TaV TANOOS uw év avTw Oewpnoat. 
dzodekduevos oUv THY kata Ocóv evvoray Ov avrov, 
edofaca evpwv Upds, ws ëyvwv, puuntas óvras Ocov. 

II. “Orav yap TG émoKkdrw vzoraconaÓe ws 5 


^ ^ , ^ 
noot Xpioró, Qaivea0é jor où Kata dvOpwrous Cavres, 


r XpiTQ Inco] LAg; iyoo0 xpwrQ G. 
see the lower note. 
4 édbtaca] gloriatus sum L; glorificavi dominum 


G; speculer L; vidi A: 
bonam mentem vestram A. 
meum tesum christum A; oka Gg*. 
cistis A; om. g. 
om. Dam-Rup 5. 


2 Oewpfica] g; Qeopñc0e 
3 etvoay] GL; vudv ebvou g5 


òs éyvwv] GL; quomodo et didi- 


5 ós'Igcoü XpwrQ] GLS,A Sev-Syr 2; os re kvple [g]; 
6 xara dvOpwrous] secundum homines L; sicut homines 


Sev-Syr 2; xarà dv@pwrov Gg Dam-Rup; £z corpore S,A: see the lower note. 


Attici nostri: ergo fructus est tuus, 
mancipium illius? At the same time 
the substitution of krios for pious 
would recommend itself as getting 
rid of a questionable doctrine. 

I. cvvexdpm OeO0euévo] ‘he re- 
joiced with, or perhaps, ‘congratu- 
lated me in my bonds? For ovyxa- 
piva comp. Ephes. 9, Philad. 10, 
Smyrn. 11, and see note on Philip- 
ians i. 17. 

2. év avrg] Le. as being the re- 
presentative of the whole body. For 
this use of the preposition comp. 
Magn. 6 ëv rois mpoyeypapupévows Tpos- 
onos, Ephes. Y ev ’Ovnoipe. 

0ecopíjca.] This reading is to be 
preferred. There seems to be no 
good authority for the middle co- 
petoOa, though it appears in some 
corrupt texts of classical authors; 
see Dindorf and Hase Steph. Thes. 
S. V. 

3. amodeEdpevos] Apoll. Tyan. Epist. 
69 addressing the Trallians says, ris 
ody airia, Ò? fjv ámoüéyouau ué dpas 
K.T.À. 

xarà Oc»] On this Ignatian phrase 
see the note Magn. 1. 

ecvoiav] sc. vuv, which the inter- 


polator inserts for clearness. The 
Trallians appear to have sent some 
substantial proofs of their goodwill 
by the hands of Polybius. 

4. édofaca] ‘Z gave glory to 
God. For this absolute use comp. 
Polyc. Y 'AmoOexyópevós cov TV èv 
Ocó yvopnv...vmepSoEa{w, and see 
also Ecclus. xliii. 28 Oo£a(ovres sod 
icxvoopev; The reading &0o£a is self- 
condemned, independently of au- 
thority. 

as čyvov] ‘as I had been informed, 
referring back to the foregoing 
€yvov. 

purs k.r.A.] See the note E2Zes. 
fie 

II. ‘When ye submit to your 
bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye live 
after Jesus Christ, who died that 
you through faith in His death 
might yourselves escape death. Do 
nothing without your bishop; and 
be obedient also to the presbyters 
as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ. 
The deacons likewise must study 
to satisfy all men; for they are 
ministers of Christ’s mysteries, not 
of meats and drinks. Therefore it 
is their duty to shun all blame, 


IO 


n] TO THE TRALLIANS. 155 


dXAd kara 'lnaoUv Xpia-rov, Tov Ov sus dzoÜavóvra 
iva sriGreUG'avTes cis TOV Oavatov aŭro TO dmoÜaveiy 
exuynte. 
TOU ÉzriG'kOTr0v unòèv Tpacoew Uuas’ QAN UroTacces be 
Kal TO mperBuTEpiw, ws [ros] dvoocTóXois *Inoot 


Xpic-roU, THs ÉéXmiOos ńuðv, év Q ÖrayovrTes [ev avc] 
a 


> ~ S , [74 ^ » 
QAVaAYKQaLOV ovv ETTV, wWOTEP TTOLELTE, vev 


7 ńuês] GS,Ag Dam-Rup Sev-Syr; vos L. 
g; credentes L; quando creditis SA Sev-Syr. 


Io mpáccew] G; mpárrew g. 
14]; the authorities for g* vary. 


Xpicrov] GLS,g Antioch; xpwroU A. 
om. GL ; al. A. 


as they would shun the fire.’ 

` 6. Kara dvÜpémovs (àvres] So too 
Rom. 8. See also Lphes. 9 kar 
dvÓpomrev Biov (according to the read- 
ing proposed). S. Paul uses the 
singular xara dvÓpermov (see the note 
on Galatians ii. 15); and the re- 
miniscence of S. Paul has doubtless 
led to the substitution of dvÓpormov 
for dvÜperovs in some texts here. 

8. Iva mw revcavres k.r...] Comp. 
Magn. 5 éàv ur) aúQaopéres €xopev ro 
drroÜaveiv k.r.À. 

9. orep morire] Comp. Ephes. 
4, with the note. 

dvev Tov éÉémiokómov 
Magn. 7 with the note. 

II. TQ mwpeaBvrepío] See the note 
on Ephes. 2. š 

és Toig dmoorOAow k.r.À.]| They 
stand in the same relation to the 
bishop, as the Apostles stood to 
Jesus Christ. So again Smyrn. 8; 
comp. Magn. 6 ràv mpecBurépoy eis 
rimov cuvedpiov Tay dmocTóAev (with 
the notes), and below $ 3. Con- 
versely the Apostles are called mpeo- 
Burépiov éxkAnotas in PAz/ad. 5. 


12. év @ xA] ie. ‘if we live in 


KTA] See 


8 micredcavres] G; micrevovTes 


9 Gomep] GLS,A; ócarep g. 


vrorácoec0e] GS,A; vrordccecOa L [Antioch 
II TQ mpecBureply] GL*g Antioch; pres- 
byteris Si; sacerdotibus A (see below on § 7). 


tots] G; om. g Antioch. Inoot 


I2 èv ajrQ] gS, (see the next note); 


Him now, we shall be found in Him 
hereafter. But in order to get this 
sense it seems necessary to insert 
èv avró, which appears in the inter- 
polator's text. The words without 
this addition can hardly have this 
meaning, since év œ cannot well be 
made to do double duty. If, intend- 
ing this sense, Ignatius omitted év 
avrà, we must regard this as an illus- 
tration of the hasty writing in which 
these epistles abound and which is 
explained by the circumstances of 
the writer (see above, pp. 28, 110, 159). 
An alternative would be to read the 
conjunctive, ev à didyovres eópe8na - 
peÓa ‘in whom may we be found 
living’; but the existence of a future 
conjunctive is very questionable (see 
Winer Gramm. xii. p. 89), and our 
Greek authorities here do not coun- 
tenance it. So too in Rom. 4 tva... 
eópeÜraopar (not wa...<dpeOnowpar) is 
substituted by the interpolator for 
tva...yévepa, of Ignatius. In r Cor. 
xii. 3 the authorities show that the 
alternative is between the fut. indic. 
iva xavOncopa (not wa KavOnowpar) 
and the conj. aor. tva kavxyjoopat. 


156 


evpeOnoopueba. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


a \ \ \ , » 
dei 0€ Kal ToUs Stakovous Ovras MUOTN- 


piwy "Inoov Xpio-T oU KATA TAVTA TpOTrOV TAC APETKELY 


5 , \ ^ > , 5 Jet} 
ou yap BpwuaTwv Kat TOTOY Elo Suakovot, GAN ék- 


1 evpeOnodueda] Gg* (Mss, but 1 has zmveniamur); inveniamur L (= evpe- 
Onowpueba, if it be not a slip of a Latin scribe). The Oriental Versions are; 7a 
ut inveniamur quod in ipso (13 ID Ni=ecodem) vivimus S, (which seems 
certainly to have read év avrà and perhaps evpeOnowueba); ut inveniatur vita 
vestra cum iis A (a corrupt text of a loose rendering of the Syriac). puo- 
tnplwv] g; pvorhpiov G. The versions, which all have the genitive, are as fol- 
lows; diaconos ministros existentes mysteriorum L, (ministros being supplied to 
assist the sense); diaconos qui sunt filii mysterii S84; diaconis gui sunt participes 
mysteriorum. A. 2 Inso XpwroU] GLS,A; xpwroU inood g. Tu] 
GLS, Antioch 14; deo et hominibus A; om. g. 3 Bpeuáreov] G 
Antioch; ciborum L; Bperóv g. 4 vm»pérad] GLg Antioch; om. 
S,A. otv| GLg Antioch; et propterea A; om. Sp. aùroùs] GS,Ag* 
(but 1 praecepta eorum. observare) Antioch; vos L (Mss, doubtless a scribe’s error 
for eos). gpuraccerOar rà éykNjuara] G (pudAdooecbe, but corrected by a 
later hand) L Antioch; rà éyxAjpara puddrrecOa g. 6 ‘Opolws] G 
Antioch; similiter et L; et ita S,; et (om. óuoles) A; al. g. rods Siakdvous... 
marpós] ros Suakdvous ws imcoUv xpwrróv, ws kal Tov émlokomov övra viðv To0 
marpós G; diaconos ut mandatum iesu christi, et episcopum ut tesum christum 


I. Oei Óé kalk.r...] This is notan tendance on the priest when offi- 


injunction of obedience due to the 
deacons, as the preceding sentence 
might suggest, but a statement of 
requirements from them, as the fol- 
lowing words clearly show. Not their 
claims, but their duties, are enforced. 

tovs Stakovouvs Ovrae k.r.A.] ‘those 
who are deacons (ministers) of the 
mysteries of Fesus Christ? This 
assertion is justified by what fol- 
lows, où yàp Bpopatoyv x.r.à. The 
reference here is to the deacons, and 
not (as some have supposed) to the 
presbyters. See Smyrn. 10 œs Qu- 
kóvovs Ocoü [Xprwroó], Polyc. Phil. 5 
opotes Ouakovor djeumrot...s Oeod kal 
Xpicrod Owikovot kai ovK dvôpærov. 
Comp. 1 Cor. iv. I ws danpéras Xpi- 
cro) kal oikovóuovs pvotnpiov Oco0, 
which passage seems to have in- 
fluenced the expressions here. In 
a later writer dvaxdvovs pvornpiov 
would probably refer to their at- 


ciating at the eucharist. But such 
a restriction of uvorgpíev would be 
an anachronism in Ignatius. He 
apparently uses the word in the 
same wide sense in which it is used 
by S. Paul, ‘revealed truths.’ 

2. kara mavra) According to S. 
Paul’s example, 1 Cor. x. 33 xaos 
Kayo mávra mci dpéako. 

3. Bpepárev x.r..] See Rom. 
xiv. 17, Col. ii. 16, Heb. ix. ro: The 
diaconate was originally instituted 
Oiakoveiv rpamé(aws (Acts vi. 2); and 
these less spiritual duties of the 
office, such as the distribution of 
alms, the arrangement of the agape, 
and the like, tended to engross the 
interests of the deacon (1 Tim. iii. 
8 sq). He needed therefore to be 
reminded that the diaconate had a 
higher aspect also. The mode of 
expression here may have been sug- 
gested by Rom. xiv. 17. 


11] | TO THE TRALLIANS. 157 


, ^ e / , 7 > 
kAnotas OcoU Urnpérar d€éov oÚv avTous puracoer bau 
\ , ^ 
5 Ta EYKANMATA ws TUp. 


III. 


e 3i ^ X / e N ` > , of , 
wS naouv pta*rov, WS KAL TOV ETLOKOTOY OVTA TUNOV 


e 7 , , 
Ouoiws TTAVTES évrperréa Üwa'av TOUS OLaKOvOUS 


existentem filium patris L; a diaconis sicut a iesu christo et ab episcopo qui est in 
Jorma (NDBEYO2) patris S, (for NDBYD see the note on Magn. 6); a diaconis sicut 
a iesu christo et ab episcopo sicut a patre deo A; avrovs [i.e. rods Ouakóvovs] ws 
xpwrOv incovv, oU $Xakés elow Tov TóTov, ws kal 6 émiokomos Tov Tarpós Tay 
hwv Tos Umrápxet g; TOUS SiaKdvous ws inoo’y xpicTOv kal Tov émlokomov ws TOV 
matépa Antioch. Comparing these authorities we arrive at these results. (r) In 
the first clause we must reject the reading of L òs évrodty inood xpicrod, as standing 
alone against all the others (GS,Ag Antioch) which support the simple ws incoty 
xpwróv (g however transposing and reading xpicrdv incovy, but dominum iesum 
christum 1). (2) In the second clause the corrupt vióv of GL must certainly be 
rejected in favour of rúrov, which appears in Sg and is loosely paraphrased in A 
Antioch. (3) The second ós is somewhat awkward, and the sentence would gain by 

_ its rejection or transposition, xal rò» émickorov ws övra rUTov k.T.X. (or in this case 
we might perhaps read ¿s évrvmov for ws óvra viðv, as nearer to the traces of the 
Ms); but it appears in this place in Gg, while on the other hand the versions are 
not of much account in such a case. It ought probably therefore to be retained, 
as it is capable of explanation. (4) For an account of the anomalous reading of L 
in both clauses see the lower note. 


4. avrovs duvddcoecba k.rÀ.] It 
is S. Paul’s injunction also, that the 
deacons should be dvéykAgrow 1 Tim. 
iii. Io; comp. Polyc. PAZ. 5, Apost. 
Const. i. 10, viii. 18. The reading 
avrà» is condemned by the authori- 
ties even in the interpolator’s text, 
and it interferes with the sense. 

III. *At the same time let the 
laity pay respect to the deacons as 
to Jesus Christ, while they reverence 
the bishop as the type of God the 
Father and the presbyters as the re- 
presentatives of the Apostles. With- 
out these three orders no body of 
men deserves the name of a Church. 
This rule, I am persuaded, you fol- 
low; for I have with me a pattern 
of your love in the person of your 
bishop, whose gentle demeanour is 
in itself a powerful lesson. Even 
the godless heathen must reverence 


him. I spare you for the love I 
have towards you. Though I might 
have written more strongly, I for- 
bear; nor do I venture, being a 
convict, to command you as if I 
were an Apostle.’ 

6. 'Onoíes] As the deacons are 
required to consult the wishes of the 
laity, so Zz like manner must the 
laity pay respect to the deacons. 
For this reciprocation introduced by 
opoiws, even where the duty is not 
identical, comp. r Pet. i. 7. The 
mavres here corresponds to the raow 
of the preceding sentence. As the 
deacons have duties fowards all, 
so they claim respect from all. 

7. ds Incotv Xptorov] This start- 
ling comparison of the deacon to 
Jesus Christ rests on the assumption 
that the relations of the deacon to 
the bishop are analogous to those 


158 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[m 


ToU marpós, Tous Qé mpeoßurépovs ws avvéOpiov OcoU 


, / \ , , , 
kat [ws] TVVOET MOY ATOTTOAWY’ X@pts TOUTOV EKKANOLA 


OU KaAéiT al, 


2 kal ós] G Antioch; kal (om. ws) LS,A [g]. 


e , < > [74 ” A 
Trepi WV MEMELO uat UMAS OUTWS EXEL: TO 


cúvõceopov] conjunctionem 


L; Secudy Antioch; otvderuos G; g also has otvdecuos, but as a nominative, the 


of Christ tothe Father; comp. Apost. 
Const. ii. 26 6 8€ Siudkovos rovro [ró 
emuwkomo] tmaptotdcOw...kat Xewrovp- 
yeíro a/rQ ev mücw duéumros, ds ó 
Xpiorós, moray dd éavroð ovdév, rà 
dpegrà Tout T marpl müvrore, 20. 30 
ds yap 6 Xpirós üvev ToU marpós 
ovdev moei, oUres oU0€ 6 Oudkovos (veu 
ToU émickOmOU K.T.A., 20. 44 müvra pev 
6 Sidxovos TH émickómq dvadepéro, às 
6 Xpwrrós rQ marpi k«.r.A. See also 
the note on Magn. 6. 

The preponderance of authority 
seems to show very decidedly that 
this is the original text. But if so, 
how can we account for the reading 
of the Latin translator? It is pro- 
bably to be explained as having 
arisen from a combination of two 
readings, rods Siaxdvous ws évroAny 
Incod Xpictod and ros ĝıakóvovs 
os “Incovy Xpiorov. The former of 
these was probably in the first in- 
stance a marginal illustration taken 
from another passage, Smyrn. 8 rovs 
0€ Suakovous évrpémeoÓe ws Oeod év- 
ToAnv, or an emendation suggested 
by this parallel. It would then dis- 
place the original reading ds 'Iycoüv 
Xpwrróv in the text; and this latter 
would be inserted just below, where 
it seemed to be required, the corrupt 
reading óvra viðv (for dvra rúrov) 
having set the transcriber on the 
wrong track. 

ds kai tov émickomov k.r...] The 
sentence would be rendered much 
smoother, if œs were transposed and 
placed before óOvra rúrov. As the 
text of this epistle here and in the 


immediate neighbourhood (see be- 
low åyaróv úpâs x.r.A.) has been much 
tumbled about, such a change would 
perhaps be justifiable. I have pre- 
ferred however to retain it in the 
place where it is found in most 
authorities, because it thus introduces 
the analogy of the relation between 
Jesus Christ and the Father as ex- 
plaining the previous injunction. 

TUmov Tov marpós] See the note on 
Magn. 6 eis rómov Oeod. ` 

I. ds ovvédpwv Kk.r.À.| ‘as the 
council of God and (as) the band of 
the Apostles’ As the bishop sits in 
the place of God, so too the corona 
of presbyters (Magn. 13) is compared 
to the company of the Apostles, 
seated, as it were, on thrones encir- 
cling the Eternal Throne. The ter- 
restrial hierarchy is thus a copy of 
the celestial ; comp. Rev. iv. 4 kvkAó- 
Oev rov Üpóvov Apovor etkoor Téooapes” 
kai émi roùs Opóvous eikoor réccapas 
mpecagurépovs ka0nuévous (comp. vii. 
II. The ovvédproy roð Oeod is de- 
fined by ovvdecpov trav ümooróAov ; 
and the second ds, which is dis- 
credited by external authority, inter- 
feres somewhat with the sense. On 
this comparison of the presbyters to 
the Apostles, and on the arrangement 
in the early Church which suggested 
it, see the notes on Magn. 6 evvéüpiov 
róv ámogrÓAav, 2b. 13 cTedjávov Tod 
mpeaBurepiov. For this concrete sense 
of cvvdecpos, signifying an aggregate 
and so either ‘a bundle’ of letters 
or ‘a band’ of persons, see the note 
on Colossians iii. 14. It occurs with 


IH] TO THE 


TRALLIANS. 


I59 


\ » F ^ > x ex » » 
yap é£eumAapiov THs dyamns Üudv edaBov kal exw 
> e A > Led > , ^ «c P 
5 eQ éavroU v Tw émokomw UuwY, OÚ a/TO TO KaTa- 


oTnua peyadn uaÜnreia, rj 96 mpaotns atro? Sivas: 


construction having been changed. 
vestrae 1). 


much the same meaning as here, 
though in a bad sense ‘a confede- 
racy, a conspiracy, in 2 Kings xi. 14, 
H20 J er, xi. O. 

It will thus appear that both the 
comparison of the deacons to Jesus 
Christ and that of the presbyters to 
the Apostles flow naturally, though in 
separate channels, from the idea of 
the bishop as the type of God. But 
the combined result is incongruous, 
for the presbyters are made to occupy 
a lower place in the comparison than 
the deacons. We may suppose there- 
fore that the last clause rovs ĝè mpeo- 
Burépovs k.r.A. was added as an after- 
thought by Ignatius, without noticing 
the incongruity. This is only one 
among many indications of extreme 
haste, to be explained by the circum- 
stances under which these letters 
were written (Rom. 5). 

2. xopis rovrov x.r.À.] ie. *With- 

out these three orders no church has 
a title to the name, deserves to be 
called a church’. This seems to be 
the meaning of ov xaAetra, ‘is not 
spoken of’, ‘is not recognised’, as 
in Heb. iii. 13 dypis o9 Tó onpepov 
kaAeirau; comp. Polyc. 7 0s Óvvrjcerat 
8coüpóuos Kareicba, Magn. 14 dbev 
oùk d£iós eipt KaNeto Oa. 
(03. wept dv] ‘concerning which 
things’, not referring to roúrev, but 
to the general injunctions of the pre- 
ceding sentence. 

4. é&eumddpiov] See the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

ris dyémys úv] This is treated 
by Jacobson as a mere compliment- 


4 tuav] GLA; om. g (Mss, but add. 


5 ped? éavrov] G; per’ épavroÜ g (edd., but see the Appx). 


ary form of address, like ‘dilectio 
vestra, 7 evoéBera ouv, ‘your grace,’ 
‘your holiness,’ and the like. Pear- 
son explains Š 13 7 ayann Zpvpvatov 
and Smyrn. 12 dyann trav adeApav 
(comp. PAzlad. 11) similarly. Any 
such usage however would be an ana- 
chronism here. For + dyarmy )póv 
comp. Rom. 1, o. Polybius was an 
illustration of their affection for the 
martyr. 

5. éavro)] For égavrobü; see Winer 
Gramm. xxii. p. 188. 

xardorgua] ‘demeanour’; comp. 
Plut. Vit. Marcell. 23 ovre poB rv 
8iknv ore vu mpós Tovs Zupakoaíovs 
Tov cwvüÜovs peraBaXàv katary pa- 
Tos, dÀÀà mpdws mávv xal Koopios 
ro THs Olkns réAos ékOexópevos. The 
derivation suggests, though it does 
not require, the idea of ‘composure, 
‘guietude, ‘staidness’ (comp. Orig. 
c. Cels. iii. 80 rò Tis eapkós evorabes 
karaotnpa); and hence karaornpart- 
kós signifies ‘of calm demeanour,’ 
as in Plut. Vit. Tib. Gracch. 2 idea 
mpoodmov kal BAéupare kal kujua, 
mpaos kai KaTUOTHPaTLKOS 7». See 
Wetstein on Tit. ii. 3, where kara- 
ornpa occurs. The view of Hammond 
(on Tit. ii. 3), that karaornpa signifies 
rank, office (from kabırrávat ‘to ap- 
point,’ Acts vi. 3, Tit. i. 5), is desti- 
tute of support from usage. 

6. peyddn paÓnreía] 1 Pet. iii. 1 
(va...Quà ris TGV ‘yuvaKarv ávacTpodrs 
¿yeu Aóyov KepdnOyaovrat. See also the 
language which Ignatius uses respect- 
ing Onesimus of Ephesus (Ephes. 6) 
and Damas of Magnesia (Magn. 3). 


160 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [111 


A 7 \ \ LOé > , 0 , e^ 
Óv Aoyi ouat kal Tous aÜéovs évrpézeoÜUat. AyamTwv 
€ ^ € £ , , 
Uude ovTws Peldoua, svvTovwrEpoy Ovvapevos ypapew 
e ` , > , > € ` € Ñ 5 - 
ÜTép TOUTOU" [ 4ÀX OUX ikaævov éavTov | EIS TOUTO 
> [3 O / , - , 
wnOny, iva wv KATAKPLTOS WS AMOTTONOS vpiv Ourac- 


TWUAL. 


r dy] GLg*. There is a plural in A, which probably therefore read dv. This isa 
possible reading, but évrpémeo@a: elsewhere in Ignatius takes an accus. (see the note 
on Magn. 6). 
Suvdwevos ypapew mèp TovTov els roUro WHOnv k.T.N. G; diligentes quod non parco 
ipsum aliqualem potens scribere pro illo, in hoc existimer ut etc. L; etiam quoniam 
amo vos, parco vobis scribere vehementer et glorificare; sed et non sum sufficiens sicut 
apostolus fraecifere vobis, quoniam vir aliquis condemnatus sum A; d'yamGv vas 


deyovr Qv...Q00y k.T.À.] deyamrüvras ds où pelõouar éavróv mrórepov 


elBouat cvvrovórepov ému etat, iva ph õótw riolv evar rpooarrns 1) émidens k.T.X. g. 
Here the text of GL is seriously corrupt. In attempting to restore the reading 
we may observe as follows: (r) The agreement of A and g establishes one unques- 
tionable emendation; éavróv mórepov is a corruption of evrrovórepov: see the lower 


note. 
that the corruption is in -ras ws ov. 


I. rovs adéovs] ie. ‘the heathen, 
who were deo èv rà koopo, Eph. ii. 
T2 Scemalsog 6727 QU 1070 c Ch 
Clem. Al. Protr. 4 (p. 52), Paed. iii. 11 
(p. 300). Origen (c. Ceés. i. 1, iii. 73) 
speaks of 1 Geos moAvOedtns ; comp. 
Mart. Ign. Rom. 8. On the other 
hand, the Christians themselves were 
denounced by the heathen as doi, 
because they bad no images or 
shrines or visible representations of 
deity; Mart. Polyc. 9 (comp. iò. 3), 
where the cry against Polycarp is 
aipe tovs dÓéovs, which he himself, 
looking eis ravra róv yov róv ev TO 
craüío dvipwv é8vàv, catches up and 
repeats. See also Justin ol. i. 6 
(p. 56), 20. 13 (p. 60), Athenag. Suppi. 
3, 4, 30, Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 1 
(p. 828 sq), Minuc. Octav. 8, Tertull. 
Apol. 10 sq ; comp. Clement of Rome 
L p. 34. Below, Š 10, the epithet 
dÓco. seems to be applied to the 
Docetic teachers (see the note 
there). 

2. guvrovorepov] ‘more urgently! ; 


(2) The coincidence of the same authorities shows that aryazóv is correct, and 
Having regard to the sense as given in Ag, 


comp. Polyc. 7 pv TO avvrovov Tis 
adnOeias. This emendation is much 
less violent than it seems at first 
sight, CYNTONWTEPON for eayro TTO- 
T€poN (see the note on dÀ)? ovy x.r.À. 
just below). At all events the inter- 
polator's text leaves no doubt about 
its correctness, as Pearson saw long 
ago. 

3. vmép rovrov] ie. rod émwckómov 
vpov, or possibly ‘on this matter.’ 

dAX ovx x.r...] The state of the 
text in the immediate neighbourhood 
(e.g. at the beginning of this chapter ; 
see also Š 4 of yàp Aéyovres x.r.. and 
Š 6 oi kai iQ k.r.À.) shows that the 
archetypal Ms of GL must have 
been much worn and probably muti- 
lated in this part. Accordingly I 
have sought to remedy the text here 
on the hypothesis that some words 
have dropped out. For éavróv see 
the note on éavroó above. I have 
chosen this form (rather than epav- 
tov) here, because it better explains 
the corruption of cvvrovorepov just 


Iv] TO THE TRALLIANS. 161 


IV. Toa ppovô èv Oew* adr’ éuavróv uerpá, 
twa uù èv Kavynoe: aTohwma võv yao me Set vAéov 
poBeioba kal urj mrpoaéx&v Tots Qvatobaiv ue’ oi yap 
Aéyovrés por gacTvyoUciv pe. a'YyaTQ uev yao TO 


I have substituted Jus otros, (3) These two authorities also seem to indicate 
that some words have dropped out, probably between (ép roírov and els roro. 
What these were it is impossible to say, owing to the capricious changes in g 
and the habitual laxity and constant omissions of A. I have hazarded a conjecture 
in accordance with the general sense of A. Hilgenfeld (Zeitschr. f. Wiss. Theol. 
XXI. p. 541 sq) has his own conjectural reading, but he does not seem to me to be 
on the right track. 4 diardoowuat] praecipiam L; diardoooma Gg (but in the 
latter the form of the sentence is altered, ojx ós dmbaroXos dtardooomar). 

6 IIoAAà& d$povQ èv OeQ] GLE Dam-Vat 35 multa cogito in divinis A; om. g. 
This and the following chapter appear at the close of the Epistle to the Romans 
in Z. 7 ue et mMéov] G; me oportet plus L* (but oportet me plus Lj); mAeióv 
ue det [g] Dam-Vat 2 (but quoted by Max, mMéov ue de?). 8 uh] GLZAg 
(but om. Max Dam-Vat). ol yàp Néyovrés pot uacTvyoUclv ue] GL; of 
yap me érawovrres uagTvyoücw g (but Max Dam-Vat quote it émauvobvres yap pe 


Mastvyovo[y]); li enim qui dicunt mihi talia Jlagellant me Z; def. A: see the 


lower note. 


before. For the construction of Za 
comp. Luke i. 43 woev uor rovro tva 
On 5 Tp k.r., I Cor. iv. 3 eis 
ehayiorov eorw va id’ Suy dvakpi0ó, 
I Joh. iv. 17. 

4. Óv karákpwros k.r.A.] His posi- 
tion as a condemned criminal is taken 
as a type of his unworthiness in the 
sight of God. See the note on Rom. 4, 
where he uses similar language of 
his. relation to the Apostles. For 
duardoo@pa comp. also Æphes. 3 ov 
Siataccopa úpîv os dv re (with the 


note). 
IV. ‘I have many deep thoughts 
in Christ. Yet I put restraints upon 


myself, lest my boasting should be 
my ruin. I have need to tremble. 
The praise of these men is a stum- 
"bling-block and a torture to me. 
For indeed I earnestly desire mar- 
tyrdom, but I know not whether I 
am worthy of it. The envy of the 
devil fights against me all the more, 
because it is unseen by many. So 


JG NS TT 


then I have every need of a gentle 
spirit, which defeats the prince of 
this world.’ 

6. oda jpovó] Comp. Herod. ix. 
16 moÀÀà povéovra pndevis kparéew. 
Similarly Barnab. r cuvewdds épavró 
dre èv úpiv adjoas mora émíora- 
pat K.T.À. 

' éyavràv perpa] “Z take the measure 

of myself’, ‘I do not exceed my 
proper bounds’; a reminiscence of 
S. Paul, 2 Cor. x. 12, 13, ev éavrois 
éavro)s petpouvres...nueis O€ ovK eis 
rà perpa kavxnaóp.e0a. 

7. mÀéov PoBeicba] So Philad. 5 
dedepevos PoBovpat nÀ Nov, os àv 
ávarápriTos. 

8. oi yàp Aéyovrés por] This can 
hardly be correct as it stands, and 
probably some words have fallen 
out: see the note, Š 3 àÀX' ovy «7.2, 
on the mutilated state of the arche- 
typal MS in these parts. It is gene- 
rally supposed that Ignatius sup- 
presses some words addressed to 


LI 


162 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [iv 


TÓ yap (Noc 
oA Aots uév où Paiverar, éue òè | r) éov | roXepet. xenGo 


^ x Do / 2 pe. 
mabeiv, QAN ovK oióa et à£ios etu 


5 po Tes / d Ne UO 

ouv TpadTnTOS, €v ñ KaTadVETaL OÓ apXwY TOU auos 
, 

TOUTOV. 


r 70] Gg (but the latter with a v. 1. ó). 2 mTMov] GL; om. ZAg. 
It was perhaps interpolated from mAéov $ofié?s0a. above. 3 mpadTyTos| 
Gg Dam-Vat 4 Dam-Rup 6; mpaŭrnros Anton 9. év 7] GLg Anton; é 
@ Dam-Vat-Rup; dub. ZA. 4 rovrov] txt GLZA ; add. ó dudBodos g; add. 
8iáBoNos Dam-Vat-Rup Anton (but these writers may be quoting the interpolator's 


text, not the genuine Ignatius). 
om. ZA. 
LZA [g]; om. G. 
tapal at g. 
made in Rom. 6. 


him such as paprus éoy (Smith ad 
loc., Uhlhorn p. 23, Zahn J. v. A. pp. 
416, 572 sq); but there is no adequate 
reason for the suppression. With 
more probability Bunsen (Br. p. 121) 
supposes that the word paprus has 
accidentally dropped out owing to 
the following pacrvyotow. It seems 
probable that the title here dis- 
claimed by Ignatius would be that 
of a martyr or witness: comp. Euseb. 
H. E. v. 2 (quoted by the commen- 
tators here) etmoré tis nuav Ov émioro- 
hfs 7 Sud Aóyov paptupas avrovs 
mpoceimev, ememANnTooy TiKpas’ nOéws 
yàp mapexdpovy Tv Ths paprvpías 
mpoonyopiay rQ XpioTe TO Tur kai 
ddnOwe paprup. k.T... Hilgenfeld 
(A. V. p. 204) suggests that the 
writer may refer to the name @eo- 
opos; but as this name implies 
obligation rather than renown, and 
as the writer of these epistles boldly 
claims it elsewhere, this suggestion 
has little to recommend it. Possibly 
the Syriac Version may preserve the 
true text, and we have only to add 
roudüra. Comp. Smyrn. 5 ri yap [pe] 
opeet, el epè émawet tis, with the 
note. 

I. rò yàp (jAos kr..] ie. ‘the 
jealous opposition of Satan, who 


dvvaua] GLEA; ¿8ouxdumy [g] (but 1 has poteram). 
6 vyntlos obcw] GLg; om. ZA. 
7 cvyyveporére] G; cúyyvore g. The converse change is 


5 My ob] G; nonne L; uù yap oók g; 
u] 
mapa09] G; 


attempts to rob me of the crown of 
martyrdom’; comp. Rom. 5 pnéev pe 
(@Ar@oa rôv óparőv kai THY dopdroev, 
iva 'Inco0 Xpiorod émurúxo, i.e. ‘may 
no power of man or devil interpose 
through envy to prevent my finding 
Christ by martyrdom’. As these are 
the only places in Ignatius where 
Gyros, CgXoüv, occur, it seems natural 
to explain the one passage by the 
other. The interpolator therefore 
correctly interprets the sense, when 
he adds rod eéx0po after ños. For 
the allusion see the next note. Other 
interpretations are; (1) ‘My passion- 
ate desire, my excessive ambition, 
for martyrdom’, as e.g. Voss p. 287, 
Smith p. 88, Jacobson ad /oc., Dressel 
ad loc.; but the language of Ignatius 
elsewhere throughout suggests that 
he would consider such a passion as 
the reverse of blameworthy ; (2) * The 
opposition and ill-treatment from my 
guards’ (Rom. 5), Nirschl p. ror; 
but I do not see how the connexion 
involved in yàp can be explained on 
this hypothesis. 

2. moÀXois pev ov daíverad] i.e. 
*many fail to see this jealousy of 
Satan in its true colours, and so 
unconsciously abet him. Ignatius 
is alluding, as I suppose, more es- 


v] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


163 


\ > , € om > 
V. My ov duvaua viv ra émovpawx “pakat; 
5 ` ^ N , G eon 
dXXd. PoBovmar un vnriois ovow piv BAdBnv Tapa. 
\ -~ / 7 > - 
KaL TVYYVWMOVELTE MOL, uizore ov dSuvnbévTES xeprcat 


a rpa*y'yaNoÜOrre. 


M M > Z 
Kat yap yw, ov KaboTi dédeuat kal 


prore] GL; uh g; cautus enim sum ne forte È; et caveo [A] (omitting the 


remaining words of the sentence). 


The insertion in 2 is probably a translator’s 
device to ease the awkwardness of the negatives. 
strangulemini L; implicemint 2; orpdyyadov Ore G; def. A. 


8 orpayyahwOnre] g; 
eyo] txt 


GLS,ZAg; add. Aéye (?) Sev-Syr 4c (but om. Sev-Syr 7): see Zahn Z. v. A. 


2 


p- 180, Zen. e£. Pol. Ep. p. 355. 


u 


kaĝórı] The rendering of L secundum 


quodcumque seems to represent kab’ 6 Tı, not kab’ órioüv, as Zahn supposes. 
kal] GS,ZAg Sev-Syr 4c, 7 (but om. Sev-Syr 7 v.1.); sed L. 


pecially to those Roman Christians 
who were desirous of obtaining a 
reversal of his sentence, and whose 
interposition he strongly deprecates 
in the letter to the Roman Church. 
He describes this interposition some- 
times as a (jos ‘jealousy’ (Rom. 
5, quoted in the last note), sometimes 
as a Backavia ‘envy’ (Rom. 7 Bac- 
kavia èv úpīv pr KaToiKeir@: Comp. 20, 
3 ovdémore €Backavare ovdevi). Itisa 
device of the devil who would effect 
his ruin, and he entreats the Chris- 
tians of Rome not to ally themselves 
with the Evil One (Rom. 7 6 ápyev roù 
aiQvos rovrov Ovapraca pe Bovderar... 
pndeis ov rv mapóvrov ouv Bone (ro 
aur@). 

mréov] i.e. ‘all the more because 
it eludes the notice of others’, if the 
word be genuine. 

mrodepet| ‘wars against me’, For 
this construction of moħepeîv with an 
accusative, which is common in 
Polybius, Diodorus, and later writers, 
see Wesseling on Diod. iv. 61: comp. 
Clem. Hom. xix. 20, Hippol p. 166 
Lagarde. On this tendency of the 
later language to substitute the ac- 
cusative for other cases, see the notes 
on Galatians v. 7, 26. 

3. Kkatadverar k.r.A.] Ephes. 13 


> in ^ ` 
kabapovvra ai Õvvápeis ToU Zaravà kai 


Avera ó ddeOpos a/ro? ; comp. John 
xii. 31, xvi. 11, 1 Joh. iii. 8. 

6 dpxev k.r..] See the note on 
Ephes. 17. 

V. *Am I not able to write about 
heavenly things? Yet I fear lest 
such strong meat should not be suit- 
ed for you babes. Forgive me, I 
would not have you suffocated. Nay, 
I myself, though I am privileged to 
be Christ's prisoner and though I 
could unfold all the mysteries of the 
celestial hierarchy, yet do not there- 
fore hold myself to be already a dis- 
ciple. We want much, in order that 
God may not be wanting to us.? 

6. gu) vyrios KTA] Suggested 
by 1 Cor. iii. I, 2, ovx nduvnOnv AaMj- 
cat piv øs mvevparikois, GAN os rap- 
kivots, às rioris ev Xpwrró* yada vpas 
éndriga, ov Bpdpa’ ova yap edvvacbe, 
GAN ovde éri viv Sdvacde. 

7. cvyyvepoveiré pou] ‘bear with 
me’, i.e. ‘when I refuse to give you 
this strong meat’: comp. Rom. 6 
ovyyveré pou. On the form ovyyve- 
poveiy see Lobeck Phryn. p. 382. 

opnaa] i ‘to take it in) The 
word is used transitively again 
Smyrn. 6. 

8. orpayyakobfre| ‘be choked’. 
The word occurs Tobit ii. 3. Other 
forms are oerpayyaAáe, orpayyadifo. 


PI 


164 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


^ , ` ` B: \ 
Svvauar voetv Ta émovpdna kal Tas Tomobecias Tas 


\ i \ # e / 
ayyeAtkas Kal Tas CUOTATELIS Tas APXOVTIKAS, OPATA 


r Ovvaua. vo&v] gS,EA Sev-Syr (twice); duvduevos (om. voe) GL* (not 


potens scire, as it is commonly read). 
the supposition that voet is a gloss: see the lower note. 
GLS,[A][g] Sev-Syr 4c; om. Sev-Syr 7. 


ôn) Lg Sev-Syr (twice); om. S,ZA. 


The consensus of authorities excludes 
2 kal] 

3 ğôn] G (written ef 
ua09rjs eim] GLZ (discipulus 


sum mihi) A g Sev-Syr (twice); discipuli estis mihi S, (doubtless an error 


of transcription in the Syriac, JIN for n'n). 


Sev-Syr 4c; vobis 
pot [g]. 


L (the Mss, 


For the metaphor see Hieron. 77257. 
84 (I. p. 525) ‘ne parvuli atque lacten- 
tes solidioris cibi edulio suffocemur’, 
Op. Imperf. in Matt. Hom. xxxviii 
(Chrysost. Of. VI. p. clxi) ‘sicut enim 
infanti si dederis fragmentum panis, 
quoniam angustas habet fauces, offo- 
catur magis quam nutritur; sic et 
homini imperfecto in fide et puero 
sensibus si altiora mysteria sapientiae 
volueris dicere, angustam' habens 
fidem et sensum magis scandalizatur 
quam aedificatur! (comp. xlix, zZ. p. 
ccv), passages quoted by Pearson 
(V. £. p. 517, and ad loc). 

ov kaĝórı éca) Comp. Ephes. 
3 el yàp kai ƏéŠsua, év T@ ovopare, 
ote amnpricpa èv “Incod Xpior' 
vov yap apxny €xe Tod pabnrever Oa. 
On the manner in which Ignatius 
regards his bonds, see the note there. 

I. Ovvapat voeiv] ‘am competent 
to understand’. For this expression 
comp. Hermas Szm. ix. 9, I4; so 
Eph. iii. 4 Ovvac6e...vofca. Pear- 
son saw that this must be substi- 
tuted for Óvvápevos; and his opinion 
has been confirmed beyond question 
by the versions and citations dis- 
covered since. The change is not 
great; AyNameNnoe! for ÀYNAMENOC 
(Svvapa: being written dvvape). 

tas romoÜeoías k.r..] ‘the disposi- 
tions of the angels’, i.e. their distribu- 
tion in their several ranks or in the 
several celestial spheres : comp. Clem, 


4 du] GS, 


but doubtless a scribe's error for nobis); 
For ZA, which have a singular, see the next note. 


Alex. Strom. vii. 2 (p. 833) ñ pakapía 


dyyeXoOeoía Kai 8 uéxpis Nay aù- 


Tv Ador vm’ dXXots eÉ évós kai OV évós 
c'o(ópevoi re kai aà(ovres Ó tar erd y a- 
rat. For romo£eaía ‘a topographical 
description’ see Cic. ad Att. i. 13, 16. 
Just such a roroĝesia of the celestial 
hierarchy is given in the Zest. Duod. 
Patr. Levi 3, where the different 
ranks of angels with their several 
names are distributed through the 
seven heavens. The large space 
which angelology occupied in Jewish 
and Christian speculation in the 
Apostolic age, appears from the in- 
cidental language of S. Paul; e.g. 
Ephes. i. 20, 21 vmepava maons dpxT)s 
kai é£ovaías kal Suvapews kai KupioTnTos 
kai ravrós ovóuaros ovoua(opévov 
K.T.A., Col. i. 16 rà óparà kai rà dópara, 
eire Opovor etre KUpLoTnTes eire apxat 
eire é£ovoíau and the condemnation 
of Opnokeia tav dyyéNov Col. ii. 18. 
On this whole subject see the notes 
Colossians i. 16, ii. 18; and to the 
references there given add Papias 
(Routh Rel. Sacr. 1. p. 14), Hermas 
Vis, iii. 4, and (for Jewish angelology) 
Gfrorer Fahrh. des Heils X. p. 357 sq, 
Eisenmenger Enid. Fudenth, 11. p. 
374, Edersheim Zzfe and Times of 
Fesus I. p. 748 sq. See also the 
discussion about angels in Orig. c. 
Cels. vi. 30 sq, especially c. 40, where 
Celsus brings this charge against 
the Christians, éepakéva. mapá Tud 


v] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


165 


\ fi \ ^ af 

TE Kal aopaTa, Tapa ToUTO Hon kai pabnTHs eu 
` \ Chr f ss tas 

7oXAa yap uiv Neier, iva Ocot un NerTwpeba. 


5 VI. 


Aeurópue0a] GLS, Sev-Syr; dmoNeQ00 [g]. 


PRU as \ 
llapakaNeo ovv vas, ok yw GAN j dyamn 


The whole sentence moid... 


Aeuróue0a is thus translated in the Oriental versions; multum enim deficimus 
ne a deo destituamur Sy; multum enim deficiens sum a perfectione quae digna 
est deo È; sed quod valde deficiens sum a similitudine dei A. Thus ZA seem 
to give loose paraphrases of the original Syriac rendering, which is preserved 


da Se 


After this sentence = has estote incolumes perfecte in patientia iesu christi 


dei nostri, which forms the conclusion of the Epistle to the Romans (see on Rom. 
Io). 5 h aydrn] GLS,Ag; ù xdpis Dam-Rup 1 (see r Cor. xv. 10). 


mpeoßurépors THs muerépas Soéns rvy- 
xavovot BiBria BapBapa Saypdvey Ovó- 
para éxovra kai repareías. For the 
passage here comp. Smyrn. 6 và 
émoupaua kai rj Od€a Tay ayyéAwy kal oí 
üpxovres óparo re Kal áóparot. 

2. TAS cvotaces k.r.A.] ‘the as- 
semblages, musterings, of the hea- 
venly rulers’; comp. é8wwai ovora- 
GeismmbOly bs XXIV de 43, XXX. TONO: 
The dpxovres here, like the apyai in 
S. Paul, are angelic beings: comp. 
Justin Dial. 36 (p. 255) oí ev rois 
ovpavois raxÜévres vro TOD Oeo dpxov- 
res (quoted by Jacobson on .Szzyzz. 
6). For dpxovrwós see Celsus in 
Orig. c. Cels. vi. 27 érépov 8e rõv Ne- 
yopévov ápxovrikv K.T.. (comp. $ 33), 
from which it appears that in some 
systems of angelology ápxovri«oi de- 
noted a particular class of the ce- 
lestial hierarchy. Jacobson would 
translate cvoráces ‘the conflicts’, 
comparing Ephes. 13 modepos émovpa- 
viov kai emtyetoy, but such an idea 
seems to be quite inappropriate to 
this context. The word occurs again 
Rom. 5. 

ópará re kal dópara] The know- 
ledge previously mentioned (rà érov- 
pdvia) has reference to the things 
invisible; but opara are also named 
here (after the precedent of S. Paul, 
Col. i. 16) for the sake of including 
all things which fall within the range 


of cognisance. So again in Smyrn. 
6 (see the note). For opara kal dópara 
see also Rom. 5. 

3: mapa rovro] ‘on this account’: 
see Rom. 5 (with the note). 

pabnrns eim) See the notes on 
Ephes. 1, 3. 

4. modda yàp k.r.A.] i.e. ‘we still 
lack much, that we may not be left 
behind by God, may not fail in find- 
ing God’, where AeímeoÓa: O«o0 is 
the negative of émwvxyeiv Oeo), a 
favourite Ignatian phrase (see the 
note on Magn. 1) For the con- 
struction here comp. Hermas Vs. iii. 
I cot O€ moda Aeímet iva k.r.A.; and 
for the characteristic Ignatian play 
on eiren Aeurópe0a, see the note on 
Smyrn. 5 paddov dé k.r.À. 

npiv| i.e. you and myself alike.’ 

VI. ‘I therefore entreat you—yet 
not I but the love of Christ—to eat 
only the wholesome food of Christi- 
anity and to abstain from the noxious 
herbs of heresy. These false teach- 
ers mix poison with Jesus Christ; 
they impose upon men with their 
plausible professions ; and the deadly 
drug, thus disguised with a sweet 
flavour, is thoughtlessly taken, though 
death is its consequence. 

5. IlapakaAó ovy k.r.A.] The form 
of the sentence is here suggested by 
1 Cor. vii. 10 capayyéAAo, oùk eyo 
dÀAà ó Kupvos, 


166 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


5 = ^ , E E e A 
Incov Xpiorov, uovm TH Xpiotiavyn Tpopy xpiia 6e, 

> [74 $ ` ° a 
dANoTpias Qé Botavns deéyeo0e, iris €éoriv aipeots 


I'Iycoü Xpwro0] GLS,g; rod kvplov Tuv "I. X. A Dam-Rup. Xpioriavy | 
GL; xpwriwik; Dam-Rup; christianismi A; gratiarum actionis (eúxapuoTu ?) 
SUD Bb b xpfja0e...&mréxec0e] LS,A; xpfj0a...Aàméxecón. G Dam-Rup; 
al. g: see the lower note. 3 of kal iQ mapeumMékovaw] of kapol ma- 
peumrMékovsw G; kal mapeumAékovow Dam-Rup; quae et inquinatis implicat T; 
kal Tov lòv mpooTXékoyres THs mhávns TH yAuKelg mpoonyopla g. The renderings 
of the passage in the Oriental Versions are: eorum. qui comimiscent semetipsos 
in (cum) jesu christo S45 jam commiscent semetipsos cum jesu christo A. They 
may have had simply of kai mapeumdéxovow and supplied the sezísos to make 
sense. The rendering of L perhaps arises from a further corruption of the 
corrupt text of G, ovxarpovrapeumdexovow being read of kal purap’ épmMékovaw; 


I. mpoog| Comp. Rom. 7 ovx 7do- 
pac tpopy pOopas. 

xpo] The imperatives, besides 
being better supported than the in- 
finitives, are more in the manner of 
Ignatius, who prefers this mood with 
mapaxadew ; see below Š 12 mapakaAet 
...Ovapevere, Rom. 4 mapakarG vyas, 
py...yernobe, Philad. 8 mapakaAa Që 
Upas, pndev mpáccere (where the infi- 
nitive mpacoew has been substituted 
in some. copies). So too mapawó 
with an imperative in Magn. 6. The 
exception is Polyc. I mapakaAG oe 
mpoo Oetvat K.T.À. 

2. [Jjorávgs] Heresy or error is 
called Boravyn, a rank weed, a noxious 
herb, again in ZZZëes. 10, Philad. 3. 
For the meaning of Bordm see the 
note on the former passage. In the 
Gospel of the Egyptians our Lord 
was reported as having said mácav 
aye Bordyny, thy 86 mwpíav éxovcay 
py payns, Clem. Alex. Strom. iii. 9 
(p. 541). 

3. oi kai id] This emendation 
involves a very simple change, Katiw! 
for kaipol. For the construction of 
(i.e. of aiperwkot understood from the 
preceding aipeous) comp. e.g. Thucyd. 
vi. 80 dzà lleXorovvraov mapecopévgs 
ddeNeias, ot ràvOe kpeiacovs eir) TÓ 
zapázay, and see Kühner Š 356, 11. 


p. 49 sq, Matthiae Š 435. For the 
metaphor of iós, as used here, comp. 
Hermas Sim. ix. 26, Clem. Hom. 
X. I4. See also Clem. Hon. xix. 15 
ovx épmeróv 6 lòs eipyá(ero, oU rÀv 
kakôv Boravóàv ai éevépyea, for the 
same connexion of words as here. 
Zahn refers to Iren. i. 27. 4 ‘Christi 
quidem Jesu nomen tanquam irrita- 
mentum proferentes, Simonis autem 
impietatem varie introducentes, mor- 
tificant multos...per dulcedinem et 
decorem nominis amarum et malig- 
num principis apostasiae serpentis 
venenum porrigentes eis.’ 
mapeumAékovaw] ‘infuse’. An ob- 
jection has been raised to such an 
emendation as the one adopted on 
the ground that it *vitio incongruae 
metaphorae laborat? (Churton in 
Pearson V. Z. p. 103). If indeed the 
derivation of the word be scrutinized, 
we have in this expression ‘inter- 
weave poison’ a combination of me- 
taphors as violent as e.g. in 1 Tim. 
vi. I9 amoOncavpifovras Oepédiov. A 
liberty however might well be con- 
ceded to an inexperienced writer like 
Ignatius, which the greatest of mo- 
dern poets has asserted, when he 
speaks of ‘taking arms against a sea 
of troubles’. But usage entirely jus- 
tifies the combination. It appears 


vi] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


<Ñ ` ar , 
Ol Kat lw TTQQEMT ACEKOUGLV 


167 


‘Incovv Xpiotov, karaËuo- 


, e i , , \ 
TITTEVOMEVOL, WSTEP Üavaciwuov bapuakov didovTeEs uera 


comp. Æphes. 16, where purapds is rendered zzquznatus (the only passage where 
the word occurs in Ignatius). The paraphrase of g points to the true reading. 
Voss first suggested ot xal tots, which some later editors have accepted. I 
have substituted ¿@ for dots, as nearer to the traces of G, as corresponding 
to the singular in g, and as more natural in itself: see the lower note. 

karaitmiurevóuevo] Dam-Rup (see the note on Zphes. 16 kaxoüiackaMa); 
kar’ á£a» murevóuevo. G; om. L (perhaps because the translator could make 
nothing of the unusual word); 2 simplices credere faciant A; ita ut credatur-iis 


(credantur) Sı; al. g. 
TLOTEVO [LEV OL. 


that the words mapeumdékew, mapep- 
mAokn, were employed especially in 
this connexion, as medicinal or culi- 
nary terms; e.g. by the physician 
Diphilus of Siphnus in Athen. ii. 
p. 57 € oi evpóflXot...Üdpakos kalap- 
Tikol Oia TO &xew mapepmemAeypnévov 
To pytiva@des, Agatharchides in Photius 
Bibl. ccl. 12 rovrov [rod xapmod rob 
madtovpov] cvupwyévros koAAóOes pev 
Tò may TOAD paddAov yiverat, Ookei Ó 
otov Ove paros j TapewmAoKNsS rád£w 
éyew. The more common words 
however in this sense in medical 
writers are the single compounds, 
msapamAékew, mapamAokj; e.g. Galen 
Op. XIV. p. 168 (ed. Kühn) tepas Bo- 
Tavyns pikpov TL mapamAékov, 20. p. 367 
déovrar Tis rGv orupovT@y mapamokfjs 
..mapamAékew Te Tov orvQóvrov, ib. 
p. 398 orvpaka Tiv úypàv pigas Naig 
mapámAeke, Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. i. 
102 xupav twv mapamiokj, Clem. 
Alex. Strom. i. Y (p. 325) otov ndvcpa 
éoTiw mapamemAeypévov abAnrov Bpa- 
part. See also Macar. Magn. iii. 37 
(p. 133) evumAé£avres...i 7) ovpmhox 
rod SiaBeBrnpévov dappuákov Oofcica 
k.T-À.; comp. 20. iv. 25 Tò dvopa roO Xpt- 
cro) cvpmAakev rois 00a. Thus the 
language here will have a parallel in 
the somewhat elaborate medical meta- 
phor of PoZyc. 2. The verb zapejmAé- 
kew occurs in other connexions in 


The renderings of AS, are paraphrases of xaragwo- 


Clem. Hom. vi. 19 and zd. Ep. Clem. 5. 

carakvoriorevopevor] ‘imposing by 
their professions of honesty’; comp. 
Polyb. xii. 17. 1 tva € p) 0ófepev ràv 
TylukoUrov avdpav kara£uomio reve Oat, 
prynoOnodpeba pâs maparáf£eos k.r.À. 
For the bad sense of dérómio ros, ‘spe- 
cious, plausible’, and so ‘an impostor,’ 
see the parallel passage PAz/ad. 2 
moAXol yap úkor dÉuómia rot hovi kaki 
alypaXorí(ovaw robs Geodpopous (with 
the note). From this comes the verb 
åéiomioreveo Gat, which on the analogy 
of dcareverOar, Siadextixever Oat, mep- 
mepeverOa, mapaBorever Oat, etc. (see 
the note on Philippians ii. 30), sig- 
nies ‘to play the d£imioros", ‘to 
make loud professions of honesty’. 
It does not appear to occur in extant 
standard writers, but is recognised 
by Hesychius s. v. Bpev0úec au 
Ovporoba, dpyiter Oa, a&umiareveg Gat, 
and by Suidas s. v. avametornypiay, 
a&wmitevovrat Oe oi dudacKkador Né- 
yovres K.T.À. (from the scholiast on 
Arist. ud. 866). Hence the com- 
pound xarafsmortever Gar, ‘to over- 
power, or impose upon, by playing the 
part of an démos, on the analogy 
of karadafoveverOat, kataveanever Oat, 
xaracoBapever Oat, karag«reveo Oat, KAT- 
epovever Oat, katepBpiOever Oar, Kario- 
xupeveoOa, etc. There can be no 
doubt about the reading here, though 


168 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


oivouérros, ÓTep ð ay vow ddeas NapBava év noovn 


kakig TO aoÜavetv. 


VII. 


Ss \ , 
QuAaTTeoÜe ovy TOUS TOLOVTOUS. 


ToUTO O€ 


e / > £ ^ 
Zora, Viv u Qvatovpévois kai OVTLY AXwWPLOTOLS [ Oeod | 


I Ómep...Tó áàmoÜavei] see the lower note; dep ó &yvoðv Hdéws apBdver év 
j8ovj kake? (so written and punctuated) rò dmoÜaveiv G; rep ó dryvoov hõéws Nap- 


Raver, èv dori] Kak rò årobðdvew Dam-Rup; quod qui ignorat delectabiliter accipit et 
in delectatione mala mori L, (where e£ is added to help out what seemed to be a 
defective construction); Z/a wt is qui non movit in voluntate mortem accipiat 815 ut 


ii quos non cognoscunt cum voluptate mortem accipiant A. 
Dam-Rup [g] (but in g the verb is dogaNlfer0e) ; rois rotovrots G. 


it depends solely on the quotation in 
the Paral. Rupef. 

I. olivouéAvwos] ‘wine mixed with 
honey’; comp. Polyb. xii. 2.7. Dios- 
corides (Mat. Med. v. 16) explains 
wherein it differs from otvos peditirns, 
how it is made, and what are its me- 
dicinal qualities. For the idea in the 
text comp. Theoph. aZ Autol. ii. 12 
kaÜámep düppakóv te ÓnAgrüpur ovy- 
kpabev pehute Ü) owo Ñ érépo Twi rò mü 
moret BAaBepov k.t.r., Anon. adv. Marc. 
i. 85 (Tertull. OZ. 11. p. 783, Oehler) 
‘dulcique cruentum circumfert mi- 
seris mixtum cum melle venenum’, 
Lactant. D. Z. v. 1 ‘incautos animos 
facile irretire possunt suavitate ser- 
monis..mella sunt haec venenum 
tegentia...circumlinatur modo pocu- 
lum caelesti melle sapientiae’, Ephrem 
Syrus Of. Syr. II. p. 554 A ‘et pro- 
pinavit simplicibus amaritudines (ve- 
nena) dulcedine commixtas' (speak- 
ing of the hymns of the heretic 
Bardesanes) Thus these impostors 
were mimicking genuine physicians, 
who disguised their curative drugs 
in the same way: Plut. Mor. p. 13 D 
iarpol Td mikpà TOV pappaxoy’ TOLS 
yNukégt xvpots karapwyvvvres THY $P- 
Ww émi rò cvppépov mápoðov eüpov, 
Julian Caesar. p. 314 oùk oloba, d 
IIpófje, dre ra mkpà þåppaka puyvivtes 
ot iarpol TO peNikpáro mpoodépovor; 


3 Tovs TotoÚrous] 
4 9eo0] 


ómep xr..] Comp. Clem. Hom. 
x. 12 ov yap, et rts mpooAGBor Oavacipov 
Qappákov adyvody, ovK drobyncket. 

adeds| ‘without apprehension’, as 
e.g. Plut. Mor. p. 477 ddeds kal avv- 
mómros. I venture on this conjecture, 
which is suggested by the interpola- 
tors paraphrase tva ó mívov, r$] yAvkv- 
ráry kAameis TOLÓTNTE THY ‘yevoTUKHY 
aicOnow, apudaktas TO Qavdre mept- 
map. The alternative would be to 
eject 7déws altogether, as a gloss of èv 
noovn. At the close of the sentence 
the reading of the Greek MS kdke¿ ro 
dm ofaveiy is tempting; but the paral- 
lel passage Phzlad. 2 (quoted above 
on kara£imtorevópevot) is decisive in 
favour of kak? (rather than kxdkei), 
and this is also supported by the 
great preponderance of  authori- 
ties. 

VII. ‘Therefore be on your guard 
againstsuch men. Your best security 
is to shun pride and self-sufficiency, 
and to hold fast to Jesus Christ, to 
your bishop, and to the ordinances 
of the Apostles. He only is pure, 
who is within the pale of the altar. 
In other words, he that acts apart 
from the bishop and presbyters and 
deacons is not pure in conscience 

3. To)s row rovs] This correction 
is necessary, as duAdoocecOa does 
not take a dative. A similar cor- 


vit] 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 


169 


, ^ ^ ` ^ , ^ 
Incov XpwrToU kai oU èmiokórov kal TOV ÒLA TAY UATWV 


N > / ens A / »* £ , 
TWV ATOTTOAWY. O évTOS Üvoiao-rnptov wv Kalapos ée rw, 


€ oe > \ 0 , N 5 , > , 
O O€ EKTOS VOLaDTHPLOU @V OU kalapos €O TL TOUTEO- 


GL; om. A. It seems however to have been in the text used by the interpolator 
(either with or without 'Igsoü Xpicrod), for g has elvar dxcplorovs Oeod...aldcis0e 0€ 
kal rov érloxorov UuGv ws xpwróv, ka0à Upiv ol waxdpror Ovrázavro dmócroNo. See 
the lower note. 7 9 6€...v où ka0após éorw] gui vero extra altare est 
non mundus est L; om. G (doubtless owing to homeeoteleuton). The clause is 
recognised in g, where the sentence is abridged 6 8? ¿kràs dv oŭrós éorw ó xwpls 
k.T.X. For the whole sentence ó óë éxrés.,.rouréorw A has merely e£: the trans- 
lator perhaps had before him a text with the same omission as in G and, finding 
nothing to explain Tovrécrw, struck it out and substituted a connecting particle in 


its place. 


rection was required in the Ms, 
Magn. 6 évrpérea 0e addndors. 

4. pn pvovovpévors] Comp. Magn. 
I2 oida Gre ov Quouobo 08. In both 
..passages Ignatius refers to the pride 
of self-assertion, which rebels against 
lawful authority. 

, O«o?] Probably this word should 
be omitted with the Armenian Ver- 
sion. Though Ignatius frequently 
speaks of Jesus Christ as God, it 
may be questioned whether he ever 
so styles Him without some explana- 
tory or qualifying phrase; see the 
note on EfAes. inscr. rod Oeo nua. 
Hence the awkwardness of the ex- 
pression is at once apparent. For 
other doubtful cases see Szyrm. 6, 
10, with the notes. If Oeo be re- 
tained, it should perhaps be separated 
from Xpiwrrov), ‘of God, of Jesus 
Christ, and of the bishop, etc.’; but 
the absence of the connecting par- 
ticle is hardly consistent with the 
genius of the Greek language. In- 
stances of such omission occur in- 
deed in the existing Greek text of 
Ignatius; Š 12 eis ruvjv marpós, Inood 
Xpuaro0, kai rv amoaróNev, Philad. 9 
rjv mapovoiay Tov Kupiov rdv Ineo? 
XpioToU, ró máÜos avrov, kal rjv dvá- 
craw, but in both passages there are 
good grounds for questioning the 


reading (see the notes). 

5. tev Ouraypárov x.r..] The 
reference is doubtless to the institu- 
tion of episcopacy. Early tradition 
points to S. John as mainly instru- 
mental in establishing an episcopal 
organisation in Asia Minor, and to 
him more especially Ignatius may be 
referring here; comp. Clem. Alex. 
Quis Div. Salu. 42 (p. 959) Omov 
pév émwkómovs karacTücGv, Omov Oe 
óAas ékkAgaías dppocey k.r.X., Fragm. 
Murat. p. 33 (ed. Tregelles) * cohor- 
tantibus condiscipulis et episcopis 
suis’, Tert. adv. Marc. iv. 5 ‘ordo 
episcoporum ad originem recensus 
in Ioannem stabit auctorem.’ So 
Irenæus iii. 3. 4 says of Polycarp 
úrò dmocróAov Karaotabels els Thy 
'Agíav èv TH ev Zpopvg exkAnoia eri- 
okoros, while elsewhere (v. 20. I), 
more especially in reference to the 
Asiatic elders, he speaks of ‘epis- 
copi quibus apostoli tradiderunt ec- 
clesias’. See Philippians p. 212 sq. 

6. ó évros Ovovactnpiov k.r.X.] For 
the meaning of Ovoiraorýpiov, ‘the 
place of sacrifice’, ‘the court of the 
altar’, and for the application here, 
see the note on Aes. 5. It sym- 
bolizes the congregation lawfully 
gathered together under its duly ap- 
pointed officers. 


170 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vu 


TU» 6 xwpis émioKOTOU kai mpec Bvrepíov kal Staxovwv 


Tp4G cov TL, OUTOS OU E iade éG TiV TH TUVELONC EL. 


VIII. 


1 émuwkómov] G; Tov émurkómou g. 


Ovx ézei éyvwv Tow UTOvV TL év Upiv, adda 


mpecBureptov] GL*; rdv mpecBv- 


répwv g; sacerdotibus A (this is the common rendering of mpecBvréptov in A, and 


therefore it determines nothing as to the reading). 


kal Siaxdvwv] kal duaxovou 


GL; kal r&v àkóvov g (having inserted articles before the previous words); om. A. 


2 mpacowy Tt] GL; rt mpacowr g. 


written above the line, though prima manu, in G. 
6 dvaxrioacbe] Cotelier; dvaxricac@e G (which similarly in 


editors. 


I. ó xapis émwkómov x.T.A.] See 
the note on Magn. 7. 

9iakóvev] This alteration is neces- 
sary with mpeoBurepiov, which seems 
certainly to be the correct reading. 
If mpeoBurépov could be retained, 
Ouakóvov might stand. The alterna- 
tive is to eject kai O.akóvov as a later 
interpolation, since it is wanting in 
the Armenian. 

2. kaÜapós k.r.A.] Comp. r Tim. 
ii. 9, 2 Tim. i. 3, êv katapà avveiàj- 
get. 

VIII. *I do not say this, because 
you have already fallen into such 
errors, but I wish to put you on your 
guard against the snares of the devil. 
Therefore be gentle-minded ; renew 
yourselves in faith, which is the 
flesh, and love, which is the blood, 
of Jesus Christ. Let no man enter- 
tain any ill-will against his neigh- 
bour. Give no opportunity to the 
heathen, lest through the folly of a 
few the whole body of God's people 
be evil spoken of, and thus the woe 
denounced by the prophet fall upon 
you.’ 

3. OvK eel] ie. OV Aéyoe radra 
enel k.r.À.; See Magn. 11 (with the 
note). 

4. mpopvrdccw] ‘I keep watch 
over you in good time’, as Smyrn. 4 
mpopurdcow de twas aro róv Onpiav 


4 Tpoopwy] mpd épav G. 5 TH] 
Hence it is omitted by many 


rà» dvÓpemopópQoev: comp. Magn. 
II. In Xen. Mem. ii. 7. 14 it is used 
of the watch-dog, who is represented 
as saying to the sheep éydó eim ó 
Kal vas avras cé(ev ote pnte vm 
avOpdrev kréntecOa pre UTO AVK@Y 
dpmá(eoÓa, erel jpeis ye, el py eyo 
mpopurdtroime ópüs, ovd av vé- 
peshat Svvacde K.T.. The same 
metaphor of the flock guarded against 
the attacks of wild beasts appears 
to underlie both these Ignatian pas- 
sages. The false teachers are wolves 
in sheep’s clothing: comp. PZz/ad. 2 
mov è 0 mouu]uv oT, eket Os mpoóflara 
dkoXovbeire’ modol yap AVKoL a&€uómuo-- 
Tot K.T.À., with the end of $ 6 in this 
epistle. 

tas evéðpas| Comp. Philad. 6. 

5. mpaimaderay| The word occurs 
only once in the Greek Bible, 1 Tim. 
vi. II, where the common text has 
mpaornra, which the interpolator sub- 
stitutes here also. The verb mpaiza- 
ctv (mpaorabeiv) occurs Philo de Prof. 
I (I. p. 547), and the substantive 
npaimddera ib. de Abr. 37 (V1. p. 31). 

6. dvaXafóvres] ‘taking up’, ie. 
‘as your proper arms of defence’; 
comp. e.g. Eph. vi. 13, 16, dvaAdfere 
Thy mavorrAtay, dvadaBdvres rov Oupedv. 

avaxtnoacbe] ‘recover, refresh’. 
This is doubtless the right reading. 
The phrase dvaxraoOat éavróv is com- 


viii] 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 


ry 


, € ^ r 5 / ^ 
TpoPvAaoow Unas Ovras uov dhyaTNTOVS, Tpoopav Tas 


5 €vedpas Tov Siaf3dNov. 


e a D \ m 
UES oUv THY TpaUzaÜeuav 


5 , > , e \ 5 
dvaNhaBovres avakTnoacbe éavroUs év TIO TEL, Ó ¿su 


` ^ , A > > 7 y e ^ 
cap TOU Kupiov, kai év yarn, O éotw aîua 'lnooü 


Philad. 6 writes kricwyta for xrjowvrm); recreate L; requiescere-facite SA: see 


the lower note. 


ô] guod L; ös G; quae (or quod) Sı; al. Ag. The whole clause 


runs in Sj, ¿z fide quae (quod) est in spe (NVIDIA) et im convivio (jucunditate 
NDD122) sanguinis jesu christi (where dryám is taken in the sense of a love-feast, 
comp. Smyrn. 8); in A, fide et spe et coena. sanguinis christi (where, as Petermann 
foresaw, there is a confusion of the Syriac NIDA caro and NID sge;). 


mon; e.g. Epict. Dzss. iii. 25. 4, Jos. 
Ant. ix. 6. 4, Dion Chrys. Ov». vii. 
p.223. As it denotes recovery after 
fatigue or hunger or sickness or 
wounds or the like, we must suppose 
that the peril of the Trallians was 
more serious than Ignatius was will- 
ing to state in words (Oùk eret éyvov 
K.T.A.. The metaphor in both dva- 
Aafgeiv and avaxracOa éavrovs is 
probably taken from campaigning; 
comp. Polyc. 6. If the other verb 
(dvaxrigerv) had been used, the words 
would have been dvaxricate éauroús 
rather than dvakrícac 6e éavrovs. 

6 srw capé x.r..] This is the 
food which their refreshment de- 
mands. The reference is only indi- 
rectly to the eucharist. The eucha- 
ristic bread and wine, while repre- 
senting the flesh and blood of Christ, 
represent also faith and love. Faith 
is the flesh, the substance of the 
Christian life; love is the blood, the 
energy coursing through its veins and 
arteries. See esp. Clem. Alex. Paed. 
i. 6 (p. 121) Bpópa de rj mloTu eis 
Oewédtov Tis KaTNXNTEwS TUVETTPAapUErN, 
Ü 0) arepepvworépa Tis axons vrapxovea 
Bpdpate dmeckaterat...kal ó Kupwos... 
érépos é£rveykev 81d avuBóXov, Payeré 
pov Tas cápkas, elroy, kai Ilíeré pov 
rò alga, évapyés Tis míoreos Kal THs 


émayyéMas TO mórikov aGAAnyopay, 8c 
Gv 7j ékkAgaía...dpüerai re kal avéerat, 
cvykporeira( ve kal cupmnyvura e£ 
duo, cøpaTos èv Tis mia reos, ruyis 
0€ trys éNmí0os, domep kal o Kupuos èk 
capkós kal aluaros' TQ yap övre aipa 
Ths mioTeos 7) eAmis, ep As avvéxeras, 
kaÜámep Uo Nrvxfjs, 7) miotis’ Ouamvev- 
caons 06 THs éAmidos Sikny  ékpvévros 
aipatos TO (@Tikoy Tis mioTews ÚTEK- 
Avera, where the application of the 
image is exactly the same as here, 
except that ‘hope’ is substituted for 
‘love’. Zahn (1. v. A. p. 349 sq) 
explains the words here differently ; 
he supposes that faith and love are 
so described, as the means whereby 
we participate in the flesh and blood 
of Christ, i.e. are united with Him. 
See Rom. 7 ápróv Gcod Oéhw 0 éarw 
capé rod Xpiorov...xal mopa Oedw TÒ 
aipa aùro® 6 eat ayámn apOapros (with 
the note). In Pilad. 5 mpoodvydàv 
TH eVayyeAio às capkt Inood, we have 
a different application of the eucha- 
ristic metaphor. See also the notes 
on Ephes. 5, Smyrn. 6, 12. 

For the neuter relative 6, referring 
to the feminine substantives miete, 
dydamy respectively, see the notes on 
Magn. 9, 10: for the combination of 
‘faith’ and ‘love’, see the note on 
Ephes. 1. 


172 


Xpirrou. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[viu 


^ 1 ^ , Sey 24 P \ 
pnoels UMOV KATA TOU TAHT LOV EXETW yn 


^ » € \ , a». J. 
ddopuas didoTe Tots éOveow, Yva pn ot  ONvyovs 


appovas TO évOeov rAñn0os BraocpnuhTar 


Ar of émi 
BAACQDHMEITAI. 


MATAIOTHTI TO 


zi 


ONOMA MOY È 


r Tyolov] g Dam-Vat 6. This is also the reading of G, though several edd. 


print zAycíov, which appears also in the Casanatensian copy. 


éxérc] 


txt G; add. rı here, Dam-Vat; add. rı after Up» g; add. aliguid (before 


habeat) L; add. stmultatem A. 


3 Tò evOeov] Dam-Vat; rò êv 0e@ G; quae 


in deo L (but in $ ro dex is translated sine deo); dei A. The reading év@eov 
perhaps underlies the loose paraphrase of g, where ó Aóyos kal ù didacKadla is 


substituted for rò éOeov mAHOos. 


I. éxéro] So eyew TL kard Twos, 
Matt. v. 23, Mark xi. 25 ; &yew xara 
Twos, OTLK.T.A. Apoc. ii. 4, 20. Zahn 
refers to Hermas Mand. ii. Z£euç kara 
ToU dOeA o0, Simm. ix. 23 of kar aì- 
Xov éxovres (comp. Vis. iii. 6), for the 
omission of the accusative here. 
Comp. also 2 Cor. v. 12 Éyew mpós 
twa, ‘to be able to answer another’. 
The upper note shows how tu is 
supplied differently in different texts. 

p? dQoppàs k.r...] I Tim. v. 14 
pnòðepiav dghoppny Siddvac TQ. dvrikei- 
pévo Aotdopias xápuw. 

3. €v6cov] Comp. Eus. Z. E. x. 4 
(p. 470) this duerépas evOéov mo(uvys. 

Oval yàp x.r.A.] A loose quotation 
from Is. lii. 5 Oavpatere kai 0AoAv- 
(ere rade éyer ó Kupios, A’ vdpas 
dia mavtTòs TO voud pov BAaodnpeirar 
ev rois &Üvecw, a passage which is 
likewise quoted indirectly by S. Paul 
Rom. ii. 24; comp. 1 Tim. vi. r, Tit. 
ii. 5. See also Ezek. xxxvi.23. None 
of these other passages however ac- 
count for the departure of the Igna- 
tian quotation from the LXX of Isaiah : 
nor is it explained by the original 
Hebrew. The interpolator brings it 
somewhat nearer to the LXX; Oval 
yap, nou ò mpodyrns às èk mpoadmov 
ToU Oeod, OV ob Td Ovond pou BXacd- 
petra, ev Tots €Oveow, but the chief 


Pracgdnunra] Pracpnuetrar G. 


peculiarity Ovai...6¢ oó remains. As 
the Armenian Versionomits the whole 
clause Oval yàp...émí rwev Bdacdy- 
petra, it might be thought that this 
quotation was a later interpolation ; 
see instances of interpolated quota- 
tions, Ephes. 1, 2, Rom. 3, 6. But, 
besides that it is found in all the 
other authorities, the passage of 
Isaiah is similarly quoted in Polycarp 
Phil, to ‘Vae autem [illi] per quem 
nomen Domini blasphematur’, and 
twice in the Apost. Const. i. IO, lii. 5, 
Oval yap, @no(, d¢ od Tò Ovopd pov 
Braopnueirar èv rois £Óveaw (but with- 
out the Ovai in a third passage, vii. 
24); and as both these writers had 
the Epistles of Ignatius before them, 
there is a certain presumption that 
they derived the quotation from him. 
Moreover the Armenian omission is 
easily explained by the homceoteleu- 
ton BrAaodnunrat, Braopnpeirar. There 
is no trace of the Ovai in the Hexa- 
plaric versions; and Justin (D7ad. 17, 
p: 235) and Tertullian (adv. Marc. iii. 
23, iv. 14) both quote the passage 
without it. For instances in later 
fathers where it is quoted Oval x.7.X., 
as here, see Cotelier on Apost. Const. 
i. Io. In[Clem. Rom.] ii. 13 we have 
apparently this same passage quoted 
in two forms (see the note there). 


Ix] : TO THE TRALLIANS. 


IX.  KedwOnre ov, 


173 


[4 to^ \ 5 ^ 
orav vp xwpis 'lycoU 


^ ^ > , ^ > 
XpwToU Aady Tis, TOU ék yévous Aaveid, Tod èk 


P A 3 ^ 5 , af , 3 
Mapias, os aXnÜws éyevvnOn, ëpayév rte kal émev, 


Oval...Bracgnuetrac] GL; and so g (with additions and variations); om. A: 


see the lower note. 


Theodt; after /oguatur [S,]; om. A. 
This is clearly the reading of G. 


6 otv] GLg Theodt; om. [S,] A. 
(07 av) LS ig Theodt; zz omni quod A. 


órav] G 
buiv] here, Gg; after xpusroÜ 
7 Aaveld] ðað G. 8 às] 
te] GS,(?)A(?) Theodt; om. g TL]. 


In this matter the authority of L is of little value; it sometimes reproduces re 
(e.g. Magn. x, Trall. 5, Smyrn. y, 12), but more commonly omits it (e.g. Magn. 5, 
Trall. 12, Rom. 3, Smyrn. 6, 12, 13, Polyc. 1). 


IX. ‘Therefore stop your ears, 
when any man would deny or ignore 
Christ ee Beleys ita Hefwasi true 
man, the descendant of David, the 
child of Mary. His human body 
"was no mere phantom. He was 
really born. He really ate and drank. 
He was really persecuted, crucified, 
| put to death—a spectacle to men and 
angels and demons. And so too He 
was really raised again by the Father, 
who will as surely raise us also 
through Jesus Christ, in whom alone 
is true life.’ : 

6. Kodpdénre] See Ephes. 9 Bi- 
cavres Ta ora, with the note. 

xepis Iro? x.r.A.] See the note 
on Ephes. 6 ?) wept Inood x.T.À. 

7. èk yévovs Aaveid] Enforcing 
the reality of Christ’s humanity, as 
elsewhere in Ignatius; see the note 
on Ephes. 18. 

èk Mapías] Another mode of ex- 
pressing Christ's human nature, as in 

_ Ephes. 7, 18; so too Smyrn. Y yeyev- 
ynpévov GdnOas ex map0évou. 

8. ddnOés] The watch-word against 
Docetism; as in Magn. 11, Smyrn. 
Lp; 

The opposition to Docetism is a 
main characteristic in Ignatius; but 
it has various degrees of prominence 
in the different letters. In the Epis- 
tle to the Romans, as addressed to a 


foreign church, and in the Epistle to 
Polycarp, as addressed to an indi- 
vidual, it does not appear atall. The 
letter to the Ephesians contains allu- 
sions to it, but they are indirect (inscr. 
thereality of the passion, § 18 the scan- 
dal of the cross, $$ 7,20, the stress laid 
on Christ’s humanity). In the four re- 
maining letters heresy is directly at- 
tacked. In Zva//. (inscr., 2, 9, 10, t1) 
andeven more fully in .Szzyzz.. (SŠ 1—8) 
Docetism, as such, is denounced at 
length. In Magn. ($$ 8, 9, 10) and in 
Philad. (SS 5, 6, 8, 9) he appears to 
be attacking Judaism rather than 
Docetism; but from incidental no- 
tices (Magn. 9 bv rwes dpvodvrat, Š II 
memAnpopopyabe èv K.T., mpayx0¿ra 
dAyÓds xai BeBaiws; Philad. inscr. 
dyaXMepérg KTA, Š 3 TQ md. où 
cvykarari&era,, Š 5 às capki Inoot, Š 8 
ó oTavpos avrod k.T.À.), it appears that 
this Judaism was Docetic, so that it 
is the same with the heresy of the 
Trallian and Smyrnean Epistles, 
though attacked from the other side. 
This Docetism, as appears from the 
notices in these two epistles, was 
extended to the birth, passion, and 
resurrection, in fact to the whole 
human life of Christ. 

¿yevu 0n] ‘was born’: see the note 
on Zfes. 18, à 


174 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[s 


dNnÜcs éOuoxOn éri Movriov IhAatov, dXu8cos éoav- 
5 ^ / ` 
pen Kat dméÜavev, Brerovtwy [z@y] émoupavtev Kat 


> , A \ $ ^ > , > \ 
émuyelwy kal vroxOoviwy òs Kal ddynOas syépÜn aro 


^ > M ^ M 5 ^ M M 
VEKPWV, éyelpavros auTOV TOU TATOOS QUTOU, KATA TO 


e es \ , 5 ^ [74 
Ouoiejua Os Kal uS TOUS MLOTEVOYTAS AVTW OUT(S: 


r Hoyríou IlAárov] GLAg Theodt; ILAdrou Ilovríov S,. 
2 trav) G Theodt; om. g. 


GLS,[g]; om. [A] [Theodt]. 


ads] 
émou- 


pavlwv] G [Theodt]; oùpavlwv g. Theodt is alone in transposing the order and 


reading émvyelwy kal émovpavicv. 
[Theodt] (after Phil. ii. 10). 


3 vmox0ov(ov] G; karax0ovicv g 


4 karà TÒ óuoloua ds kal k.T.M.] G; gui 


et secundum. similitudinem nos credentes ipsi sic resuscitabil etc. L; ita ut et nos 


I. émi Tovriov Widarov] On the 
significance of this form of expres- 
sion, as giving force to the protest 
against Docetism, see the note Magn. 
II. 

2. fXemóvrev k.r..] Comp. Phil. 
ii. IO may yóvv kapwn émovpaviov kal 
émuye[oy kal karaxÜoviev: see also I 
Gor iv; 

3. kal ddnOds nyepn] See Orig. c. 
Gest 
mabeiv o) máccopnev, iva pi Wevdns 
avrov kal 7) dváaragts J, GAN adAnOns- ó 


^ A ^ ^ 
IÓ ýpeis rò Ookeiv emt rod 


yàp adnbas ámoÜavóv, el avéatn, dAnOas 
avéotn, 6 0€ Ookóv dmoreÜvgkéva, ovK 
dAy6ós avéotn. 

4. éyeipavros k.r.A.] Apparently 
a reminiscence of 2 Cor. iv. 14 eiddres 
őri ó éyeipas Tov Kúpiov “Incovy kai 
"pas oùv 'lggo0 éyepei, I Thess, iv. 
I4. el yàp mioTevopev Ort "Igoo0s amé0a- 
vev kal avéoTn, ovT@s kai ó Oeós Tovs 
kouunÜévras Sia Tov “Inood déet ody 
avr@ : see also Rom. viii. 11. So too 
Polyc. Phzl. 1 o è éyeipas aùròv èk 
vekpov kal nuas éyepei. 

Kara TO Opo(ega k.r.A.] For the 
sense see Rom. vi. 5 dÀAà xai [ovp- 
purot TG Ópow)part] ths dvaerácecos 
ecópe6a, which passage Ignatius pro- 
bably had in his mind. The sentence 
would be simplified by the transpo- 
sition, òs kal kata TÒ ópo(epa for Kara 
TO dpoiwpa 0s kal, as suggested by the 


versions ; but in a transposition they 
are not a safe guide. Zahn goes 
further and reads oŭ xai kara ró polow- 
pa. An easier correction would be 
os for ds, so that karà rò Ópo(opa os 
would be equivalent to ópoíes as. 
The tautology kata ró opoiwpa...ovtas 
is explained by the circumstances 
under which the letter was written: 
see the next note. 

6. ó marjp aoroo| Added to 
show that the agent interided is not 
Christ, as the form of the sentence 
might otherwise suggest. This is 
one of many instances, in which these 
letters betray haste of composition. 
Markland, Petermann, and others 
would omit these words, but without 
sufficient reason. It is true that they 
are wanting in the Armenian; but, 
as the Syriac from which the Arme- 
nian was taken contains them, the 
omission is obviously due to the Arme- 
nian translator or to some transcriber, 

To addnOwov giv] See the note on 
Ephes. 11. 

X. 'Ifit be true, as these godless 
unbelievers affirm, that Christ did 
not really die, then why am I a pri- 
soner? Why do I desire to fight 
with wild beasts? In this case I die 
for nothing ; and I lie against the 
Lord.’ 

8. den, k.r.À.] ‘godless men, I 


IX] 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 


175 


5 ^ e ` cG' 11 ^ ^ a 
éyyepet ò TaTHP avTOU év Xpi-T o *Incov, ov xywpis TÒ 


dXriOwov Gv ovK EXOMEV. 


> , e \ » E 
X. Ci Óé, worep twes abeor Ovres, TovTéa Tw 


3} // ` a 
amirTo., N€youow TO Ookeiv TeTovOévat avTOv, avcoi 


qui credimus in eum itidem resuscitabit etc. Si; itidem et mos credentes im eum 
secundum eandem rationem resuscitabit A; al. g: see the lower note. 

6 ó marip..."Incod] GL; pater jesu christi S, (the change of a single letter à 
for ‘I would produce pater eius im jesu christo, which was doubtless the prior 


form of the Syriac); om. A (as being superfluous); al. g. 


G; rà doxeiv [g]; secundum videri L. 


mean disbelievers’. The first, word, 
not being strictly applicable to these 
heretics, needs explanation: ‘They 
are disbelievers’, says Ignatius, ‘and 
therefore they have severed them- 
selves from God’. By calling them 
‘dOeot (see Š 3 above) he places them 
on a level with the heathen; comp. 
Orig. c. Cels. ii. 3 aipécewy dÓéov xai 
'"Ipmoü mávrg dAAorpiov. So Tertull. 
de Carn. Chr. 15 ‘merito ethnici 
talia, sed merito et haeretici: num 
quid enim inter illos distat, nisi quod 
ethnici non credendo credunt, at 
haeretici credendo non credunt? 
speaking also of a form of Docetism. 
The same epithet dmoros is applied 
to these Docetics in Smyrn. 2, 5, as 
not believing in the reality of Christ's 
birth, life, and death. Comp. Iren. 
iii. 18. 7 ‘Venit...omnibus restituens 
eam quae est ad Deum communio- 
nem: igitur qui dicunt eum putative 
manifestatum, neque in carne natum 
neque vere hominem factum, adhuc 
sub vetert sunt damnatione,..non 
devicta secundum eos morte’. Igna- 
tius seems to have the same idea 
here. It is the reality of Christ’s 
humanity, as well as of His deity, 
which makes communion with God 
possible to the believer. Those there- 
fore, who deny this, hold themselves 
aloof from God; they are still d6eo 
¿y r@ kóopo (Ephes. ii, 12). See also 


9 TO Soxety] 


Cyrill. Hier. Caz. iv. 9 (p. 56) $ayàv 
os nueis addnOds kal mov ws Nuets 
ddnOas: ei yap pavracpa Hv 7 êvavôpa- 
mots, pavracpa Kal r) cergpía. 

9. ro Soxetv| “ZZ appearance’. For 
this adverbial use of rò doxeity comp. 
Smyrn. 2, 4. The former of these 
passages is almost word for word 
the same as here. See also Tertull. 
de Carn. Chr. 1 ‘et partus virginis et 
ipsius exinde infantis ordo rò Ookeiv 
haberentur’, where some editors read 
rà 9okeiv. But the dative is read in 
the interpolator's recension here and 
in Smyrn. 2, 4; and so also in Philo 
Leg. ad Cai. 34 (p. 584), 42 (p. 594), 
Orig. in Hieron. c. Joann. Heros. 25 
(II. p. 431), Hieron. c. Pelag. ii. 14 
(It. p. 758), at least in the printed 
texts. The accusative however seems 
altogether to be preferred here. The 
construction is different in Plat. Gorg. 
527 B pedernréov ov To Soxetv eivat dya- 
Qóv dÀAà rò elvat, which Jacobson 
quotes as a parallel. 

ajroi ovres k.r.A.] ‘being themselves 
nothing but outward profession’. 
Similarly Iren. iv. 33. 5 ‘judicabit 
autem eos qui putativum inducunt... 
putativum est igitur, et non veritas, 
omne apud eos’; Tertull. adv. Valent. 
27 fita omnia in imagines urgent, 
plane et ipsi imaginarii Christiani". 
Hippolytus plays on the word doxy- 
rìs in another way; Haer. viii, II 


176 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS "ns 


^ ` , , - , \ \ » 
övres TO Soxeiv, yw Ti dédEeuar; Ti O€ Kat eUxopiat 


^ \ 7 5 l¢ ” 56 
: aTa- 
Onpiomaynoa; Swpeay ovv damohvjokw. apa ovv K 


revdouar Tov Kupiov. 
XI. 


7? , ` 
Qe/yere ovv Tas kakas mapapvadas Tas 


1 rl 86 kal] L* (but with a v. 1.) Sev-Syr 2; ri 06 G; 2 quare S,A; xal 
[g]. 2 &pa otv] Voss; dpa où GL; quare S, (the same interrogative 
with which it has twice translated ri just before); &pa (om. otv) [g] Sev-Syr 
(at least of» is not translated); e¢ A. But S,A seem to have transferred dpa 
otv to the sentence éyw rl dédeuar. 5 oô] GLg Dam-Rup r Sev-Syr. 
There is no authority for the reading dy. I do not quite understand Zahn's 
statement, ‘dv Sf 1, rs [i.e. S,] A, quorum hic ad fructus, ille ad propagines traxit 
pronomen, uterque enim xapmovs Oavarngopous habet. S, translates the sing. 
xapmóv here (as it does kapmós just below) by the plur. of NINH, this being a 
common practice with Syriac translators, and necessarily therefore it substitutes a 
plural in place of ob. In this it is followed by A. In A the form of this plural 
pronoun gives no indication of gender, and it might be referred equally well to 
mapapuddas, if we had not the Greek to determine the reference for us. In S, the 


Soxnras éavroùs mpoonyopevoay dv ov ment shows. The @npiopayeiv of S. 


TÓ Üokeiv elvat Tud ç karavooüpev pa- 
rai(ovras, dÀÀà THY ek rocavr9s UAns 
okov év dpOarud epopévny Suehéy- 
xopev. Pearson (on Smyrn. 2) com- 
pares Epiphan. Waer. lxxvi. Io (p. 
923) dvópnotov marpt Xéyov od dvópots 
yéyovas, kAnp@bels Tovro Td Ovopa, 
pnkere poros imápxav Tov ev Oe Tw- 
Couévov. In the same vein Plato 
makes merry with the views of those 
philosophers whom he calls oí péovres, 
Theet. 181 A. 

I. éyà rh 8é80epai] i.e. ‘The atone- 
ment becomesan unreality,and there- 
fore my sufferings for Christ are 
vain The argument is put in a 
somewhat different form in Szzyraz. 4 
ei yàp TÒ Ookeiv ravra émpáxÓy úrò Tod 
Kvpíov, kay rò Ooketv dédeuar. 

eVxonat Onpiouayjoa] ‘J pray that 
Z may fight with wild beasts : comp. 
Ephes. 1, Rom. 5. The same verb 
occurs with an aorist infinitive, § 12 
below, Zes. 2, Rom. 5, Smyrn. 11. 
This passage is obviously a reminis- 
cence of I Cor. xv. 32 e xara dvÓpo- 
mov €Onpiopaxnoa k,r.À., as the argu- 


Paul however is probably metaphori- 
cal, while that of Ignatius is literal. 

2. Oapeay oiv x.t.A.| Comp. Gal. 
ii. 21 dpa Xpwrrós Swpedy áméÜDavev. 

dpa ovv k.r.A.] ‘in this case I le 
against the Lora’, i.e. ‘my life and 
my preaching alike are a falsehood 
against Him, for they assume that 
Christ really did rise’. The whole 
argument here is founded on 1 Cor. 
KV. 421 Sq; asee especiallyjivesspr5 
evpirxopeba 0€ kai Wevdoudprupes Tod 
Geod, dru euaptupnoapyev Kata Tod Oeod 
Sre Tryeupev TOY Xptoroy x... For dpa 
ovv comp. Rom. v. 18, vii. 3, 25, viii. 
I2, etc. The reading ov (which re- 
quires to be read interrogatively, dpa 
ov=nonne) is possible in itself (see 
Kühner Gramm. 11. p. 1027), but not 
good here. 

XI. ‘Shun such false and irregu- 
lar growths; for their fruit is poison- 
ous and causes immediate death. 
These men are not the planting of 
the Father; otherwise they would 
have been seen to be branches of 
the Cross and have borne imperish- 


xi] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


177 


5 yevvworas Kap OV Üaverrueópov, ou av yevonrai TIS, 


uas dmobynonet. OÚTOL Yap OUK uu Qvrela 


K €i yap rav, epaivovro av kadar ToU TTavpou~" 


Kal yv av 6 kapzrós aUTIV apbapros: Ov o0 év Ta mabe 
[4 


existing text has the fem. 11135, which would refer to rapaguddas, but this is doubt- 
less a scribe's error for the masc. nno. yebonrat] yevonre (with ac written 
above, but whether prima manu, is doubtful) G. tıs] here, GL Dam-Rup ; 
before yetonra g. 6 mapavra] map ajrà G; mapavrika [g] Dam-Rup. 

yap] GLS, Dam-Rup; om. [g] A. 
Dam-Rup. For the not uncommon confusion of TTNC and Tpc see the note on 
Smyrn. E cav] GLA; add. $vreía rarpéds Si; add. rod marpòs kħàáôor [g]. 

8 kal Tv àv Ó kaprmós Eo KT] GL; et fructus eorum incorrupti manerent in 
passione crucis domini nostri cujus membra estis Sys. et Jructus eorum. permanens. 
tam signo crucis domini nostri vos membra estis eius A (for the substitution of signo 
for passione see above, p. 26); al. g. The Syriac translator must have had a 


7 mar pos] GLS,Ag ; TOU TveÜuaros 


mutilated text, which omitted ôi of and mpockade?rat. 


able fruit—the Cross, whereby He 
calleth us unto Him, being His own 
members. The Head cannot be 
found apart from the members, 
forasmuch as God promiseth union, 
which union is nothing else than 
Himself.’ 

4. mapapvadas] ‘excrescences, of- 
shoots’; comp. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 8 
(p. 138) kaĝvňopaveî yap un kXa8evo- 
pér 1 dumeNos, ovtas dé kai ó Qv0po- 
mos: kabaiper Se avro) ras eEvBpiCovoas 
mapupvddas ó Aóyos, rj páxyawa, k.r.À. 
The word is used of an adventitious 
shoot or other growth of a plant. 
Aristotle, Plant. i. 4 (p. 819), writes 
mapaguabes S€ elo, rà amd rìs pins 
roð dévdpov BAXacrávovra, but Theo- 
phrastus A/zs¢. Plant. ii. 2. 4 con- 
templates their springing from other 
parts besides the root, for he says 
eav amo pins n mapadvas 7. This word 
occurs several times in the LXX, 
where however it is not used with any 
precision. The metaphorical sense 
is naturally very common, and ap- 
pears at least as early as Aristotle, 
Eth. Nic. i. 4 (p. 1096). See also the 


IGN. II, 


allegory of the mapapvades in Hermas 
Sim. viii. I sq. 

6. mapavrà| ‘forthwith’; comp. 
Mart. Ign. Ant. 6. Itisa good classi- 
cal word: see Lobeck Phryn. p. 47. 

Qvreía marpós] So again PZz/ad. 3 
dia TO p) eivai aùroùs $vreíav marpós. 
The reference is to Matt. xv. 13 
Taca Qvreía iv ovK éjvrevaev ó marnp 
pov ó o)pd»ios k.r.A., which passage 
the interpolator has introduced into 
his text here. 

7. kdadou rod cravpo)] This they 
are not, for they deny the reality of 
the Passion. On the prominence 
given to the Cross by Ignatius in 
refuting Docetism, see JEfAes. 18, 
Philad. 8, Smyrn. 1, with the notes. 

8. dd$0apros] For the Cross is the 
true £iAov (of. 

d¢ o] sc. rod oravpot ; comp. Gal. 
Vivis Ephr ii 26, Coll 26, See 
also Ephes. 9 dia rhs pnxavns 'lgooU 
Xpicrov, os srw otavpos. The in- 
termediate clause, kai jv àv ó kapròs 
avtov apbapros, is parenthetical. 

ev TG Taber avrov| See the note on 
Ephes. inscr. 


178 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS TH 


^ ^ e / , 5 ^ > 
avToU pockaAevrou Ups, Ovras pedy avrOU. OV 


P \ ^ ” ^ ^ 
Svvatar ovv keiaNn xepis yevynOnvar &vev. ieNov, TOU 


^ t€ / [14 > > , 
Ocot évwow emayyeAAoMEvov, OS EÉOTIV AUTOS. 


XII. 


5 e ^ \ , e ^ 
AoraCoua vuas dro Cpuvpvns, &ua Tats 


, ^ ^ e \ / 
guprapovoas pot exkAnoias TOU Ocot, ot kara Tavra 


Z \ , 
Me aveTTAaVTaY TAPKL T€ Kat TVEVMATI. 


\ , A [4 
Td Ocoua mou, a EVEKEV 


3 ös] G; quod L; al. A; def. g. 
mihi L; pov G; afud vos A. 


I. mpookadeira] i.e. probably ó 
Xpioros, to whom the preceding and 
following avrod must necessarily refer: 
comp. Clem. Rom. 22, where mpos- 
kaAeirat pâs is said of Christ. 

péXy] As in Rom. xii. 4 sq, 1 Cor. 
vi 15, Eph. v. 30, and especially 
I Cor. xii. I2 sq, which last passage 
has suggested the words following 
here: comp. ver. 21 ov dvvarat...7 
cepady x... See also Clem. Rom. 
37, 46; comp. also Ephes. 4. 

ov Ovvara. ov) ‘Now zt ts not 
possible (in the nature of things) Aat 
a head should be born without limbs’ ; 
and therefore the existence of Christ 
as the Head implies the attachment 
of the believers to Him as His mem- 
bers. Perhaps however we should 
read yernOjvac for yevynOnvat. 

2. TOU Oeod évoaw x.r.A.] i.e. ‘God 
supplying the principle of cohesion, 
which principle is nothing else than 
Himself’; comp. John xvii. 21 sq 
iva mávres ëv dow, kaÜàs ov, márep, 
êv epoi kayo èv coi, tva kal avtol èv 
"piv dow k.r.A. With és éorw aùrós 
comp. Ephes. 14 ra 0€ Ojo év évornre 
yevopeva Oeós srw, and see the note 
Magn. 15. For the attraction of 
ós see the note on Magn. 7. The 
interpretation suggested by Smith, 
* qui Deus est ipse Christus, is quite 
out of place, 


zapakaXet UMaS 


'"Incov Xpiorov TrEpipepw, 


5 uo] g* (but with a v. l. mov); 


mávra] GL; wav [g]; dub. A. 


XII. ‘The churches present with 
me at Smyrna join in my salutation. 
I appeal to you by the chains which 
I wear in Christ: Remain in unity 
and prayerfulness. It is your duty 
one and all, but especially the pres- 
byters, to assist and cherish the 
bishop, to the honour of God, of 
Christ, and of the Apostles. Listen 
to me, lest this letter rise up as a 
witness against you. I desire your 
prayers that by God’s mercy I may 
attain the martyr’s crown for which 
I thirst, and may not be rejected.’ 

4. rats ovpmapovoas pot kK.T.À.] 
The churches who were present 
in the person of their representa- 
tives; comp. Magn. 15 kai ai Noral 
0€ €xkAnoia....adomatovra vas. Among 
these were the Ephesians (Zphes. 
I sq.) and the Magnesians (Magn. 1), 
from both which churches several 
delegates were present with him. 

5. kara mávra k.r..] On this 
common Ignatian phrase see the 
note Ephes. 2. 

6. capki re k.r...] See the note 
on Ephes. 10. 

mapakadet vpas k.r.A.] For similar 
appeals in S. Paul see Eph. iv. 1 mapa- 
Kaha ov pâs éyà ó déopuos KTA., 
Philem. 9 uàXXov mapakaAó, rovodros 
àv os IIaüAos...0écjuos Xpwrroo "Inaod ; 
comp. Col. iv. 18, 


IO 


xn] TO THE TRALLIANS. 


179 
> Ri Oo ^ 5 ^ $ , ^ e / 
«vrovuevos  OeoU émuiruxet' Siapévere èv Th op ovota 
e ^ ` ^ > 5 , ^ É , S 
vuv Kal TH MET aAANAWY 7pocevxm.  Trpéme& yap 
tA ^ Dep , ^ 
úuîv Tots kaÜ' eva, é€apéTws kai Tots mpeaButéposs, 
> , ` 5 , > > 
dvapúyew Tov émiskorov eis Tiny TATpOS [kai ELS 
\ > ^ ^ \ - 5j 
Tun] noot Xpiotov kai Gv dzoocONev. ebxomat 
€ ^ H > , > ^ y [74 ^ > , 56 
UAS €v AYATMTN akovoal MOV, iva pr Els MapTUpLOY t 
6 pe] here, GL; before xara [g]. 
geniti eius domini nostri jesu christi etc. A; ‘Inco XpwroÜ (om. kal els rus) GL: 


II kal eis Tuy I. X.] g; e£ uni- 


see the lower note. 


7. mepwbépo] See the notes on 
Ephes. 11, Magn. 1. 

8. Oeo émwrvxeiv] So too below, 
$ 13. For this favourite Ignatian 
phrase see the note on Magn. 1. 

Ouapévere] These are the words of 
the appeal (zapakaAe?) which his 
bonds address to them. For this 
favourite construction in Ignatius, 
who prefers the imperative to the 
infinitive after zapakaAeiw, see the 
note on Š 6 xpjobe above. 

IO. tots kað’ éva] See Eph. v. 33 
for this expression. Similarly oí kar 
avdpa below, Š 13 (see the note on 
Ephes. 4). In Rom. xii 5 we have 
the strange expression rò kaĝ’ eis. 

éÉaipéros xai] The transposition 
kai e£aipéros, suggested by Jacobson, 
seems unnecessary ; comp. Š 13 dpolws 
xai (with the note). For the adverb 
é£aipéros comp. Smyrn. 7 (with the 
note), and for the corresponding ad- 
jective é£aíperos, Philad. 9. Neither 
word is found in the N.T., but e&ai- 
peros occurs in the LXX, Gen. xlviii. 
22, Job v. 5. 

II. avapúyew] See the note on 


Ephes. 2. 


eis ruujv «.7.A.] For this Ignatian 
mode of expression see the note on 
Ephes. 21. 

marpòs k.rA.] If the Greek MS of 
Ignatius be followed we must punc- 
tuate *to the honour of the Father 


of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles? 
(making "Iyco? Xpwro? dependent on 
marpos), rather than ‘to the honour 
of the Father, of Jesus Christ, and of 
the Apostles’ ; for the latter connexion 
would almost necessarily require a 
connecting particle, kai ’Inood Xpuorod 
(see the notes on Š 7 dyapiarois Oeo 
K.T.N., and PAz/ad. 9 rijv mapovaíar). 
But in this case the omission of ‘the 
honour of Jesus Christ’ would be in- 
explicable. The probability however 
is that the right reading is preserved 
in the interpolator’stext, which inserts 
another kal eis riu)v before “Incov 
Xpiorov, and that a transcriber has 
ejected the words as a superfluity. 
Zahn defends the common text on 
the ground 'scriptoris menti simili- 
tudinem illam obversari, quam et 
inter episcopum Deumque Christi 
patrem, et inter presbyteros aposto- 
losque intercedere existimat! (comp. 
Magn. 6). 

I3. eis paprópwv à] Comp. PAilad. 
6 kai maou 06, èv ois éAáAgoa, evxopat 
tva py eis paprptuor QUTÓ KTHO@VTAL 
The ë should probably be retained, 
in which case ypawas will stand by 
itself, ‘by my writing? The inter- 
polator has omitted the preposition 
in conformity with the very common 
idiom eis papripióv tux, Matt. viii. 4, 
x. 18, xxiv. 14, Mark i. 44, vi. II, 
etc. 


12—2 


180 


[év] mtv. ypawas. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xi 


^ , 
kai mepi uot Që mpooevyeoe, 


^ E ^ y ~ , , ^ ~ 
Ths ad’ vuov dyamns ypnCovTos év TH éXéet TOU Oo, 
5 ^ / ç ^ , Ka of 
eis TO KaTa€wOyvat pe ToU kNnüpov ovmep eykemat 


> ^ c \ PENSA ^ 
EMLTUXELV, iva un dóokuuos eUpeOc. 


XIII. 
'€oeotov. 


^ , l4 \ 
‘Aoratera vas 1 dea, Cuvpvaiwy kat 


jynpovevere v Tals Tpocevyais Uv TNS 


év Cupia ékkNnoias: d6ev [kai] oUk G£ios. eim Eyer Dau, 


1 é] GL; om. Ag. 


ruxeév Gg: qua conor potiri Ls accipere (sortes) ad quas vocatus sum A. 
Juv] GL [g*]; om. A. 


Tals mpocevxats] GLA; om. g. 
G ; om. LAg. 


3. karafwÓnvai| See the note on 
Ephes. 20. 

Tov KAnpov| i.e. the glory of mar- 
tyrdom, as in fom. 
KAjpóv pov dveumoüioros dmoAafeiv, 
Philad. 5 € mpocevxyn vpav cis Oecóv 
pe dmapríceu iva ev à KAnp@ Yenny 
émurúxo. The word is used in the 
same connexion elsewhere; Mart. 
Polyc. 6 iva ékeivos róv (iov. Kdjpov 
dmapriog, Ef. Vienn. et Lugd. Š 3 
(in Euseb. ZZ. E. v. I) áveMij$65 kai 
adros els Tov KMjpov ràv papripov. 

oUmep éykewuuat. KTA.) ° which I am 
eager to attain” I know no better 
emendation of the obviously corrupt 
ov mepixewa than this conjecture of 
Bunsen’s (Br. p. 141), corresponding 
to the Latin gua conor potiri; but I 
am not quite satisfied with it. I do 
not know whether ¢yxeso Ga: elsewhere 
takes an infinitive; its common con- 
struction is with a dative of the 
thing or person. The common text 
might mean ‘zo obtain the lot with 
which I am invested’ (of by attrac- 
tion for ôv), but this is hardly sense. 

4. tva u) addxipos k.7.A.] Suggested 
by 1 Cor. ix. 27. The idea of a race 
seems to be present here (e.g. in 


> ` ` 
I eig TQ-*0V 


8 ékelvov] GL; rev éket g; al. A. 
GL; é Kupie inood xpwrQ g (Mss, but in christo jesu l) A. 


3 orep ëykeruar émirvxeiv] Bunsen; o0 meplieusat émt- 


6 èv 
7 kai] 
èv 'Igco0 Xpu r] 
9 ws 


€ykeuiat émirvxeiv), as in S. Paul. 

XIII. * The Smyrnzans and Ephe- 
sians salute you. Pray for the Church 
in Syria, of which I am an unworthy 
member. Farewell in Christ. Be 
obedient to your bishop and pres- 
byters, and love one another. My 
spirit is devoted to you, not now 
only but when I shall find God. 
At present I am still exposed to 
dangers; but the Father is faithful 
to fulfil your prayers and mine in 
Christ Jesus, in whom may we be 
found blameless.’ 

5. 75 dyann k.r...] Comp. Rom. 9, 
Philad. 11, Smyrn. 12. This is not 
a mere complimentary title, as Pear- 
son and others would take it; see 
note on Š 3 ris dyamns var, 

6. 'Ed$ecíev] Though the repre- 
sentatives of other churches were pre- 
sent with him at Smyrna, the Ephe- 
sians are singled out, as the more 
numerous body of delegates and as 
attending more continuously on him ; 
comp. Magn. 15, Rom. 10. See the 
notes on Aes. 1, 2. Ephesus and 
Smyrna were regarded as the ‘two 
eyes’ of Asia; Plin. JV. Z. v. 3r 
‘Ephesum alterum lumen Asiae’ (in 


xu] 


» DA 5 E: 
wV EXYaATOS ékeíveov. 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 


18y 


sI 5 ^ ^ t 
eppwo 0e év ` [noro Xpoio-To, UTO- 


/ ^ > "ó e ^ Ej A e / \ 
"C0 00gHM€VOL Tw ETLO KO7r c wS EU €vTOAN, OMOLOS KAL 


Lae rss \ c o. 4 ^ 
10 TG mpeg Bvrepio kai oi KaT’ avdpa aàXNiIXovs. deyamrá e 


5 ? , / 
év aucploTw Kapoia. 


5 / ^ > \ Nee = 
ov MOVOV VUV aXXa kai OTav OcoU émuruxo. 


e AY he f. > 
UTO kivðvvov ELUL 


Tj vronn] G; om. g; add dei LA. 


mpecBurépas kal rots 0uakóvows g ; sacerdotibus A (see above on § 7). 
domagerar buds g (MSS, but castificet vos l); 

13 umd kivóvvov] GL; émixivduvoy g (MSS, but see Appx); 
év “Inood Xpwrq] GL* (but L, zm christo iesu); inood 
Xoro? g; domini nostri jesu christi [A]. 


ferar budv] &yvijere duv GL; 
desiderat erga vos A. 
in sollicitudine A. 


reference to Smyrna mentioned pre- 
viously). 

Tis ev Zupía exxAnoias] This request 
appears in all the letters written from 
Smyrna; see the note on Zphes. 21. 

7. 60ev kx. A.] Comp. Magn. 14 
O0ev ovk á£iós elpt kaXeio Gar. 

8. dv écxaros x.t.A.] Comp. Æ- 
phes. 21 čoyatos àv rv KE TLOTÕV 
(with the note). 

éppwabe| See the note on EfAes. 
2I. 

9. ds rj évroÀj] So too Smyrn. 8 
rovs Svaxdvous evtpémecbe ws Oeod 
evrodnv: comp. also Magn. 2 rà 
mpeoBvrepío as vou@ “Incod Xpioroû 
(with the note). In our passage 7 
évroAy is used absolutely, as in Rom. 
vii. 8 djopyjv NaBodca ú ápapría dia 
Ths évroÀáe «7A. I Tim. vi. 14 Th- 
poai oe thy évroM]v Gomidov k.r.À. 
Not satisfied with this, the translators 
have added ‘Dei.’ This absolute 
use is not consistent with Pearson’s 

interpretation of Smyrn. l.c. ‘¢am- 
quam Det praecepto institutos, le. 
‘as being God’s ordinance’ (where 
he refers to this passage). The Tral- 
lians are told to obey the bishop’s 
orders, as they would obey God's 


€ y, € ^ M 5 \ - 
deyviCerat uwv TO uov mveUpa, 


ETL yap 


> ` ` € . 5 > ^ 
«Ac motos O marp év 'lnooU 


Io Tg Tpeopvrepio] GL* ; Tots 
II ayvl- 


orders. The sense of évroA; here is 
active, not passive; 'the voice or- 
dering,’ not ‘the thing ordered.’ 

dpoiws kai] See the note on Ephes. 
19. 

IO. oí kar avdpal ‘each individu- 
ally’; see the note on Ephes. 4. 

II. dpepíorQ kapüíg] So again 
Philad. 6. Thus also 8:dvovay did- 
kpurov Š I, ümepiomáa TQ diavoia Ephes. 
20. 

dyvi(erat jud) i.e. dynuopa yCyverat 
úpr, where &yriopa, ‘a piacular offer- 
ing, like mepiynua, mepixdOappa, etc., 
denotes entire devotion to and self- 
sacrifice for another: comp. ÆpAes. 8 
mepipnua pv Kal ayvifopar vpav 
(with the note). 

12. drav Oeod émiróxo] i.e. ‘by my 
martyrdom’; see above $ 12. 

13. vd kivduvov] Comp. Ephes. 12 
eyð mó xivüvvov, tpyeis eornprypevor 
(with the note). There is still the risk 
that either by his own weakness or 
by the interposition of others he may 
be robbed of the martyr's crown. 

marès ó marp] Compare S. Paul's 
muros ó Oeòs and similar expressions; 
I Cor. i. 9, x. 13, 2 Cor. i. 18, 1 Thess. 
Vi 242 Ness nis, 


182 IGNATIUS TO THE TRALLIANS. Pan 


^ ^ , \ p s \ Q O 
XpigTG wAnpwoai uov Tv aityow kai uov’ év w 
e , af 
evpeOeinuey &uwuot. 


2 evpebelnuev] Ag; evpeOelmre GL. A single letter might make the difference 
-HA€ for -HTE. duwpor] GL; add. gratia vobiscum omnibus. amen A; 
add. ovatuny tudy èv kupte g. 

There is no subscription to GLA. For g see the Appx. 


I. mAnpéoa] An infinitive after aùr x.r.à.; comp. Ephes. 11 pdvov 
motos, as in Neh. xiii. 13. ev Xptor@ “Inoov evpeOjvat, and see 
ev à] ie. Invod Xpior@, as in Phil. also Š 2 of this epistle. 
iii. 9 va Xpiorov kepdyow kai evpeOG ey 


4. 


TOR CHECROMANS: 


UM J uv] 


( Neh M^ peti: 


4. 


TORRE ROMANS! 


IKE the three preceding letters, the Epistle to the Romans was 

written and despatched from Smyrna. The Ephesian delegates, 

who were still with him, acted as amanuenses; and, as the name of 

Crocus is singled out for mention, we may suppose that he was the chief 

penman on the occasion. This is the only letter which bears a date. 
It was written on August 23rd ($ ro). 

Ignatius had been preceded by certain members of the Syrian 
Church, who however are not mentioned by name. He assumes that 
they will have arrived in Rome before the letter; he bespeaks for them 
a kindly welcome ; and he wishes them to be informed of his speedy 
arrival Of these persons nothing is said elsewhere. Probably they 
had been despatched from Antioch direct to Rome, immediately after 
the condemnation of the saint, with the news of his impending visit. 
The letter throughout assumes that the Roman Christians are informed 
of his fate, and will act upon the information. 

But, though the letter was despatched from the same place and 
probably about the same time with the Epistles to the Ephesians, 
Magnesians, and Trallians, though it closely resembles them in style 
and expression, yet the main topics are wholly different. “The subject 
matter is changed with the change in the relations between the writer 
and the readers. ‘There is no direct allusion to the Judzeo-Gnostic 
heresy, which occupies so large a place in his letters to the Asiatic 
Churches. The Roman Church is complimented in the opening as 
‘filtered clear from every foreign colouring,’ and from first to last the 
epistle contains no reference to false doctrine of any kind. On the 


186 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


correlative topic also, the duty of obedience to the bishop and other 
officers of the Church, which shares with the denunciation of heresy 
the principal place in the other letters, he is equally silent here. Indeed - 
we might read the epistle from beginning to end without a suspicion 
that the episcopal office existed in Rome at this time, if we had no 
other grounds for the belief. On the relation of this phenomenon to 
other early documents bearing on the Roman Church I have spoken 
elsewhere (S. Clement of Rome 1. p. 68; comp. Philippians p. 217 sq). 

On the other hand the letter is almost wholly taken up with one 
single topic, which appears only casually in the other epistles—his 
coming martyrdom. We have seen how the news of his conviction 
had preceded him to Rome. He was alarmed at its possible effects. 
Perhaps he had good reason to fear the too officious zeal of his friends 
from Syria. At all events there were Christians holding influential 
positions in Rome at this time, more especially about the court (see 
the note on $ r oBodua x.7.A.). What, if they should attempt to 
obtain a reversal or a commutation of his sentence? Their inop- 
portune kindness would be his ruin (§ 4). The whole letter is a 
passionate cry for martyrdom, an eager deprecation of pardon. The 
altar is ready. Will they then withhold the libation (§ 2)? Will they 
refuse the sacrifice ($ 4)? It will be an act of jealousy ($ 5 énAwoat), 
a display of envy (Š 3 ¢Bacxavare, Š 7 Backavia), an infliction of wrong 
(§ 1 adiucyon), an outbreak of hatred ($ 8 éuoyoare), an abetting of 
Satan ($ 7 Bonfeitw avrà), to rob him of his crown. Even though 
he himself on his arrival in Rome should crave their intercession, 
which now he deprecates, he intreats them not to listen to him (§ 7). 
Martyrdom is the new birth, is the true life, is the pure light (§ 6). 
Martyrdom is the complete discipleship, the final enfranchisement (Š 4). 
The martyr's crown is better than all the kingdoms of the earth (§ 6). 
Only then, when he sets to the world, will he rise to God ($ 2). The 
teeth of the wild beasts are the mill which grinds the fine flour for the 
sacrificial bread. Therefore he will entice them, will provoke them, 
to mangle, to crush, to pulverize his limbs for the altar of God ($ 4, 5). 
Crowned by martyrdom, his life becomes an utterance of God; robbed 
of martyrdom, it is a vague unmeaning cry (§ 2). 

The Epistle to the Romans had a wider popularity than the other 
letters of Ignatius both early and late. It appears to have been circu- 
lated apart from them, sometimes alone, sometimes attached to the 
story of the martyrdom. Thus it seems to have become in some sense 
a vade mecum of martyrs in the subsequent ages. At all events we find 


TO THE ROMANS. 187 


it quoted before any of the other epistles (Iren. v. 28. 4; see § 4, p: 207 
below) ; and its influence on the earliest genuine Acts of Martyrdom 
extant—those of Polycarp, and those of Perpetua and Felicitas—seems 
to be clearly discernible (see the notes on § 6 rpooBidcopat, Š 5 "Ovatuxv 
K.T.À. ; comp. also the note on Š 4 azeXe/Oepos x.r.X.). Moreover in the 
Menza for Dec. 20, the day assigned to S. Ignatius in the later Greek 
Calendar, we meet again and again with expressions taken from it, 
whereas there is no very distinct coincidence with the other epistles. 
On the other hand, where the interest was doctrinal and not practical, 
as for instance in the Monophysite controversy, the other letters are 
prominent and the Epistle to the Romans recedes into the background. 
Owing to these circumstances, the history and the phenomena of the 
text are different in several respects from those of the other epistles 
(see above, p. 5 sq). 


The following is an analysis of the epistle. 
*IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF ROME, preeminent in position as in 
‘love, worthy of all good things and filtered clear from all defilement, 
abundant greeting in Christ.’ 

*My prayer has been more than granted; for I shall see you in 
my bonds. Only do not interpose, that so my course, which has begun 
well, may also end well (§ 1). The opportunity is great ; do not mar it. 
If you keep silence, God will speak through me. The altar is ready 
for sacrifice; chant ye the hymn of praise round the victim (§ 2). 
Teach me my duty, as you have taught others. Pray that I may have 
strength to do, as well as to say. I shall be seen most plainly then, when 
I have ceased to be seen. Christianity is not talk, but might (Š 3). 
I tell all the churches that I die freely. Leave me to the wild beasts. 
I am the fine meal ground in the mill for sacrifice. Stir up the wild 
beasts to devour me wholly. I cannot command you as Peter and 
Paul did; for I am only a criminal and a slave (§ 4). I am fighting 
with wild beasts the whole way from Syria to Rome. Yet the cruelty 
of my guards is a wholesome discipline to me. I trust and pray that 
the beasts will devour me at once; that they will be eager, as I am 
eager. Let no power in heaven or on earth envy me my crown. Iam 
ready for any torture (§ 5). All the kingdoms of the earth are nothing 
to me. I desire Christ; I desire light and life. Let me imitate the 
passion of my God ($6). Satan would seize on me as his prey; do 

not abet him. Obey me in these words which I write now. My 
earthly passions are crucified. I desire not the food of corruption. 


188 IGNATIUS TO THE ROMANS. 


I crave the bread and the cup of God (§ 7). Once again; do not 
thwart me. I write briefly, but Christ will interpret. It is God’s own 
will that I declare (8 8).’ 

* Pray for the Syrian Church, which has no bishop now but God, and 
of which I am an unworthy member. The churches which have re- 
ceived and escorted me join in my salutation (89). I write this from 
Smyrna, with the assistance of the Ephesians, especially Crocus. Tell 
the Syrians who have preceded me, that I shall arrive shortly. Written 
onix Kal Sept. F arewell, be patient to the end (8 ro). 


TPOC POMAIOYC. 


"ITNATIOC, 6 kai Oeodopos, TH Nenuévn êv meya- 


, ` ^ ^ ^ 
AELoTNTL TaTpOs piorou Kal ‘Inco XpiaT0U ToU uovov 


ETIA 5 ^ > l4 > 7 2 
VLOV QUTOV, É€kkAncia Nyamnyevn Kae TEepwTia uévn €v 


, ^ , , e 
OeAXnuatt tov ÜeXcavros Ta TavTa à éoTW, KATA 


TIpoc Pamaloyc | Tod avrod miero mpds pwpualovs g*; zgnati epistola ad 
romanos L* ; epistola tertia (eiusdem sancti ignatii) Z*; ad romam urbem A. There 


is no title in GAmSmM. 

I 0 kal] M; qui est Am; om. Sm. 
Ephes. inscr. 

^ vplorouv beo marpós g. 


For the other authorities see the note on 
2 marpds bYlorov] GLEAAmM; excelsi (om. marpós) Sm; 
kal] GLAmSm{M] g (but omitted in 1); om. A; def. 


2. 3 hyarnuévn] GLAmSmM: tryacuéry [g*]; sancti A (translating it as if it 


had read the sentence viod ro Ay.acpévou kal dwrlfovros) ; def. 2. 


4 ToU 0eMj- 


carros] GLAAmM ; 700 zovjcavros [g]; ejus qui ligat et tenet omnia Sm; def. 2. 


‘IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF 
ROME, that hath found mercy and 
enlightenment in Jesus Christ, that 
is foremost in rank as in love, worthy 
in all respects, attached with Christ’s 
commands, full of grace, and filtered 
clear of all defilement; a hearty 
greeting in Christ. 

I. T jXeguévg k.r.A.] ‘which has 
found mercy in the mightiness of the 
Father Most High, i.e. ‘on which 
He in His compassion has conferred 
gifts such as His mightiness alone 
‘can bestow’; comp. Smyrn. inscr. 
jAenuévg èv maw xapícpar For 
jXenuévy see also PAz/ad. inscr. For 
peyaAetórns, *mightiness, *magnifi- 
cence, applied to God, comp. Luke 
ix. 43, 2 Pet. i. 16, Clem. Rom. 24, in 
all which passages it refers to muni- 
ficent exhibitions of His power (Acts 


ii II rà peyadeia Tod Osob). It oc- 
curs in other connexions, Jer. xxxiii 
(xl). 9, 3 Esdr. i. 4, Acts xix. 27. 

3. qjyamnuévy] So to be read, as in 
Trall. inscr. Though s5yucpévg has 
very high support, yet it pught pro- 
bably to be rejected, as a likely word 
(comp. 1 Cor. i. 2) to be substituted 
in this connexion by a scribe. This 
very substitution has been made in 
many MSS of Jude I rots ev Əe@ marpi 
jyucpévois, where ryarmpévos is the 
correct reading. 

4. ToU Oednjoavros k.r.A.] ‘of Him 
that willed all things which exist; 
comp. Magn. 3 eis Tuy éketvov ToU 
8eXjcavros úpâs. I have punctuated 
after gorw and accentuated it paroxy- 
tone, as the sense requires. 

kara mlorw Kal dyámnv Kk.r.À.| ‘in 
faith and love toward Fesus Christ? 


190 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


f Vava 'InooU X 0 ToU Oeov juv, jris 
riotw Kal ayarny Incov Xpirtov Tov Oeov uwv, h 


r mlorw kai] gAAm; om. GLSuM; def. 2. 
dévd0e0s...délaryvos] txt GLA (with variations 


loco chori L; regione Sm. 


2 rómro xwplov] GEZA AmMg ; 


explicable through the medium of the Syriac; see the next note) AmSmg; digna deo 
(d&ó0eos) et digna vita (dtvorperns, for NN vita is doubtless a corruption of N'N* 


The genitive case is objective and 
probably refers to both the preceding 
substantives, as in Ephes. 20 êv tH 
avrov micTe. kai év TÜ avrod dyamp; 
comp. 20. 14 àv Tedelws eis “Inoovy 
Xpiorov €ynre THY miot kal THY ayd- 
my. See also Zes. 1 with the note. 
The preposition xara gives the rule 
or standard after which their con- 
duct is fashioned. 

I. Tov Oeod pôv] See the note 
on Ephes. inscr. 

2. mpokáÜgrai] ‘has the chief seat, 
presides, takes the precedence.’ The 
word is used of preeminence or supe- 
riority generally in writers of about 
this time; e.g. Dion Chrysost. Or. 
xxxv (p. 68) rijs re Ppvyías mpoká6n- 
oe kai Avdias k.r.A. (of the town of 
Celeenz), Galen XIX. p. 22 (Kühn) 
nélacdy rwes TOY Gévohoyav larpdv ev 
mpoedpeta KabeCopevor xk.t.d.. Greg. 
Naz. Or. xlii. 14 (I. p. 780) rò Bv- 
duru, Tv mpokaÜeCouévmv ths édas 
mów. Schol to Soph. Electr. 234 
Muka, 7 mpoxabeCouevn ToU "Apyovs. 
See the inscription in Bull. de Cor- 
resp. Hellén. VII. p. 283 Tápaos...ràv 
y énapxeiáv, [KOuktas |, Ioaupías, Avkao- 
vials, mpo]ka€eCouévg, with the refer- 
ence (26, p. 285) to Basil of Seleucia 
Of. p. 275 (Paris, 1622) Sedeveeua... 
mpoedpevovaa kai mpoxabeCouevn máans 
"Iravpíüos modews. Pearson quotes 
an edict ascribed to the Dictator 
Cæsar in Ioann. Malai. Chron. ix. p. 
216 (ed. Bonn.) 'Ev "Avrtoxe(g Tf uN- 
rporoAe, iep kal dovd@ kai avrovop@ 
kal dpxovon kai mpoxabnpévy ths dvaro- 
Afjs, loUAtos Tdios Kaicap k.r.A. Leo 
the Great thus apostrophizes Rome 
herself at a later date (Serm. 82, Op. 


I. p. 322, Venet. 1753), ‘civitas sacer- 
dotalis et regia, per sacram beati 
Petri sedem caput orbis effecta, latius 
praesideres religione divina quam 
dominatione terrena.’ 

èv róno k.r...] These words pro- 
bably describe the limits over which 
the supremacy or jurisdiction ex- 
tends; comp. Tert. de Praescr. 36 
*percurre ecclesias apostolicas apud 
quas ipsae adhuc cathedrae apostolo- 
rum suis locis praesident. In this 
case it might be thought that there 
was a reference more especially to 
the presidency of the Roman see 
over the suburbicarian bishops, who 
formed a sort of college under the 
bishop of Rome as their head—a con- 
stitution out of which thelater college 
of Cardinals grew. But, not to men- 
tion that the presidency is here as- 
signed not to the Roman bishop but 
tothe Roman Church, such a refer- 
ence would probably be a great ana- 
chronism. ‘Though some have seen 
distinct traces of this relation between 
the bishop of Rome and the subur- 
bicarian sees at least as early as the 
beginning of the third century (Bun- 


‘sen Hippolytus I. p. 422 sq, ed. 2; 


Milman Za£ Christ. I. p. 41; comp. 
Ruggieri de Port. Hippol. Sed. ii. 8 
in Lumper Hist. Sanct. Patr. vin. 
p. 518 sq), yet there is really no evi- 
dence of such a constitution till a 
very much later date, while many 
facts point in the opposite direction ; 
see Dóllinger Hippolytus u. Kallistus 
p. 108 sq. The róros xepíov ‘Papalev 
therefore will have a looser significa- 
tion, denoting generally ‘the country 
or district of the Romans’ (comp. 


TO THE ROMANS. 


19I 


\ , 
kai TpokaÜnroi èv com xwpiov ‘Pwuaiwv, áticos, 


decorum, as Cureton and Petermann suggest) e£ beatitudine (dévopaxdpioros) et laude 
(¿Ë émaeos) e? memoria (perhaps =dtlayvos, 833231 memoria being a corruption of 
WDT purificatio) et digna prosperitate (A£vemirevkros) 2; om. M. 


Macar. Magn. Apocr. iii. 38, p. 135, 
ev okjmrpo Kal xópa Popaiov dvara- 
TG»); and the Church of Rome itself 
is so entitled, as the principal church 
in this region, just as the Church of 
Jerusalem might be said mpoka67o6a: 
êv róro xopíov "ovüatov. 

On the otherhand it might be urged 
that êv rém@ x.r.A. describes not the 
range of the supremacy, but the 
locality of the supreme power itself. 
In this case zpoká85ra. would be used 
absolutely of a certain precedence 
assigned to the Church of Rome, as 
situated in the metropolis of the em- 
pire and the world, over the other 
churches of Christendom. The ex- 
pression would then be allied to the 
‘potentior principalitas, which Ire- 
nzus (iii. 3. 2) assigns to the Roman 
Church; though not so strong in 
itself. But, if this were the meaning, 
it is difficult to see why Ignatius 
should write ev róre xcepíov '"Popatev 
in place of èv ‘Péuy, which alone 
would be natural to describe merely 
the locality. The idea ofthe ‘cathedra 
Petri? therefore has no place here. 

For the pleonastic róme comp. 
Clem. Hom. i. 14 mwoÜó émi rov tis 
'Tovüaíae yevéoOar rómov, Letter of 
Abgar in Euseb. H. E. i. 13 carnpe 
d'ya0Q dvaqavévri ey Tém@ 'leporoNópov 
(comp. Doctrine of Addai p. 4, ed. 
Phillips). It may perhaps be regard- 
ed as a Syriasm, since the Syrians 
constantly insert the corresponding 
word NINN in translating from the 
Greek, where it has no place in the 
original; e.g. Acts ii. 9, Io, iv. 36, 
xi. I9, xiv. 24, xvi. 7, 8, xviii. 2, xx. 2, 
etc., in the Peshito. In Origen zz 
Joann. ii. 12 (IV. p. 172) memoímkev 
éxet TOU Tómou xXwplov mapaxMjoeos, 


quoted by Pearson and others as a 
parallel to the expression here, we 
ought probably to read xepíov. The 
explanation of Bunsen, who governs 
Xep(ou by mpoxdénra and interprets ey 
rómo in dignitate, in officio suo (Br. 
p. 114), appears to me quite unten- 
able. Nor again does it seem possi- 
ble to accept Zahn's solution (Z. v. 4. 
p. 311 sq, and ad /oc.), who takes the 
same construction but substitutes 
tine for ror, making ëv rim signify 
‘as an example, ie. to the other 
churches. We should expect eis 
TUmov Or øs rúros in this case; and 
indeed the extreme awkwardness of 
the whole expression condemns it. 

xeptov] ‘region? The words xópos 
(‘place’), ydpa (‘country’), and xo- 
ploy (‘district’), may be distinguished 
as implying Jocality, extension, and 
limttation, respectively. The last 
word commonly denotes either ‘an 
estate, a farm, or ‘a fastness, a 
stronghold,’ or (as a mathematical 
term) ‘an area.’ Here, as not un- 
frequently in later writers, it is ‘a 
region,’ ‘a district’; but the same fun- 
damental idea is preserved. The 
relation of xópos to xapiov is the 
same as that of dpyvpos, xpvaós, to 
dpyüpwv, xpvotov, the former being 
the metals themselves, the latter the 
metals worked up into bullion or 
coins or plate or trinkets or images, 
e.g. Macar. Magn. Apocr. iii. 42 (p. 
147) ratr’ èk xpvcoU kal dpyúpou Kal 
xarkod kai aiBrjpov marropeva poppa- 
para àpyúpiov kai xpuciov. 

aéróðeos K.r.\.] On the frequency 
of these compounds of dos in Igna- 
tius see the note on Æphes. 4 afto- 
vópacrov. In this passage, though 
symmetrical in composition, they are 


192 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


> > , / E , 

d£iwomperriis, dErouakdpio Tos, d£ierrauvos, aELETLTEUKTOS, 
, ^ 5 , , 

aFlayvos, Kal pokaÜnuévm Ths ayamns, XptoTOvouos, 


, 
TATPWVUMOS* 


a \ > , 5 , 4 ^ 
NV Kal domaCouat €V ovouaTt yO OU 


r dgverlrevxros] g* (but 1 has fide dignae) G (written d£oerirevkros) 2 (see the 
last note) AmSm ; diene ordinata L; digna precibus A: see the lower note. 
2 xpwrévouos] g* (though the common text has xpwrówvpos); christi habens 


hardly so in meaning, but take their 
complexion from the other compo- 
nent element, ‘worthy of praise,’ 
‘worthy zz purity,’ etc. For the word 
d&.d6eos itself see Zrad/. inscr. (note). 

I. d&werirevxros] The meaning of 
the word may be doubtful. Accord- 
ing as an active or a passive sense is 
assigned to -emureukros, it will signify 
‘worthy of success’ or ‘worthy of 
associating with) Jacobson indeed 
says of this latter sense, ‘mire Vede- 
lius dignissima quae invisatur) But 
itis suggested by the passive form ; 
it is supported by such analogies as 
aéw(nr@ros, a&toGéatos, a&oxrnTos, 
and especially d&soxowdrynros (Plat. 
Resp. p. 371 E); and it would harmo- 
nize with Ignatius’ expressed desire 
to see the Romans (Š 1). On the other 
hand dvemírevkros, evemírevukros, both 
of them late and rare words, are used 
in the sense ‘unsuccessful,’ ‘fortu- 
nate, respectively. All those versions 
also, which had the word uncorrupted, 
agree in so rendering it ; digna prospe- 
ritate Z; digna assecutione (desidert- 
orum) Am; digna tis quae petiit Sn: 
and this fact may perhaps be allowed 
to decide the meaning. Ofthe others, 
digne ordinata in L represents déte- 
miraxros, and fide digna in l afwo- 
mlotevtos, While digna precibus in 
A is due to a corruption in the 


Syriac text (aA 
EAN bem prosperttate) which the 


Armenian translator had before 
him, as Petermann has pointed out. 
Yet Ovoemírevkros seems to have a 


precatione for 


passive sense ‘difficult of attainment’ 
(unless indeed its meaning is 'diffi- 
cult of success?) in Diod. Sic. xvii. 93 
épav Ovaemírevkrov thy émi roùs Tav- 
Sapidas arparetav obcay, 2b. xxxii. exc. 
eis moAdAds emBoras SucemitevKrous 
éxye tas mpáfew, and so certainly 
Methodius Cozv. i. 1 (p. 11,ed. Jahn) 
oravioy mavy kai Óvaemírevkrov dvÜpd- 
mots ayvela; while Hesych. uses it in 
a somewhat different sense, but still 
passive, ‘difficult of access, unsoci- 
able,’ when he writes Óvemeréore- 
pos: Svokod@repos, Óvaemtreukrórepos. 
As regards the form of the word, 
aéveritevkros is more in accordance 
with analogy (e.g. á£iémauvos just a- 
bove, d£iévrperros Clem. Alex. Prof. 
Eci. 28, p. 997). 

2. a€&iayvos|‘worthily pure? Bun- 
sen (Br. p. 115) conjectures d£tawos, 
supposing that the previous d£iérauwos 
is a transcriber's gloss to explain the 
unusual word a&iawos. But the con- 
vergence of so many and various 
authorities in favour of the reading 
in the text forbids such a violent 
alteration. 

mpokaOnuévn ths dyámys] Comp. 
Clem. Hom. Ep. Clem. 2, 17, where 
mpoxabéCecOar ddneias is said of Cle- 
ment as the successor of S. Peter. 
There is doubtless here a reference 
back to the foregoing mpoxaOnpévn èv 
tor@ k.t.A. The Church of Rome, as 
it is first in rank, is first also in love. 
A noble testimony is borne to the 
spirit which distinguished the early 
Roman Church by Dionysius of 
Corinth, who writes as follows to the 


TO THE ROMANS. 


193 


^ € = , \ v ^ 
Xpta-ToU VLOU TATOOS’ kara TapKa Kal 7rveUpa jvajévots 


, > ^ , ^ , - 
5 maon EVTOAH aUTOU, meTAnpwuévois xdprros Ocot ddia- 


/ 4.199. , \ 
KOLTWS kat ATOOLWALTMEVOLS AMÒ TAVTOS dAXXoTplov ypw- 


legem L; in lege christi [Z] Sm; lege christi A; xporvvuos G; def. M. Am gives 


both readings, cAzzstz-Aabems-legem (aut; X4 habens-nomen). 


which follows, 2 is greatly abridged. 


Christians in Rome (c. A.D. 170), e£ 
dpxüs Univ os rri roUro, mavras 
ue adeAods morkos e)epyereiv, ék- 
KAngíate ve ToÀÀais rais karà mücav 
mow epddia méyumew, Oe pev THY TOV 
Seopéver mrevíav dvaydxovras, €v ueráA- 
Aois Oe doe ois Umdpxovow emixopr- 
yo)vras: Ó dv méyumere apyjbev epo- 
iov matpotapdadoroyv Z0oç “Po- 
paíov Pena, $vAárrovres, and he 
adds that Soter, their present bishop, 
had more than sustained the tradi- 
tional reputation of his church for 
deeds of charity; Euseb. Z. Æ. iv. 
23. The Epistle of Clement itself is 
a happy illustration of this spirit. 

xpioróvopos| ‘observing the law 
of Christ’: comp. 1 Cor. ix. 21 čvvo- 
pos Xpiorov, and see also Gal. vi. 2 
dvan\np@cere Tov vópov Tod XpicTo0, 
Magn. 2 ds võu “Incod XpicTov. 
Considering the great preponder- 
ance of the best authorities in favour 
of xpuaróvopos, and the likelihood of 
alteration into ypiordvupos for the 
sake of conformity with the following 
word, there can be no doubt about 
the reading. 

3. rarpórvpos] See Ephes. iii. 14, 15, 
mpos tov matépa e& ob Taca marpià 
€v ovpavois kal émi yas ovopacerat 
The lexicons give no other example 
of this word, though the derivatives 
TATPOVULLKOS, marpaovvpikós, are not 
uncommon in later writers, and ma- 
"rpevóptos occurs even in Æschylus 
Pers. 151 TO matpwvipuoy yévos rjuére- 
pov (where Blomfield would read ro 
matpovupoy àv k.r.À.). This same play 
also offers a good analogy to the pre- 
ceding word in IHepoóvopos ver. 916. 


IGN. II, 


In the passage 


4. cápka kai mveüpa] See the note 
on Zes. 10. 

nvopévors| ‘united to’, and so ‘act- 
ing in unison with’; comp. Magn. 6, 
Smyrn. 3. 

5. adcaxpiras] not ‘inseparably’, 
but ‘without wavering, with undi- 
vided allegiance, with singleness of 
heart’; comp. Philad. inscr. dyaA- 
Arwpevy ev rà wader TOU Kupiov rv 
ddvaxpirws. See the note on ddidkpi- 
Tov, Ephes. 3. Comp. also such ex- 
pressions as dpepior@ xapdia Trall, 
13, arepuo máo ro diavoia Ephes. 20. 

6. aroðwopévois] ‘strained clear’, 
‘filtered’; comp. PAz/ad. 3 ovx órumap 
Upiv epia pòv evpov dXX. drodwAropor. 
The single compound éwhifew occurs 
literally in Amos vi. 6, Matt. xxiii. 24 
(comp. Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 20, p. 
489), and metaphorically in Clem. 
Alex. Proph. Ecl. 7 (p. 991) ro Kat 
mvevpata dkáÜapra cupmendeypeva TH 
ux? Swri¢er@a k.7r.A. For the sub- 
stantive see Iren. i. 14. 8 čv re móvots 
kai raÀauropíaus ux yevouévg eis 
OwAucpóv adrns (explaining the Va- 
lentinian teaching), Clem. Alex. Paed. 
i. 6 (p. 117) ot SwAcopoy pev ToU mvev- 
paros THY prunv TOY kpewróvov eivat 
pasiv’ SwAtopoy O6 voovou róv amo 
THS VTOMYNTEWS TOV djewóovov TOY xet- 
póvov xapicpov (speaking of certain 
Gnostics)...róv avrov ody Tpómov kal 
npeis...OwriCopevor Bamticpate  k.T.À. 
For another compound see Clem. 
Alex. Exc. Theod. 41 (p. 979) ev à 
avvdwaricbn Kata Ovvapuv Kal rà omép- 
para ovveOoyra avT@ els TO mArjpopa. 
For coincidences with the Valenti- 
nian phraseology in Ignatius see the 


13 


194 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


^ ^ ^ ^ [Ss m 3 , h 
patos, TAXetoTa év’Incod Xpia o TH Oeo juwv duwpws 
Xatpeuv. 

^ 5 a ^ \ 
I. "Enel evfauevos Oeo éméruxov iðeiv vuwy Ta 


rCL X. 7G 0eQ hudv] GLAm Sm; T. X. 7G 0eQ (om. mâr) M; `I. X. 
(om. rd 0e@ quà») A; 0e@ kal marpl kal kvplo Tj» "I. X. g; om. 2 (see the last 
note). 3 "Eme evtáuevos] GAAm Mg* (but 1 has deprecans); deprecans 
(émevéduevos) L. The following are doubtful; jampridem deum oravi ut dignus 
fierem...nune autem ligatus etc È; oravi et datum est mihi ut viderem etc Sm} but 
they seem to be attempts to mend the anacoluthon of rel ei£áuevos k.7.X. See the 
lower note. Oc] GM; rQ Oe@ g. 4 a&60ea] GZSm g; 
dévobéara M (but v.1. á£&ó0ea); dignas visione L (but this does not necessarily imply 
d£io0f6ara, since d£0ca might have been so interpreted, though wrongly; see the 
lower note); vestras dignas visione facies, (aut, vestras deo dignas facies) Am (this 
might imply merely alternative renderings of déd@ea, but probably intends alterna- 
tive readings, d£ó0ea and d£io0éara); om. A. ws] GL; ods g* (mss, but 1 has 
sicuti); quod (or quem, or quos) A; id quod Sm (but this does not imply any other 


notes on Ephes. inscr, Magn. 8, 
Trall.t. The construction and meta- 
phor here are well illustrated by a 
fragment attributed to Archytas in 
Stobzeus Flor. i. 73 O6€0s...eD pu 
kai SwvAocpevay exer Tay áperàv amo 
mavros TO Ovard mabeos. The ypóna 
refers to the colouring matter which 
pollutes-the purity of the water. 

I. mAclora...xaipew] See the note 
on Ephes. inscr. 

TO Oe nyuov| See the note on 
Ephes. inscr. 

dudes] On this word in the open- 
ing salutations of the Ignatian Epis- 
tles see the note Zes. inscr. 

I. ‘My petition has been more 
than answered, when I prayed that I 
might see your faces: for I hope at 
length to salute you as a prisoner of 
Jesus Christ, if it be God's will that 
I complete my course. The begin- 
ning indeed is well ordered, if only I 
am successful to the end, so that no 
one interposes to rob me of my por- 
tion. I say this, because I am ap- 
prehensive of your love. It is easy 
for you to do as you will; but it is 
difficult for me to find God, unless 
you stay your hands’, 


3. Erel ev&dpyevos k.r.X.] ‘Seeing 
that in answer to my prayers’. The 
sentence is an anacoluthon; depen- 
dent clauses crowd upon each other 
in succession; and the thread of the 
grammar is lost. For similarinstances 
in the openings of these epistles 
see Ephes. Y “AmodeEduevos (with the 
note). The anacoluthon here has a 
close parallel also in Magn. 2 'Emei 
ody n&tdOnv k.T.r. (see the note). The 
subject on which he here ‘flies off at 
a tangent’ is his fear lest the Roman 
Christians should interpose and rob 
him of his martyrs triumph. Here, 
as in similar cases, the transcribers 
and critics have attempted to mend 
the syntax. Such an attempt, for 
instance, is the substitution of "Emev- 
Éápevos for "Emei evEduevos (Vedelius, 
Ussher, Pearson, etc, with the Latin 
Versions and some MSS of the Meta- 
phrast), or the reading Id\au ézev£á- 
pevos (Bunsen after the Syriac), or 
the omission of yàp after 8e8euévos 
(the editors commonly after the Me- 
dicean MS). 

emérvxov] “Z have been successful’, 
‘it has been granted me’; not mean- 
ing that he had already seen them, 


I] TO THE ROMANS. 195 


5 , Z: \ 5 > 
aEwbea mpocwra, ws kal mAéov 9] yTouunv NaBetv: Sede- 
, \ > ^5 ^ : ° ^ > 
5 pevos yap ev Xpia To ‘Inco’ édriCw úuâs domdcacbar, 
EL , F ^ ^ > > 
éaymep ÜéNnua ñ ToU aEwOivai ue eis TéNos eivav n 


reading than ws); def. EM. For Ax see the next note. TMéor Ñ qroóumv] 
see below; màéov yrovuny GLAg; ex multo tempore petebam Sm (perhaps a bad 
rendering of mAéor rather than a v. 1. ráAa)); def. ZM. Am has guantum petit, plus 
etiam accepi, which gives the same sense as my conjectural reading. 5 yap] 
gL Am; nunc autem [È] (see a previous note); e£ nunc A; om. GM; al. Sm (but 
the existing text seems to have been corrupted from one which had yap; see 
Meesinger p. 25). XpwrQ “Inoot] GLAmSmMg; inood xpwrQ ZA. 

domdcacbat] GLAAmMg; venire et salutare Sm; accipere et salutare 2 (where 
accipere seems to represent Aageiv, which has been preserved from the omitted 


context). 
the lower note. 


6 éna] gLZSm; add. roð 0c00 GAM; add. domini Am: see 
evo] GLg; oüres eva, M; pervenire Nm; sustinere 


haec Sm; om. ZA. The variations of the Oriental Versions seem to be mere 
expedients of translators, and not to imply any v. l. in the Greek. 


but that circumstances were such as 
to have already insured the fulfilment 
of his prayer. 

4. d£w6ea] See the note on Trall. 
inscr. The authorities for a£io6éara 
are too slight to justify its adoption, 
though plausible in itself. I cannot 
find that d£ió6eos (or indeed any com- 
pound in -@eos) is ever derived from 
6éa, and therefore equivalent to déo- 
Óéaros (as maintained by Zahn Z. v. 
A. p. 558, though ad loc. he is dis- 
posed to retract this opinion). In 
C. Z, G. 4943 déi0éovs in ver. 3 has 
not the same meaning as àá&uéopov 
in ver. 4 but refers to the ‘shrines’ 
which are mentioned in the same 
line. Alciphron Z. iii. 55 is quoted 
in the lexicons for this sense, but the 
reading is probably d£iéxpea, not a£- 
obea. 

os kal K.r.À.] ‘so that I have re- 
ceived even more than I asked for’. 
He had prayed that he might see the 
Romans; he was permitted to visit 
them, decorated with a prisoner’s 
fetters and (so he ventured to hope) 
crowned with a martyr’s chaplet. 
For the ideas associated with 8éej4os 
in the mind of Ignatius see the notes 


on “Lphes. 3, 11, Magn. 1. For os 
with the infinitive, expressing the 
consequence, see e.g. Actsxx. 24 (v. l), 
Clem. Hom. i 20 œs ékmAayévra pe 
Oavpá(ew, 3 Macc, i. 2 œs póvos kreivat 
avrov. It is not very uncommon in 
classical authors, e.g. ZEsch. Ez. 36, 
Xen Anab. idp T0, ic. 10, 11 4a 25; 
iv. 3. 29 (with Kühner's notes), and 
fairly common in later writers. The 
reading of the MSS here seems quite 
unintelligible, though the editors have 
hitherto acquiesced in it. I have 
remedied the fault by the repetition 
of a single letter, màéov 7j yrovumv for 
màéov nrovuny (comp. e.g. the vv. Il. in 
Gal. v. 1, Clem. Rom. 35, ii. 8). For 
the construction comp. Aristid. Of. I. 
p. 48 oxémns er mreiovos 3j pepew 
duvaiuny. Another simple emenda- 
tion would be zAéov dy for mÀéov, as 
the ó» might easily have been omit- 
ted owing to homoeoteleuton; comp. 
Polyc. 1 airoü obverw mreiova js Exes, 
ib. 3 whéov a rovüaios yivou ov ei. 

6. éávmep Oena | ‘if z£ should 
be willed’, For this absolute use of 
Onna, referring to the Divine will, 
see the note on Apes. 20. Here, as 
in most other passages where it oc- 


13—2 


196 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


mev yap apxn EVOLKOVOMNT OS OTW, av TEPATOS TL- 


TUXW ELS TO TOV Kaf pov pov dvejuimoòio us daroňaßetv. 


Po oras yap TNV VMOV ab Di uj aùr pe duco 
úuîv yap evxyepés éovw, Ó OédAETE, moroa uoi 5 


r édy méparos émvróxc] si finem etiam inveniam A; si dignus-fiam perduci ad 
finem X; éávmep xdpiros émiróxo GL; éávmep ris xápvros émirixw M. Hitherto we 


have had two separate words xápvros and méparos. 


In the authorities which follow 


they are combined ; uż usque ad finem assequar hanc gratiam Sm; st finem etiam 
gratiae assequar Am; and so too the presence of both words is betokened in the 
adaptation of g, éávmep xápuros émirixw els Tò Tov KMipóv pov eis wépas üveyuro- 


dlorws dmoAaBé&v. 


GLZM g; sed AAnSm.- 


curs, the transcribers have added 
explanatory words. See the critical 
note. 

eis réAos eivai] ‘to arrive at the 
end’: comp. Luke xi. 7, and see A. 
Buttmann p. 286. See also the note 
on Š 2 evpeOqva eis SUow. For similar 
uses in classical writers (e.g. Herod. 
i. 21 ès vr)» MiAnroy jv) see Kühner II. 
p. 471; comp. Polyc. P/Az/ 9. It is 
unnecessary to read with 
Young. 

I. evorxovopntos] So too Ovcouwovo- 
pyros, e.g. Artem. Ozezr.ii.58. The 
words more often have the meaning 
‘digestible’, ‘indigestible’, eg. Di- 
philus of Siphnus in Athen. ii. p. 54, 
where both occur. They are rare in 
any sense. 

méparos| ‘the termination, goal’, 
as e.g. Lucian Harmon. 2°én\ Tò mépas 
apigén rìs eùxfs. This reading, which 
I have restored, seems to follow from 
a comparison of the authorities as 
given above. We can there trace the 
genesis of the variations. The ori- 
ginal reading would be emended thus 

xape 
éav méparos, whence would arise two 
variations; (1) éávrep yapiros, the read- 
ing of GL; (2) éàv méparos ydpuros, 
the reading of An, which is also the 
foundation of Sm g. 


37 
teval 


See the lower note. 
patienter is a mere gloss Spee by any other abel 


' proper, destined lot: 


2 ámoAafeiv] The addition of 2 
3 yàp] 


Thy tuav dyámqv] GM; rà» ayarny vuv g. 


2. Tov kMjpóv pov] See the note 
on Tyall. 12 for this use of «Apos, 
referring to his martyrdom. In dro- 
AaBety, ‘to secure’, the preposition 
probably denotes that it was his 
comp. [Clem. 
Rom.] ii. 8, and see the notes on Ga- 
latians iv. 5. 

3. oBodpar x...] For the con- 
struction see Winer Š Ixvi. p. 782. 

The persecutions in the reign of 
Domitian show that Christianity had 
already forced its way upwards to the 
highest ranks of society in Rome 
(see Clement of Rome I. p. 29 sq). 
Although Ignatius had been con- 
demned to death, yet the inter- 
cession of powerful friends in the 
metropolis, whether open Christians 
or secret sympathisers, might have 
procured, if not a pardon, at least a 
commutation of his sentence. An 
instance of such interposition with 
the emperor on behalf of Christian 
convicts at a later date is given by 
Hippol Haer. ix. 12. The strenuous 
efforts of the Christians under like 
circumstances are described in Lu- 
cian Peregr. 12 emel ò oiv edédero, of 
Xpiotiavol oupdopay  mowüpnevoi TÒ 
mpaypa mávra exivovy eEapmaca Terpo- 
pevot avrov. Ignatius appears to have 
heard that such efforts were contem- 


1] TO THE ROMANS. 


I97 


5 Š / N , > ^ Oo ^ 2 ^ 9 ¢ ^ ` 
UG KOAOV €OTLY TOU €Ou ETLTUNELV, EAVTTED UMELS ui] 


$elona0é uov. 
Dee E I. 


^ , [14 N / 
Oed dpéra, daep Kal dpéakere. 


Ou yap OéXw Uuás dévOpwrapecknoa dXXa 


of ` , 
OUTE yap yw TOTE 


[4 \ ^ ^ ^ » [i ^ 
€Ë@ kaipov Tot0UTOv OcoU émwvTvyeiv: obre Upeis, éav 


4 yàp] GLAmM g; autem 2; scio enim quod Sm; om. A. 
LZA. g* (but with a v. 1.); om. GSm Am (substituting sc) M. 
after où GLM; after 0é\w g; om. AAm; al. Sm; def. Z. 

dAA& Ow apécat] GLAmM g; sed deo A (a translator's 


app. L; duly G. 
abridgment); om. Sm; def. 2. 
gL Sa (?); o GMZ(?) A(?) An(?). 


ëË@ more katpov); &&w kaupóv more M; habebo aliquando tempus L. 
It is omitted altogether in M. 


^ ^ L4 
oürov] G; rotoÜrov wore g. 


plated on his behalf. 

5. Oeo) émwvxyei] See the note 
on Magn. 1. 

“pn peionobé pov] ‘if you should 
not spare me’, ie. ‘should inter- 
pose to rob me of my desire.’ To 
Ignatius martyrdom is life: comp. 
Š 6 uj) eumodionré poi (not Oaveiy, as 
we might have expected, but) (ca. 
Whosoever stands between him and 
this his true life, does him a wrong 
(aduxnon just above). Such a person 
grudges him a blessing (Š 3 ovdémore 
éBacxavate ovdevi, Š 7 Backavia ev vpiv 
p; karowe(ro) Hence in his no- 
menclature the meaning of words is 
reversed. To ‘spare’ means to deliver 
to death, because death islife. From 
not understanding this, transcribers 
here have omitted the negative. Simi- 
larly u) was omitted in some texts 
in Š 6 u) OedAnonré pe dmoaveiv (see 
the note there). 

II. ‘I would not have you please 
men but God, as indeed you are 
doing. For me this is the great op- 
portunity of finding God, while for 
you it will be the noblest achieve- 
ment to hold your peace. If you are 
silent and leave me to my fate, I 
shall become an utterance of God; 
if you are solicitous for my life in 


5 ui] 
7 yep] 
buds] gM, and 


8 dpéckere] dpéoxera G. otre] 
mote ëw katpüv] Gg* (but with a v. 1. 
9 Tot- 


the flesh, I shall be reduced again to 
an inarticulate cry. Permit me—I 
ask nothing more—to pour out my 
blood as a libation to God, while 
there is still an altar ready. Encircle 
this altar as a chorus, and sing your 
hymn of thanksgiving to God in 
Christ for summoning the bishop of 
Syria from the rising to the setting 
ofthe sun. Yes, it is good for me to 
set from the world, that I may rise 
unto God.’ 

7. dvOpwrapeckjoum kz] For 
the opposition see Gal. i. ro, 1 Thess. 
ii. 4. The adjective dvOpamdpeckos is 
a Pauline word, Eph. vi. 6, Col. iii. 
22, and it occurs also in Ps. lii. 7; 
comp. [Clem. Rom.] ii. § 13. The 
verb is not found either in the LXX 
or in the N. T. Justin (4004 i. 2) 
uses àvÜpemapéakeia, This family of 
words seems to be confined to bibli- 
cal and ecclesiastical Greek. On 
these forms see Lobeck PAryn. p. 621. 
By ‘pleasing men’ he means abetting 
those friends who desired to save 
him, or gratifying the merely human 
cravings of his own nature: comp. 
éüv eépaoÓóíTe ths capkós pov just be- 
low. 

Q.  Kaipüv — TOLo0TOV 
opportunity like the present’. 


erA] San 
For 


198 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


» ^ 3: 

TLWINTNTE, KpelLTTOVL ¿oye EXETE emiypapnvat. éav 

2 yàp] GLAAm Sm; om. 2 Joann-Mon (twice), M (but with a v. 1. otv); T€ 
yàp g. éyi] txt L; add. yerjooua GMg. Other authorities supply different 
words; sum Am; sum mihi Sm Joann-Mon (once); ero 2 Joann-Mon (once); fiam A; 
but there is no reason to think that any corresponding word stood in their Greek text. 
There is no sufficient authority for the omission of ¿yà (with Zahn): it appears di- 
rectly in GLAAmMg Joann-Mon (once), and is represented, though less emphatically, 
in the sum mihi of Sm Joann-Mon (once). Aóyos beot] L*2Sm Joann-Mon (twice); 
G00 (om. Mos) GMg; «go verbum sum (aut; ego dei sum) Am (where both readings 
are recognised, but the first imperfectly, for there is no other evidence for éyó Aóryos 


without 6€o0). 


the infinitive after kao rovodroy 
comp. e.g. Hom. Od. vii. 309 od pot 
Torov evi orjheosoi (Nov Kp payi- 
diws kexoAGoÜa, and see Kühner Ir. 
pp. 580, IOII. 

I. kpeírrow k.rA.] ‘have your 
name attached to, have ascribed to 
you, win the credit of, any nobler 
achievement’: as e.g. Plut. Mor. p. 
326 F THY TUX NY TOlS karopÓdpagur 
éavriv emvypapoveay, Dionys. A. R. 
vii. 50 rois éxBaivovor mapa Tas vperé- 
pas avvOnkas o) tiv rUxyqyv aGAda THY 
)perépav émvypádeu Oidvoray, /Elian 
H. A. vii. 2 rots dAXorpíow éavróv 
movos ovK emtypapey. Sometimes the 
dative is omitted, and éemypagew twa 
signifies (to give the credit to a per- 
son’, e.g. Clem. Hom. ix. 16, 17, 18, 
xii. II, while emvypaper Oa is ‘to have 
the credit’, zd. xi. 9. So in Latin Se- 
neca de Brev. Vit. 16 ‘quid aliud est 
vitia nostra incendere, quam auctores 
illis zzscezbere deos. The metaphor 
is taken from a public tablet, where 
the name of the person is added to 
the mention of the achievement. 

2. Toronte dm épo)0] With refer- 
ence to what follows, *Silence in you 
is speech in me’. The twice repeat- 
ed éàv ewomonre shows the nature of 
the efforts which Ignatius feared from 
his Roman friends. They might 
plead for his life. The words ‘be 
silent from me’ are a condensed ex- 
pression for ‘be silent and leave me 


A has si siletis a me verbo ego pars dei fiam. 


This departure from 


alone.’ 

Aóyos Oco0 x.r.A.] ‘a word of God’. 
The saint's career, if it is left to work 
out its course and ends in martyr- 
dom, will be a word of God; it will 
be an expressive testimony to the 
Gospel, a manifestation of the Divine 
purpose: but, if interfered with, it 
will be reduced to a mere inarticulate 
meaningless cry. The point of this 
sentence depends on a recognised 
distinction between Aóyos and on, 
as denoting respectively ‘an intelli- 
gible utterance’ and an ‘irrational 
cry’; comp. Arist. Pvodl. xi. 55 (p. 
905) Adyou Kowavei povoy (avOpemos), 
rà 0€ dÀÀa povis, de Interpr. 4 (p. 16) 
Aóyos 06 esre pov) ongpavrue] km. 
It was a Stoic definition also that 
Aóyos del onuavtikos sti (Diog. Laert. 
vii. 57). See Lersch Sprachphilos. d. 
Alten ii. p. 32 sq, 42 sq. Thus dam, 
as Aristotle says elsewhere (Ze Gez. 
An. v. 7, p. 786), is merely the vAn 
of Aóyos. It has in it the making 
of Aóyos. The three words Aóyos, 
hom, Y'ó$os, are in a descending 
scale, and denote respectively ; (1) 
the utterance of a rational being; 
(2) the cry of an animate creature, 
whether articulate or not; (3) a mere 
confused indistinguishable sound ; 
comp. Arist. de An. ii. 8 (p. 420) 4 
port yopos ris ori èupóyov. They 
are respectively ‘an utterance’, ‘a cry’, 
and ‘a noise’. It will be seen from 


T] TO THE ROMANS. 


199 


` / > 3475. ^ 3 \ , ^ aN NES 
yao CIWTNTNTE AT E OU, Eyw Xoryos Ocot’ éav ðe Epas- 


the Syriac may be explained in several ways; (1) A may have read hls 
verbo for oia verbum, and pars det may represent 0co0; (2) There may 
have been in the Syriac text of the translator a corruption rA portio for 


hlo verbum, and a subsequent correction, so that both words were retained; 
(3) The mixed result may be due to a confusion of.the two Greek readings 
ey Xóyos Oeo and éyó yeryjcouat 0coU, the Armenian text having been clumsily 


and imperfectly corrected by a Greek Ms which had the latter. 


The substitution 


of currens in the next clause from such a Greek Ms favours this last explanation. 


this distinction, why Ignatius uses 
gery rather than Wédos ; for dew, as 
such, though it does not imply reason, 
yet expresses animal emotion, Arist. 
Pol. i. 2 (p. 1253) 5j pev oiv pov) ro? 
Avmgpoü kai ydéos écri onpetor, dio 
kai Trois dAXow mápxet Cdous...0 Se 
Aóyos emi rÊ OnXobr dore TÒ cvudQépov 
kai rò BAaBepdy, Bare kal +ó Oikatov kai 
TÓ &diKov’ roUro yàp mpos Tara (da 
rois dvOpdrois tiov, Tò povoy dya0o0 
ka} kako Kal Sixaiov kai adikov Kai TOY 
Mov aicbnow £yew. Hence hov 
stands to Aóyos in the same relation 
as the yyvxikós ävðporos to the mvev- 
parwós. So again Plut. Mor. p. 1026 
A ds 0€ hoary tis éoriv Gdoyos xal aoh- 
pavros, Aóyos 06 Aéfis ev ovi onpav- 
tiki Óavotas ; comp. Plato ZZeaet. p. 
203 B ed dyer A€yerOar avra dÀoya, ov 
ye Ta évapyéarara...jevv povov €xet, 
Aóyov 0€ ods óvrwoüv. 

This distinction of Aóyos and dev? 
was at once pressed into the service 
of Christian theology. Melito (Fragm. 
xv, ed. Otto: see Cureton Spicil. Syr. 


pp. al, 53) speaks of our Lord as 
‘among angels the Archangel, among 
voices the Word’, where the editors 
(Renan, Cureton, Sachau) all have 
the singular ‘in voce’, ‘in the voice’, 
but where we ought certainly to read 


the plural las with su So 
again Heracleon the Valentinian saw 
this distinction in Johni. 1, 14, where 
our Lord is called 6 Aóyos, as con- 


trasted with i. 23, where the Baptist 
styles himself pov) Boóvros, adding 
that the prophets were yos and 
arguing vv doevüv oikewrépav o)cav 
TQ Aóyo Xoyov yiverOa (Orig. in Joann. 
vi $ 12, IV. p. 121). And Origen 
himself, though rejecting the com- 
ments of Heracleon, assumes the dis- 
tinction of Aóyos and dev) as under- 
lying the language of S. John, and 
argues at length from it, the pev) 
being the minister and forerunner of 
the Adyos (2d. ii Š 26, p. 85; vi Š 10, p. 
118 sq; comp. c. Ce/s. vi. 9). The 
Docetze too in Hippolytus (Haer. viii. 
9) base some of their speculations on 
this distinction. See also Clem. 
Alex. Protr. 1 (p. 8) mpodpopos Iwar- 
ms, kai Ú pov) mpoðpopos roô Aóyov 
K.T.À.: comp. Sérom. viii. 2, p. 914 sq. 
From Origen more especially the 
distinction would find its way into 
later fathers; comp. Meletius in 
Epiph. Z/aer. lxxiii. 30 (p. 878), Ephr. 
Syr. Evang. Conc. Exp. 3 sq, 39 
(ed. Moesinger). 

The passage of Ignatius is ex- 
plained accordingly by Johnthe Monk 
in the latter part of the fourth cen- 
tury (see Quotations and References 
no. 21), who writes, *The Word is 
not of the flesh but of the Spirit, 
whereas the Voice is not of the Spirit 
but of the flesh...for every beast and 
bird together with cattle and creep- 
ing thing of the earth utter the voice 
only; but because man has in him a 


200 


- ^ Z , ” , 
Ore TAs c'apkós uov, Tad €copat Pwvn. 


THE .EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


TTAéOV [ dé | 


- ^ ^ / 
poi uù rapaa xnoOe Tov arovdicOjva Oeo, ds ETL 0v- 


r pwvh] L*2Sm Joann-Mon 206 sq (several times); rpéxev GAMg. As before, 
Am recognises both readings, ¿erum ero mera vox (aut, iterum ero currens). It 
should be noticed that in G the words ré\w @coua tpéxwv are omitted in the text 
and added in the margin, though apparently by the same hand. The alterations 
in this context, (r) the insertion of yeyjoouat, (2) the omission of Aóyos, (3) the 
substitution of rpéxev for ¢wvy, all hang together; see the lower note. The 
departure of A here from the original text of the Syriac Version, as shown by 
readings of 2 Joann-Mon, must be explained as the alteration of some later 
scribe who substituted in a familiar quotation the form with which he was ac- 


quainted. mAéov] GM; mAetov g. dé] MLg; jam Am; igitur Sm; 
om, GZA. 2 uw) GLZAAmSm; om. g* (the existing authorities) 
M. mapdoxnobe] G; mapéxec0e g; mapáoxec0e M; fribuetis L (the 


MSS, but we should probably read zzzézazis). 


soul and is not like the rest of the 
other bodies, he uses the Word and 
the Voice etc.', with much more to the 
same effect, and he refers in the con- 
text to the contrast between the 
Word and the Voice in John i. 1, 14, 
23. This is doubtless substantially 
the meaning of Ignatius. His mar- 
tyrdom alone would make his life an 
intelligible utterance; otherwise it 
was no better than the passionate cry 
of some irrational creature to whom 
life is pleasure or pain, and nothing 
more, In the highest sense of all 
One only is the Adyos, the Word of 
God; but all His saints, made perfect 
in knowledge, are utterances, words, 
of God, as fragments of the One 
Word. 

Partly because he did not under- 
stand this distinction of Aóyos and 
gory, and partly (we may suppose) 
because he shrank from applying 
the term Aóyos Oeo? to any one but 
Christ, the interpolator has altered 
the passage after his wont, substi- 
tuting eyo yernoouar Oeod for éyó 
Aóyos Qeoü and rpéyev for dow. 
Wordsworth (Church History 1. p. 
143) translates madw rpéxev ‘rene- 
gade, backslider’, referring to his 


orovõio hvar] gM 3 orovdiac- 


note on zaAwóponeiv, S. Hippolytus 
p. 124 (ed. 2); but the interpolator 
probably meant that Ignatius, in- 
stead of receiving the crown of 
victory, would be put back again to 
run the race (comp. Macar. Magn. 
lii. 40, p. 138, kékAeurra, TOY TOveY kai 
Tov Spopev TO oradioy,..kal ov TÀ Ly 
dvoiyets kai Tp éx etu ÈTLITATTELS K.T.À.: 
and for the metaphor see also PoZyc. 
I mpocbeciva TQ Ópóuo rov; SO too rpé- 
xew in I Cor. ix. 24, 26, Gal. ii. 2, v. 
7, Phil ii. 16, etc., and dpduos Acts 
xx 9245222 0]m.eiv.w7 M OBnutebebas 
spoiled the antithesis. From the 
interpolator it has got into the 
Greek Ms of Ignatius. Cureton sug- 
gested nye for rpéxyev on account 
of the similarity of the letters, and . 
this not very happy conjecture is 
adopted by Bunsen p. 96, by Lipsius 
S.T. pp. 75, 196, and by Zahn, though 
Cureton himself (C. Z. p. 292) retract- 
ed it in favour of oi. But obviously 
the case here is not one of a clerical 
error, but of a deliberate alteration. 
Moreover $e; is required as well 
by the common antithesis of Aóyos 
and gery, as also by the render- 
ings of the versions; e.g. the Latin 
‘vox’, which is not an equivalent to 


i] TO THE ROMANS. 


201 


, e / , € 5 2 
GlaoTHPLOV ETOLMOV €O TLUW@:: iva EV ayarn Xopos yevo- 
‘ 


» ^ \ 3 3 ^ ^ [74 
evot aonte To maTpi év “Incov Xowro, Tt Tov èri- 


Ovar G. 3 tva...donre] GLAmMg ; ut in amore sitis in uno consensu 
et glorificetis 2, (probably only a loose paraphrase); Zam£um (cum) amore state et 
una-voce gloriosum facite A; sed in coetu amoris estote mihi cantatores et glorificate Sm. 

4 TQ marp] GLAAmSmMg (but deo patri 1); deo patri X. èv “Inood 
XpwrQ] L; per iesum christum AmSm; in iesu christo domino nostro È; èv xpurr@ 
iņnooù GMg; domini nostri iesu christi A. ÖT... .ueTaTEuYáuevos] txt 
GLA Mg (with the variations in GM noted below); guod episcopum (syriae) 
dignificavit ut sit dei, quum. vocaverit eum ab oriente in occidentem È (where [rov] 
Geov is perhaps read for ó 0eós, and where z sz? represents evpeOfjvar; see however 
the lower note for another possible explanation); gui episcopum syriae dignatus 
est vocare ab oriente in occidentem A (not reading ðs for 67, but so translating the 
ambiguous Syriac 1); guod dignificavit episcopum syriae ut in confessione dei inve- 


niretur im occidente missus in vinculis ex oriente Sm. 


7x9. Again, in the first clause the edi- 
tors read éyd yevjropaı Aóyos Oeod 
(Cureton, Bunsen), or èyè yevropa 
Oeo) Aóyos (Lipsius), or Aóyos yev- 
copa, Ocot (Zahn): but the Latin 
version, which is almost always 
literal, shows that the terse and 
characteristic éyà Ayos Oeo is 
correct. 

I. mAéov k.r.A.] ‘give me nothing 
more on your part’, ‘I ask no favour 
of you beyond this? On mapéxecOau 
see the note Colossians iv. I. 

2. ro omov0wOzva] ‘to be poured 
out as a libation’, The idea is taken 
from S. Paul, Phil. ii. 17 €i xal omév- 
Somat emi rå Óvaía k.r.A., 2 Tim. iv. 6, 
éyó yap Tóm emév0oua. In both 
these passages it occurs in immediate 
connexion with the metaphor of the 
stadium, and this may possibly have 
suggested rpéxov to the interpolator. 
The word occurs also in Joann. 
Damasc. Æp. ad Theoph. 18 (L p. 
639) úrò Tod paOnpariKod “EBpaiov TQ 
diaBor@ orrovdiCouevos. The lexicons 
give the meaning ‘to be reconciled’ 
(-emév8opat) in both passages. This 
meaning might be possible in John 
Damascene, as the word might there 
be middle, but in Ignatius neither 


the voice nor the sense of the context 
will admit it. 

de ére ÜvoiaaTQpuov KTA.) ‘while 
yet there is an altar ready’, i.e. pre- 
pared for the sacrifice. The altar 
intended is, we may suppose, the 
Flavian amphitheatre, the scene of 
his approaching martyrdom. 

3. xopós] The Roman Christians 
are asked to form into a chorus and 
sing the sacrificial hymn round the 
altar; comp. Ephes. 4 kal of kar äv- 
dpa 8€ xopós yiverbe. The metaphor 
is taken from a heathen sacrificial 
rite; see K. F. Hermann Gottes- 
diens. Alterth. à. § 29. For a 
similar figure borrowed from a 
heathen religious procession see 
Ephes. 9 éevé oiv kai advodot x.r.A. 

4. Tov émíakomov Zvpías] ‘the bishop 
belonging to Syria’, i.e. ‘from the dis- 
tant east’; the genitive denoting, not 
the extent of his jurisdiction, but the 
place of his abode. Onthe supposition 
that episcopal jurisdiction is implied, 
objection has been taken to Supias 
(which is wanting in one copy of the 
Curetonian Syriac)as an anachronism 
in the time of Ignatius, and there- 
fore as an indication of the spurious- 
ness of the Greek Epistles (Bunsen 


202 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


€ € ^ , 
ckorov Cupias katrnëlwsev ó Ocós evpeOnvar eis ÓQuc'uv, 


, ^ > m / 
aro avaToAns peTameuypapevos. 


` ^ \ 
KaANov TO Ouvalt a7ro 


/ \ , J > 5 N 5 / 
Kogpou mpos Oeov, tva eis avrov avaTelrw. 


r Zuplas] GLZ,AAmSmMg (comp. Mart-Rom 10); om. Za 


Kkarnilwoev 


ó Ocós] gLAm; 6 Beds karyilwoev GM; al. ZASy (see the previous note, p. 201). 


2 uerameuá;evos] txt GL[g]; preef. roórov M. 

Sev-Syr 4a; add. mihi AZ, Joann-Mon; add. aurem Sm. 
in the authorities for g see the Appendix. 
Sev-Syr; intrare Am; congregari A; Tó dvadv0jva g*. 


kaAàv] txt GLZ,AmMg* 
For the complications 
dvvac] GLESmM Joann-Mon 

3 mpòs Ocóv] GLÈ 


AAmSmMg; om. Sev-Syr (but he quotes the passage loosely from memory bonum 


est occidere a mundo et oriri in christo). 


Br. p. 117). But the anachronism 
would be as great in the third or 
fourth century, as in the second; see 
Zahn Z. v. A. p. 308. Moreover the 
other MS of the Syriac version con- 
tains the word, and therefore its 
omission in this one copy must be 
due, not to the text which was 
before the original translator, but to 
an excision practised by a later 
scribe. 

I. eópeOfjvat eis 00m ww | Comp. Esther 
i. 5 rois €Ovect rois eópeÜciaw eis THY 
sow, Acts vili. 40 Pirros è eupéón 
eis”Af@rov. So too dhavnva eis, e.g. 
2 Macc.i. 33. See also the note on 
Š 1 eis réXos eivai. The rendering of 
the Curetonian Syriac may perhaps 
be explained by an accidental repeti- 
tion of the first syllable of evpeOjva., 
which would easily be read @yeyp- 

S. Chrysostom obviously alludes 
to this passage in his oration on 
Ignatius, Of. II. p. 598 (ed Bened.) 
kaÜámep Jus Tis €€ dvaroMjs dvia xov 
kal mpos Tiv Stow TpéÉXov...kdkeivos 
pev eis rà THs OUTEws ámiv pépr kpim- 
rera. kal vokra evOéws émdycu odros 
de eis rà Tie Ó/ceos dmeAÓGv pépm 
adporepov ékeiÜev dvéreiNe. So too 
the Menæa Dec. 20 rots Ópópows ris 
mloTews, ws Tis, THY yv yevvaiws 
diedpapes ar axpwv odpavod, kal Bvvas 
adits dmó ys ele Xpioròv rò pds 
guvaotpanters avr tis adOapoias, 


dvarelhw] GLZAg Joann-Mon; 


besides several other allusions to this 
passage more or less direct. See 
also Ephrem Syrus Of. Graec. MI. 
p. 261 čðvoav amd kócpov kal mpós 
Xpioroy dvéreilav, quoted by Zahn. 

2. kadov Tó dSdvat K.r.A.] He was 
following the course of the sun; his 
life would set to the world in the far 
west; but as the sun rises, so it also 
would rise again to God. For this 
expressive intermingling of the actual 
and the metaphorical, see karaxptros 
$ 4. There is a somewhat similar 
turnin 2 Tim. ii. 9 èv à xaxonaba 
péypt Seapayv, ws kakoüpyos, dÀÀAà ó 
Àóyos ro) Oeod ov SéSerau. 

III. ‘You have never yet grudged 
any one his triumph: you have. 
always hitherto been the instructors 
of others. It is my wish now that 
the lessons which you have taught 
should stand fast. One service you 
can do me. Pray that strength may 
be given me within and without, so 
that I may not only say, but will; may 
not becalled, but be found a Christian. 
'The name will follow in due course. 
My faithfulness will then be manifest, 
when I am no more seen by the 
world. Nothing visible is of any 
worth. Our God Jesus Christ Him- 
self is the more clearly seen, since 
He has returned to the Father. The 
work of the Gospel is not a matter 
of persuasive rhetoric: Christianity 


ur] TO THE ROMANS. 203 


IIl. Ovdérore éfaokavare ovdevii GAXovs é 


$ ` e , =~ 3 e 
50aLare. éyw O6 Oéd\w Yva kdxeiva Béßaia Ñ à uaĝn- 


dvarethwpev M; oriar (aut, fiam oriens) Am (which seems to offer an alternative 
reading avaro) à for dvarelhw); tandem (ad finem) oriar Sm; al. Sev-Syr. After 
avateihw ZA Joann-Mon have ¿z vita, which must be regarded as a mere gloss 
of the Syriac translator. 4 €Backavare] Gg; éBackqvare M. ovdevt] 
gM; ovdéva G; oúóë Am (mom unquam invidistis nobis, et non alios etc). As the 
case affects the meaning, the testimony of the versions is important; invidistis 
im aliquo L; invidistis cuiquam BASm; fascinastis aliguem 1 (which requires 


ovééva, not ovdevl as in g): see the lower note. 


GLAnSmMg; om. ZA. 


is a thing of energy and power, when 
it is hated by the world.’ 

4. eBaakdávare o)0evt] ‘grudged any 
one’, i.e. the triumph of martyrdom: 
comp. Š 7 Backavia èv ópiv uù) karov 
keito, where he is speaking of the 
same thing. ‘Do not’, writes Ignatius, 
‘depart from.your true character ; 
you have hitherto sped the martyrs 
forward to victory, do not now inter- 
pose and enviously rob me of my 
crown. For the form and meaning 
of eéBackdavare see Galatians iii. I. 
The dative is required here: for Bas- 
katvew twa is either ‘to bewitch’ or 
‘to calumniate’, while Backaivew twi 
is ‘to envy’; see Lobeck Phryn. 
P- 463. 

ovs edidaéare| ‘you instructed 
others’, i.e. in the training of the 
Christian athlete; comp. .EfZes. 3 
tp úpðv vraretPOnvac mioTeu vov- 
Oeria, umonovp, waxpoOvpia (with the 
note). Rome had hitherto been the 
chief arenaof martyrdom; the Roman 
brethren had cheered on many a 
Christian hero in this glorious con- 
test during the persecutions of Nero 
and Domitian. The expression might 
therefore refer to the Roman martyrs 
themselves, in which case dAXovs 
would be ‘others besides mysed/’. 
Perhaps however dAAovs here means 
‘others besides yourselves’. In this 
case Ignatius would refer to the 
exhortations of the Romans, whether 


5 éyw dé...évré\\eo Ge] 


by letter or by delegates, to foreign 
churches. More especially we may 
suppose that he had in his mind 
the Epistle of Clement, which con- 
tains several references to confessors 
and martyrs, with exhortations to pa- 
tient endurance founded on these ex- 
amples; e.g.$7 ratra, dyamroí, ov povov 
vpas vouOerovvres emiorédAopey K.T.À., 
Š 46 rovotrous ody vmodetypacw KoAAn- 
Onvac Kai gps Oei K.r.À. Š 55 iva de 
kal vrodelypara eOvav évéykopev K.T.A. 
There are other slight indications 
also in Ignatius that he was ac- 
quainted with the Epistle of Clement ; 
and the fact of his mentioning S. 
Peter and S. Paul in connexion a 
little below (§ 4), just as they are 
mentioned in Clement ($ 5), makes 
this inference very probable. Zahn (Z. 
V. A. p. 313) supposes that Ignatius 
alludes also to the Shepherd of 
Hermas, which is directed to be sent 
els Tas čéo moes (Ves. ii. 4) ; but this 
assumes the early date of Hermas, 
which is at least doubtful. 

5. éyà 8€ 0Ao xr.d.] ‘For my- 
self, I only desire that you should be 
consistent, so that the lessons, which 
you thus give to your disciples, may 
not fail when it comes to a practical 
issue in my own case.’ Ignatius al- 
ways uses pabyrevew as a transitive 
verb; comp. Š 5 below, and Zphes. 
3,10. So too Matt. xiii. 52, xxviii. 19, 
Acts xiv. 21, and probably also Matt. 


204 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


, > / , du > ^ 0 ” 0é 
Tevevres éyréNNeo e. — uóvov uor Ovvaguw avreia e ea wÜ€v 
» Ü ` / , \ / * v $ 

T€ kal é£wÜev, iva un povoy NEyw dXXd. kat OENw tva 


N ` \ Cm TUN 
un uóvov Aéywuar Xpiotiavos dXXa kai evpeOw. av 


^ , \ , \ 
yap eúpeQ@, Kat NéyeoOar Ovvamat, kot TOTE Ti07OS. 


> 5 , 
civar, OTav KOoMw un Þaivwuai. — oúóév atvopeEvoy 5 
I por Oóvajuy aires] GL; po Ovvapuv alricacbe [M]; vag aircic0é 
po g. 2 iva pa sec.] GM; orws um g (comp. Smyrn. 11, where there is 
the same substitution, and Polyc. 2, where there is the converse); #¢ non Sm; 
non ut L; et non ut È; et non AAm. 3 édv ydp] gLZAa; éàv 
yàp kal G; al. ASm; def. M. 4 kal róre mioròs evar] GLMg; e£ tunc 
fidelis possum fieri Am; et tunc sim fidelis A; tunc sum fidelis 2 Joann-Mon ; 
et fidelis (creditus) ero [Sm] (róre being transferred to the former clause). 
5 órav] GL; óre g (Mss) M. gpalvwpa] Gg* (with a v. 1.); gatvoua 
M (with a v. 1.); appareo L. ovdev] txt GLAAmg (but 1 add. ezim) [ Tim- 
Syr 1]; add. ydp ZSuM. 6 kaXóv] bonum LAAm; pulchrum (EY) 
ZSm; decens (NN) Tim-Syr; alwviov GMg. Doubtless aiówiov is wrong; and I 
have chosen kaAóv rather than cya6óv (Petermann, Zahn), as it is suggested by the 


xxvii. 57, where however there is a v. 1. 
ewadnrevoey for euabnrevOn : but in 
classical writers (e.g. Plut. Mor. p. 
837 C) it is perhaps more commonly 
intransitive, ‘to be a disciple He 
here claims the Romans for his 
teachers, as elsewhere he regards the 
Ephesians in the same light, Zes. 
3 (quoted above). 

I. povoy] i.e. ‘This is the only 
interposition on your part, which I 
wish.’ 

éowOév re k.r.A.] Le. ‘with moral 
courage and with physical endur- 
ance’. It is nearly equivalent to the 
common antithesis in Ignatius sap- 
ki re kal mvevpart. 

2. iva py póvov Aéye x.r.A.] Comp. 
Ephes. 15 dpewov x.r.A. with the note. 


3. pù) póvov Aéyopai] Clem. Hom. 


Hi. 37 póvos yàp obros kal Aéyera kal 
EOTW. 

eqy yap K.r.à.] “If I am proved a 
Christian by my martyrdom, then 
I shall certainly be recognised as 
one; and my position as a true be- 
liever will be only the more manifest, 


when I myself am withdrawn from 
the sight of the world’; comp. $ 4 
Tore copa. pabytns adnOds “Incov 
Xpuorov, dre oU0€ TO a'Gpá pov 0 kompos 
éWera. His martyrdom alone will 
make him truly movrés, ‘a believer’, 
as it alone will make him truly padn- 
THs. 

5. ovdey dawopevoy k.r.A.] ‘no- 
thing visible’, i.e. external and ma- 
terial, ‘zs good’; comp. 2 Cor. iv. 18 
p) Gkosrosvrov 1v rà BAeróp.eva GAAA 
rà py femóneva: ta yàp [Xemópeva 
kT... Of which passage the latter 
part has been foisted into the text of 
Ignatius in many copies here. S. 
Chrysostom in his panegyric of Igna- 
tius says (Of. II. p. 598) wei@av kara- 
$poveiv rs mapovons Cans kai pndéev 
nyetoOat ra BXemópeva kal roy 
peXXóvrav épüv x.r.A., probably having 
this passage more especially in his 
mind. Zahn (Add. e£ Corr. p. 404) 
has pointed out that this expression 
is quoted by Origen de Orat. 20 (1. 
p. 229) ov3év hawopevov kaÀóv éorw, 
olovet Soxnoes ðv kai oUk GAndas. 


IH] TO THE ROMANS. 205 


, e \ ` ^ ^ 
Kahov. 0 yao Ocos úuðv “Inoovs Xpiotos, év Tap 


» ^ , e 5 
wv, MGAÀAov (aiverat. ov meuovis TÒ Épyov dAAd 


, > \ Q " t ^ e 
ueyelovs €O Tl» O XPLTTLAVLO MOS, Ora MONTAL UTO 
L 
KOTOV. 


Syriac renderings (see e.g. kadcv in § 6). [The above note was written before I 
noticed Zahn's Add. et Corr. , He there quotes Origen ovdéy pawóuevov Kaddv éorw 
K.T.X. (see the lower note), and is disposed to adopt «aXóv, pointing out ‘vocem 
&ya60s omnino Ignatianam non esse’.] After alówtov Gg add rà yàp BXemóueva 
mpookatpa, rd dé p» BXemopueva aidvia (from 2 Cor. iv. 18), and similarly M; om. 
LZAAnSm Tim-Syr. ó ydp...palverat] GLAAmSm Tim-Syr; om. 3g; 
def. M. 7 mewpovis] gLZAm Tim-Syr; desiderii Sm; vanitatis A; 
cumas uóvov G; def. M. &pyov] épywv G. 
GZAAqgg* (as appears from 1, but the MSs ypiortavds); christianus LSm (but here 
it is doubtless due to a corrupt reading in the former part of the sentence, N32) 
vir for NTIY opus, thus rendering christianus necessary) Tim-Syr; def. M. 

órav puonra bro kócuov] g*LAm Tim-Syr; guando odit eum mundus XA; 
quando mundum. odit Sm (but this inversion of subject and object is explained by 


8 xpuruavic uos] 


a superfluous letter in the Syriac); om. G; def. M. 


6. ó yàp Oeós pv] See the 
note on Zes. inscr. 

ev marp, ov k.A] i.e. Sis more 
clearly seen, now that He has as- 
cended to His Father’. During His 
earthly ministry He was misunder- 
stood and traduced; but now His 
power is manifested and acknow- 
ledged in the working of His Church. 
As soon as He ceased kósuo paiveo- 
Gat, He paddov edaivero. The sen- 
tence is thrown into the form of a 
paradox; ‘Christ Himself is more 
clearly seen, now that He is no more 
seen’, o 

7. ov  mecpov)e KTA] ‘The 
Work is not of persuasive rhetoric’ ; 
comp. I Cor. ii. 4 ó Aóyos pov Kal TÒ 
kjpvypá pov ovk èv megois codias 
Aóyows GAN ev ámoOeífe mvedparos xai 
- Suvdpews, I Thess. i. 5 rò evayyéAcov 
nav o)k eyevnOn eis úpâs év Aóyo 
povoy adda kai èv dvvduer K.T.. For 
mewpovj comp. Gal v. 8 with the 
note. On rò čpyov ‘the Work’, as a 
synonyme for the Gospel, see the 


note on the closely parallel passage 
Ephes. 14 o) yap viv émayyeMas Tó 
épyov, ad èv Suvaper miotews K.T.À. 
Ignatius here returns to the idea ex- 
pressed a few sentences above in the 
words iva pù) povoy Àéyo adda kai 
béo. Men must not talk fluently, 
but act mightily, when persecution 
is abroad. I do not understand how 
Renan (Les Evangiles p. 490 sq) 
can defend the reading cromis uóvov. 
The external evidence is decisive 
against it: nor does it suit the con- 
text, which depreciates talk as con- 
trasted with work. 

8. peyébovs] Involving the idea of 
‘power, efficiency,’as e.g. Mart. Polyc. 
17 TO péyeÜos avroð Ths paprupias : 
comp. Zes. inscr., Smyrn. 11. 

ó xpwrriavumpós] See the note on 
Magn. 1o. 

putas vo kócpov] Comp. John 
vii. 7, xv. 18, 19, xvii. 14, I Joh. iii. 13. 
This last clause has dropped out of 
the Greek Ms. There is a similar 
omission in Š 6 pndé JA koXakevamre. 


206 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1v 


= >= , ` 5 

IV. '€yo ypapw Tacas TATS €KKAnolals, Kat EV- 
^ e \ € \ \ ^ 5 , 

TéeANOMaL TAaTW STL [eye | ékwv Urep Oeov azroÜvna ko, 


, ° ^ , ^ e ^ \ 3 
édvmep vets un KwAvonTe. mapakaNw vpuas, un ev- 


I mdous] g S,S.Z2A Ax Tim-Syr; om. GLSnM. évréNNouacd] GL*S,S,2 
AAmSmM Tim-Syr; évrehoduae g* (Mss but mando 1). 2 éyó] GM; om. g. 
It is not expressed in LA AmSm Tim-Syr, and doubtfully in ZS,8,. 3 eüvoua 
äkaipos yérnobe] GMg; concordia (cbvvova?) intempestiva (nom. or abl.) fatis L; sitis 
in amore intempestivo È (eivola dxalpy, unless it is a loose paraphrase); faciatis 
amorem...intempestive A; inutiliter (aut; incongrue) curas ostendere Am (this is per- 
haps an alternative translation, not an alternative reading); compatiamini inaniter, 
sitis amatores inanes Sm (a double translation): see the lower note. 4 Onplov 
elvat] S,S4ZSu; add. Boppdy G; add. Bopay M; add. põua g; add. cibum LA; 


a bestiis devorari Am. 


IV. ‘I write and tell all the 
churches that I die gladly for Christ, 
unless you hinder me. I beseech 
you, be not inopportune in your kind- 
ness. Give me to the wild beasts, that 
so I may be given to God. I am the 
wheat of God, and am ground by 
their teeth, that I may be made pure 
bread for a sacrificial offering. Lure 
the wild beasts that they may devour 
me wholly and leave no part of my 
body to be a trouble to any. So 
shall I be truly a disciple, when the 
world sees me no more. Pray God, 
that I may be found a fit sacrifice to 
Him. I do not command you, as if 
I were Peter or Paul. I am onlya 
convict, not an apostle; only a slave, 
not a free man. Yet, if I suffer, I 
shall be liberated by Christ, and be 
free in the resurrection. At present 
I am learning from my bonds to 
crush all my desires’, 

I. mdoas rais éxkAnoias | So Lucian 
relates of Peregrinus ($ 41) gaol 8€ 
mágaıs oxedov rais évOofow móMeow 
emtotohas Õraréuyar adroy «rd. Ig- 
natius was afterwards prevented by 
circumstances from entirely fulfilling 
this intention: Polyc. 8 èrme) máoas 
rais éxkAnolas ovK ndvenOnv ypayrat 


5 évecrw] GM (with a v. 1); éorw g; est 


kr... It may have been the apparent 
contradiction between these two pas- 
sages which led to the omission of 
maoas in some texts of Ignatius 
here. 

3. eÚvota dkawpos| They were kind- 
ness itself to him, but this kindness 
was inopportune. An easy alteration 
would be evvola dxatpou, but the text 
is probably correct as it stands. It 
seems to be a reference to the proverb 
ükawuos evvor ovdey éxÓpas àudqépe, 
(Zenob. Paroem. i 50); comp. Š 8 
eav amodokipacda, é€uionoare. 

4. Onpiov| The opposition between 
Onpiwy and Oeo? is studied. He must 
first be the wild-beasts’, that in the 
end he may be God's; comp. Smyrn. 
4 pera£) Onpiov, peraù Ocov. The 
insertion of Bopay or Bpôpa in the 
existing Greek texts entirely mars 
the antithesis. 

5. Oeod emrvyxeiv] See the note on 
Magn. 1. 

6. dXjfouac] ‘J am ground’; the 
present indicative being used, as in 
dzoÓvwjcko above. The correction 
adjndwpa is unnecessary and weakens 
the sense. As regards the form, 
aAeiv is considered by some more Attic 
than àXj8ew; see Lobeck Phryn. 


—— 


rv) TO THE ROMANS. 207 


» , , / , dy 
Noia AKAIpOc yevnobe mor. eeré ue Onpiwy eivai, 


Cy x” a > ^ ^ > ^ 
5 00 wy [€v- leariw Oco? émvrvyeiv. oîros eiu Ocot, Kal 


, 
dv ddovTwy Ünpiev adrnOopar, (va kaÜapós pros evpebw 


LAm; possum Sm; al. A. otros k.r.A.] This saying is quoted several times 
in the Menea in different forms, but the license taken in this book deprives the 
quotations of any value. I shall not therefore give its readings as a rule. Oco0] 
GM Theod-Stud; roð OeoU g Mart-Rom 10; dei LS,S4ZAAg&Sma Beda Comm. in 
Apoc. xvii; christi Iren. v. 28. 4 (Lat., but quoted 6eoU in Euseb. X. Z. iii. 36) 
Beda Martyr. viii Kal. Dec. 6 àXj8oue] Mg (but 1 has molar) Iren Mart- 
Rom (but Copt. has molar) Theod-Stud; aňħéðouar G; molor SS83Z AAmSm; molar 
L (=4A7jOwua, if indeed it is not intended for a future; comp. Hieron Cazal. 16, 


and see Zahn Z. v. A. p. 339): see the lower note. 


Yon (v. 1. ylvwuar) Mart-Rom. 


p. 151. The latter form occurs in 
other dialects, and even in Phere- 
crates (quoted by Suidas s.v.) avņp 
(8€) yép@v dvo8óvros aje, which 
illustrates the expression as well as 
the form here. Meineke however 
(Fragm. Com. I1. pp. 285, 292) gives 
reasons for questioning the reading. 
From dAeiv comes the substantive 
dXeopós, which is better supported 
than adnopos below, in $ 5. 

kaÜapós dpros| ‘a pure, clean loaf’; 
comp. Jos. Azz. iii. Io. 5 kaOapas 
mpos adeotav (v. 1 ddeopov) ras 
kpiÜàs movjcavres TH Bop doodpova 
mpocdyovot rQ Oe. The epithet 
is especially applied to dpros; e.g. 
Alexis (Fragm. Com. Ul. p. 483, 
Meineke) dpros kaÜapós eis ékarépo, 
morýpiov vdaros, of the Pythagoreans ; 
Hermeias (Athen. iv. p. 149 E) érevra 
ékáoTQ mapar(0era, pros kaÜapós, of a 
sacred banquet; Lamprid. V7. Alex. 
Sev. 37 ‘panis mundus’, opposed 
to ‘panis sequens’ (i.e. ‘seconds’). 
The purest bread (ó kaðapøraros äp- 
ros), according to Galen, was called 
in Latin oduyvirns (i.e. ‘siliginea’), 
the next quality in point of pureness 
being cepidadirns (Of. VI. p. 483, 
Kühn.) As symbolical of purity, 
(pro. xafapot were offered in sacrifice ; 


evpe0w] GLÈ etc; 


e.g. Herod. ii. 40, See also the 
passage of Josephus quoted above. 
This is doubtless the quaint but 
beautiful thought of Ignatius here. 
He was the grain of God; by the 
teeth of the wild beasts he would be 
ground into fine flour; thus he would 
become a pure sacrificial loaf fit for 
the altar of God. See Oeo 0ucía 
below, and comp. omovdicOjva Š 2. 
See the Menea (Dec. 20) otros Oco0 
kaÜapós cipi, éAeyes, kal Ov 00óvrov 
Ogpíev adrjOoua, iva dpros yévopa 
ieporeXoUpevos TO eépaoT9 Kal Oed Ke- 
kaÜapp.évos. 

So far the metaphor is clear. But 
we may perhaps go a step further 
and see a reference to the offering 
of the Pentecostal loaves. These 
were ordered to be made of fine 
flour (Lev. xxiii. 17); it was sifted 
twelve times to insure the greatest 
purity (Mishna MJenachoth vi. 7); 
the loaves were eaten the same night, 
and no fragment was allowed to 
remain till the morning (Jos. 47. iii. 
10. 6). The language of Josephus, 
describing this last regulation, closely 
resembles the context of Ignatius 
here; mpocdyovot TG @e@ üprov...kai 
karaAumeiv ovdéy éarw eé avrar eis 
Thy émtoÜmav avykexoprpévov. 


208 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1v 


^ / \ 7 / 
u&XNov koXakeUmare Ta Onpia, iva 


[ToU Xpicro( |. 
pow Tapos yéveovTat, Kal unÜév kaTaALTOGOiV TØV TOU 
cwuarós pou, fva prj kouunÜeis apis Tin yévwpat. 
TOTE ¿Coronar uaOnrns aANnOas nood Xpiorov, OTE OUOE 


\ - P e / » , E 
TO cd pov 6 kóopos OWeTal. — AvravevgaTe TOV 5 
I ToU Xpwro0] GLSmM; Oeo (before evpeOd) g; dei Sj84ZA Am Iren-Lat Beda 
Martyr.; om. lren-Gr (Euseb) Mart-Rom Hieron Catal. 16 Beda Comm. in 
Apoc. It seems probable from a comparison of these authorities that the genitive 
should be omitted altogether. If indeed @e08 (contracted 6v) had stood in the 
original text before evpe<, as in g, its omission through carelessness might easily 
have been explained by the recurrence of similar letters (see the notes on eoù Ovela 
just below, and on § 2 eUpe8va« els 8úcu above); but with eoù, or Tov 0co, in the 
preceding clause, its appearance again here would be very awkward, though it has 
far better support than rod XpucToU. L&XNov] GLAMg; om. Am. It is ap- 
parently intended to be expressed by the strong forms, provocando provocate, adu- 


lando adulamini, in S983ZSm. 
of g vary. 
latter with a v. 1.). 


I. paddov] Referring to the clause 
pù eBvowa ükaupos yévno 0é pot. 

Kodakevoate| ‘coax, humour, en- 
tice’, a somewhat favourite word in 
Ignatius: see the note on PoZyc. 2. 

2. rá$os yévevrai] So in the Me- 
"cea (Dec. 20) it is said of Ignatius 
onmhayxva Onpiov co rádos yeyovacw. 
Gorgias spoke of vultures as uwuxor 
rapo: (Longin. de Subl. iii. 2). Our 
own Spenser has the expression ‘to 
be entombed in the raven or the 
kight’, Fairy Queen ii. 8.16. The last 
two passages, with others from Latin 
writers, are given by Munro on Lu- 
cret. V. 993 ‘Viva videns vivo sepe- 
liri viscera busto’. Compare Suicer 
Thes. s.v. rapos for other illustra- 
tions. See also Soph. EZ. 1487 kra- 
vov Tpó0es rahetow, dv TóvO eikds 
éart rv'yxávew, &momrov jua», Eur. Jon 
933 Onpeiv pňov ripBevpa; and a- 
mong Christian fathers, Athenag. 
Suppl. 36 ris àv 90" dvácraow merio- 
TEVKOS ETL Gcoópnagw “dvaoTnoonévotus 
éavróv mapaoxoe tapoy ; Amphiloch. 
Lamb. ad Sel. 148 (Greg. Naz. Op. 11, 


2 pnbev] under (sic) G; undév M. The Mss 
kataNlrwow] karadlrwoe (sic) G; xaradelrwow (or -sú gM (the 
TGV TOU cdmards pov] g; eorum quae corporis mei L; e 


p. 1096) Onpia memAnopéva, ráiovs rpé- 
xorras. 

pnOev karañirosw] In one Martyr- 
ology, the Antiochene ($ 6), it is re- 
lated that the saint's wish was almost 
literally fulfilled, tva pndevi rà» aded- 
pov émaxyÓ)s dia ris ovAMoyns Tod 
Aewavou yevnrat, kalos ev TH émw oM) 
thy lav emeOvper yeverOar Tedcl@ow: 
póva yap Ta TpaxvTepa Tay Merpavov 
meptedeipOn, arwa eis thy " Avrióxeuav 
dmekopícÓm x.r.. In the other, the 
Roman, this wish is entirely ignored, 
(Š 10) of Aéovres...mpoameaóvres ámé- 
Tua [adrov] povov, ouk évyov be 
qOro0 TÀv capk@v, iva TO XAeiravov 
avro) ein QvAakrjpi tH “Popaiwy 
mover K.T., though in this latter 
document the passage has been al- 
tered in one copy to conform it to 
the other account (see the note 
on the passage). In either legend 
the narrative has been framed to 
meet the claims of certain cities to 
the possession of the saint’s reliques. 
It may safely be said that the saint 
had no thought of the preservation 


1v] TO THE ROMANS. 209 


$: e \ > ^ e \ ^ 
Kvpiov UTEp Epot, iva dia TOV Op'yavov TovTwy Ocot 


yi e ^ e - 
bucia evpedw. Ovx ws [lérpos kat [labos Stateéooo- 


Mat úu Ékeivou dTOOTONOL, yw KaTaKpLTOS* ékelvoL 
EAevOepor, yw òè uéypi vüv SovAOs. GAN’ av Trao, 
corporibus meis Am (probably the plur. is intended to represent the rv); Tod 
odparés uov (om. rüv) GM; e corpore meo S,S,2 A. (but in such a matter the Oriental 
Versions do not count for much). 3 yevwpor] GEM; sim Sm; eópeOjoouac 
g* ; inveniar L; appaream Am; def. A. 4 Tore] GLZAnSmM; róre dé g; 
et tunc A. a\nbGs] GL* Am; in veritate E; àAnfjs gASmM. "Inood Xpwro0] 
LZAmg; roÜ xpwToÜ GASmM. 5 Tov Kóptv] SSXZAAmng; rv ypwróv 
GLSm; r9 xporQ M. 6 Oeo] g* (but om. 6cob 1; and some Gk mss 
read ĝe); dei L; deo or dei (probably the latter) AAm; deo S3=Sm3; om. GLM 
(which last reads vola rafapd): see the lower note. 8 éyo] GLS,M ; ¿yo 
Əë [g] (altering the context freely) ZS. Sev-Syr 8; e? ego AAm. 9 ¿yo 66] 
GS,EM[g]; & ego AAm; éyà (om. 0€) LSm. There can be little doubt that ôè 
should be admitted here, but rejected in the previous clause. The testimony of 
some authorities however (gEAA&) is weakened here by their insertion of a con- 


necting particle in the former case. 


of his reliques in the words faps 
TwL yévopa, but referred only to the 
difficulties of sepulture in a strange 
city and at a season of trouble. 

4. pa@nrjs| On this favourite 
idea of Ignatius see the note EZZes. 1. 

6. tay Opydvev rojrev] ‘these in- 
struments of my purification’, i.e. the 
wild beasts. 

cov Ovcía] The omission of Əeo6 
in some texts must be explained by 
the similar letters @yeycia. For 
this reason @eod is to be preferred to 
O«Q. See however the v. 1. in Clem. 
Rom. 10 6uciay [rë Oca}. 

7. œs Ilérpos kai IaóAos] S. Peter 
and S. Paul are especially mentioned, 
because they had been at Rome and 
had given commandments (ôrera- 
avro) to the Roman Church; see 
the note on Æphes. 12 IlavAov svp- 
pvora. For the combined mention 
of these two Apostles in connexion 
with the Roman Church in early 
writers see the note on Clem. Rom. 
5, where also their names appear in 
conjunction. It is worth observing 


ideo dÜIE 


that this phenomenon appears in the 
earliest document emanating from, as 
well as in the earliest document ad- 
dressed to, the Roman Church, after 
the death of the two Apostles. 

8. ékeivor dmóoroXoi k.r.A.] ‘They 
visited you, as Apostles, as accre- 
dited delegates of God: I only as 
a convict, as one despatched to 
Rome to receive his punishment 
For éketvou amóorToñot . . . eketvot &Aev- 
epo. comp. I Cor. ix. I ovk eii 
eAeUBepos ; ouk elut ámóoroXos ; 

karákpuros] ‘a convict? His ju- 
dicial condemnation by the Roman 
power was a type of his unworthi- 
ness, his conviction, in the sight of 
God ; his duxalwous was yet to come 
(Š 5 o) mapa Tovro Sedckaiwpas). For 
this intermingling of the symbol and 
the thing symbolized see the note on 
Š 2 kaXóv rò Òvau k.7.d. For the whole 
sentence comp. Trall, 3 tva dy kará- 
Kpitos às dmócToXos vu arao a oopat, 
Ephes. 12 éyà karákpvros, vpeis Aen- 
pevot (with the notes). 

9. péxpte viv OoüAos] It has been 


I4 


29 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


ET 


^ ^ ` > , , 5 A 
dmeNevOepos 'InaoU XpiroU, kat dvaosryoopati €v auTw 


éXeUÜepos. — vüv pavOavw dSedeuévos pndev émi£vpeiv. 


r dmedevbepos] GM; add. yevoouar g. The versions naturally supply various 


words; fiam L; fio A; inveniar Am; ego sum S425 sum miht Sm: 
Xpicrot] LSZ AAmSmMg; om. G. 


note. 


see the lower 
év atr@] GS,2S=Mg ; 


cum eo Am; om. LA. 2 vov] GAmMg; ef nunc LEA ; nunc autem Sm. 


pavOdyw] txt GLDEAAmSmM ; add. ¿y aór@ g* (Mss, but om. 1). 
txt LEAAmSm; add. xoopuxdy 7j uárarov GMg. 


émrOupetv ] 
3 iis kal Oaddoons] 


GLAmSm[M]g Euseb Mart-Rom 1; @addoons kal ys DA Euseb-Syr Hieron. 


inferred from this (Bunsen Zez. p. 
58, Ritschl Althath. Kirche p. 412), 
that Ignatius was, or had been, ac- 
tually a slave. This inference is at all 
events supported by the analogy of 
karákpiros, Which describes an actual 
fact, though taken as the symbol of 
a spiritual state. Some external fact 
indeed seems to be required ; but 
probably Ignatius means nothing 
more than that, as a prisoner, he 
was subject to the despotic will of 
others ; see Zahn /. v. A. p. 410 sq. 

I. amedevOepos k.r.A.] ‘a freed- 
man’, the idea being taken from 
I Cor. vii. 22 6 yàp êv Kupio kNy6cls 
odos  dmeAeUÓepos  Kupíov éortiv: 
comp. Mart. Fustin. et Soc. 4 Eù- 
éAmtotos SovAos Kaícapos dmexpivaro, 
Kaya Xpiriavós elpe, €Aevbepobeis 
vmod Xptorov, Cyprian Epist. 76 (p. 
829, Hartel) ‘O pedes in saeculo ad 
praesens ligati, ut sint semper apud 
Deum liberi, Act. SS. Did. e£ Theod. 
I ‘Judex dixit Zzgezua es, an an- 
cilla? Theodora respondit Yam tibi 
dixi, Christiana sum; Christus autem 
adveniens me liberavit’ (Ruinart Act. 
Mart. Sinc. p. 428, Ratisbon. 1859). 
Similarly Epictetus Diss. iii. 24. 68 
eÉ où p Avticbévns nrevOepacer, 
ovkért eOovhevoa’ môs rAevÜépoocev ; 
KT.À., lV. 7. 17 gAevÜépopat $m Tov 
Oco0, &yvoka avroU Tas évroAás, ovKére 
ovdeis Oovlaywyjoai pe Ó vara. (comp. 
iv. I. 35). For the form of the sen- 
tence (with the omission of the sub- 


stantive verb) comp. Ephes. 8 mepi- 
anya jp» kai &yviCopat pav. 

2. viv pavÓáve x.t.rd.] “At pre- 
sent I am only a learner; my bonds 
are teaching me to abandon all 
worldly desires’: comp. Š 5 uáAXov pa- 
Ónrevopat...vüv apxopar pabnrns etat, 
and Š 7 ó éuds épos eoravportat k.T.À. 

V. ‘From Syria to Rome, by land 
and by sea, night and day, I am fight- 
ing with wild beasts. I mean these 
soldiers to whom I am bound, for 
they are like ten leopards. Kindness 
only makes them worse. Yet their 
wrong-doing is my discipline. How- 
beit I am not thereby justified. 
Gladly shall I welcome the wild- 
beasts that are prepared for me, and 
I trust they will do their work 
quickly. I wil lure them on to 
devour me. Even if they are un- 
wiling, I will force them to it. 
Pardon me, I know what is good 
for me. I would not have anything 
visible or invisible stand between 
me and God. Fire and cross, wild- 
beasts, the most horrible manglings 
and tortures which the devil can 
devise—let all these overtake me, if 
only I may find Christ.’ 

3. 'Amó Zvpías k.A. ‘Shall I 
encounter wild-beasts only then at 
length, when I arrive in Rome? Nay, 
I am assailed by them every hour 
throughout my journey. This man- 
iple of soldiers is to me now what 
the lions of the Flavian amphi- 


v] TO THE ROMANS. 


2I 


V. °'Amo Cupías uéxpi `Pwuns Onpiopaya, Sic yis 
kal Oadacons, vuKTOs kal "iépas, evdedeuévos ðéka Aco- 


In the passage which follows I have not generally recorded the vv. ll. of 
Jerome and of Gildas (de Exc. Brit. iii. 7) as having no independent value, since 
the former merely repeats Euseb, and the latter borrows from Rufinus! translation 
of the same historian. Nor again are all the vv. ll. of Mart-Rom recorded here; 


they wil be found in their proper place. 


4 €vOcüeuévos] g Euseb 


Mart-Rom ; vinctus inter BA; vinctus cum AmSm Euseb-Syr; dedeuévos GM; 


vinctus (with dat.) L. 


theatre will be to me then.’ The 
metaphor of 8ppiouayó is suggested 
by 1 Cor. xv. 32 ei xarà üdvÓpemov 
€@npiopaynoa èv 'Edéco, but it has 
reference to the literal 6ppwpaxía 
which awaits him. See the saying 
of Pompeius in Appian Bel. Civ. ii. 
61 ofow Ónpiows paydueda, and Lucian 
Pisc. 17 où yàp rois rvyobci Onpious 
Tpoomo\ewyioat Senoer pot, Gd’ dAa(ó- 
ow avOperots kai dvoehéyxrous, quoted 
in Wetstein on 1 Cor. Z c. For dro 
Zupias k.rÀ. comp. C. 7. G. 3425 
aTeQavoOévra iepovs dyàvas Toùs amd 
THs oikovpévns mavras darò Kamwo- 
Aelwy Zes "Avrioxeías tis Zup(as. 

dua ys kai QaÀacons] This ex- 
pression has been thought to militate 
against the statement in Mart. Jen. 
Ant. 3 kareAÓGv dro 'Avrioxeías els 
Tiv Ze) eúketay, ékeifev elxeTo Tod TAdOS 
kal mpooxov perà moddy káparov TH 
Spupvaioy mode x7... as the few 
miles from Antioch to its port Se- 
leucia would hardly justify the 64 
ys. The difficulty however is not 
serious. Ignatius is referring to the 
whole journey, not yet completed, 
so that not only the stay at Smyrna, 
but the way across the continent 
from Neapolis and Philippi to Dyr- 
rhachium will be included. On the 
other hand Eusebius speaks of it as 
a land journey through Asia Minor, 
H. E. ii. 36 thy 80 'Aaías avaxop.dyy, 
and this is required by another ex- 
pression in this epistle, Š 9 rav 


exxhynoidy trav Ocfauévov pe...ody os 
mapodevovra: kal yap ai uù) mpoorKov- 
gai pot TH 00@ kr... In this case the 
difficulty is to explain $a 6aAácces ; 
but the answer is the same. It is 
far from improbable indeed that (as 
Zahn suggests, J. v. A. p. 253) they 
should have taken ship from Se- 
leucia to some Cilician or Pamphy- 
lian harbour, in order to shorten the 
route; but, even without this, the 
saint is contemplating the voyages 
from Smyrna to Troas, from Troas 
to Neapolis, and from Dyrrhachium 
to Puteoli or Ostia or Portus, which 
are yet to come. 

4. €vOeüeuévos] This reading is 
better supported and more appro- 
priate than dedepévos. The saint was 
attended by a company of ten 
soldiers, who relieved guard in turn, 
so that he was always bound night 
and day to one of them by a dAvaus 
or ‘coupling-chain.’ On this ‘custo- 
dia militaris? see Philippians p. 
8sq. It is probable that the soldiers 
were in charge of other prisoners 
also, though these are not mentioned 
by Ignatius. We might have con- 
jectured that among these were 
Zosimus and Rufus who are men- 
tioned by Polycarp (PAZ. 9) together 
with Ignatius, as visiting Philippi 
(apparently) on their way to mar- 
tyrdom. But if his fellow-prisoners 
had been Christians, he would pro- 
bably have alluded to them. 


14—2 


212 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


. M , A \ , 
Tapools, Öö ¿ou TTPATLWITLKOV TAYMA, OL Kat €veprye- 


r 8 ésrw] GLMg Euseb (Gk Mss, Hieron Rufin); olrwés else Mart-Rom 


(v. l); Ziqui sunt Sm; qui sunt ZAA, Euseb-Syr. 


orpariwrixov] gM 


Euseb Mart-Rom; militaris L; otpatwrdv G; militum ZAAmSm Euseb-Syr 


I. AeomápOow] This is the earliest 
occurrence of the word in any extant 
writing. Thirty or forty years before 
however Pliny (JV. H. viii. 17) speaks 
of *leones quos pardi generavere,’ so 
that the word was then on the point 
of formation, if not already formed. 
And about fifty years later than 
Ignatius, we find it in Galen (Of. v. 
p. 134, Kühn) és Aeóvrov kat Aeawàv 
kai zrapOáAeov re Kal AeomápOcv, dpkrav 
Te kai Avkev, of Tas cápkas avTav 
ndéws éaÓiovres ádioravra, TOU oTÀ9- 
vos és aBpérov, where it is used as 
a familiar word. The work quoted, 
de Atra Bile, appears to have been 
one of Galen's earliest treatises; see 
Op. 1. p. lxxviii. Again in a rescript 
of Marcus and Commodus (i.e. be- 
tween A.D. 177—180), quoted by 
Marcianus in Dzg. xxxix. 4. 16, men- 
tion is made of ‘leones, leaenae, pardi, 
leopardi, pantherae, among commo- 
dities liable to customs’ duty. Again 
in the contemporary Acts of Per- 
petua and Felicitas, who were sa- 
crificed to grace a birthday of Geta 
about A.D. 202, this word occurs 
several times; § 19 ‘leopardum ex- 
perti, zd. ‘ab uno morsu leopardi; 
§ 21 ‘ab uno morsu leopardi’ (again), 
2b. ‘leopardo objectus. Of this 
Geta too it is related (Spartian. 
Vit. Get. 5) that he used to ask ques- 
tions about the cries of different 
criminals, as ‘leones rugiunt, leo- 
pardi rictant, elefanti barriunt, 
Again of Heliogabalus we are told 
(Lamprid. Vzz. Hel. 21) that he *ha- 
buit leones et leopardos exarma- 
tos in deliciis, and again (2. Š 25) 
that he ‘subito nocte leones et 
leopardos et ursos exarmatos inmit- 
tebat, among his drunken friends, 


* ita ut expergefacti in cubiculo eodem 
leones ursos pardos...invenirent, so 
that Lampridius appears to use ‘leo- 
pardus? and *pardus? as synonymes. 
Under the younger Gordian again 
mention is made, among other foreign 
animals exhibited at Rome, of ‘leo- 
pardi mansueti triginta, Capitol. 
Vit. Gord. 33. Of Probus too it is 
related (Vopisc. Vit. Prob. 19) that 
‘editi deinde centum leopardi Li- 
byci, centum deinde Syriaci? This 
last word explains why leopards 
should occur to Ignatius as naturally 
as lions or tigers. In the edict of 
Diocletian also leopards are men- 
tioned, Corp. Inscr. Lat. VW. p. 832 
déppa Aeomáprov depyov, eipyacpévor, 
‘pellis leopardina infecta, eadem 
confecta) The word occurs also in 
one text of the Acta Philippi 36, 
but this work is of uncertain date 
and cannot be very early. In Cant. 
iv. 8 ‘pardorum’ is quoted ‘leopar- 
dorum? by Jerome adv. Fovin. i. 30 
(11. p. 286). 

Bochart (Hzerozotcon Pars 1. Lib. 
ii. c. 8) alleged the word as a proof 
of the late date of the epistles, as- 
serting that it was not used till the 
age of Constantine, He attempted 
to set aside some of the passages 
from the Augustan Historians on 
the ground that they represented the 
language of the narrators, and not 
of the times to which the events 
belong. Pearson (V. Z p. 456 sq), 
and Cotelier (aZ 7oc.), besides other 
considerations, referred to the Acts 
of Perpetua and Felicitas in reply. 
But they overlooked the earlier pas- 
sages from Galen and the Digests, 
which, so far as I know, are ad- 
duced here for the first time ; and 


v] TO THE ROMANS. 25 


, , , 
TOUMEVOL XELpOUS YIVOVTAL. 


Ó 


, oc ^ > / 5 - 
ÈV ÒE TOTS dOucuagiv aUT(Gv 


(the Greek word erparıórns being transliterated in ZS,, Euseb-Syr) : comp. Ps-Ign. 


ad Mar. 4 ù erparworuc) ppoupa. 


The Syriac Versions are of no account here, 


as they could hardly have translated otherwise. 


the Edict of Diocletian was yet un- 
discovered. Bochart’s objection was 
revived by Baur (Ursprung des Epis- 
copats p. 156). 

The form of the word seems to 
show that it was of Roman and not 
Greek origin. The more natural 
Greek would be AeovromápOaA:s, like 
Kapn\orapdadts. Theognostus how- 
ever (Bekker Anecd. p. 1394) treats 
it as Greek, and justifies it by the 
analogy of yepoxouos (from yépov), 
" AgroANoyérgs, ' AroANocávgs (from 'A- 
moov). In Athanas. Vit. Anton. 9 
(I. p. 640), where Aeordpdwy occurs, 
there is a v. l. Neomapdadav (see Fes- 
tus quoted below) The name ori- 
ginated in the mistaken belief that 
the animal was a hybrid; see (be- 
sides Pliny Z c.) Festus (p. 33, ed. 
Mueller) *Zzgezera dicuntur ani- 
malia ex diverso genere nata, ut 
leopardalis ex leone et panthera’ 
(where for /eofardalis inferior MSS 
have Zeopardus), Philostr. Vit. Apoll, 
ii. I4 (p. 30) Aéyerac òè kai mepi ray 
Aeawwáv Ayos, Os épaarás pev mrowoüvrat 
Tovs TApÕANELS K.T.A....0TUKTA yap TIK- 
rovow. On the animals intended by 
the ancients under the several names 
mavOnp, mapdadis, pardus, etc., see 
Wiegemann in Oken’s Zszs 1831, p. 
287 sq. 

ő é€orw «.t.A.]| This looks like a 
gloss at first sight, but it is found 
in all the copies. It is added some- 
what awkwardly in explanation by 
Ignatius, as his obscure metaphor 
- might otherwise have been misun- 
derstood. 

crparworikóv ráypa] ‘a company of 
soldiers) The word ráyua here might 
be rendered in Latin by ‘manipulus, 
if the disposition of the legion, which 


Vegetius describes (ii. 13), already 
prevailed when Ignatius wrote; 
*Centuriae in contubernia divisae 
sunt, ut decem militibus sub uno 
papilione degentibus unus quasi prae- 
esset decanus, qui caput contubernii 
nominatur ; contubernium autem ma- 
nipulus vocabatur etc.’; comp. Spar- 
tian. Vit. Pesc. Nig. 10 ‘decem com- 
manipulones” This is a great de- 
parture from the earlier sense of 
‘manipulus, which was equivalent 
to ‘centuria, and contained 100 or 
120 men; see Marquardt Rom. 
Alterth. iil. 2, p. 458 sq (comp. 20. 
p. 253 sq). The Greek ráypa is 
used widely, to denote any body of 
soldiers, whether maniple or cohort 
orlegion. The very expression which 
we have here, erparwerikóv tdaypya, 
occurs in Dion. Halic. A. A. vi. 42 
of a legion; comp. Dion Cass. lxxi. 
9 xaAobci. O06 Tò Tdypa oi 'Popaiot 
Aeyeóva; but more properly it de- 
noted an ‘ordo’ or maniple, as in 
Polyb. vi. 24. 5. For otpatiorixor 
ráypa see Euseb. Quaest. ad Marin. 
(Op. IV. p. 984) ý yàp kovoroðia orpa- 
Tiarikdy esri ráypa, Vit, Const. ill. 44, 
47, iv. 56, 68, 70, 71. For the number 
ten comp. Joseph. B. /. iii. 6. 2 
rovras ad’ ékáaTrs ékarovrapxías 1)ko- 
AovOovy Oéka K.T., and see esp. Leo 
Tacticus iv. 2 (quoted by Marquardt 
Rim. Staatsverw. II. p. 580 sq). 
evepyerovpevot k.r.À.] i.e. the more 
they receive in gratuities, the harsher 
and more extortionate they become’ ; 
as rightly explained by Pearson (V. 
Z. p. 511) who, to illustrate this mode 
of procuring comforts for Christian 
confessors and martyrs, cites Lucian 
Peregr. 12 ovvexdbevdov čvðov per 
atrov StapOeipoyres robs deopo- 


214 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


paNNov paÜOyrevouat* &AN oy apd TOQTO AEAIKAIO- 


> / v^ 7 ~ 5 \ ° , 
mat. "Ova(uny tov Onpiwy Gv pot n rouaouevov, 


D » y ^ A \ , 
& Kal evyouat cUvTopa uot eUpeÜrvav a Kal KONaKEVO W 


^ > e ^ , 
TUVTOMMWS ME KATAPAYELY, oUx aep TLYWY det awvopeva 


2 Tov ¿nol fjrouuacuévov] GMg (comp. ad Mar. 2 dvaluny tov Sewav r&v Epuol 
hromacuévwr); tev éuol éroluwy Euseb; mhz esse paratis L*; quae mihi paratae 
sunt (manent Am) ZDAAmSm Euseb-Syr. 3 à] g Euseb AAm; om. GLM. It 
is omitted also in [Sm Euseb-Syr, but the Syriac idiom would suggest the omission. 

otyroua] g Euseb; veloces...in tempore suo Sm; confestim 2 (the same word which 
renders guvróuws just below) A (the following cuvrduws is not represented) ; prompte 
Am (the following cwrduws is omitted); erouua GM; promptas L. Those texts, 
which omit cuvrduws below, favour oeórvroua here; for the omission is then ex- 
plained by the desire of avoiding an awkward repetition. 
GLAAmMg Euseb; ab aliis hominibus B (but twéy of g is translated zz aliis 
by 1; while Jerome freely renders Euseb here sicut aliorum martyrum, and the 
Syriac version of this same historian has ad aliis); a multis Sm. SevAaw6- 
peva odx Tyavro] GLAmSmMg Euseb (but with a v. 1. 7aro). 2 Euseb-Syr 
have metuens ab aliis (add. hominibus È) et non appropinguans iis, as if they had 


4 Twar| 


read deawdbuevos oùx Haro. 


, > ^ r E 
$vXakas' eira Oevmrva motiXa eloeko- 
piero K.T., Apost. Const. v. 1 el 
tis Xptotiavos...katakpiOn rò doeBav 
cis Aoü0ov 9 Onpia 9 péraAXov... 

, > ^ 2 M > ^ St 
méuwpare avT@ eis Otarpodr)v avroU kal 
eis puc ÜamoDooíav ró» oTpaTta- 

^ e Y ^ ^ > , 
Tov, iva éXajpvvÓg Kal emuveÀ)e(as 

y e e ^ > 4 tA ` , 
TÚXN, tva Ocoy TO ef uiv u) OAiBnTaL 
ó pakapios addeAds juóv, Act. Perp. 
et Fel. 3 ‘Tertius et Pomponius, be- 
nedicti diaconi, qui nobis ministra- 
bant, constituerunt praemio ut paucis 
horis emissi in meliorem locum 
carceris refrigeraremus, with other 
passages. 

I. padnrevoua| See the note on 
Š 3. 

> ` ^ 

ov mapa ToUro k.r.A.] Taken from 
I Cor. iv. 4 ov« êv rovro Sedikaiopar. 
For mapa rovro ‘on this account’, 
where mapa ‘along of’ denotes causa- 
tion, comp. Trall. 5 rapa vobro 75n 

` , > ` .. 
kal pabntns eip. So too I Cor. xii. 
I5, 16, ov mapa roro oUK éorw Èk Tod 
oaparos, Clem. Hom. xv. 10, xviii. 18. 
In all these passages it is with a 


5 ékovra ui] Oy] g; volentem non velint 


negative, or with an interrogation 
which is equivalent to a negative. 
This however is not always the case; 
see e.g. the references in Kühner II. 
p- 444 Sq. 

2. "Ovaiugv KTA] So Act. Perf. 
et Fel. 14 ‘ut bestias lucraretur’. 
Pearson has given a wrong turn to- 
the expression, when he writes ‘fo- 
Zar feris; potius feris quam Ais 
leopardis’. For óva(ugv see the note 
on Lphes. 2. 

3. ovvropal ‘prompt’, ‘expedt- 
tzous’, as frequently. The emenda- 
tion ovvrova suggested by Voss is 
not an improvement. 

4. Öeawópeva] See for examples 
Euseb. 4. 2. vii. 7 (quoted in a 
subsequent note), Act SS. Tarach. 
Prob. etc. 10 (in Ruinart Act Mart 
Sinc. p. 473). So too of Blandina, Z7. 
Vienn. in Euseb. v. 1 pndevos ayrapé- 
vou Tore THY Onpiwy adris. 

5. kav ajrà 6é x.r.A.] The autho- 
rities point to ékóvra as the original 
reading; and, if so, it is perhaps 


v] TO THE ROMANS. 


oUx ijvravro* 
Buacronau. 


215 


5N > \ \ P E 
Kav aŭta 0€ ékovra prj Q¿éAn, èyw Tpos- 
t 
# a , 
OVYYVWMHVY pot exere TL Mor TUUEpEL ¿yo 
z ^ x” 5 
ywwskw’ viv apyoua uaÜnrns civar 


pnOev pe niw- 


^ ^ `) ^ ^ - 
Tat TOv OpaTwY Kal TwY dopaTwy, tva “Incov XpiaToU 


L; dkovra wh 0éXy Euseb; ükovra ph Oedjon G; dkovra uh 0€Njoeiev M; non 
velint AnSm; non velint appropinguare mihi ZA Euseb-Syr. This last seems to 
represent a reading ékóvra uQ €\Oy, the confusion of cA8H and 0€AH being easy. 
Possibly however appropinguare is supplied after 665 from the previous 7y/avro, which 
is translated ‘approach’ in all the three. 6 éyo...elvar] GLS,AAmSmMg 
Euseb Euseb-Syr; om. 2. A line seems to have dropped out in the copy from 
which this abridgement was made. 7 un8év] G; um0é or uxüév g; pndév 
Euseb; def. M. prWOoat] twsa g (accentuated as infin. (Acc in 
the Mss) Euseb (Jerome treats it as an infin.; Rufinus and the Syriac as an 
optat.); nÀ Ocak (for it is treated as an infin.) LAAm ; Zzvideat (fmddoar or àwon) 
S,Z Joann-Mon; £y^óce" G. The original reading therefore was doubtless (yAecat 
(not $£$»Aócp), and the sense requires (»^cca. rather than $»Xóeo4: see the 
lower note. 8 rv áepárev] gS, Euseb-Syr (the two latter repeating 
ex dis quae); áopárev (om. r&v) G Euseb; dub. LZ (which repeats guae only) 


pA al Sas def M; 


best taken as the accusative with the 
Latin Version, i.e. kàv avrà py OEN 
[karajayeiw pè] ékóvra, ‘to devour 
me, though I am ready’. 
mspocBiácopa]] So Mart. Polyc. 
2 (of the martyr Germanicus) éav- 
TO émeomácaro to Onpiov mpooBuaca- 
pevos, Euseb. Mart. Pal. 6 (of Aga- 
pius) Spopaios dyrixpus erem 
kar avrov dpkro vravriácas, Taury 
TE éavròv dopevéorara émidedwkas eig 
Popó», Act. SS. Tarach. Prob. etc. 10 
‘sanctus vero Andronicus posuit 
caput suum super ursum et insti- 
gabat eum ut irasceretur etc.’ This 
provocatio was not purely volun- 
tary in some cases; Euseb. H. Æ. 
viii 7 rà» dvÓpemoBóopev émi mÀciova 
xpóvov pi mpoorpavew pnde my od 
Cev rois TÀV eop óv odparw ent- 
- TOAPH@YTO@D.. ` póvov ôè Tay iepõv 
dohar ev yvpyav éosrørov kal Tals 
xepat KATATELOVTOV èri TE opas av- 
TOUS emo mopévov, TOUTO yap avrois 
éxedevero mpárrew, pnd os édamro- 
pévey, which passage also illustrates 


the preceding dechauvopeva. 

7. vov adpxopar K.rA.] The com- 
mencement of his sufferings is the 
inauguration of his discipleship (see 
Ephes. 1, 3, notes) This disciple- 
ship will only then be complete, 
when his sufferings are crowned by 
his passion; comp. $ 4 Tóre écogat 
pabnrns adnOds k.r.À. 

(rdca] Not nsan The opta- 
tive is wanted rather than the infini- 
tive. The word here seems to have 
its common meaning ‘envy’; comp. 
Š 3 éBackávare, Š 7 Backavia, with the 
notes. Zahn however gives it a dif- 
ferent sense; ‘ (nAovy Twa, i.e. studi- 
ose gratiam alicuius guaerere omnt- 
busque artificits aliquem captare’, as 
jna Gall y a7 ou Cor x ene 
expression 'IgcoÜ Xpicrod émurvxeiv 
is equivalent to ua6rrjs eva. in the 
language of Ignatius. Both will at 
length be realised in his martyr- 
dom. 

8. óparóv...dopárev] See Trail. 
5 (note). 


216 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


, , ^ A ` ? z > 5 
EMTITUXW. TUP KAL g'ravpos Onpiwy TE CGUOTAOCELS, [ave 


\ , \ 
Topal, diaipecers |, TKOPTITMOL OTTEWY, TUYyKOTaL ME- 


^ > rj A , \ , Lad 
Adv, dXeaol SOV TOU GwMaTOS, kakat kokaceis TOU 


I ovordces] GLAmMg; cúsragıs Euseb (Laemmer, but v. l. ovordoets) Sm 
Euseb-Syr (the two latter owing to absence of zióuz). S ŁA have bestiae quae 
paratae sunt (mihi). ávaroual, Siarpécets] GAm[Sm]Mg ; dcapéoes (or rather 
dcalpeots, omitting dvaroual) S,A; om. altogether, LZ Euseb Euseb-Syr. 2 oKop- 
migpol...edov] GLS,AAmSmMg Euseb Euseb-Syr (the minor variations in these 
authorities are given below); e£ abscissio membrorum et dishersio ossium 2 
(transposing the two clauses; comp. om. inscr., Ephes. 19). oKop- 
mwcuol] GLMg Euseb Mart-Rom 5 (v.1.); dispersio TAAmSm Euseb-Syr (but 
the sing. in ZASm Euseb-Syr is explained by the absence of riui, and Am 
renders ĉıaipéseis, dvatoual, okopmu Lol, ddecpol, also by singulars). ócTéov] 
woréwy G cvykoral] g Euseb Euseb-Syr [Mart-Rom];  evykos"j 
GLS, ZAAmSmM; but the Oriental Versions are of no account here (see the 
last note). ueo] uev G. 3 åňecpol] gM Euseb (but 
v. 1. dAnopol) Mart-Rom; ddAnopol G. There is no authority for ddvopol, unless 
it. be Am which has contritio (aut, contritio et dissolutio), where the words in 


brackets perhaps mean a v. 1. giving both words, dA\ecuol kal ddvopol. 


I. gvcordces] ‘conflicts, grap- 
pilings with’. As ovorddny payer Oa is 
a common phrase for ‘comminus pug- 
nare’, so. gvoracis denotes ‘a hand 
to hand engagement’, e.g. Plut. 
Vit. Pomp. "70 tis cáNmvyyos dapxo- 
pévns éyxedever Oar mpós Tv oúoracu, 
Vit. Demetr. 16 órav paora ovoTacw 
ó ayay €xn (i.e. comes to close quar- 
ters). Itis indirectly defined in Plat. 
Legg. vii. p. 833 A n év rais ovp- 
mAokais dyn kai cvoracis. The word 
occurs in a different sense, Trall. 5. 

2. okopricpot OcTéov|] Ps. xxi 
(xxii) 15 SvecxopricOn mávra rà dota 
pov; comp. Ps. lii (liii). 7, cxl (cxli). 8. 
The word økopri¢ew is an illustration 
of the exceptional character of the 
Attic dialect. It appears in Heca- 
tæus, and reappears in writers, sacred 
and profane, of the post-classical 
ages; it is called by some an Ionic, 
by others a Macedonian word; but 
in Attic it seems not to occur. See 
Lobeck Phryn. p. 218, and comp. 


kakal] 


Pathol. p. 295. For similar instances 
see Galatians vi. 6, and p. 92; Phi- 
lippians i. 28, ii. 14. 

3. adeopoil| For this form see 
the note on ddAndopat $ 4. The read- 
ing dAvopol, ‘restlessnesses’, ‘dis- 
tractions’, has no authority (see the 
upper note) and is inappropriate. It 
was first introduced into the inter- 
polator’s text by the editor Morel, 
who prints advcpol, and is not found 
(as Smith states) in the Cod. August. 
of the interpolator’s text. 

kakai koÀ dous k.T.A.] Pearson quotes 
Justin Dial. 131 (p. 360 C) xoXAáces 
péxpi Óavárov omo ràv Saipoviay Kal rhs 
oTparias Tov ıaßóñov, Celsus in Orig. 
c. Cels. vi. 42 (I. p. 663) 6 rod Ocov 
mais dpa yrrarat tnd. diaBddov, kal 
koAaCópevos m avrod SiddoKxer Kar 
nas TOY vo Toúrov koXáceov kara- 
Qpoveiv. 

4. povov iva] For the ellipsis 
with povov see the note on Ephes. 11. 

VI. ‘The kingdoms of this world 


W. s 


v] TO THE ROMANS. 217 


£ Hep Mya , e m m 

dvaBorou ér’ ¿ué epyécbwoar: povov tva 'InaoU Xpia-roU 

5 ézriTUX e». 
VI. 


ioe € ` - ^ »^ , , , 
OvOE at Bact €lal TOV QGLOVOS TOUTOU’? KaNoy Mot amo- 


sS 5 , \ , ^ 
Oudév ue wpednoe Ta Tépata ToU Kdcpov, 


GL; et malae S,A (the conjunction is of no account); durae 2; et omnes AmSm; 
kal gM Euseb-Syr; om. altogether, Euseb. Nothing can be inferred from the 
loose quotation of Sev-Syr 216 ignis et bestiae et mille species tormentorum veniant 
super me. koAáces] GLS EA AmSm(?)M Euseb; xóAacis g (reading also 
épxéa0w for épxéc0wcav) Euseb-Syr. 4 póvov iva] GLAmMg Euseb; 
solum A Sev-Syr; et solum S,+2ZSm Euseb-Syr. 'Igco0] GLES AS&4Mg 
Euseb Euseb-Syr Sev-Syr; om. An. 5 émirixw] 2 breaks off here and 
(with the exception of the words ó rokerós pot émikevrat § 6) contains nothing till 
8 7 6 éuds ¿pos k.T.À. 6 ue] gM; wo G. mépara] gLS,AmSm 
(written however *1113Yy opera for Y33239 termini); thesaurus A; réprva GM. 

7 Tov alQvos roórov] GLAmSmMg; ejus S»; kujus A. The Syriac had already 


exhausted the proper equivalent to aióv, NDD, in translating Koojos. Ka ór] 


gM; bonum LS,A Tim-Syr r; pulchrum Sm; paiddov G; melius (?) Am. 


poor] GM; épo g. 


will profit me nothing. It is better 
to die for Christ than to reign over 
the whole earth. I long for Him 
who died and rose for me. The 
labour-pangs of a new birth are upon 
me. Do not prevent me from living; 
do not desire me to die. I would 
fain belong to God; do not bestow 
me on the world. Let me see the 
pure light. When I am come thither, 
I shall be truly a man. Permit me 
to imitate the passion of my God. 
Let all who have Him in their 
hearts feel and sympathize with my 
desire, for they know what constrain- 
eth me’. 

6. pe ohedyjoer] With an accusa- 
tive, as Mark viii. 36, 1 Cor. xiv. 6, 
Heb. iv. 2. This is the common con- 
struction; but it sometimes takes a 
dative, more especially in poetry. 
See Kühner II. pp. 251, 252. 

Tà mépara ToU k.rTA.] ‘the boun- 
daries of the earth’, i.e. ‘the whole 
earth from one end to the other.’ 
In the LXX ra mépara rìs yüs (Tis 


oikouyeyns) is a common expression : 
see esp. Ps. ii. 8 wrw ... rijv kara- 
oxeciv cov rà mépara tis ys, which 
well illustrates the meaning of Ig- 
natius here. See also the note on 
Ephes. 3. The other reading ra 
repmvà is discredited by the deficiency 
of authority. 

7. ai Baordreia k.r.M.] This was 
the temptation offered to Christ 
Himself; see Matt. iv. 8, Luke iv. 5. 

Kadov kKk.r.A.]| Suggested by r Cor. 
ix. 15 kaXóv yap pot pàAXov. dmobaveiy 
jj TO kaúynud pov K.T.A. For kaAóv.. . 7) 
(without uaAXov) comp. Matt. xviii. 8, 
9, Mark ix. 43, 45; and see Winer 
$ xxxv. p. 301 sq for this construc- 
tion, which is common in the LXX. 
If the alternative reading paddov 
were accepted, we must understand 
apednoet; but it is condemned by 
the great preponderance of authori- 
ties. Itwas perhaps originally written 
above the line to supply the defective 
construction kaAór...7j and after- 
wards displaced kaAóv. 


218 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v1 


^ , ^ , » , ^ , 
Oavetv Sia “Incotv Xpiotov, N BaciNevew THY TEpaTwY 
^ ^ > ~ ^ \ N ^ y a 
Tis ys.  €kelvoy CyTw, TOV UTED Uw azroÜavovra 


3 ^ / \ 9 Re H , e , 
éxeivoy 0éAo, Tov [Ov :juás] avacTavTa. © TOKETOS uot 


r 64] g (but 1 translates zz) L Tim-Syr; ¿ë M; eis G; in SpAAm (they may 
have read either év or eis); cam Sm. "Inoodv Xpwróv] LS,Ag 
Tim-Syr; xpiorov inoody (or xptar@ inood) GAmSmM. Tay Teparor | 
GLAmSmMg Tim-Syr; super omnes terminos SoA. 2 yĝs] txt 
LS,AAmSm Tim-Syr; add. rl yap dpedetrar dvOpwmos ùv Kepdijoy TOV KoopMor 
Sdov (rov kóopov ddov Kepdjon g) T» 06 Wuxiy adrod (-pue05 (T. 06 y. aŭro? 
¿moon g, kal ¢. T. y. aùro M) GMg from Matt. xvi. 26: comp. Mart-Rom 2. 

3 dv quads] GLAn[Sm] Tim-Syr; om. S,A[g] Mart-Rom ; def. M. 6 TOK- 
erós] [D]AmSm; ó 08 rokerós GL* (reading however 00e for ó dé, and mis- 
translating rokerós Jucrum) Tim-Syr; e£ dolores mortis S, (reading hani 


mortis for e EN QA arius; see above p. 78sq); dolores mortis (om. òè) A; 


def. Mg. Am has partus meus (aut; fenus et lucrum meum), where the words 
in brackets may imply another reading ré«os or another interpretation of roxerós. 

po] GLZASg Tim-Syr; pov Am; om. S5; def. Mg. 4 ovyyvore] GM; 
evyyvouoretre g: see the converse change in Trall. 5. 5 un Oedjonre] 
GLS ,ASm g Tim-Syr; unè Oedijonre M; velitis (secundum alios; ne velitis) Am. 
There is no other trace of this v. 1. @eAjoenre for uù) OeAjonTe. The omission of the 
negative has an exact parallel in § 1 [u7] pelono Ge, the motive being the same. ue] 
gM and perhaps L (velitis me); por G. The rest are doubtful. TOV ToÜ 
Oeo 0£Novra] G Sm Tim-Syr; Tov Oeo OéNovrá ue gAm(?); dei volentem...me L; 


3. 6 Tokerós k.rA.] ‘My birth- est angelorum’, a passage which has 


pangs are at hand’. The image re- 
fers not only to the birth of the child, 
but to the pangs of the mother also. 
Ignatius stood in the position of both 
the one and the other. His martyr- 
dom represented the pains of labour. 
They were suffered by the earthly 
Ignatius; they resulted in the birth 
of the heavenly. The dies roù 
Oavárov (Acts H. 24) were with him 
the ‘natalicia’ of his higher life, 
For the metaphor, as regards the 
mother, comp. Gal. iv. 19 rexvia pov, 
ovs maw @dive k.A.; and as re- 
gards the child, e.g. August. Serm. 
381 de Natali Apost. (V. p. 1481) 
*Natalicio ergo Petri passus est 
Paulus, non quo ex utero matris in 
numerum fusus est hominum, sed 
quo ex vinculo carnis in lucem natus 


more than one resemblance to the 
language and thoughts of Ignatius 
here. As this interpretation was 
written down some years before 
Zahn's book appeared, I am con- 
firmed in its correctness by finding 
that he had expressed independently 
and in other language the same view 
respecting the double reference in 
rokerós (J. v. A. p. 561 sq) The 
word takes a genitive either of the 
mother (Ephes. 19, Job xxxix. 1, 2) 
or of the child (Ecclus. xxiii. 14). 

On the other hand the Latin Ver- 
sion renders it 'Zucruz;, and the 
Armenian Martyrology gives as an 
alternative translation ‘fenus e£ lu- 
crum? Soalso some modern critics, 
e.g. Smith p. 99, Denzinger p. 62, 
who compare Phil. i. 21 rò åroĝaveîv 


mem 


ss " —n 


——_ 


vi] ^ TO THE ROMANS. 219 


o d , , 5 
EMIKELTAL. G'uYyYyVeT€ uot, düeNQot un éumoóísnTé Mot 


5 Goa, un OerXyonTé pe dzoÜaveiv, | TÓv ToU Cceod bé- 


Xovra eivai KOO uw un xapionabe, unde AN KOAQKEUGNTE. 


def. M. S.A favour rév...0édovra as against 0£Xovrá ue, but otherwise they have a 
corrupt text: see the next note. 6 xaplonobe] gAmSm (which has dedu- 


catis, a loose rendering) Tim-Syr (for doubtless we should. read AEQ for 


sals); xapheņnoðe G; separetis (xcplona0e, taken as if ywplonre) L; def. M. 
In S, the whole sentence is rendered, ium gui non vult esse in mundo ne honoretis 
me im hoc, and similarly in A gui mom volo manere im mundo, me honoretis sic. 
'The explanation of this rendering seems to be this; (1) Some letters dropped out, 
TON[ Toye ]oy0eAoNro, owing to the recurrence of similar letters, so that it was 
read roy où Oédovra k.r.A.; (2) In order to make sense, cdc was attached to the 
preceding words; (3) xaploynoGe was inaccurately translated honoretis. At all events 
the coincidence of S,A shows that the corruption is not in the Armenian, as Peter- 
mann not unnaturally supposed, but existed already in the Syriac Version. bende 
try Kodaxevonre] see the lower note; negue per materiam seducatis L; meque per 
Aylen adulemini (blamdiamini) me Tim-Syr; meque provocetis-me-ad-aemulationem 
per ea quae videntur Sy; et ne aemulatorem faciatis visibilium A; neque labefactetis 


me (om. Ün) Sm (but for the verb ex. Jabefactavit, peccare fecit, we ought surely 


to substitute Aaz blanditus est, which is used in Tim-Syr); ze elementis (mate- 
rialibus) quibusdam seducamini Am (reading perhaps kodaxevOjre, but a single 
letter makes the difference between the active and the passive in the Armenian, as 
in the Greek); om. Gg; def. M. 


xepdos, and similarly Leclerc. This 
arises from a confusion of words. 
While rókoś frequently bears this 
secondary sense of ‘interest’, rokerós 
seems never to have it. 

6. pyè (Àm koXake?ogre] For 
(Ag ‘matter’, ie. ‘external things’, 
see the note on qudrciAov $ 7. The 
words missing in the existing Greek 
text have been supplied pý Ay 
€famarüre by Petermann, pj? jg 
mapa(ndoonte by Lipsius, and pyôè 
(Ag éfamarjogre by Zahn (Z v. A. 
p. 560, and zz Zoc.) and Funk. They 
- have rightly substituted 58e for 
pyre, since there is no reason for 
introducing a connexion py...unre 
which is only not soleecistic. The 
word ¿Àm is preserved in the Syriac 
of Timotheus. For the verb I have 


preferred koAakevamre, because it ex- 
plains a// the versions better than 
éÉazarüre (éfamarjogre) Or mapa- 
(jAeogre, while moreover mapa- 
(jAeogre does not give the right 
sense. The verb byw, which the 
translator of Timotheus uses here, 
occurs in Z as the rendering of ko- 
Aakevew in Polyc. 2, and the sub- 
stantive from the same root appears 
in the Peshito of r Thess. ii. 5 for Ko- 
Aakeía. The word in the Syriac Ver- 
sion S, (from which the Armenian 
A is translated), 13D (Aphel, provo- 
care ad selum, stimulare), though 
neither well suited to the context 
nor a good rendering of koAakevew, 
is closely allied in meaning to 3^3 
(excitare) which is used by Z in Rom. 
4, 5, the only remaining passages 


220 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


i ^ , , » 
peré ue kaÜapóv bos Maßen ékei maparyevopevos áv- 
» 5 £ , \ Ss ^ 
Opwros écouat.  émitpeyraTe por pupTüv eivai TOV 


( v OeoU L jTOV Èv ÉQUTO EXEL 
maĝovs tov OcoU pov. ei Tis avToY D EXEL, 


€ , > ` ` £ 
vonoatw 0 ÜéNo Kal cuuTrabeitw por ciðws Ta Tuve- 


xovTa ue. 5 


r ävðpwros] LSm Tim-Syr; homo perfectus SA; in luce perfectus S, (but this 
is clearly a corruption, YAS zz luce for RID Lomo, as S, shows); 
dvOpwros Oeo GMg. The perfectus of the Syriac and Armenian, and the 0eo0 of 
the Greek copies, are evident glosses. In Am the sentence éxe?...écowat runs zz 
homo sum, sed illuc iens angelus fiam, the seemingly unmeaning åvôpwros being 
displaced by a paraphrase. 2 émirpéparé uod] GMg; éácare Anast-Sin. 
The singular 2e77:2/7e in Sev-Syr 3 is doubtless an error of transcription, as 
the plural appears in three other places, 2 (twice), 4 b. pura] G d 
(written pijunrnvy) LS3sAAmSmMg Anast-Sin Tim-Syr (twice) 1, 2, Sev-Syr | 


| 
i 
l 
{ 
| 
| 
| 
I 
| 


where koAakevewy occurs in Ignatius; 
and indeed the two roots are con- 
nected together in the Peshito ren- 
dering of 2 Cor. xi. 2 rò Juv (Aoc 
npéOtoev Tos màeiovas. On the 
other hand in the Latin Version 
blandiri is the consistent rendering 
of koħaxevew in these epistles else- 
where, while seducatis occurs ‘here. 
For the sense of koAakevew comp. 
Clem. Hom. xx. 4 kohakevoton ápap- 
tia, and see the note on Polyc. 2. 

I. dvÓpemos] ‘a man’ in the 
highest and truest sense, ‘a rational, 
immortal being’. In the language 
of Scripture generally, as in other 
writers, ávÜpemos is a disparaging 
term, suggesting the weakness, the 
sins, the mortality of human nature; 
see esp. I Cor. iii. 4 oùk dvÓporrot éore ; 
(where the received reading, ovxi 
capkikol éste; is a mere paraphrase). 
Here however the case is different. 
Ignatius speaks of the kawós dvOparos, 
the man regenerate, in whom the 
Divine image (Gen. i. 26) is renewed. 
So used, it is higher than dvjp; for 
while dwjp implies either maturity 
(opposed to mus, e.g. 1 Cor. xiii. II 


re yéyova dvýp) or courage (opposed 
to yv»j, e.g. Hom. ZZ vi. 112 dvépes 
čare, piot), ivOpwmos denotes the ideal 
of humanity. The use of the word 
here is partially illustrated by M. An- 
tonin. iv. 3 éAevOepos éco kai dpa rà 
mpaypara, os ávijp, ds GvOpwrros, ws mo- 
Airs, os Oynrov (Gov, x. 15 loroprrocav 
oi avOpwrot dvÜpoxrov adnOwor kata þv- 
ow (evra, xi. 18 apa moré ävôporos 
eiva, €ws (js. Thus too Menander 
says (Fragm. Com. IV. pp. 355, 372) 
@s xápiév €or ávÜpemos, Grav dvÓpo- 
70s 7, quoted by Clem. Alex. (Strom. 
Vill. 3, p. 916) whose comment is 
Üvros dvÜpemos, ó Tas kowüs dpévas 
kextnuevos. So again in the well- 
known story of Diogenes the Cynic 
(Diog. Laert. vi 41) Avxvov pef 
ńjpepav avas, “AvOpwrov, edn, nT, 
and in another story of this same 
philosopher (2d. vi. 60) émavgew dmó 
’Oduprrioy: mpós otv Tov mvlópevov el 
OxAos v mods, IloAos pé», elmer, 
óxXos, dAtyo è avOpwmro. See also 
[Clem. Rom.] Fragm. 1 (p. 213) dia 
TovTd é€opev avOpwrot kai dpdvnow 
€xopev kr... Scribes and translators, 
not understanding this use, have 


vit] TO THE ROMANS. 221 


e s ^ IA 
VIL ‘O dpxev ToU aidvos TouTou Siapraca ue 
7 ` X > 
BovAreTat Kal Tyv eis Oeóv pou yvøunv diapeipar. pun- 
M F ^ £ ^ > ^ ^ 
dels obv THY TapdyTwY Uv Bonbeirw a/TG: pMáXNov 


(four times), Anon-Syr, Anon-Syr, Theod-Stud. In the first passage Severus 
states that ‘in other copies which are rather older’ the reading is paéyrjv. No 
other trace of this reading exists. eva] GLMg; yevéo@ar Anast-Sin. 
The Oriental Versions determine nothing here. Tod rá0ous] GM Anast-Sin; 
máÜÓovs g. 3 Tod Oco0 uov] GLS,ASm Anast-Sin Tim-Syr (twice) Sev- 
Syr (three times) 2, 3 (while elsewhere 4 b he quotes it ‘my God’ for ‘of my 
God,’ but probably a letter " has dropped out of the existing text) Anon-Syr, 
Anon-Syr,; xptcTod Tod Peo wou g; Tod xpicrod M; domini met Am. 4 el- 
00s] GLAmSmMg Tim-Syr; hoc dico quod scio A, but this is probably a translator's 
insertion to refer eis (wrongly) to the rst person. 7 Ocdv] GM; ror Gedy g. 

8 rüv mapóvrov úv] Gg; praesentium de vobis L (which probably is a mis- 


interpretation of the same Greek); e vobis (om. Qv mapóvrov) AAm; rGv mapóvrev 


(om. iuar) Sa M. 


helped out the meaning in different 
ways, as the critical note shows. 
The reading of the Greek MS dv0po- 
mos Oeo was probably suggested to 
the scribe as a scriptural expres- 
sion, e.g. I Tim. vi. rr, 2 Tim. iii. 
17. 

2. pipnrny evar &.A] Comp. 
Ephes. Y papyrai dvres O€o0, dyaÇo- 
mupioavres év aipare cod (with the 
notes) Anastasius of Sinai (77odeg. 
i. 12, p. 196 Migne) mentions this as 
one of the passages in earlier writers, 
which the Monophysites quoted in 
support of their doctrine. The quo- 
tations in the extant fragments of 
the Monophysite Severus confirm 
this statement. 

VII. ‘The prince of this world 
desires my ruin. Do not ye abet 
him in his purpose; but espouse my 
cause, which is God's cause also. 
Do not talk of Jesus Christ and de- 
sire the world at the same time. 
Let no man grudge me my crown. 
Obey not my prayers, if I should 
entreat you by word of mouth, but 
rather obey my letter, as I now write 
to you. For though living, I write 


aùr] There is no v. 1. here. 


For L see the Appx. 


to you, desiring to die. All my 
earthly longings have been crucified. 
There is no more any flame of pas- 
sion in me, but living water, which 
speaks and summons me to the 
Father. I have no delight in cor- 
ruptible food or in this life's plea- 
sures. I desire the bread of God, 
which is the flesh of Christ the son 
of David, and His blood, which is 
imperishable love.’ 

6. ‘O dpxev Kk.r.À.] See the note 
on Ephes. 17. 

duapraca] The word used in the 
parable of the strong man's house, 
Matt.xii.29 (v. 1), Markiii.27; which 
passage may have suggested its em- 
ployment here. 

7. Tjv ele Ocóv k.r.A.] ‘my mind 
which ts to Godward’, ‘my heaven- 
ward thoughts’; comp. PA/ad. I 
ri els Gedy adrod yrdunv. See also 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. 3 x yrdous 9 mpos 
aúróv. 

8. rv mapóvrov] ‘who are on 
the spot, i.e. ‘who will be witnesses 
of my approaching martyrdom.’ It 
corresponds to the following mapow, 
‘when I am among you.’ 


222 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vit 


5 ` , , ^ ^ 

€uol syivea Oe, Toute iw TOU Ocov. 
\ ^ 

Xpirrov Koopov ðe émiÜvyuetre. 


un AaAeire 'Inoobv 
BacKkavia èv viv un 


P, 5 \ ` ^ e ^ / 
KaTOKELTW* fund av EYO Tapwy TAPAKANW VMAS, TEL- 


I éuol ylvecbe] gM; uot ylvecbe G; mei atis L, (which would suit either read- 
ing); ad meum latus estote AAm (where ¿uol the possessive pronoun seems to be 
mistaken for the dative of the personal pronoun); al. Sm. 3 pnd üv ¿yQ mapav 
mapakaAd buds] GM; pndé éàv ¿yQ duds mapàv mapaxade g; neque utique ego vos 
praesens (v.1. praesens vos) deprecor L. metoOnre] welaberre G. 4 pot] 
GLAAmM; ZZ Sm (perhaps a corruption in the Syriac text, ¿yë having been 
already dropped, so that a third person takes the place of rapaxadw); om. g. 
mireboate] gA (prob., for it has credatis here, but odtemperetis (obediatis) for 
melsOnre above) Am (prob., for it has credite here, but convincamini (consentiatis) 
above) Sm; mere GML* (prob. for it uses the same verb credere in both 
cases). 5 yàp] gLM (which has é£ wy ydp...épd); om. GASm; def. Am: 
see Clem. Rom. 62 (note). 6 éus] GLAAnSmM (v. 1. uos) g Dion-Areop 2 
Theod-Stud; et meus [E]; meus autem Orig. = resumes here and continues 
(with omissions) to the end of the chapter. 6 écravpwra] GLZA (see 
below) SmMg Orig Dion-Areop Theod-Stud; but Am has meum desiderium a patre 
est (secundum alios; meum desiderium vel meus amor crucifixus est), where the 
corrupt reading ék marpés sri (for éoravpwrat) is partially explained by the 


I. épol yiverbe] ‘take my side, 
where epot is the nominative of the 
possessive’ pronoun. Scribes, mis- 
taking it for the dative of the per- 
sonal pronoun, have altered the text 
to produce conformity in the two 
clauses, some reading épo) for epoi, 
others ré Oeà for roð Geod. 

B) AaAeire «.r.4.] See the note on 
Ephes. 6. 

2. Bacxavia] To desire to spare 
his life is to grudge him the glory of 
martyrdom; comp. Š 3 ovdémore eßa- 
ckávare ovderi (with the note), Š 5 
pnbey pe (ora. 

3. mapóv mapakaAó] i.e. ‘if on my 
arrival in Rome I should change my 
mind and ask your intercession to 
save my life.’ 

5. (Órv yàp KTA] ie. ‘In the 
midst of life, with all its attractions, 
I write deliberately and desire death’; 
where (àv is emphatic. 

ó epos €pos] ‘my earthly passion’ ; 
comp. Gal v. 24 Tv odpka éorav- 


pecav oùv Tois waOnpacw kal rais 
emvOupiats, Vi. 14 epot kómpos orav- 
pera Kaya kocpo. The word épas, 
so frequent in classical Greek, is 
found only twice in the LXX, and in 
both passages it denotes strong sen- 
sual passion, as a term of reproach ; 
Prov. vii. 18 detpo kai éykvuo6opev 
čpoT XXX. 16 ddns kal pos yuvatkos 
€... In the New Testament it 
does not occur at all. Conversely 
the common term for Christian love 
in the New Testament, dydzmy, is 
almost, if not quite, unknown in 
classical writers (in Plut. Mor. p. 
709 ayarns ov has been rightly 
corrected into dyamjcav). Ignatius 
therefore would necessarily use épas 
in a bad sense to denote the passions 
of his former unregenerate life. 
His dyàmy, we might say, was per- 
fected, when his épws was crucified. 
His meaning therefore being clear, 
it is strange that Origen should have 
given a wholly different interpreta- 


vii] TO THE ROMANS. 22 


^ 
9 
8 , , de ^ , sd , 
OUNTE uot, TOVTOIS CE MANNOV TMIOTEVTATE, ois ypapw 
des ^ \ 7 S > ^ ^ > ^ e 
Suuiv. Cov [yap] ypapw vuiv, épav ToU dzoÜavew: ó 
, \ af > , > , 5 5 = 
EMOS Epws EgTavpwTal, Kal ovK EoTW èv uol TUO 


usual contractions of marpés and cravpós (with its derivatives). The double 
rendering in A amor meus crux est, meum desiderium crucifixum est, is owing 


to the ambiguous kay of the Syriac, which may be either crux or cruci- 
fixus. ësrw] éerqv G. mip Piddidov, ÜOcp 06 (Gv kal Aadodv] 
G; rûp ptddiiror, Udwp 06 p&XXov Foy kal Nadovy M Theod-Stud (Menza Dec. 
20); mUp girovy Ti, Vdwp 06 (dv &XXÓnevov g (l omits wip pov Te and translates 
the remaining words agua autem viva alia manet, i.e. Uðwp dé (v dro uévov); 
ignis amans aliquam (leg. aliam?) aquam. sed vivens et loquens est (rip duNoüv vt 
Vdwp (Gv dé kal Nadody) L; ignis in amore alio (v.l. amoris alius) È (perh. rip 
póadov, a corruption of giAdidov; the rest of the words are omitted); alius calor 
amoris. aqua bona et vivida...existit (rip pdariov, Viwp Kadov kal (Gv) A; ignis 
amandi (alienum quidquam) aqua vivida et loquens est Am (where the words in 
brackets may be merely an explanatory gloss or may betoken a v. 1.); ignis alienus, 
diligo euim aquas vividas et loquentes Sm. The Menza (Dec. 20) have ok éoxes mip 
duXóUXov èv col, lyvarie, Vdwp dé (Ov u&XNov kal NaXoUr...00cp TO ÀNNópevov k.T.À. 
‘Thus the authorities exhibit a strange confusion of -vXov, dAdo, Kadov, u&XNov, 


&XNóuevov: see the lower note. 


tion to the words; Prol. zx Cant. 
IH. p. 30 ‘Nec puto quod culpari 
possit si quis Deum, sicut Ioannes 
[1 Joh. iv. 8] caritatem [ayámy], ita 
ipse amorem [épora] nominet. De- 
nique memini aliquem sanctorum 
dixisse, Ignatium nomine, de Christo 
Meus autem amor crucifixus est, nec 
reprehendi eum pro hoc dignum 
judico) Origen is followed by some 
later writers. Thus the false Diony- 
sius the Areopagite, de Div. Nom. 
iv. 12 (p. 565 ed. Cord.), accounts for 
the expression by saying that it was 
thought by some erepov eivat TÒ 
ToU époros Ovoua Tov Tis dyámgs. So 
also Theodorus Studites, Catech. 3 
(Grabe Spic. II. p. 229) ó épós epos 
eoraúporTa, Xpiatos (where Xpiorós is 
his own gloss), ib. Sam. 70 (p. 
1797 Migne) £yev ¿pera Xpıoròv ev 
oj kapdia. Hence too in the Menga 
(Dec. 20) ós rerpapévos €port ayámns 
ToU Kupíov cov, ‘O épós épws, éfóas, 
Xptords éoravpara ÓéAov, besides se- 
veral other allusions to this saying, 


in all which it is interpreted in the 
same way. In favour of this inter- 
pretation it might be urged that pâr, 
épaotys, are applied in the LXX 
(Prov. iv. 6, Wisd. viii. 2) to the 
pursuit of Divine wisdom; comp. 
Justin Dial. 8 (p. 225 B) épol dé ma- 
paxpĝĥpa mip ev th Wuxn anpdn xai 
épws elyé pe TOY mpodQrnràv Kal Tov 
avOpav ékeívov oi elo, XpuaroU piñor 
Clem. Al. CoA. 11 (p. 90) 6 yé roe 
ovpavios Kai Ocios dvrws “pos, ib. 
Fragm. p. 1019 Babvv twa róv rod 
kría'Tov mepipéepopev épora. So Chry- 
sostom says of Ignatius himself (Of. 
II. p. 599) motoUrot yap ot épóvres: 
Ümep av macyoow vmép TOY epopévov, 
ped’ jovis 0éxovra, though he may not 
have been thinking of this passage. 
But the fatal objection to this inter- 
pretation is that, even if otherwise 
admissible, it would tear the clause 
out of the context. Obviously épos 
and mvp are synonymous here, as 
they are in the passage of Justin. 
Sce the saying ascribed to Buddha, 


224 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vir 


^ ^ , 3 » , 
QiXoUANov, Udwo ðe Cov +xai Nadrovvt èv uoi, eowlev 


^ M , 
uor Aéyov: Aevpo Tpos Tov 7raépa. 


1 éowbev] GMg ; évdof_ev Theod-Stud. 


oUx ýðouarı TPOPH 


2 Aéyov] M Theod-Stud ; Aéyev 


(sic) G; Mwye g (but 1 dicens); dicens Sev-Syr 4 b; dicit L; et dicit A; et...clamat 
et dicit Am. The two last seem to have had the participle rather than the 


indicative. 


Dhammapada 251 ‘There is no fire 
like passion? (Buddhaghosha's Pa- 
rables, by Rogers, p. cxxviii). 

I. Qu oXov] ‘ matter-loving, ‘sen- 
suous) ‘carnal’; comp. Š 6 pe 
vAn koAakevanre. On the other hand 
the Holy Spirit is mip dJXov ‘ignis 
materiae expers? in the Liturgy of 
S. Cyril (Renaudot Zzz Orient. 1. 
p. 38). The word ¿Àm has here its 
secondary sense ‘matter,’ as e.g. in 
Wisd. xi. 18, xv. 13, Clem. Rom. 38. 
It is too fanciful to see (with Zahn 
p- 563) a reference also to its primary 
sense, as if Ignatius had in view the 
same metaphor as in James iii. 5 
HAlkov Top NAiKnY VANY avdmres (comp. 
Is. x. 17, Ecclus. xxvii. I0). There 
seems indeed to be the double re- 
ference in the passage to which he 
refers, Clem. Alex. Paed. ii. 1 (p. 164) 
oi mappayo., kaÜámep To mp, rrjs VANS 
é£exópevo, (where however we should 
perhaps read é£exyópevov); but it is 
there brought out by the form of the 
sentence. Forthe compound $iA6UAos, 
which is very rare until a later age, 
comp. Orig. Fragm. in Luc. potov 
xai þoropárov Aóyot miÂavoi (III. p. 
982, Delarue) For the Gnostic 
(Valentinian) tinge of the sentiment 
see the notes on Zphes. inscr. 

I have adopted q@uAcidoy here on 
authority which elsewhere would 
not deserve a preference, for several 
reasons. (I) It is so obviously the 
best reading; (2) It explains the 
other main variations, duAoüv re and 
diXobv addo, which would be substi- 
tuted for diAdiAcv, if either mis- 


Sm renders the sentence cwdé& jor Aéywr quum sit mihi dominus 


written or unintelligible to the scribe; 
(3) Conversely it is not usual for 
a transcriber to show such intelli- . 
gence as appears in the substitution 
of an unusual word giAdidoy for 
either doby te or poy Addo. 

tdop dé (àv] Doubtless a refer- 
ence to John iv. Io, II, as indeed 
the whole passage is inspired by 
the Fourth Gospel. This water at 
once quenches the fires of sensual 
passion and supplies an unfailing 
draught of spiritual strength; comp. 
Justin, Dial. 114 (342 B) ths kaAás 
mérpas...U0cp (àv rais kapdias ràv Ó 
avroð dyamgcávrev Toy marépa Tay 
Xov Bpvovons. 

Txai Aadovvyt] According to Jor- 
tin (Zccles. Hist. 1. p. 356 sq, quoted 
by Jacobson) there is an allusion to 
the heathen superstition that certain 
waters communicated a prophetic 
power to the person drinking them ; 
e.g. Anacreont. II (13) dadvnddparo 
$oí(gov AdXov mióvres Oop (comp. 
Stat. Sylv. 1. 2. 6, v. 5. 2). As there 
was one of these ‘speaking’ foun- 
tains at Daphne (Sozom. ZZ. Z. v. 
19, Evagr. 1. 16) the famous suburb of 
Antioch, he supposes that the image 
would readily suggest itself to Igna- 
tius. This reference seems to me 
more than doubtful, even if the text 
were correct. But I am disposed to 
believe that the right reading is 
preserved in the interpolator’s text, 
G@opevoy for kai AaNotv. The various 
readings show that the text here has 
been much tumbled about in very 
early times; and this being so, Aa- 


vir] 


TO THE ROMANS. 


225 


$Üopás ovdé :Oovats coU Biov Toú+Tou' aptov OcoU 


meus intus dicens mihi, doubtless reading the masculine Aéywv (with G) and wishing 
accordingly to give it a personal application. Similarly Severus translates mpés 
Tov marépa ad patrem meum, thus giving a personal reference to the participle, 


and he too perhaps read Aéyoev: see the lower note. 
3 9eo0] GM ; rot 6co0 g. 


odkjdowar G. 


Aoi» might very easily suggest itself 
to a scribe from the following Aéyov. 
If àAMóuevov be correct, it is taken 
from John iv. 14 my) d8aros áAXo- 
pévov eis Conv aidwov. Combined 
from this and the preceding passage 
(ver. ro, 11) in the same Gospel, the 
expression vdop (dv áAXóuevov took 
a prominent place in the speculations 
of the second century; e.g. of the 


Naassenes, Hippol. Haer. v. 9 édaxev . 


av oot mev v0op (àv dXAópevov; of 
the Sethians, zd. v. 19 dmeAovoato xai 
€mte TO motýpiov Cavros tdaros dAXo- 
pévov ; of Justin the Gnostic, zd. v. 
27 Omep êsri Xoürpov avrois, œs vopi- 
(over, myy) (óvros Vdaros dAXopévov. 
This makes the combination the more 
probable here. Heracleon in Orig. 
in loann. xii. Š ro (IV. p. 220), the 
earliest commentator on this Gospel, 
lays great stress on dÀXopévov. 

2. Aéyov k.r.A.] Similarly PZzZ/ad. 7 
TO dé mveüna éküpuvsoev, Aéyov rá8e- 
Xa@pls tod émwgskómov k.r... See also 
Dion. Alex. in Euseb. ZZ. £. vii. 7. 
$ 2, 3. I have not ventured to sub- 
stitute the masc. Aéyov, though the 
evidence is in its favour. This read- 
ing would identify the vdwp (àv 
directly with Christ (see the upper 
note), and thus the reference to John 
iv. 10 sq would be made more dis- 
tinct. For a similar instance of an 
alternative between Aéyov or Aéyev 
see Philad. 1. c. 
= rpo Oopas] Suggested by 
John vi. 27 épyá(ea0e u) thy Bpdow 
Thy amohdvpevny. 

3. mOovais k.r.A.] The phrase 7o- 
voy tov fov occurs Luke vili. 14. 
This sentence involves a distinction 


IGN, II, 


2 ovxX Toga] 


between Bios and (a7 (in Sdap (àv), 
which is brought out more definitely 
in the interpolator’s text by the in- 
sertion of dprov ¢ws in the next 
sentence. The former denotes the 
lower earthly life, the latter the | 
higher divine life. If ¿eñ is some- | 
times used of the earthly life, Bios is | 
never used of the heavenly. This ' 
distinction holds in the writings of 
the Apostolic Fathers, not less than 
in the N. T. It is founded on an 
essential difference between the two 
words, recognised by Greek philo- 
sophers; but to the Christian their 
relative position is exchanged, be- 
cause his point of view is altered. 
As (oy) is the principle of life, vz/a 
gua vivtmus, Bios denotes the pro- 
cess, the circumstances, the accidents 
of life, in its social and physical 
relations, vzta guam vivimus; comp. 
Athenag. Resurr. 19 n rv àvÜpomoev 
où kal cvpras ó Bios. Hence Aris- 
totle could say Bios éovi Noyixn Con 
(Ammonius s. v. Bios); for with him 
Bios was the higher term of the two. 
See Trench WV. T. Syn. Š xxvii. p. 86 
sq, and Field in Fournal of Philo- 
logy X. p. 178 sq (1882. But in 
Christian philosophy the principle of 
life is not physical, but spiritual ; and 
thus, while Bios remains at its former 
level, (er; has been translated into a 
higher sphere and takes the prece- 
dence. So too Dion Cass. lxix. 19 
Buods pev ern róca, (cas Se črn émrá. 
Accordingly, while 6ávaros is opposed 
to (ej, it may be identical with 
Bios ; [Clem. Rom.] ii. 1 6 Bios nua 
Eos Ado ovdev Hv et ur) Oavaros. Con- 
trast I Joh. iii. 15 (wry aidwov with 


15 


226 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vir 


[4 ej > \ ^ ^ ^ , , 
éw, & éorw oaoË Tov Xpiorov Tov ék omeppaTos 


r 0éXo] txt LDAAmSm; add dprov oùpdviov, dprov gwis GMg. 
(with a v. 1l. és) g; dub. ZAAnSn; vulg. ös. 


8] GLM 


Tov Xpicrov] g*2 ; imcoU 


xpioroð GLAAmSmM. After xpiorod add. roÜ vio) Tot Oeod GMg; om. L[Z]AAmnSm. 

ro] txt L (ejus quii ex genere) Sm (qui est ex genere); add. yevouevov GAAmMg 
(but the versions AAm are not of much weight in this matter); def. 2: see the 
lower note. After rod [yevouévov] add. év Verépg GMg ; om. LAAnSm; def. 2. 


ib. ver. 17 Tov Biov Tov Kocpov, or the 
same Apostle's absolute use of 6 Bios 
in I Joh. ii. 16 with his absolute use 
of 1 (ei) elsewhere, e.g. iii. 14, v. 12. 
Contrast also the expression rod 
Blov rovrov here with rs (wns raúrns 
in Acts v. 20. See too Clem. Hom. 
Ep. Clem. 1 aùròs rod viv Biov Biaiws 
to (hv pernddaéey (i.e. ‘received true 
life in exchange for this earthly life’), 
2b. xii. 14 ros aBacavioras tov chy 
Tov fov petaddAdEae Qun0gs (which 
passage, like the former, seems to 
have been altogether misunderstood 
by the critics), whereas zd. i. 14 we 
have roy mávra pov THs Cans Biov, but 
there an only half-converted heathen 
is speaking; Clem. Alex. Paed. ii. 1 
(p. 168) oi ramewódpoves, xapavyevets, 
rov édwuepov Sidkovtes ov, ds ov 
(gcópevou (comp. 26. p. 163), Orig. 
c. Cels. iii. 16 (I. p. 457) mepi rìs é£fs 
TG Bim Toro (wis, Macar. Magn. 
Afocr. iii. 12 (p. 82) apéumr@ 0€ Bio 
rjv Conv égeyáAvvev, C. Z. G. 9474, a 
Christian inscription where ó glos 
(otros) is contrasted with ¿e? ovpavios 
(aidvios). 

dprov Oco0] Here again is an ex- 
pression taken from S. John's Gos- 
pel, vi. 33. Indeed the whole con- 
text is suggested by this portion of 
the Evangelist's narrative. The con- 
trast of the perishable and imperish- 
able food—the bread and the cup as 
representing the flesh and blood of 
Christ—the mystical power emanat- 
ing therefrom—are all ideas con- 
tained in the context (vi. 48—59). 
'The later interpolator has seen the 


source of Ignatius’ inspiration, and 
has introduced expressions freely 
from the Gospel; ‘the heavenly 
bread’ (vi. 31, 32, 50, 58), ‘the bread 
of life’ (vi. 48), ‘eternal life" (Zen 
aidvios, Vi. 27, 40, 54). For “pros 
cod compare also Zes. 5 with the 
note. 

The reference here is not to the 
eucharist itself but to the union with 
Christ which is symbolized and 
pledged in the eucharist. 


Obviously 


any limitation to the actual reception | 


of the eucharistic elements and the 
blessings attendant on such recep- 
tion would be inadequate; for Ig- 
natius is contemplating the consum- 
mation of his union with Christ 
through martyrdom. The indirect 
reference to the eucharistic elements 
is analogous to that which our Lord 
makes in John vi. 

I. ToU ex acmépparos Aaveid] i.e. 
* who was really and truly incarnate': 
see the note on ZZes. 18. The 
reality of Christ's humanity is neces- 
sary to the full power and significance 
of communion with Him; because 
only so is our own manhood truly 
united with God. The shadow of Do- 
cetic antagonism, which was rife in 
Asia Minor, rests for a moment even 
on this letter to the Church of Rome, 
though the Romans were droðwiio- 
pévot amo mavrós dAXorpíov xpoparos, 
and though there is no direct mention 
of this heresy init. — 

The insertion yevopévov stands on 
a slightly different footing from the 
other interpolations in this context, 


icto eie a n m A tam 


vir] 


TO THE ROMANS. 


227 


A T] M / Oé \ «e 5 ^ VA 4) , [4 
QUELO, Kat TOMA €Aw TO «una QUTOU, O EO TL) any ar) 


apbapros. 


2 Aaveid] ôa G. After Saveld add. 


def, =. 


mona] gLEAAmSm; add. 0eo0 GM. 


kal áBpaáu GMg; om. NASA SIS 
3 dó0apros] txt LEAS,, ; 


add. kal dévvaos (d€vaws G) (wj GMg*; comp. Mart-Rom ro (where this addition 
seems to be recognised). In Am e vita aeterna is added in brackets as a v. ]. 


being somewhat more highly sup- 
ported ; but it ought probably to be 
omitted. There was an obvious mo- 
tive for inserting it, so as not to 
overlook the preexistence and Di- 
vinity of Christ ; comp. .Szzyrz. 4 roo 
teeiov avOpdmov [yevouévov], where 
the motive for the insertion would 
be the same, and see also the v. 1. 
Ephes. 7 èv capi yevópevos. 

2. 6 éorw dyám apOapros] The 
relative refers to +ó aîua avrov. As 
the flesh of Christ represents the 
solid substance of the Christian life, 
so the blood of Christ represents 
the element of love which circulates 
through all its pores and ducts, ani- 
mating and invigorating the whole. 
See especially Zya//. 8, where the 
flesh and the blood are separated in 
a similar way, and made to represent 
respectively the faith and the love 
of the Christian; and compare also 
the passage from Clem. Alex. Paed. 
i. 6 (p. 121) there quoted, in which 
there is an analogous application. Ig- 
natius does not here directly say what 
he means by the flesh, as distinguish- 
ed from the blood; but we may supply 
the omission from the parallel passage 
in Trall. 8, and say that he refers to 
Jaith as the substance of man’s union 
with Christ See also for partial 
illustrations of this passage Clem. 
Alex. Paed. i. 2 (p. 177) troîr gor 
mwiv TO aipa Tov 'Ipgo0, rfe kvpuakíjs 
peraXaBeiv àd0apoías, lc xy)s è rod 
Aóyov TO mveÜpa, ds atpa. capkós, Quis 
div. salu. 23 (p. 948) dprov épavróv 
diSovs, o) yevodpevos oddels ere meîpav 
Üavárov NapBaver, kal móa Kal? juépay 


evdiovs dBavacías. ‘I desire, Ignatius 
appears to mean, ‘that heavenly sus- 
tenance which is derived from union 
with a truly incarnate Christ through 
faith and love.’ But it is impossible 
to be confident about the interpreta- 
tion of language so obscure. 

On the other hand Zahn (Z. v. A. 
p. 348sq, and ad Joc.) would apply 
the relative clause ó éorw dyám 
ap$apros not to rò atua avrov, but to 
both clauses of the preceding sen- 
tence, i.e. ‘which participation in the 
flesh and blood’, so that it will no 
longer be parallel to és éorw odpé 
Xpwrro?. Accordingly he supposes 
that in dyámm there is a secondary 
reference to the ‘love-feast’ (comp. 
Smyrn. 8) of which the eucharist 
formed a part. This reference to the 
agape is, I think, barely possible; but 
the grammatical construction thus a- 
dopted seems to me altogether harsh. 
It is true that the parallelism, as I 
take the sentence, is grammatical, 
rather than logical. The logical pa- 
rallelism would have been dprov 6d 
TY cdpka Tov Xpiotod Ú éaTw rioris 
ürperrros k.r.À. ; and in a more finished 
and less hurried writing it might have 
been so expressed. But instances of 
parallelism not strictly logical are 
common, and here it is too obtrusive 
to be set aside; while it is further 
confirmed by the very similar pas- 
sage, Trall. 8. 

3. dpOapros] The interpolator 
adds kai dévvaos (ey, an expression 
occurring in the LXX apparently only 
in 2 Macc. vii. 36, and never in the 
N.T. But it was doubtless suggested 


15—2 


228 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [viu 


VIII. 
86 ora, av Uueis OeAnonTe. 
OernOnte. Sf dAlywv YyoaupaTwv aiToupoL Yas? Ti- 
otevcaté por. 'lyooUs 06 Xpioros vuiy Tavra pave- 
pwcel, OT. aAnOws Néyw" TO arpevdes OTOpa, EV w 05 
aitnoacbe rept éuoU, iva 


> \ [4 un ^ 
Ovx ¿rL Oé\w kara dvÜpu rovs Cv TOUTO 
[74 ACTES ^ 
OeAnoaTeE, tva kat vpets 


\ , > ^ 

maTip ENANNTEV [aAnOws]. 
if , 5 M 7 €. E 

émuruxe [ey mvevpare dyiw|. ov kara sapka vpuv 
2 0eMjegre] GM; 6édrnTe g. The omission of the following words in some 
texts (see the next note) points to a homceoteleuton, 8eMjeyre, OednOnre, and 
therefore favours JeAjonrTe. Oehjoare...be\nOnre] GLAmSmM ; om. A [g]. 
With 6eXjsare connecting particles appear in some texts; autem LSm; ov M; 
jam Am. 3 OednOfre] GLMSm; def. Ag. Am has z£ ef vos auxilium 
inveniatis (aut; ut et vos optati fiatis, id est accepti). The alternative auxilium 
inveniatis seems to represent a v. l. woednO7jr7e, but there is no trace of it else- 


where. 
GLMS45; om. AAm; al. g: 


by ¢w7 aidmos which occurs several 
times in John vi. 

VIII. ‘I no longer wish to live, 
as men count life. I entreat you to 
fulfl my desire, that God may fulfil 
yours. I have written briefly to this 
effect ; but Christ, the unerring mouth- 
piece of the Father, will show you 
that I speak the truth. Pray for 
me, that I may succeed. I write 
not this after the flesh, but after the 
will of God. If I suffer, it is your 
favour; if I am rejected as unworthy, 
it is your hatred. 

I. Kata dvÓpemovs] i.e. ‘accord- 
ing to the common, worldly, concep- 
tion of life’; comp. Trall. 2 aívea0é 
pot oU kata avOpdmous (Gvres (with 
the note). 

rovro] ‘this desire of mine to live 
no longer the common life of men’. 

3. OednOnre] i.e. vrd roð Oco0 
‘may be desired, may be looked upon 
favourably, by God’; comp. Clem. 
Hom. xi. 25 ei 8€ kal perà rò KAnOAvat 
ov Odes 7 Bpaddvecs, Ouxaia Ocot 
aroi) Kploe, TÔ pr Oedknoar ph 


60 édlywv] GLSmMg; pref. ð (or a) AAn. 


4 8] 


^ ^ t ^ 
buy raüra pavepdce] GM; $avepóoet vty 


OednOeis, Athan. c. Arian. iii. 66 
(Op. I. p. 487 sq) ó viós rH OeAnoer 
Ú Oé€derat mapa Tod marpós Taúr? kal 
avros dyamá kai Oédee kal Tina Tov 
marépa, Greg. Naz. Orat. xxix. 7 (I. p. 
527) 7 Tò pev avtov OéAnoap, rò 8c 
GednOév, The passive occurs not 
very commonly of things (e.g. Epict. 
Diss, iv. 1. 59), and still more rarely 
of persons (e.g. Clem. Hom. xiii. 16 7 
cadppav cis rò ÓcAeo0a. mpopacets o) 
mapéxer jj TQ adtis QvƏpÜ ù acdpoev 
Um érépov Oedopern Avmeira). From 
this passive use comes the OeXyrós, 
which has a place among the zeons of 
Valentinian mythology (Iren. i. 1. 2). 

0r odlyov ypapuárov] ‘in a brief 
letter’; comp. Polyc. 7. So è òl- 
yov, I Pet. v. 12, Ptolem. ad Flor. 4 
in Epiph. Haer. xxxiii. 7; i Bpa- 
xcov, Heb. xiii. 22. 

5. ev 6 KT] So He is styled 
Tov matpòs ñ yvøun in Ephes. 3. 

8. yvepnv Oeo] Comp. Ephes. 3, 
Smyrn. 6, Polyc. 8. The expression 
itself does not occur in the N. T. (see 
however Rev. xvii. 17) 


viii] TO THE ROMANS. 229 


» 5 ` \ , ^ 

éypavra, dXXa kara yvwunv Ocob. 
SN > - 

cate’ éav dmoðokiuaTrÂhð, éuonoate. 


éav maQw, jOENN- 


/ ^ ^ ^ ^ > 
IX. Mvnuovevere év TH Tpowevyn Vuwy Ths év 

, > , [74 > NE ^ 7 ^ ^ ^ ^ 
Cupia éxxAnoias, ijris dvri uo 7ouuévu Tw Oew ypnrat 
, > \ ^ \ e e ^ 
povos avtnyv “Incovs XpiwrrOs émiskoTnce Kal 5 vuav 


> , E \ \ 5 , > ^ , 
ayarn. yw ÒE aloxuvoma éË aiTwv NéyerOau: OVE 


M 3} [e 5 N ” e E 2 
yap a&ws cim, wv ExyaTos avrov kai ExTpwuat GAN 


Tatra g; vobis manifestabit haec L. 5 àA908s] GLA; om. AmSm; def. M; 
al. g. 7 év rvevmate iyle] [g]; siritu sancto A; om. GLAmSnM. 
Ta yvøun] GLSmMg; søiritu et voluntate A; secundum spiritum et secun- 
dum voluntatem Am. nOedjoare] GLAAmSm; 7yam)care g; def. 
M. 1o mpocevx?7] GM; ex g. The genuine Ignatius does not anywhere 
use the word evx7. 13 00€] GLAAmSn; 06 kal g; def. M. 
yàp] G; oò yàp g; non enim L; quia non A; quoniam non Am; non Sm; 
def. M. 14 ds ceim] G (but writing jue for elm); eiut d&os g; sum 


8 ka- 


000€ 


dignus L; def. M. 


7OeAnoate] ‘Ye have done me the 
favour which I asked’. It is best 
not to understand ro maĝetv, but to 
refer g0eXjeare to the preceding éà» 
vpeis Oehynonre. 

9. dgmoÓokuuao 06] See Trall. 12 
iva uù) adoKios evpeOo (with the note). 

IX. ‘Pray for the Church of 
Syria whose only pastor now is God. 
Jesus Christ will be its bishop—He 
and your love. For myself, I am 


. not worthy to belong to them; but 


God has had mercy on me, if so be 
I shall find Him in the end. Saluta- 
tions from myself and from the bro- 
therhoods which have received me 
as Christ's representative, not as a 
mere passer by; for even those 
churches which lay out of my path 
went before me from city to city’. 

IO. Mynpovevere x.r...] For this 


‘injunction, which occurs in all the 


four letters written from Smyrna, 
see Ephes. 21. n 

II. Jus] ‘seeing that it, thus 
giving the reason for their prayers : 
see Philippians iv. 3 (note). 


ou, k,r...] In connexion with 
émicxomnoes which follows, this pre- 
sents a close parallel to 1 Pet. ii. 25 
emegTpádmre voy eml Tov moueva kal 
emiokorov Tov wWuyeav úpðv (comp. 
I Pet. v. 2 wouavare...émurkorovrtes, 
but émickomoüvres is very doubtful): 
see also Ezek. xxxiv. II sq. 

12. émickomüoe] ‘be its bishop’: 
comp. Polyc. inscr. paddov émecko- 
mnuévæ vmó Oeod, and Magn. 3 rà 


marp} “Incod Xpioroð T mávrov 
èriokóro. The office of Jesus Christ 


is here identified with the office of 
God in the pastorate of the Syrian 
Church. 

j úpóðv aydnn| See the note on 
Trall. 3. 

13. ovd€ yap d£ios x.r.A.] See the 
note on Ephes. 21 éoxaros àv tay 
€ket TLOTÓV. 

14. ékrpopa]* az immature birth’. 
'The word, occurring in this context, 
is obviously suggested by 1 Cor. xv. 
8, 9, &exarov è mávrev, ocmepei TO 
ékrpóparu, @POn kåpoi éyà yap elu 
ó éAdyuaros TOv  dmooTóAev, ds ovk 


230 


ceo V ^ , 
nXénuat Tis civar, Eav Oeo émiTvyw. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[x 


5 , € = 
domaCeTar vas 


^ , ^ E ^ ^ 
TC uov TVEUMA Kal rj deyaz y TØV É€kkNnaowov TWV deEa- 


^ ^ f. A 
uévwv pe eis övoua 'Ina'oU. Xpirrov, oUx ws mapodevovTa 


2 kal h åyámn Tov èkkìnorôv] GLESm (so doubtless originally, but the present 
text has amor et ecclesiae) Mg ; et amor omnium ecclesiarum Am; et omnes ecclesiae A. 
3 els] GL (in nomine, but els is often so translated in L) AmMg* (but v. 1. òs); 
propter Sm (probably representing eis); ws Z (novos TN, not ws eis as Petermann ` 


cim ikavós kaAeioÜau drmóoToNos k.r.À. 
Objection was taken to ékrirpéokew, 
ékrpopa, etc., in this sense, instead of 
the approved words apriore, äp- 
BXepa, etc., by purists (see Lobeck 
Phryn. 208 sq); but they occur as 
early as Hippocrates and Herodotus 
(iii. 32); and ékrpepa is mentioned by 
Aristotle as a common word, de Gez. 
Az. iv. 5 (p. 773) kvjpar. ékmrimrevmapa- 
mAsa Tois kaAovnévots ékrpopacuv. 
In the same sense it occurs also in 
the Lxx, Num. xii. 12, Job iii, -16, 
Eccles. vi. 3. See also references to 
other writers in Wetstein on 1 Cor. 
Z.c. For the metaphorical use com- 
pare Philo Leg. A4 i. 25 (1. p. 59) 
ov yap mépuke yóvipov ovdéev TeÀec-bo- 
pew ý roð hadidov Wux7, à & à» Soxp 
mpoopépey, auBrAwOpidia cdpiokerar kal 
extpopara (referring to Num. xii. 12 
ge tcov Oavat@, oTel ékrpopa ékmo- 
pevopevov ek ntpas uņTpós), Clem. Alex. 
Exc. Theod. 68 (p. 985) dreiñ kal 
wu Kal adpova kai do evrj kai dopa, 
oiov extpopata mpocevexÓévra, Iren. i. 
8. 2, év ékrpóparos poipa. The idea 
in the metaphor, as used by S. Paul 
and by Ignatius, is twofold: (1) irre- 
gularity of time, referring to an unex- 
pected, abrupt, conversion; and (2) 
imperfection, immaturity, weakness 
of growth. Ignatius, like S. Paul, 
we must suppose, had been sudden- 
ly brought to a knowledge of the 
Gospel. The late story, that he was 
the child whom our Lord took up 
in His arms and blessed, is doubtless 
founded on a misinterpretation of 


Ocojópos (see the note on .Ef/es. 
inscr.) and cannot be reconciled with 
his expressions here. It is very pos- 
sible that his early life had been 
stained with the common immorali- 
ties of heathen society; but at all 
events this expression throws a flood 
of light on his position and explains 
the language of self-depreciation 
which he uses so freely. See on this 
point Zahn Z. v. A. p. 403 sq. In the 
letter of the Gallic Churches, Euseb. 
H.E. v. 1, the same metaphor is twice 
similarly applied. In $ 4 it is said 
of some who shrank from martyrdom, 
eaivovro Që oi duérouuot kal dyúpvas- 
rot kai éru daÓeveis, Qyóvos peyáňov 
Tovoy eveykeiv pt Suvdpevor, av Kal é£é- 
Tpecav as Séxa Tov dpiÜuóv: and in 
§ 12 of others, who had before denied 
their faith but at the last moment 
gave themselves up to die, éveyívero 
TOAN) xapà vj maphévo pyrpi i.e. TH 
ékkAgoía], oùs os vekpo)s éÉ£érpooe, 
Tovrovs (Gvras üroAap[Javovag. 

GAN yAéggal «.7.A.] Again an echo 
of S. Paul, 1 Tim. i. 13 adda 7renOnv 
Tt K.r.A., Where the words occur in a 
similar connexion; comp. 1 Cor. vii. 
25 gAenuévos mò Kupiov motos eivat. 

I. Oeo ëmuruxo] See the note 
on Magn. 1. 

2. T0 épuóv mvedpa) Comp. Ephes. 
18, Trall. 13, Smyrn. 10. This again 
is a Pauline expression, r Cor. v. 4. 

7 dydmn] See the notes on Trall. 
3, 13 

Tov Océapévov k.r.A.] The Churches 
of the Ephesians and Smyrnzans 


ix] 


TO THE ROMANS. 


231 


\ \ © ` , 7. ^ e ^ ^ 
KaL yap «t MN N poo"nkovoat MOL TN 000 TY KaTa c'apka 
t D 


A £ ^ 
kaTa TOALY ME Trponyov. 


gives it, 5 being merely the sign of the accus.) [A]. 

Tj karà cápka] GLZAmSmM; om. gA. 
It is translated by an imperfect in 2, and by an aorist 
At this point Z departs from the text of Ignatius: see the 


Z5: see the lower note. 

fryv] GM; mpo/yayov g. 
or perfect in LAAnSn. 
lower note on Tpáġw 0, p. 233. 


are meant in the first instance; 
comp. Magn. 15, Trall. 13. He was 
also attended about this time by 
several delegates from the Magne- 
sians (Magn. 2 sq), and by one at 
least from the Trallians (Trall. I). 
These churches also would be in- 
cluded.. By ray de£apévwy he intends 
not only those churches which (like 
Philadelphia and Smyrna) he had 
visited in person, but those which 
(like Ephesus and the others) had 
welcomed him through their repre- 
sentatives. 

3. eis dvopal ie. ‘having regard 
to the name’, i.e. ‘because I bear 
the authority of’, ‘because I repre- 
sent Christ’: comp. Matt. x. 41, 
42, 6 Oexópevos mpopytny eis övopa 
mpopyrov ... ó Oexópevos Oikatoy eis 
óvopa Óaiov: and see Buxtorf Lex. 
Talm. p. 2431 for the correspond- 
ing usage of DU. Ignatius seems 
here to have in his mind the 
context of this same passage of 
S. Matthew, ver. 40 ó ÓOexópuevos 
vpas epè Oéyerau: comp. Ephes. 6 
otras det pâs a/róv déxyerOa ws 
avroy Tov méuvavra k.r.. The read- 
ing eig must be preferred to es, be- 
cause (1) It is the more difficult read- 
ing of the two; (2) The scribes would 
naturally alter eis into os to produce 
uniformity with the words following, 
oUx ds mapo8evovra. Independently 
of this reason, the tendency is to 
change eis into œs in such cases; 
e.g. Potter on Clem. Alex. Strom. i. 
15 (p. 359) ov... eis Oedv reruujkaot 
writes ‘seu potius œs 6eóv, though 


44A] GLEA AmSmMg; om. 
5 ™po- 


eis Oeov Tysay is excellent Greek; (3) 
Considering the meaning of déyeoOar 
eis, it cannot be assumed that those 
versions which give a rendering equi- 
valent to às had øs in their text. 

ovx Gs mapodevovral ‘noé as a 
chance wayfarer, a mere passer by’, 
as e.g. Ezek. xxxvi. 34; comp. Epkes. 
9 éyvov 9€ mapodevoarras Twas ékeiÜev, 
Mart. Len. Ant. 5 Sia diimrov rapo- 
8evev Maxedoviay (of Ignatius himself). 
See also zápo8os, Ephes. 12. On the 
other hand Hilgenfeld (4. V. p. 191 
sq) here, as in Z2Zës. 9, gives to 
mapodeven the sense ‘to take a 
by-way’, understanding it of one who 
has deserted the true path of the 
Gospel, which is par excellence ‘the 
way’, and supposing that an an- 
tithesis is intended between this odds 
kara Ocóv and the odds karà odpka 
mentioned in the next sentence. 
To this it is sufficient to answer; 
(1) That mapo8evew, though a fairly 
common word, never has this mean- 
ing elsewhere; and (2) That such an 
antithesis would be meaningless here, 
even if the readers of the letter 
could have discovered it. 

4. kai yap ai pr k.r.X] ie. ‘for 
not only have those churches through 
which I passed welcomed me; but 
also those which lay out of the way, 
etc/ The Curetonian Syriac text, 
as represented by one MS Z,, omits 
the negative and reads 'for even 
those which were near to the way, 
etc. It has been contended that 
this was the original reading, and 
this supposed fact has been alleged 


292 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


X. [paw òè (piv ravra amo Sigl oe (Ger tm 


TOV TR ESET me 


gor òè Kal dua uot ov àN- 


Aois zroAXois Kal Kpókos, TO zro0nróv [uor] óvopa. 


1 6:] GLSmMg; om. AAn. 
GL; 
GLg; after woddots M. 
aliis (om. moXXNots) Am. 


ôt] GM; dua g. 

Zorw 06 (om. kal) gM; est or sunt AAmSm. 
&AXXots. trodAois] GLM ; 

For ASm see the next note. 


2 éorw 6é kal] 

dua éuol] before avv 
modois kal dANois g; 
3 kal Kpókos] 


LAmM; xpóxos (om. xal) Gg. The two remaining authorities take a different form; 


as favouring the priority of the Cure- 
tonian letters by Lipsius (S. T. p. 
136). But (1) The negative cannot 
be dispensed with, for it alone gives 
any significance to kal yap ‘for 
even’, ‘for also’; and (2) Though 
absent in one (3,) of the two Syriac 
MSS, it is present in the other (33), 
and the latter elsewhere preserves 
` the correct reading as against the 
former; see Zes. 19 with the 
note. S. Chrysostom indeed says 
of Ignatius ai yàp karà Tv 000v modes 
cvvrpéxovcau. mavrobev Nebo Tov 
aOdntny kal perà toiv é£émeymov 
Tay éQo0iev x.r.X. (Of. II. p. 598); 
but the expression diverges too far 
from the words of Ignatius to justify 
the inference that the negative was 
omitted in his copy of Ignatius; 
and indeed the word evvrpéxovca: im- 
plies the presence of those churches 
which did zof lie on the actual 
route, 

vj kata cápka] By this qualifying 
clause he wishes to imply, that though 
in actual locality they lay out of his 
way, yet in the spirit they were all 
his close and intimate neighbours: 
comp. Ephes. 1 óuóv 8é [ev sapri] ém- 
G KOT o. 

This passage is quite inconsistent 
with the account in the Antiochene 
Martyrology, which represents Ig- 
natius as sailing direct from Seleucia 
the port of Antioch to Smyrna. To 
save the credibility of this Martyr- 


ology, Pearson (ad loc.) translates 
ai pi) mpoojkovoai por, ‘which do not 
belong to me’, i.e. ‘are not under my 
jurisdiction’, separating 7 009 k.T.A.; 
and so too Smith ‘multi ab ecclesiis 
non mei juris et ad me neutiquam 
spectantibus [um mpooyjkovoai pot), 
in hoc nimirum ultimo itinere, quod 
in mundo restat emetiendum [77 
00Q Tj kata cápka] ut mihi obviam 
irent missi, me singulas civitates 
ingressurum honoris causa praeces- 
sere’. It wil be seen that Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 254) is mistaken, when he 
charges Smith with giving to odds 
the sense ‘episcopal jurisdiction’ ; 
but though Smith is not guilty of 
this error, his separation of r 006 
from mpoojkovoa. and his general 
interpretation of the passage (in 
which he follows Pearson) are too 
harsh to be tolerable. Even if this in- 
terpretation were possible, xara mów 
would remain an insuperable diffi- 
culty. The only land journey which 
on this hypothesis Ignatius had 
hitherto taken was from Antioch to 
Seleucia, some 15 or 16 miles (130 
stades, Procopius Bell. Pers. ii. 11, 
I. p. 199 ed. Bonn. ; 120 stades, Strabo 
xvi 2, p. 751). For the double dative 
comp. 2 Cor. xii. 7 é060n por Kodo 
7j capki, and see Kühner Š 424 (II. 
P. 375 sq), Winer $ xxxii. p. 276. 

kara móhw x ‘went before 
me from city to city’, Le. so as to 
make preparations and welcome him 


x] TO THE ROMANS. 


255 


À ^ z E) 5 

[lepi «v rpoeNOovtwv ue dzró Cupias eis ‘Pøæunv eis 
, - ^ e ^ > fe 

5 d0€av [rov] Oo) moarevw UMAS ETreyVWKEVal. ois kai 


sunt mecum et alii multi fratres dilecti A (omitting kpóxos) ; sunt autem mecum 


etiam alii multi crescus (sic) Sm. 
Smyrn. 13, Polyc. 8. 


po] GLAm; om. SmMg; al. A: comp. 
4 TÓ mpoehOdvTwy ue] G; qui praevenerunt me A; 


qui comitati sunt et deduxerunt me Sm (this also seems to represent ™poehOdvTww ; 
comp. Luke xxii. 47); rGv mpoce\Odvrwv (om. ue) g; advenientibus mecum L; r&v 


owehOovrwv uo. [M]; gui venerunt Am: see the lower note. 


Geod gM. 


on his arrival. For cara móňħw comp. 
Luke viii. 1, 4, Acts xv. 21, xx. 23; 
for mpodyew, Matt. xiv. 22 XVI, 32) 
xxviii. 7, Mark xi. o, etc. Zahn (Z. v. 
A. p. 255) rightly objects to taking 
it as an equivalent to mpomégmew, 
a sense which it seems never to 
have; nor indeed would his guards 
have allowed anything like a tri- 
umphal procession. The &yew of 
mpodayevy here is intransitive, and the 
construction is the same as in mpoed- 
cv $ 10. When the word is transi- 
tive, it has the sense ‘to put forward’ 
or ‘to drag forward’. 

X. ‘I write this from Smyrna by 
the hand of the Ephesians. Among 
others the beloved Crocus is with 
me. I believe you have already re- 
ceived instructions concerning those 
who have gone before me to Rome. 
Inform them that I am near. Re- 
fresh them with your friendly ser- 
vices, for they deserve it. I write 
this on the 9th before the Kalends 
of September. Farewell; endure unto 
the end in Christ Jesus.’ 

I. Tpapo ôe k..] The Syrian 
epitomator here leaves the text of 
this epistle. He first makes up a 
sentence of his own; ‘Now I am 
near so as to arrive in Rome’. He 
then inserts two chapters (4, 5) from 
the Epistle to the Trallians. And 
he concludes with the farewell sen- 
tence of this epistle, £ppeoe x.r.À. 

àv ’Edeciov] For the names of 
some of the Ephesian delegates who 


5 Tov Oco0] G; 


were with Ignatius at Smyrna, see 
Ephes. 1, 2. These delegates are 
mentioned also in Magn. 15, Trall 
13. For the whole expression comp. 
Philad. 11, Smyrn. 12, in both which 
passages he says ypaho wi Mà 
Bovppov (the only Ephesian then re- 
maining with him at Troas). See 
also 1 Pet. v. 12 dca SAovavod úpîv... 
Ó odiywv éypawa. In all these in- 
stances the preposition would seem 
to denote the amanuensis. And this 
would appear to be the case also in 
the passage before us. But in Polyc. 
Phil. 14 ‘haec vobis scripsi per 
Crescentem’, Crescens would appear 
to be the bearer of the letter; and 
in Dionys. Cor. quoted in Euseb. 
H. E. iv. 23 rjv mporépav ńuîv did 
KAjpevtos ypapeicav, Clement is the 
composer of the letter, though it is 
sent in the name of the whole Ro- 
man Church, 

2. d&vopaxapioror | 
inscr. 

3. Kpoxos] See the note EAes. 2. 

4. Tov mpoeA0óvrev pe] No men- 
tion is made of these persons else- 
where. The letter however presup- 
poses throughout that the Roman 
Church already possessed informa- 
tion of his condemnation and ap- 
proaching visit to Rome; and such 
information could only be conveyed 
by a previous arrival from Syria. 
The Metaphrast, not understanding 
this obscure allusion, abridges the 
passage so as entirely to alter the 


See Ephes. 


234 IGNATIUS TO THE ROMANS. [x 


3, , , > st co 

Sydwoare éyyus me dvTa? mavres yap eia ator [TOU] 

ee e^ € € ^ > \ , 5 A 
Oco? kai Ujuv* ovs mrpérrov ÚMTV EOTW kara ravra AVA- 

ex » ^ ^ ^ \ 5 y: 
mavoa, eypawa Që vuv TaUTa TH mTpo Évvea kaAav- 
dav C Bot Epowabe eis TéAOS Ev VTropovn Ina ov 
wy CerreuBpiwv. Epp ovi 
XpirTou. 


r OwXócare] G; dnddoere g (but 1 mandastis or mandatis); manifestatis L; 
notificate AmSm; def. AM. ToU Ocot] G; Oeov g; def. M. 2 Üpiv 
éorw] G; éorly tu g; est vos L; def. M. 3 9e] GLSng (but om. 1); 
om. AAyM. Tj...Semreufplov] txt LMg (but cemreuBpiov in M); add. 
rovrécrw aùyoúcrov elkáóu pir G; ante ix kalendas septembres, mense augusto qui 
dies 22 erat A; ante ix kalendas ahehani (gr. et lat. septembris, hoc est a4 augusti) 
Am. The difference in the calculations in GAAm shows that the additions have 
been made independently. Sm substitutes for the clause a local reckoning of time, 
undecimo (die) mense ab. 4 Inco Xpiwrov] GLMg; add. dei nostri 2; 
pref. domini nostri Am; add. gratia domini nostri vobiscum omnibus A; add. estote 


incolumes. gratia vobiscum Sm. 


Add. ¿um GASmM ; om. 2LAng. 


There is no subscription in GLAAmSmM. For Zg see the Appx. 


sense; Kpókos, ró moOnrov dvopa, TÓv 
cuvehOovre@v pot dmó Supias eis óav 
Oco). eypawa viv k.r.À. 

I. éyyvs pe óvra] This would be 
the case, when the letter arrived in 
Rome and the message of Ignatius 
was delivered. There is therefore no 
difficulty in his using such language 
at Smyrna; see Zahn 7. v. A. p. 251. 

ägor ToU Oco) k.r...] See Ephes. 2, 
where the same expression occurs. 

2. xarà mávra avaravoa| See the 
note on Ephes. 2. 

3. TH mpóéevvéa k.r.A.] i.e. August 24. 
The Armenian martyrology alone has 
correctly reckoned the day. The 
others give the 21st, the 22nd, or the 
23rd. The 21st is the equivalent to 
the 11th of Ab in the Syriac Mar- 
tyrology (Mcesinger p. 26). For the 
common construction r mpo évvéa 
k.T.A. comp. e.g. Plut. Mor. 203 A rH 
pO pâs vovàv oKxt@Bpiov. So also 
we have such expressions as mpó pâs 
npépas, Tpo rpiákovra jnuepay, ‘one day 
before’, ‘thirty days before’, in Greek 
writings of this age : comp. e.g. John 
xii I mpd éé nuepdv roð marya, and 


see Winer $ lxi. p. 697, together with 
the instances in Kypke Ods. Sacr. 1 
p. 393 sq. It is the Greek equivalent 
to ante diem nonam Kalendas Sep- 
tembres, though the construction in 
Latin is somewhat different. 

4. €ppwobe] See the note on 
Ephes. 21. 

ev úmopovi k.r..] Comp. 2 Thess. 
lii, 5 karevÜiva, )pdQv tas kapü(as eis 
THY dyámqv ToU Oeo kal eis THY vmo- 
Mow] tov Xpiwrov. In Rev. i 9 
vmonovj 1gso), the right reading is 
úropov ev Inso. The expression 
apparently has the same sense here 
as in 2 Thess. iii. 5, but the meaning 
is doubtful. Most probably it is ‘the 
patient waiting for Christ’: comp. 
I Thess. i. 3 ris úmopovis ris €Xmidos 
Tod Kupiov K.T., and see also Rom. 
vii. 25. In the LXX it is a transla- 
tion of MP, MPN, etc, ‘expectatio’, 
‘spes’, e.g. Ps. Ixii (lxi). 5, lxxi (lxx). 
5, Jer. xiv. 8, xvii. 13, etc. The com- 
mentators however more commonly 
take it otherwise, ‘such patience as 
Christ Himself showed’. The former 
sense is much more appropriate here. 


So 


MOFLE EHILADELEHIANS 


D <a P I 
deed Cope "T v 


A yt A Sar" 


J 


HE lI whet AD EI? PLANS: 


ee name Philadelphia was borne by several cities (see below, p. 
249). Of these perhaps the most important was the Syrian Phila- 
‘delphia, the Rabbah or Rabbath-Ammon of the Scriptures; while the 
second in importance—if second—was the Lydian Philadelphia, with 
which Ignatius corresponded. But, though bearing the same name, 
they did not owe it to the same person. The Syrian city was so 
designated from the second Ptolemy of Egypt, who restored this ancient 
capital of the Ammonites ; the Lydian city was called after the second 
Attalus of Pergamus (B.C. 159—138) its founder. Both these princes 
bore the surname Philadelphus. The foundation of the Lydian city is 
distinctly ascribed to the Pergamene king (Steph. Byz. s. v. 'ArráXov 
krispa Tod PiadeAdov), as indeed its situation would suggest. Yet we 
may be tempted to suspect an error in this statement. Joannes 
Laurentius the Lydian, a writer of the sixth century, himself a native 
of this Philadelphia, in a part of his work which is not preserved, 
related how it was founded by the Egyptians (Ze Mens. ii. 32, p. 45, 
ed. Bonn., órt tjv év Aviia BradeApeaay Aiydrrion éróMcav) ; and this 
notice would seem to point to Ptolemy Philadelphus, who had large 
possessions in Asia Minor (Theocr. ZZyZ. xvii. 88). 

Philadelphia lies at the foot of the Tmolus mountains, which separate 
the valley of the Hermus on the north from that of the Cayster on the 
south, and is washed by the river Cogamus, an important tributary of 

‘the Hermus (Plin. W. ZZ. v. 30 * Philadelpheni et ipsi in radice Tmoli 
Cogamo flumini appositi Joann. Lyd. de Magistr. iii. 26, p. 218, THs 


238 THE EPISTLE. OF IGNATIUS 
eveyxovons pe DiiadeAdetas THs trd TG Tuddy kal Avdia Keyrevys). It 
is situated in the loop which connects the valley of the Mzeander with 
that of the Hermus, the valley of the Cayster being shut in between the 
two. Hence the importance of its position, as commanding the way to 
the pass between the two valleys, It is nearly equidistant from Tripolis to 
. the west and Sardis to the east (33 miles from Tripolis, 28 from Sardis, 
Anton. Itin. p. 336 ; 34 miles from Tripolis, 30 [?] from Sardis, Peuting. 
Tab.), lying on the great high-road between Apamea and Smyrna, which 
leaves the Meeander close to Tripolis and touches the Hermus near 
Sardis. Along this road the great king led his countless hosts on his 
fatal expedition against Greece; and Callatebus, at which he halted on 
this occasion, and where he committed the plane-tree to the guardian- 
ship of one of the Immortals, must have been not far from the site of 
the later city of Philadelphia'. It was along this same road also that 
Cyrus marched with his Greek auxiliaries from Sardis to the Maeander 
(Xen. Anab. i. 2. 5, see Ainsworth’s Travels in the Track of the Ten 
Thousand Greeks p. 13 sq); but no place within these limits is men- 
tioned by name in Xenophon’s account of his march. Descriptions 
of the road, and of the city of Philadelphia, will be found in Smith 
Sept. Asiae Eccles. Not. p. 32 sq; Chandler Travels in Asia Minor etc. 
L p. 303 sq (ed. Churton); Arundell Seven Churches p. 163 sq; 
W. J. Hamilton Researches in Asia Minor etc. u. p. 370 sq; Ainsworth 
l.c.; Fellows Asta Minor and Lycia p. 216 sq; Texier Aste Mineure 
HL p.23 sq. For the physical features of the region see Tchihatcheff 
Asie Mineure P. 1. p. 235 sq, 470 sq, P. 1v. Vol. 3. p. 229 sq. 
Philadelphia does not appear ever to have attained the magnitude or 
the wealth which its position might have led us to expect. The ‘little 
power’ (Rev. iii. 8 puxpady éxes Ovvapav) of the Christian Church here 


1 Herod. vii. 31 ¿Zat mapa Kaddarn- 
Bov óNw, èv TÑ õnpoepyol péri ¿k puplens 
T€ kal Tupov mowo. K.T.X. Philadelphia 
is still famous for a similar confection, 
called kalva; von Hammer Gesch. d. Os- 
man, Reiches 1. p. 220, Texier Z? Univers 
p.271. Xerxes is stated by Herodotus to 
have arrived at Sardis from Callatebus 
Oevrépm huépn, and as the distance be- 
tween Philadelphia and Sardis is 28 or 
30 miles, this would be a fair two days? 
march for a large army. On the other 
hand, some would place Callatebus about 
four hours higher up the valley of the 


Cogamus at Aineh Ghieul (see Hamilton 
Asia Minor I1. p. 374), near which the 
tamarisk grows in great abundance. This 
is possible; but not so the position as- 
signed to Callatebus in Smith’s Dict. of 
the. Bible, s. v. Philadelphia, ‘not far 
from the Meeander’; for the Mzeander 
must be some seventy miles from Sardis 
—a distance far too great for Xerxes’ 
host to traverse in the time. Cyrus took 
three days, marching quickly with a 
much more manageable force (Xen. 
Anad. i. 2. 5). 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 239 


probably reflected the comparative size of the city itself. It lies indeed 
in a region of great natural fertility ; and, as is frequently the case with 
volcanic regions, this was especially a vine-growing country. The wines 
of Tmolus were among the most celebrated of antiquity (Virg. Georg. 
ii 98, Plin. M. ZZ. v. 30, xiv. 9). But this physical characteristic was 
at the same time its most terrible scourge. It borders on the region 
called Katakekaumene, which is to Asia Minor what the Phlegrzan 
Plains are to Italy ; and in a country where every city was more or less 
liable to such catastrophes, none suffered more cruelly from convulsions 
of the earth than Philadelphia. On this account the city itself con- 
tained a very small population, the majority preferring to live in the 
country and follow agricultural pursuits. Strabo, who gives us this 
information, expresses his surprise that even these few are hardy 
enough to brave the dangers. The earthquakes, he says, are con- 
stant: the houses are continually gaping asunder with the shocks: 
the architects are obliged to reckon with this fact in building (Strabo 
xii. 8, p. 579, xiii. 4, p. 628). In the terrible catastrophe during the 
reign of Tiberius, when twelve cities were thrown down in one night, 
Philadelphia was among the sufferers (Tac. Amn. ii. 47 ; see also the 
Puteoli marble, C. 7. Z. x. 1624). Doubtless these subterranean forces 
were exceptionally active when Strabo wrote; but the account of a 
Philadelphian in the sixth century shows that the danger was not 
confined to any one epoch. This last-mentioned writer, Joannes Lau- 
rentius, also speaks of the hot springs in this region, as connected with 
its volcanic energy (Ze Ostent. 53, p. 349, ed. Bonn.)'. 

In the age of Pliny (JV. ZZ. v. 30) this city had no law-courts of 
its own, but belonged to the jurisdictio or conventus of Sardis (see 
Colossians p. 7 sq) Before the middle of the next century however 
a change appears to have been made; for the rhetorician Aristides 
speaks of the legate as holding courts here (Of. 1. p. 530, ed. Dindorf, 
kupo? Tv xetpotoviay èv DiradeAdia |v. l. Diradedrdeia] dKaorypiors 
amovros épo; see Masson Vit. Aristid. ib. 111. p. cxviii sq). No great 
weight can be attached to the fact that the epithet ‘splendid’ is 
given to Philadelphia in a Smyrnzean inscription of the age of Valerian 
and Gallienus (C. Z. G. 3206 èv T$ aurp PradeAdéwv móde); nor 
again, do the titles of the two ruling bodies in the city, ‘the most 


1 From this district also was obtained  ...olós éorw 0 ¿k PidadeAdelas kouu(óp.evos 
the highest quality of the commodity 7s év Avóí(g. For the substance meant 
which the ancients called spuma nitri; by døpòs virpov see the reff. in Steph. 
Dioscorid. Mat, Med. v. 130 dgpos vírpov Thes, s. v. dppovirpov, ed. Hase et Dind. 


240 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


sacred,’ or ‘the most excellent Council,’ and ‘the most splendid People’ 
(4 tepwrdrn [kparicrn] BovXj Kal 6 Xajwmpóraros ójuos, C. Z G. 3416, 
3421), imply very much. It is more important to observe that Phila- 
delphia bore the name of ‘Little Athens.’ This designation was given 
to the city on account of its religious character. As the great Athens 
especially prided herself on being the most ‘pious’ city in Greece (see 
the passages in Wetstein on Acts xvii. 16, 22 sq), while from an opposite 
point of view the earliest historian of the Christian Church described 
the place as ‘beset with idols’ (Acts xvii. 16 xare/dwAov) ; so also this 
miniature Athens was distinguished by the number of its temples 
and the frequency of its festivals (Joann. Lyd. de Mens. iv. 40, p. 75, 
Muxpas "AÓjvas éxddovy tv BiraddAgpeay dua tas éoptds Kat rà iepa Tdv 
cidwdwv). This statement is borne out by the not very numerous 
extant inscriptions found in or near the city. Among the festivals 
celebrated there we read of the Jovialia Solaria (Acta " AXeu. diXaBéA- 
gaa C. I. G 3427, Acia "Adea èv diXaBeAe(a no. 3428, peyada “Acia 
no. 3416; see Boeckh’s note, 11. p. 804 sq, Lebas and Waddington no. 
645), of the Communia Asiae (kowa Asias èv PiradedAdeia, no. 1068, 
3428), and of the Augustalia Anaitea (weyaXo. SeBaora " Avacírew. no. 
3424, Le. in honour of Artemis or Aphrodite Anaitis, a Persian and 
Armenian deity worshipped in these parts): while Asiarchs, pane- 
gyriachs, xystarchs, ephebarchs, hipparchs, etc., appear in considerable 
profusion. More especially mention is made of the ‘ priest of Artemis’ 
(no. 3422) who seems to have been the patron-goddess of the city 
(see Mionnet Iv. p. 97 sq, Suppl. vil. p. 398 sq); and the title of 
‘high-priest,’ which occurs from time to time, probably belongs to this 
functionary. 

It would seem from these facts that paganism had an exceptional 
vitality in this otherwise not very important place. At the same time, 
it is no less clear that Philadelphia was a stronghold of the Jews. 
The message to the Church in the Apocalypse contains a reference to 
‘the synagogue of Satan,’ which is further defined as ‘those that called 
themselves Jews, though they are not’ (Rev. iii. 9) ; and in accordance 
with this notice the Epistle of Ignatius is largely occupied in controvert- 
ing a stubborn form of Judaism which obviously constitutes the chief 
peril of the Christian Church in this city (see esp. $$ 6, 8, 9). The 
promise in the vision of Patmos that the Jews should come and worship 
‘before the feet’ of the Philadelphian Church had been fulfilled mean- 
while; but the influx of Jewish converts had been attended with the 
usual dangers. 

The intimate connexion which subsisted between Philadelphia and 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS, 24I 


Smyrna, where Ignatius made his long halt, appears from several cir- 
cumstances. Among the coins of Philadelphia are not a few which 
commemorate the ‘concord’ (éudvova) of the Philadelphians with the 
Smyrnzans (Mionnet, tv. pp. roo, 108, Suppl. Vit. pp. 400, 401). The 
Anthology again contains a couplet recording some honour which 
Philadelphia, uvýuov 4 cs evvouins, had paid to a statue of one 
‘ Philip ruler in Smyrna’ (Anthol. u. p. 450). Again, an inscription 
at Smyrna mentions one Apollinaris, a citizen both of Smyrna and of 
Philadelphia, as of other places also (C. Z. G. 3206). And lastly we hear 
of Philadelphian Christians crowned with martyrdom at Smyrna about 
the middle of the second century (Mart. Polyc. 19; see below, p. 243). 

The earliest notice of Christianity in Philadelphia is the passage in 
the Apocalypse (iii. 7—13). But the language there used implies that 
this church had already existed for some years at least. In default of 
any information we fall back, as before (see above, pp. 102, 147), on the 
supposition that its evangelization was due to S. Paul and his com- 
panions ; though here the distance from Ephesus, his head-quarters, was 
much greater than in the cases of Magnesia and Tralles. 

Unlike the churches which have come before our notice hitherto 
Philadelphia had been visited in person by Ignatius. At the bifur- 
cation, on the banks of the Lycus, his guards had taken the right- 
hand road which led in a more northerly direction over the Derwend 
pass through Philadelphia and Sardis, by the valleys of the Cogamus 
and Hermus, to Smyrna (see above, p. 2). At Philadelphia they 
appear to have made a halt of some duration. To this visit Ignatius 
incidentally alludes more than once in the course of the letter. He 
speaks of making the acquaintance of their bishop, whose modesty and 
reserve and gentleness he praises highly ($ 1). After the example of 
S. Paul, he appeals to the character of his intercourse with them. It 
was entirely free from tyranny or oppressiveness of any kind (§ 6). He 
alludes obscurely to an attempt on the part of certain persons to lead 
him astray—an allusion which (in the absence of information) it were 
lost time to attempt to explain. He reminds them that he had warned 
them emphatically ‘with the voice of God’ to give heed to the bishop 
and other officers of the church (§ 7). He had done all that one man 
could do (zo (àwov ëmoíouv) to promote unity. He recals a dispute— 
apparently held at Philadelphia—when the Judaizers had pleaded the 
ancient charters (rà apxeta) against the Gospel, while he himself de- 
clared that Christ's Cross and Resurrection were their own witnesses 
and superseded any such appeal (§ 8). 


IGN. II, 16 


242 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


Nor is this the only point in which the Epistle to the Philadelphians 
differs from the previous letters. It was also written from a different 
place. Since the despatch of the earlier letters, the saint had moved 
onward from Smyrna to Alexandria Troas, and was waiting there to 
embark for Europe. ‘This interval had somewhat altered the position 
of affairs. ‘Two persons had meanwhile joined him from the east after 
his arrival at Troas, or at all events after his departure from Smyrna 
— Philo, a deacon of Cilicia, and Rhaius Agathopus, a member of the 
Syrian Church. They had followed in his track, and halted at Phila- 
delphia. Here they had received a hearty welcome from the main 
body of the church; but some persons—doubtless his Judaizing op- 
ponents—had treated them with contempt (Š rr) From them he 
probably heard of those misrepresentations of his conduct during his 
stay at Philadelphia, which he considers it necessary to rebut (8$ 6, 7). 

But at the same time, they brought him more welcome news also. 
The prayers of the churches had been heard. The persecution at 
Antioch had ceased. He therefore urges the Philadelphians to despatch 
a deacon to Syria, as their representative, to congratulate the brethren 
there. Other churches which lay nearer, he tells them, had sent dele- 
gacies on a larger scale (§ 10). 

But, though the letter contains this incidental charge, its direct 
purport and motive is different. The main burden is the heresy which 
troubled the Philadelphian Church. It had awakened his anxiety 
during his own sojourn there, and the later report of Philo and Aga- 
thopus had aggravated his alarm. What the nature of this heresy was, 
the tenour of his letter plainly indicates. He is attacking a form of 
Docetic Judaism (see the note Zra//. 9), but more directly from its 
Judaic than from its Docetic side. The Docetism is tacitly reproved in 
the opening salutation, where he congratulates the Philadelphians as 
‘rejoicing in the Passion of our Lord without wavering,’ and ‘steadfast 
in the conviction of His Resurrection,’ and salutes them ‘in the blood 
of Jesus Christ which is eternal and abiding joy.’ There are perhaps 
also allusions to it, when speaking of the eucharist he refers to the 
‘one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ’ (§ 4), and when he describes him- 
self as ‘taking refuge in the Gospel as the flesh of Jesus’ (§ 5). But 
the Judaism is openly attacked. A Jew talking Christianity, he says, 
is better than a Christian talking Judaism. If any disputant is silent 
about Christ, he is no better than a tombstone with its epitaph inscribed 
(§ 6). The Judaizers allege the ancient charters: but to himself Jesus 
Christ—His Cross and Resurrection—is the one inviolable charter (§ 8). 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 243 


The prophets are to be loved and admired, because they foretold Christ 
(8 5). The priests too are not to be despised, but the great High- 
priest is better than all. He is the door through whom patriarchs and 
prophets alike, not less than the Christian Church, must pass to the 
Father ($ 9). These heretics are described as treacherous wolves 
devouring the flock (§ 2). The heresy itself is a noxious herb, which 
does not belong to the husbandry of Jesus Christ (83). Asa safeguard 
against its assaults he recommends here, as elsewhere, unity and obe- 
dience to the bishops and officers of the Church (88 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8). 
In saying this, he merely repeats a charge which he had given them 
orally (§ 7). More especially they must not separate themselves from 
the one eucharistic feast (§ 4). No schismatic can inherit the kingdom 
of God (§ 3). 

When Ignatius wrote this letter from Troas, Burrhus the Ephesian, 
alone of the delegates who had been with him at Smyrna, still remained 
in his company (see the note on Zes. 2). He was the amanuensis of 
the letter (Š 11). 

It will be seen from the above account, that the impression of the 
Philadelphian Church left by the language of Ignatius is less favourable 
than that which we obtain from the message in the Apocalypse, where 
its constancy is commended (Rev. iii. 8, 10). The warning with which 
the Apocalyptic message closes was not superfluous; ‘Hold fast 
that which thou hast, that no man take thy crown (ver. 11) At the 
same time the main body of the Church appears to have been sound ; 
for Ignatius praises the steadfastness of their convictions (inscr.), and 
declares that he has found ‘sifting, and not division,’ among them (§ 2). 
The next notices also in point of time are honourable to the Philadel- 
phian Church. She numbered among her sons eleven martyrs, who 
suffered at Smyrna in the persecution which was fatal to Polycarp, 
A.D. 155 (Mart. Polyc. 19). We are also told of one Ammia a pro- 
phetess of Philadelphia (7 év ®uvadeAdeig Appia) who appears to have 
flourished early in the second century, for her name is mentioned in 
connexion with Quadratus more especially (Anon. in Euseb. Z. Z. 
v. 18). The Montanists claimed her as a forerunner of their own pro- 
phetesses; but this claim the orthodox writer quoted by Eusebius 
indignantly denies. The name is probably Phrygian, and occurs com- 
monly in inscriptions belonging to these parts (see Colossians p. 307). 
At the council of Nicza this Lydian Philadelphia is represented by her 
bishop Hetoemasius (Sic. Solesm. 1. p. 535, Cowper Syriac Miscellanies 
pp. 11, 28, 33), as is also the Syrian by her own bishop Cyrion. On 

16—2 


244 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


the other hand at the Council of Constantinople (A.D. 381) the only 
Philadelphia which puts in an appearance is the Isaurian (zb. p. 37, Labb. 
Conc. 1. p. 1135), both her more famous namesakes being unrepre- 
sented. In the meanwhile our Philadelphia has been toying with Semi- 
arianism. At the Synod of Philippopolis (A. n. 347) there was present 
one Quirius (Kvpuos) bishop of Philadelphia (see Labb. Conc. 11. p. 743) 
apparently the Lydian city, though the name of the bishop would suggest 
the Syrian; and at the Synod of Seleucia (a.D. 359) again, we meet 
with a Theodosius, bishop of Philadelphia, here expressly defined as the 
Lydian city (Labb. Conc. 1. p. 922) At Ephesus (a.D. 431) the 
Lydian Philadelphia is represented by "Theophanes or Theophanius 
(Labb. Conc. 111. p. 1086) ; and at later councils also her bishops appear 
from time to time. For some centuries Philadelphia remained a suffra- 
gan see under Sardis, but at a later date it was raised to an independent 
metropolitan rank, though apparently not without some vicissitudes (see 
the Notitiae pp. 96, 132, 156, 226, 236, 246, ed. Parthey). 

It was in the last struggle for independence that Philadelphia won 
an undying renown. ‘The strategical importance of the site, which 
doubtless had led to the foundation of the city in the first instance, 
was also the cause of her chief woes. Philadelphia was besieged by 
every invading army in turn, Byzantine, Latin, and barbarian. Against 
the Turkish hordes the Philadelphians offered a manly resistance. For 
nearly a hundred years after the neighbouring places had succumbed, 
Philadelphia held out. ‘The whole land beneath the sun,’ writes the 
Byzantine historian, ‘was subjugated by the Turks, but this city like 
a star shone still in the over-clouded mid-heaven’ (Ducas iv. 4, p. 19, 
ed. Bonn.). It is said that she was sustained in her resistance by the 
commendation and the promise in the Apocalypse. At length she 
yielded to the assaults of the victorious Bajazet, ‘the thunderbolt.’ 
But even then her fall was due quite as much to the baseness of 
the Byzantine emperors as to the persistence of the Turkish invader. 
Philadelphia was part of the price paid by John and Manuel Paleo- 
logus for the support of the Turk against rival claimants to the throne 
of the Cæsars in their own household. The Greek emperor summoned 
the Philadelphians to surrender and receive a Turkish governor. They 
replied proudly that *they would not, if they could help it, deliver 
themselves over to the barbarians.’ But it was only a question of time. 
The siege, aided by famine, was successful; and the Greek emperors, 
fighting under Bajazet, were the first to enter the defeated city; oùto 
concludes the historian, édAw d(Xa8éA eua y ris Avdias rots ees 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 245 


EMnvis (Chalcocond. de Reb. Ture. ii. P- 64, ed. Bonn). Probably 
Philadelphia had never been more prosperous than at this epoch, 
for it is described as ‘of vast size and very populous? (Ducas l. c. 
Vmepéxovca +@ j.€y 0e, kal moAvavSpos odra). Nor was this siege the last 
trial endured by this city. If she was chastised with whips by the 
Ottoman Bajazet', she was chastised with Scorpions under the Tartar 
Timour, the conqueror of Bajazet (Ducas xvi p. 7r, xxii. p. 122): 
But from first to last she has never altogether forfeited her claim to 
the proud title of a ‘Greek’ city. 

The present name of Philadelphia, as given almost universally by 
English travelers, is 4a Shehr, ‘the city of God.’ The true form 
however seems to be Ala Shehr, ‘the pied or striped city’ (v. Hammer 
Gesch. d. Osman. Reiches 1. p. 219, not ‘the white city,’ as in Texier 
L Univers p. 270, Murray’s Handbook for T. urkey in Asia p. 327), but 
no explanation is given of this epithet. The Apocalyptic message to 
this Church (Rev. iii. 12), containing the promise that ‘the name of 
the city of God’ shall be written ‘on him that overcometh,’ may pos- 
sibly have led travelers and natives alike to wrest Ala Shehr into 
Allah Shehr. At all events the coincidence with the language of the 
Revelation is purely superficial. At the present time Philadelphia con- 
tains a population variously estimated at from seven or eight to fifteen 
thousand, of whom a larger proportion than is common in Turkish cities 
—perhaps a third or a fourth—are Christians. The number of churches 
again is differently stated, the highest number being thirty, and the 


1 T. Smith Sept. As. Eccles. Not. p. 33, 
speaking of this victory of Bajazet, writes; 
*Sola conjectura est, quam jam profero, 
hujus stragis, cujus ille author erat, 
vestigia adhuc restare. Ad mille enim 
quingentos ab urbe [Philadelphia] passus 
versus austrum crassum murum ex ossibus 
humanis cum lapidibus gypso confusim 
permistis consistentem vidi; illum [Baya- 
zidem] hoc irae suae in obstinatos hosce 
cives monimentum erexisse verisimile 
mihi videtur: mihi enim pene constat fa- 
cinus adeo horrendum et ab omni huma- 

-nitate prorsus alienum nonnisi a Turcis 
perpetrari posse.’ Rycaut also mentions 
this wall built of human bones. The 
Turks have enough to answer for; but of 
this atrocity assuredly they were not 


guilty. This wall is a mass of vegetable 
matter incrusted with a calcareous de- 
posit, as pointed out long ago by Wood- 
ward (Addition to Catal. of Foreign and 
Native Fossils p. 11, 1728). A specimen 
procured by him may still be seen in the 
Woodwardian Museum at Cambridge. 
Tchihatcheff (P. rv. Vol. 3, p. 230 note) 
tells us that the Turks in the neighbour- 
hood glory in this supposed atrocity of a 
former sultan. He has so little acquaint- 
ance with the writings of his predecessors, 
that he supposes himself to have dis- 
covered the phenomenon and unearthed 
the legend, though this wall was men- 
tioned by Smith two centuries ago, and 
the true explanation given by Woodward 
a century and a half ago. 


246 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


lowest fifteen ; but only five or six are in common use, while the greater 
number lie in ruins. The Christian community here is governed by a 
resident bishop ; and altogether its ecclesiastical arrangements betoken 
a vitality and influence, such as is rarely found in the cities of Asia 
Minor. 

The often-quoted passage of Gibbon may be quoted once again, as 
a just tribute to a city whose past history is exceptionally bright in the 
midst of the surrounding darkness. 

‘The captivity or ruin of the seven churches of Asia was consum- 
mated ; and the barbarous lords of Ionia and Lydia still trample on the 
monuments of classic and Christian antiquity. In the loss of Ephesus 
the Christians deplored the fall of the first angel, the extinction of the 
first candlestick, of the Revelations; the desolation is complete ; and 
the temple of Diana, or the church of Mary, will equally elude the 
search of the curious traveler. The circus and the three stately 
theatres of Laodicea are now peopled with wolves and foxes; Sardes 
is reduced to a miserable village; the God of Mahomet, without a rival 
or a son, is invoked in the mosques of Thyatira and Pergamus; and 
the populousness of Smyrna is supported by the foreign trade of the 
Franks and Armenians. Philadelphia alone has been saved by pro- 
phecy or courage. At a distance from the sea, forgotten by the em- 
perors, encompassed on all sides by the Turks, her valiant citizens 
defended their religion and freedom above fourscore years; and at 
length capitulated with the proudest of the Ottomans. Among the 
Greek colonies and churches of Asia, Philadelphia is still erect; a 
column in a scene of ruins; a pleasing example, that the paths of 
honour and safety may sometimes be the same (Decline and Fall c. Ixiv). 


The following is an analysis of the epistle. 

*IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF PHILADELPHIA which is rooted 
firmly in the conviction of the Passion and Resurrection of Christ; 
greeting in the blood of Jesus Christ which is abiding joy, so long as 
there is obedience to the bishop and presbyters and deacons.’ 

‘Your bishop has his authority from God and exercises it in love. 
I admire his gentleness and modesty. As the lyre to its strings, so is 
he strung to the commandments (8 r). As children of truth, shun 
dissension. Follow the shepherd, lest ye be devoured by wolves (8 2). 
Abstain from noxious herbs, which are not of Christs husbandry. Be 
united with the bishop, that ye may be owned by God. No schismatic 
shall inherit the kingdom (š 3). Be partakers in one eucharist. ‘There 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 247 


is one flesh, one cup, of Jesus Christ, one altar, one bishop Go H 
love you heartily, and therefore I warn you. By your prayers I hope 
to be made perfect, while I cling to the Gospel and the Apostles. We 
love the Prophets also, for they foretold Christ and were saved through 
Him (§ 5). Turn a deaf ear to Judaism. Whosoever speaks not of 
Christ, is no better than a gravestone. Flee from these snares of the 
devil. I thank God, that I oppressed no man, when I was with you 
(86). They tried to mislead me in the flesh; but the Spirit cannot be 
misled. I told you plainly to obey your bishop and presbyters ‘and 
deacons. It was the voice of the Spirit, enjoining unity (§ 7). I have 
done my best to promote harmony. God will forgive those who repent 
and return to unity. Men appeal to the archives against the Gospel ; 
I know no archives but Jesus Christ—His Passion and Resurrection 
($ 8). The ancient priesthood was good; but the great High-priest is 
better. Patriarchs and Prophets must enter through Him as the door. 
The Prophets foretold ; the Gospel is the crown and fulfilment (8 9) 

‘Your prayers have been answered. The Church of Syria has 
peace. Send a deacon to congratulate them. The nearer churches 
have sent bishops and presbyters also ($ 10). I thank God that you 
gave a welcome to Philo and Agathopus. May their enemies be for- 
given. The brethren at Troas salute you. I write by the hand of 
Burrhus. Farewell in Christ (§ rr) 


TTPOC @IAAAEAPEIC. 


"ITNATIOC, ó kai Oceodopos, ExxAnoia Oceov ma- 


^ ~ ^ E > , ^ 
Tpos kal 'Ino'oU  Xpio-ToU Tn oven év Piraderdia Tis 


/ ` , 5 e t A ` 
"Acias, nrenuern kai ópaouéyn év Opovoia Ocot Kat 


TIPOC Pidadeddeic | paynoeiow giadedpetow iyvarios G (the first word 
being the displaced subscription to the Epistle to the Magnesians which imme- 
diately precedes); ignatius philadelphicis L* ; rot avrot émustodn mpos piradedgets 
(with the number S in the marg.) g; ad philadelphenses (the form uncertain) A. 


I Ó kal] See Ephes. inscr. 


‘IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF PHIL- 
ADELPHIA, which is founded on godly 
concord and rejoices in the passion 
and resurrection of the Lord: greeting 
in the blood of Christ, if she is united 
with her bishop and clergy whom He 
ordained.’ 

Trpoc midadeAdeic] Here the co- 
pies of the genuine Ignatius and of 
the interpolator’s text agree in 
taking the form 4AadeAdeis, not 
Bradedpyvoi. Steph. Byz., s. v. Pia- 
üéA$ea, after mentioning several 
places of the name, adds 6 soXirns 
Diraderheds, rò è DriadeAgnvis èrm- 
xépiov. This however refers pos- 
sibly not to all, but only to the last 
mentioned, the Philadelphia of Syria ; 
for he adds ojre yàp Idbonmos K ris 
*Iovdaixis apxatodoyias. Yetthesame 
Josephus, who there (Az¿. xx. 1. 1) 
uses @iAadeAnvol, in an earlier pas- 
sage (xiii. 8. 1) has @:\adeAdeis, both 
passages referring to the Syrian 
Philadelphia. The same variation oc- 


2 Inco XpwroÜ] L; kvplov “I. X. Gg; 


curs with regard to the Philadelphians 
of ‘Asia.’ In the coins we have con- 
stantly d$iXa8eAéov (Mionnet IV. p. 
97 sq, Suppl. VII. p. 397 sq), and once 
(perhaps by an error) PaðeAgpeiwv 
(IV. p. 103). In the inscriptions too 
the form is most commonly a- 
deddets, e.g. C. Z G. 3206, 3424, 
3425, 3426 ; but peyiðvos Bidadeddn- 
us, nO. 3436, and this must also 
have been the form in the mutilated 
inscription no. 3000. Joannes Lydus 
is styled dia8eA$ebs in the head- 
ings of his works. So also it is 
written in Nicet. Chon. AZex. vii. 16, 
p. 341 sq (ed. Bonn.). In Suidas s. v. 
Zéfros we have “Hpodorov roù paĝe- 
$aíov, a form which seems not to 
occur elsewhere. The Latins com- 
monly say Phzladelphenus, Plin. JV. 
FT, v. 29 (30), Tac. Am. ii. 47. But 
the version of Ignatius has ‘ Phila- 
delphicis (-sis) and the version of 
the interpolated text ‘Ad Philadel- 
phienses’; while in the printed texts 


[271 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


249 


> , > ^ , ^ ^ 
ayadNwuern év TG mabet Top Kupiov ipu adtak pitws 


Vs ^ , 5 ^ 
Kal EV Ty avacTaceE avTod, 
Li 


iesu christi domini nostri A. 


tuting év &yámy). 
om. A. 


TETANpopopnuévn €v TaVTL 


Tfs'Aclas] GL: urbe asiae A; om. g (substi- 
3 "Opacuévy] hõpasuévn (sic) G. 
4 GYaXXtenéyn] G; åyaňouévy g. 


Ocov] Gg; 
ToU Kuplov *udv] GL* 


(but L, domini iesu christi) g* (prob. but the Gk mss add ¿so or inoot xpuToi). 
[A] omits ro? kvplov judy here and substitutes christi for ajroÜ in the next clause. 


of Jerome Vir. Ill. 16 it is ‘Ad 
Philadelpheos,’ 

2. Aadedpia] The form da- 
déApeva with the diphthong appears 
in the inscriptions (eg. C. 7. C 
1068, 3428 four times), and gene- 
raly in the best Mss of ancient 
writers; comp. Moschop. IIepi axed. 
P. I21 duaücAea mods rò $e ôi- 
pboyyov, praderpia 8e ira (quoted 
in Steph. Thes. s. v. ed. Hase et 
Dind.. So too it is scanned in 
Anthol IL p. 450 "Ex PMaðeApeins 
Eewnia x.r.A.; comp. also Anon. in 
Euseb. ZZ E. v. 17, and Eusebius 
himself (speaking of this epistle) 
H. E. ii. 36 (though with a v. 1). 
Accordingly it is written PAz/ade/- 
Phea on the Puteoli marble C. 7. Z. 
x. 1624. In Apoc. i. 11, iii. 7, however 
the uncial MSS are generally agreed 
in the form ®:AadeAdia, and so it oc- 
curs on coins, Mionnet IV. pp. 98, 100, 
Suppl. VII. p. 399, and in an inscrip- 
tion C. Z. G. 9911; and with this 
spelling apparently it is found also 
in the Mss of Mart. Polyc. 19. I have 
therefore retained this form, which 
alone appears in the Ignatian mss. 

ms Asias] This town was one of 
several bearing this name. Another 
was in Isauria, a third in Egypt, a 
fourth (the ancient Rabbath-Ammon) 
in Palestine; see Steph. Byz. s. v. 
Thus here, as in the case of Tralles, 
ths Asias might have been added 
for the sake of identification, ‘ Asia? 
being of course the Roman province 
(see Trall. inscr). The same words 
however are added in most texts in 


the case of Ephesus, where such 
specification was unnecessary (see 
Ephes. inscr.). Politically Philadel- 
phia was in * Asia,’ but ethnographi- 
cally it was in Lydia (Dioscorid. Mat. 
Med. v. 130 (131) DidadeAdias...rhs èv 
Avdia, Steph. Byz. s. v. rédus AvÓ(as, 
Ptol. v. 2. 17, and the Notitiae gene- 
rally), or in Mysia (Strabo xiii. IO, 
p- 628). 

3. TÀemuéyn] See the note Rom. 
inscr. Here it is used absolutely, 
‘having found mercy.’ 

nOpacpévy èv] For this construc- 
tion see Smyrn. 1, and possibly 
Polyc. 1 (see the note). 

opovoia Oco0] See Magn. 6, with 
the note. 

4. dyadwwpérn K.r.À.] ‘rejoicing 
in the passion, i.e. ‘joyfully recog- 
nising it and the benefits derived 
from it.’ For the prominence of ‘the 
passion’ in these letters, see the note 
on £EfAes. inscr. The connexion of 
“steadfastness in concord’ and ‘rejoic- 
ing in the Passion’ is to be noticed. 
The Docetic teaching at once threat- 
ened the unity of the Church and 
assailed the reality of Christ’s death. 

advaxpitws] ‘without wavering’; 
comp. Rom. inscr. memdnpopévors xá- 
piros Oeo dĉıarpiros (with the note), 
and see also the note on åôıákpırov 
Ephes. 3. 

5. kai év rjj dvaaráget k.r.A.] This 
is perhaps best taken with the pre- 
ceding words dya\\t@pevy x.r.A., rather 
than with the following memAgpoQo- 
pnvevn For this co-ordination of 
the passion and the resurrection see 


| 250 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


5 e e ^ ^ / 

édéer v adomaCoua ëv aipate noot Xpirrov, nis 
5 N , A SN E e IN 

¿ori yapa aiwvios Kal zrapajuovos* paNıoTa Eav év évi 


ç ^ ^ A ^ , 

(cw GUY TQ ÉmLGKOT( Kal TOTS GUV AUTO 7 peo BuTEpas 
, Id 5 / 5 ^ ^ 

kal Oiakóvors dmoðeðeryuévois év yvwun nooo Xpiorov, 


2 mapápovos] GAg; incoinguinatum (uwuos?) L. 


éàv èv évl Gow] G; sz 


in uno simus (v.l. sumus) L; év évl wow g* (Mss, but prob. éàv has been accidentally 
omitted); sz stetis in concordia A. For the change of persons in AL see the lower 


below $ 9, Ephes. 20, Magn. II, 
Smyrn. 7, 12; comp. Smyrn. I. 
There is however no objection to the 
construction mAnpodopetcOar ev TH 
dvacrdce. ‘to be convinced of the 
resurrection’; comp. e.g. Magn. 11. 

sen Agpodopypévy k.r.À.] ‘being fully 
convinced, i.e. of their reality. On 
the meanings of mAnpodopety itself, 
and on its different connexions with 
èv, see the note Colossians iv. 12 
memAnpopopypévor èv mavri Oedjpart, 
where, as here, the preposition de- 
notes the sphere, the surroundings, 
of the conviction. Their firm belief 
was a manifestation of God's mercy ; 
comp. the preceding Aemuévg kal 
jõpacpévy K.T.À. 

I. domá(opat èv aipare k.r.A.] i.e. 
* whom I greet as ransomed with me 
and incorporate with Christ through 
His blood, again an indirect con- 
demnation of Docetism. Only those 
are included in his greeting who 
acknowledge with him the reality of 
Christ's passion; see below § 4 eis 
évwow Tov a(paros avro, and comp. 
Ephes. 1 áva(emvproavres év aipare 
Oeod, Smyrn. Y ndpacpevous ev dyámy 
ev TÔ aipar. Xpiorov. 

nris kr] ‘seeing that tt) i.e. 
daiwa “Inoov Xptorod, the gender of the 
relative being thus attracted to yapa, 
as e.g. I Tim. iii. 15; comp. Winer 
$ xxiv. p. 206 sq. For similar in- 
stances of attraction in these epistles 
see the note Magn. 7. The blood 


of Jesus Christ, sincerely recognised 
in itself and in its practical conse- 
quences, is the source of all abiding 
joy. This is the simplest construc- 
tion. On the other hand Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 350) takes the antecedent 
to gr to be the whole sentence dyaA- 
Niopévn K.T.. But the interposition 
of another feminine relative 7», re- 
ferring to a wholly different ante- 
cedent, and thus isolating zr from 
the words in question, seems to me 
to be an insuperable objection to 
this construction, which otherwise 
would be very reasonable. 

2. mapágovos] Comp. Zes. inscr. 
eis óav mapápuovov k.r.. The word 
occurs occasionally. in classical 
writers, but not in the LXX or N.T. 

paora kz. To be connected 
with demá(opa: k.r..; comp. Polye. 
6 ávr(jvxov éyà rév omoraccopévev 
TO ÊTLOKÓTO K.T.À. 

ew k.r.A.] ‘Zf they) i.e. the Phila- 
delphian Christians. He still uses 
the third person, because the address 
of the letter is not yet concluded ; 
see 2 Joh. I rois rékvow aùris, con- 
trasted with ver. 4 ray rékvov cov. 
The difficulty has occasioned the 
substitution of the first or second 
person in the versions, and the read- 
ing padtora ev évi dow in the inter- 
polator's text. See the upper note. 

This sentence—a warning against 
dissension—is a sort of after-thought, 
which deranges the whole of the 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


251 


e y A 37 , 
5 ovs kaTa TO tiov OéAnua éornpicev év BeBawovvn To 
t 4 


e y , ^ "4 
aylw auvTou TMVEVUQATL. 


A , 3 > ^ 
L “Ov émickomov čyvwv ovk ap éavroU ovde bv 


note. 
in different ways. 


subsequent passage. After the words 
nv domá(opat k.r.A. would naturally 
have followed xai e¥youa mAeiora 
xaipew (comp. Magn. inscr., Tradl. 
inscr). This however is forgotten; 
there is no opening benediction, such 
as we find in the other six letters; but 
instead of this Ignatius runs off into 
a justification of the Church officers 
thus accidentally mentioned (drode- 
Oevynévois x.7-.), and more especially 
into a eulogy of the bishop (ôv èri- 
oKoTroy Éyvov). 

4.  dmo0eüeryuévow] ‘designated; 
‘appointed to office’; comp. Susann. 
5 kat dmedelxOnoav dv0 mpeoßúrepor 
ek TOU aod kpuraí k.r.À., a very com- 
mon classical usage. This word 
refers to the nomination or election 
by the human agents—whether the 
congregation or the officers of the 
Church—as the following words èv 
youn k.r.À. show. 

ev yvópg] ie. ‘with the approval 
of’; comp. Ephes. 3 oi émiokoro: oí 
Kara rà mépara opicOevres ev 'Igoo0 
Xpwcrov yvopn eiotv (with the note). 

5. oùs xara k.T.A.] i.e. Christ con- 
firmed and established in their office 
the persons so appointed through 
human agency by the gift of His 
Holy Spirit; where rò ¿(or OéAgua 
is opposed to the dróðeréis of man. 

I. 'I know well that your bishop 
does not owe his office to any human 
appointment or any spirit of vain- 
glory, but to the love of God the 


3 civ aire] GL; om. Ag. 
Tip ékkNyaíar k.r.À. afterwards) ; gut A (adding zos afterwards). 
have been an early corruption, which obli 
GéAnua] G; Bothnua g*. 


5 ods] GL; ðs [g] (adding 
Thus ós seems to 


ged Ag to supply the object to éer/jpi£ev 


7 oix] o?x G. 


Father and of Christ. His gentle- 
ness overwhelms me; his silence is 
more powerful than the speech of 
others; for he is attuned to perfect 
harmony with the commandments, 
like the strings in alyre. Therefore 
I praise and bless his godly mind, 
knowing its virtues and perfections, 
its calmness and forbearance, which 
are of God.’ 

7. “Ov émíekomov] The relative 
refers to the previous otv r ém- 
oxor@; but the antecedent being so 
distant, émíckomov is added to make 
the reference clear. For the cause 
of the derangement in the sentence, 
which has given rise to this awk- 
wardness of expression, see the note 
On padtora k.T.A. above. The inter- 
polator has straightened the con- 
struction, Oeacáuevos úpðv roy èri- 
TKOTOV éyvav K.T.À. 

€yvov] Ignatius had passed through 
Philadelphia on his way to Smyrna; 
see above p. 241, and $ 6, 7 (with the 
notes). There is no indication in this 
letter or elsewhere, that the Phila- 
delphian bishop had visited him at 
Smyrna with the delegates of other 
churches. 

oUk aQ’ éavro) k.T.A.]] An obvious 
reflexion of Gal. i. 1 ouk dm’ àvÜpomev 
ovde dv avôpærov, where see the note 
on the difference of prepositions. 
Neither did he himself originate 
(amó), nor did other men confer (6:4), 
the office which he held. 


252 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


> , ^ A / \ > ` ` 
avOpwrwy kekrýolaı Tyv StaKkoviay TNV eis TO KOLVOY 
\ 2 E] > $ ° , A 

dvkovrav, ovee kara kevoðočiav, ZAA. év ayam Oeou 

> ^ ^ ES 7 
TAT POS Kal Kvptov Incov XpiwToU: ov KaTamerAnypat 
` > , A ^ / ou ^ $ 

THY meikerav, OS GIywV TWAELOVAa OUVaTaL TWV XaXovv- 
N ^ ^ - 

Tov cuvevpvOmora. yap ais évToNats, ws xopoais 


I dvaxovlay] Gg; administrationem, ; dispensationem (domus-administrationem 
=olkovoulav) A. There is no reason to suppose (with Petermann) that L read 
olkovouíay. In L olxovoula elsewhere (Æphes. 6, 18, 20) is always dispensatio, 
whereas ótakor(a is rendered by mznistratio in § 10 below, Magn. 6, by ministerium 
in Smyrn. 12, and by this very word administratio in Hero 9. On the other hand 
the rendering of A certainly implies oixovouíav, and we may suppose that this word 
was substituted in some texts, because õakovla seemed an unfit term to apply to 


a bishop. 
quae decet communem hominem. 
marpòs Tod éyelpavros k.T.M. [g]. 


T0] gL; róv G, and this was also the reading of A, which translates 


2 Ocov...Xpicrov] GLA ; ’I. X. kal 0eoU 
4 mdelova] GL; mdéov g; al. A. 


rõv AaNobvrov] quam. loquentes (rationales) A; Tdv udreua XaNoóvrov GL; T&v 


théov Aadovvrwy g* (the Gk Mss, but 1 om. mAéoy). 


The Armenian word means 


properly ‘persons gifted with Aóvyos,' i.e. ‘speech, reason, intelligence,’ and its em- 


I. eis TÓ kowóv Kk... Comp. 
Smyrn. 9 rev àvgkóvrov eis rjv ékkAg- 
cíav. For the expression ávjkew «eis 
see the note on Clem. Rom. 45. The 
verb takes a dative in Clem. Rom. 35 
rà djkovra- Tj appe BovXjseu 20. 
62 rà» aynkovTay tH Opnokela nv, 
Herm. Sim. v. 2 dwjkoucay Th vy- 
creig, and so in Polyc. 7. 

2. ovde xara kevodokiay] ‘nor with 
vain-glory. Add to this the expres- 
sion in Š 8 uev kar épibeiav mpac- 
cere, and for both combined comp. 
Phil. ii. 3 pndev kar’ epidevay pndé Kara 
kevodoéiay, For the different mean- 
ings of kevodofia see the note on 
Magn. 11. 

cot] The subjective genitive, as 
the antithesis to ouk ad’ éavrod x.r.À. 
suggests; comp. Trall. 6. God's love 
conferred the office upon him. The 
genitive is perhaps objective in Rom. 
inscr. (see the note). 

3. ov] SC. Tow ériokómov. 

4. eémeixevav] ‘modesty, modera- 
tion, forbearance. See the notes 
on Clem. Rom. 58, Ign. Ephes. 10. 


There is an oxymoron in xararé- 
mAnypat, Since émueixeca is the quality 
to reassure, not to dismay. Similarly 
in the following clause silence is said 
to be more eloquent than speech. 
Comp. Ephes. 6 dcov BAéme tis oi 
yGvra eriokorov, mAeuvos aùròv Qo- 
Beiroa. See the note there. 

0s ovyév k.t.A.] So Carlyle says of 
Cromwell (Zzfe and Letters, Introd. 
c. 2) ‘His words—still more his 
silences and unconscious instincts, 
when you have spelt and lovingly 
deciphered these also out of his 
words—will in several ways reward 
the study of an earnest man, 
Comp. Aristoph. Ran. 913 sq. of & 
éctyov. AIO. éyà & &yaipov rÅ even; 
kal pe TOUT’ érepmrev ovx ÚTToy Ü vüv oi 
AaXobvres. The interpolator and 
transcribers have enfeebled the ex- 
pression by inserting màéov or udraua. 
The editors have retained the latter, 
apparently without misgiving. 

5. ovvevpvOuora] ‘is tuned in 
harmony with’; comp. Ephes. 4 và 


Z et £ ^ 
-mpeourépuov...oUres gvvijppoorat TO 


I] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 253 


, ` , ` ` 
Kapa. dio MakapiCer uov ij Wuxn tiv eis Oeóv aú- 
^ £ > ` > , 3 
TOU YVMUNV, ETLyvovs évaperov Kal TENELOV orav, TO 
A wit 4 ^ M \ 37 ^ 
aKLNTOV avTOU Kal TO aopynTov [avro] €v taon èr- 
j G À 4 
eikel Oco Cavros. 
ployment here is a proof that the translator had: neither mAéov nor uáraia in his 
text. The evidence of 1 seems to show that mAéov was omitted in the original text of 


g. See the lower note. 5 owverptOmora] G; patiens est et concordans est A; 
cwiHpworrat g; concordes estis (sruveupúQuj0e p) ERR Xopdats kiüdpa] GL; 


chordae citharae (xop8al xiÜápg or KiOdpas) A: xopdal rH KOdpa g 6 eis 
9e] GLg; divinam (tv0cov?) A; comp. the v. l. in 77a. 8. 7 Té- 
Xetov] G; reMelav g. 8 atrod sec.] G; om. Lg; al. A. 9 £Gvros] 


GLg. The rendering of A is scio quod perfecta est (om. éváperov) ea et non unguam 
conturbatur et irascitur sed vivit omni humilitate cum deo (ger deum). Petermann 
suggests that the translator read (àv for Gyros, or that he misunderstood the Syriac 
NM NNT ‘dei viventis,’ separating the last word and interpreting it vivit. But 
a third solution seems at least as probable. May not the Syriac translator himself 
have separated {@vros from O«of and connected it with atrod? See the lower note. 


€miwckómQ, œs yopdal KiÜdpg. Here 
however the metaphor is not so 
clear. It is not easy to see in what 
sense the harp as a whole can be 
said to harmonize with the several 
strings; and, even if this difficulty 
were waived, the application of the 
metaphor is not good. Perhaps we 
should read xopóai kıðápa, as some 
authorities suggest. For rats évro- 
Aais, used absolutely, see the note 
on Trall. 13. If the lexicons may 
be trusted, not only is evvevpv6ui(ew 
a Gma& Aeyópevov, but neither evpv6- 
pigo nor cvvevpvÜuos occurs else- 
where. 

6. Tjv eis Gedy wr.A.] The same 
expression occurs Rom. 7: comp. 
Polyc. 1 cov thy €» Oe yvdyy. 

7. éváperov| The word does not 
occur in the LXX or N. T., but is 
found in 4 Macc. xi 5, and in 
Clem. Rom. 62 ró» à$euperárev 
eis éváperov Biov. It is a favourite 
word with the Stoics; see Phryn. 
p. 328 (Lobeck) mapà rois Xroikois 
KukAeirat roUvopa, ovk dv ápxaiov, with 
Lobeck’s note. 


réÀAewy] Here an adjective of two 
terminations, as e.g. Plat. Phaedr. p. 
249 C, Leg. x. p. 951 B, Aristot. Z/A. 
Nic. vii. 14 (p. 1153), Pod. i. 2 (p. 
1252), and frequently. Compare 8$- 
os [Clem. Rom.] ii. 12. 

Tó dkívrrov k.r..] In apposition to 
Tijv eis ©. adrov yrduny, as explaining 
it Ignatius here runs into Stoic 
phraseology (see the note on évdperov 
above). For dépynros see the note 
on Clem. Rom. 19. 

9. Oeo) (órvros] ie. ‘inspired by 
a living God.’ There is not however 
much force in the epithet here, and 
perhaps (óvros should be separated 
from ©cod and taken with avro, 
as the Armenian Version suggests; 
comp. Š 3 tva dow kara "Incoüv Xpioròv 
(vres. 

II. ‘Therefore as children of 
truth, avoid dissension and false- 
teaching. Where the shepherd is 
there let the sheep follow; for many 
wolves are prowling about, ready. to 
seize the stragglers in the race of 
God. But they will have no place, 
so long as you are at unity. 


254 
II. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


Téxva ovv [pwros] dXnOctas, pevyere TOV pept- 


\ \ \ / [34 NM CO , 5 
c'uàv Kal Tas kakoüi0ackaALas: ömov ÕE Ó Tony TTU, 


_ e ^ L4 , 
éxel ws mpóßara dkoXovÜeire*. Tool yap AvKOL d£io- 


1 Téxva] GLA Dam-Rup 5; ws rékva g. 
inserts ez) g Dam-Rup; Zzezs et veritatis A. 
is older than any existing authorities, though probably corrupt. 
ever is not to insert a xal, as is commonly done: see the lower note. 
(but the Casanatensian transcript has uév) g Dam-Rup ; autem L; e£ A. 
odx eovow] Gg; non habent L; non est illis A (but the 


Tr] évoryre G. 


pwròs addnOetas] GL* (but a v. 1. 
It is clear therefore that pwròs ddnOelas 
The remedy how- 
200] G 


5 évó- 


freedom elsewhere used by A in translating the Syriac future deprives it of weight). 


I. Téxva k.r.A.] Tékva Qeros oc- 
curs, Ephes. v. 8; viol [rod] porós, 
Luke xvi. 8, John xii. 36, 1 Thess. v. 
5. The reading of the Greek MSS 
poròs ddnoeias, ‘of the light of truth,’ 
cannot stand; for definite articles 
would almost certainly be required. 
The text might be mended by in- 
serting a xai, as the Armenian Ver- 
sion gives ‘light and truth. On 
such a point however a version has 
little weight, since this would be a 
very obvious expedient for a trans- 
lator. I am disposed to think that 
rékva adAnOeias was the original read- 
ing of Ignatius; and that eros was 
first intended as a substitution or a 
gloss or a parallel, suggested by the 
familiar scriptural phrase rékva (viol) 
porós. 

pepiopòov] So again $$ 3, 7, 8, 
Smyrn. 8. The word occurs both 
in the Lxx, and in the N. T. (Heb. 
ii. 4, iv. 12), but not in this sense. 

2. kakoüibackaAMas] See [Clem. 
Rom.] ii. IO kakoüi9aokaAoQvres, with 
the note. 

3. Aéxo] So S. Paul, Acts xx. 
29 Aóko. Bapeis...un Hedpevor ToO 
rousviov; comp. John x. 12. In d&ó- 
moto: there is perhaps an allusion 
to the 'sheep's clothing? of Matt. 
vii. 15 (comp. Clem. Hom. xi. 35, 
Iren. i. praef. 1, Clem. Alex. Progr. 1. 
p. 4). For the metaphor see also 
Epictetus Diss. iii. 22. 35 ri ody el; 


Touny rais ddnOcias. ovTw yap KAdets, 
@s oi moueves, Stay Avkos dpTáo? TL 
TOY mpoBaTav avtdy: kai ovro. Óë mpó- 
Bará eiow of vr cov apxopevor: comp. 
ZO. i. 3. 7 oí pev...AUKOLS Opotot yivópe- 
Oa, amiocrot kai émi[BovAot kai BraBepoi: 
of è A€ovow x... Rhodon (in Euseb. 
H. E. v. 13) calls Marcion 6 Hovrikós 
dvkos, and at a later date it is not un- 
common as a designation of heretics. 

dfimioroi] ‘specious, plausible, de- 
ceitful, as in Polyc. 3 (where how- 
ever the bad sense is not so directly 
prominent); comp. Trall. 6. kara£o- 
morevopevot (with the note). Suidas 
distinguishes between the earlier and 
later sense of this word, 'A£iómoros 
ovxl ó karámAagros Aéyerau Úmó TOY 
Takaay kal repareía ypepmevos, GAN 6 
moos kai Sdxtmos kal déidypews. For 
this later and bad sense comp. 
Epist. ad Diogn. 8 rous kevoùs kal 
Anpadets ekeivov Adyous dmodéyn Tdv 
diorictav piiocdpev, Lucian Alex. 
4 TiÉaviv kal diómioTov kal úmokpuru- 
kv To) BeXriovos, Charito iv. 9 éuvg- 
povevoe KaNupóns á£ríoTo TÓ Tpoc- 
eme (comp. 2d. i. 4), Apollon. in 
Euseb. ZZ. E. v. 18 Oepisov 6 civ 
d£iómusrov  mAeovefíav juchreopévos. 
So too d£wmiría, Joseph. B. F. ii. 
13. 3 mavranaow vm a&tomorias Hoa 
avevperot, Tatian ad Graec. 25 kekpa- 
yos Onuooía per’ a€womorias, Aristid. 
Art. Rhet. i. 4 (Of. 11. p. 745, ed. 
Dind.) á£wmiorías 06 kai rd émara- 


1] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


2 


e ^ ^ > / \ , 
TLIO TOL noon kakn aL ypaNwTiÇOVow TOUS Oeodspopous: 
E 2.9 ex Wr ua € ^ > [74 / 
5 aAN êv TY EVOTHTL VWV OUX é£ovauw TOT7OV. 


bE 


£ ^ ^ ^ 
"Améyeate Tøv kakdav Boravdv, &o-iwas où 


E ^ / \ a 
yewpyet hoots Xpiorós, dia TO un evar aUTous Qvretav 


6 "Améxeo0c] GL [Dam-Rup]; add. ot» g ; jam (ergo) A (prob. representing otv, 


if it be not an insertion of a translator or of a Scribe). 
"I. X.] GL; dorwas T. X. oi yeepye g; 


dorwas ov yewpye? 


Gv xXpiords ljroUs où yewpye? Dam-Rup (so 


the Ms, but Lequien omits où); quas dominus noster iesus christus non plantavit A 


(omitting the rest of the sentence). 


7 uros] Gg* (mss, though edd. 


read avrás) Dam-Rup; ¿səs L (not ipsas, as commonly given); def. A. There is 


therefore no authority for aùrás. 


WevderOa (with the whole chapter, 
which treats of d£iwmicría in all its 
forms); and dévorioras, Polyb. iii. 33. 
I7 rois d£voricras Wevdopévois (comp. 
xii. 9. 5, xxviii. 4. 10), Tatian ad Graec. 
2 d£tomioros ñooreúcaro, Joseph. Z. 
7- I. 25. 2, Anon. in Euseb. Z. E. 
v. 16. In this sense the word differs 
from mavds, as implying a show 
of severe honesty or downrightness. 
It is frequently found however in a 
good sense, even in late writers, e.g. 
Joseph. c Apion. i. 1, 20, ii. 37, 
Clem. Alex. Strom. i. 2 (p. 327), ii. 5, 
6 (pp. 442, 445), vii. 8, 9 (p. 862). 
The manner in which it slips into a 
bad sense will appear from Clem. 
Alex. Paed. ii. 11 (p. 302) pù) uóvov 
eivat mwas adda kal déoriorovs pa- 
vivat. i 
4. 758ovj kakj] This is the bait 
which they hold out to their victims; 
see the parallel passage Trall. 6, 
where the same phrase occurs. 
aixuaXerí(ovew] As in 2 Tim. iii. 
6; and so Iren. I. praef. 1 Ova ris 
mavovpyos avykekpornuérns mÜavórgros 
...aixpaAeríi(ovow aùroús (comp. 20. 
i. 3. 6), quoted by Pearson. In all 
these cases it is said of the machina- 
tions of heretical teachers. 
0coüpóuovs] ‘the runners in the 
stadium of God, who is the great 
dyevotérgs. It is the metaphor of 


Qvreíav] $vríav G. 


the Christian 8pónuos, which occurs 
so frequently in S. Paul; see the 
note on fom. 2, and comp. also 
Clem. Rom. 6, 7, [Clem. Rom.] ii. 7 
(with the notes) The idea here is 
much the same as in Gal. v. 7 érpé- 
Xere Karas” Tis vas évékoyev; The 
word 6eo8pópuos occurs again Polyc. 7, 
but in a somewhat different sense, 
* God's courier.’ 

5. êv rj évornre xt.) ‘So long 
as you are united, they will find no 
place for their machinations.’ 

III. ‘Beware of these false teach- 
ers, as of noxious weeds, which were 
not planted by the Father and are 
not tilled by Christ. Not that I found 
any dissension among you, but on 
the contrary purity of faith. Those 
who belong to God and Christ attach 
themselves to the bishop; and those 
too, who repent and enter again into 
the unity of the Church, are owned 
by God and live after Christ. Be 
not deceived. No man who follows 
a leader of schism can inherit the 
kingdom of God. He, who adheres 
to a false doctrine, dissevers himself 
from the Passion.’ 

6. Boravdy] ‘weeds? See the 
note on Irall. 6, where the same 
metaphor occurs. 

7. yewpyet] Comp. John xv. 1 
Ó maTýp pov ó yewpyos egru, 1 Cor. iii, 


256 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [ru 
maTpos.  OUx OTL Tap’ Upiv pEepirpuov eüpov, AAA’ dmo- 
SwAriocudv. seo yap Oco? eiow kal Inso? Xpirrov, 


ey \ a > 7 Ni cf N , 
OUTOL META TOU ETLOKOTOU €LGiV* kat OTOL GV PETaVON- 


” \ N f ^ > , \ 
cavyres EA\Owow émi THY VOTTA TNS EKKANTLAS, kat 
3 ^ af [74 5 ` ^ M 
oUTO. Ocot écovta, iva wow Kata *Inoovv Xpia-TOv 

I marpós] Gg; roO marpós Rup. darodiwwdo nov] abstractionem L (comp. Rom. 
inscr. darodwicuévos, translated adstractis); àmoðüouévov G; clamor A; def. g. 
The rendering of A is explained by Zahn Z. v. A. p. 270. The same Syriac root bby 
signifies colare (wiew, e.g. Pesh. Matt. xxiii. 24) and clarum sonitum reddere; see 


Bernstein Zex. Syr. Chrestom. s. v. 
dei sunt A; xpiorod celow [g]. 


9 Oeo) yedpyiov...eore. Here the 
Father is represented as planting 
the field and as sending Christ to 
till it. 

avrovs] i.e. ‘these heretical teach- 
ers,’ who are intended by the kara 
Boravai. The reading is certainly 
avrovs, not avrás (see the critical 
note); and the sudden change to 
the masculine is the same here as in 
the parallel passage, Trall. 11 gev- 
yere ov Tas Kaxas mapadváOas...oórot 
yàp ovk eiaw dvreía sarpós. 

$vreíav marpós] A reference to 
Matt. xv. 13 maca dvreía, nv ovK 
epúrevoev ó maryjp pov k.r-À., as in the 
parallel passage Zya//. 11 already 
cited. There is also doubtless an in- 
direct reference to the parable of the 
tares sown by the Evil One, Matt. 
xii. 24 sq. This reference has been 
seen by the interpolator; for to the 
words dia rò pup evar aùroùs Qvreíav 
matpos he adds adda oméppa To 
Tovnpov. 

I. ovdx dri] This sentence must 
be taken as parenthetical. Ignatius 
guards against appearing to censure 
the Philadelphians in what he has 
said. The words dco yàp k.r.A. are 
connected with the previous sen- 
tence, dorivas...matpos. For this cor- 
rective ovx ôr see the note on 


Magn. 3. 


2 Oeod celow kal Inoot Xpwrov] GLS,; 


6 ddeXpol uov] GLS, Dam-Rup r Anon Syr, 


eópov] 7 found? This implies that 
Ignatius had himself visited Phila- 
delphia; see above p. 241, and the 
notes on Š I Oy ézícakomov &yvov, § 6 
ór. €Bapnoa k.r.A., Š 7 ékpavyaca per- 
a£v àv. 

dzroüwAupóv] ‘filtration. See the 
note on Rom. inscr. drodwdiopévors 
amò mavròs dAAorpíov xpóparos. The 
false teachers had been at Philadel- 
phia; but the Philadelphian Chris- 
tians had strained out these dregs 
of heresy. They had separated them- 
selves from the heretics; but this 
separation deserved the name of 
‘filtering,’ rather than of ‘ division.’ 

2. Oeo elow] For this phrase 
see the note on Zes. 5. 

5. xarà “Incody x.rA.] So again 
Magn. 8. Similarly, karà xpicria- 
uopov (v Magn. 10, karà Oeóv (fv 
Ephes. 8, kara adnbevav (5v. Ephes. 6, 
kata kuptakny (hv Magn. 9, xara lov- 
Sacpov (jv Magn. 8, cara dvÜpexrovs 
Gv Trall. 2, Rom. 8. 

6. py mdavacbe] As in I Cor. 
vi. 9, xv. 33, Gal. vi. 7, James i. 16. 
Here the phrase is clearly suggested 
by 1 Cor. vi. 9 sq, whence the words 
Baa(Xeiav cod ov KAnpovopet also are 
borrowed. Comp. Ephes. 16, where 
there is the same connexion of 
phrases suggested by S. Paul's lan- 


guage. 


5 


IO 


IH] 


(GvTes. un wrAavacbe, adeApot pov: el Tes 


akoXovÜOet, 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


257 
oxi Covte 


BaciAelaN Oeo? o KAHpONOMeT € TiS 


2 5 , if ^ a ^ , 
ev aAAor7pta YOUN TWEplTATEL, OVTOS TH maler où G'ury- 


^ o ^ ^ 
IV. Crovðdsare oiv Mia €eUxapicTía ypnobat: 


oxlfovre] txt GL Dam-Rup; add. ¿zà ris 


7 Kigpovoué] GLA Dam-Rup Anon-Syr, ; KANpovomijre g; 


I Cor. vi. 9, 10, Gal. v. 2r. 


they severed themselves 


/2 
KaTaTiderat. 
(but for the Syriac authorities see Clem. Rom. ii. 8 13); fratres (here) A; á8eA dot 
(before uù mXavácte) g. 
adnOelas [g]; add. ecclesiam Anon-Syn; add. ecclesiam dei 915 sefaratoris ec- 
clesiae A. 
Aaereditabit S,. The future is taken from S. Paul, 
8 TỌ má0«] GL; add. christi S,À. The sentence is paraphrased in g, oóros otk 
CcTw xpioTod obre Tod má0ovs a/ToÜ Kowwvds. 
oxigovre] ‘making a rent, ‘ causing Church, 
a schism. For this absolute use of 


exiew comp. Orig. Comm. in Matth. 
X. Š 16 (III. p. 462) où exí(ev år 
avrijs (i.e. rs avvayoyfjs), Dion. Alex. 
Ep. ad. Novat. (in Euseb. H. E. vi. 
45) €vexev rod p!) oxica, passages 
referred to in E. A. Sophocles Lex. 
S. V. It is not so used in the Lxx 
orkN: T: 

8. dAXorpía] ‘strange, ie. ‘here- 
tical,” as in 7Zva//. 6 ad orplas Bo- 
ravíjs, Rom. inscr. dAXorpíov xpóparos, 
Papias in Euseb. Z. Z. iii. 39 rois 
Tas dÀAorpías évroÀàs pynuovedovow. 
So too £évos, Heb. xiii. 9. 

TO mále] See the note on Ephes, 
inscr. 

ov ovykararidera] ‘has no part or 
agreement with, ‘ dissociates himself 
Jrom? ; Exod. xxiii. 1, 32, Susann. 20, 
Luke xxiii 51; comp. ovykarddeous 
2 Cor. vi. 16. The full phrase would 
be ovykararidecOa Wipov, or kMjpov, 
‘to cast in one's vote or lot with.’ 
It is a good classical word. The 
meaning of Ignatius here is ex- 
plained by the following sentence, 
emovüdcare pia evxapiotia xpfjoÓau. 
These heretics separated themselves 
and set up a eucharistic feast of 
their own. By thus severing them- 
selves from the true eucharist of the 


IGN, II, 


from the passion of Christ and all 
the benefits flowing therefrom; see 
Smyrn. 6 with the note. 

IV. ‘Therefore take care to keep 
one eucharistic feast only ; for Christ's 
flesh is one and His blood is one; 
there is one altar and one bishop 
with his priests and deacons. Do 
this, and ye will do after God's 
bidding. 

IO. jud evyapioria k.r.A.] Comp. 
Smyrn. 8 robs 0 pepiopods pevyere 
-pndeis opis éemurkdmov rl mpacoé- 
To TOY aynkovT@Y eis THY exkAnolav* 
éxeivn BeBaia edyapioria ñye(o-0o ý ind 
Tov émíakorrov otoa, k.t.A. The heretics 
disobeyed this rule. These passages 
in Ignatius (comp. also Smyrn. 6, 
and perhaps Aes. 13) are the 
earliest instances of eùyapıoría ap- 
plied to the Holy Communion ex- 
cept perhaps Doctr. Apost. 9 mepi 8€ 
Ts e/UxapioTías, oüros eVxapia- 
Tyoate k.T.3.: comp. Justin Martyr 
"Apol. i. 64, 65 (p. 97 sq) peradaBeiv 
aro ToU eUxapiarrÜévros aprov kal otvov 
kai vdaros...Kal 7) Tpopy abr kaA eirat 
map piv evxapiaría...rjv Ov eüxfe 
Aóyov Tod map avro evyaptornbei- 
cav tpopyy, é£ s aipa kal aápkes karà 
petaBodny rpépovrar ruv, éketvov Tod 
capkorotwnGévros “Inoov kai cápka kai 


17 


258 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1v 


^ ^ ^ ^ vog 

ula yàp càpE ToU Kupiov judy Incod XpioToù, kat ev 
D ^ [4 [om eN y 

moTipiov eis Evwow TOU aiparos avTov: ëv Óvaiaa'rH- 
€ «€ > , e ^ y \ x: 

piov, ws eis ÈTIOKOTOS, dua TH mperBuTepiw kai dia 
^ [24 CN pk , \ 

KOvois Toîs TUVOOVAOLS uov’ iva Ó éav TEAaTONTE, kara 


Ocov paconre. 


2 els wow] GL; concordiae S4; om. A; al. g. 


3 ws] G; e L (but 


perhaps we should read v; see the converse error in Kom. 4, and comp. Ephes. 21); 


sicut et A; kal [g]. 
kóvois [g]. 


atpa €didayOnuev civar (comp. Dial. 
117, p. 345), Iren. iv. 18. 5 juan de 
aippavos 5) yropr TH edvxaptoTia... 
és yàp ard ys dpros mpoohapBavo- 
pevos T)v exkAnow ToU OeoU ovkére 
kowós äpros éorív, AAN evxaploria, 
Kk.T.A., Clem. Alex. Paed. ii. 2 (p. 178) 
evyaptotia KéKAnTaL, xápis érawovp.évr 
kai kaXj, Orig. c. Cels. viii 57 €ore 
dé cipBorov july ths mpòs Tov Ocóv 
evxapiorias, üpros evxapiotia Kadov- 
pevos; comp. Tertull. ad. Marc. i. 23 
‘super alienum panem alii deo gra- 
tiarum actionibus fungitur, On the 
question whether the eucharist was 
at this time still connected with 
the agape or not, see the note on 
Smyrn. 8. 

With this passage compare 1 Cor. 
xi 18, 20 mp@rov pev yàp ocvvepxo- 
pévov vpav ev exkA\noia dkovo Txis- 
para ev ópiv Vmüpxew...cvvepxop.évov 
ovv wav émi TÒ, avTO, oUk facTU Kv- 
ptaxoy  OeUmvov dayeiv xr... The 
heretics of Ignatius’ time violated 
this bond of union, though not in 
the same way, but by holding sepa- 
rate eucharistic feasts; see the note 
on Smyrn. 6, 8. 

I. pia yàp càp£ «.r.A.] Doubtless 
suggested by 1 Cor. x. 16, 17 rov 
dprov ov Kaper, o)xyi kowcovía tod 
cóparos TOU Xpiorod srw; bre elg 
dpros, év rpa oi moddol èrpev of 
yàp mávres ek Tod évós prov peréxopev. 
The ‘one flesh? here is the one 


Should we read ws kal with A? 
6 "AóeNQol uov] not omitted in A, as stated by Petermann; but 


Ovaxdvors] G; Tots ĝia- 


eucharistic loaf betokening the union 
in the one body of Christ. 

2. els évoow] ‘unto unity, i.e. ‘so 
that all may be one by partaking of 
His own blood? For the word 
voss see the note on Magn. 1. 

êv Ovotacrnpiovy] Comp. Cyprian 
Epist xlii 5 (p. 594, Hartel) 
*Aliud altare constitui aut sacerdo- 
tium novum fieri praeter unum altare 
et unum sacerdotium non potest. 
Quisque alibi collegerit, spargit) It 
would be an anachronism to suppose 
that Ignatius by the ‘altar’ here 
means the ‘Lord’s table) Even in 
Irenæus, though he is distinctly 
speaking of the eucharist in the 
context (see the passage quoted 
above), yet only a spiritual altar is 
recognised ; Haer. iv. 18. 6 ‘offerimus 
eum ei, non quasi indigenti sed 
gratias agentes [evyapicrotyres] do- 
minationi ejus et sanctificantes crea- 
turam...sic et ideo nos quoque offerre 
vult munus ad altare frequenter sine 
intermissione. Est ergo altare in 
caelis (illuc enim preces nostrae et 
oblationes diriguntur) et templum, 
etc, Compare also the passages of 
Clement and Origen quoted in the 
note on hes. 5, and see Philip- 
fans p. 265 sq. Probably Ignatius 
here means by the term (to use 
Clement's definition) the Z46powpa 
TOv rais eUxais dvakewuuévoev, See the 


notes on Ephes. 5, Trall. 7. For 


IO 


v] 


V. "Adergoi pov, Aíav exkéyuuan 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS, 


259 


deyoT(V úuâs, 


\ 5 ^ 5 
Kal UTEpayaNNoOmeEvos arpariCoua vuas: ovK yw €, 
5 ^ 7 5 me ^ ^ 
arr "InaoUs. Xowós, èv W dedeuévos dofloUuai ManXov, 


/ N ie 
WS ETL (QV avaTrapTioros. 


Oeóv] 


attached to the former sentence. 
eis Ocóv] Gg; om. L [A]. 


arn’ 5 TPOTEVYH UudGv [ eis 
1 , / E © , £ 
ue a7rapriacet, iva év w KAnow qAenÜnv ETLTUXW, 


9 dvamdpricros] gLA; dvápracros G. 
IO KMjpe preHOnv] GL; ékN8nv g. The read- 


ing of GL seems to underlie the rendering of A, which paraphrases the sentence 
loosely z/a ut dignus Jam hac portione et in ea requiescam. 


different applications of the image 
see Magn. 7, Rom. 2 (with the notes). 

3. mpesBvrepío] See the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

4. avvdovrdois] See the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

xarà Ocóv] See the note on Magn. 


AA 


V. ‘Brethren, my love for you is 
unbounded, and I wish therefore to 
warn you—yet not I, but Jesus 
Christ, whose prisoner I am, anxious 
and fearful as yet, because not yet 
made perfect. But your prayers will 
perfect me, so that in God's mercy 


| this my lot may be fulfilled, and I 


may obtain the martyrs crown. I 
cling to the Gospel as the flesh of 
Christ, and to the Apostles as the 
presbyters of the Church. Yes, and 
we love the prophets also, because 
they foretold the Gospel and awaited 
the coming of Christ. Thus they 
were saved by faith through union 
with Him, being worthy of all love 
and honour; to whom also Christ 
bore witness, and who are enrolled 
in the Gospel of our common hope.’ 
6. ék«éyvum] Implying profuse 
demonstrations of love, as not un- 


frequently, e.g. Arist. Vesp. 1469, 


Lucian Sa/¢. 81, Polyb. v. 106. 7 eis 
mdvras robs BaciXeis éfekéyvvro, i.e. 
*were lavish in their loyalty and 
devotion?; see also Clem, Alex. 


Protr. 2 (p. 27. So the Latin ‘ef- 
fundi, e.g. Cic. AZ iv. 9 ‘in nos 
vero suavissime hercule est effusus? 

7. vUmepayaddopevos] So ómep8o- 
édćew Polyc. 1, ómepemaweiv Ephes. 6. 

dc$aMoua] ‘I warn you, ‘put 
you on your guard? The word 
means properly ‘to shut up fast,’ 
‘to make secure for oneself, e.g. 
LXX Neh. iii rs, Wisd. xiii. I5; 
comp. Clem. Hom. i. 45 6 rò Trepié- 
Xov Tapa ev dme(po meMáyei mveüpart 
Bovis dopaħıodpevos. See Bekker 
Anecd. p. 456 +ó dedaM(eota Bap- 
Bapov. It is however a common word 
from Polybius downward. 

8. év @ 8e8euévos] Comp. $ 7, 
Ephes. 3, Trall. 1, Rom. 1. For the 
feeling of Ignatius respecting his 
bonds see the notes on Zfhes. 3, "yg 
Magn. 1. 

$oBobpa. padrov] Comp. Trail. 4 
viv yap pe det mAéov dolei at. 

9. ávamáprwros] See the parallel 
passage Ephes. 3 el yàp kai Oc8epai 
ev TQ ÜOvóparu oUm dmýpriopai èv 
'yroó Xpior®. The word dvandp- 
tıoTos occurs Diog. Laert. vii. 63. It 
is vain in the face of the authorities, 
the requirements of the context, and 
the parallel passage, to attempt with 
Voss to defend dvdpracros here. 

IO. dzapríce] The word was 
condemned as a solcecism by the 
purists; but the condemnation must 


17—2 


260 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


` ^ , é e & s ^ ` - 
_mpocpuywv TQ evayyeAlw ws Tapki lncoU Kat Tots 


r Inco] GL; inood xpwroU g; christi A. 


be taken with some qualification. It 
is used several times by Aristotle. 
See Lobeck PAryn. p. 447 sq. 

kdnpo] Of martyrdom; see the 
note Trall. 12. 

nArenOnv] After S. Paul's manner of 
speaking, 2 Cor. iv. I kaàs nAer6n- 
pev, oUk éykakoüpev, I Tim. i. 13, 16 
GANG HAr|EnOnv...dAAA dia roro HrEenOnv : 
comp. Rom. xi. 30,31. So too r Pet. 
ii. Io. See also Rom. inscr. (note). 
For édecioda ev comp. Smyrn. inscr. 

émurúxo] The construction is tva 
émirÜxo TOU kNjpov ev à HrenOny, ‘that 
I may secure, make good, the lot, 
in which (i.e. in the way of obtain- 
ing which) God’s mercy placed me’: 
comp. Trall. 12 ro) KAnpov ovmep 
čyketpat [MS ov mepíkeuiat] €mirvxeiv, 
Rom. Y eis rò Tov KÀAQpóv pov dveumo- 
Sictas drodaBeiv. So too Mart. Polyc. 
6 roy iàtov KÀñpor dmapríiag. 

I. mpoopvyearv| This can hardly 
be connected with 7AenOnv (as Zahn 
proposes Z. v. A. p. 575), seeing that 
émw)xo intervenes. Nor is there 
any objection to connecting it with 
iva...€murdxw. The participle here 
signifies not ‘by taking refuge,’ but 
‘inasmuch as I took refuge) In 
other words it is not necessarily part 
of the contingency implied in iva. 

às gapki k.r.A.] i.e. because it gives 
the earthly life, records the actual 
works of Christ, as the Logos zucar- 
nate; comp. Š 9 é£aíperov 0é re &xek 
TO evayyéAiov, THY  mapovoíav Tov 
Kvpíov juv “Incod Xpiorov, ró Talos 
avrov, k..X. The metaphor is eucha- 
ristic. Somewhat similarly Origen 
in Lev. Hom. vii. $ 5 (Il. p. 225) 
interprets the words of John vi. 
53 Sq, àv uy) fygre THY aápka x.r.^., 


* carnibus et sanguine verbi sui...po-. 


tat et reficit omne hominum genus’ ; 
and so too Euseb. EccL Theol, iii. 


I2 dore aùrà elvai rà prjpara kal Tovs 
Adyous avrov tiv cápka kal TÓ aipa 
x.r.A., Anon, Brev. in Psalm. cxlvii 
(Hieron. Of. VII. p. 530 Appx) * Ego 
corpus Jesu evangelium puto, sanctas 
scripturas puto, doctrinam ejus; et 
quando dicit Quz non comederit car- 
nem meam etc.’ These passages are 
quoted by Ussher. See also the 
notes on Trall. 8, Rom. 7, for similar 
eucharistic metaphors. There is 
probably an indirect allusion to 
Docetism here. 

Tots amocroAots k.r.A.] The Apostles 
stand in the same relation to the 
Church at large, in which its own 
presbytery does to each individual 
church. So conversely 77a/7. 2 
Urotaccer Oa kal TS mpeoBurep(o, ws 
Tots amocroAas “Inco Xpicrod (comp. 
Smyrn. 8). See the notes on Magn. 
6115 Im y 

The expression obviously points 
to some authoritative writings of 
the New Testament. The ‘Apostles,’ 
like the ‘Prophets,’ must have been 
represented in some permanent form 
to which appeal could be made. So 
far the bearing of the passage seems 
to be clear. But it is not so obvious 
whether Ignatius refers to two classes 
of writings included in our New 
Testament, ro ejayyéov the Gospel 
or Gospels, and of amécrodan the 
Apostolic Epistles (perhaps includ- 
ing the Acts), or to one only, oí dzó- 
arokot as expositors of the evayyéduor, 
in which latter case it would com- 
prise the Gospels as well as the 
Epistles. The former view is taken 
by Ussher, Pearson, and Leclerc, and 
more recently by Westcott Zz£ro- 
duction to the Gospels p. 416, and 
Hilgenfeld Einleitung in das N.T. 
p. 72; while Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 431 
sq) and others interpret evayyéAvoy 


v] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


261 


> , e , 
ATMOTTONOLS ws mpeo BuTEpio €kkAncías. Kal TOUS mTpo- 


2 mpecBvreplo] GLg; ministris (diaconis) A. 


in the latter way, not of the book, but 
of the teaching. The parallel pas- 
sages are Š 9 below oí yàp dyamnrol 
mpopirar karýyyeav els aùróv, rò Oe 
evayyeduov drápriopá eorw apOapcias, 
Smyrn. $.00s o)k ereway ai mpodn- 
Teiat ovde ó vouos Moaéos, dAX? ovdé 
Bexpe viv TÓ evayyéduov kK.r.À., zb. 7 
mpocéxew Që rois mpodrrais, éÉadgpé- 
Tos O€ TH cVayyeMo, év @ Tò mabos 
"piv Sedprora «.7.d. These passages 
point to the latter view, which re- 
gards the Apostles as the expositors 
of the Gospel. They cannot how- 
ever be considered decisive in them- 
selves, since ‘the Gospel’ might here 
be broken up into ‘the Gospel’ and 
‘the Apostles,’ just as ‘the Prophets’ 
_are broken up in Smyrn. 5 into 
‘the Prophets’ and ‘the Law of 
Moses.’ But the use of evayyédvoy 
in the context here (eis rò evayyéAuov 
karnyyedkévat and ouvnpiOunuevor èv 
TO evayyedio) is a more powerful 
argument, and seems to show that 
the idea of written documents is not 
intended in the word evayyéduov it- 
self, but only involved in the subse- 
quent mention of the ‘ Apostles.’ 
In this case the description of the 
Old and New Testaments as ‘the 
Prophets’ and ‘the Apostles’ re- 
spectively may be compared with 
Justin’s statement Aol. i. 67 (p. 
98 D) rà aropynpovevpata Tov droaTó- 
ov 0 rà cvyypáppara ràv mpoQruróv 
dvaywoakerat or the language in the 
so-called Second Epistle of Clement 
Š 14 rà BÀ) (a kai of dméarodor, or the 
classification of the Muratorian 
Canon (Tregelles, p. 58) ‘neque inter 
prophetas completum numero neque 
inter apostolos) Towards and after 
the close of the second century the 
separation of the ‘Gospels’ from the 
‘Apostles’ becomes common, e.g. 


Iren. i. 3. 6 ràv eVayyeAkóv kal r@y 
dzocToAkáv, Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 
3 (p. 836) Tó re eJayyOuov 8 re dró- 
arodos, Tertull. Ze Praescr. 36 * evan- 
gelicis et apostolicis literis? and 
elsewhere; see Reuss Gesch. der 
heil. Schr. N. T. § 300. There is 
indeed nothing to prevent the same 
author from using both modes of 
speaking in different places ; comp. 
e.g. Clem. Alex. Stvom. iii. 10 (p. 
543) vouos re ouod kal mpodjra, aiv 
kal TQ evayyehio èv òvóparı Xpıoroû 


` > , , - . . 
eis pav GuvayoyTa, yvoouv, with zů. 


V. 5 (p. 664) Troù evayyediov kal rév 
dzrooTóÀey ópolos rois mpopyras &ract, 
vi. II (p. 784) cuppaviay tiv éxkdn- 
ciagTukv vóuov Kal mpoQráv ópoð kal 
amogTóAov civ kal TH eVayyeMo. But 
we should certainly not expect it in 
the same passage, and therefore 
there is no ground for interpreting 
the language here in a way which 
would perhaps (we cannot say, cer- 
tainly) be an anachronism in the age 
of Ignatius, Lessing attempted to 
handle Ignatian criticism here and 
burnt his fingers (Sdmmtl. Schrift. 
SCIEN EDD ETO/ 5107 E297 eda Malts 
zahn; passages referred to by Zahn 
I. v. A. pp. 431 sq, 575). He stated 
that there was no trace of a collection 
of N. T. writings in the fathers of 
the first two centuries, and being 
confronted with this passage de- 
clared it to be corrupt. His emen- 
dation is an exhibition of reckless 
audacity, all the more instructive as 
coming from a great man; mpoodv- 
yov TQ éÉmwkóro os capki Ingo? 
Xpiorov kal rois mpeafvrépow ekkàn- 
cias às dmoorONots: kai Tovs StaKovous 
dé dyamó, às mpopyras Xpwrróv karay- 
yshavras Kal ToU avrov mveüparos 
peragXóvras ov kai of dz óoToÀot. 


2. xal rovs mpopjras dé k.r.À.] 


262 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


, \ , ^ M ` \ , \ 5 ` > , 
(nas dé dyarwpev, dia TO Kal aVTOUS Els TO Evayyê- 


, ` > DEN 2 , A DEN. 
NOV KATHYYEAKEVAL KAL ELS avTOV éAgri(ew Kal avTOV 


5 RS / f: 9 . , 
dvapéveiw’ &y w Kal miGTeUVc'avres éowÜrnaav év EvoTHTt 


^ ^ 5 > è \ 5 , 
"Incot Xpiotov, övres afiayarntoi Kal a£ioÜavpao ot 


r éyarQuev] GL; diligamus L; dyamQ g; diligo A. Perhaps it was treated 


as two words dyad uév: see the lower note. 


5 kal ouvnprOunuévoc] 


GL; om. g. A translates the passage guos Zestificatus est dominus noster Jesus 


For what reason are the prophets 
thus suddenly introduced? The mo- 
tive is clearly apologetic; but what is 
the accusation or the antagonism 
against which the words are di- 
rected? Is it aimed at Judaizers 
who overrated the Old Testament 
in comparison with the Gospel? 
or at Anti-judaic Gnostics or Mar- 
cionites who depreciated or even re- 
jected it? In the former case the 
force of the words will be, *We do 
not disparage the prophets any more 
than yourselves ; only we maintain 
the superiority of the Gospel; the 
prophets themselves look forward 
and bear witness to the Gospel.’ 
And this sense is required by the 
context, eav 8é ris iovOaicuóv épun- 
veu K.T.À., i.e. ‘but if any one, while 
upholding the Prophets (the Old 
Testament) so interprets them as 
to teach Judaism, etc) It is more- 
over supported by the very close 
parallel in $$ o, Io, where Ignatius 
represents his Judaizing opponents 
as alleging against him the ar- 
chives (i.e. the records of the Old 
'Testament) while he himself con- 
cedes the greatness of the Mosaic 
priesthood (kaXoi kal oi iepeîs), but 
maintains the superiority of the 
great High-priest of the new cove- 
nant (kpeiao ov dé ó dpywepeis), declar- 
ing that all the saints under the 
old dispensation entered through 
Him into the presence of God, and 
that the prophets heralded the Gos- 


pel See especialy the note on 
Š 9 kaXol xal x.T.À. 

I. dyamópev] Not an imperative, 
‘let us love,’ as the Latin Version 
‘diligamus,’ but an indicative, ‘we 
love.” It may be a question how- 
ever, whether we should not read 
dyaré pev, to which the antithetical 
clause would be éà» 8é ris iovdaicpov 
k.T.\.; comp. Trall. 4 dyar pev yap 
TÓ maleiv k.r.À. 

eis TO evayyéAtov k.r.X.] For the 
construction and sentiment alike 
comp. Š 9 of dyarnrot mpopyrat kariy- 
yetdav eis adrov, Barnab. 5 oí rpopirat, 
dr avrov éxovres THv.xapw, eis adrov 
erpopyrevoav. For the sentiment 
see also the notes on Magn. 8, 9; 
for the construction comp. Aéyew eis; 
Acts ii. 25, Ephes. v. 32, and see 
Winer $ xlix. p. 495. 

3. èv ó kal k.r.A.] ‘tn whom also 
(i.e. when He actually appeared to 
them) ZA&ey believed and so were 
saved’; comp. § 9 below. On the 
salvation of the prophets through 
Christ, as involving the descent into 
Hades, see the note on Magn. 9. 

ev évotntt] ‘in an unity which 
centres in Jesus Christ, i.e. they 
were incorporated in one and the 
same body with the faithful members 
of the Church; comp. Š 9 mávra 
rara els évórnra Əeo0. 

4. d&vaydrnro] ‘ worthy of this 
Jove, which we accord to them,’ a 
reference to kai roùs podras de 
dyaropev. On the compounds of 


on 


v] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 26 


4 
2 


e7 e ues: ^ ^ 

aytot, Uo “Inco Xpiwroü Meuaprvpnuévo: kal Svv- 
if , A 5 te PN ^ 2 

pOunpévor èv ro evayyeAlw THs Kos ¿A718os. 


Vi. 


"Cav Oé tis iovdaiopor Eounveun Upiv, un 


5 , > ^ y [4 
GKOVETE avTOV. apelvoy yap STW Tapa av6pos TrEpL~ 


christus quod fideles computantur (numerantur) in evangelio, thus clearly recognising 


our npid unuévor. 
O] LA; qui G; al. g. 


afios in Ignatius see the note on 
Ephes. 4 a&vovépacrov. 

5. dyoj Connected by previous 
editors with the preceding words, 
but it seems to go better with those 
following. 

cvrppióuuévo] i.e. ‘included a- 
mong those who participate in the 
privileges of the Gospel.’ It is 
wrongly explained by Smith *27o- 
Phetae cum apostolis zz evangelio 
connumerati, utpote de quibus utris- 
que insigne testimonium illic reliquit 
Christus. There is no reference 
to the written record in evayyehio 
here. 

6. ths kowüs éXmiBos] ‘our com- 
mon hope, ie. Christ, as appears 
from $ 11 below èv Xpiorĝ 'Inooó, vj 
kowi eAmidt uà»; and so elsewhere 
in Ignatius; see the notes on Ephes. 
I, Magn. 11. Zahn (Z. v. A. pp. 430, 
435) suggests reading ris kawñs €Ami- 
9os, comparing Magn. 9 eis kauwórrra 
eA7(Šos; but I cannot think this an 
improvement. Not to mention that 
7) kow) éXrís occurs more than once 
elsewhere in Ignatius, the epithet 
here is especially appropriate, as 
enforcing the main idea of the pas- 
sage (comp. ev évórgr 'Igao0 Xpiorod 
and evvgpiüuguévot) that all alike, 
. whether they lived before or after 
the coming of Christ, are united in a 
common Saviour. 

VL ‘But if anyone so interprets 
them as to find Judaism in them, 
listen not to him. It is better to 


7 9€| GL; ef A; om. [g]. 


tis] GA[g]; om. L. 


hear the circumcised teaching Chris- 
tianity than the uncircumcised teach- 
ing Judaism. But in either case, 
if they speak not of Jesus Christ, 
they are no better than tombstones 
inscribed with men’s names. Flee 
therefore from the snares and devices 
of the Evil One, lest your love wax 
feeble: and meet together all of you 
in concord. I thank God that my 
conscience acquits me of oppressing 
any one, while I was among you. 
And I pray that my words then 
spoken may not rise up in judgment 
against you.’ 

7. tovdaionoy] See the note on 
Magn. 8. 

épumveun] ‘propound’; as Celsus 
in Orig. c. Ces. iii. 58 (1. p. 485) oddé 
Üvvrjcovra. rois mac éppgvevew dya- 
óv (quoted by Pearson), where as 
here the accusative describes not the 
text interpreted but the result attain- 
ed by interpretation. The reference 
here is doubtless to the interpreta- 
tion put upon the language of the 
prophets who have been mentioned 
in the last sentence, so as to support 
Judaizing practices, just as below 
($ 8) Ignatius represents his oppo- 
nents as appealing to the dpyeta 
against him. 

8. duewov ydp x.rA] Who is 
meant by the dxpóBvoros in this 
sentence? Is he to be identified 
with the rs in the preceding clause, 
so that dkovew mapa dxpoBvorov in 
the latter place corresponds to dkov- 


264 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


\ , » \ > 
TOMY EXOVTOS ypıoTiavıouov dkovew N Tapa dkpo- 
, 5 . / > ` Š 5 , \ Uu A 
Búortov iovðaïsuov.  éav ðe aupotepor mepi Inoov 
a ^ € ^ 2 5 Ri ` 7 
XpioToU um Nardo, OVTOL éuoi TTHAAL erw kat Taqot 
^ e , > , 
vexpav, ep ois yéeyparTat uovov ovopata avOpwrwr. 
9 ^ / 
Qevyere ovv Tas kakoTexvías kai évéópas TOU &pxovros 5 


^ ^ , if / ^ , 5 ^ 
TOU aiwvos rovTOv, umore OALBEVTES TH 'yvopu AVTOV 


7 éacbevioere] g; eéacOevjoerar G; infirmemini LA. 
8 ebxapwrQ 00] GL; evxapior (om. dé) A [g*] (but v. 1. evxXapLoTws). 
11 év pwuxp@] GL; 7 év mrp g; dub. A (where 


et L. 
9 uou] GLA; om. [g]. 


7... may perhaps be represented by vel etiam). 


ere avrod in the former? In this case 
the teachers would be represented, 
not as Jewish Christians, but as 
Gentile Christians with strong Ju- 
daic tendencies. This seems the 
most natural interpretation; nor 
can I with Zahn (1. v. A. 368 
sq) see any serious objection to it. 
These opponents of Ignatius indeed 
are represented as intimately ac- 
quainted with the Old Testament 
and taking their stand upon it (§ 8 
àv uù) èv rois dpxelow k.T.À., comp. 
Smyrn. 5 obs o)k Émewav ai mpodm- 
Teiar ovde 0 vópos Mocéos); but the 
effective proselytizing of Jews and 
Judaic Christians among persons of 
Gentile origin is a patent fact, and 
there is no reason why proselytes so 
made should not have taken up the 
position of proselytizers themselves 
in Philadelphia. On the other hand 
it is possible, though I think not 
probable, that the dxpdBvoros is the 
recipient, not the promulgator, of the 
false interpretation. Under any cir- 
cumstances the fovdaicpos, i.e. Jewish 
manner of living, which was enforced, 
would include the observance of 
sabbaths (comp. Magn. 9), rigorous 
restrictions respecting meats and 
drinks, etc., and in short such prac- 
tices as are condemned in Col. ii. 16, 
21, but not circumcision, as the word 


ara] GAg; sed 


0€] GL* (but a v. 1. omits 


åkpoßúsrov shows. Though circum- 
cision was insisted upon by the 
earliest Judaizers (see Gal. v. 2 sq, 
vi. 12 sq), this requirement was soon 
dropped as impracticable. In the 
Clementine Homilies for instance, 
notwithstanding their strong Judaic 
tendencies, nothing is said about it. 
Thus the heresy combated by Ig- 
natius was only an iovOaicuós amo 
pépovs, as Epiphanius describes the 
Judaism of Cerinthus (Haer. xxviii. 1). 

I. xpiotiavicpov| See the note on 
Magn. 10. 

dkpogócrov] Though the word 
dxpoBvoria occurs many times in 
S. Paul (see also Acts xi. 3), axpo- 
Bvoros is not once found in the N. T. 
Nor does it occur in the LXX, though 
found in other of the Hexaplaric 
Versions, Exod. vi. 12, Josh. v. 7. 

2. dpddrepor| ie. whether zepuro- 
pay €xev or dkpófvaros. 

mept Irod Xpiorod kx.r.A.] See the 
note on Epkes. 6. 

3. oral k.r.A.] Comp. Matt. 
xxiii, 27 mapopoid(ere ráQois kekovia- 
pévois. So old men are styled réufo:, 
Eur. Med. 1209, Heracl. 168, Arist. 
Lys. 372; comp. Lucian Dial. Mort. 
vi. 2 éuyrvxóv twa rádov; and copós, 
e.g. Athen. xiii. p. 580. So too the 
Latin ‘sepulcrum,’ Plaut, Pseud. i. 4. 
19. The closest parallel however 


IO 


vı] 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


265 


3 , , ^ , » \ > 
€Eacbevnoete èv Ty ayarn: &XXa 7rávres émi TO avrà 


(veo Üe £v dueol 001 
y MepiaTo Kapdia. 
[24 / / 5 ^ 
Mou, OTL EvouvEldnTos ciu ¿y piv, 
£ 3} / D ^ 
Xiao Qa, ovre Aañoa ovTE pavepws, 


év ukp® H èv peyadw. 


> ^ \ ^ ^ 
evyapioTw ðe To Oeo 
4 4 

M » 
KaL OUK EXEL TIS kav- 


4 > , , 
oTi €Bapnoa wa 


\ ^ / < 
kat maou OÉ, év ois ENANTA, 


»! [74 \ 5 , > ^ 
€vxopuat tVva UN eus Map'rrvptov QUTO KTÝTWVTAL. 


dé); om. gA (but A omits kal also). 


12 uaprópwr] G; papruplay g. 


kThow Ta] g; possideant L; xrlowyra G 3 fat iis A. So in Trall. 8 G has åva- 


Krícac0e for dvaxricacde. 


is in Laberius (Macrob. Sat. ii. 7) 


*sepulcri similis nil nisi nomen re- 
tineo, quoted by Voss; comp. also 
Lucian 77. 5 # mov kai 00@ Badifev 
€vrÜxo Tu airav, domep rwà ornAnv 
madatov vexpod ómríav vmó rod xpóvov 
dvarerpaypémy mapépxoyra, pnd dva- 
yrovres. So Jerome (Of. VI. p. 105), 
referred to by Ussher, explains cr$- 
Aa in the LXX, Hos. x. r, of the 
heretics, because ‘terrae suae bona 
verterunt in titulos mortuorum, quia 
omnis doctrina eorum non ad vi- 
ventes refertur, sed ad mortuos etc.’ 
The Pythagoreans used to erect 
*cenotaphs' (Orig. c. Ce/s. ii. 12, iii. 
51) to those who were untrue to the 
principles and practice of their 
School; comp. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
v. 9 (p. 680) arýjànv em avrà yevéata 
oia vexpó, lambl Vit. Pythag. 17 
armAny 0f twa TO rowrQ kal uvypeîov 
-..X@oavtes, a practice to which Zahn 
directs attention in his note. The 
false teachers in Ignatius however 
are compared not to the dead, but 
to the sepulchres themselves. 

5. debyere xr.A.] See Polyc. 5 
Tas kakorexvías pede (with the note). 

Tov dpxovros k.r...] See the note 
on Ephes. 17. 

6. OMfévres rkr] ‘worn out, 
wearied, dy his suggestions, 

7. eac0evnoere] ‘grow weak’; 
comp. Matt. xxiv. 12 yuynoera ñ 
dyamn tov moAAóv, Apoc. ii 4 mr 


dyámmr cov rjv mporqv dfkes. 

emi rò ajrÓ kr.A.] ‘meet together; 
ie. for public worship and the eu- 
charist; comp. 4 omovddcare pid ev- 
xapwTía xp5joOa. For èv apepior@ 
xapdia comp. Trall. 13. 

9. evovveidnros] See Magn. 4 
with the note. 

IO. drt €Bdpnoa x.r.À.] 2 Cor. xi. 9 
ev mavrl dfapij épavrüv úpîv eTnpnoa, 
Xii 16 éyà o) KareBdpynoa úpâs (v. l. 
karevdpxnoa), 1 Thess. ii. 9 mpós ró uù 
emBapjoai twa Our (comp. 2 Thess. 
iii. 8). See also the protest of Samuel, 
2 Sam. xii. 3 ríva KareŠuydoreuca UO 
Ü Tiva é£emíaca úpôv; Hefele sup- 
poses that Ignatius refers to the 
yoke of Jewish ordinances: but he 
was extremely unlikely to be charged 
with imposing such a burden. The 
parallel of S. Paul’s language would 
rather suggest that he is speaking of 
using his position and authority ty- 
rannically, whether (as in S. Paul’s 
case) to burden them with his 
maintenance, or (as the following 
words suggest) to overawe and crush 
any free expression of opinion. This 
apology obviously implies that he had 
heard of such accusations brought 
against him at Philadelphia. The 
report was probably conveyed to him 
by Philo and Agathopus (Š 11). See 
Zahn J. v. A. p. 266 sq. 

II. kai mace 0é k.r.A] ‘yea, and 
Jor all those among whom I spoke, I 


266 
VIL. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vi 


> , 
Ci yap kal kata sapka pé Tueç nÜeNAnaav 


^ M Ñ ^ ^ ` ^ ot ° 
TAavnoa, dXXa TO 7rveüua oU TWAAVaTAaL, ATO Ocot ov 


\ , » A € + A \ 
OÍlAEN yap mó6ew épyerat KAl TOY Ynàrei KAL TQ 


I kal] GLA; om. g. 
mvedua] GLA; add. mov [g]. 
of g add ydp); add. zgttur Sj. 
see the lower note. 
ada Oco g; om. G. 


Twes HOEAnoav] GL; 20éNmcdy rues g. 


276 
4 éxpavyaca] GLAg* (but some texts 


nera£ó dv] GLS,A ; uera£? dy g* (vulg.): 
5 Oeo pwr] LS,A ; paraphrased ov« éuds ó Nóyos 
6 Oukóvos] G; rots Ouakóvots g. 


oi ó 


K.TA.] of ðè mrécavrés pe ds Tpoeóra Tov pepioudy Twwv Méyew Taira: máp- 
Tus 6€ wor K.T.\. G; quidam autem suspicati (add. sunt Ly) me ut praesctentem 
divisionem quorundam dicere haec ; testis autem mihi etc L; et sunt quidam qui 
cogitaverunt de me quod tanquam cognoverim divisiones quorundam haec dixerim ; 


pray that they may not find my 
words a testimony against them’; 
comp. Trall. 12 (with the note). For 
the dative with evyeoOa: see the re- 
ferences in Rost u. Palm s. v. 

VII. ‘Though certain persons 
attempted to deceive me in the flesh, 
yet the Spirit is not deceived. It 
knows its own movements, and it 
penetrates into the most secret re- 
cesses. When I was among you, I 
told you plainly, speaking with the 
voice of God, to give heed to your 
bishop and presbyters and deacons. 
Some men suspect that I said this, 
knowing the dissensions which im- 
pended. But indeed I did not learn 
it of flesh and blood; the Spirit 
cried aloud, saying, “Do nothing 
without the bishop; defile not your 
bodies which are the temples of 
God; cherish unity; avoid dissen- 
sions; be imitators of Jesus Christ, 
as He was of His Father.”’ 

I. 70Ancav x.t.d.] ‘desired to 
lead me astray, i.e. ‘to impose upon 
me by their deceit’; comp. Magn. 3 
oUx OTL TOY émíckomov roUrov TOv BAE- 
mopevov Tavā Tis kA. Markland’s 
interpretation of mAavíjsa: ‘decepto- 
rem esse’ (i.e. ‘would make me out 
a deceiver is refuted by the fol- 
lowing ov mAavara, and indeed by 
the whole context. It is vain to 


speculate on the circumstance to 
which Ignatius alludes. The ex- 
pression xara cápka points to some 
deceit practised upon him (and per- 
haps successfully) in the common 
affairs of life; comp. esp. Ephes. 8 
a 0€ kai kara sapka mpáccere, Rom. 9 
th 00Q TH Kata capka. In this pro- 
vince they might deceive him, but 
in the sphere of the Spirit no de- 
ception was possible. The obscurity 
of the allusion is a strong testimony 
to the genuineness of the letter. 

2. TO mve)pa] i.e. ‘the Spirit 
which is working in me.’ 

3. oldey yàp x.r.A] John iii. 8 
oúk oldas mróÜev &pxera kai mod Urráyeu, 
said of the wind, as the symbol of 
the Spirit. The coincidence is quite 
too strong to be accidental Nor 
can there be any reasonable doubt 
that the passage in the Gospel is 
prior to the passage in Ignatius. 
The application in the Gospel is 
natural. The application in Ignatius . 
is strained and secondary; nor is 
his language at all explicable, except 
as an adaptation of a familiar pas- 
sage. ‘Though no one else can 
trace the movements of the Spirit, 
Ignatius would say, ‘yet the Spirit 
knows full well its own movements.’ 

kal rà kpurrtà k.t.A.] Comp. 1 Cor. 
ii. IO TÒ yap mveĝpa mrávra épavvà, xiv, 


vir] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 267 


WAWA / > , \ af 5 
KpU7T TG eheyxel.  éxpavyaca uera£v dv, éNaXovv uE- 


if ^ ^ s far 281 , , 
5'yaAn pwn, Oeo? porn Te EMTLOKOTW TPOTEXETE Kal 


Te TpeaÓvTepio kal Siakdvos. of & vmomrevoavrés 
testatur autem nobis etc S,; et sunt quidam qui cogitaverunt de me quomodo cognovi 
ego divisiones quorundam et dixi hoc; testatur mihi etc A; el 6¢ dromreveré me òs 
mpoua0óvra TÒv epia bv Twty héyew TAÙTA, udprus pot K.T.À. g* (but 1 has Az vero 
despexerunt me etc, thus showing that the earlier reading of g more closely followed G). 
It seems clear that the original of all these was oi 0' ùrorreúsavrés Me às Tpoeldbra 
Tov pep. Tw. Ady. Tara, uáprvs 06 uot K.T.r. G has preserved this with the corruption 
of mrécayres for vrorrevoayres; L has translated it literally (for the swat of L, is ob- 
viously a later addition) ;. S; (followed by A) has set the syntax straight; and g (as 
it now stands) has paraphrased the sentence, mending the grammar at the same 


time. See the lower note. 


25 rà kpvrrà Ths Kapdias avrod pavepa 
yivera, Ephes. v. 12, 13 paddoy 8€ 
Kai éAéyyere" rà yàp kpudrj ywópeva 
KTA. 

4. ekpaúyaca] For the expres- 
sion see Joh. xi 43 avy peyddAn 
expavyacev: comp. Tatian Oraz. 17 
Kekpayóros domep dd rod peredpov 
Karakovcaré pov, and see the note on 
Ephes. 19 nvorrjpia kpavyrjjs. Bunsen 
(Len. p. 73) translates expavyaca ‘Ich 
schrieb einen Brief,’ and suggests 
that the writer alludes to passages 
in the letter to Polycarp (I suppose 
to § 4,6). By such free renderings 
anything may be made of anything. 
Moreover the letter to Polycarp 
does not profess to be written from 
Philadelphia, but from Troas. 

peragd dv] ‘when I was among 
you. It is evident from the whole 
context that Ignatius had himself 
visited Philadelphia. He must there- 
fore have taken the northern road 
through Sardis to Smyrna, instead 
of the southern which would have 
led him to Ephesus on his way 
thither (see above, p. 241). Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 268) adopts the reading 
pera&v oy éAdAow, ‘in the midst of 
my discourse,’ which is found in the 
common text of the Long Recension, 


and is rendered (though incorrectly) 
in the Latin Version of the same, 
‘inter eos quibus loquebar) The 
Greek MSS however of the Long 
Recension do not altogether support 
this reading; while in the Greek Ms 
of the uninterpolated text, and in all 
the Versions of it (Syrian, Armenian, 
Latin), it is consistently read uera£) 
æv, éedddouv. The change of tense 
€kpav'yaga, éAdAov», is no serious ob- 
jection to this latter reading, which 
is otherwise much more natural. 

5. Oeo Qos] The words are 
omitted in the Greek Ms by homceo- 
teleuton, as in a parallel instance 
Zrall.7. The paraphrase of the in- 
terpolator, oúk épós «.r.A. (see the 
critical note), gives the right sense. 
For a similar claim where the writer 
declares himself to be speaking with 
the voice of God, see Clem. Rom. 59 
(with the note). 

T6 émwkómo x.r..] Comp. Polyc. 6 
TO  €mickÓmq  mpocéxere...dvridyvxov 
yÒ TAY )moraccopévev TO Émwkómo, 
mrpeoBvrépois, Ó.akóvois. 

6. oi © vmomreicavres k.r.À.] ‘but 
these persons suspecting me? There 
is no authority for any earlier form 
of the text than this ; see the critical 
note. We must therefore suppose, 


268 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vu 


pa wS poeta: TOV jepi uov eI Aévyew TAUTA. 
Bae € uor év © edet, STL dro c'apkós avOpwrivys 
oUk éyvwv: TO O€ sveüpa ékrpva'a ev, Meyor Tade” 


X«pis TOU ÈTLOKOTOU MNOEV TOLELTE® TAV capka UMOV 


- 5 A Z ^ é \ 
ws vaov OcoU TNPELTE’ THY EVWOLY a-yaTT€' TOUS MEPL- 5 


\ / > ^ a e \ 
o ous Qevyyere: punta vyiverOe 'InaoU Xpwrov, ws kat 
5 ^ \ ^ 
aUTOS TOU 7raTQOS aUTOU. 
r ds mpoa0óra] GL; ds mpouabdvra g. Zahn supposes that the reading of 


S,A (see the last note) was deep eiüóra, and adopts this reading. But the omis- 
sion of the preposition in rendering mpocpwuérg Ephes. inscr. (ZA), and mpoopv 


Trail. 8 (A), renders the inference somewhat doubtful. And, even if it were cer- 
tain, this reading does not seem so well supported, or so good in itself, as ùs mpo- 
eLO0Ta. 2 6€] GLS,; om. [A] [g] [Antioch 14] [Dam-Rup 5]: see the last 


note. pod] GL[A]g Antioch ; pov Dam-Rup ; zobis qo for D) S év $] 


GLS,A Antioch Dam-Rup; 6 ðv g: see the note on Magn. 5. 


either that some word such as g- 
riévro has fallen out, or that the 
sentence is an anacoluthon. This 
latter seems the more probable hy- 
pothesis. Forsimilar instances, where 
in the hurry of dictating under pres- 
sure of circumstances sentences are 
left unfinished, see the notes, Zes. 
I 'AmoBefápevos k.r.A. Otherwise we 
might adopt Zahn’s conjecture, ei dé 
imodmrevody Tivés pe k.T.A., thus making 
páprvs 0é por the apodosis.. 

2. èv à Oc0eua«] See § 5 with the 
note. 

amo gapkós k.r...] Matt. xvi. 17 
oapé kai aia oUk dzekdXviyev k.r.À. 

3. Aéyov kx.r...] See Rom. 7 éro- 
Óév pot Aéyov, Aeüpo x.r.A. (with the 
note) If the masculine Aéyev be 
correct here, it may be compared 
with ékeivos in Joh. xvi. 13, 14; but 
no dependence can be placed on the 
reading in such a case. There is the 
same v. l. also in Rom. 7. The pas- 
sage has been misunderstood to mean 
that *an apocryphal writing is quoted 
as Holy Scripture’ (Supernatural 
Religion I. p. 273, ed. 2: see West- 


amd capkós 


cott Canon p. 60, ed. 4). Ignatius 
is plainly speaking throughout this 
passage of a spiritual revelation to 
himself. 

4. Xopis x.r...]] See the note on 
Magn. 7. 

Tj» cápka k.r...] Comp. [Clem. 
Rom.] ii. 9 Set otv ras os vaóv Oeo 
$vAdccew thy capka, with the note. 
See also the notes on Efhes. 9, 15. 

5. €voow] Comp. Polyc. 1 tis 
évdgeos $póvr(e, and see the note 
on Magn. 1. 

Tovs pepiopoùs $evyere] Comp. Š 2 
above (with the note), and Smyrn. 8. 

6. pra k.r.M.] ie. of His ¿r 
eixeca; comp. Ephes. 10, and see the 
note on ppnta óvres Oeod Ephes. 1. 

VIII. *Itherefore did my best to 
promote union. Where dissension 
is, there God has no dwelling-place. 
Now the Lord will forgive all who 
repent and return to the unity of 
God and to fellowship with the 
bishop. I have faith in the grace 
of Christ, who will shake off your 
chains; but I exhort you to do 
nothing in a sectarian spirit. I heard 


Cs 9—ENPT 7 


D———— — — a 


Io 


virt] 


VIII. 


> e 

EIS EVWOLY KATNPTLOMEVOS. 
, , ` > - 
opyn, Oeos ov KaTouxel. 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


269 


'€ ` ` > \ 18 5 / € » 
YW MEV ovv TO LOLOV ETOLOUV, WS avOpw7ros 


KY N g 
où Oé pepiouds éotw Kal 


Taow ovv ueravooUcw adie 


€ Ko »>\ 7 > € ^ ^ \ j^ 
(0) vplos, €av METAVOHOWOLY ets EVOTHTAa Ocov Kal OUVE- 


piov TOU ÉvGKOTOV. 


morTevw TH ydoirt  In&oU. Xou- 
i xdprrt " IngoU. Xpi 


^ A , 5 ^ , ^ 
C'TOU, Os Avoe ah Vudv ravra Oecuóv: mapakan € 


avOpwmrlvns] GL Antioch Dam-Rup; ad hominibus S,A ; dd ordparos ávÜpórrov g. 
3 €xjpvocev] G Antioch [Dam-Rup]; clamabat S,A; Jraedicavit L; éxjpvéé por g. 
Aéyov] Antioch; Xéyev Gg* (some Mss; but v. 1. Meyov) ; dicens L; et dicebat S,A; 


om. Dam-Rup: see the lower note. 
5 tnpetre] g Dam-Rup; 77pfjre G. 
Meravoovow] G; rois ueravooUcw g. 


dpiov] G; avveüpelav (or cvvedplar) g ; concilium L; coetus A. 
jy] GLA ; quay g*. 


GL; ôr g; quod is A. 
(but autem 1); om. A. 


` some persons saying Z will not be- 


lieve it, unless I find it in the 
charters. l said to them, ZZ zs so 
‘written. They answered, You are 
begging the question. But to me the 
charter, the inviolable charter, is 
Jesus Christ and His Cross, His 
Death and His Ascension, and faith 
through Him. In these I hope to be 
justified through your prayers.’ 

8. rò ov] ‘my own part’; as 
e.g. Isocr. Archid. 8 (p. 117) ei Set 
rovupov iõiov eimetv, Lucian de Merc. 
Cond. 9 as éywye tovpov (toy k.r.À., 
passages quoted in the lexicons. 

9. Karnpticpévos|] ‘settled? The 
Latin translator here, as elsewhere, 
has rendered it ‘perfectus, as if 
dmnpticpévos. On the meaning of kar- 
apri(ew ‘to settle, reconcile, pacify,’ 
see the note on Epkes. 2. 

II. els évórgra eov] Comp. Š 9 
below, Smyrn. 12, Polyc. 8, where the 
same expression occurs. See also 
the note on êv ópovoía Oco Magn. 6. 
The évórgs here is the result of the 
€évogis mentioned just before. For 
the abridged expression peravoeîv eis 
évóryra comp. .Sz1y*At. 5 peravonowow 


4 ToU] G Antioch; om. g Dam-Rup. 


6 xai] GLA[g]; om. Dam-Rup. IO 
II Kópws] GL*A ; ó 0663s g. owe- 
13 òs] 


òè] G; autem L; otv g 


eis TO máÜos, and see the note on 
Ephes. 1 Sedepevov ard Zvpías. 
cvvéOüpiov k.r.A.] ie. ‘the bishop 
with his council of presbyters as 
assessors.’ In Afost. Const. ii. 28 
the presbyters are styled ovpBovrdor 
TOU émickómov kal ths exkAnolas aTé- 
pavos’ ort yap ovvédpiov kai BovAr ris 
exkAnoias. See the notes on Magn. 
6, 13, Trall. 3. A civil avvéüpiov róv 
mpeoßvrépov at Philadelphia is men- 
tioned C. 7. G. 3417 (comp. 3422). 
I3. Avoew kr.X.] Is. lviii. 6 Ae 
mavra ovvdecpov dOwas, from which 
passage the interpolator has substi- 
tuted civdecpoy adicias for Oeopuóv 
here. The passage of Isaiah is 
quoted, Barnab. 3, Justin Apol. i. 37 
(p. 77), Dial. 15 (p. 233), Iren. iv. 17. 
3, Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 18 (p. 470), 
Apost. Const. ii. 53, viii, 5, and seems 
to have been a very favourite cita- 
tion in the early Church. In the 
original the ‘bonds of wickedness’ 
refer to the oppression of the weak, 
and apparently in a literal sense to 
the chains of slaves and of debtors. In 
the LXX however it may be a ques- 
tion whether oivderyov is not in- 


270 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vir 


A M 
úuâs, pndev kar éplÜciav mpdooeTe aXXa kara KXpLTTO- 


pabiav. 


> X3 , , 7 "Ea ` 2 
EMEL NKOVOA TLYWY AeyovTov OTL av un ev 


I mpáccere] g; facite A; mpáscew GL: see the lower note. xpurTo- 
ua6lav] G; xpwroua8elav g* (with a v. 1. -ua6(a»). There is no authority of any 
value for xpqyeroua0elav. ALI all render xpuro- not xpycro-. 2 ér& 


tended to mean ‘a conspiracy’ (comp. 
ver. 9 avvdecpov kai xetporoviay), as it 
is used in Jer. xi. 9 and elsewhere 
in the Lxx. In ost. Const. ii. 53 
e€axodovoer TH ToU Kupíov vou Ave 
mavra otvSecpoy ddikias’ em goi yap 
€£ovaíav 6 corp ebero ahıévaı ápap- 
tias k.r.À., 2b, vill. 5 Avew dé mávra 
ovvdecpov Kata THY é£ovaíav ny edwKas 
rois dzogTOÀows, it is understood of 
the remission of sins (comp. Matt. 
xvi 19, xvii. 18). There may or 
may not be an allusion to this pas- 
sage of Isaiah here. In any case 
it seems to refer to the power of evil 
generaly, as in the words of the 
collect ‘though we be tied and bound 
with the chain of our sins, yet let 
the pitifulness of Thy great mercy 
loose us.’ Hilgenfeld however refers 
it to the oppressive yoke of Judaism; 
Uhlhorn to the overbearingness of 
the heretical teachers. See also the 
note on Ephes. 19 ó0ev éAVero máca 
payela kai was Seopos KTA. 

I. kar épidevav] ‘in a sectarian 
spirit. From Phil ii 3 pydev xara 
epiÂerav pnd Kara Kevodokiayv: see the 
note on § 1, where the other member 
of S. Paul’s sentence appears. For 
the meaning of épidewa, ‘partisan- 
ship, *factiousness) see the note 
Galatians v. 20. 

mwpáccere] See the note on Trall. 
6. 

xprorouabiay| So xXpicropabns, Mo- 
dest. Encom. in B. Virg. 1 cow quXo- 
pabeis iov xpwrrouaÜeis (Patrol, 
Graec. LXXXVI. p. 3080, a reference 
given in E. A. Sophocles s.v.); comp. 
xpuavróvouos Rom. inscr, 


2. é rois ápyetow] ‘in the ar- 
chives? For apxeiov comp. Dion. 
Hal A. R. ii. 26 péxype rips eis rà 
dpxeia (v. l. dpyaia) rà Snpoowa &yypa- 
Qs, Jos. c. Ap. i. 20 êv rois apxeiors 
(v. l. dpxaious) róv dowikov, B. F. ii. 
17. 6 TO wip émi rà dpyxeia édepov, 
ddavicat omevdovtes rà cupBdodaa 
«.7-A., Apollon. in Euseb. ZZ. Z. v. 18 
TO ths 'Acías dpxeiov African. in 
Euseb. ZZ. E. i. 7 dvaypámrev eis róre 
èv rois dpxelos óvrov Tàv 'Efpaikav 
yevov, Euseb. H. Z. i 13 trav ému 
arov dmó TOY dpxeíov Hiv ava- 
AnPOecav. The word occurs in 
the following inscriptions found at 
Smyrna itself; C. 7. G: 3137, 3264, 
3266, 3281, 3282, 3286, 3295, 3318, 
3335, 3349, 3356, 3382, 3386, 3394, 
3400. It signifies originally ‘the 
government house,’ ‘the magistrates’ 
office” Hence it comes to mean 
‘the record-office’; and hence, like 
the English word ‘archives,’ it is 
used indifferently of the place where 
the documents are kept and the 
collection of documents themselves ; 
nor is, it always easy to separate 
the one meaning from the other. 
The word is naturalised in Chaldee 
(see Levy Lex. Chald. s. v. WS 98) 
and in Syriac (see Payne Smith 


Thes. Syr. D vi aie). The 
meaning here is as follows. The 
opponents of Ignatius refuse to defer 
to any modern writings, whether 
Gospels or Epistles, as a standard 
of truth; they will submit only to 
such documents as have been pre- 
served in the archives of the Jews, 
or in other words, only to the Old 


w. 


viri] 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


271 


^ > / e 5 ^ 5 
TOIS apxetois EVvow, €v TH EVayyEriw où TG TEVw* Kal 


nKovoa] G; guia audivi L; #xovca yap g; sed quoniam audivi A. 3 åp- 
xelos]g 5. scripturis antiquis (prioribus) A; ápxalos G; veteribus L, év 


TQ eVayyeMo] GL; rà evayyéhov Or ToU evayyédov ae 


A also seems to have 


read rò e/wyyéMov, for it translates sz in scripturis antiquis non laudatur (glori- 


ficatur) evangelium, non credimus ei. 


Testament Scriptures. Thus the 
apxeia and the edvayyéAvoy are op- 
posed as the Old Testament and 
the New, so that the antithesis is 
similar to that in [Clem. Rom.] ii. 14 
rà BiBXia ka of dmrócroÀoi. A wholly 
different interpretation however has 
not uncommonly been given to the 
passage, e.g. by Voss (apparently), 
Smith, and several later writers; rà 
dpxeia being explained as referring 
to the original autographs or au- 
thentic MSS of the Evangelical writ- 
ings, with which is contrasted rò 
evayyéAiov, the Gospel as written and 
preached in Ignatius’ time, In other 
words his antagonists are repre- 
sented as complaining that the Gos- 
pels had been tampered with; comp. 
Polyc. Phil. 7 ôs àv ue0o8e/g rà Aóyia 
Tov Kvupiov mpós ras idias émiÜvuías 
(quoted by Zahn Z v. A. p. 379), 
where however the words perhaps 
refer rather to misinterpretation than 
to corruption of our Lord’s sayings. 
But this restriction of evayyéduov is 
unnatural ; and altogether the inter- 
pretation is unsuited to the age 
and character of these Judaizing 
antagonists. Nor again is it easily 
reconcilable with yéypamra.. 

There can be no doubt, I think, 
that dpxeíous ought to be read here ; 
as by Voss, Cotelier, Smith, Rothe 
(Anfänge p. 339), and others. For (1) 
The argument requires that the same 
form should stand in all the three 
places ; and, if this be so, there can 
be no question which word should 
be preferred on external authority. 
For dpxeia alone is read in the 


second and third places, while even 
in the first the weight of authority 
is in favour of dpxeío:s rather than 
dpxaíow. (2) While rà dura dpxeta, 
‘the inviolable archives, is an in- 
telligible phrase, no very satisfactory 
meaning can be attached to rà accra 
dpxaia. (3) It is more probable that 
the more usual word dpyaío: should 
be substituted for the less usual 
dpxeíous than conversely, as indeed 
we find to have been done elsewhere. 
For the common substitution of dp- 
xaia for dpxeia see Wyttenbach on 
Plut. Mor. p. 218 C. On the other 
hand Credner (Beiträge 1. p. 15) 
reads dpxaíow, dpxaia, dpyaia, con- 
sistently, and so Hefele (in his later 
editions), Dressel, Hilgenfeld (4. V. 
p. 236), and others. 

Some of those who retain dpyaious 
take it as a masculine, ‘the ancient 
writers’ (comp. Matt. v. 21, 27, 33); 
and Markland even proposes at the 
second occurrence of the word to 
read apxaioí éotw "Inoots Xpurós, 
comparing the line quoted in Pliny 
Ef. iv. 27 ‘Unus Plinius est mihi 
friores!; but he does not say what 
he would do with the third passage 
rà dura dpxeia. The view of Bull 
(Works VI. p. 208, ed. Burton), that 
dpxaio. signifies ‘the old rabbis or 
doctors, has nothing to recommend 
it. 

3. €v rQ evayyedio xr..] The 
construction is, if I mistake not, 
‘Unless I find it (the point at issue) 
in the archives, I do not believe it 
(because it appears) zm the Gospel? 
The parallelism demands this. [This 


222 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vir 


- [74 J: 7 Ve 
Aéyovrós uov adtots Ste Féypartar, dmexpiOnoay pot 
^ ^ , 
Sr llpókevrai. epoi de doxeta orv “Inoous Xpıo Tos, 
>, B ^ \ ^ \ , TETE 
Ta &áÜwra dpxeia 6 a-Tavpos avToU kat o ÓavaTos kat h 


2 IIpóxevrou] GL, and so too [g*] (but with a v. l. mpoxplverar) 5 superfluum est 


A. ápxeta] Gg; principium L; scriptura prior A. 
3 Qura] Onkra G; inapproximabilia L; qui non 


inoots 6 xpiords g. 


construction I find is supported by 
Hilgenfeld Zeitschr. f. Wssensch. 
Theol. XVII. p. 116; but he reads 
dpxatow for dpxeíow.] On the other 
hand the passage seems to be al- 
most universally taken, ‘ Unless Z 
find it (i.e. the Gospel) zz the ar- 
chives (or in the ancients), I do not 
believe in the Gospel) with the very 
rare construction which occurs Mark 
i. I5 morevere ev TG evayyerio. A 
third interpretation is adopted by 
Zahn (J. v. A. p. 378 sq, and ad loc.) 
after Holsten (in Dressel, p. 180), 
‘Unless I find it in the archives, 
that is, zz the Gospel, I do not believe 
z; but the Greek order and pa- 
rallelism are strongly against this 
mode of breaking up the sentence ; 
not to say that the apposition of the 
dpxeia with the Gospel is in itself an 
anachronism. Zahn takes the view 
that these objectors appeal to the 
original documents of the New Tes- 
tament, as evidence for the true 
Gospel. 

I. Téypamra.] i.e. Sin the Old 
Testament Scriptures, as Ephes. 5, 
Magn. 12, according to the common 
use of yéyparraı in the N. T.; comp. 
Clem..Rom. 4, 14, 17, 29, 36, etc. 
Though it is not impossible that 
Ignatius might have applied yé- 
ypanta. to some Evangelical or 
Apostolical writings (as e.g. Barnab. 
4; comp. Polyc. Phil. 12), yet quite 
independently of the requirements 
of the context the word would refer 
much more naturally to the Old 
Testament. Ignatius meets these 


"Inoovs Xpiorés] G; 


objectors on their own ground ; 
they ask for proof from ‘the charters’ 
(rois apxetous), and he points to the 
passages in the Old Testament. 

What the points at issue were, the 
following words ó cravpós k.r.A. will 
suggest. The old question e maĝn- 
Tos ó Xptoros (Acts xxvi 23; comp. 
Justin. Dzal. 36, 76, pp. 254, 302) 
had still to be discussed. The Cross 
was still a stumbling-block to these 
Docetic Judaizers, as it had been in 
the Apostolic age to the Jews, though 
from a different point of view. They 
denied the reality of Christ’s birth 
and death and resurrection; see the 
note on Trall. 9. It was therefore 
necessary to show from the Hebrew 
Scriptures, not only (as in the Apos- 
tolic age) dre róv Xpiorov ede mabeciv 
kal dvagTijvat èk vekpàv (Acts xvii. 3 ; 
comp. Luke xxiv. 26, 46, Acts iii. 
18), but also that He *must needs? 
have been born in the flesh. 

2. Ilpóxkewai] ‘ This is the question 
before us, this remains to be proved’: 
comp. Arist. Eccl. 401 mepi cwrnpias 
mpokeyzevov, Dion. Hal. Ars Rhet. vii. 
5 (p. 274) où mepi avrod viv mpókevrat, 
Plut. Mor. p. 875 A, Galen Of, v. p. 
126, Clem. Hom. xix. 12 viv ámoOei£al 
pou mpoxerrac (comp. 2d. v. 8, xix. 13), 
Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 8 (p. 676) mpó- 
kerar © jt Ti rovodvres...dpixoipeba 
(comp. .SZrozz. i. 10, p. 344, ii. 21, p. 
500, vi. 15, p. 801, vii. 1, 10, pp. 829, 
867), Athenag. Suppl. 18 où yap mpo- 
keipevoy po eAéyxew, Orig. c. Cels. i. 
22, ii. 3, iii. r, iv. 38, 52, 53, 60, v. 2, 
vi. I9, 41, 5I, vii. 2, 30, 48, and so 


viri] 


* , ^ , ^ 
avacracts aUTOU kal i mío Tis ñj OV avrop 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


273 


@ / 
év ois GéXw 


3 ^ ^ € ^ ^ 
5€v TH Ttpocevxr Uuv SiKawOyjvar. 


rapitur A (attaching it to "Igsoüs Xpiwrós and omitting àpxcîa). 


In the corre- 


sponding place g* has dóicrov, for which some texts substitute aùĝevrıikóv. 


dpxeia] G; principia L; om. A; apxelov [g]. 


TovTwy Z; ejus A. 


frequently. Hence rò Tpokeiuevov 
‘the subject under discussion’; e.g. 
Joseph. c. Apion. i. 22, 35, IP D ICON 
46, Clem. Hom. xix. 1, Clem. Al. Quis 
av. salu. 26 (p. 950), Orig. c. Cels. i. 
24, 44, iv. 21, V. I, Vi. I, viii. 16, 65; 
and rà mpoxeiweva Joseph. Ant. xvi. 
2. 5. Many other interpretations 
have been adopted; e.g. by Pearson 
*It stands already written? (com- 
paring Athen. xiv. p. 646 TPOKELTaL 
TO kapriptov), and so Bull (in the pas- 
sage cited below) as an alternative, 
as also several later writers; by Bull 
(Works Vi. p. 208) ‘It is rejected by 
us’; by Credner (Beiträge 1. p. 16) “It 
is obvious,’ ‘So ist die Sache ausge- 
macht,' and so other writers; by Hug 
Un£rod. to the N. T. 1. p. 105) ‘This 
is to be preferred? (comparing Sext. 
Emp. Pyrrh. i. 8); together with 
others which it is unnecessary to 
give. All these fail, either as forcing 
a meaning on mpókerat which is 
alien to it, or as yielding a sense 
which is unsuited to the context. 
The emendation of Voss, who inserts 
a negative, dre où mpoxerrar, and the 
conjecture of Pearson (see Smith p. 
84), who substitutes or for dru, may 
likewise be dismissed, notwithstand- 
ing the great names of their authors. 
They do not gain any support from 
the language of the interpolator, 
où yap mpókeuraL (v. l. mpoxpiverac) 
Ta ápxeia ro) mve)paros, but just 
the contrary; for this language is 
put by him into the mouth, not of the 
objectors, butoflgnatius himself. It 
is clear therefore that the interpolator 


IGN. I, 


4 7 ò adrot] GL; h «epi 


read in his text mpókerrau which he 
interpreted, ‘The archives (i.e. the 
Old Testament Scriptures) ave Zo be 
preferred; and he makes Ignatius 
answer the objectors accordingly. 

cepol òè k.r.A.] i.e. ‘Though I have 
condescended to argue, though I 
have accepted their appeal to the Old 
Testament Scriptures, yet to myself 
such an appeal is superfluous : Jesus 
Christ zs the archives; He contains 
in Himself the documentary proofs 
of His person and mission’: comp. 
Clem. Recogn. i. 59 ‘non ideo cre- 
dendum esse Jesu, quia de eo pro- 
phetae praedixerint, sed ideo magis 
credendum esse prophetis, quod vere 
prophetae sint, quia eis testimonium 
Christus reddat, etc.’ 

3. Oira] ‘inviolable’; an appro- 
priate epithet of dpyeia, being used 
especially of sacrosanct places and 
things. 

5. ev Th mpocevyh k.r.M] ie. 
‘through your prayers’; compare 
Ephes. 20 with the note. 

SixarwOjvar] Comp. Rom. 5. 

IX. ‘The priests deserve respect, 
I allow; but much more the High- 
priest. He alone is entrusted with 
the holiest things of all, the hidden 
mysteries of God. He Himself is 
that door of the Father, through 
whom patriarchs and prophets and 
apostles and the whole Church must 
alike enter into the unity of God. 
But the Gospel has the pre-eminence 
in that it sets forth the advent, the 
passion, the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ. The prophets indeed fore- 


18 


274 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1x 


IX. Karol kai oi iepéts* kpeisoov òè ó cp Lepevs 
ó memioTevuévos TA ğyia TMV dylwv, Os uóvos Temi- 
oTevTal Ta KpuTTa ToU Octob avTOs wv Ovpa ToU 
marpos, ov ns eicépyovrou “ABpaau Kat 'leaak Kal 
I kal] GL; uev g: om. A. kpetrcov] GL; kpeloowv g* (though some 
MSS read kpeloow); dub. A. 3 abrós cv] GL; oûrós éorw [g] (but 


the whole context is changed); e£ Aic est A (but A commonly changes participles 
into finite verbs). 4 eleépxovrau] GLA ; eiosjA0ov [g]. 6 cov] 


told Him; but the Gospel is the 
crown and completion of immor- 
tality. All things together are good, 
if your faith is joined with love.’ 

I. Kadol kai x.7.A.] The contrast 
here is between the Levitical priest- 
hood, and the great High-priest of 
the Gospel, i.e. between the old and 
new dispensations. This is recog- 
nised by most commentators, and 
indeed is so directly demanded by 
the context, that it is strange any 
other interpretation should have been 
maintained. The interpolator how- 
ever has altered the passage, so as 
to make a reference to the three 
orders of the Christian ministry, Ka- 
Aoi pev of íepeis Kal of ToU Aóyov 
Sudkovor, Kpelaoay è 6 dpytepeds K.T.À, 
interpolating several words so as to 
disconnect avros dv úpa from dpyie- 
pevs, which he evidently intends to be 
understood of the Christian bishop. 
This has misled Cotelier, who in- 
terprets íepeis of the Christian pres- 
byters, and so too others (e.g. 
Greenwood Cathedra Petri 1. p. 73). 
Rothe (Anfänge 1. p. 732) applies it 
to the Christians of Philadelphia 
generally, as the fepets of the new 
dispensation (comp. Rev. i. 6, v. Io, 
X) 

But what form of antagonism has 
the writer in view, when he says 
kaAol kai oi iepeîs? Is the statement 
aggressive, as against those who dis- 
paraged the Old Testament dispen- 


sation? or concessive, as towards 
those who rated it too highly ? Were 
these antagonists Antijudaic or Ju- 
daic? The latter view alone seems 
consistent with the sequence of the 
writer’s thoughts. There is no indi- 
cation that the antagonists contem- 
plated here are different from those 
mentioned in the previous context, 
who were plainly Judaizers; and 
moreover the stress of the sentence 
itself is not on the eminence of the 
Aaronic priesthood, but on the supe- 
rior eminence of the High-priest and 
the Gospel. 

kpeiccov] The neuter is justified 
by such passages as Matt. xii. 41, 42 
metov “lava...Sokopevos ; comp. also 
Winer $ lviii. p. 649 sq. 

ó dpxwpe)s] After the Epistle to 
the Hebrews, ii. 17, ili. I, iv. I4, v. 5, 
TO, Vi. 20, "Vill. 265 VILIA TERNI 
Sce ESP.) vii 7, 19, 2223 26 
TOU kpeirTOVOS...€mewgayorys) kpeírrovos 
eAidos...Kpeirtovos  OuaÓnkns...oi pev 
melovés elow tepeis yeyovores Sa TO 
Oaváro Korver Oar mapapévew, ó 8€ dia 
TO pévew K.T.N....rotoOTos ri» [kai] 
émpemev apytepevs. For this term 
apxtepevs applied to Christ in early 
writers, see the note on Clem. Rom. 
36 ; and to the references there given 
add zů. 61 dia ro) dpxiepéos kal mpo- 
crárov TGv Jeux pv, Melito 
Fragm. 15 (Otto) *in sacerdotibus 
princeps sacerdotum; Clem. Alex. 
Protr. 12 (p. 93), Strom. iv. 23 (p. 


Ix] 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


275 


5 ` \ [3 ^ \ > y 3 
lakwß kal oi mpopnrar Kal Ol Q7 OG'TONOL Kal nN EKKAN- 


/ 
ola. 


, ^ 5 , ^ 
gravra TavTa eis évorqyra Oeo. 


é£atperov dé TL 


x” \ 5 , ` ^ ^ 
Exel TO evayyeMov, THY Tapovoiay Tov cuwriüpos, 


GA[g]. The reading of the Mss of L, fidei, is obviously corrupted from dez. The 


reminiscence of Ephes. iv. 13 would assist the corruption. 


7 owrTnpos| 


LA[g]; om. G. Petermann inserts cwrjpos after rapovelay, but this is soloecistic, 
Zahn places it as I have done; and this position is suggested by g, which has 
T? Tapovolay Tov gwrhpos Tu» ’Incod Xpiorov. 


633), Tertull. adv. Marc. iii. 7 ‘verus 
summus sacerdos patris, Christus 
Jesus,’ iv. 35 ‘authenticus pontifex 
Dei patris’ (comp. iv. 9). 

2. ó memiorevpévos k.t.A.| The re- 
ference is to the special privilege of 
the high-priest, who alone was al- 
lowed to enter into the holy of 
holies, as in Heb. ix. 7—12, x. 19 sq. 
This coincidence, combined with 
those noticed in the preceding note, 
shows, I think, that Ignatius must 
have had the Epistle to the Hebrews 
in his mind. 

os k.r.A.] ‘for He alone etc? This 
clause explains the symbolism of 
‘being entrusted with the holy of 
holies.’ The furniture of the adytum, 
the ark of the covenant, the pot of 
manna, the rod of Aaron, the tables 
of the law, etc, which were com- 
mitted to the keeping of the high- 
priest alone, represent the secret 
counsels of God; comp. Heb. ix. 3 sq. 

3. a/rós àv Opa] ‘He not only 
enters into the presence-chamber of 
the Father, but is Himself the door’; 
doubtless an allusion to John x. 9 
eyo «ip. y Ovpa: Se epod edv tis 
elaéAÓy, cwOnoera. For similar re- 
ferences to Christ, as the door or 
gate, see the note on Clem. Rom. 
48. See especially the allegory in 
Hermas Szm. ix. 12. It is worth 
observing also that this image occurs 
in the message to the Philadelphian 
Church, Rev. iii. 8 doù S€d@xa évómióv 
gov Ovpay dvewypévny K.T.À. 


4. 'Afpaàp k.A.] For the man- 
ner in which Ignatius regards the 
privileges of the Gospel as extended 
to the patriarchs, etc, see the notes 
on $ 5 above, and esp. on Magn. 9. 
In the allegory of Hermas those 
stones which represent the patri- 
archs and prophets, not less than 
those which represent the apostles, 
are carried through the gate for the 
building of the tower, i.e. the Church; 
S7Zm. 1X. 4, 15. 

6. mávra rara k.r.A.] ‘AW these 
elements, whether they belong to the 
old dispensation or to the new, are 
brought Zo the unity of God, i.e. all 
are united together in the same God 
through the same Christ; § 5 above, 
muotevoarres eadOnoav év évdrnre `In- 
gov Xpiorov, where the idea is the 
same. For the expression évérns 
O«co0 see the note on § 8. 

e€aiperoy k.r.A.] Comp. Smyrn. 7 
€faipéros 0€ TH evayyehip, ev @ TO 
malos "piv OedjAwrat Kal ú dydoracis 
TETENELOTAL. 

7. tv mapovoiav| The reference 
is obviously to the first advent, the 
incarnation, though the word, when 
not specially defined, generally refers 
to the second advent. The word 
does not occur in this sense in the 
N. T., except possibly in 2 Pet. i. 16. 
See for instances elsewhere, Zest. 
Duod. Patr. Levi 8, Juda 22, Clem. 
Hom. à. 52, Clem. Recogn. i. 59 
*praesentia et adventus Christi,’ Iren. 
IV LINE LOJEINS» Clem. Alex, 


18—2 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1x 


276 


^ ^ ^ \ f 5 - \ > , 

Kuplou nuv Ingot XpioTot, o malos avToU, THY dva- 

\ ~ / > 

oTacw. oi yap dyamnTol TpoñiTa, KaTnyyelay Els 
/ , 9 / 

aùróv TO O6 evayyédov dmdprwua éotw apOapatas. 


^ Z \ A / 
TAaVTA OMoU KANA EOTLV, éav ÈV AYAMN TLOTEUNTE. 


A ^ \ ` 
X. Credy kara Tyv mpocEevyny VUwY, Kal KATA 5 


r Kwplov] GLA; om. [g]. 


cTacw); ari g. 


and otherwise alters the form of the sentence). 
the other omitted. See the lower note. 
L; xarnyyedov [g] (Mss, but with a v. 1.) ; graedicaverunt A. 


3770771. 1.2954 (D-23931) 128193 (D35970): 
Early writers are careful to distin- 
guish the two mapovola of Christ; 
e.g. Justin Aol. i. 52 (p. 87), Dial. 
14 (p. 232), 32 (p. 249) ; comp. 20. 49 
(p. 268), 120 (p. 350) ; Iren. iv. 33. 
I sq; Can. Murat. p. 35 (ed. Tre- 
gelles); Tertull. 42o/. 21; Clem. 
Recogn. i. 49, 69. The passages in 
the Recognitions I should have over- 
looked, but for Hesse Das Murat. 
Fragm. p. 112. 

I. Tó dos k..A.] For the ab- 
sence of conjunctions comp. Polyc. 
6 rà émikómo, mpeoßuvrépois, Oiakó- 
vois. The xai before rv avacracw 
in the Greek MS of Ignatius is al- 
most certainly an interpolation. It 
produces an almost impossible Greek 
sentence, and demands another xai 
before rò mados: see the notes on 
Trall. 7, 12. Whether we should 
read avrov or agro, is a less easy 
question; probably the former, both 
because it is better supported, and 
because a)rjv Tv avactacw would 
emphasize the Resurrection as com- 
pared with the Passion, in a way 
which the language of Ignatius else- 
where does not justify, the chief 
stress being commonly laid on the 
Passion. 

2. karnyyeray eis] For this con- 
struction see the note on $ 5. 


avrob] GLA (which translates it after Tù» dává- 
riv] g; kai rjv GA (but A inserts e¢ before 7d md0os also 


In one Ms of L ef is inserted, in 
2 karyyyeNav] G; annunciaverunt 
4 morednre] 


3.  drdpricpa adabapoias| “the 
completed work of tmmortality, as 
the law was the first stage; where 
dmdpticua corresponds to reredeio- 
ra, in the parallel passage, Smyrn. 7 
quoted above. In 1 Kings vii. 9 
(Symm.) dzaprícpara are the coping 
stones, the tops of the walls, com- 
monly called ĝpıykoi. The word 
differs from dmraprıspós (Luke xiv. 
28), as the result from the operation. 
By d$6apoía is meant the indestruc- 
tible, eternal life, which is the object 
of the Gospel; comp. Polyc. 2 rò 8€ 
épa ád0apoía kai (e) altos, [Clem. 
Rom.]ii. 7 róv rhs d$apoías àyóva. 
The word however involves the idea 
of moral incorruption, which is in- 
separable from eternal life; see the 
notes on Z Aes. 17, Magn. 6. 

4. mrávra óo? kaAd] i.e. ‘whether be- 
longing to the old dispensation or 
the new’; comp. kaAol xai oí fepeis 
K.T.À., and závra rara k.r.À. 

X. ‘Since the Church of Antioch 
has rest owing to your prayers and 
your Christian compassion, it is your 
duty to send a deacon thither, as 
God's ambassador, to congratulate 
them and to glorify Christ's name. 
Happy the man, who shall be en- 
trusted with this office. The mission 
will redound to your glory. If you 
really desire to send such a person, 


x] TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


277 


A fe A of > ^5 ^ 5 , 
Ta omAayxva a exere év Xpiotw 'InooU, dmnyyédn pot 
2 , ` > 7 ` ^ 
Elonvevely Tyv ékkNgaiav TY Èv "Avrioxela TNS Cupías, 
, 5 \ c a e > / ^ ^ 
"pérOv EoTLV Upiv, ws ékkNuoia OcoU, xeworovijsoat 
if > \ - > ~ ^ 
Olakovoy EiS TO mper petora, éke? OeoüÜ mper etav, eis TO 


s , ^ > \ \ \ 
10 OUYXapNVal aUTOLS ETL TO AUTO yevouévots Kal doFaca 


G; creditis L; al. Ag. 


5 xara sec.] GL; om. g; al. A. 


8 mpérov] 


txt GLg; add. otv S,A (but they alter the former part of the sentence). 
9 9iikovor] GL; ministrum aliquem (unum) S,; aliquem bonum ministrum A; 


émíckorrov g. 


Io cvyxapjvad] GLS,A5 cvyxwpndijvae g. 


kal otara] 


GLg; et glorificent S4; qui glorificant A. 


you will not find it impossible. The 
churches nearest to Syria have sent 
bishops, and others presbyters and 
deacons.’ 

5. "Eme k.rA.] When Ignatius 
wrote his four letters from Smyrna, 
he was still anxious 
Church of Antioch, and desired the 
prayers of his correspondents for its 
welfare; see the note on ApS. 21. 
By the time that he arrived at Troas 
however, or soon after, he had heard 
that the persecution was ended, and 
inthe threeletters written from thence 
he charges his readers to send dele- 
gates to congratulate this church 
on the restoration of peace; comp. 
Smyrn. 11, Polyc. 7. The words cara 
Tj» k.T.A. are connected, not with 
amnyyéAn, but with eipgvevew. 

6. rà omAáyxva] i.e. ‘your Chris- 
tian compassion and love’; comp. 
Philippians i. 8 émuro0ó mávras opas 
éz omddyxvois Xpwrro) “Inoov (with 
the note). 

7. ths Supías] As in Smyrn. 11, 
Polyc. 7. So it is specified also 
Clem. Hom. xi. 36, xii. 1: see also 
eg. C. I. G. 3425. The addition 
was not unneeded, though this was 
the principal place bearing the 
name; for Appian (Syr. 57) relates 
that Seleucus founded (ékrisev) six- 
teen cities which he called 'Avró- 
xeva after his father, and Steph. Byz. 


about the- 


s. v. enumerates fourteen bearing the 
name. Ignatius however inserts such 
specifications where there was not 
this reason; see e.g. Ephes. inscr. 
ev "Edéow ths Asias, Smyrn. inscr. 
êv Suvpyn ths Actas, with the notes. 
This Antioch, the great Antioch, 
was not unfrequently called 5 em 
Addvn (e.g. Strabo xv. I. p. 719, xvi. 
2. p. 749, Joseph. Azz. xvii. 2. 1) or 
n emt Adds (Plut. Vit. Lucull. 21; 
comp. Plin. W. H. v. 18 * Epidaphnes 
cognominata") or 7 mpos Add 
(Hierocl. Synecd. 711) or y mpós 
Addvn (Mionnet V. p. 36 sq) or 7 
mept Aádvgv (Steph. Byz. s. vv. "Akpa, 
Mepon); but the associations con- 
nected with the grove of Daphne 
would not recommend this designa- 
tion to Ignatius; see I. p. 4I sq. 

8. mpémov stiv x..A.] See the 
similar directions to the Smyrneeans 
in Smyrn. 11, Polyc. 7. 

9. Oeo mpeoBeiav] A similar mes- 
senger is called OcompecBuirns Smyrn, 
II, Oeodpopos Polyc. 7. 

IO. émi rò avrÓ k.r..] ‘when they 
are assembled together’ in church ; 
comp. $ 6, and Ephes. 5, 13. The 
Latin translator has merely adopted 
the common Vulgate rendering of 
eri rò avTo ZZ idipsum, but commen- 
tators (e.g. Smith, Jacobson) have 
misapprehended it. 

xai Soédca] It is possible to çon- 


278 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


TO Ovoua' paxapios év Xpiw ro noo, ds kara£wOmn- 
cerat THS ToOLaUTNS SiaKkovias’ Kal Upets dofacbycec be. 
Gérovow dé Upiv ovK eat advvatoy Vrép dvOMaToS 
Oeo ws Kal ai ëyyiora éxkAnoia ëmeupav èm- 


e , \ / 
aKkorous, ai 0€ mpeaPuTépous Kat Otakovovs. 


1 76 dvoua] GL; add. rov cot g; add. domini S,A. 
KarazwwOjcerat] GL; karnktwðn g. A has a 

2 dotacbncecbe] GLg; glorificabitis S,; dub. A. 
ovk éorw] GL; non est...hoc 845 mon quidquam 
4 kal ai ëyyiora éxxAnola] G; et quaedam propinquae 


gA; lnood xpicr@ GLS; 
future, S; a present. 
3 90] GLg; om. S,; e£ A. 


est A; oU mücw g. 


Xpror@ *Inoov] 


ecclesiae L* (see appx); Kal del ai @yyiora éxxAnola g; sanctae ecclesiae ¿ae quae SE 


nect these words with either yeupo- 
rovicat Or mpeaBevoa OF ovyxaptjvat. 
The first mode of connexion is re- 
commended by the subsequent clause 
kal vj.ets SoEacOnoecbe. The third is 
favoured by the proximity, and pro- 
bably this consideration should pre- 
vail The second has nothing to 
recommend it. 

I. Tò óvoua| ‘the Name’; see the 
note on Ephes. 3. 

kara£uoÜ5cerad] See the note on 
Ephes. 20. 

2. xal úpeîs k.rA.] Perhaps to 
be connected closely with 8o£áca: rò 
évopa, the intervening words pakdpios 
...dvakovias being parenthetical; comp. 
e.g. Š II eis Aóyov ruis: ruwjoer ai- 
Tovs 0 Küpios K.T.À. 

3.  O0éNovow Qé kx] “Where 
there is a will, there is a way.’ With 
vmép dvóparos Oeo must be under- 
stood roóro mou, or words to this 
effect. 

5. ai de] ‘but others, presuma- 
bly those which were not so near and 
whose bishop could not be spared. 

XI. ‘Philo the deacon from Cilicia, 
who is assisting me in the Word, 
and Rhaius Agathopus, who follows 
me from Syria, bear witness to the 
kindly hospitality which they re- 


ceived from you. I am thankful for 
it, and I pray that God may.requite 
you. May Christ’s grace redeem 
those who treated them otherwise. 
Salutations from the brethren in 
Troas, whence I write to you by the 
hand of Burrhus, whom the Ephe- 
sians and Smyrneeans have sent with 
me to do honour to me. The Lord 
Jesus Christ in whom they trust will 
do honour to them. Farewell in 
Christ Jesus, our common hope.’ 

6. Tepi dé kr.à.] The persons 
here mentioned had followed in the 
track of Ignatius. They would 
therefore pass through Philadelphia, 
as he had done (see Š 1, 6, 7, with 
the notes). From Philadelphia they 
went to Smyrna, where also they 
were hospitably entertained (Smyrn. 
IO. It appears from the language 
of Ignatius to the Smyrnzans, that 
he had already left Smyrna, before 
they arrived. They therefore fol- 
lowed him to Troas. They were 
doubtless the bearers of the good 
news that the persecution at An- 
tioch had ceased. "They would pro- 
bably also accompany him further ; 
and, if so, they would be those com- 
panions of Ignatius about whom 
Polycarp enquires, PZz/. Š 13 ‘et de 


xi] 


XI. 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


279 


[epi 0€ Pitwvos Tov diakovov darò Koukías, 


E \ / e \ ^ 2 ^ 
dvOpOs ueuaprvpnuévov, Os Kal viv èv Adyw Oeov úm- 


E [74 ^ e 
peret por, &ua Pale “Ayaborodi, avdpi €kNekTQ), OS 


sanctae ecclesiae quae A. Petermann supposes that this reading is to be explained 


by a confusion of rox. qo sanctae and FA propinguae. It seems 
quite as likely however that arial may have been corrupted from Kàlàl, the word 


éyywra being omitted. 
Kideklas g. 


6 àmó Kuidixlas dvópós] GLA; dv8pós dard 
7 Oeo] GLA; om. g* (but l adds dz). 


8 'Paío 


*Aya0omod] see the lower note; pew . dyaĝóroðı (with the interpunctuation) G; 
reo agathopode L; reo fratre et agathopode A; yale (or yavia) kal dyabdrod g*. 
See also Syzyrn. 10, where L, in addition to Ag, inserts the conjunction. 


ipso Ignatio et de his qui cum eo 
sunt [rois ody aùr] quod certius ag- 
noveritis, significate'; see Pearson 
V. I. p. 171. In the opinion of those 
critics who maintain the genuineness 
of the Antiochene Martyrology, they 
were also the eye-witnesses and nar- 
rators of the saint's voyage and suf- 
ferings ($7 rovrov avrórrat yevóp.evot). 
So for instance Ussher (A72. len. 
p- 54), Ruinart (Act. Sinc. Mart. p. 55, 
Ratisbon. 1859), Smith (p. 42, who 
says, (vix a quoquam dubitari aut 
potest aut debet), and many later 
writers. ‘The first person however 
does not commence, as on this hy- 
pothesis it ought, at Troas, but off 
Puteoli (Š 5 nets); see Zahn Z. v. A. 
p- 42. 

roð ĝıakóvov k.r...] The Pseudo- 
Ignatius. makes him a deacon of 
Tarsus, Tars. IO domaferar vpas 
Pov 0 Owkovos vuav (a letter pur- 
porting to be written from Philippi). 
In the genuine Ignatius, Smyrn. 13, 
he sends a salutation to the Smyrn- 
zeans. 

4. avdpos pepaprvpguévov| The 
same phrase is used of the Seven 
in Acts vi. 3. On the meaning of 
pepaprvpnpévov see the note on Ephes. 
12. 

év Aóyo Oeo?) ie. ‘the preaching 
of the Gospel, as e.g. Acts vi. 2 
karaAetyravras Tov Aóyov rod Oeo9, 


Col i. 25 mAnpdoa Tov Àóyoy Tov 
Oco?, Rev. i. 9 did róv Aóyov Tov Oeo. 
In the parallel passage .Szzyrz. 10 
eis Aóyov Oeo) the expression has a 
wholly different sense. Zahn how- 
ever treats the two phrases as equi- 
valent and compares Phil iv. 17, 
etc. 3 

vmnperei] By doing the work of a 
deacon or attendant; comp. Acts 
xiii. 5 etyov 8€ kai "Ioávvgv vrnpérny. 

8. 'Paíg] I have ventured on 
this correction of the reading for two 
reasons. (1) I have not succeeded 
in finding the proper name Rheus 
elsewhere, whereas Raius (Raiius, 
Rahius) occurs several times Corp. 
Inscr. Lat. 31. 1129, 497555, I1. 6183, 
V. 4078, and the feminine Raia, C. 
JE JL. wb CY(p an Yee. MAC, Wü 
973; see also the indices to Vols. 
IX. X. (2) This form explains both 
the readings of the Mss. By a com- 
mon itacism it would become ‘Péa, 
as in the MS of Ignatius; by a slight 
corruption, ràaiwı for paiwı, it would 
produce the Taio of the interpolator’s 
text. As Raius is a nomen, and 
Agathopus a cognomen, the com- 
bination is correct. In a Greek 
inscription at Palmyra (C. Z. G. 4482) 
the name ‘Paaios occurs. 

'"Aya8óro0.] A common name, more 
especially in the case of slaves and 
freedmen; see for Greek inscrip- 


280 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x1 


> ` , 5 m Vg , ^ T ^ \ 
dmo Cupias por dkodovbet drotaEapuevos TH (Bie ot kai 


papTupovoly úM. 


iyw To Oew cv OTM UTE 
Kayo To Oeo evvapicTo p 


^ € if 4 ^ , € 
Uuav, OTL €0é£ao0c a/ro/s, ws Kat Uuas ó Kupus. ot 


1 dmoraiduevos] GLA; dmoratduevot g. 
(substituting úrèp Gv for örı in the next clause). 


2 rèp] G; pro LA; cepi g 
4 Inco? Xpicrov] gL; 


ToU lgcoU xpicrod G; domini nostri iesu christi A. The reading of G seems to 
have arisen from the accidental omission of kuplov judy, for Tod inood xpuwroÜ can 
hardly stand. 5 ràv ddehpav] GAg; multorum L. 6 Boíppov] 
G; durrum L; Boópyov g (without any v. L); A has urdum here, as also in 
Ephes. 2, Smyrn. 12. Petermann supposes that this is owing to a confusion in 
the Armenian letters for Z and g, which closely resemble each other, so that the 


tions, C. 7. G! 268, 270, 1380, 2454, 
[2837], 2878, 3847 d, 3977, 4716 d, 
etc; Wood's Discoveries at Ephesus 
Vals 4 Goh Mp aioe Weir, (Co 26 ILS 160 
2431, 2864, 4463, 4550, III. 633, 1825, 
2113, 3017, 3141, 3959, V. 744, 806, 
L129 8079581201465 99 ites r (G5 7 
L. 1I. 4463 it is connected with other 
familiar names, CVRA . AGATHOPI . 
TROPHIMI.POLYCARPI.LIBERTORVM. 
As an early Christian name it ap- 
pears in the Roman catacombs (de 
Rossi Roma Sotterranea M. p. 47 sq, 
IH. p. 286 (?) ; comp. Bull. di Arch. 
Crist. Gennaro 1863), being some- 
times confused with Agapetus. It is 
also used as the name of a con- 
fessor in the Ancient Syriam Mar- 
Zyrology, published by Wright in the 
Fournal of Sacred Literature, Jan. 
1866 (from a MS itself dated A.D. 412), 
under Nisan (April) 4th. For an 
illustration of the meaning of Aga- 
thopus, comp. August. Æ. 17 ad 
Max. (II. p. 22) *'Namphanio [a Punic 
proper name] quid aliud significat 
quam boni pedis hominem, i.e. cujus 
adventus afferat aliquid felicitatis, 
sicut solemus dicere, secundo pede 
introisse, cujus introitum prosperitas 
aliqua consecuta sit?’, quoted by 
Pearson on Smyrn. Io (but he 
wrongly calls it an epistle of Maxi- 
mus žo Augustine). The meaning 


will account for the frequency of the 
name, as one ‘fausti ominis.’ Cle- 
ment of Alexandria, .SZrozz. iii. 7 (p. 
538), quotes a letter of the heretic 
Valentinus to one Agathopus. Voss 
(on Smyrn. 1o) expressed a belief 
that he is the same person with our 
Agathopus, and defended his opinion 
in his answer to Blondel (see Pear- 
son V. Z. p. 645 sq, ed. Churton). 
This identification is likewise main- 
tained by Pearson (on Smyrn. Io) 
and by Grabe (Spic. Patr. 11. p. 53). 
Chronologically it is quite defensible, 
since Agathopus is apparently a 
young man now, and Valentinus 
flourished within some 20 or 30 
years of Ignatius’ death. Moreover 
it would help to explain those anti- 
cipations of Valentinian phraseology 
which we find in Ignatius (see e.g. 
Ephes. inscr, Magn. 8, Trail. 1, 
Rom. inscr., 6, 7); for it would show 
that Ignatius moved in the same 
circles. The identification therefore 
seems far from improbable. But, the 
name being so common, too much 
stress must not be laid on it. 

In the interpolator’s text this per- 
son is divided into two, ‘Gaius (for 
Rhaius) azd Agathopus, both here 
andin Smyrn. 10. There can be little 
doubt however that this is a mis- 
take; for (1) The addition avdpi 


XI] 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


281 


\ > , ` ^ 
ÒE ATLIUATAVTES aUTOUS NuTpwHEinoav év TH xapırı ly- 


5 où XpiTov. 


, ^ 5 ^ ^ 
"Aeaterati Uds 1) dyarmy Tdv adedpav 


TOv év Tpwadi: 006v Kal ypapw ipiv did Bovppov meu- 


Greek reading underlying this authority would be Bovpyov. 


This explanation 


might pass here and in Smyrn. 12, where also g has Botpyou; but it fails to account 
for the reading of A in Ephes. 2, where there is no various reading Bovpyov in the 
Greek, and where even g has the form in pp (though with some variations in the 
vowels). The true explanation of the Armenian reading in all the three passages 
is that which Petermann himself gives on Zes. 2; that it arises from a confusion 


of the Syriac letters 3 and $, Z and 7. The substitution of Botpyos for Bodppos, 


here and in Smyrn. 12, has a parallel in the substitution of yatw for palw just above. 


ex\exT@ k.r.À. shows that a single 
person is mentioned; (2) In the 
spurious Ignatian Epistles (Amz. 13, 
Philipp. 15; comp. Tars. 10) only 
two persons are represented as being 

with Ignatius on this journey, die 
kal "AyaOorous of dudkovot. As these 
false letters emanated from the same 
author who interpolated the genuine 
letters, he is inconsistent with him- 
self, unless indeed the xai, here and 
in Smyrn. 10, crept into his text at 
a later date. It would appear from 
Smyrn. 10 (see the note), that Aga- 
thopus, like Philo, was a deacon, for 
the two are there called é:akovor 
Xpicrov (the word probably being 
used in its official sense) The 
Pseudo-Ignatius (ll. cc.) is explicit on 
this point. 

I. dmora£ápevos k.r.A.] ‘having 
bidden farewell to this lower Bfe’; 
comp. Philo Leg. ad Caz. 41 (II. p. 593) 
iva pn ó ròs Aypürmas droragnra TO 
Bio, [Clem. Rom.] ii. 6 det 9e jyas 
rovrQ [TG aiðvı| drorafapnévovs éketvo 
[rà uéAXovri] xpào6at, with the note. 
For the distinction between Bios the 
lower and (o) the higher life, see the 
note on Rom. 7. 

2. paptupodow piv] i.e. ‘bear 
witness to your hospitality’: comp. 
3 Joh. 5, 6, eis roùs ddeAhods Kat 


^ à , ^ 
Toüro Éévovs, ot épapr)pgsáv cov TH 


dyámy évémiov exkAnoias k.r.À. 

3. œs kal jpás] i.e. dmo8é£erai 
Or dzo0éfavro: comp. Ephes. 2 kara 
mavra pe dvémavgev, oç kai a)róv 6 
matnp 19000 Xpwrro) advawvéa [v. 1. 
avawvéer], Smyrn. 9 karà mávra pe 
dveravoate, kai )püs “Inoovs Xpwrrós 
(with the note) See also the note 
on Smyrn. 5 paddrov dé x.7.A. for 
other similar modes of expression. 

oí òè driácavres] These were 
doubtless the heretical teachers who 
had opposed Ignatius himself when 
he was in Philadelphia; see above 
$$ 6, 7, 8. 

4. Avtpobeincay] ‘be ransomed, 
and set free from this chain of sin, 
in which they are at present bound; 
see above Š 8 c2 xdpuru 'Ipoo0 Xpiorod, 
ds úse ah ouv mavra deopov. For 
this word as a theological term com- 
pare (besides the passages in the 
N. T.) Barnab. 14, 19, [Clem. Rom.] 
1081/7 

5. 5 dàyámy| See the note on 
Trall. 3. 

6. dua Bovppov| He acted as the 
amanuensis of Ignatius. For this 
Burrhus see the note on Z2Z6s. 2, 
and for the meaning of the preposi- 
tion dca the note on Kom. 10. 

meppôévros| In accordance with 
the wish expressed Aes. 2 evyopat 
mapapetvar avrov K.T.À, 


282 


IGNATIUS TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. [xi 


° £, 
pbévros dua éuol dro 'Eperiwv xoi Cpvpvaiev eis 


Adyov rus. 


5 ^ , 
Tyujnoer avtous ó Kupuos ` lnoous Xpioros, 


> A 5 / / ^ f , 
a T TVEVMATL, TG TEL 
eis Ov éNmiQovow  capki, w»vxs, LAT Ly 3 


> , e $ 
dyaTN, Omovoic. 
2 / iS 
éArridt NUOV. 


I éuol] GLA; om. g. 
norabit A; ods dpelperar [g]. 
Gg; sperent L; def. A. 

A; capkl, yux (om. mveúuarı) G. 
Inoov] GLA; kupt inood xpuT@ g. 


Eppwole év Xpiat@ “Inoov, TH kown 


2 Tuhoe avrods] G; honoret ipsos L; quos ho- 
6 Kúpos] GLg; om. A. 
capkl, ux, mveúuarı] Lg; corpore et spiritu et mente 


3 €dmlfovocw] 


riore] GLg; om. A. 4 Xpwrdg 
Koun] GLg; om. A. 5 Tuv] 


txt GL; add. & ¿yle mvevmare g; add. gratia vobiscum: amen A. 
There is no subscription in GLA. For g see the Appx. 


I. darò 'Edeoíov x.r.A.] Though 
himself an Ephesian, he was the 
joint delegate of both churches; see 
Smyrn. 12. 

eis Aóyov ruis] ‘to do me honour, 
eis Aoyov meaning ‘to the account 
of, ‘on the score of’; comp. Smyrn. 
IO eis Aóyov Oeo), and see the note 
on Philippians iv. 15. 

2. Tue. avtovs| This responds to 
the foregoing rus ; comp. Smyrn. 9 
6 Tuy émlakorov úmò Oeod Teripnrat. 


3. capi, Wyn, mveúuar For 
this threefold division of the human 
personality see the notes on 1 Thess. 
v. 23. The omission of mvevpare 
(contracted rrNI) in some authorities 
is easily explained owing to -the þe- 
ginning of the next word rri-. 

4. é&ppec0e] See the note on 
Ephes. 21. 

Th Koun) erii] See the notes on 
Ephes. 1, Magn. 11. 


o 


r 


TO THE SMYRNÆANS: 


Om Ube oN VR N ALANS: 


T would not be possible, even if it were advisable, to discuss the 

notices of Smyrna and the Smyrnzan Church with the same fulness 
which has been aimed at in the introductions to previous epistles. The 
history of a city which struck its roots into the most remote antiquity, 
which claimed Theseus or Tantalus or an Amazon as its founder and 
Homer as its most illustrious child, which has had a continuous au- 
thentic history of twenty-five centuries, and which is at this day the 
most flourishing and populous centre of commerce in the Levant, must 
be too well known to require, and too copious to admit, the scale of 
treatment which seemed suited to Magnesia and Tralles and Phila- 
delphia. Such details moreover, as are necessary to understand the 
position of Christianity in Smyrna at this time, have found their proper 
place in the notice of Polycarp. 

This letter, like the preceding one to the Philadelphians, was written 
from Troas, and probably about the same time. The personnel there- 
fore is the same. Burrhus is again his amanuensis ($ 12). Philo and 
Rhaius Agathopus are again mentioned as having received a kindly 
welcome from his correspondents (S 10). Directions are again given 
for the dispatch of a representative to congratulate the Church of Antioch 
(811). But at Smyrna he had made a longer halt, and apparently had 
established more affectionate relations, than at Philadelphia. Hence 
he sends special salutations to certain classes of persons, and to certain 
individuals by name (§ 13). 

The main purport of the letter is the condemnation of the same 
Judaic Docetism which he assails elsewhere (see pp. 16, 103, 147 sq, 


286 IGNATIUS TO THE SMYRNÆANS. 


242 sq). But whereas in the Philadelphian letter it is attacked 
chiefly from its Judaic side, here on the contrary he denounces mainly 
its Docetism ($$ 1—6). Yet at the same time its Judaism appears in- 
cidentally from an allusion to the tuition which these heretics had 
received from the Law and the Prophets ($5). Their separatism and 
their contentiousness are dwelt upon more fully here than in his 
other letters, and the duty of unity is strenuously enforced in con- 
sequence. 


The following is an analysis of the epistle. 

* IGNATIUS to the CHURCH oF SMYRNA, which abounds in faith and 
love and lacks no spiritual grace ; abundant greeting.’ 

‘I give glory to Christ who has bestowed so much wisdom on 
you, that ye fully believe in the blood of Christ and are convinced of 
His incarnation, His baptism, His passion. ‘The cross was the standard 
round which Jew and Gentile alike were summoned to rally (§ 1). These 
things were realities, not phantoms, as some persons, phantom-like 
themselves, imagine (§ 2). The Lord appeared to Peter and to the 
disciples after the resurrection. They handled Him. He ate and 
drank with them (§ 3). These things I say to warn you. If the life 
and death of Christ were unreal, then my sufferings also are unreal (Š 4). 
These heretics have failed to learn from either the Law or the Gospel. 
It is a mockery to praise me, and yet to deny my Lord. I would 
gladly forget the existence of these men (§ 5). Even angels will be 
condemned, if they believe not in the blood of Christ. Beware of these 
heretics. They abstain from deeds of love (§6). They hold aloof from 
the eucharist of the Church. Yet love only is life. Shun them there- 
fore, and avoid dissension ($ 7). Obey your bishop. ‘The bishop is 
the centre of the individual congregation, as Christ is the centre of the 
universal Church. The bishop is the fountain-head of all authority 
(§ 8). Be wise in time. May God requite you for your kindness to 

e (§ 9). I thank you also for your welcome of Philo and Agathopus. 
God will reward you (§ 10). The Church of Antioch at length has 
peace. Send ye a delegate to rejoice with them. This will be a 
worthy work ; and it is within your reach (8 rr). 

‘Salutations from Troas. Burrhus, your representative, is my amanu- 
ensis. I salute your bishop, your clergy, your laity ($ 12). I salute 
the families of the brethren, and the holy widows. Philo sends salu- 
tations. I salute Gavia and Alce and Daphnus. Farewell (§ 13).’ 


HPOC CMYPNAIOYC. 


I NATIOC, ó kai Oeoddoos, éxxAnoia Oeo ra- 


N UNES > ^ ^ , , 5 
Tpos Kal TOU .1yaTHuévov *Incov Xpio-TOoU, nAenpevy êv 


\ , , > , \ s , 
Ta a 
VTL Xapio uai, 7rezAnpoepévg EV MITTEL Kal ayaTn, 


> , s \ if / 
«vva'repn'r o ovon 7T «V'T OS X«pta MATOS, Georperertatny 


TIpoc CMYPNAIOYC | Tod aylov iyvarlov mior cuvpyatois (numbered a in the 


marg.) G; Tod avrod émurrod} mpds cuupralous g*5 ad smyrnaeos A; item alia epistola 
sancti ignatit martyris qui vocatur theophorus, quod est qui fert deum, quam scripsit 


, ad smyrnaeos (numbered B in the marg.) C. For L see the Appx. 
6 (om. xal) C; for the other authorities see Z/es. inscr. 
Oco marpós] txt GLAC; add. bylerov g. 


add. gui scribit C. 
mnuévov] GL; add. viod avrod gAC. 


‘IGNATIUS to the CHURCH OF 
SMYRNA, which is of God the Father 
and His beloved Son, and through 
His mercy abounds in. faith and 
love, being deficient in no spiritual 
gift; greeting in a pure spirit and in 
the word of God.’ 

2. tov pyamguévov] ‘The beloved, 
or ‘H7zs beloved’; comp. Ephes. i. 6 
éxapíreocev rjuás êv TO r'yamguéve. So 
too Barnab. 3 ôv mroípgacev ev T@ 
jyamuuévo a/ro0, 20. 4 iva Taxú ó 
jyamquévos avroð, r Tov myammnpuévov 
"Ipso? [rajk], Clem. Rom. 59 ro? 
nyarnuévov madds aro), Tov yarn- 
pévov maiðós cov. This title ‘Dilec- 
tus’ is the common designation of 
the Messiah in the Ascensio Isaiae, 
Cre IDUD O73 IAL, 17.10, IV. 3, 
6, etc. 

QAeguévg ev] ‘having been pitied 
ín; i.e. ‘having in God's mercy been 


I Ó kai] 
Ocopópos] txt GLAg; 
2 hya- 


endowed with. For the construction 
and meaning see Philad. 5 èv à 
KAjpe rXer6nv (with the note). Comp. 
also 1 Cor. vii. 25 ws mAegpévos vd 
Kupiov motos civar, Ign. Rom. 9 JA 
npat TLS ewa. 

3. ev mioret K.r.X.] For this pre- 
position with zAgpobv see Ephes. v. 
18, Col. i. 9, and perhaps Ephes. i. 
23. With sAgpo$opeiv it is more 
common; see the note, Colossians 
iv. I2. For the connexion mícere kai 
ayam see the note on Æphes. 1. 

4. avvorepijro x.r.À.] Probably sug- 
gested by 1 Cor. i 7 dere úpâs jun 
dorepeia bat ev pndevi xapia iari ; comp. 
Polyc. 2 va pnSevos Nein kai mavrós 
Xapioparos mepiooevns. The word 
dyuorépnros, though a very peus 
form, is not very common. 

Ocompemearárg] See the note on 
Magn. 1. 


288 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


^ , ^ £ > > £ 
Kal deyioQopo, Th ovon év Cuupvn Ths ’ Asias, év appo 
t 
, M if ^ ^ / 
zrvevua TL Kal Noyw Oeo veto ra yaipew. d4* 
A \ ` ` e 
I. Aog€aGw hoov Xpiorov Tov Oceov Tov ovTws 


^ , \ ^ / > 
Uuas coQicavra' évonoa yap UMas KaTNPTLOMEVOUS EV 


2 mvevuart] GLCg; fide A. 


(having transposed ĝeoô and connected it with mveúparı). 
Inooty Xpwróv tov Oe» Tov k.r.M.] GL 


Cg Sev-Syr 2; dofdgwv G. 


Aóyo] txt GLAg; add. sancto (app.) C 
3 Aofáteo] LA 


Sev-Syr (comp. Ephr-Ant); Zesuzz christum qui etc. (om. tov 0e0v) AC; rv Oeòv 


kal warépa ToU kvplov Tuv “I. X. róv OU ajTOU k.T.M. g. 


I. aywpope] ‘ferax sanctorum; 
says Pearson. The analogy of other 
Ignatian compounds however, such 
as Geopdpos, xpiotopopos, vaodepos, 
etc, points to another meaning, ‘car- 
rying holy things, rather than ‘ pro- 
ducing holy men.’ See the notes on 
Ccopdpos Ephes. inscr., and on éoreé 
otv k.r.. Ephes. 9 (in which last 
passage the word dywdopos itself oc- 
curs), for this metaphor derived from 
religious processions. The ‘sacred 
vessels,’ which the Church of Smyrna 
bears, are its Christian graces and 
virtues. 

Spdpyn| For the form of this word 
see the note on Po/yc. inscr. 

tis "Acías| On this specification 
see the notes Hfhes. inscr, Trall. 
inscr, PAz/ad. inscr. It was not 
wanted in this instance to distin- 
guish the place from any other bear- 
ing the same name. A part of 
Ephesus was indeed called Smyrna 
at one time, but this name no 
longer remained, when Ignatius wrote 
(Strabo xiv. 1, p. 633 sq) ; and more- 
over Ephesus itself was equally in 
‘Asia.’ 

ev dudum mvevpate k.r..] Comp. 
Ephes. inscr. metra èv Incov Xpiorg 
kal ev apopo xapá xaipew, Rom. inscr. 
mheiora ev Incov Xpiorg TH Oeo rjuóv 
dpGpes xaipew. The words ev áuóuo 
K.r.À. therefore are to be attached to 


oUres] GACg Sev- 


what follows. On duópo see the note 
Ephes. inscr. 

2. Aóye Oeo] Regarded here as 
an inward monitor; comp. I Joh. i. Io, 
li. I4, and see the note on Colossians 
iii. 16. 

mÀetcra  xaípew] See 
Ephes. inscr. 

I. ‘I give glory to Christ who has 
bestowed this wisdom upon you. I 
perceive that your faith is steadfast, 
being nailed to the Cross, and that 
your love is firm in the conviction 
of Christ's blood. Ye believe that 
Christ was truly born of a virgin, 
was truly baptized, was truly nailed 
tothe Cross. From the fruit of this 
tree we are sprung. Through His 
resurrection. God has held up a 
standard to Jew and Gentile alike, 
that all may flock to it, and be united 
in the one body of His Church.’ 

3. Aokafo] The finite verb is 
here adopted in preference to the 
participle, both because the great 
preponderance of authority is in its 
favour, and because the variation is 
very slight (0ofá(e, 0ofá(o); comp. 
Polyc. 1 omepüofá(o. It is quite pos- 
sible however that Ao£á(ev is right 
and that-we have here again an 
anacoluthon (the sentence being in- 
terrupted by a succession of subor- 
dinate clauses and never finished), as 
in Ephes. 1 "AmoDe£dpevos k.r.À., Rom. 


the note 


1] TO THE SMYRNAANS. 289 


5 , , u z ^ ^ ^ 
5 akiinTQ TITTEL, Go7rep kaÜnXwyuévovs év TO TTAVPW TOU 
4 Li 
, > ^ ^ , 
Kupiov ’lyoo? Xpiarov, copki re Kal TVEUMATL, Kal 


° / 5 , , 5 ^ [JA ^ 
Opac uévovs EV ayarn EV TW aiguaTi Xpirrov, eT AÀnpo- 


Syr; om. L (but see Appx). 


4 yàp] GLCg Sev-Syr; om. A. 


5 ToU 


Kuplov] txt GCg* (but Gk Mss add. hua); add. nostri L[A][Sev-Syr] (but the two 


last are valueless, since the addition is always made in the Syriac). 


sec.] GL[A]g Sev-Syr; om. C. 


I Erel ev€duevos x.r.A. ; see the notes 
on both passages. 

Tov Ocüv Tov K.r.A.] ‘the God who 
thus made you wise? For reasons 
which are explained in the note on 
Ephes. inscr, rov Oeóy must be 
closely connected with the words 
following. Ignatius does not appear 
ever to call Jesus Christ God abso- 
lutely. Ephraim of Antioch, quoted 
by Photius (Bz6/. 229, p. 258), refers 
to this passage, kai 6 Oeodpédpos ô 
'"Lyvários kai páprvs, Xuvpvaío: émi- 
créAÀev, ópoíos Kéxpnra TÂ dpÓpo 
(i.e. uses the article with Oeós, when 
speaking of our Lord); but the in- 
ference to be drawn from the pre- 
sence of the article is somewhat 
modified by the additional words ròv 
ovrws K.rÀ. Though the words rév 
Oeóv are wanting in two important 
authorities, they seem to be genuine, 
as they are appealed to by two 
fathers. The omission would be easy 
owing to the repetition of similar 
letters TONONTONOYTOS. 

oUros vas coQícavra] ‘made you 
thus wise, as described in the open- 
ing salutation. For the expression 
comp. 2 Tim. iii 15 rà duvdyeva ce 
gopica x... See also Ps. xviii 
ux). 9, civ.(cv)..22, cxvili (cxix). 
98. 

4. évonoa] “Z perceived, when I 
was staying among you.’ 

katnptiopévous] ‘settled’; see the 
note on Epkes. 2, 


IGN. II. 


6 kal 
7 Xpwrov] G; roi xpwroÜ g. 


5. àwijro] Comp. Philad. 1, Polyc. 
T: 
Trep xa8nAepévovs] Col. ii. 14 
Tpoonocas aùrò TÊ oravp@. For the 
metaphor see Gal. ii. 20 Xpior@ acuv- 
coravpopa (comp. vi. 14), Rom. 7 0 
epos &pos éoravpwra. Here however 
the ‘nailing fast on the Cross’ im- 
plies especially a firm belief in the 
reality of the crucifixion, as opposed 
to the theories of Docetism; comp. 
Polyc. Phil. 7 ôs àv pw) OpoAoyg TÒ 
papróp.ov ToU oravpod. See also 
Trall. 11 édaivovro àv Krddo rod 
oravpov, Lphes. 18 mepivrnua ró èpòv 
mveðpa To) oravpod, Philad. 8 và 
Qura dpxeia ó cravpós avro? (with 
the note) where under different 
images the necessity of this belief is 
enforced. For èv with ka6ydodcba 
comp. e.g. Arist. Ra. 618 èv kripake 
Əsas. So the Latin ‘figere zz cruce, 
zz parietibus 

6. gapki re K.A. For this fa- 
vourite Ignatian phrase see the note 
on Ephes. Io. 

7. Opacpévous ëv] For the con- 
struction see P/Z/ad. inscr. (note). 

€v TQ a(gari] This again implies 
a belief in the reality of the passion ; 
see the note on Phz/ad. inscr. 

memAnpopopnuévous k.r.À.] ‘having a 
Juli conviction with respect to our 
Lord as being truly descended from 
David etc? For the different mean- 
ings of mAnpodopeiv see the note on 
Colossians iv. 12. 


I9 


290 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


^ ^ ” , 
dopnuévovs eis Tov K/piov ńpðv addnOas övra ék vyévovs 
^ \ , \ £ 
Aavel8 kara capka, viðv OcoU kara OéAnua Kat ÓUVGULV, 
/ 5 ^ 2 / / e Ne 
yeyevvnuévov dcs k rapÜévov, BeBarticpevov vro 


r tov] txt GC Theodt Sev-Syr; add. incoty xpwróv gLA. 


arnb ðs] 


GL Theodt (after merAnpopopnuévovs, Schulze) Sev-Syr; ws adnOds g (trans- 
posing it and placing it after mrem\npopopyuévous); vere C (connecting it with 


mem\npopopnuevous); om. A. 


Sev-Syr; naturam A; Oedrnra Theodt; def. g. 
add. @eo0 GLC Sev-Syr; def. g: see the lower note. 


2 Aaveld] ôað GC. 


onua] GLC 
Ovvauw] txt A Theodt; 
3 yeyevvnué- 


vov] Theodt (Schulze); gui natus est A Sev-Syr; genitum LC; yeyevnuévov G; 


def. g. 


I. èk yévous Aaveld] See the note 
on Ephes. 18. 

2. vióv Oeo] For the same an- 
tithesis comp. Æphes. 20 (with the 
note). See esp. Rom. i. 3 rot yevo- 
pévov êk oméppatos Aaveld xara 
cápka, Tod opicbévros vioð Oeo ev 
Svvaper, which passage Ignatius 
doubtless had in his mind. 

Oednpal ‘the Divine will’ ; see the 
note on Ephes. 20. Again ðúvapıv 
is used absolutely, as in Rom. i. 3 
just quoted. The addition of Oeo in 
the common texts is a transcriber’s 
expedient, owing to ignorance of this 
absolute use of OéAnua. Theodoret 
strangely substitutes Oedrnra for 0<- 
Anpa. This reading again may be 
due in part to the same ignorance. 
The Armenian translator likewise 
has substituted another word. See 
Justin Dzal. 61 (p. 284) dd rov 
matpos Oeo yeyevviobar compared 
with 2d. 128 (p. 358) yeyevvto 6a. dad 
Tod marpós Suvder kai Bovi airo, 
Tatian ad Graec. 5 Oednpare 86 ris 
dmAórnros aùroð mpomnda Aóyos com- 
pared with Z5. ó Aóyos mpoedOadv èk 
Ths ToU marpós Ovvápeos, passages 
quoted by Pearson. 

3.  yeyewmuévo] So we must 
certainly read with Theodoret (as 
printed by Schulze, but Sirmond 
has yeyevnguévov), as e.g. Justin Dza/. 
66 (p. 291) ëk mapÓévov yeyévvnra: ; 


dAm0ds] not omitted in A, as stated by Zahn, who is misled by 


comp. Ephes. 18 ds éyevvnbn xai 
éBarric6n, Trall. 9 ds adnOds éyev- 
mn. This word should probably 
be read also in Hippol. Haer. vii. 38, 
where the MS has roürov òè oùk ëk 
mapbévov yeyevjoĝar For the mean- 
ing of yeyevvguévov, ‘born, see the 
note on Zes. 18. 

4. tva mdrnpoby x.r.X.] According 
to Matt. iii. I5 ovrw yap mpémov early 
ut 7A9pécat rácav ðikarosúvnv. No- 
thing is said respecting the motive 
of Jesus in coming to baptism in 
the other Canonical Gospels. On 
the other hand the Gospel of the 
Hebrews, which Ignatius is supposed 
to quote below $ 3, gave an account 
of the matter which is inconsistent 
with this motive; Hieron. c. Pe/ag. 
iii. 2 (11. p. 782) ‘In Evangelio juxta 
Hebraeos ... narrat historia; Ecce 
mater Domini et fratres eius dice- 
bant ei; Ioannes Baptista baptizat 
in remissionem peccatorum ; eamus 
et baptizemur ab eo. Dixit autem 
eis : Quid peccavi ut vadam et bap- 
tizer ab eo? nisi forte hoc ipsum 
quod dixi ignorantia est.’ In the 
Praedicatio Pauli also it is said that 
Christ *ad accipiendum Ioannis bap- 
tisma paene invitum a matre sua 
Maria esse compulsum,’ Refract. de 
Bapt. 17 (Cyprian. Of. III. p. 9o, ed. 
Hartel). 

5. Iovriov Marov] For the reason 


1] TO THE SMYRNAANS. 291 


3 , [24 ^ ^ D ae 

Iwavvov iva mAupwor náca AIKAIOCYNH ÚT GUTOU, dàn- 
er \ / z 

5 Ows émi Movtriov [lX aou kal 


e / 

Howdou Terpapxou KaOy- 
£ \ e ^ ? , > O ^ e - 5 

Awuevov drep Huwy év Tapki’ ap ov kaprroU nMELS dro 


Petermann's translation. 5 ka0mNeuévov] GL Theodt ; ka0mNouévov g* 
(some authorities); dub. AC Sev-Syr. 6 è] GLC(?)g; om. Theodt ; 
dub. Sev-Syr. As A is derived from the ambiguous Syriac, it has no authority on 
this point. xaproó] GLAC Sev-Syr (not kaprov, as Zahn; for the word 
SIND is very commonly used in the plural, as a rendering of kapmós: see the 


note on Trall. 11, p. 176); kal g. 


of this specification see the note on 
Magn. 11. Here the date is still 
further defined by the mention of 
Herod. 

‘Hpoddou rerpápxov] The part taken 
by Herod is mentioned by S. Luke 
alone in the Canonical writings; 
Luke xxiii. 7—12, 15, Acts iv. 27. 
This Herod Antipas is called *te- 
trarch’ also in Matt. xiv. 1, Luke iii. 
I9, ix. 7, Acts xiii. I, to distinguish 
him from his predecessor Herod the 
Great who is ó Baowevs (Matt. ii. r, 
comp. Luke i. 5), and from his suc- 
cessor Herod Agrippa who is also 
ó Bao) eús (Acts xii. 1). The absence 
of the definite article however before 
the word obliges us to translate eri... 
‘Hpddov rerpápxov ‘before Herod as 
tetrarch, or more probably ‘when 
Herod was tetrarch’ (—rerpapxobvros 
... Hpddov Luke iii. 1), 

6. ad’ ot kaprov|‘fromwhich fruit’; 
comp. Tertull adv. Fud. 13 ‘Et lig- 
num, inquit, attulit fructum suum[Joel 
ii. 22], non illud lignum in paradiso 
quod mortem dedit protoplastis, sed 
lignum passionis Christi, unde vita 
pendens etc.” The Cross is regarded 
as a.tree (É£Aov); comp. Trall. 11 
edaivoyro àv kdddot rod cravpod kal Ay 
av 6 kapmós aùrôv addpOapros. The 
symbolism of the tree of life planted 
in paradise, as referring to the Cross 
of Christ, dates from a very early 
time; Justin Martyr Dial. 86 (p. 
312 D), Clem. Alex. Strom, v. 11 (p. 


q4es] GLC ; add. écuév g. 


689 sq) aXAgyopóv ó Mavons údov 
(ans dvopacer év rà mapadeiow mepu- 
Tevpevor...ev TOUT 6 Aóyos HvOnoey re 
kal ékapmodópnoev oàpÉ yerouevos ka 
TOUS yevcapévous Ts xpnorórgros aù- 
TOU é(oomoigoev, ère) unde dyev rod 
&Xov eis yvóouw ñuti ddixra. This 
application of the tree of life would 
probably be made by Papias; comp. 
Anastas. Sinait. Hexaem. vii. (p. 961 
Migne), and see Contemporary Re- 
vtew, October 1875, p. 844. Similarly 
Melito saw a reference to the Cross 
in the tree of Gen. xxii. 13, Fragm. 
I2 (p. 418 Otto) $vróv Zaßék, rovr- 
éorw adécews, éxddeoe Tov oTaupov, 
and Clem. Alex. (Stvom. l. c. p. 690) 
so applies also the £/Aov ¢œñs (which 
however he quotes dévdpov áflavaaías) 
in Prov. iii. 18. If the reading xap- 
mov be correct, Christ Himself seems 
to be regarded as the fruit hanging 
upon the tree; and d$' oj kapmo is 
further explained by darò ro 6eoja- 
kapicrov avroð máÜovs. We may be 
said to spring from that fruit, inas- 
much as the taste of it gives us life; 
see Clem, Alex lme Dhem Latin 
translator renders df’ ot xapmo? a 
cujus fructu, which Pearson explains 
*ligni quod hic subintelligitur, taking 
£/(Aov to be the antecedent of oj. 
But it is more naturally rendered 
a quo fructu. Zahn takes the same 
construction as Pearson, but makes 
Xpirrov the antecedent of oj. The 
clause d$ o$...máff ovs must be taken 


19—2 


292 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


^ ^ , [74 3 ' 5 
TOU ÜcopakapiaTov avtov TaÜovs iva Apu cYCCHMON és 


^ ^ , / E \ ew, \ 
TOUS aimvas Sia THS avacTaTEws ELS TOUS dylovs Kal 


\ , ^ af > , Š , af ° c0 > e. 
710 TOUS QCUTOU, ELTE EV lov «Lots ELTE EV €UVEOlV, EV EVL 


^ / > ^ 
TWUATL TÜS EKKANT LAS AUTOU. 


II. 


Taira yap mavra čmalev ó pâs [iva cwbo- 


1 Oeouaxaplorou] g; divine beatissima L (i.e. Peowaxaplorov, the word having been 
mistaken for a superlative); @0eouakaplrou G; dub. A Sev-Syr; beati (uakaplou) C. 


3 elre év...elre èv] gC; ere év...évre èv G; et im...et in L. 
5 yàp] GLg Sev-Syr; om. CA (but supplied in the 
wa cwOduev] GL Sev-Syr; ad vivificandum nos A (but in the marg. 
6 ws] GLCg; om. A (but it omits the context 
érabev ws kal à^$08s owing to homceoteleuton) Sev-Syr. 


Sev-Syr; om. C. 
marg.). 
ut saloemur) ; om. C[g]. 


éni] GLAg 


dvéatnoev éavróv] 


GL Sev-Syr; avéorn g (but below it adds ó Aóyos Tòv éavroÜ vaóv...àvésrmoev); 


as parenthetical, so that (va pm is 
connected with the preceding sen- 
tence. The punctuation in the com- 
mon editions (Cureton, Jacobson, 
Hefele, Dressel) is wrong. 

I. Óeopakapiaorov] Comp. Polyc. 
7. The word occurs also Method. 
de Sym. et Ann. 5 (p. 107 Jahn) pa- 
kapia ov èv yeveats »yvvauGv, Oeopa- 
kapıore. The other form Oeopakapírov 
is worse supported and is exposed 
to a double objection, as a dma€ Ae- 
yópevov, and as being somewhat out 
of place here (since praxapirns is used 
of the blessed dead) Zahn retains 
it and endeavours to justify it as a 
transference from the dead to the 
death. 

apy cvcomnuov] ‘raise am ensign 
aloft. The reference is to Isaiah 
xlix. 22, lxii. 10 (comp. v. 26), where 
the LXX has atpew ovoonpov to 
describe the raising of Jehovah’s 
standard in Jerusalem, about which 
(in the prophet's image) men should 
rally from all parts of the earth. 
Ignatius sees the fulfilment of this 
in Christ's resurrection. Hence the 
words etre év "IovBa(ots etre èv COveow, 
which follow; for the gathering of 
the Gentiles is a prominent feature 
in the context of the evangelical pro- 


phet. Jerome says on Is. v. 26 (Of. 
IV. p. 88), ‘Legi in cujusdam com- 
mentariis, hoc quod dicitur Levadzt 
signum in nationibus procul et sibi- 
labit ad eum de finibus terrae de 
vocatione gentium debere intelligi, 
quod elevato signo crucis et deposi- 
tis oneribus peccatorum velociter 
venerint atque crediderint! The 
commentator to whom Jerome al- 
ludes is probably, as Pearson sug- 
gests, Origen. There is nothing of 
the kind in Eusebius. But the idea 
seems to have been present to the 
mind of Lactantius Div. Inst. iv. 26. 
There is perhaps a reference to this 
same prophetic image of a standard 
in John xii. 32 kdyà av ved ek 
Ths ys, mavras éAkógo mpos épavrov. 
The expression aipew avcornuov oc- 
curs also Diod. Sic. xi. 22, 61, xx. 
51. The word ovconpoy, which sig- 
nifes properly ‘a concerted signal’ 
(Diod. Sic. xx. 51 rò cwvyxeípevov... 
ovoonwoy, comp. Mark xiv. 44), was 
used even by Menander, who how- 
ever is roundly scolded by Phrynichus 
for the solcecism (ed. Lobeck, p. 418). 
There is mention of the ‘vexillum 
crucis’ in Fragm. 5 of the passages 
ascribed to Polycarp by Victor of Ca- 
pua, The word rpóraiov is frequently 


5 


IO 


ir] 
uev |: 


TO THE SMYRNAANS, 


M > ^ af 
Kat aAnOws érabev, de kai 


293 


^ ett 
adnlos dvéornoev 


€ / : D [74 af , ^ 
cavTOV* OVX WOTEP &Ti0TOL TWEs Aéyovaw TO Sokeiv 


gx / > `í \ AT 4 
QuTOV rrezrovÜévai, aUTOL TO Qokety ovTeEs* 


\ \ 
kal kaÜds 


^ \ , ^ o 
QpovoUcw, kai cuuBnoerar avTois, ota ATWUATOLS kai 


Saimovkois. 


resurrexit a mortuis As resurrexit C. 


MSS) ; 
passage, and ofzzzo in the second. 
[elsa €. 


kal] GLA; om. C; al. g. 


7 70 Soxetv] G; TQ Ooketv g (some 


secundum videri L. And so again just below. A has opinione in the first 


8 adrov wemovOévar] GLA 5 mémov0ey 
9 dowudros kal Sarpovexots] 


GL; daemonia sine corpore C; encorporet sicut daemones A; al. g. 


used by Athanasius of the cross or 
crucifixion of Christ (see the note 
on the Festal Letters p. 97, Oxf. 
transl.), as well as by later fathers. 
This image would gain currency 
through the Zaéarum of Constan- 
tine; but it appears before his time, 
as the passage of Methodius p. 103 
(referred to by Zahn) shows, and 
indeed might be suggested by Col. 
ii. 15. The conjectural reading sús- 
cepov, which is adopted by Bunsen, 
destroys the point of the expression. 

3. muorots] The Docetæ, who 
denied the reality of the Cross, did 
not fall under this category; see the 
note on dmorot Š 2. 

ev én oépatt] Doubtless a remi- 
niscence of S. Paul’s teaching, Ephes. 
li. 16 dzokaraAAdég rois dpdorépovs 
ev éyi odpate TO Oe Sia Tod 
otavpov (where also the context, 
ver. 18, contains a reference to the 
evangelical prophet, Is. lvii. 19), iii. 
6 eiva rà eOvn...cUoc@pa, iv. 4 év 
cópa kal év mveüpa, etc.; comp. 
Hermas Sim. ix. 18 gorau ý éxkAnoia 
Tov Oeod ev cópa. And for the exact 
expression see Col. i. 18 rod eóparos 


- Ths ék«kAnoías (comp. ver. 24, Ephes. 


1825/51v4512080,1V.425,/20, 30) The 
corresponding part of the image, 
uéňņ, appears in Zes. 4, Trall. 11. 
Pearson writes on év oøwparıe ‘Hic 
usus erat signi militaris, ut collige- 


rent se et in unum congregarent, si 
quando erant dispersi aut dissipati.’ 

IL ‘He thus suffered for our 
salvation. His passion and His re- 
surrection were realities, and not 
phantoms, as some think. To such 
persons it shall happen according to 
their thoughts; for they are unreal 
and visionary.’ 

6. dvértnoev éavróv] This is dif- 
ferent from the language of the N. T., 
where Christ is always said to be 
raised by the Father. Accordingly 
the interpolator has substituted dvé- 
orn, as Jacobson points out. Below, 
$ 7, the doctrine is stated in the 
scriptural way, odpka eivai ToU Tw- 
THpOS...qv TH xpuoróryr. ó mar)p 
NY ELpen. 

7. moto] He calls the Doce- 
tze unbelievers, because they denied 
the reality of Christs humanity; 
comp. also below Š 5 rà 8€ óvópara 
avray óvra dmiora kr... See the note 
on Trall. 10, where they are likewise 
so called. 

8. avrol ró Soxeiy k.r..] See the 
note on Z7//. 10, where similar lan- 
guage is used. 

9. Kat ouvpBnoera] ‘so shall it 
happen. For instances of kai in the 
apodosis answering to œs (kaÓds) in 
the protasis comp. e.g. Gal. i. 9, Phil. 
i. 20, I Joh. ii. 18, and see Winer 
Š liii. p. 548 sq, A. Buttmann p. 311. 


204 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[ur 


, 2 \ 
III. “Eye yap kai uera Tv avacraow €v Tapki 


r yàp] GL Theodt; àë C[g] Euseb; atguc A. 


2 olda] GLCAg 


Euseb Theodt; vidi L (prob. a mistranslation rather than a v. l. eiov, since 


The passage is wrongly punctuated 
in the common editions. For the 
sense comp. [Clem. Rom.] ii. Š 1 êv 
TO yàp ppoveiv pikpà wept avrod, piKpa 
kai eAmicopev AaBetv. 

dccepárois k.r.A.] ‘being unsubstan- 
tial and phantom-like, in their opin- 
ions: comp. Hieron. Comm. in Tsai. 
xviii. (Op. IV. p. 774) ‘nec daemonia 
subsistant, quia jam a Deo qui vere 
est exciderunt, nec sectae haereti- 
corum, quae nullam retinent verita- 
tem, sed in umbrarum similitudinem 
transeunt et intereunt, where there 
is a similar comparison. For dauov- 
wois see the note on dapomov Š 3. 
In dowparos there is possibly an 
allusion to the capa tis ékkAgoías 
(at the end of § 1) in which they have 
no part. The two adjectives are 
chosen with a view to the daipornov 
do@parov in the narrative which 
follows. The word ĝarpovikós occurs 
in Athenag. Suppl. 25, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. vi. 12 (p. 789), as well as in 
Plutarch. Pearson distinguishes be- 
tween daiporkds (=datporvddns) and 
Satmoviaxos (=Saporiagopevos). The 
distinction is fundamentally just, but 
the one sense frequently runs into 
the other. 

III. ‘I myself am convinced that 
He was still incarnate even after the 
resurrection. He told Peter and his 
companions to handle Him and as- 
sure themselves that He was not a 
phantom. They did so. They were 
convinced, and in this conviction 
they despised death. Nay, He even 
ate and drank with them in the flesh, 
though in the spirit He was one with 
the Father. 

I. kai perà k,.A.] i.e. ‘not only 
during His natural life, of which they 


deny the reality, but evez after His 
resurrection. See the irony of Ter- 
tull. de Carn. Chr. 5 ‘Fuit itaque 
phantasma eZzazn fost resurrectionem, 
cum manus et pedes suos discipulis 
inspiciendos offert, Aspicite, dicens, 
etc 

èv capk k.r.A.] ‘Z know and be- 
lieve Him to be in the flesh’? For 
oda kai micTeUQ comp. Rom. xiv. 14 
oida kai mémeropar. Jerome (Vir. Ll. 
16), clearly deriving the quotation at 
second hand from Eusebius and re- 
ferring the passage by inadvertence 
to the Epistle Zo Polycarp, translates 
‘in carne eum vidi et credo quia sit,’ 
as if it were eiOov, and evidently sup- 
poses that Ignatius had seen our 
Lord in the flesh. Similarly the 
Latin Version here ‘in carne ipsum 
vidi et credo existentem. This in- 
terpretation would be encouraged by 
the story, built upon a misinterpre- 
tation of Oeopópos (see on fes. 
inscr.) that he was the child whom 
our Lord blessed. Chrysostom dis- 
tinctly states the opposite, Hom. zz 
SS. Ign. 4 (II. p. 599) rov ovdé éwpa- 
kóra avTov ovdé dmoXeAavkóra aóro@ 
ths cvvovcías. Pearson conjectured 
that the false interpretation arose 
from John xx. 8 kal ciSev kal èri- 
OTEVOEYV. 

2. xai dre x.T..] The reference 
is plainly to the same incident which 
is related in Luke xxiv. 36 sq; see 
esp. vv. 38, 39 éüókovv mveüpa Óecpeiv, 
kal eürev avrois...¥ndapyoaré pe kai 
ere, dre mvetpa odpka kai doréa ovK 
€xeu, kaÜàs epè Oewpeire čxovra. The 
words however, in which it is told, 
are different. Eusebius (Z. Z. ii. 
36) is at a loss to say from what 
source this incident was taken (ovx 


Ir] 


TO THE SMYRNAANS. 


295 


> ` N M , DA 
«aUTOV ola kai mioTEVw OvTa* Kal öre Tpos TOUS Trepi 


Jerome so translates the ofa of Euseb). 


modo (oUrws) C; dominum A. 


oià ómóÜev Dnrois ovykéxpyra). Je- 
rome however states that it was 
taken *de evangelio quod nuper a 
me translatum est, ie. the Gospel 
to which he has referred before in 
the same treatise, *evangelium quod 
appellatur secundum Hebraeos, et 
quod a me nuper in Graecum Lati- 
numque sermonem translatum est, 
quo et Origenes saepe utitur? (Vir. 
Zil. 2), and which at this time he 
was disposed to regard as the ori- 
ginal Hebrew of S. Matthew ; *Ip- 
sum Hebraicum [Matthaei] habetur 
usque hodie in Caesariensi biblio- 
theca quam Pamphilus martyr stu- 
diosissime confecit; mihi quoque a 
Nazaraeis, qui in Beroea urbe Syriae 
hoc volumine utuntur, describendi 
facultas fuit? (Vzr. JIM. 3); though 
afterwards he spoke less confidently 
on this point ; zz Matt. xii. 13 ‘quod 
vocatur a /erzsque Matthaei authen- 
ticum! (Of. VI. p. 77) ; c. Pelag. iii. 2 
‘in Evangelio juxta Hebracos...siveut 
plerique autumant, juxta Matthaeum, 
quod etin Caesariensi habetur biblio- 
theca’ (Op. II. p. 782). In another 
passage also Comm. in Tsai. xviii. 
praef. (Of. IV. p. 770) he writes 
‘quum enim apostoli eum putarent 
spiritum, vel, juxta evangelium quod 
Hebraeorum lectitant Nazaraei, zz- 
corporale daemonium, dixit etc.’ But 
this statement, though thus repeated 
and explicit, is attended with diffi- 
culties; for (1) Eusebius was well 
acquainted with the Gospel accord- 
ing to the Hebrews. There was a 
copy preserved in his own city, 
Caesarea, in the library which had 
been collected by his friend Pamphi- 
lus, was probably attached to his 
own Church or palace, and certainly 


Üvra] GLg Euseb Theodt; oc 


was habitually used by him; and 
he makes it his business to record 
all references to these apocryphal 
gospels in early writers, and does so 
in other cases. Yet he cannot verify 
the quotation in this instance, not- 
withstanding the striking words 9aió- 
vov àcdpuarov which would be likely 
to dwell on his mind. (2) Origen, 
who was also well acquainted with 
the Gospel according to the Hebrews, 
ascribes the words not to this but 
to an entirely different apocryphal 
writing, de Princ. praef. 8 (1. p. 49) 
*Si vero quis velit nobis proferre ex 
illo libello qui Petri Doctrina ap- 
pellatur, ubi salvator videtur ad dis- 
cipulos dicere, Non sum daemonium 
tncorporeum, primo respondendum 
est ei, quoniam ille liber inter libros 
ecclesiasticos non habetur, et osten- 
dendum quia neque Petri est ipsa 
Scriptura, neque alterius cujusquam 
qui spiritu Dei fuerit inspiratus’. 
With these facts before us it is 
reasonable to suppose either (1) That 
it was a lapse of memory in Jerome. 
His memory sometimes plays him 
strange tricks. Thus he quotes, as 
from ‘Ignatius vir apostolicus et 
martyr, the most notable passage in 
the Epistle of Barnabas; c. Pe/ag. iii. 
2 (11. p. 783). Or inasmuch as, hav- 
ing translated the book, he was not 
likely to have made this mistake, it 
seems more probable that (2) His 
copy contained a different recension 
of the Gospel according to the He- 
brews from that which was known to 
Origen and Eusebius. This Gospel 
bore various titles and there is every 
reason to think that it went through 
various recensions, The copy in the 
Caesarean library would represent 


296 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[u 


[lérpov Alev, En a/Tois AdBete, yHAapHCATE me, Kal 


lAere OTI OYK EIMI AAIMGNION ACOMATON. 


\ Xx nA 5 
Kal evOus Qu- 


A e / , ^ \ 5 ^ 
ToU ijvNravro, kal ériatevoay kpaÜévres TH a'apkt avrov 


r Alev] Gg Theodt; é&XjAv0cv Euseb. 


3 Kpabévres] G; convicti 


(kparnOévres?) L; quum prehendissent eum C5 al. g. A has crediderunt qui eucha- 
vistiae-participes-fuerunt (lit. communicaverunt) et coenaverunt antea corpus et san- 


guinem ejus. 


The first clause is evidently a gloss (prob. later and certainly erro- 
neous) of the second; and the rendering generally points to xpa6évres. 


The 


rendering of C may represent kparjoavres, but prob. is a loose paraphrase of 


xpadévres. See the lower note. 

the text as Origen and Eusebius had 
it. Though Jerome refers to the 
existence of this copy, apparently for 
the sake of vouching for the respec- 
tability of the Gospel, there is no 
reason to suppose that he had seen 
it. His own, as he tells us, was a 
transcript made at Beroea: and this 
incident seems to have been a later 
accretion incorporated either from 
Ignatius or from the Teaching of 
Peter or from some other source. 
As regards Ignatius himself, it is 
impossible to say whether he got it 
from oral tradition or from some 
written source. Under any circum- 
stances the more elaborate language 
(Sarpovioy dawparov) shows that it is 
later than the account in S. Luke, 
which is told in simple and natural 
language (mveüpa cápka kai doréa ovK 
€xet). 

I. Tos mept Ilérpov] ie. rovs 
évõðeka kai rots avy avrois, as the 
company gathered together on this 
occasion is described in the parallel 
narrative, Luke xxiv. 34. The ex- 
pression of mept Ilérpov might in 
late Greek signify Peter alone (see 
Kühner II. p. 231, Winer Š xlix. p. 
506 sq); but it commonly implies 
others as well (e.g. Acts xiii. 13), and 
here the plurals following, aùroîs, 
Aáfere, etc. are decisive. Zahn points 
out that itis the expression used in 
the alternative ending to S. Mark’s 


4 aluart] A; mvebuar. GLC; al. g: 


Gospel found in L and some other 
authorities, rots zepi róv Ilérpov avvró- 
pos e&ryyedav. 

2. Saimovioy aodparov] ‘an in- 
corporeal spirit” Origen (l. c.) sup- 
poses that the author of the Doctrina 
Petri used this epithet aodparov, not 
in its philosophical sense (=‘im- 
material’), but as meaning composed 
of some subtle substance and with- 
out a gross body like man. He says 
also that the Scriptures of the Church 
do not countenance the use of the 
word. Similarly in Clem. Alex. Ea. 
Theod. 14 (p. 971) we read rà ôa- 
póvia do@pata elpntat, ovx os rpa 
py f€xovra" exer yàp oxjpa’ ò kal 
cuvaicOnow koAáceos exer’ GAN as 
mpós cúykpiow TÀV co(onuévov cTopd- 
TOV mvevpartkQv gkià Ovra, dcópara 
etipnra. As the Preaching of Peter 
(Kýpvypa Ilérpov), which is supposed 
to have been the same work, was 
well known both to Clement of 
Alexandria and to the Valentinians, 
we may suspect that the explanation 
in this excerpt has special reference 
to this saying of that apocryphal 
writing. Zahn infers from the intro- 
ductory xai dre here (instead of dre 
yàp), that we have a direct citation ; 
but the inference is precarious. 
When Celsus assumes that the Chris- 
tians regard angels as daipoves, Ori- 
gen is careful to reply that to the 
Christian ear daipwr, Oauióviov, is not 


i11] 


\ ^ / 
Kal TW aipaTe. 
4 


55/péÜnaav Që vzép Oavarov. 


TO THE SMYRNZEANS. 


297 


\ ^ 
dla ToUTO Kai Üavd-ov ka'reQpovnaav, 


\ \ \ > À 
uera ÒE THY avacTracw 


\ i! ^ \ , 
[kai] ouvepayev avTols kai cuvertey as TaAPKLKOS, Ka (rep 
^ p ^ 
TVEVMATIKWS HYWMEVOS TH TATP. 


see the lower note. 


5 nbpéOnoay 00] GL; nbpéOnoav yàp G; def. A 
(doubtless owing to homeeoteleuton); al. g. 


6 kal owédayer] g (the 


connexion of the sentences however being different) C Theodt ; owédayev (om. 


kal) GLA. 


avrois] here, GLCg; after cuvémev [A] Theodt. as 


Tapkikds, Kalrep mvevparixds] GL; òs capkwds kal mvevmarikds Theodt; al. g. 
The sentence is rendered ¿£ erat corpore et spiritu et unitus cum patre in A, and 


a neutral word, but de emi ray 
paviov £Éo roð Tayurépou coparos 
Ovápeov ráccerat Tò rv Satpover 
Óvoua, mÀavóvrev kal TEPLOTOVT@Y 
tous dvÜpómovs, c. Cels. v. 5 (1. p. 580). 
For the whole passage comp. Tert. 
adv. Marc. iv. 43, where this father 
argues against the Docetism of Mar- 
cion from Luke xxiv. 37 sq. Marcion 
retained the passage, but explained 
Kaos êpe Oewpeire čyovra, ‘as ye be- 
hold me having (neither flesh nor 
bones)! ‘Quae ratio tortuositatis 
istius!’, exclaims Tertullian. The 
way in which Apelles disposed of 
such passages in the Gospels may 
be seen from Hippol. Haer. vii. 38. 
3. kpaÓévres] ‘being mixed with, 
Joined to, and so ‘having handled,’ 
the strongest possible expression 
being chosen to express the closeness 
of the contact ; comp. Pind. Pyth. x. 
65 ore yfpas oUAópevov kékparaı iepá 
yevea, Olymp. x. 123 dpa kekpapévov, 
Plato Phaedr. 279 A 96« yevvikoépo 
kexpaoba, Epist. vil. 326 C oUx oro 
Oavpactn pice. Kpabnoera. So also 
avykexpacOa, e.g. Arist. Plut. 853 
Todvpop@ oavykeKpapa Oa(uow and 
see the note on dvaxexpapévous Ephes. 
5. The editors for the most part 
have followed Voss in substituting 
kparrÜévres, which perhaps the Latin 
translator had in his text. But this 
is not so good. The same confusion 
of kpaOjvat, kparnOjva, appears three 


times in Iren. i. 6. 4 dore avTny kpa- 
TnOnvat, KparnOels yvva«kt, kparnOnva, 
where the Latin translation has ‘ut 
ei conjungatur,’ “mixtus mulieri,’ 
‘mixtus est,’ thus showing that the 
Greek should be read Kpa@jvat, kpa- 
Geis, kpaOnva. The construction kpa- 
TetoQa( tux however is unobjection- 
able in itself; eg. Act. Paul et 
Thecl. 9 kpareira emiupía kau, 
Clem. Alex. Strom, vi. 13 (D755) 
Yuxas twas kparovuévas pice TO 
oodpart, Exc. Theod. 32 (p. 977) ékpa- 
THO, damep rois dows, otto 8€ kai TÓ 
TapakAnTa. 

4. TÓ aivart] This is clearly the 
reading of the Armenian Version 
(which wrongly interprets it of the 
eucharist) and seems to be required 
for the sense. ‘Flesh and blood’ is 
a synonyme for the corporeal part of 
man: Matt. xvi. 17, 1 Cor. xv. 50, 
Gal. i. 16. In Heb. ii. 14 the reality 
of Christ’s humanity is described as 
a partaking aiparos kai capkós. The 
Apostles who were invited to feel the 
nail-prints in His hands and the 
spear-wounds in His side might be 
said almost literally to touch His 
blood as well as His flesh. At the 
same time mveúparı might easily be 
substituted for atwarc, because the 
conjunction ‘flesh and spirit’ is fre- 
quent in Ignatius. See Trač. inscr., 
where there is the same confusion of 
mvevpate and aipare in different texts, 


298 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1v 


^ ^ ^ \ [74 
IV. Taira sé mapawe viv, ayarnrol, elows OTL 


Ae ^ [74 af ‘ , Š Ë ^ $ ` ^ 

kal Upeis oUTws ExEeTE? TMpohuvAdcow ðe uas dro TOV 

- A , ^ ^ \ 

Onpiwy av avOpwrouoppwv, ovs ov uovov Set Ups un 
5 \ ^ ^ 

mapadéyerOat, dXN', ei Óvvaov, unóé avvavràv [avrois]* 


e ^ ph 
uovov òè mpocevyeoÜ0e Umép avTOv, dv mws ueravon- 


existens carnalis et spiritualis (Qv capkucós kal mvevparixds) existens unus cum patre 
in C. Possibly the correct reading may be ùs capkuós kal mvevparıkós, but more 
probably the mep was accidentally dropped, and the terminations of capxixds, mvev- 


paruis, were then made to conform by altering the one or the other. 


3 àv- 


Opemouópóerv] txt GLACg; add. aiperudv Theod-Stud (but prob. this is his 


own gloss according to his practice; see Rom. 7 6 éuds pes... XptoTós). 


óc 


judas uh] GL, and so prob. C; ov det twas Theod-Stud; non oportet vos A 


Anon-Syr,; al. g. 


pera O06 KTN] See Acts x. 41 
otrwes cvveQüyouev kai ouvermíojev 
are perà TO dyagTíva, avrov ëk ve- 
kpav. Three several occasions are 
recorded in the Canonical Gospels ; 
(1) Luke xxiv. 30, 35 ; (2) Luke xxiv. 
4224351606) Jona I2) 053 

jvenévos]] Compare Magn. 7 
üvev Tov marpós ovdeyv émoínoev væ- 
pévos dv. See also Marcellus in 
Euseb. c. Marc. i. 2 (p. 37) and 
Eccl. Theol. ii. 4 (p. 106) tv 06 Kara 
mvevpa aidiérnra jnvaocOa Te mrarép, 
TremioTeUkap.ev. 

IV. *I give this advice, knowing 
that you yourselves act as I would 
have you act. But I would put you 
on your guard against these monsters 
in human shape. Do not go near 
them, but pray for them. Their re- 
pentance is not an easy matter, but 
Christ can do all things. If Christ's 
life was a phantom, then my bonds 
are a phantom also. Why then do 
I expose myself to fire and sword 
and wild beasts? Near to these, I 
am near to God ; if only I suffer in 
Christ's name. I have all power in 
Christ, the perfect man.’ 

2. vpets oUros éxere] See the note 
on Ephes. 4 ómep kai moieîre. 


4 Ovaróv] txt L Theod-Stud Anon-Syr,; add. 
éort G; al. g. The verb substantive is naturally supplied in AC. 


avrots] 


mpopvracaa|] Comp. Trall. 8 adda 
mpopvrdcoe vas dvras pov dyammrovs 
K.T.À., with the note. 

3. avôpæropópþoæov] Philo de Aór. 
6 (11. p. 6) kvpuórepov 8€ eizeiv, vÓpo- 
mopoppþov Onpiov. So too avôporoeiðñ 
Onpia, Vit. Moys. i. 8 (11. p. 87), de 
Decal. 16 (11. p. 194). This last ex- 
pression occurs also post. Const. ii. 
21. 'These passages are collected 
by Cotelier. See also Eus. ZZ. E. x. 
4. (p. 467) Ps-Ign. Tars. 1, and comp. 
Suicer s. v. dv9pardpophos. 

6. ómep] sc. Tò peravoeiv. For the 
whole passage compare Iren. iii. 2. 
3 ‘adversus tales [haereticos] cer- 
tamen nobis est, o dilectissime, more 
serpentum lubricos undique effugere 
conantes. Quapropter undique 7e- 
sistendum est illis, si quos ex his 
retusione confundentes ad conver- 
stonem veritatis adducere possimus. 
Etenim si zon facile est ab errore 
apprehensam  resipiscere animam, 
sed zon omnino impossibile est er- 
rorem effugere, apposita veritate." 

7. Gv] Used as a substantive; 
see the note on Aes. 11. 

el yàp k.A.] To be connected 
with the preceding chapter, the in- 
termediate words raóra 6é...¢qv being 


Io 


Iv] TO THE SMYRNZEANS. 


299 


cwow, öTep OVokoXov: Tovcrov dé EXEL é£ovaíav 'Ino-oüs 
Xpirros, TO &ňnðwòv "uov üv. e yap TO Ookeiv 
TAUTA érpaxOn U7TO TOU Kvpiov snudv, Kayo TO Ookeivy 
dédeuat. ri d€ kal éavtov čkõorov dSddwKa TG QavaTw, 
mpos mvp, Tpos Maxatpay, mps Onpia; dXN d èyyis 

xi MN (but AC add. zi also after ó/ekoXov) 

alig: 


orate 1), 


Anon-Syr; om. G Theod-Stud ; 
5 mpoce/xec0e] C Anon-Syr,; mpocetyecba GLAg* (mss, but 

7 yàp] GCg Theodt; autem LS,; at A. TÒ 
Ookév] G; secundum videri L; rd õokeîv g Theodt. The various readings are 
just the same below. The other versions do not assist in determining between 
TÓ doxety and TO oker. 8 kåyò] GS,g Theodt; ego et ipse etiam 
C; ergo et ego L* (but with a v. 1. Z ego) A. 9 éavróv] G; éuavróv g 
Theodt; meipsum L. IO 6 éyyis] SAC (which however translates 


just below as if 6 weraéd Onplwv) Theodt; ¿yybs (om. 6) GL; al. g. 


parenthetical. The return to the 
subject however was suggested by 
the expression rò dAnOwov judy (jv, 
which here, as in Zyadl. 9, has a 


as 
,reference to Docetic error. 


to Ookeiv] For this expression, and 
for the sentiment, see the notes on 
Trall. 10. 

9. éavrov] Of the first person, as 
in Trall. 3 (see the note). 

ék8orov k.r..] We find ék8orov ôd- 
va e.g. Demosth. c. Aristocr. 217 (p. 
692), Polyb. iii. 20. 8, xx. 10. 5, xxviii. 
4. 11, Bel et Drac. 22 ; ékOorov mapa- 
ôrðóva,, e.g. Diod. Sic. xv. 10; &kdo- 
rov mpoOi0ova. Polyb. vi. 49. 5. The 
corresponding čkðorov Aagfávew oc- 
curs Acts ii. 23, Jos. Azz. vi. 13. 9. 

IO. mpós wip k.r.A.] Tertull c. 
Marc. iv. 29 ‘Qualis machaera, talis 
et flamma, commenting on Luke xii. 
49, 51 (Matt. x. 34). 

ó eyyùs paxaípas k.r.A.] A saying to 
this effect is attributed to our Lord 
by Didymus on Ps. Ixxxvii. 8 à 
now ó carnp, O éyyis pou éyyds ro) 
mupos, Ó Óé pakpàv dm eno pakpàv 
amo ths Bactdelas (p. 1488, ed. Migne); 
see Westcott Zzfroduction to the 
Gospels p. 455 (ed. 4). It is men- 


tioned also by Origen Hom. xr in 
Jerem. Š 3 (III. p. 280) * Legi alicubi 
quasi salvatore dicente, et quaero, 
sive quis personam figuravit salva- 
toris sive in memoriam adduxit, an 
verum sit hoc quod dictum est; ait 
autem ipsi salvator Qwz juxta me 
est etc? Gregory Nazianzen attri- 
butes a similar saying to S. Peter, 
Efist. 20 (II. p. 19, ed. Caillau) Kdp- 
vouga yap jeux] €yyós êsri Oo, yat 
mov Oavpaoidrara Aéyov ó Ilérpos. 
This latter saying is quoted again 
by him anonymously, Ora. xvii. 5 
(I. p. 321) éreiór) káuvovca Woy? eyyús 
esri Oeod (though S. Peter is men- 
tioned in the context), on which 
later passage Elias Cretensis (Greg. 
Naz. Of. 1I. p. 895, Migne) remarks 
ev Tj AijagkaMa Llérpov keirav Káp- 
vovoa yap, Quot, Yrvxy, rovréart, ka- 
koraÜoÜcá Te kal rois mepuorariKois 
opryyouérn, eyyice: paňov Oe. These 
words are highly natural as the 
genuine expression of Ignatius be- 
fore his execution (comp. Rom. 5), 
for fire, sword, and wild-beasts all 
alike were possible ; but extremely 
improbable in a forger writing after 
the occurrence had excluded all al- 


300 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1V 


^ M lA N e 

paxaipas, éyyds Ocoi* uerat) Onpiev, uera£v Ocot 
3 A e c S \ x: 

povov v T@ dvopate [nooo XpwroU. eis TO cupmabety 


aUTO. 


TeAelov avOowrrov. 


TAaVTa Uropéve, AVTOU Me évOvvauoUvTOSs TOU 


€ e Lad - ` 
V. “Ov «wes dqvooüvres cdpvovvta, paddov òè 


I peratd Onplwv uerató Oeot] GLS,AC; om. Theodt (from homoeoteleuton); 


def. g. 


qui mortuus est propter nos Sg; al. g. 
ToU TreAelov ávOpómov| C Theodt; add. yevouévov GL; 


sustinebo (imoweve) L. 


2 Inso Xpwrov] GLAC Theodt; domini nostri iesu christi 


3 brouévw] GSgACg Theodt; 


iesu christo deo S,; iesu christo deo nostro A; def. g: see the lower note. 


5 dpvoivra] GLS,AC Theodt; %pvijcavro g. 


mpoofjra. C; prophetia prophetarum. A. 


ternatives but one; see Zahn Z. v. A. 
p. 246 sq. As a matter of fact all the 
three had a place in the case of 
Polycarp’s martyrdom. He was in- 
tended to be thrown to the wild 
beasts (§ 3, 12); he was actually 
burnt at the stake (§ 5, 13 sq); and 
he was ultimately dispatched by the 
executioner’s sword (§ 16). 

I. peraéd Onpiov «.r.r.] So Rom. 
4 äperé pe ÓOmpíov eiva, Ov ay 
€vegTw O eo émiruxeiv. 

2. póvov] sc. yevécÓe. For a 
similar ellipsis with póvov comp. 
Rom. 5, and see the note on Ephes. 
11, The common punctuation (Us- 
sher, Voss, Smith, Jacobson, Cureton) 
which attaches povoy k.r.A. to mavra 
vmouéve destroys the sense. That 
of Hefele, Dressel, and Zahn, which 
punctuates after Xpiorod and at- 
taches eis rò cupmabeiy avrQ with 
what follows, is somewhat awkward. 
I have adopted a punctuation dif- 
ferent from either. 

cvumaÜeiv avrà) Comp. Rom. viii. 
17 

3. mávra vmonévo] This sentence 
is modelled on Phil iv. 13 mávra 
For 
mavra )mouévo comp. 2 Tim. ii. Io, 
and see also $ 9 below, Polyc. 3, 


icx)e ev TO evdvvapovvTi pe. 


7 mpoQmoréw] GLg; 
8 Mwcéws] G; 6 pwoéws g. It was 


Polyc. PAZ 8. The word év8vvapotv 
is especially Pauline in the N. T.; 
it occurs also several times in Her- 
mas, Mand. v. 2, xii. 5, 6, Sz. vi. I, 
Vau fb Ue 

Tov reAeiov avOpeamov| Zahn refers 
to Melito Fragm. 6 (p. 416 Otto) 
Ocós yàp av Ono) re kal üvÓpemos 
The addition yevo- 
pevov, which appears in the com- 
mon texts, ought to be omitted. It 
has doubtless been added to sug- 
gest indirectly the preexistence and 
Divinity of Christ; see the note on 
Rom. 7. The substitutions in the 
Syriac and Armenian are due to a 
similar motive. The object of Igna- 
tius however in this passage was to 
assert broadly the humanity against 
the Docetics, and with the Divinity 
he was not concerned here ; comp. 
i Jirions o. s 

V. ‘Certain persons deny Him, 
or rather are denied by Him. They 
are advocates of death, not of truth. 
'They turn a deaf ear to the Law and 
the Prophets and the Gospel. Our 
sufferings produce no effect upon 
them. What good is it to me, if I 
am praised by one who denies my 
Lord in denying His humanity? I 
will not mention their names. I will 


^ € > , 
TéÀetos O AUTOS. 


v] TO THE SMYRNAANS, 


301 


D / e Š ^ / P ^ 

novn@noav vr aŭro, QvTes cuv5'yopou TOU Üavarov 
^ PN ^ > f A 4 

MaXXov 4 THs adAnOeEias: oùs ovK éreacay ai mpopnreiat 


PSA e , , Š as S 
ovdé 6 vóuos Mwoéws, éXX’ ovde MEX pL viv TO elayryé- 


A joe \ e , ^ 3 » } , \ 
LOV, OVOE Ta NMETEDAa TWV KAT QV pa manuara’ Kal 


to be expected that L* after the Vulg., and C as an Egyptian version, should take 


the form uec? moyses with the v. 


The Gk Mss however are too late to be of 
any account in such a question of orthography. 


aN] GLAg; om. C. 


9 ra8juara] GLC (rà $juérepa rdv kar’ ävõpa maÓuera being rendered victoria 
laborum) g. The clause is translated scripturas nostras quas singulos docemus in A, 
which must therefore have read ua0%uara, (not ypduuara, as Petermann supposes); 
see the confusion of ra@yris, pabnTýs, in Polyc. 7 (see the note on Clem. Rom. 2). 


strive to forget them; until they 
repent and believe in the Passion.’ 

5. “Ov rwes k.r.A.] Comp. Magn. 
9 (with the note), 

paàXXov dé x.r..] See 2 Tim. ii. 12 
el dpynoopeda, Kakeivos ápiijaerat "pas. 
So of the opposite, Gal. iv. 9 vov dé 
yvóvres  Oeóv, paddov 8d yvocévres 
umd Oeoó (see the note there) For 
similar turns of expression in Igna- 
tius see Po/yc. inscr. emuckómQ Zuip- 
vns, paddov émeokomguévo, 2b. 3 mávra 
vmonévew yas dei iva kai aùròs pas 
vropeivn, Trall. 5 moXAà yàp riv 
Aeimet iva Oeo) uù) Xeurue0a, Rom. 8 
Oednoare iva kai úpeîs OeAnOAre. See 
also such expressions as PAz/ad. 10 
9ofácai Tò Ovopna...kai úpeîs Soéac br- 
ceabe, 26, 11 éüéfao0e adtods ws xai 
vpas 6 Kúpıos (with the note), PoZyc. 

T@ ÉmwkómQ mpocéyere iva kal ó 
Ocós viv, and below Š 10 ovde émno- 
xvvOnre- oùvðè vpas enacyvvOnoeraL 
K.T.À. 

6. ovvpyopo k.rA.] ‘advocates of 
death, because by denying the verity 
-of Christ's passign and resurrection, 
they practically denied the immor- 
tality of man; comp. vexpopdpos 
below. 

7. THs adnOeias] It is probable 
that these heretics, like many others 
since, arrogated to themselves a 
monopoly of ‘the truth,’ Thus the 


Valentinians had their Evangelium 
Veritatis (lren. iii. 11. 9); Celsus 
entitled his work 'AAz6js Aóyos (Orig. 
€. Cels. i. 40 perà odds Opacdrnros 
kal dda{oveias émvypdas x.7.d.); and 
Hierocles similarly named his own 
attack on Christianity badyOns (Eu- 
seb. c. Hzerocl. 1, p. 511, etc). 

ai mpodrreia. k..A.] As Judaizers 
they professed the greatest respect 
for thé Law and the Prophets, and 
yet they ignored the testimony borne 
by them to Christ's passion; see the 
notes on Magn. 6, Philad. 5, 8, 9. 
Like S. Paul before him, Ignatius en- 
countered a stubborn opposition, as 
he duedéyero arò ràv ypadóv, Scavolyor 
xai zapariÉépevos Gre Tov Xpuorov ee 
mabey kai avactiva èk vexpov (Acts 
xvii. 3). 

8. péxpı viv] i.e. notwithstanding 
the clear revelation of the Gospel; 
comp. Magn. 8. 

9. rà nuérepa] On his own suffer- 
ings, as a testimony to the reality 
of Christ's life and death, see Trail. 
IO (with the notes). 

tov kar dvOpa|] i.e. ‘our several 
sufferings, i.e. of himself and other 
martyrs and confessors, each addi- 
tional instance being a fresh testi- 
mony to Christ's passion. For oí 
kat’ áv0pa see the note on Ephes. 4. 


302 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


^ > ^ P , 5 ^ 
yap Trepi nuwy TO avTo $povovaw. Ti yap [ue] operet 
Dia 25. > ^ \ \ , L4 ^ \ 
ei ¿uë érawet Tis, Tov O06 Kipiov pov BAacdnpet, un 
€ ^ , š \ ^ C \ Z 
OMoNoyay aŭrov capkoQopov; O 06 TOUTO un AEyor 


/ 5 M $ / PN J 
TENELWS avTOV ATMNPVNTAL, (V veKpoopos. 


\ \ , / 
Ta OÓ€ OvO- 


, ^ 3! »! , CÓ , 5 , ^ 
Kara CUTOV, OVTA ATLOTA, OUK € o€ev fot ¿yypavau 


I ue] GL (after juvat) AC; om. g Theodt. 
éue] Gg; elmep we Theodt; ei éué (or ue) uév C; sz... me A. 


gA Theodt; after pede? GLC. 
add. Oedr g. 

note § rr below). 
app. had dy vekpopópos. . 


un] GL[A]g; om. C. 
Theodt has ws vekpoQopov for dv vexpopdpos. 
5 ok] GLAC; vv ovk g. 


2 el 

Tis] here, 
3 capkoóópov] txt GLAC Theodt; 
4 à»] gLA; àv G (see the 

C is mutilated, but 
4 els TO... 


à$eNe] dere? G. 


ávácrac:s] GLAC (but 76 má0os is paraphrased passionem salvatoris mostri in A, 


and mortem domini nostri iesu christi in C); om. g. 


IO TLOTEÚTW- 


cw] LAC Tim-Syr r Anon-Syn; misredowner G; moreton g (the sing. being 


I. TÓ avrò dpovobcw] To be ex- 
plained by Š 4 ei yàp rò Ookeiv rabra 
empdx0n vd ro) Kupiov nor, Kayo Td 
Ooxety dé5enaz. The view which they 
take respecting Christ’s sufferings 
applies by parity of reasoning to his 
own. They reduce everything to an 
unreality. 

2. el epè emawei] Pearson sup- 
poses that there is a special reference 
to his title Gcodpos : * Illorum laudes 
non acceptabat, dum eum Oeo$ópov 
vocarent, negarent autera Christum 
capkooópov, et se probarent vexpo- 
opovs.’ But if this had been so, the 
word Oeo$ópos would almost cer- 
tainly have been expressed, for the 
sake of the alliteration, as well as 
for clearness. See also the notes on 
Trall. 4. 

4. Qv vekpooópos] ‘he himself car- 
rying a corpse The word signi- 
fies ‘a bearer in a funeral,’ ‘ves- 
pillo? ‘bajulus’; e.g. Polyb. xxxv. 6. 
2 mórepov )mó rGv map' rpiv èv Ayala 
vexpopopor kkoo Go. Appian Bell. 
Civ. iv. 27 mAeová(ovauw oi vexpopdpor. 
For other applications of the meta- 
phor see Philo F/acc. 19 (11. p. 540) 


créAXopat yàp ó kako0a(pov éyà rpó- 


mov Twa vexpopopay épavróv óomep 
eis jplov, de Agric. 5 (I. p. 304) áx6os 
Tomovroy ovK amoTiderar vexpopopovaca, 
Leg. Alleg. iii. 22 (I. p. 100) un yap 
dAXo Te momoe ékaorov Nay moetn, 
Ü) vexpopopeiv, TO vekpòv eÉ éavroð 
oôpa éyeipovons kal dpoxÓl depovons 
Ths Wuxns (comp. de Migr. Abr. 5, 
I. p. 439, de Somn. ii. 36, I. p. 690), 
Greg. Naz. Of. II. 246 vexpodopos 
(of Adam on his expulsion from 
Eden) Cotelier quotes Cypr. de 
Laps. 30 (p. 259, Hartel) “spiritali: 
ter mortua supervivere hic tibi et 
ipsa ambulans funus tuum portare 
coepisti Hieron. Z. 68 (I. p. 319) 
*Quanti hodie diu vivendo portant 
funera sua et, quasi sepulcra de- 
albata, plena sunt ossibus mortuo- 
rum.’ This last quotation combines 
the metaphors which appear in this 
and the parallel passage of Ignatius 
referring to these same Docetic 
Judaizers, Phzlad. 6 oro, enol ordai 
elow kal rabot vekpàv. But why 
are they called vexpopopo.? Pearson 
quotes such passages as 1 Tim. v. 6 
(oca réOvnkev, Apoc. iii. I ¿(ç Kal 
vekpós et. It may possibly have this 
reference to their moral state also; 


v] TO THE SMYRNZANS. 393 


i > A \ v , > ^ T7 
«XXa poe wévovró mor avv pvnuoveúeiw, uéxpis oU 


IO 


peravorja cgi eis TO malos, 
VI. 

/ ^ , , \ e of e 

Sofa cv dyyéňwv kal oi &pXxovres OpaToií TE Kal 


> 7 SAN \ fe > A ^ ^ 
copaTot, EAV MN TLOTEVOWOLY ELS TO «uua Xpia-T oU [ rou 


v/ ' 2 ^ Z 
O €OTLY NUOV dvacTacls. 


\ / 
Mnóeis wXavdaÜw. Kai rå €rroupavia kal 7 


necessary to harmonize with changes in the context). TOU Oeo] gui est deus 
Anon-Syr,; gui est dei Tim-Syr (where the relative may refer either to qua or 
to xptorov); om. GLAC (which last renders the sentence, zz dominum nostrum 
Jesum. christum et sanguinem eius sanctum); al. g (but something corresponding to 
Tov coU might have been expected, if it had been in his text). If any insertion is 
to be made, roU Oeo has the advantage of explaining the renderings of both Anon- 


Syr, and Tim-Syr. 
tuting NHON'TT for 


but I believe that it points more 
directly to their doctrinal position. 
If Christ's resurrection were not real, 
then their own immortality was de- 
stroyed also; they were simply carry- 
ing corpses to the grave. 

5. dvra amoral ie. ‘being those 
of unbelievers,’ by a very natural 
brachylogy ; comp. Š 2 domep dmorol 
Twes Aéyovauw. 

7. eis rò máÓos| For the con- 
struction comp. Phzlad. 8 peravon- 
coow eis évornra Oco0 (with the note). 
For the prominence given to the 
Passion see the note on Æphkes. 
inscr. 

VI. ‘Be not deceived. Even the 
angels will be judged, if they believe 
not in Christ’s blood. Let no man 
be elated by office. Faith and love 
are all in all. Beware also of the 
false teachers. They have no regard 
for deeds of charity. They abstain 
from the eucharist, because they do 
not acknowledge it to be the flesh of 
Christ which truly suffered and rose 
again.’ 

8. Myndels mAaváo60o] See Ephes. 
5 with the note. 

Kal rà émovpáwa k.r.A.] See Trall. 


They might however be brought to conformity by substi- 
NONS in the Syriac, or conversely. See the lower note, 


5 p?) où OUvapat rà érovpávia ypdypa.... 
ÜUvapat voetv rà érrovpdvia k.r.À. 

7] 9ó£a réy dyyéXov] i.e. ‘the angels 
notwithstanding all their glory.’ 

9. dpxovres] For this word as a 
designation of angels comp. Trall. 5 
with the note, and see Hort's article 
in Smith's Dict. of Christ. Biogr. 
s.v. Archon. 

óparoí re kai dóparo]] The same 
expression occurs again in a similar 
connexion, Trall. 5 ras avaráceis Tas 
dpxovrikás, opara Te kai dópara (see 
the note there). 

IO. To) Oeod] ‘who is God? I 
have inserted these words in brackets 
with very great hesitation, as a pos- 
sible reading. Such a mode of 
speaking however is almost, if not 
quite, unique in Ignatius; see ÆpAes. 
inscr. roð Oeo yuv. If this was 
the reading of Timotheus and the 
anonymous Syrian writer, as it seems 
to have been (see the upper note), 
it may be due to a transcribers 
reminiscence of Ephes. 1 èv atparı 
Oeo. See the notes on Š ro below, 
and on Trall. 7, and compare the 
variation of the Syriac Version above 
in Š 4 rod redeiov avOparov. 


304 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


^ , if D if c ^ D , 
Ocot], kdketvois Kplots ETTLY. 6 YOPAN yopeiro. TOTOS 
\ 4 E M 4 WD , 
unòéva pusioúTw' TO yap OXov EGTLY TLOTIS Kat AYATN, 
> , \ M € 
dv ovdev mpokékpvrai. Katauabete de Tous ETEOO0E- 


- , ^ ^ Ni > e ^ $ A 
oüvras eis THY xapw'Inoov XpiaroU Thv eis Huas éA00v- 


r Tóros] GCg Tim-Syr; gualiter (rò môs) L; def. A. The same corruption of 


Tómos appears in Clem. Rom. 54. 


4 Inso) Xpwro0] GL; domini nostri jesu christi C; dei A; al. g. 


3 09€] GLC; etiam A; ov [g]. 
7 o) 


mept 0NBopévov o) mep. dedeucvov] GL; oppressorum et ligatorum A; aut alicuius 


I. ó xoepàv xcepetro] ‘Let him 
that receiveth receive, taken from 
Matt. xix. I2 ó duvdpevos xopeiv yo- 
petro. Itis a mysterious truth, and 
beyond the capacity of the common 
hearer. Similarly in 7vad//. 5, when 
he is tempted to speak of the hea- 
venly hierarchy, he checks himself 
and says, PoBotpar uù) vgmiow o$ow 
dpiv BraByny mapa0ó: kai avyyvopoveiré 
pou pymore où SuvnOevres yopar 
otpayyakwOnre, which passage also 
ilustrates the metaphor in xopeiv. 
The interpolator himself was not able 
xepeiv, for he obliterates all mention 
of the angels here, evidently looking 
upon them as a stumbling-block, 
and substitutes «àv BacuXebs 7 Kav 
iepeds Kav üpxov Kay iOwr]s k.T.A. 
Perhaps the reading morevoopev 
may be due to the same cause. 
S. Jerome (quoted by Smith) says, 
Comm. in Ephes. iv. 10 (VII. p. 614) 
*Neque enim scire possumus quo- 
modo et angelis et his qui in inferno 
erant sanguis Christi profuerit; et 
tamen quin profuerit, nescire non 
possumus. 

rómos] ‘place, i.e. ‘office, 'digni- 
ty’: see the note on Polyc. 1. 

2. dvow)re] Pearson compares 
Iren. iv. 26. 3 ‘principalis conses- 
sionis [i.e. mperoka0e8pías, where the 
MSS have ‘concessionis’] tumore elati 
sunt.’ 

miotis Kal dydarn] See the note on 
Ephes. 14 apxn (ahs k.r.À.; and for 


the frequent conjunction of míeris 
and dydmn in Ignatius, the note on 
Ephes. 1. 

3. dv ovdev mpokékpirau] ‘to which 
nothing is (justly) preferred, ‘than 
which nothing is better’; comp. 
Magn. with the note. 

karapáGere] ‘mark well, as in Matt. 
vi. 28; comp. Polyc. 3, and see also 
Clem. Rom. 7. 

érepoüofotvras] See the note on 
Magn. 8. The xdpis, as to which 
they have gone astray, is the gift of 
Christ's incarnation and passion. 
The yydun of God, which they defy, 
is the obligation to love imposed 
upon them in consequence thereof. 
Their doctrinal error leads to their 
moral failure. On the phrase yropn 
Oco see Rom. 8 with the note. 

5. mepi ayámgs] i.e. ‘deeds of 
charity.’ There is apparently no re- 
ference to the technical sense which 
dyarn has below in $ 8. It is the 
general term introducing the men- 
tion of the special directions in which 
love may be manifested. 

6. mepi ynpas x.r.M.] For the 
whole passage comp. Barnab. 20 
xXnpa kai òpþav o) mpocéxovres... 
amoarpepopevor Tov évüeópevov kal ka- 
rarmovoüvres TOV ONuSópevov. 

The care of widows and orphans 
was regarded as of primary obliga- 
tion in the Christian Church from 
the beginning; Acts vi. r, ix. 39, 41, 
I Tim. v. 3—16, James i. 27. See 


vi] TO THE SMYRNAANS. 


Cav, Tws ÉvavTioL 


305 


JUR ^ / ^ ^ 
elo Th yvwun ToU Oeog. Tepi 


> A 3 / > _ 5 \ , > 3 ^ 
ayamns ou medet avTois, ov TEOL Xnpas, ov TEL oppavou, 


ov mepi ÓXiBouévov, 


E M if Ü 
OU mepi OcOeuévov [7 XeAvuévov], ov 


indigentis aut alicuius oppressi C (thus transposing the two words and reading deopé- 
vov Or évdeouévou for dedeuévov 3 see Doctr, Apost. 5, quoted below); 6X6uevoy... 


Oeüeuévov [g] (changing the form of the sentence). 


om. AC[g]. 


Ñ XeNvuévov] GL; 


The omission in g however is of little account, since this re- 


cension contains nothing corresponding to the remainder of the section où mepl 


TEVOVTOS K.T.À. 


also (besides Barnab. 2o just quoted) 
Polyc, 4 Xüpat p dueXeiaOccav, 
Polyc. PAZ. 6 yu dueXobvres xrjpas i) 
oppavod jj Tévnros, Hermas Vis. ii. 4 
vovOerrceu Tas Xüpas kal rods éppa- 
vous, Mand. viii Xüpais — Ómppereiv, 
OpQavobs xal VoTepovuévovs émukér- 
Tea, Sim. i dvri aypav otv dyopa- 
Cere uyads OdiBopuevas...cat Xüpas kal 
ópiavois émickémreoÓe kai M) mapa- 
BXémere avrovs, Sim. v. 3 does airó 
x'ipa: 1j óp$avá ij VoTepovuévo (comp. 
Sim. ix. 26, 27), Justin Apol i. 67 
(p- 99) ézukovpet ópdavois re Kal xrjpais 
Kai rois dua vócov Ü OC anv airíav 
Aeurouévois Kal Toig èv Ôeopois ofsi 
K.T.À., Clem. Hom. Ep. Clem. 8 rois 
Lev oppavois mouoÜvres rà yovéov rais 
d€ y5pai rà avdpar, iii. 71 TULATE.. 
xüpas eð BeBioxvias, ópdavo)s ds 
exkAnoias Tékva, Tertull. Apol. 39 
*dispensatur...egenis alendis human- 
disque, et pueris ac puellis re ac pa- 
rentibus destitutis, iamque domesti- 
cis senibus, item naufragis, et si qui 
in metallis, et si qui in insulis vel 
in custodiis, dumtaxat ex causa dei 
sectae alumni confessionis suae fiunt, 
Apost. Const. ii 24 oikovopelro òp- 
$avois kal yýpais kal OdBopevors kai 
Eévors dropovpévois, Cyprian Efzsz. 8 
(p. 487) ‘sive viduae sive thlibomeni 
qui se exhibere non possunt, sive hi 
qui in carceribus sunt etc. (comp. 
Epist. 7, p. 4855 Test. 113, p. 181). 
For the practice of the Roman 
Church see Cornelius in Euseb. ZZ. Æ. 


IGN. II. 


Vi. 43 xfüpas civ OXiBopévots vmep 
Tas mevrakosias, ods mávras 7 ToU ĝe- 
cTÓTOV dpi kai prarOperia ĉa- 
Tpéper. 

7. Od Bopéevov] Besides passages 
in the last note, comp. Doctr. A fost. 
5 droorpepopevor tov evOeopevov, kara- 
Trovovvtes Tov OrBdpevorv, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. vi. 12 (p. 873) apéder ÓNiBó- 
pevov emixovpifer, mapauvdias, Tap- 
opunoeot, rais Biorikaîs Xpetas èm- 
Kovpõv. 

Ôcðeuévov] The prisoners again 
were a special object of solicitude to 
the early Christians, more especially 
if they were suffering for the faith ; 
comp. Heb. x. 34 kal yàp rois deopi- 
ote ovveraĝýoare, xiii. 3 piuvjokeoĝe 
Tàv Üecuíoev ds cuvdedeuévor, Clem. 
Rom. 55 émwráyue0a roddovs èv np 
mapadedwkdras éavroùs cis Seopa bras 
érépovs AvrpóGovra, K.T.À., TÀ. 59 Av- 
Tpwca Tors Serpiovs juv, Hermas 
Mand. viii èé dvaykóv durpoicba 
rovs Sovrovs rod Oeod (with Sim. i 
quoted above), Clem. Hom. Ep. 
Clem. 9 mo nüAÀXov mewóvras Tpé- 
Pere kai dupdot mapéxere mórov, yvu- 
vois évOvua, Toùs voroðvraşs émické- 
mreaÓe, rois ev pudakais émibawópevo 
os OvvagÓe BonÜeire k.r.À. (comp. 20. 
iii. 69, xi. 4, xii. 32, where nearly the 
same words are repeated), Dionys. 
Cor. in Euseb. ZZ. Æ. iv. 23 (of the 
Roman Christians) 2 peraddous Se 
ddeApois Vmápxyovgw émiyopnyodvras 
K.T.À., Apost. Const. iv. 9 fvdpevor 


20 


306 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v1 


^ \ ^ / \ A 
TEpl TEWØVTOS 7) dwpwvross eUxapio Tias Kal TOCTEVXNS 


€ ^ \ y / 
dTéxovTaL dud TO um OjkONOvyetv THY eiyapıo Tiav TapKa 


> ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ \ \ ^ 
ela, oU GwTHpos juav Incov Xpw rov, Tnv mep Twv 


1 OnjGvros] C breaks off at this word. 


SovAovs kai alypwarorovs, Seopious emn- 
pea(opévovs, ňkovraş k karaBíkgs Sua 
TÓ ğvopa TOU Xpiorod vm rvpávvov cis 
povopaxtav kai Qavarov, V. I ei dé xai 
olds Te éotly dmavra Tov (Mov avrod 
dzoüópevos piaacba aŭroùs êk ToU 
decpornplov, paxdpios Zora, (with the 
whole context) Hippol. Haer. ix. 12, 
Cyprian Epist. 72 (p. 698) and pas- 
sim. See especially, as the testimony 
of a heathen, Lucian de Mort. Peregr. 
12 éret Ò ody ed€dero [ó Hepeypivos], of 
Xproriavol cuppopay jyodpevor TÒ m pày- 
pa mavra éexivovy eEapracar mepopévot 
avrov: etr emei rovr Hv advvaroy, rj ye 
Ay Gepareia mra od mapépyos ddra 
c)v omov0j eylyvero: kal éwĝev pèv 
evOds 5v ópüv mapa To Secpornpio 
mepuiévovra ypabia xrpas. Twas kal 
mabla oppava k.r.A. For passages in 
the early Liturgies see the note on 
Clem. Rom. 59. 

7) AeAvpevov|] No adequate sense 
can be given to these words. It is 
proposed for instance to interpret 
9e0euévov ‘a cripple’? and AeAvpévov 
‘a paralytic’ (‘de podagricis et pa- 
ralyticis aliisque etc.” Smith). For 
dedepévos in this sense comp. Luke 
xiii. 16 ravrny...nv @noev 6 Saravas... 
ouk ôer Avivar dmó Tod Secpuod Tov- 
rov; Clem. Hom. xi. 18 yuy) óA 
ind dous twos cvvOeÜcica: and for 
Aedvpévos, Epist. Vienn. in Euseb. 
H. E. v. I ind tod yrjpos kai úrò ths 
vócov AeÀvpévov (of Pothinus), Greg. 
Naz. Of. Il. p. 276 ékavrovrápxoto 
AeAvpevoy Space aida in allusion to 
Luke vii. 2 sq (comp. Avous zb. II. p. 
278, Avopedjs ib. pp. 860, 946). 
But though each word singly might 
refer to some kind of disease, the 


evxapiorias kal mpocevxíjs dm- 


odd antithesis of ‘bound and loosed’ 
in this sense is quite inconceivable ; 
not to say that parallel passages 
make the sense of dedepévov ‘a pri- 
soner’ quite certain. Markland again 
would render it ‘fatigato, deficiente’ ; 
but even if this rendering could 
stand in itself, it makes no antithesis 
to dedepévov. Zahn preserves this an- 


` tithesis (Z. v. Æ. p. 333) by giving to the 


passage the sense “they care not 
whether a man is in bonds or free’; 
but this assigns to 7j quite a different 
sense from that which it has in the 
next clause wept mewóvros 7 Supdrros. 
It seems necessary therefore to eject 
the words 7 AeAvpévov, as the addi- 
tion of some officious scribe who had 
more regard for rhetoric than for 
sense. They are omitted in the 
Armenian aud Coptic Versions. 

I. evxapiorias] On the appli- 
cation of this word to the Holy 
Communion, and even to the ele- 
ments themselves, see the note on 
Philad. 4. It would appear from 
$ 8 (comp. Phzlad. 4), that these 
heretics did not altogether abstain 
from this sacrament, but that they 
established a eucharist of their own 
apart from the Church. This Igna- 
tius does not allow to be a real 
eucharistic feast (Š 8 ékeivy BeBata 
evxapioria k.r.A.), And therefore he 
says here evxapiorias dwéyovra. The 
mpooeuxis is the public prayer of the 
Church, more especially that which 
accompanies the eucharist. Theo- 
doret Of. IV. I. p. 231 quotes the 
passage loosely, evyapiorias kal mpoo- 
hopas ovk amodéyovrat K.T.À. 

2. dua TÓ u) Gpodoyciv k.r.à.] The 


vi] 


TO THE SMYRNAANS. 307 


° ^ e ^ ^ e ^ fe 
AMAPTLOV NUOV mahotsav, NV TH XPNTTOTHTL O TATNP 


5 ñyerpev. 
VII. Oj 


éxovrat] GLA; evxaptorlas kal Tporpopas oUk dmrodéxovrat Theodt; al. g. 


> 5 te t ^ ^ ^ ^ 

OUV avTiNéyorTes Th Üwped tov Otoü 
^ y 

cv(nroUvres dmoÜvijakovaa. 


, ^ 
Tuvehepev òè avTois dya- 


6 TN 


Swpeg] G; huic dono (Tõe Swpeg) L; donis AY; al g: 


argument is much the same as Ter- 
tullian’s against the Docetism of 
Marcion, adv. Marc. iv. 40 ‘Accep- 
tum panem et distributum discipulis 
corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est cor- 
pus meum dicendo, id est figura met 
corporis. figura autem non fuisset, 
nisi veritatis esset corpus. ceterum 
vacua res, quod est phantasma, figu- 
ram capere non posset? The eu- 
charist implies the reality of Christ's 
flesh. To those who deny this 
reality, it has no meaning at all; to 
them Christ’s words of institution 
are false; it is in no sense the flesh 
of Christ. Somewhat similarly Ire- 
naeus (iv. 18. 5) argues against those 
who deny the resurrection and im- 
mortality of the body from the eucha- 
rist; and he challenges them either 
to change their opinions or to give 
up the celebration (7) jv yvepny aAXa- 
£árecav Ü rò mporpépew rà eipnuéva 
mapatteicOwcav). See also v. 2. 2. 
4. i» «rd.] Comp. Trall. 9, and 
see the note on $ 2 above. 
VIL ‘It is death to gainsay the 
gift of God. They must learn to 
love, if they would rise again. Have 
nothing to do with these men, but 
give heed to the Prophets, and es- 
pecially the Gospel, where the Pas- 
sion and Resurrection are set forth.’ 
(6. rj Oeped ro) Oeo] The ‘gift 
"of God’ is the redemption of man 
through the incarnation and death 
of Christ. It has substantially the 
same sense in Ignatius, as in S. Paul, 
Rom. v, 15 sq, 2 Cor, ix. 15; comp. 


ren, s 2 13... Those who denied 
the reality of the passion gainsaid 
the gift. There is no direct reference 
here to the eucharist, as Aldrich 
Supposes. The elements were called 
d@pa, not as the gifts of God, but as 
the offerings of the congregation. 

7. cv(mroüvres x.r.À.] ‘die by their 
disputing? The contentious spirit 
is death; for it is the negation of 
love (rò dyarâv). 

ouvedepev dé k.r.A.] This was the 
point in which they were at fault, 
Tepi dyámns où uéÀew adrois Svr aT 
they had devoted themselves to cha- 
ritable works instead of theological 
disputations, it would have been 
better for them (cwvéepev adrois). 
Love would have revived them, for 
love is resurrection, is life: comp. 
I John iii. 14 5ueic otüapev Bre pera- 
BeBykapev èk ro) Oavarov eis THY 
Conv, dre dyamópev rois dOeA ovs - 
Ó pu) dyamdv péver é TO Óaváro. 
Many commentators (Cotelier, Pear- 
son, Aldrich, Hefele, Zahn) would 
take dyanav=dydrnv mou ‘to hold 
an agape' (see $ 8 below). This how- 
ever seems lexically impossible, nor 
would the passage be improved by 
the interpretation, if it could stand. 
The word might possibly contain an 
indirect allusion to the agape, but 
even this would destroy the force of 
the expression. The sense ‘to ac- 
quiesce,’ i.e. ‘in the revelation of the 
Gospel,’ which Smith assigns to the 
word, is too weak for the occasion. 


20—2 


308 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vni 


nav, iva kal dvactoow. mpérov [o?v] éoTiv améxeo a. 
Tdv TOLOUTWY, Kal NTE KAT iðlav mepi avT&v NANET 
wire kowh' mpocéxew ðe Tots pe rina: Spain òè 
TH evayyeriw, €v w TO malos uiv dedyAwrar kai ñ 


dvdoTaGcis TETENELWTAL, 5 


VIII. 


r kal] G; om. L (the omission of e£ after z was easy); al. Ag. 


Gg; om. AL* (but see Appx). 
cum A. 


paraphrase of g, rois evaryyehicamévors bu k.T.À. ; 


GL (but om. L4) g; ef A; om. [Dam-Rup 1]. 


Tous [86] mepi pots devyere, ws dpxnv 


otv] 
2 mepl] Gg* (but v. l. uer); de L; 


4 uiv] GL, and this reading seems to be recognised in the 


Tuv) A. 6 66] 
7 ws Ingos Xpwrós 


nostra (— 


TG Tarp] GL Dam-Vat 2 Dam-Rup 5; 6s ó xpiords inootds T@ marpt g; sicut 


iesu christo et patri deo A. 


I. mpérov otv éegriv| See the note 
Ephes. 2 

2. mept avtov| This expression 
suggests that the previous róv Torov- 
rov may perhaps be neuter, and not 
masculine, as it is generally taken. 
See however Š 5 rà 8e óvópara avràv 
K.T.À. 

3. rois mpopyras| On the pro- 
phets as witnesses to the passion 
and resurrection see $ 5 above, and 
Philad. 5, 9, with the notes. 

é£apéros è] ‘but preeminently ; 
comp. Philad. 9 eéaiperov dé te exer 
TO evayyéduoy «.t.A. For efaipéras 
see the note on Trall. 12. "BEapérws 
de occurs, as here, in Mart. Ant. 3. 

4. TÓ evayycrio| ‘The Gospel’ 
is here the body of fact or doctrine. 
There is no direct reference to a writ- 
ten record here, though the whole 
body of the four Gospels is often 
called rò evdayyédiov (e.g. Orig. c. 
Cols. i. 50, 76, v. 56). Pearsons 
question ‘An unum tantum evange- 
lium viderat?’ is quite out of place. 
For the distinction between ‘the 
Gospel’ and ‘the Gospels,’ comp. 
Iren. Hi. II. 9 oí aOerotvres thy i0cav 
Tov evayyeXiov kal etre mÀe(ova etre 


8 mpecBvreplo] txt GL Dam-Vat ; 


add. dé g; 


eAdrrova róv eipruévov maperaeporTes 
evayyeAlov mpórora, and again ‘in 
nihilo conveniens apostolorum evaz- 
gelits, ut nec evangelium quidem sit 
apud eos sine blasphemia! (comp. 
zb. Š 8 ‘neque rursus pauciora capit 
esse evangelia : quoniam...firmamen- 
tum ecclesiae est evangelium etc’), 
Orig. c. Cels. ii. 13 èv rois evayye- 
Aiots yéyparrai...ovðèv è eixyev eEo- 
Oev Tov eúayyeÀ (ou hépew (comp. i. 
44,.45, li. 27, 34). 

5. reredelwra] ‘has been fully 
accomplished’; comp. Philad. 9 rò 
06 evayyeAvov ámápriapá eotw apbap- 
gias. The word cannot signify, as 
several commentators take it, ‘is 
demonstrated, assured, attested.’ 

VIII. ‘Shun divisions. Follow 
the bishop and presbyters, and re- 
spect the deacons. Do nothing with- 
out the bishop. The eucharist is 
not valid without his consent. Where 
the bishop is, there should the laity 
be found. It is not allowable to 
baptize or to hold an agape without: 
him. A ceremony so held is dis- 
pleasing to God and has no vali- 
dity.’ 

6. Toùs 0€ pepiopods x.7.A.] Comp. 


Io 


viii] TO THE SMYRN/ZEANS. 309 


y ^ - , 3 ^ e 2 ^ 
TOMTESV TG ETLOKOTW) dkoXovÜeiTe, ds ` Ino-oUs 
\ ^ / \ ^ 
Xpirros TO TATPl, Kal TH 
/ 
O'TONOLs* 


Kako. 
"pea BuTEpio WS ToOls aro- 
TOUS ðe dtakovous évrpéreo Ge ws Ocoü évTOAÀNv. 
UnÓeis ywpis émiakózov Ti TPATOETW TOV dVQHkOVT(OV Eis 
THY €KKAnGolay, éxelyn BeBaia eUxapia ría ryeicOw 7 
UTO TOV éÉmiGkomOV ovca, 


sacerdotibus A (see the note on Trall. 7, p- x7o). 
Dam-Reg Dam-Rup; add. 8wkovoüvras g Dam-Vat. 
Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; roi émirkérov G. 


êv €xxyola Dam-Rup; al. A. 
Rup. 

Dam-Vat; 
Dam-Rup. 
Gg; édy Dam-Rup; def. Dam-Vat. 


Philad. 2 (note), 7, where the same 
expression occurs of these same 
heretics. These Docetic teachers 
were separatists, as well as heretics. 
Their separatism however seems to 
have been only partial. They would 
mix with the Church generally, but 
they would have their separate ritual, 
e.g. the agape, baptism, etc. 

7. œs "Ingots xA] For this 
analogy see Magn. 6, 7 mpoxaOnuéevou 
TOU émickómov eis TrÚmoy Ocob...damep 
ov ó Küptos dvev rod marpds ovdév 
emoinoey Kk.r.À., 20. 13 Umoráyyre TO 
émickómo kal aAdzijAous, ds "Lycos 
Xpıoròs TQ marpi, Trall. 3 rov èri- 
cKomov óvra TUmov tod marpós, with 
the respective notes. 

8. ds rois dmooróio] For this 
comparison see Magn. 6 ràv mpeafv- 
Tépev eis rUmov ovveðplov Tay dmooTó- 
Aev, Trall. 2 ómorácceoÓe kal TO 
mpeaBvrepío ds Tots droordAus K.r.À., 
2b, 3 ros b€ mpecBurépous ds owwé- 
dpiov Ocod kal ds civSecpoy ámocrd- 
Awy, and conversely Philad. 5 rois 
dmogTóÀows de mpeo(jvrepig éxkAyoias, 
with the several notes. 

9. œs cod evrov] not ‘as the 
ordinance enjoined by God’ (so Pear- 


5N fes N 5 \ > y 
Nn @ av a/rOs émirpéyn. 


9 éroNjv] txt GLA 
IO émokórov] g 
eis r) ékkÀmo [ay] GLg Dam-Vat; 


11 éke[ym] GLg Dam-Vat; om. A (?) Dam- 
12 brd róv èrlokorov] GLg Dam-Reg; úmó roy émickérwy 
rò ToÜ émukómou A (translating guaecumgque ab episcopo efficiatur) 
ë] GAg Dam-Rup; guod (6) L; def. Dam-Vat. 


av] 


son 'tanquam Dei praecepto insti- 
tutos), but ‘as the voice of God 
enjoining you.’ The deacons speak 
with the authority of God; they 
command in God’s place. See the 
note on the parallel passage Trai.. 
I3 vroraccopevor TO €miwgkómo ws TH 
€vroÀj, and compare the v. l. in the 
Latin of Trall. 3 'vereantur dia- 
conos ut mandatum Jesu Christi, 
which is probably borrowed from 
this passage. See also 1 Cor. xiv. 
37 émvywoockéro à ypapw Or. Kupiov 
€criv evro). The interpolator has 
inserted Owakovoóvras to govern év- 
roAnv and thus relieve the sense. 

IO. pneis xopis x.r.A.] See the 
note on Magn. 7. 

TÓv aynkovreyv eis] See the notes 
on Philad. 1 and Clem. Rom. 45. 

II. ékeiv] Kk.r.À.| This passage 
shows that the heretics celebrated 
the eucharist separately; see also 
below ovx egov x.r.À. 

BeBaia] ‘valid, às e.g. Rom. iv. 16, 
Heb. ii. 2, ix. 17; comp. Rom. 3. 

jyeia0o] ‘be held? This passive 
use of deponent verbs, even in the 
present and imperfect tenses, is not 
very uncommon in other words, e.g. 


310 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vin 


awe ^ \ ^ af e 
Omou av pavi o &rlooros, éke? TO WANOOS ETTW, WOTEP 


1 av] Gg Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; éà» Dam-Reg. 


Vat Dam-Rup; érløkoros Antioch 14. 
om. Dam-Rup. 


6 éríckoros] Gg Dam- 
éorw] Gg; #rw Antioch Dam-Vat; 


2 örov àv 9] G; Sov àv 7 Dam-Rup; mov àv Dam- 


Vat; mov (om. à» $) g; ëmoumep àv óvouac05 Antioch; wtigue ubi est L; ubi 


Biáćopas, Xoyí(oua, œvoðpar: comp. 
Kühner IL p. 106, Winer Š xxxviii. 
p. 325, Cope on Arist. Rez. I. p. 299 
sq; and for déyeoOa, mpoaO£xea6ai, 
etc, see Poppo on Thuc. iv. 19 (comp. 
eg. the passive mposOexécÓo in 
Apost. Const. ii. 58, viii. 31). But I 
have not found an instance of the 
present or imperfect of jyeio@ar ex- 
cept in an active sense, for in Herod. 
li. I4 »yeópevov, ‘being led, the 
reading is highly doubtful. The per- 
fect rà dynuéva occurs as a passive in 
an oracle in Demosth. Mac. p. 1072, 
and nynOyocera also is passive in 
Hippol Haer. i. procem. p. 3. The 
commentators do not notice the dif- 
ficulty. 

2. 1 kañoÀNuk] ékkAgoía] ‘the uni- 
versal Church. “The bishop, argues 
Ignatius, is the centre of each in- 
dividual Church, as Jesus Christ is 
the centre of the universal Church. 
The word xa0oAwos is found in a 
treatise ascribed to Aristotle de Plant. 
ii. 6 (p. 826), where kaOodixds Aóyos 
is a ‘universal statement’ (comp. ii. 
8, p. 828, cadodixds) ; and Zeno the 
Stoic wrote a work called Kadohixa 
*Universals' (Diog. Laert. vii. 4). 
It occurs several times in Polybius, 
e.g. Vi. 5. 3 K. éujaets ‘a general 
exposition,’ viii. 4. II «. ioropia * uni- 
versal history) So also Philo Viz. 
Moys. iii. 32 (II. p. 172) kaÜoAuwkorepov 
vóuov, c. Flacc. 29 (Il. p. 574) mms 
kaÜoNwcerépas moditetas, Dion. Hal. 
de Comp. Verb. p. 68 kaÜoXwrv re- 
piu, Epictet. ii. 20. 2 Kadodcxov 
dÀnÓés (comp. ii. 2. 25, iv. 4. 29, iv. 
I2. 7), Quintil. ii. 13. 14 *praecepta 
quae kafoArka vocant, id est (ut di- 


camus quomodo possumus) univer- 
salia vel perpetualia’, and examples 
might be multiplied. The word 
therefore was extremely common in 
the age of Ignatius. 

At a later date the expression 7 
kaĝo) ékkAgoía acquired a techni- 
cal meaning, ‘the Catholic Church’, 
as opposed to the heretical sects ; 
but here its use is different. It is 
the general or universal Church, as 
opposed to a particular body of 
Christians. This meaning is ob- 
viously required by the context; and 
yet it was reserved for Zahn (Z. v. A. 
p. 428) to emphasize the difference, 
and to point out its bearing on the 
Ignatian controversy. The expres- 
sion as used here therefore is no 
indication of a late date, but the 
opposite. It was natural at any 
moment from the time when the 
Church first began to spread by the 
labours of the Apostles. Thus it is 
not more indicative of a late date 
than other uses of the word in early 
Christian writers; e.g. 7 kab. dvacra- 
ots ‘the general resurrection’, Justin 
Dial. 82 (p. 308), Theoph. ad Autol. 
i. 13 (p. 18); kad. mveúpara (of the four 
principal winds) Iren. iii. 11. 8; «a6. 
Oia07 ka, Iren. iii. 11.93 kaĝ. cwrnpia 
Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 116) ; kað. 
opodoyia (opposed to pepue]) Strom. iv. 
9 (p. 595); Kad. kivnows kai perábesis 
(speaking of Matt. xxvii. 52) Strom. 
vi. 6 (p. 764) ; kað. Aóyos, Strom. i. 
4 (p. 330), vi. 8 (p. 773); rà Kad. 
eToeia (of the letters of the alpha- 
bet), kað. Oewpnuara, Strom. vii. 8 
(p. 928) ; ‘cath. bonitas? (said of God) 
Tertull adv. Marc. ii. 17; ‘cath. 


v] 


ef » = ^ 
oTov av 5 Xpioros 'lnooUs, 


sit A. 
Rup; ó xpwrós Dam-Vat. 


TO THE SMYRNAANS, 


3 T3 


5 ^ \ 
exer N kaÜoNu éxKAnola. 


Xpucros Incots] GL Antioch Dam-Reg; inoods xpwrós A Dam- 
éxkAyjola] txt GLA (which however inserts 


sit or esto) Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; add. émuwd-yera [Antioch]. 


Dei templum’ (applied to our Lord), 
adu. Marc. ii. 21; ‘cath. patris 
sacerdos' (said likewise of Christ) 
adv. Mare. iv. 9. 

The earliest examples after this 
time, where it occurs as an epithet 
of ékkAyoía, are (about A.D. 155 ora 
little later) in the letter of the Church 
of Smyrna on the Martyrdom of 
Polycarp, where it occurs three times; 
inscr. Taras Tals kara Tavra TÓTOV 
a aylas Kat cabohukis éxeAnoias Tap- 
oukíaus, $8 maons Ths karà "v oiKov- 
Bém ka&oNukt)s ekeànoias, § 19 “Ingoby 
Xpiorov.. ‘TOLMEVA TNS karà THY olkou- 

` pémmy kabodixijs éxkdnolas; but in all 
these Passages it still signifies ‘uni- 
versal.’ Ina fourth passage indeed, 
§ 16, Polycarp i is called in the com- 
mon texts ezíakormos Ths ev Zyujpvg 
kadodixns ékkÀnoí(as. If this reading 
were correct we should have here 
the earliest instance of the use of 
‘Catholic Church? in its technical 
sense; and it would stand in marked 
contrast with the passage in Igna- 
tius. For, whereas in Ignatius the 
‘Catholic Church’ is distinguished 
from the congregation over which 
Polycarp presided, in the passage 
of the Martyrdom this very congre- 
gation is itself so designated. But 
the recently collated Moscow MS. 
(see Zettschr. f. Hist. Theol. 1875, 
p. 360) for kaĝoňikĝs has dyias in ac- 
cordance with the Latin Version; 
and there can therefore be little 
doubt that this is the original read- 
ing. The technical sense however 
occurs in the Muratorian Fragment 
pp. 20. 47 (ed. Tregelles), ‘in catho- 
licam ecclesiam recipi non potest’ 
(speaking of heretical writings), and 


very emphatically in Clem. Alex. 
Strom. vii. 17 (p. 898) perayevearépas 
THis kaĝoikis éxenotas Tas dvOpa- 
mivas gv Mets Temoujkagw.. êk Ths 
mpoyeverrarns kai adn Georarns exkAn- 
cias.. plav eivau Thy adn OF Ko 
Tv TO OvrL dpxaíav.. -pouny etval papey 
TÀ» dpxatay kal Kabohixiy ekkAnolav eis 
évórnra míoTeos pias. 

In its earliest usages therefore, as 
a fluctuating epithet of éxkdyoia, 
‘catholic’ means ‘universal,’ as op- 
posed to ‘individual’, ‘particular.’ 
The Church throughout the world is 
called ‘catholic,’ just as the Resur- 
rection of all mankind is called 
‘catholic.’ In its later sense, as a 
fixed attribute, it implies orthodoxy 
as opposed to heresy, conformity as 
opposed to dissent. Thus to the 
primary idea of extension are super- 
added also the ideas of doctrine and 
unity. But this later sense grows 
out of the earlier. The truth was 
the same everywhere, ‘quod semper, 
quod ubique, quod ab omnibus.’ The 
heresies were partial, scattered, lo- 
calized, isolated (comp. the note on 
Col. i. 6). See Athanasius Festal 
Letters 11 (p. 94, Oxf. transl.) ‘The 
Catholic Church which is in every 
place,” Aug. Apzst. lii (II. p. 119) 
“KañoÀukn Graece appellatur, quod per 
totum orbem terrarum diffunditur. 
Not unnaturally however there was 
a tendency in theologians to put 
into the word more than history 
warranted : e.g. Cyril of Jerusalem 
Cafech. xviii. 23 (p. 296) says that 
the Catholic Church was so called 
for three reasons; 
maons eiva Ths olkovpévgs ; (2) did rò 
Oibdokew | kaÜoMukOs Kal dveAAeurás 


(1) Osa Tò Kara 


312 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vir 


2 ^ ? , A É 
OUK é£óv EO TlV xepis TOU É7TLGOKOT7OU OUTE Barr riCew 


r roô] Gg Antioch Dam-Vat; om. Dam-Rup. 


2 åyárnv] GLA (see 


Petermann) Antioch Dam-Vat; áyámas S, (owing to 7/5: Dam-Rup; Sox 


ámavra Tü eis yooow avOpdrav edOciv 
opetiovta Sdypara; (3) dia rò kaĝo- 
Aukós larpevew pev Kal Ocparevew ámav 
TO TOY dpaprió» Eidos K.T.A. These 
two latter reasons, that it is com- 
prehensive in doctrine, and that it is 
universal in application, can only be 
regarded as secondary glosses. So 
again Augustine Æpisćt. xcii. 7 (II 
p. 240) calls a Donatist adversary 
to account because he explained 
* Catholicae nomen non ex totius or- 
bis communione sed ex observatione 
praeceptorum omnium divinorum at- 
que omnium sacramentorum, but he 
adds *quasi nos, etiamsi forte hinc sit 
appellata Catholica, quod totum ve- 
raciter teneat, cuius veritatis non- 
nullae particulae etiam in diversis in- 
veniuntur haeresibus, etc.’ 

I. ovre famrí(ew] Tertull. de 
Bapt. 17 *Superest...de observatione 
quoque dandi et accipiendi baptismi 
commonefacere. Dandi quidem ha- 
bet jus summus sacerdos, qui est 
episcopus ; dehinc presbyteri et dia- 
coni, non tamen sine episcopi aucto- 
ritate, etc.’ In early times the bishop 
stood to his diocese in the same in- 
timate relations in which a rector now 
stands to his parish. Reference to 
him therefore was possible on all 
these points. The following passages 
show how it soon became necessary 
to relax the rule and extend the 
power to others; Cypr. Æpist. Ixxiii. 
7 sq (p. 783 sq, Hartel) ‘intellegi- 
mus nonnisi in ecclesia praepositis 
..licere baptizare...nec posse quen- 
quam contra episcopos et sacerdotes 
usurpare sibi aliquid’; Can. Apost. 
Cc. 47 ézriakomos } TpecBúrepos Tov 
xarà aAnOevay €xovra Badmricpa éày 
dvobev Barrion k... (comp. c. 46, 
49, 50), Apost. Const. ili. 11 obre rois 


Aowrois kAgpukois émwrpémopev Barri- 
(ew, otov dvayvdarats k.r.À., Ü póvois 
émiokómots kal mpecButépors, e- 
vmyperovuévav avrois Tdv Ouakóvev, 
[Cypr.] de Rebapt. 10 (p. 82, Hartel) 
‘aut si a minore clero per mecessi- 
tatem traditum fuerit? Yet theoreti- 
cally the power still remained with 
the bishop; see esp. Hieron. c. Lucif. 
9 (11. p. 181 sq) ‘Non quidem abnuo 
hanc esse ecclesiarum consuetudi- 
nem, ut ad eos qui longe a maioribus 
urbibus per presbyteros et diaconos 
baptizati sunt, episcopus ad invoca- 
tionem sancti spiritus manum im- 
positurus excurrat.... Inde venit ut 
sine chrismate et episcopi jussione 
neque presbyter neque diaconus jus 
habeant baptizandi; quod frequenter, 
si tamen necessitas cogit, scimus 
etiam licere laicis’; Ambros. de 
Sacram. iii. r (p. 362) ‘Succinctus 
summus sacerdos: licet enim pres- 
byteri fecerint, tamen exordium mi- 
nisterii a summo est sacerdote.’ 
Comp. Bingham Christ. Ant. ii. 3. 3, 
Augusti Denkw. aus der Christl. 
Archéol. VM. p. 136 sq, Probst Sa- 
kramente etc. p. 115 sq. 

2. ovre dyyámr Tout] ‘nor to hold a 
love-feast. The interpolator expands 
the sentence, ovre Bamrí(ew ovre mpoo- 
$épew ovre Óvaíav mpockopifew ore 
doxnv émwreAe. For this last clause 
comp. Apost. Const. ii. 28 rois eis 
dyamnyv rot Soxny, os 6 Kúpıos 
dvópace, mpoatpougévots kaev k.r.À. 
(where the reference is to Luke xiv. 
I3 órav moms Soyny k.rA.)). | For 
9oxy, as a synonyme for dyáms, see 
the emperor Julian Fragm. Epist. 
p. 305 Spanh. (I p. 392, ed. Hert- 
lein) ths Aeyouévgs map adrois ayamns 
7| vmodoxys kai Staxovias rpame(óv, 
where he is speaking of the ‘impious 


viii] 


» a E Oe 
oUTE€ ayamny mowi GÀN Ó 
[g]. 0] GLS,A[g] Antioch Dam-Vat; 


Antioch Dam-Vat; ¿àz Dam-Rup. 


Galileans) For this use of dyám in 
the earliest ages of the Church see 
Jude 12 èv rais dydras Üpdv omrdddes 
(compared with 2 Pet. ii. 13 evTpv- 
partes év rais dyámais aùrôv, ouveuo- 
Xovpevoe óuiv, where the v. l. dmárais 
is an obvious error), Clem. Alex. 
Paed. ii. 1 (p. 165) ôv ayarnv tives 
ToAU@ow kaXeiv. ..Oeurvápid Tiva.. TOT@ 
T€ kal Tpu@j) kal kanve BAaodrjuobvres 
Tovvopa...deurvapia Te Kal apura kal 
Ooxas eikóros dy kaXoipev ry ovrndv- 
ow tavrny...tas rova’ras dé éoridcets 6 
Kupuos d'yámas où KéxAnxev (denouncing 
the abuse of these entertainments), 
Strom. iii. 2 (p. 514) es ta Seimva 
aOporgopévous, ov yàp áyámqw eimo 
ay éywye rijv ovvédevow avróv (speak- 
ing of the Carpocratians), Celsus in 
Orig. c. Cels. i. 1 (L p. 319) BovAera: 
diaBadrew Tiv kahoupévny áyámmv Xpic- 
tiavov K.T.À., Act. Paul. et Thecl. 25 
Wy €co èv râ pynaeío ayarn mo 
(not found however in all texts), 
Act. Perf. et Felic. 17 *Quantum in 
ipsis erat, non coenam liberam sed 


agapen coenarent, Tertull. 4707. 39: 


* Coena nostra de nomine rationem 
sui ostendit : id vocatur quod di- 
lectio penes Graecos etc.’ (where it 
is described), ad Mart. 2 * Quae justa 
Sunt caro non amittit per curam ec- 
clesiae et agapen fratrum, de Fein. 
17 *Apud te agape in caccabis fervet 
etc.’ (where, as a Montanist, he is 
reviling the feasts of the Catholics). 
We find references to these agapae 
in heathen writers (besides Celsus 
already quoted who seems to have 
mentioned them by name); e.g. Pliny 
Ef. x. 97 (96) ‘Soliti stato die ante 
lucem convenire carmenque Christo 
quasi Deo dicere secum invicem, 
seque sacramento non in scelus ali- 
quod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne 


TO THE SMYRNÆANS. 


913 

N > ^ , ^ 

av éketvos Ookiuag, TOUTO 
t 


@ Dam-Rup. är] Gg 


latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent 
quibus peractis morem sibi disce- 
dendi fuisse, rursusque [coeunaz] ad 
capiendum cibum, promiscuum tamen 
et innoxium: quod ipsum facere 
desisse post edictum meum, quo 
Secundum mandata tua hetaerias 
esse vetueram’; and Lucian ge 
Mort. Peregr. 12 etra Seimva roia 
eicekopi(ero kal 
eAéyovro. 

In the Apostolic age the eucharist 
formed part of the agape. The ori- 
ginal form of the Lord's Supper, as 
it was first instituted by Christ, was 
thus in a manner kept up. This 
appears from I Cor. xi. 17 sq (comp. 
Acts xx. 7), from which passage we 
infer that the celebration of the eu- 
charist came, as it naturally would, 
at a late stage in the entertainment. 
In the Doctr. Apost. 10 this early 
practice is still observed. In after 
times however the agape was held 
at a separate time from the eu- 
charist. Had this change taken 
place before Ignatius wrote? I think 
not. The words ovre Bamrí(ew ovre 
ayannv Towiv seem to describe the 
two most important functions in 
which the bishop could bear a part, 
so that the dyamy must include the 
eucharist. Indeed there would be 
an incongruity in this juxtaposition, 
as Zahn truly says (Z. v. A. p. 348), 
unless the other great sacrament 
were intended; see e.g. Tertull. ge 
Virg. Vel. 9 ‘Non permittitur mulieri 
in ecclesia loqui, sed nec docere 
nec tinguere nec offrre) de Exh. 
Cast. 7 ‘et offers et tinguis et sacerdos 
es tibi solus.’ Nor would the omis- 
sion of the eucharist be intelligible. 
Pearson indeed urges ‘de eucha- 
ristia ante locutus est’; but this fact 


, € ^ > ^ 
Aoyou íepoi aùrâv 


314 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[vri 


^ ^ a7 Lic; > \ rs. \ , = 
kai TG Oeo evaper ror, iva acQaXes n kat BéBaov mav 


€ , 
ô TPATOETE. 


" ^ ^ € DA 
IX. EvAoyov ¿ou Xovrróv dvavnnvat nuas, os [ere] 


af > \ ^ 
Karpov ëxopev eis Oeov peravo&v. 


, F 5 , 
é€mloKOTroY ELOEVal. 


^ of \ \ 
Kaos exet Oeov kat 


e ^ fee ald G \ o ^ / 
O 'TLACV €7TLO KO7TOV VTO €ov TETIS 


, ^ / 
unrar 6 Adbpa émiokórov T mwpdcawv TH diaBow 


r kal] GL Antioch Dam-Reg Dam-Rup; om. S,A Dam-Vat. 


TG Veg] 


GLS,A Antioch Dam-Vat; paraphrased kar’ evapéornow beo g; TQ inco 


xpior Dam-Rup. 


wa] g Dam-Rup; t$» G. 


^ y 4 
2 0 mpáccere] 


quod facitis Si; quidquid et faciatis A; à mpdocerae GL Dam-Rup; ó © à» 


mpdoonre g (attaching it to the next sentence). 


3 àvavQya. quads] g 


Dam-Rup; ut evigilemus S,S, (WYNNII); vigilem stare A (the Syriac form for 
the 3rd pers. sing. and the rst pers. plur. being the same); ávav$jyat (om. huâs) 
GL. Add. xal GL (so that ueravoeiv is made dependent on e/Aoyóv srw); om. 


S,S,Ag Dam-Rup. Thus «ai seems to have displaced jas. 


om. S,S,A Dam-Rup. 


would not dispense with the men- 
tion here, where it is imperatively 
demanded. The interpolator, living 
more than two centuries after the evya- 
pioria had been separated from the 
dyarn, feels this necessity and inserts 
words accordingly, ovre mpoodépew 
oUre Óvoíav mpockopi(ew. On the 
other hand some have inferred from 
the words of Pliny quoted above 
and italicized, that when he wrote 
(about A.D. 112) the two were held 
at different times of the day. This 
however depends, first on the ac- 
curacy of Pliny's information, and 
secondly on the interpretation of 
sacramentum, which is supposed to 
have been used by his Christian 
informers in its technical sense and 
to have been misunderstood and 
confused with its ordinary meaning 
by Pliny. The inference therefore is 
somewhat precarious. Others again 
maintain that the eucharist was se- 
parated from the agape and attached 
to the early morning service zz con- 
sequence of Pliny's edict prohibiting 
these Christian heteriz. For dif- 


ër] GLg; 


4 ueravoév] GLS,g Dam-Rup; foenztentiae A; 


ferent views on the relation of the 
agape and eucharist see Bingham, 
Antig. xv. 7. 6 sq, Augusti Dez. 
VIII. p. 78 sq, 317 sq, Probst Lehre 
u. Gebet p. 349 sq, Th. Harnack Der 
Christliche Gemeindegottesdienst p. 
213 sq, Suicer Thes. s. v. 'Ayám. 

IX. 
and repent, while there is time. 
Honour God and the bishop. He 
who deceives the bishop serves the 
devil. May you abound in all grace, 
as you deserve. You have been good 
to me alike in my presence and in my 
absence. May God requite you.’ 

3. evroyov] ‘lt zs the part of 
reasonable men’; a common expres- 
sion. It frequently however means, 
not ‘it is reasonable, but ‘it is pro- 
bable, e.g. Cic. aZ Adz. xiii. 7, xiv. 
22. The word occurs in the same 
sense as here in Magn. 7. The 
warning is addressed to the here- 
tical teachers. 

Aouv]| ‘for what remains, i.e, 
seeing that the time is short ; as in 
Ephes. 11 €oxarot katpol. ourdy' ai- 
oxvvOdpev. 


5 


‘It is well to learn sobriety, - 


Ix] TO THE SMYRNAANS, 


Aa'Tpevet. 


315 


, +X € ^ > , 
TAVTA OUV UMLIV EV XaptTL TEPLTOEVETH, 


of , > \ , $. ^ 
&£iot YAP €OTE. KATA avra ME avezavaare, Kal UMaS 


'Ino-oUs Xpirros. 


5 4 \ / 
ATOVTA ME Kat 7rapovra nya ae: 


, , Cine / 5 e / ^ 
10 duelo Viv Ocos, Ov dv marta UTOMEVOVTES aUTOU 


Tev£eae. 


, ^ > 
X. Pirwva kai ‘Paiov ' Aqa0ómovv, oi €7NKOAOU- 


om. S+ 
vmod tov Oeov Antioch r4. 


G; ¿moos 6 xpwrós g. 
duelWerat [g]. 


5 érloxomoy bd Oeo] Gg Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; róv émíckormor 


tetiuntat] GL Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; rui&rat 
Antioch; honoratur S,AÀ; riyunOjoera [g]. 
enim omnia L; nam in omni A; xa0à (om. vávra) [g]. 


8 karà mávra] G; secundum 
9 “Inoovs Xpuwrós] 


IO duelBor] dmolBe G; retribuat L; servabit A; 
b] G; vobis L; úu&s g. 


Ocds] G; ó Beds 


g. 12 'Paiov] péwv G; reum L; ydiov g; agrium (dypiov) A. This 
last may perhaps be a confusion of the two readings PAlON (peon) and PAION, 
or it may have come from KAIPEON, read KAPPEON: see on Philad. 11. After 


this name add. xal gLA; om. G: see on Philad. 11. 


’Ayabórovw] G; aga- 


thopum L; àyaĝóroða g (but 1 has agathopum); dub. A. 


avava] ‘to recover our senses? 
‘The word occurs in the same con- 
nexion, 2 Tim. ii. 25 den adrois ó 
cos nerávoiav eis émiyveow dÀn- 
eias kai dvayypacuv èk rhs Tod 
dtaBorov rayidos, [Clem. Rom.] ii. 
13 404 moré peravonowper, vi oper 
emt rò dyadov. See also M. Anton. 
Vi. 31 avavnge kai dvakadod aeavróv. 

@s ér. kapòv €xopev] See Gal. vi. 
10, [Clem. Rom.] ii. 9, with the notes, 

5. «idéva] ‘to acknowledge, ap- 
prectate, value’; see esp. 1 Thess. v. 
I2 eidévar ro)s Komi@ytas év vpiv kal 


The 


> / 
€T LO KOTTOV 


-poicrapévovs úpðv ev Kupio. 
more natural word with 
would be ywoóckew or émvywóokew ; 
but eidévac Ocóv is a somewhat fami- 
liar expression. 

Ó Tyov k..M.] Comp. Phzlad. 11 
meupbevros Gua épo arò "EQeoíov kai 
Zpvpva(ov eis Aóyov Tus. Tune 
avrovs 6 K< pos x... For such 
modes of expression in Ignatius ge- 
nerally see the note on § 5 above. 

8. doc «7.A.] See the note on 
Ephes. 1. 


kata mávra k.t.\.| See the note on 
Ephes. 2 for this favourite Ignatian 
phrase. 

kal úpâs]| SC. dvamavcet Or dvarav- 
cee; comp. Ephes. 21 às kai tua L. 
X., Philad. 11 os kai dpas ó Kúpıos. 
The future is suggested by Š ro ovde 
vpas emacaxyuvvOnoerat k.r.A.; the 
optative aorist by Aes. 2 œs xai 
avroy ó marnp 1. X. avayvEau. 

9. amóvra k.r.À.] Comp. Phil. ii. 
12. 

nyarnoare] See the note on Polyc. 
2; 

IO. müávra Umopévovres] 
note on $ 4 above. 

avrod tevéecbe| See the note on 
Magn. I. 

X. ‘Ye did well to welcome Philo 
and Agathopus. They have a grate- 
ful remembrance of your kindness. 
You will not lose your reward. I am 
devoted to you. As ye were not 
ashamed of my bonds, so also Christ 
will not be ashamed of you.’ 

I2. ova k.r..] On the two 
persons here mentioned see the notes 


See the 


316 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [x 


> / ^ ^ [4 € £ 
Onodv po. eis Adyov Ocot, kards éromoate úmoóe£a- 


~ ^ e ` > = 
mevor ws dtakovous [Xprotov] Oeo’ ot Kat €úxXapuTou- 


^ \ ^ / \ y \ 
cw TH Kupiw vee vuwv, OTL avrovs averavaaTe kara 


, , 
TAVTA TpPOTOV. 


PEN eon , M 5 ^ 
ovóév vjüv ov um aTOoNXevrat. 


, , 
aVT l= 


e ^ ^ , \ , A , 
Yuyov Ujuov TO TveUua pov, kai TA erua pov & OUX 5 


2 XpwroU Oco0] G; de christi L; Oeov (om. xpwro0) A. 


In g the passage is 


paraphrased of érnxodovOnody pot els Nóyov Oeo Sidkovor xpta To0 Üvres, KadOs 
émov]care UTo0c£áuevou. às Ota kÓóvovs Xptorod, in the Greek Mss, but 1 has minis- 
tros dei in this last place, and perhaps 0uakóvovs eo was the original reading of g 


here. 


to Philad. 11. They had evidently 
arrived at Smyrna after the depar- 
ture of Ignatius thence and followed 
him to Troas. 

I. eis Àóyov] (Zo the score of? ‘in 
the matter of’; see the note on 
Philad. 11 els Aóyov runs. 

2. ds Staxovous K.T.À.] It is pro- 
bable that the Armenian Version has 
preserved the correct text. The com- 
mon reading dsaxovovs Xpioroð Oco0 
must be regarded as a confusion of 
the two expressions dvaxovous Xpirrod 
and d:axovovs Gcod. Both occur in 
S. Paul; dvaxovos Geod, Rom. xiii. 4, 
2 Cor. vi. 4, I Thess. iii. 2 (v.1.); &4- 
kovos [ro?]| Xpuorov, 2 Cor. xi. 23, Col. 
i. 7 (comp. r Tim. iv. 6): and both 
are combined by Polyc. PAil. 5 Oeo 
kai Xpiorov Suaxovor. A scribe, fami- 
liar with the language of the Apostle, 
would not unnaturally write down 
the alternative phrase in his margin 
or elsewhere ; and hence the con- 
fusion. At all events the expression 
Xpıoroð O«co0 is very awkward in 
itself and quite without a parallel 
even in Ignatius. The nearest ap- 
proach to it is the various reading 
XpigroU Tov Oeo (above, § 6) which, 
though more intelligible, is itself 
highly doubtful (see the note there). 
See also a questionable parallel in 
Trall. 7. For the limitations with 


If so, the paraphrase may point to xpicrot 0eoU as standing in the text 


which Ignatius speaks of Christ as 
God, see the note on ZZZes. inscr. 

Though S. Paul uses the expres- 
sion dsdkovor Oeo) (or Xprorod) in a 
much wider sense, it is probable that 
Ignatius here employs ôrákovos in 
its technical, restricted meaning of 
‘deacon,’ for he never uses it with 
any other signification ; comp. esp. 
Trall. 2 rods Svaxévovs Ovras pvorg- 
pilav *Incood Xpusrov. See also the 
note on Æpkes. 2 respecting his ap- 
plication of ovvdavdos after S. Paul, 
but with a similar restriction. Philo 
is distinctly called a deacon in 
Philad. 11; and the same was pro- 
bably true of Agathopus (see the note 
there). 

4. avtiipvyov x.t.d.] Comp. PoZyc. 
2 karà mávra cov dvr(drvxov éyà kai rà 
Seopa pov à Hyarnoas. For the mean- 
ing of ávríyvxov see the note on 
Ephes. 21. 

5. ovx vrepnparvnoare| Comp. Gal. 
lv. I4. 

6. ovd€ emnoxú0nre] Suggested by 
2 Tim. i. 16 rijv áAvaív pov oùk éng- 
cxóvÓn (see the note on Ephes. 2). 
The interpolator has seen the pa- 
rallel and introduced the context of 
S. Paul into the context of Ignatius, 
dan piv 6 Kúpios evpeiv &Aeos k.r.A.. It 
will be seen that there is considerable 
authority for émauaxvvOgre here ; and 


IO 


x] 


TO THE SMYRNAANS, 


317 


€ , \ f 5 ^ > 

v7eonQavigaare oùðè ernoxuvOnre ovdé Uuás Tair yuv- 
7 e £ £ ^ 

Oroerat ý reela TioTis, Incovs Xpioros. 


XI. 


\ ^ 
THY èv "Avtwxeia Tis Cupías: 


e M e A E ^ 4 M 
H Tpocevxn vuv arijXO0ev éri THY ékkNnaay 


bOev Oe8euévos Ocorpe- 


, ^ if , E 
TETTATOIS OETMOIS mayas domacoua, ovK wy aEvos 


which the paraphrast had before him. 


5 úuðv] LAg; quay G. 


6 vrepnpayyoare] imepiparjoare G. 


See however the lower note. 


éry- 
oxwOnre] émawxóvÓyre G. The Mss of g vary between éraytvOnre and er n- 
ovdé sec.] GLA; did obdé g. 7 moris] 


oxUvOnre: see the lower note. 
GL; édmis gA: see the lower note. 


in 2 Tim. i. 16 éraucxdvOn is the best 
supported reading. Probably this 
was a common, though incorrect, 
form of the word, and perhaps it 
should be retained here. 

era, xvvÓrjeerai] Comp. Mark viii. 
38 Os yàp àv emauzxuy0 ue...kai 6 vids 
To) dvÜpómov emauryuvOnoerat k.r.À. 
(Luke ix. 26). 

7. mícris] Here in its passive 
sense '£rust-worthiness, fidelity) as 
e.g. in Rom. iii. 3. See Galatians 
p. 155, and the note on v. 22. For 
the idea compare Heb. vi. ro oi yàp 
dóuos 6 Oeós emidabécba tod epyov 
vpay k.r.A. In this mention of Christ's 
fidelity there is probably a reference 
to His promise, which is quoted in 
the last note. The reading eAzís has 
rather better support, but is open to 
suspicion as a scribe's alteration, the 
term being frequently used of Christ 
in these epistles ; see the notes on 
Magn. 11. 

XI. ‘Your prayer for the Church 
of Antioch has been heard. A very 
unworthy member of that Church, I 
have nevertheless been glorified by 
my bonds and have received grace, 
which I pray may be perfected. 
Perfect your work also and send an 
ambassador to Syria to congratulate 
the brethren on the restoration of 
peace. It will be a deed worthy of 


Xpiorós] G; 6 xpwrós [g]. 


you thus to show your sympathy with 
them for that the storm has ceased 
and the haven is reached. Aim at 
perfection in your counsels. God 
ever assists the ready will.’ 

8. “H mwpocevyj] See the note on 
Phitad. 10. 

anh bev emi] ‘went forth unto, ‘has 
been directed towards) as e.g. Luke 
xxiv. 24 dafdOov émi rò pynuetov. 
Their prayer had indeed been an- 
swered; but this is not the point 
here, and cannot be implied in the 
expression. ‘ Your prayer, says Ig- 
natius, ‘travelled to Antioch; let 
your congratulations follow on the 
same road.’ 

9. ths Zupías] 
Philad. 10. 

dev Sedeuévos] As Ephes. 21 ; 
comp. also Æphes. 1 Oe8euévov ard 
Zvpías. 

Ocompereorároig] So called because 
they are goodly ‘ornaments’ with 
which God has invested him ; comp. 
Polyc. Phil. 1 rois évetnuevous rois 
dytompeméo, Seopots said with re- 
ference to Ignatius and others, Ezs7. 
Vienn. in Euseb. Z. E. v. 1 rà eap 
kócpov eümzpem?. See the note on 
Ephes. 11. For the word 6eonpemijs 
see the note on Magn. 1. 

IO. oúk àv gws] See the notes on 
Ephes, 2, 21. 


See the note 


318 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[xi 


5. » 2 ^ EA \ £ E 
ékeiÜev eivat, EXATOS avTOv wy Kara GéAnpa katTnEw- 


, , 5 / ^ A of = 
Onv, oUk ék cuvedoTos, GAN ék yapıros Oeov, nv evxo 


p e 2 ^ eue ^ ^ 
par TeAciav pot SoOnvat, iva év TH TPOTEVXY vuv Ocov 


> , 
ETLTUVNW. 


c ^ 5 VM \ 
(va oUV TENELOY UM@Y *yevnTaL TO É€pryov kat 


5 A > ^ £ 5 ` ^ 
erri yns Kal êv OÙPAVwW, MPETEL ELS LUN U OQ€oU X€tpoTo- 


I dya] GL; vocari A; om. g*. 
A (vilior quam omnis homo). 


aitav] GLg; dvépwrwy (ANON) 


dv] LAg; àv G (connecting it with what 


follows). Dressel adopts this reading. which however yields no tolerable sense. 


For similar false aspirates in G see the note on Philad. 7. 
txt L* (but autem added in the printed texts) g* 


kara 0éNqua] 
(but ôè added in some texts); 


add. 6¢ G; pref. jam A. After 0é\nua add. ded L; om. GA (voluntate mea) g* 


(originally, but some texts add roù 0eo0). 
scientia L; mente A; ovveiboews ¿uñjs g. 


I. OéAnpal ‘the Divine will’; 
see the note on ZfAes. 20. The 
various readings give the expedients 


of translators and scribes to help out ` 


this absolute use of 6éAnya here, as 
in other passages. 

2. èk aweiüóros] The participle, 
when used for cuveidnous, generally 
has the article. For instances of its 
omission however see Liturg. D. 
Marc. p. 8 év kaÜapà ovveiðóri (and 
so also Zz£urg. D. Facob. pp. 42, 56), 
Pausan. vi. 10 ó pev 07) om cvveidoros 
érapproid(ero dyadot, Hermog. Rhet. 
21 otros cuvedoros pevyer(Rhet. Graec. 
II. p. 145, Spengel), 2b. 30 (p. 152) rov 
marépa Kpivet avveibóros, 7) yur) avvet- 
doros $evye, Joseph. Ant. i. I. 4 où 
yàp em dpern thy oromiy üyew GAN èri 
avveidórt movnp@, Orig. c. Cels. viii. 62 
perà ovveibóros Tod mpds Tov Ocóv rGv 
drA@v kaÜapás evoeBovs, Euseb. Z7. Z. 
X. 8 cuveddte d$a/Ae robro Xoy(ó- 
pevos, Chrysost. Hom. in Rom. xiii 
(IX. p. 552) ri yàp dXyewórepov, etmé 
pot, cuverddtos movnpo? ;...00dev obras 
dyéxeo Kal puKpod mérerðat mou, ds 
cvveibós dya0óv. See also mpoedds 
in Dion Cass. (Epit. Xiph.) lxix. 4 
eE ov mpoeóros. The expression 
might have either of two meanings ; 


2 cvuretüóros] evveióóros G; con- 
3 TH mpocevxn] GL; rats mpos- 


(1) *of conscience, i.e. ‘not that my 
conscience pronounces me worthy,’ 
comp. I Cor. iv. 4; or (2) ‘of consent, 
complicity, i.e. ‘it was God’s sole 
doing.’ This latter is the meaning of 
ovve.oos in Hermog. 1. c., and more 
commonly of rò cvveós. See the 
note on ouveidnows Clem. Rom. 34, 
p. 113. The latter is perhaps the 
more probable sense here. 

3. èv TH mpooevxn )póàv] See the 
note on Ephes. 20. 

cod émw)óxyo] See the note on 
Ephes. 1. 

4. TéAewv] With a reference to 
the preceding reAeíav, as the em- 
phatic position of oue» shows; ‘I 
pray that God's grace in me may be 
perfect ; take ye heed that your work 
also may be perfect, He still harps 
on the same word below, réAetot dvres 
TéÀeta Kai ppoveire. 

5. «eis tuv Oeod) See the note 
on Ephes. 21. 

6. 6compeaflórgv] ‘an ambassador 
of God’; comp. Philad. 10 els rò 
mperBevoa éket Oeo mpeoßeiav, els 
TO cvyxapfjva. avroîs Kw... More 
particular. directions are given about 
this delegate in the companion 
epistle, Polyc. 7, where he is called 


5 


xi] 


^ \ 3 , e ^ , 5 \ 
voci THY ékkNnaiav Vuov Ocompeo(ducmv eis +ó 


TO THE SMYRNAANS. 


319 


, 
yevo- 


4 / > Ae 
pevov €ws Cupias cuvyyxapivat avrois bri Elonvevovay Kal 
5 4 Ny / 
&TréXa[dov 0 tiov pevyeOos kai d7ekaTeoTáÜn avTois ro 


rë ^ 5 / ey » ^ , 
torov TwuaTElov. Edavn uoi ovv &£iov pua meupat 


evxais [g] (but it has substituted ai m 
also has a plural, but this is the common Armenian usage. 


g: see the note on Rom. 3. 
ëpyov rédevov yévnrar g. 
pave] G; ris yas... TG o)pavQ g. 
om. A, 
lower note. 


pocevxal for 4j mpocevyh above, Pasty) A 


4 wa] G; tws 


TéXevov úv yévnras TÓ epyor| GL; Dë rò 
kal éri] GL; ¿zà (om. xal) gA. 


5 is... ov- 
els ruv Oeo0] GL; els Beo TUW g; 


6 Oeorpeoßúrnv] Gg; deo venerabilem L; praecursorem A: see the 
7 €es Zvplas] GL; & cvpía g; in syriam A. 
Tetov] G; eceuártov g; corpusculum L; perfectio A. 


9 coua- 
div] Gg; deo digna 


(&£ó0eov, perhaps written AEIOON) L; gratum deo A, 


8eoüpóuos (see the note there). There 
can be no doubt about the meaning 
of the word here, but I have not 
thought it necessary to substitute 
eompeaBevrgv (the correct form), as 
there is sufficient evidence that the 
forms mpeoBeutns, mpeofvrgs, were 
confused at this time ; see the note 
on Philem. 9 mpeaBurns, vvvi 8€ xai 
Üéapaos  k.7.À. 

eis Tò KTA] ‘that he may visit 
Syria and congratulate them? For 
yevéoOar €ws, ‘to arrive as far as, 
comp. Rom. 2 cipeOiva eis dda, 
with the note. 

8. amédaBov x.7t.r.] ‘recovered 
their proper magnitude’. The church 
had been previously weakened and 
diminished by the dispersion and 
defections consequent on persecu- 
tion. 

rò iov copareiov] ‘their proper 
corporate substance’. So we should 
probably read in Euseb. ZZ. Z. x. 5 
(an imperial law) árwa mávra r 
coparío Tov Xpiotiavey...rapadidoc bat 
denoet, The form caparcoy, like cap- 
kiov (aapkidiov), is a word of depre- 
ciation, affected more especially by 
the Stoics, ‘this puny, wretched 
body’ (e.gi-Epictet. i... 10, 1-25. 21, 
where it appears in conjunction with 


other diminutives) ; whereas Topa- 
Tetov is a term of enhancement. The 
proper distinction between the two 
words is recognised in Choerobosc. 
Orthogr. s. v..(Cramer Anecd. 1. 
p. 262) onareiowv e ñ mapadocts: 
copáriov b€ kai mpomapo£vróves rò 
úrokopiorikóv. The meanings of ro- 
pareiov are as follows; (r) ‘A corpo- 
ration, college’, as Cod. Fust. i. 2. 
20 as éAXeuróvrov j6ev rois dpiOpois 
cepareíov: comp. Suicer and Du- 
cange s.v. In this sense substan- 
tially it is used here. (2) ‘An actors 
dress and make up’, including the 
padding, etc. to give dignity to the 
figure; Pollux Ozom. iv. 115 xai 
ckevi) pev 5 róv Vmokpwrdv oToAr Ú 
& aùr) ka copareiov ékaAeiro, where 
the editors have wrongly substituted 
gopariov (though in ii. 235 it is so 
written, gapdriyv). The word is 
mentioned by Pollux side by side 
with mpocwmeior, popuoÀvketov. So 
Lucian Fup. Trag. 41 rà mpérora 
TG» Îeðv aŭrà xal rods éuBdras kal 
Tos modnpets xvrávas...kadi Topareia 
kai rdÀÀa ois ekeivot ceuvóvovgi Thy 
tpay@diav, where however it is com- 
monly read cwpuaria. In this latter 
form too it appears in Photius s. v., 
who defines it dvamAácpara ols oí 


320 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [xi 


Twa TOY Üperépev uer EmiTTOANS, va avróo£ao THY 
kara Oeóv aùroîs yevouérny evdiav, kal STL Nuuévos. HON 
eTUYNAVOV TH TPOTEVXT vmv. TEAELOL óvTes TEAELA kai 
dpovevre* OéXovow yap Upiv eb mpaocsew Ocos éTormos 


eis TO rapa xev. 


XII. 


'Aemáterai (uds 1j dean Tv aOeXQov rov 


^ / e 
év Tpwadi, dev kai ypadw vpiv dia Bovppov, ov dre- 


2 109] GL; subst. evddpuov [g]; om. A. 


3 éréyxavov] pervenerunt in A; 


éréyxavev GL; rerúxmka g. -This last reading points to ér/yxavov, which however 
the interpolator has mistaken for a rst pers. sing. instead of a 3rd pers. plur. 


kal] GLAg ; om. Max Dam-Rup 1. 
huw Dam-Rup. 


eð mpárrew g Max Dam-Vat Dam-Rup. 


Dam-Rup xal éroiuds éorw ó 0€ós g*. 


vrokpirai Suawarrovew avrovs: (3) ‘A 
corpus, or collection, of writings’, 
as e.g. Iren. i. 9. 4 r@ THs dÀn0e(as 
copareéíg. But in other authors 
where this sense occurs, the existing 
texts frequently write it copgártov. 
(4) ‘A corpse’, not regarded by it- 
self but (as may be inferred from 
the form) with its belongings, e.g. 
the urn which contains the ashes. 
So it appears in three inscriptions, 
at Aphrodisias, C. 7. G. 2826, 2829, 
2835. Though these same inscrip- 
tions elsewhere have e for ¿ they 
do not so write where the + is cer- 
tainly short, as it is in sœpárıov. It 
must be confessed that no stress 
can be laid on manuscripts, so far 
as regards the distinction between 
L and eu and with some of the above 
meanings the form of the word may 
be doubtful; e.g. with the second the 
diminutive form socpáriv is explic- 
able, when compared with ‘corset’, 
‘corselet’, ‘leibchen’. But inthe sense 
which it has here, this form seems 
quite out of place. The word sø- 
paretov dua Ts e, SupOoyyouv is ex- 
pressly recognised by a writer in 


4 ouv] GLAg Max Dam-Vat r; 


e mpdocew] G (not ev’rpdooew, as commonly stated); 


Oeòs ëroruos] GL Max Dam-Vat 
5 mapacxev] Gg; mapéxew Max 


Cramer Anecd. II. pp. 308, 309, but 
he does not distinguish its meaning 
from capariov. 

I. ovvdofacn| The word occurs 
Rom. vii. 17, and (in a different 
sense) Arist. Polit. v. 9 (p. 1310). 
Otherwise it is rare until a later date. 

2. Amévos] The simile occurs al- 
so Polyc. 2. 

3. téiert k.T.A.] See Phil. iii. rs 
"Oroi ovv TéÀewu Tovro dpovópev. 
Ignatius is here referring to what 
has been said above, iva ov réAetov 
úpðv yeérnta To épyov: so that réAeia 
$poveire means ‘do not leave your 
plans incomplete.’ 

XII. ‘The brethren at Troas 
salute you ; whence also I write by 
Burrhus your delegate. His minis- 
trations are an example for all to 
copy, and God will requite him. 
I salute your bishop, presbyters, 
deacons, and laity, in Christ, in His 
passion and resurrection, in the 
unity of God and of yourselves. 
Grace be with you always.’ 

6. 1 dyann Kk.r.à.] See the notes 
on Zrall. 3, 13. 

7. Ó Botppov] See the note on 


Ic 


XII] TO THE SMYRN/EANS. 321 


£ 5 SEC. ^ ^ e — 
TTEINATE ueq uo? dua '€oeotois mois dóeN ots Up: 


A ` /2 Qe uz Noua / E] 
OS KATA TavTa ue dvéravoev. Ka) 0QeNov mavrtes at- 


\ 5 ^ 3) 5 /2 ^ 
TOV €ulmouyTo, ÜvTa é£eumAdpiov Oeog Otakovias. duel- 
, ` 
‘AoraCouar tov 


\ ^ \ , 
verat avTOv h X4pis kaTa TüvVTa. 


d£iÜeov èmiskorov ka) Ocozrpezrés "pea (vTépiov, [kai] 


\ , A \ 
TOUS cuvdovAous uov Siaxdvous kal TOUS Kav’ dvdpa Kat 


^ ie £ 
Koln TavTas, év ovOuaTL 
t 
Dam-Vat Dam-Rup. 


TE: 
xápıs] GLA; 
úuðv roXókaprrov g. 
L[A][g]; om. G. 

christi A. 


add. ro kvplov g. 


Philad, 11, where the 
sion occurs. 

8. dua °Edecíouçs K.r.À.] ‘Jointly 
with your brethren the Ephesians’, 
The Smyrnæans had joined with the 
Ephesians in commissioning Bur- 
thus see Phs/ad. 11, Smith there- 
fore is wrong when he explains dua 
"Edeoíow rois d8eA dois, *Euplo et 
Frontone', who are stated in Ephes. 
2 to have been among the Ephesian 
delegates in Ignatius company at 
Smyrna. Evidently dua ’Edecious is 
connected with the subject, not the 
object of ámeareíXare, as the parallel 
passage, Phzlad. 11, shows. Moreover 
there is reason to think that Euplus 
and Fronto were no longer with him, 
having parted from him at Smyrna, 
so that Burrhus was the only Ephe- 
sian delegate in his company at 
Troas; see the note on Liphes, 2. 

9. xarà mávra x.rA.] For this 
phrase see the note on Ephes. 2. 

dpehov] *7 would’, as r Cor. iv. 8, 
EM Colurxitm «GalL v. I2 (see the 
note), Apoc. iii. 15: see Winer § xli. 
p. 377. The word so used is properly 
the Ist pers. sing., ‘I ought (sc. to 


IGN. II, 


same expres- 


6 áóeX$óv] GLA; add. Uv g. 

burrum Ls Búppou G; byrdium A; Boúpyou g: see the notes on Ephes. 

8 ddedpois] G; fratribus LA; cwvadeddors g* (but with a v. 1.). 

I2 éríckorov] GL; add. Vestrum A; add. 
8eompemés] gL[A ?]; Ocomperécrarov G. 

14 "Incoü Xpwrov] GL; xpusro0 ixoot T; 

TH caprÌ] GLA; THs capkàs g (MSS, but l has zz carne). 


'InaoU Xo ToU, kal Th Tapki 
t 


7 Bovppov] 
2, Philad. 
1157) 


kal sec.] 
domini nostri iesu 


witness it)’, ‘Would I might see it’, 
but becomes a mere particle =‘ uti- 
nam.’ The form without the aug- 
ment seems to be the more common 
with this usage. 

IO. éÉeumAdpiov] See the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

II. 9 xápis] ‘the Divine favour’; 
as Polyc. 7 morebw yàp TH xápur., ib. 

€orae 5j xdpis per adrod. For this 
absolute use of 7 xápis in the N. T., 
see the note Philippians i. 7. Com- 
pare in Ignatius the similar uses of 
[zo] Oédnwa (see note on Ephes. 20), 
TO Óvoua (see the note on Ephes. 3),5 
evroAy (see note on Trall. 1 i91 

12. d£ióÓeov| See the notes on 
Magn. 2, Trall. inscr. 

&eompemés| See the note on Magen. 
I; 

I3. ovvdovAovs] Appropriated by 
Ignatius to deacons; see the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

rois kar" ávOpa] ‘individually’ ; see 
the note on Zes. 4. 

14. kal rH capki x.rA.] A farewell 
warning against the false doctrine of 
the Docetics; comp. $8 1, 2, AND. 
6517. 


222 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[XII 


^ ^ [74 , ` > , ^ 
QUTOU Kal TW GL UG TL, mabet TE KAL AVAOTAOEL 0 a pktK 


^ 5 , ^ \ e ^ , 
T€ Kal TVEUMATIKH, Èv EVOTHTL OcoU Kat uov. — xapis 
t 


econ Sf > Me e M Š ` lA 
UJV, EAEOS, ELONVN, VTOMOVN Ola TAVTOS. 


2 rvevuarikh] txt LAg; add. év òvóuarı G. 
év] GL; om. g (but 1 has zz). 


ôvóuarı Inso XpuToo above. 


I. Gapku Te KT.À.] A spiritual 
resurrection was not denied by the 
Docetics. Hence Ignatius asserts 
both; see [Clem. Rom.] ii. 9, with 
the note. 

2. év évornts KTA] A farewell 
warning against the separatism of 
the Docetics; comp. $ 8. For the 
form comp. Polyc. 7 robro Tó épyov 
Ocot cory kal ouv. For évórgs Ocot 
see Philad. 8, 9, Polyc. 8 (comp. 
évorgs “Inood Xpiorov Philad. 5); for 
évorns vpov, Philad. 2. The first 
genitive describes the binding prin- 
ciple of the unity ; the second the 
component parts. 

xdapis «.7.A.]| The form of bene- 
diction gathered words by time. In 
all S. Paul’s Epistles, except the 
latest, in 1, 2 Peter, and in Clement, 
it is yapis kai eipnyn; in the Pastoral 
Epistles, and in 2 John, ydpis, &Aeos 
[xai] eiprvg; while here úrmopovů is 
superadded. The additional words 
(€Xeos, úmouový) point to a time of 
growing trial and persecution. Other 
forms are éAeos xal eiprjvg, Polycarp; 
éreos [kai] eiprjvm kal dyámy, Jude, 
Mart. Polyc.; «ipnyn kai xapis kai 
96£a, Epist. Vienn. et Lugd. 

XIII. *I salute my brethren and 
their families ; as also the widows. 
Farewell Philo my companion sa- 
lutes you. I salute the household of 
Gavia; likewise Alce, Daphnus, Eu- 
tecnus, indeed all one by one. Fare- 
well once more. 

5. tas TapÜévovs k.r.A.] The first 
care of the Church was to provide 
for the wants of the widows (see the 
note on $ 6 above) The next step 


It has clearly crept in from év 
A, being 


was to impose upon them such duties 
as they were able to perform in re- 
turn for their maintenance, e.g. care 


of orphans, nursing of the sick, visit-_ 


ing of prisoners, etc. Hence they 
were enrolled in an order, which 
however did not include all who re- 
ceived the alms of the Church. This 
order was already instituted in the 
Apostolic age (1 Tim. v. 9 sq). It 
is probably intended here, and in 
Polycarp PAZ/. 4 ywookovoas ore eisi 
Ovotarrnpiov Oéot. It is certainly re- 
ferred to in Hermas ls. ii. 4, and 
in Clem. Hom. xi. 36 xnpikà svory- 
cdápevos (said of S. Peter) It was 
even known to the heathen, as ap- 
pears from Lucian De Mort. Peregr. 
I2 jv ópüv mapa TO Secpornpio mepipé- 


vovra *ypáOia yxñpas Twas (i.e. ‘widows ` 


as they call them’; comp. zd. Š 41 
émigroAàs Stamépyat avrov OuaÓrkas Ti- 
vás, ‘testaments as he called them’). 
The importance of this order may 
be inferred from the incidental col- 
location in Tertullian de Pudic. 13 
‘prosternis in medium ante viduas, 
ante presbyteros) Indeed there is 
every reason to think that it was 
more important throughout the se- 
cond century than at any later time. 

The interpretation of the language 
of Ignatius has been confused by the 
assumption that the widows were the 
same order as the deaconesses. This 
however seems to be quite a mis- 
take. Whatever confusion there may 
have been in later times, in the 
apostolic age and for some genera- 
tions after Ignatius they were dis- 
tinct, This is clear from S. Paul’s 


OO T T WSA w ar w r TCF s 


xim] 


XIII. 


transmitted through the Syriac, has no authority on this point. 


TO THE SMYRN/EANS. 925 


2 


3 id \ / - , ^ 
Aomá(ouat tors olkovs TÓV aEAPwY uov 
\ \ \ , 

Tuy yuvatEiy kal réxvois, kal ros 


7 \ 
mapGevous Tas Neyo- 


3 &Xeos, 


elpyyn, mopov] Gg; et salus et patientia Ns et misericordia et pax et sustinentia L*, 
4 Aordfouar K.7.À.] Some sentences in this chapter are transposed in A. 


language in 1 Timothy, where the 
qualifications and functions of the 
two are quite separate (the deacon- 
esses are described in iii. II, the 
widows in v. 9 sq). It held equally 
when the Apostolic Constitutions 
were compiled. The distinction is 
observed alike in the earlier books 
(the deaconesses are discussed in ii. 
58, ili. 15, the widows in iii. 1—8; 
while in ii. 26 the two are mentioned 
apart, and in iii. 7 the widows are 
ordered to be submissive to the 
deaconesses), and in the later (sepa- 
rate directions are given for the ap- 
pointment of the two—for the deacon- 
esses in viii. 18 sq, for the widows 
in viii. 25—and are assigned to dif- 
ferent Apostles). 

Having thus cleared the way, we 
ask next, what is the meaning of 
"the virgins that are called widows’. 
From their mention as distinct from 
‘the households of the brethren with 
their wives and children, it is clear 
they were persons who lived apart 
from the family life of the rest. 

It is generally explained as imply- 
ing that the order of so-called ‘widows’ 
either contained among its ranks per- 
sons who were actually unmarried 
virgins, or was altogether made up of 
these. This view is not uncommonly 
supported further by the identifica- 
tion of the ‘widows’ with the ‘dea- 
‘conesses’; e.g. by Cotelier, Hefele, 
and others here, by Bingham Anz. 
li. 21. 2 sq, vii. 4. 9, by Probst Kirch- 
liche Disciplin p. 143 sq, and by 
Dillinger Christenthum u. Kirche p. 
326, etc, S. Paul however did not 


contemplate anything of the kind, 
for his directions point to widow- 
hood in the strictest sense, r Tim. v. 
IO uù) @darrov ér@y é£jkovra ‘yeyovvia, 
€vós dvdpos yur Kerr. Moreover 
even at the beginning of the third 
century Tertullian treats it as a mon- 
strous and unheard-of irregularity 
that a virgin has been admitted into 
the order of widows; de Virg. Vel. 9 
“Plane scio alicubi virginem in vi- 
duatu ab annis nondum viginti col- 
locatam: cui si quid refrigerii de- 
buerat episcopus, aliter utique salvo 
respectu disciplinae praestare potuis- 
Set, ne tale nunc miraculum, ne 
dixerim monstrum, in ecclesia de- 
notaretur, virgo vidua? It seems 
therefore impossible that at any time 
when these epistles could have been 
written, the ‘viduatus’ should have 
been so largely composed of virgins 
as to explain the writers language 
So interpreted. Cotelier feels this 
difficulty and attempts to overcome 
it by the supposition that different 
churches had different practices ; 
and Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 336) argues 
similarly. But Tertullian could not 
treat as a ‘monstrum’ a practice 
which had prevailed commonly in 
the Churches of Asia Minor for a 
whole century before he wrote. More- 
over with this interpretation we must 
suppose either that the ynpixdy of 
Smyrna was wholly composed of 
virgins, or that Ignatius selected out 
of the order for salutation those only 
who had never been married. Either 
supposition would be inexplicable. 
The passages which speak of virgins 


21—2 


324 


uévas ynpas. 


^ \ 5 Noe) 
Cerar duás Pirwv, avv épot wv. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


af / e , / 
EppwoE jor év duvvaper 7raTpos. 


[xi 


, 7 
«a7ra- 


> \ 2 
domdaÇouat TOV OlKOV 


r marpós] LA; mveúuaros G (contracted 77s) g* (mss, but 1 has dez patris). 


3 Taovias] yavias g: 


as admitted into the diaconate in 
somewhat early times, though quoted 
in support of this view, prove no- 
thing, when it is seen that the 
viduate and the diaconate were 
originally separate institutions. I 
do not hesitate therefore to offer a 
wholly different interpretation, which 
is suggested by the following pas- 
sages ; Clem. Alex. Stvom. vii. 12 (p. 
875) ó yap émOvpnoas kai karac xdv 
éavroð kaÜdámep 7 xn pa, bia Taoppo- 
aivns avOts mapÓévos.. 
elow ai yywotikal yal as drelkacey 
TO evayyéuov [Matt. xxv. 1 sq] rais 
jj ya pévais mrapÜévois Talis mpood_xo- 
pévats Tov Kóptov' mapOévor pev yap os 
kKak@v area ynpevae k.T.À. (comp. Strom. 
lii. I6, p. 558 705g reves kai ris mapôé- 
vov TY Xüjpav eis éykpáreuv mporeíi- 
vovot KaTapeyadoppovncacay is me- 
meipara jOovns), Tertull. ad Uxor. 4 
(of certain widows) ‘Adhibe sororum 
nostrarum exempla, quarum nomina 
penes Dominum, quae nullam formae 
vel aetatis occasionem praemissis ma- 
ritis sanctitati anteponunt; malunt 
enim Deo nubere; Deo speciosae, 
Deo sunt puellae, de Virg. Vel. 1o 
* Non enim et continentia virginitati 
antistat, sive viduorum (v. l. vidua- 
rum), sive qui ex consensu contume- 
liam communem jam recusaverunt?’, 
de Exh. Cast. 1 ‘secunda [species] 
virginitas a secunda nativitate, id 
est a lavacro, guae aut in matrimonio 
purificat ex consensu aut zz vzduztate 
perseverat ex arbitrio, This then I 
suppose to be the meaning of Igna- 
tius here; ‘I salute those women 
whom, though by name and in out- 
ward condition they are widows, I 


.avra é 


gaviae A: raovias G; thaviae L: 


see the lower note. 


prefer to call virgins, for such they 
are in God’s sight by their purity and 
devotion. See also Jahn .S. Method. 
Platoniz. p. 42, on some uses of 
mapÜévos which illustrate this. M. 
Renan (Les Agótres p. 124 sq), with- 
out any thought of this passage in 
Ignatius, says, *Cette position si dif- 
ficile de la veuve sans enfants, le 
christianisme l'éleva, la rendit sainte. 
La veuve redevint presque légale de 
la vierge) 'These words give fairly the 
Christian sentiment about widows in 
the age of Ignatius, and the mode of 
expressing it here is eminently cha- 
racteristic of this father in its terse 
epigrammatic form. It is difficult 
to say exactly what interpretation 
Voss takes; but he quotes (in a 
mutilated form) Clem. Alex. Strom. 
vii. I2, and seems in one part of his 
note, as if he were approaching the 
explanation which I have given. 
The expression in Seneca Agam. 
196 ‘An te morantur virgines viduae 
domi? quoted by Pearson, has a 
wholly different sense. The reader 
should be cautioned that in the notes 
of both Cotelier and Voss, as quoted 
by Jacobson, important sentences 
are left out without any sign of 
omission, 

I. êv dSuvapec marpós] In con- 
firmation of this reading comp. Magu. 
3 xarà Ovvauw Ocod marpds. The 
confusion of the oblique cases of 
mar)p and mve)pa is not uncommon, 
owing to the contractions TPC, TING, 
etc. So Trall. 11 $vreía marpòs is 
quoted $vreía rod rvevparos in [Ioann. 
Damasc.] Par. Rupef. a. lxxvi. (O. 11. 
P- 773); see also the notes on Zes. 


xii] 


TO THE SMYRNZEANS. 


325 


DA q / < - E ^ 
Faovias, ijv eUxouat éOp&a at mrlo-rei kai dyarmy a'apkuei 
t 


M ^ 
TE KQL TVEVMATLKN . 
t 


€0pàcÓai] edpacba G; q0p&c0a. g. 


do7ratouat "ÀAKnv, TO molyTov 


4"AXcy] dAkyv G. The other authori- 


ties, LAg, write it without an aspirate: comp. Polyc, 8. 


9. In r Cor, xv. 24 bEhassasvt 
mu for marpí. In Iren. v, 5. I tov 
mvevparikGv, the Latin has ‘patrum’, 
which must have arisen in the same 
Way; just as in Hippol. Haer, vii. 33 
the MS has zarpikóv where the sense 
requires mzvevparikóv. Again in Jus- 
tin Dial. 3o (p. 247) the common 
reading is perdvorav rod zarpós, where 
the sense requires TveUuaros. The 
critics there refer to Tatian Orat. 5, 
Method. Cozv. p. 93, where the Mss 
exhibit a similar confusion. In Euseb. 
H: E. i. 13 mapa roô zarpós there is 
a v.l. mvevparos. 

3. Taovías] There cannot be 
much doubt about the word here. 
The names Gavius, Gavia, are fre- 
quent in the Latin inscriptions: 
see also Jul. Capitol. Axton. Pius 8. 
Gavius appears also in a Greek in- 
scription, C. Z. G. 5979. On the 
other hand I have not observed any 
example of Tavia, and only one or 
two of Tavius or Thavius, Muratori 
MCCCXCV. 10, Corp. Inscr. Lat, IH. 
6248. 

€0pácÓa, riore] Comp. Ephes. 10 
éðpaãiot Tj mare, with the note. The 
form pacOa for dpacOa is pos- 


sible; see D'Orville on Charito 
P. 404. 

capkw; K.T..] See the note on 
Ephes. Yo. 


4. “AAkny] She is saluted also in 
the companion letter, Polyc. 8, and in 
the same terms, rò qoÜgróv Mot Ovopa. 
The name occurs also in the ac- 
count of Polycarp’s martyrdom (A.D. 
155 or 156) Š 17 úréßañe yotv Nikýryv 
tov roô “Hpddov marépa d8eAdv dé 
"Akys kT., Herodes being the 


magistrate who was instrumental in 
putting Polycarp to death. There is 
no difficulty, though a period of forty 
or fifty years may have elapsed, in 
supposing the same person to be 
meant. The Alce there mentioned 
was plainly well known to the Chris- 
tians; and her relationship to the 
magistrate implies that, if still liv- 
ing, she was advanced in life. If 
so, this divided family is an illus- 
tration of the warning in Matt. x. 35; 
for her brother Nicetes and her 
nephew Herodes are both actively 
hostile to the Christians. Pearson 
says incorrectly that on her account 
‘utpote Christianae, frater eius in- 
tercesserat pro Polycarpo’. But Ni- 
cetes interposes for quite another 
purpose, to prevent the Christians 
from recovering the remains of 
Polycarp, being instigated by the 
devil, as the writers of the Martyr- 
dom state. The name Alce occurs 
occasionally in inscriptions, but is 
not common. It is remarkable that 
of the only two occurrences in the 
Greek collection the one (C. Z. G. 
3268) is at Smyrna, while the other 
(C. Z7. G. 7064) is on a gem of un- 
certain locality. In the Latin col- 
lection however it is less rare. Jacob- 
son (Polyc. 8) supposes that in ro 
moOnrov uot dvoua there is a play on 
the word ddky, ‘robur, fortitudinem 
desiderabat ad martyrium subeun- 
dum’. But this can hardly be; for 
Ignatius uses the same expression of 
Kpókos, Rom. 10, where no such play 
is possible (see also the note on 
Ephes. x). 


326 


IGNATIUS TO THE SMYRN/EANS. 


[xi 


5 \ , ` » 
pot Óvoua, kal Addvov tov davyKpiTov Kat Cirekvov 


\ , af 
Kal TAVTAS KAT OVOMG., 


I uo] g; mihi L; wou G; al. A. See also Polyc. 8, Rom. xo. 


Eppwole év xdpvrt Ocov. 


2 Oeo0] 


GL; add. amen A; add. kal kvuplov NUOV k.T.À. g. 
For the subscriptions of GL see the title to the Epistle to Polycarp. For A 


no subscription is given. 


I. Ad$vov| This name occurs 
from time to time in the inscrip- 
tions. 
it is found in connexion with ano- 
ther name which occurs in this con- 
text, D. M. GAVIAE . QVADRATILLAE 
C. GAVIVS . DAPHNVS. PATER . IN- 
FELICISSIMVS. Pearson also refers 
to Daphnus the Ephesian physician, 
who is an interlocutor in Athenzeus 
pat. 

aovykpirov| ‘incomparable’: Her- 
mas Mand. 7 1) mpagis aov dovykpiros 
éorat, Clem. Hom. i. 21, il. 43, 45, lii. 
30, xi. 12, etc. Test. XII Patr. Levi 2, 
Hippol p. 89 (Lagarde) It occurs 
also in classical writers of this age. 
Pearson points out that the corre- 
sponding (incomparabilis? is a very 
common epithet in the Latin in- 


In one, Reines. Jaser. p. 693, . 


For g see Appx. 


scriptions; and dovykprros itself oc- 
curs on epitaphs in Jewish cemeteries 
at Rome (Garrucci Dissert. Archeol. 
II. pp. 179, 182). In Rom. xvi. 14 
it appears as a proper name; but 
this is apparently rare. 

E)rekvov] I have not observed any 
other example of this name; nor 
does it seem very suitable as a proper 
name. However Evrékwos is found 
in literary history; see Fabric. 5247. 
Graec. V. p. 6or, ed. Harles. Zahn 
writes eUrekvov and treats it as an 
epithet, but this is awkward. 

2. kar õvopa] 3 Joh. 15 doráćov 
rovs d(Xovs kar óvoua, Polyc. 8 aoma- 
(opa. mavras eé ovoparos. See also 
the note on eé ovóparos Ephes. 20. 

éppoec6c] See the note on Z2Zes. 
21. 


7 


TOREO CARP 


J tan oe = 


DATOJ- OT a 


7. 


ete ire OVC ASR:p: 


HILE addressing a letter from Troas to the Church of Smyrna 
generally, Ignatius writes at the same time more especially to the 
bishop Polycarp. He had during his stay in Smyrna received much 
kindly attention from Polycarp, whom he mentions affectionately in 
letters written thence (Zphes. 21, Magn. 15), and had learnt to admire 
his character and work. 

Like the Pastoral Epistles of S. Paul, with which it has many 
points in common, this letter is the exhortation of an older servant of 
Christ to a younger friend who holds a responsible office in the Church. 
Like them also, though special, it is not private. It was obviously 
intended to be communicated to the Smyrnzan Church, for at the 
beginning of § 6 the writer turns from the bishop to the congregation 
and addresses them directly on their reciprocal duties towards their 
chief officer. ` 

In this letter fuller instructions than in the more general epistle 
are given respecting the delegate who is to represent the Smyrnzeans 
at Antioch (§ 7). Moreover Polycarp is charged with the duty of 
writing to other churches nearer to Syria and directing them to send 
representatives in like manner (§ 8). As in the letter to the Smyrnzeans, 
so here special salutations are sent to individual persons (2). On the 
. other hand there is no mention, beyond a passing allusion expressed 
in general terms (§ 3), of the heresy which occupies so large a space 
in the companion epistle. The directions have reference to the inter- 
nal circumstances and private life of the Church, not to its relations 
with alien persons and creeds. Owing to this fact it has escaped with 


330 IGNATIUS TO POLYCARP. 


comparatively few changes from the violence of the interpolator, who 
accepts any mention of heresy as a signal for free-handling and 
insertion. 


The following is an analysis of the epistle. 


* IGNATIUS to POLYCARP greeting. 

‘It was a great privilege to see thee. I exhort thee to greater zeal 
than ever. More especially have a care for unity. Be firm and tender 
and watchful. Bear the ailments of all (§ 1). Adapt thy medicines 
to the complaints of thy patients. Join the wisdom of the serpent 
with the guilelessness of the dove. Thou art compact of flesh and 
spirit, that thou mayest use each in its proper function. Thou art 
the pilot of the vessel of the Church, the athlete in the race of God 
(§ 2). Be not scared by false teachers. Be firm as an anvil; submit 
to bruises, as a victorious athlete. Read the signs of the times, but 
await the advent of the Eternal (§ 3).’ 

‘Provide for the widows. Let nothing be done without thee. Let 
your meetings be more frequent. Do not overlook slaves, but do not 
exalt them unduly ($ 4). Warn thy flock against evil arts. Explain 
the duties of husbands and wives to each other. Vows of chastity 
and vows of marriage should be taken with thy cognisance; and all 
things done to God’s honour (§ 5).’ 

‘Ye laity, obey your bishop and your clergy. Work and suffer, 
sleep and rise, together. Be not remiss in your spiritual warfare ; 
but buckle on your armour and win your reward. Be patient one 
with another (§ 6).’ 

‘As the Church of Antioch now enjoys peace, I am the more 
ready to die. Gather together a council, Polycarp, and elect a 
representative who shall go to Syria A Christian is not his own 
master. It remains for you to complete your good deed ($ 7)” 

* Hurried in my departure hence, I have had no time to write to 
the distant Churches. Do thou, Polycarp, urge them to send delegates 
to Syria. Salutations to the widow and children of Epitropus, to Attalus, 
to your elected representative, to Alce. Farewell ($ 8). 


MPOC TIOAYKAPTION. 


ITNATIOC, 6 xai Ocodópos, 


$ > $. 
lloNvkdpzro €TLOKO- 


> ip , ^ , , \ 
TW EKKANo Las Cuvpvaiwr, parov ETETKOTNMEVW VTO 


A \ N45 ^ ^ ^ 
Ocov maTpos kat ‘Incov Xpirtov, zrAeiora xatpew. 


Tipoc TOÀ YKaprroN] cHupvaots dad Tpwáðos mpds moN/kaprrov Cyvóárts. (num- 
bered 8 in the marg.) G (the first three words being the subscription to the pre- 
vious epistle); epistola 2a tgnacii smyrnets. a troade policarpo L* (where the two 
are confused); ad polycarpum episcopum. smyrnae urbis A; epistola [domini] ignatii 
[episcopi antiochiae] 2; ToU avTo0 eru TON)) mpos moNUkaprov émlaKomToy cuoprms g. 


j I ó kal] See Zphes. inscr. 
smyrnae urbis SA; zmyrnae X. 


A. émeckomyuévo] g; émickomquévQ G. 


ingot GDA. 


‘IGNATIUS to POLYCARP who is 
overseer of the Church in Smyrna, 
but himself is overseen by God and 
the Lord Jesus Christ; greeting’. 

2. Zuupva(ev] The Syriac Version 
(and after it the Armenian) writes 
the word with a Z, as it is written 
also in the Syriac translations of 
the Martyrology (Moesinger ppor, 
10) and of Eusebius Æ, Æ. iii. 36 
(Cureton C. 7. p. 203, four times). 
This may be a scribe's caprice, but 
it not improbably represents the 
original form in Ignatius, At all 
events elsewhere (e.g. in the frag- 
ments in Cureton C. Z. pp. 198, 210, 
212, 214, and in Rev. i. 11, ii. 8) it 
is spelt with S in the Syriac. The 
forms Zpgpva, Zpuvprvaios, are com- 
mon in Greek inscriptions; e.g. 
C. I. G. 3032, 3203, 3211, 3270, 3276, 


2 éxkdyolas Zpvpralov] GLg; ecclesiae 
HadXov] txt GZg; add. autem L; def. 
3 'Iyco0] Lg*; kvplov 


3286, 3289, 3311, 3371, all these at 
Smyrna itself, besides several else- 
where (e.g. Wood's Discoveries at 
Ephesus Inscr. vi. 20, p. 70). On 
the coins too this name is written 
indifferently with a 3 or a Z: see 
Eckhel Doctr. Num. Y. p. 545 sq. 
In the earliest coins the Z seems 
to be preferred, in the latest the s, 
while about the age of Ignatius 
both seem to be used impartially ; 
see Mionnet HI p. 302 sq, Suppl. 
VL p. 190 sq. In Rev. i. rr, H. 8, 
it is Zuvpva in 8, and Zmyrna in the 
Cod. Amiat. Nor is this form very 
uncommon in Latin MSS elsewhere 
(e.g. Tac. Ann. iv. 56). The title 
of Cinna's poem was evidently so 
written, ‘Zmyrna’; see Catull. 95 
(p. 67 ed. Mueller, with the fragments 
of the poem itself, 22. p. 88). Lucian 


332 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS (1 


E , , \ E ^ , e 
I. 'Aroðeyouevós cov tyv év Oeo yvwunv nópa 
€ 5 , 
ouévnv ws émi métpav dkivmrov, Umepoota(w kaTa- 
^ ^ , e , , 
Erwbeis ToU mpocwrov cov ToU dpwpov, OV Ovaiumv év 


I cov THY Q Oc yveunv] G; tuam in deo sententiam L; rip èv 0ed aov *yvópmv 


g; dub. ZA. 
GLg; om. ZA. 


(ud. Voc. 9) makes = complain 
that among other aggressions Z has 
‘robbed him of all Smyrna’. The 
form Zpvpva is supported by the an- 
alogy of ¢udpaydo., *zmaragdi, which 
is frequent, ¢uepdadéa in the Her- 
culanean papyri of Philodemus, etc : 
see Munro on Lucret. iv. 1126. Simi- 
larly the duplicate forms ¿“Cuíóos, 
ZpiOos, of a proper name occur in the 
inscriptions. Compare also the two 
forms Zeríev, Zeríev, in Magn. 2 
with the note. The substitution of 
‘bishop of Smyrna’ in the Syriac of 
Cureton for ‘bishop of the Church 
of the Smyrnzans’ is an indication 
of a later date. 

émeokomyuévo] See below $ 8 èv 
évorntt Oeod kal émiwokomy, Magn. 3 
TH marpi 'lgcoü XpwroÜ r mávrov 
émwgkómo; comp. also r Pet. ii. 25. 
For this use of the verb, referring to 
God's supervision, comp. Orig. de 
Orat. 31 (I. p. 268) úmnpecía rod 
Ociov BovAnparos émwckomoüvros thy 
exkAnoiav,..of ToLovToL...0vK emirkomn- 
Oncovra. There is perhaps the same 
play, as here, intended by Polycrates 
in Euseb. H. E. v. 24 MeMroxa...ós 
Keira, ev Sapdece TEPYLEV@Y THY amò 
TOY ovpavay éemioxomny kK.r.À., and in 
Eusebius himself 77. Z. iii. 7 ldkwBos 
avrós ó Tjjüe mpóros émíakomos...ríjs 
Ücias émis komfjs eimér: Tore paxpobv- 
povons. For the sentiment here 
comp. Gal. iv. 9 yvóvres Ocóv, paddov 
8€ yvoaévres vio Oeod; and for simi- 
lar turns of expression in Ignatius 
see the note on Smyrn. 5. 


2 imepboiáfo] GLg; add. deum ZA. 
4 èv xapirt] For the addition in L see Appx. 


3 ToU àp pov] 
5 TávTas 


I. ‘I welcome thy firm faith in 

God, and I give glory that I have 
seen thee face to face. Be more 
diligent in thine own life, and exhort 
all men to be saved. Vindicate thine 
office; be zealous for unity; bear 
the burdens of all; give thyself to 
prayer and ask for more grace; be 
vigilant ; address thyself to each man 
severally ; bear the sicknesses of all. 
The greater the pain, the greater the 
gain.’ ; 
I. 'AsroOexópevos] ‘ Welcoming, ap- 
proving, asin Ephes. í AmodeEauevos 
vpav ev OcQ TO TorAvayannToy dvopma, 
Trall. Y amodcEduevos ody thy Kata 
Cecov eüvoiay Ov adrod edd€aca k.T.À. 

ev Oe] These words might be 
connected with 7dpacpévyy, as in the 
Syriac and Armenian versions. For 
édpateo Oa ev see PAz/ad. inscr. (with 
the note). Comp. also patodcda èv 
Geo Epiphan. Haer. lxi. 8 (p. 512). 
Perhaps however they are better 
taken with yvóugyv; comp. Rom. 7 
Tiv eis Oeóv pov yvopgv, and Trall. 1 
(quoted above). 

2. émimérpav] As in the parable, 
Matt. vii. 24, 25, Luke vi. 48. 

vmepüofá(o] Used absolutely, like 
€00faca in Trall. 1 quoted above 
(see the note there) The Syriac 
and Armenian versions, followed by 
Petermann, supply ‘Deum,’ from not 
appreciating this usage. For ómep- 
0ofá(e see Orig. Comm. in loann. 
xiii (Of. IV. p. 235), and comp. vrep- 
evppaivoua Barnab. 1, úmepevyapioró 
Barnab. 5. 


1] TOSPOLVCARD: 


Oca 3 


333 


^ > , e 5 ^ 
TapakKarXw OE ÈV XapıTı n évðéðvoa mpoo eivai 


^ , ` , n. = 
5 Tw dpouw OOU, KAL TayTas 7rapakaXetv iva C'oCoVTat. 


> y ` , , ^ 
€xdiket Gov TOV TOTOV èv 701] ET WLEAELA CGOKlKr TE Kal 


TapakaNéw] GLg; petas pro omnibus hominibus ( filiis hominum) Zi petere pro 


filiis hominum A, 


GLZAg; om. Antioch. 


karafiobels kr] ‘having been 
Jermitted to see thy face? ‘N umquam 
igitur ante viderat Polycarpum,’ says 
Pearson. This seems a just infer- 
ence from the language ; and if SO, 
it refutes the statement in Mart. 
Len. Ant. 3 that Polycarp had been 
a fellow-disciple (cuvaxpoarns) of Ig- 
natius under S. John. For the fre- 
“quency of karaćıoðv in Ignatius see 
the note on EZ/es. 20. 

3. ToU duduov] The absence of 
these words in the Syriac and Arme- 
nian versions renders them doubtful 
here ; but üpopos, dudpos, are favour- 
ite words of Ignatius, especially in 
the addresses of his letters: see the 
note on Zes. inscr. 

ov dvaipny] ‘and may I have joy of 
zt” See the note on Ephes. 2. 

4. mpoodeiva k.7.d.] * Zo add to thy 
race, i.e. ‘to run thy race with in- 
creased vigour. The words are 
copied by the pseudo-Ignatius Hero 
I mwpocÓeivau rà póu cov ka) ékài- 
keiv cov To déiopa. The word ôpópos 
reproduces S. Paul’s favourite meta- 
phor of the stadium; e.g. T™Anpovv 
tov Spowov Acts xiii. 25, reAeioUv Tov 
Spopov Acts xx. 24, reAeiv ròv Spdpov 
2 Tim. iv. 7. For the metaphor in 
Ignatius see the note on Rom. 2. 

6. exdixer k.7.d.] ‘vindicate, assert, 
thine office? i.e. ‘make it felt and 
respected by a diligent discharge of 
its duties.” Pearson quotes Origen 
Comm. in Mate. xii. (IIl. p. 531) oí 


2 "E n 
Tov Tómov THs émwckomüse ékÓwkoUvreg 


6 cov roy rómov] GLg (and so Antioch II avrov roy 
TóTOV); convenientia (decentia) ZA: see the lower note. 


capku Te kal] 


XpOrra rà pyTS ds IIérpos, Cornelius 
in Euseb. Z. Æ. vi. 43 (speaking of 
Novatian) emu komv... jui) émifBdAXov- 
cav avTQ exdixet. In the first passage 
the phrase is used exactly as here; 
in the second somewhat differently. 
The word èkôikeîv occurs frequently 
in the LXX, but most commonly in 
another sense, ‘to exact vengeance for 
or from, ‘to avenge,’ ‘to punish.’ 

tov rómov] ‘thy place, i.e. ‘thine 
office’; comp. Smyrn. 6 rómos pndéva 
gvowoirw. See also Acts i. 25 roy 
Tomov ths Siaxovias (the correct read- 
ing) Clem. Rom. 40 rois iepevowy 
tStos 6 rémos mpogTérakra, 2b. 44 pj 
TiS avTous peTaoTHON aro roo iSpupevov 
avrois rórov, Polyc. PAz/ 11 ‘ignoret 
is locum qui datus est el,” Mart, 
Vienn. in Euseb. H. E. v. 4 e yap 
noeiev Tómov Tu Q¿katoo-Úu mrepurot- 
ela Üa,, às mpeoßúrepov exkAnolas k.r.À, 
Apost. Const. ii. 2 kaĝlorarat. ev TÓ 
rómo THs Émikomíüs, ii. II yvopi(ov 
TOV TOTOV GOV kal THY dÉ(ay, ii, 18 
dgiws ToU Tómou cou év TOOE TH Bio 
dvaotpépou, ii. 35 rhs iepwovyns rot 
tnAtkovTov rómov, Alexander in Euseb. 
H. E. vi 11 Nápkcos ó T™po €nov 
duemav rov rómov Ths émickomüe Tov 
evade, Orig. Comm. in Matt. l c. 
So also in Latin, Tertull. de Fuga 11 
*omnem servum dei...etiam minoris 
loci, ut majoris fieri possit...sed cum 
ipsi auctores, id est, ipsi diaconi et 
presbyteri et episcopi fugiunt, etc ^ 
Cyprian Æpist. iii (p. 469 ed. Hartel) 
‘immemor sacerdotalis loci tui et 


334 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1 


^ QU e , a SEI 1 
TVEUMATIKN. TAS EVWOEWS ppovrite, NS OUOEV @M€LVOV 
/ Z e [2 € y ls ré x5 
vávras Baorale, ws Kal oe 0 Kupios: mavtrwv  dvéxov 

> > , e \ a ^ $ 9 
. ocevvaits GaYoAa(e dòia- 
Èv ayaTn, WTTEP Kae TOLels d c X S X (€ U 
> A € > 
AcimToist airot cuverw 7Aelova ns €x€us* yonyopet 


2 às kal] GLAg Dam-Vat 2 Antioch (twice) 7, rr; szeg£ (om. kal) S42. 6 
Kvpios] GLg Antioch (twice) Dam; add. fortat S,2; add. portavit A: see a simi- 
lar addition of ZA in 8 6 ws kal 6 Oeós duty. 3 demep kal] GL*Ag; sicut 
(om. xal) 2 (see above 1. 2); i4 quod S4: def. Dam-Vat Antioch. áóua- 
Aelrrois] GLg* Dam-Vat Antioch rr (who paraphrases mposevxécÓc imép mávrov 


ddvadelrrws); om. S,ZA (seemingly, but see the note on Zphes. ro). 


officii xv (p. 513) ‘solicitudo loci 
nostri,” xvi (p. 517) ‘aliqui de pres- 
byteris nec evangelii nec loci sui 
memores, xl (p. 586) ‘ promovebitur 
quidem...ad ampliorem locum reli- 


gionis suae? See Pearson here and, 


on Smyrn. 6, where several passages 
are collected. So in English we 
speak of ‘placemen,’ ‘ place-seekers.’ 
The scruples of Cureton (C. Z. p. 265) 
respecting Tov rómov are groundless ; 
for rómos was certainly so used in the 
time of Ignatius, as the quotations 
given above show. The rendering 
of the Syriac and Armenian ‘things 
becoming’ is perhaps merely a loose 
paraphrase, meaning the ‘ official 
duties’ of a bishop (see e.g. Payne 


Smith Thes. Syr. s. v. raaa). 


But in uncial characters TONTOTTON 
might easily be read totrpetton, the 
confusion between n, rr and between 
€, o, being very frequent where the 
MS is blurred ; and the plural is ex- 
plained by ribut. 

gapki te KTA] As we should 
say, ‘secular as well as spiritual.’ 
For this favourite combination in 
Ignatius, see the note on Zes. 10. 

I. Ts €vócees] See the note on 
Magn. 1. 

ovdey dpewov| Comp. Ephes. 13 
Magn. 7. 


2. mdvras Baorafe] i.e. ‘support 


, 


5 mvedua] 


the burdens of all men’; comp. Rom. 
xv. I, Gal. vi. 2. So Epist. ad Diogn. 
IO rò Tov mÀqoíov dvaðéyeraı fBápos. 
See Apost. Const. i. 1 Baorá(ere otv, 
oi oor kai viol Tot Oeod, aAAnAovs, 
ò pév dvr)p THY yuvaika K.T.A. 

os Kal ce ó Kópios k.r..] An allu- 
sion to Isaiah liii. 4 paraphrased 
in Matt. viii. 17 avros tas àaceveías 
nov €daBev kai Tas vócovs €Bacracev. 
The influence of the evangelist’s 
paraphrase is clear, when we com- 
pare the words used just below, 
máyrov Tas vooovs B dorae: for the 
LXX rendering is quite different, oó- 
Tos Tas dpaprías "uv pépet kai wept 
"uv ddvvara. The interpolator has 
seen the reference, and has intro- 
duced the words of Is. liii. 4, as given 
in S. Matthew, into the context of 
müvrov Tas vócovs kK.T.Ar. just below. 

mavtev avéyov| This describes the 
passive side of his duty to others, as 
the previous clause had described 
the active. See Ephes. iv. 2 dvexó- 
pevor dÀArjAov ev dyáry, which Igna- 
tius probably has in his mind. Comp. 
also the saying of Epictetus, dvéxov 
kat améxov, Aul Gell xvii. 19. This 
verb generally takes the genitive in 
Eher 

3. dOuAeimrow] See Ephes. 10 d&- 
aXeimros mpooeUxeaÓe with the note, 
where the omission of dƏ,aÀe(mTouç in 
some texts here is discussed. 


1] TO POLYCARP. 335 


v A 
dkoiunTov cveUua KEKTHMEVOS* 


Oponlerav Oeo AdXer 


^ / 
TOlS kat avopa kara 


y A [4 [4 
TAVTWY TAS VOG' OUS Baca, 


€ 7 , y [74 
ws TEAELos AOANTHS: Ozrov vAelov KOTOS, TOAD KEpO0s. 


GLS,ZAg Dam-Reg; uua Dam-Vat; def. Antioch. 
adjutorium 1); consuetudinem L; voluntatem S,ZA; Bober G. 


Gg Antioch; ó 4@Anr1s Dam-Vat. 
add. yap S,X Antioch. 
Reg; multus S,ZA. 

etiam SZA; add. xal rò Antioch. 


5. mveüpa] The substitution of 
dupa in a quotation of the passage 
was probably suggested by the fact 
that dkoiunrov Supa is a more fami- 
liar combination ; e.g. Philo de Mut. 
Nom. 1 (I. p. 579), de Mon. 6 (U. p. 
219). 

Trois kar dvÓpa] ‘to each singly’: 
see the note on Efhes. 4 for this 
characteristic Ignatian phrase. 

, karà oponderay Oeo] “ZZ conformity 
with God. If the balance of au- 
thorities had left any doubt about 
the reading, it would have been 
settled by Magn. 6 ópnojüeuv O«o0 
AaBóvres. The Syriac and Armenian 
give a loose rendering of ópojeuav, 
which it was difficult to translate ac- 
curately. The similarity of the letters 
B and u in cursive MSS explains the 
variation Boyfecavy, a common word 
being substituted for an uncommon. 
See also the note on Mart. Rom. 10. 
For 6uondea see Clem. Alex. Strom. 
vii: 12 (p. 878), Philostr. Vzz. Apoll. ii. 
II (p. 61), Cyril. c. Julian. x. p. 338 
(ed. Spanheim). Ignatius here means 
*conformity with the character of 
God’ our Father, who neglects no 
one, but makes His sun to shine 
alike upon the good and evil (Matt. 
v. 45 sq). It will appear, I think, from 
the context, that Ignatius has this 
saying of Christ in his mind ; comp. 
mavrayv Tas vócovs Baorate ds T éÀ eto s 
aris, with ver. 48 Zoeo0e odv úpeîs 


6 óuońðerav] g* (but 
7 abrnrHs] 
mov] txt GLAg (but add. enim 1) Dam; 


telwy] g*L Antioch Dam-Vat; mAetov G Dam- 
Tod] GLg (but przef. 242 etiam 1) Dam-Vat; add. 


TÉéAetou ds ó marp juóv K.T.À., and 
Kahovs pabnras éà» hfs k.rA. with 
Ver. 47 SQ àv yàp dyamhonre rods 
dyamóvras pâs, ríva nb €xere 
K.T.À. 

6. rds vócovs x.r.A.] See the note 
ON ds kai c x.7.A. above. 

7. TéAets dOAntHs] So Polyb. ii. 
20. 9 aédnrai réXeiwt yeyovóres Tov 
xarà móňepov épyov; comp. 70. i. 59. 
I2 dOAnras ámeréAeoe. In this ap- 
plication of the word ‘athlete’ Igna- 
tius had already been anticipated by 
Clement of Rome, $ 5. The allied 
words, a@deiv, dÓAgois, occur in this 
connexion as early as 2 Tim. ii. s, 
Heb. x. 32, and the idea is con- 
stantly present to S. Pauls mind. 
It afterwards became a very favour- 
ite metaphor, more especially as 
applied to the martyrs; e.g. Mart. 
Polyc. 18, Epist. Vienn. in Euseb. 
H. E. v. 1 (several times), Act. Perf. 
et Felic. 10, etc. Naturally also it 
was frequently employed by the 
Stoics. Here Ignatius seems to be 
contemplating the pancratiast (máv- 
tov K,r.A), in whom all the faculties 
were on the alert, and all the muscles 
brought into play; so Panetius in 
Aul. Gell. xiii. 28. 3 * Vita hominum 
qui aetatem in medio rerum agunt ac 
sibi suisque esse usui volunt, negotia 
periculaque ex improviso adsidua et 
prope cotidiana fert : ad ea cavenda 
atque declinanda perinde esse opor- 


336 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [n 


Ü ^ , af 
II. Karovs pabntas av pirgys, xdpis aot ovk. €o- 


^ M / ^ e / 
Tw’ M&ANov TOUS AoiuoTépous ÈV TPAUTHTL UTOTAGCE. 


r pfs] txt GLg Dam-Vat Antioch (pĝ) Anton 4 (@OOes); add. tantum 


S,ZA. 


éorw] or éore GLS,ZAg Antioch Anton; écra. Dam-Vat. 


2 maddov] GLE Dam-Vat Anton; maddov 06 g; &AMà u&XNNov Antioch; sed potius 


S,A. 


tet animo prompto semper atque in- 
tento, ut sunt athletarum qui pan- 
cratiastae vocantur: nam sicut illi 
ad certandum vocati etc? For ré- 
Acros Pearson compares Plato Legg. 
vii. p. 795 0 reAéos mayKpdtioy 7)0&1- 
Kos k.r.A., Galen de San. iii. 2 (VI. p. 
168 sq, Kühn) ov& oi msAetera. mo- 
voüvree adOAnral kar dAdo TL yvyvac tov 
epedpevovra 
kaNovpevov vm 


kómov xovcu mAnY TÒ 
aùrðv TéAev, and 
again TO TeNewtarov ékeivo yvpvágutov 
0 07) Kal KatacKeuny ovoud(ovat. 

drou mAclov k.r.A.] ‘The more pain 
the greater gain) So S. John in 
Browning’s ‘Death zm the Desert, 
‘When pain ends gain ends too? A 
contemporary of Ignatius, R. Tar- 
phon (Tryphon), is credited with a 
saying which resembles this, Pzrke 
Aboth ii. 19 ‘Dies brevis et opus 
multum et operari pigri et merces 
multa et magister domus (oixo8eomó- 
ts) urget, So too Tertull. ad Mart. 


3 of athletes, ‘quanto plus in exer- . 


citationibus laboraverint, tanto plus 
de victoria sperant, Greg. Naz. Orat. 
xl (I. p. 706) adro ro kapeiv mAéov, 
Treiov mobos k.r... The word kóros 
is used especially of the athlete's 
training : comp. e.g. Galen 1. c., and 
see the note on ovykxomare Š 6. 

II. ‘It is not enough to love good 
scholars. Bring the pestilent into 
subjection. Apply not the same 
remedy to all diseases, Be wise as 
the serpent and harmless as the 
dove. Thou art compact of flesh 
and spirit, that thou mayest humour 


rods Xousorépovs] Gg; deteriores L; malos SZA; rods &met0eoTépous 
(dmiOecrépovs) Antioch Dam-Vat Anton. 


mpairyre] g (but with a v. 1.) 


the things that are visible and may- 
est acquire a knowledge of the things 
that are invisible. The occasion 
demands thee, as a pilot the gales or 
as a storm-tossed mariner the haven. 
Train thyself, as God's athlete. The 
prize is eternal life. I am thy de- 
voted friend, I and my bonds.’ 

I. Kadovds k.A.] Luke vi. 32 € 
dyamüre roùs dyamóvras vpas, Tola 
vpiv xapis éoriv; k.r.À. (see the note 
on Š I xarà opornberay Oeo), 1 Pet. ii. 
18 où uóvov Trois ayabois kal émveckéow 
dAÀà Kal rois ckoÀtots' roUro yap xdpus 
k.rA. See also [Clem. Rom.] ii. Š 13 
ov xápis piv, el d'yaráre roUs dà'yamáv- 
Tas uns. 

2. mobs Roorepovs| ‘the more 
pestilent}, with a reference to the 
metaphor in Š I mávrev ras vócovs 
K.T.. This word, like 0Ae6pos, is used 
of persons even in classical writers, 
e.g. Demosth. c. Aristog. i. 80 (p. 
794) ó Nous ‘the pest.’ Hence it 
comes to be employed as an ad- 
jective, and is even declined as such; 
e.g. I Sam. i. I6 Ovyarépa ony, 
Barnab. 10 óvra oiua TH movgpía av- 
toy. This usage is most common in 
the LXX; comp. also Acts xxiv. 5. 
But I have not found an earlier in- 
stance of the comparative. Zahn 
refers to Clem. Alex. Stvom. ii. 67 
(p. 464), where this father mentions 
having heard a wise man (Pante- 
nus?) interpret kaĝéðpav Aouwdv (Ps. 
i. 1) as referring to the heretical 
sects (rds aipéoets). 

mpavTnre] Probably the correct 


n] TO POLYCARP. 337 


2 


> ~ ^ ^ IAN s Z 
OV Tav Tpavua TH auth EUTNATTpw Oeparrevera Tots 


Trapo£va ovs €uBpo x ats 


Anton; mpaóryr. G Antioch Dam- Vat. 


Dam-Vat Anton; abscissionem 2; abscissam A. 


TQUE. 


PPONIMOC riNOY óc 


3 Toùs mapotvouoùs] GLg Antioch 
4 €uBpoxais] g* (but 


with v. 1.) Dam-Vat Anton; év Bpoyaîs GL Antioch; (cx) lenitate 2; lenitate A; 


êv eùxaîs Dam-Reg. 
form here. See the note on Gala- 
Zans v. 23. 

3. Tpaüua] The word, as a medi- 
cal term, is not confined to bleeding 
wounds, but includes all external 
bruises and sores, 

Th aur eumddorpe| ‘the same plaster 
or salve’: comp. Clem. Alex. Fragm. 
p. 1020 (Potter) èv pâ cunAáoTpo kal 
ccavróv xal roy mÀgoíov iacdpevos, 
Hermes Trism, zepi for. XVA. p. 331 
(ed. Roether) €umAáoTpo p) TO ara 
xp®. The word is properly an ad- 
jective, Oepareia or appakeia being 
perhaps understood, and hence its 
gender. In late Greek however it 
became a neuter, rò fumÀaorpov. On 
the other hand, the recognised Latin 
form was the neuter emplastrum, 
and Gellius (xvi. 7) complains of cer- 
tain ‘novicii semidocti, who treated 
it as a feminine. This branch of 
medicine seems to have been espe- 
cially elaborated by the ancients. 
Their treatises are largely occupied 
in describing the different kinds of 
‘emplastra’; e.g. Celsus Med. v. 19, 
Galen de Comp. Med. per Gen. i. 
4 sq (XIII. p. 357 sq). In the index 
to Galen the list of emplastra occu- 
pies several pages. The familiarity 
of the Latins with the word appears 
from the passage of Laberius, ‘Quid 
est jusjurandum? emplastrum aeris 
alieni,’ quoted by Gellius 1. c., and 
by the remarks of Gellius himself 
on it. With the expression here 
comp. Apost. Const. ii. 41 ds G'uuma- 
Ons iarpós robs nuaprykéras mávras 
8epámeve ... pù) póvov véuvov ... dAAà 


IGN, II, 


kal...kataBpéy ov Àóyots mapakdAnri- 
Kois* éàv 0€ kodov 7 TO Tpavpa, 
Ópévrov avró Ov €umAáaTpov K.T.À., 
a passage which is evidently taken 
from Ignatius. See also Clem, Flom. 
X. I8 ov yap xpr) THY eutrracrpov Tpos- 
hépew émi rò vytewóv pépos k.r.À. 
Zahn quotes Orig. Hom. in Fes. Naue 
vii. $ 6 (Ir. p. 414) ‘si oleo perunxi- 
mus, si emplastris mitigavimus, si 
malagmate mollivimus, nec tamen 
cedit tumoris duritia, solum superest 
remedium desecandi.’ See also Epict. 
iL 21. 20 sq rà yap koÀAópia ovk 
axpyora rois őre Sei kal d det ey- 
Xptouevots, with what follows. 

This passage of Ignatius is quoted 
anonymously by Peter of Alexandria 
as retranslated into the Greek from 
the Syriac by Lagarde Rell. Fur. 
Eccl. Gr. p. xlvi ék meptoood [uddiora?] 
dKkovopev ór, Où ray TpaÜua Tj arn 


eumAdoTpo Oeparevera 
M po Cep ° 


4. mapokvopovs] ‘sharp pains or 
inflammations’; a medical term with 
a much wider meaning than the 
derived English ‘ paroxysm.’ Its 
Latin equivalent is ‘accessio.’ 

epBpoxaîs] ‘embrocations’ or Jo 
mentations, Galen Op. XIV. PP. 314, 
316; comp. Plut. Mor. p. 42C oú8ë 
(nretvy pupiferOa, | Oeópevov €uBpoxns 
kai karamAácparos. For parallels to 
the metaphor see also Plut, Mor. p. 
74 D ovre yap éxeivor Téuvovtes ev T 
moveiv kai dhyeiv Katadelrover TQ re- 
movOos ad’ évéBpe£ay TPOONVOS K.T.À., 
Apost. Const. ii. 41 (quoted above) xa- 
raBpéxev Adyous mapakAnrikots : comp. 
Galen Of. XII p. 210 mapnyo- 


22 


338 THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


^ Y > n 4 N € 3 
ó dóic é TATV Kai àképaroc €iga& óc H Tepi- 


^ 5 \ Ech: \ 

Ci ep À. Ova TOUTO CT APKLKOS EL KaL TTVEUMQATLKOS, IVA TA 
> , PM \ AF5 507 

qhauóueva OOU €LS 7rpoao'c7TOV KOXaKevrs Ta E aopa'a 


r 6 dus] g* (but with a v. 1. dus), and so prob. Antioch who substitutes the plur. 
ol dpes; dus (om. ó) G. Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 597) is not altogether correct about 
the authorities. The clauses are balanced, ó óQ«s against 7) epwrepá. râ- 
ow] or tact g Antioch; dmracw G. eicael] g (but om. 1, which like- 
wise omits èv mácw in the first clause); ad ea quae requiruntur (els à de?) È; 
iis quae digna (ox qui digni) sunt A; om. GL Antioch. The omission is doubtless 
owing to the recurrence of similar letters. ós 7] Gg, and so prob. Antioch, 
who has the plural ws ai vepwrepal ; woel vulg. 3 cov els mpócorov] G; 
in tuam faciem Ls coram facie tua ZA; co eis mpdcwrov g Dam-Vat 2. In 
Antioch r it stands airGy els mpoowmov, where a)ràv corresponds to cov, but as the 
context is in the 3rd person szzguw/ar we should prob. read avrà corresponding to 
got. KoNakeógs] GLE Dam-Vat; koXakees Dam-Reg; koħakeúņ Antioch 
(transferred to the 3rd pers.); Zuczeris A; émavopOdons g*. 4 atre] G 
Dam-Vat, and this was prob. the reading of g*, though the existing authorities 
vary; fete BA; petas L. Antioch has air, which corresponds to airs, when 


plas paddov per ovy Seira 9 Bias èv 
Tots mapoEvopots k.r.À. (comp. 2. p. 
182 sq). 

dpoviysos k.r.A.] A reference to the 
saying in Matt. x. 16 yiveoOe o?v hpo- 
vipor ws oi Obes Kal dképaiot ws ai 
meptorepal. Ignatius has substituted 
the singular, and inserted év mücw 
and eicaci in the respective clauses. 

2. 8a robro k.r.A.] i.e. ‘You are 
composed of two elements ; of flesh, 
that you may be able to deal with 
the world of matter, and shape it to 
God's ends ; of spirit, that you may 
be competent to receive a revelation 
of the unseen world.’. For 8i rodro 
tva comp. Magn. 9. 

3. cov] This seems to be the 
right reading; and if so, it should 
probably be taken with eis mpórorov, 
This position of the pronoun, even 
when there is no special emphasis, 
is common in Hellenistic Greek (e.g. 
Matt. vi. 17, ix. 6, xvi. 18, etc.), and 
occurs, as here, even with an inter- 
posing preposition, e.g. Luke vii. 44 
eloh bov aov eis THY oikíav, John ix. 15 
eméOnkev pov ext roùs coOadrpovs (the 


correct reading). By ‘the things 
which appear before thy face’ is 
meant ‘the visible and material 
world.’ Pearson wrongly interprets 
rà Qawopevá cov ‘corpus tuum.’ 
koXakeugs | 
characteristic word of Ignatius, Rove. 
4 koAakeUcare rà Onpia, 2D. 5 à kal ko- 
Aaxevow, and (as I have restored the 
Greek) 2b. 6 jindé Ag Kodakevonre. 
The word is used here in a good 
sense, as in Clem. Hom. xi. 25 vr 
eÀéou KoAakevOeioa émémewro evepyéris 
yevéo Oat k.r.A., xii. 16 5 cadpev rv 
avdpa évüuaÜéres direi-..kodakevet, d- 
pécke. (comp. Apost. Const. i. 2 rj 
idia yuvatkt povoy BovAónevos dpéakew 
kat ravtny Kodakevew evripos, which 
can hardly be independent of this 
passage), xiii. 17 dxovoay aru mpòs 
Tov codppovifoyra dei eloépxea Oat Xoyov 
dváyKacov, koħákevoov. The advice 
here is not very different from S. 
Paul’s maxim of ‘ becoming all things 
to all men’ The things of this 


` world are to be ‘coaxed’ into con- 


formity with the will of God. 
4. otra] So we should probably 


‘mayest humour’; a. 


— 


n] TO POLYCARP, 339 


” [74 ^ / M 
ATEL iva Gor pavepwOyr iva pndevos Aetzrn, kal sravrós 
he , ° \ ^ i e 
5 XaplopaTos TrepuraeUgs. ó KALPOS AMALTET oe, Ws kußep- 


A 3 M , ^ 
PANTAL «véuovs kat ws yeruaouevos Auuéva, eis à Oco0 


transferred from the third person to the second. See the lower note. 
p907] G Dam-Vat; pavepwheln g; dub. Antioch. 


Dam-Vat; 


Dam-Vat; und& co g. 


pare- 
iva sec.] g Antioch 


ömws G. The change seems to have been made to avoid the repe- 
tition of tva; comp. the note on Rom. Be 


Hndevds] GLEA Antioch 


5 Ó Katpos áravrét ce] GL, and so Antioch 


(transferred to the 3rd pers.; see the next note); add. etyerOa g; tempus poscit 


(or posce) E*; pete tu tibi in tempore A. 
ut gubernator navem =. The sentence is para- 


sapiens gubernator ventum A; 


ws kuBeprfjra, åvéuovs] GL; sicut 


phrased in g*, demep yàp kvBepvírm venos cvuBáXXerat kal ds vnt xeutadouévm 


Ameéves eÜüero, els cwrnplay, 


oUro kal col Td Émwtrvxeiv 0coü, which points to the 


same reading as GL. The paraphrase of Antioch is very different, 6 karpòs yap 
amare? airy, os KuBepyyrny Tpos Tos àvéuovs kal ras Tpikuulas Kal <ddas rdv 
TVEULAT WY THs Tropyelas orhvar yevvalws kal ddnyety rods xXetuafouévovs ëm) rà» Apéva 


ToU ÜcNjuaros ToD 0eo0, 


read, as the evidence suggests. The 
form of the sentence is suddenly 
changed. Otherwise we should ex- 
pect rà 8€ dópara airoüvri cou pavepo- 
65, or words to that effect. For this 
sudden transition to an imperative 
in the antithetical clause comp. 
Magn. 11 memÀnpoóópnoóe, Trall. 2 
VrorácceoÓe, Smyrn. 4 mpoceUxea be. 
In all these examples scribes have 
shown a leaning towards a more ob- 
vious mode of expression. See the 
vv. ll. in the several passages. 

$avepo05] The other reading ga- 
vepwOein would perhaps seem more 
apt here, as expressing greater diffi- 
dence; but in the N.T. at all events 
final particles like tva are never found 
with the optative; comp. Winer § xli. 
p. 360. 

pndevos Aeímy k.r.A.] James i, 4 sq 
ev pneri Xeuróuevov el 8é tis Bucy 
Neimera codias, aireirw k.r.., 1 Cor. 
i. 7 pâs uj JorepeioÜa. èv pndevi 
xapía part. 

5. Ó kxaiós x.r.] Hippol de 
Antichr. 5 (p. 4 Lagarde) ère) kai- 
pos Aorróv dgawrei k.r.,, where La- 


See the lower note. 


garde refers to Herodian i. r. 5 
Hepiobeioa és melovs Suvacretas 7 ò 
Xpóvos. àmjTei. Cureton here quotes 
Period. Ioann. in Birch's Auctar. 
Cod. Apocr. p. 265 kai yap ó katpós 
araire? TOU Tatra yevéa Oa. 

os KuBepvijra x.r.A.] There was 
perhaps some early corruption in 
the text here. The Syriac wz gu- 
bernator navem hardly makes sense, 
for we should naturally expect zZ 
gubernatorem navis. On the other 
hand, the Greek text ¿ç KuBepynrar 
dvéuovs, making the crisis the cap- 
tain and Polycarp the breeze, is cer- 
tainly not what we should expect. 
I can only conjecture that the ori- 
ginal reading was os kuBepvijrqv vaüs 
Kai œs dvépois xewa(ópevos )upéva. 
The variations at all events sug- 
gest the existence of both words, 
vavs and ávepos, in the original text 
in some form or other. When so 
read, the metaphor is intelligible. 
‘The ship of the Church is tossed to 
and fro on the ocean of the world. 
It is a critical moment, a tempes- 
tuous season, You must be both its 


22—2 


340 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [u 


^ e ~ 3 , \ , > , 
émituxel. vie, ws Oeo dÜNwTüs TO Oéua diÜapota 


\ Neo N \ Ó , 
Kat Con QALWVLOS, TEL NS KAL OU MEMELO AL. 


` , 
KATA TAVTA 


> , \ , M SH , 
cov dyriv/vxov yw Kal Ta Seana MOV a HryaTnoas. 


1 70 béua] GL; o0 Oédnua g; quicquid promissum est nobis 2; quoniam. quod- 


cunque promisit nobis A. The paraphrase of ZA points to épa. 


apbapata 


kal twh aicvis] Gg; incorruptio vita aeterna (om. kal) L; vita quae in aeternum 


sine corruptione 2; vita saeculorum quae non transit A. 
s 070] Gg; orĝke Dam-Rup 8 Anton ro; al. 


GL*g; aliquid S,2A. 


helmsman and its haven; must 
guide its course and afford it a 
shelter. So will it arrive at God, its 
destined goal.’ 

This is the earliest example of a 
simile which afterwards was used 
largely by Christian writers. The 
comparison of the Church to a ship 
is drawn out at great length in Clem. 
Hom. Ep. Clem. 13 sq ðvvjoeoðĝe cis 
Tov rfe dvama/cecos evexOnvar Aupeva, 
€vÜa peyddou Bacidéas eotly eipnyeKt 
mols. čorke yap ov TO mpüypa Ths 
exkAnoias vni peyadn dia apodpod yei- 
padvos avdpas depovon k.r.A., where the 
= writer dwells chiefly on the personnel 
of the vessel, the owner being God, 
the captain Christ, the mate the 
bishop, the sailors the presbyters, 
etc. It is elaborated also by Hip- 
polytus de Antichr. 59 (p. 30 La- 
garde) ñaÀacca 0é éarw ó Kéopos, ev à 
7 €xkAnoia às vais èv meddyer xewid(e- 
Tat wey GAN’ ovK amrodAuTaL, Eyer yap peb’ 
éaurfs Tov €uretpov KkuBepyntny Xpioròv 
K.r.ÀN., where this father dwells espe- 
cially on the furniture of the ship, 
the mast being the Cross, the two 
rudders the two covenants, the un- 
dergirding ropes the love of Christ, 
with much more to the same effect. 
The ship is one of the ornaments 
which Clement of Alexandria allows 
a Christian to wear, doubtless as 
representing the Church; Paed. iii. 
11 (p. 289) vads ovpodpopotca (for so 
it should be read). On the use of 


4 á&mwro] 


this particular symbol as an orna- 
ment, see Smith and Cheetham's 
Dictionary of Christian Antiquitzes, 
s. v. Gems, I. p. 715. In the AZosz. 
Const. ii. 57 we have probably the 
earliest instance of the application 
of this metaphor to the material 
building, stay avvabpoitns thy Tov 
Oeo ékkAgaíav, os àv KuBepyntns vos 
peyaAns...kal mpórov pev ó Oikos... 
€ouke vý, after which the writer de- 
scribes the functions of the different 
officials in reference to the building, 
having regard to this simile. 

This simile was used of the State 
by classical writers long before it 
was applied by Christians to the 
Church. It is found as early as 
Alcaeus Fragm. 28 (Bergk), a pas- 
sage which has been imitated in the 
familiar ode of Horace Carm. i. 14. 
In Plato Resp. vi. p. 488 it appears at 
some length (comp. Polit. p. 302), as 
also in Polyb. vi. 44, in both which 
passages it is applied to mutiny and 
disorder in the crew. For other 
examples see Orellis Excursus on 
Horace 1. c. 

I. vie] ‘be temperate} as an 
athlete training for the contest: 
comp. I Cor. ix. 25 mas 06 ó dyew- 
Copevos mavra éykpareverau’ ékeivot uev 
oiv iva dÜapróv crédjavov Adßoow 
«T... Comp. Tertull. ad Mart. 3 
‘athletae...continentur a luxuria, a 
cibis laetioribus, a potu jocundiore 
etc.) Epict. Diss, iii. 15. 2 sq (comp. 


ii] 


III. 


^ , 
3G0kaAXoUvTes ux ace kaTa7TAncocérocay, 


TO POLYCARP. 


341 


Oi GokoüUvTes a£ TOL etvat kai érepo0ida- 


OTO, édpaios, 


Antioch 8. Add. 8e gS,2A; txt GL [Dam-Rup] [Anton]; al. [Antioch]. 
€dpatos] GLg, and so Antioch (substituting éðpaĉot to conform to other changes 
which he has made); édpalws Dam-Reg; in veritate S,84ZA (which represents 


€Opatos or éðpalws); om. Dam-Rup Anton. 


Ench. 29) 60 Ovunma vua... 
det ce cirakreiv, dvaykodayeiv, dré- 
XeoOa meupárov...q) Vrvxpóv rivew, 
u) olvov, or’ eruyey k.r.A., Plut. Mor. 
59 F domep dóÀ)nrDy GXeintns éàv 
pedvew kal dkoAacraivew, Horace Ars 
Poet. 412 sq. This is probably the 
idea also in the parallel passage, 
2 Tim. iv. 5 od dé vie ev máauv, ka- 
korráüncor, as the direct reference to 
the dyà» and Spéuos in ver. 7 seems 
to show. 

TÒ épa) ‘the prize’; see e. g. 
C. Z. G. 2758, 2759, 2954, 3082, 3493 
(at Aphrodisias, Ephesus, Troas, 
and Thyatira) and esp. Orac. Sid. ii. 
45 SQ dyvós yàp Xpioros rovrow rà 
ikara BpaBedoe, kal Bok(uovs orée, 
avrap épa pdprvot doer «td. The 
épa was a prize of money, as dis- 
tinguished from the oréfavos. Con- 
tests were of two kinds, either øre- 
avirat or dpyvpira (Athen. xiii. p. 
584 C); for which latter word 6eya- 
Tikol Or Óegarirau was a synonyme 
(Pollux iii 153) Two Smyrnzan 
inscriptions make mention of Qepa- 
rikol dyôves, C. Z, G. 3208, 3209. 

3- dvripuyov kr] ‘Z am thy 
devoted friend, I and my bonds which 
etc”; comp. Smyrn. 10. For dyri- 
Wuxov see the note on Lphes. 21. 
jyámcas] ‘didst welcome, caress, 
Jondle’; see Smyrn. 9 ámávra pe kai 
mapovra yyamjcare. The word seems 
originally to have referred to the 
outward demonstrations of affection. 
In Hom. Od. xxiii. 214 it is used of 
welcoming a new comer: in Eurip. 
Hel. 937 mpóse of? dmóvra ðakpúors 


ay jyámov, Suppl. 764 pains à» e 
mapio ór' yára vexpods, of the last 
offices paid to the dead. This origi- 
nal sense appears still more strongly 
in dyamá(e. The application of the 
term to the zxward feeling of love is 
a later development ; and the earlier 
meaning still appears occasionally. 
On the other hand I do not know of 
any instance where it has the very 
precise sense of eiv ‘to kiss,’ as 
Bunsen and Zahn (Z. v. A. P- 415) 
would take it here; though it is 
quite possible that the dyámņoıs in 
this instance might take this parti- 
cular form, as e.g. in Tert. ad Ux. ii. 
4 ‘ad osculanda vincula martyris ^ 
(quoted by Zahn). 

III. ‘Be not dismayed by false 
teachers. Stand firm as an anvil. 
A true athlete will suffer blows that 
he may win the victory. We must 
endure all things for God’s sake. 
Grow in diligence. Discern the sea- 
sons. Await the eternal, invisible, 
intangible, impassible One, who was 
seen and handled and suffered for 
our sakes,’ 

4. dfimwro] ‘plausible’: comp. 
Trall. 6 kara£iomiarevónevot (with the 
note). For the bad sense of á£ó- 
moros see the note on Philad. 2. 

érepoOidao kaAobvres] Comp. 1 Tim. 
rh sh plese, (So) erepodiddoKadros, He- 
gesipp. [?] in Euseb. H. A iii. 32. 
See the notes on kakoƏà,@acxaÀooyreç 
[Clem. Rom.] ii. 10, and on erepodv€ia 
Magn. 8. 

5. ornde éüpaios «.7.r.] I Cor. 
vii. 37 os 8€ forokev ev rh kapdia 


342 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[nt 


e D , $ \ > ~ \ 43 
ws div rvz-TÓuevos. pmeyadou éxtiv dÜNn ToU [TO] òE 


pea 0a; kal VIKGV. 


t ^ , € 1 
aiora òè évekey Ocov 7avra umo- 


° ^ ^ e M 5 \ e - e , , 
evel nas Qe, iva Kat AUTOS "guas vTopueivn. T À€ov 


I dxuwv] GLg Antioch Dam-Reg Dam-Rup Anton ; vir fortis (ndn) SISA; 


athletes (SOON) >. 


peyddou] GLg (but add. ezim 1) Antioch Dam-Reg 
Dam-Rup Anton; add. enim S,S4ZA (but S4A om. peyddov). 


éorly 


dOdyr00] Gg; 4OAnrod éorw (or sri) Antioch Dam-Reg Dam-Rup Anton. 76] 


G; om.g Antioch Dam-Reg Dam-Rup Anton. 


2 6] GLSyg Antioch 


Dam-Reg Dam-Rup Anton; om. ZA (Petermann's transl is misleading). 


édpaios. Comp. Ephes. IO mpós Tiv 
TAdNY a)TÀv vueis ESpaior TH míaTeL, 
of these same false teachers. 

I. @s kupov k.r.A.] (as an anvil 
struck with the hammer’; comp. 
Job xli. 15 éovgke è domep äkpov 
dvjAaros. This passage of Ignatius 
is plainly in the mind of Ephraem 
Syrus Paraen. de Pat. (Op. Graec. 
Il. p. 367) yevaopeda wos ükpuoves 
TUMTOMEVOL kal uù evüiSovres...0epó- 
pevot vikno o uev Tov dyriraNov Oi 
Ths Umopovíjs' kal yap ó K/ptos ruv 
..Tmávra Umyveyke Ova THY "pv 
corņnpiav. For the image comp. 
ZEsch. Pers. 51 Aóyxns akpoves (quoted 
by Jacobson), Aristophon 1 (Fragm. 
Com. Yl. p. 357, Meineke) Kara- 
veUs, úmopévew mAnyas äkpov, Callim. 
Hymn. Dian. 146 rotos yàp det Tı- 
pvvOos äkpov eornke mpo mvAéov, 
Shakespeare Corzol. iv. 5 ‘Here I 
clip the anvil of my sword.’ 

O€épecdac k.r.A.] ‘to be bruised 
and conguer’; comp. Epict. iii. Io 
7 oiov ei tis mAnyas AaBdv àro- 
orain ToU maykparueu ` GAN éket pev 
efeare karakioa kai pn Salpecba 
(v. 1. d€pecOar), evOade © x.r.M. The 
word dépew ‘to flay’ was originally 
a vulgar expression in this sense; 
but in the later language the vul- 
garity had worn off, and it came to 
signify merely ‘to beat, bruise.’ For 
the application to athletes see eg. 
I Cor. ix. 26, Timocles Fragm. Com. 
III. p. 610 éavToùs dvr} kopikev Oépew 


mapéxovres dOAntaiow (where Oépew 
is Porson’s conj. for Aéyav). For the 
idea see Seneca de Provid. 2 ‘ Ath- 
letas videmus...caedi se vexarique 
patiuntur ... marcet sine adversario 
virtus: tunc apparet quanta sit 
quantumque polleat, cum quid pos- 
sit patientia ostendit, de Ira ii. 14 
‘Athletae quoque...ictus doloresque 
patiuntur, ut vires caedentis exhau- 
riant etc &fzst. 13 “Non potest 
athleta magnos spiritus ad certamen 
adferre, qui numquam suggillatus 
est: ille qui sanguinem suum vidit, 
cujus dentes crepuere sub pugno, 
ille qui supplantatus adversarium 
toto tulit corpore nec projecit ani- 
mum projectus, qui quotiens cecidit 
contumacior resurrexit, cum magna 
spe descendit ad pugnam, Æpist. 78 
‘Athletae quantum plagarum ore, 
quantum toto corpore excipiunt... 
nos quoque evincamus omnia...virtus 
et firmitas et pax in ceterum parta, 
si semel in aliquo certamine debel- 
lata fortuna est.  Cotelier quotes 
the Metaphrast Vit. Chrysost. 43 
(Op. I. p. 1161, Migne), where Epi- 
phanius writes to Chrysostom d6Anra 
"Iodvvg, malov kal vika. 

2. mavra vmopévew] For this phrase 
see the note on .Szzyrz. 4; and for 
the turn of expression in this sen- 
tence, the note on Smyrn. 5 uaAXov 
O€ k.r.À. 

4. Tovs katpobs k.rA.] See esp. 
Matt. xvi. 3 rà onpeia rdv Karpov ov 


ut] 


a , ie a 
TTovoaios yivou où et. 


e \ ` , M » 

5 UTEP kaipov voocO0ko, TOV àxpovov, 
> e ^ \ 5 

Ov mas OpaTOv, TOV anradntor, 


TOY POLYCARP) 


343 


\ \ , 
TOUS K«tpous karauavÜave- TOV 


\ / \ 
TOV aopaTtoy, TOV 
\ ^ \ 
TOV a7aÜ5, Tov OU 


&vekev Oeo] Gg Dam-Rup Anton; veke Ocoü Dam-Reg; 6eo0 tvexev Antioch. 
bTouévew $uás de] GLg; quads úmouévew ôe? Dam-Rup Anton; de Ts bTOuévew 


Dam-Reg; al. Antioch. 


Ürepkapüy G; Vmépxpovov Antioch; al. g. 


Syr 2: add. 6? 


3 tva...bmopelvy] al. S4. 


5 rèp kaupóv] 
6 àynħápnrov] GLIA Sev- 


quads ðè Wyradnbévra [Antioch]; add. 6? huas 56 darév kal 


Vya$éuróv èv cwparı [g]; see the lower note. 


dvvacde [Siaxpiver] : comp. Luke xii. 
56. The suspicion of Mill on Rom. 
Xii II, that Ignatius had the read- 
ing rà kap Sovdevovres there, has 
not much weight, since the passages 
in the Gospels were more likely to 
have suggested the expression to him. 

Tov vmép kawó»] ‘who is above 
opportunity, i.e. ‘to whom all 
seasons are alike.’ Smith's transla- 
tion ‘omni tempore priorem’ would 
be more appropriate to dypovov. It 
fails to recognise the distinction be- 
tween xpóvos and kapós : see Trench 
N. T. Synonyms Š lvii. p. 197 sq. 
The editors before Jacobson read 
it as one word vmépkaipov. If such 
a word had existed, it would mean, 
as Jacobson points out, ‘immode- 
rate’: but in the only passage ad- 
duced, Xenophon as quoted in Athen. 
xiv. p. 613 oiray b€ úmepkaí(poyv, the 
text of this author himself (Ages. v. 
I) has rèp xatpóv. 

5. dxpovov| ‘eternal, *tranuscend- 
ing the limits of time, as explained 
in Plut. Mor. p. 393 &orw ó Ocds... 
kai éoT. kar ovdéva xpóvov dÀÀà karà 
Tov alva Toy dkívprov kai üypovov: 
comp. Greg. Naz. Æpist. ror (I. p. 
96) eümep p!) rajrów...ró dxpovoy Th 
Und xpóvov. For the word in this 
sense comp. Iren. i. 17. 2 (where it is 
translated ‘intemporalis,’ as here), 
Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 1, p. 829. Oc- 
casionally it has the opposite mean- 
ing ‘instantaneous,’ and so ‘brief,’ 


‘ short-lived,’ e.g. Plut. Mor. p. 908 
dvatuxeis kai dypóvous (comp. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. viii. 9, p. 931). The 
corresponding adverb dypóves too 
has both meanings; (1) ‘eternally,’ 
e.g. Hippol Haer. viii. 12, Julian. 
Orat. iv. p. 156 Spanheim ; (2) *in- 
stantaneously, e.g. Philo de Sacr. 
Aor eb Cas TINT. p. 172) 

Tov dóparov k.r..] See Melito 
Fragm. 13 (p. 419 Otto) * Invisibilis 
videtur, neque erubescit ; incompre- 
hensibilis prehenditur, neque indig- 
natur; incommensurabilis mensura- 
tur, neque repugnat; impassibilis 
patitur, neque ulciscitur ; immortalis 
moritur, neque respondet verbum; 
..tunc intellexit omnis creatura 
propter hominem. ..invisibilem visum 
esse et incommensurabilem mensu- 
ratum esse et impassibilem passum 
esse et immortalem mortuum esse 
etc., Iren. iii. 16. 6 * hominem ergo 
in semetipsum recapitulans est in- 
visibilis visibilis factus, et incompre- 
hensibilis factus comprehensibilis, et 
inpassibilis passibilis etc.,’ Greg. Naz. 
Orat. xxxviii (I. p. 664) 6 áóparos 
oparat, 6 dvady)s Wndapara, ó dypovos 
dpxera, Epist. ci (II. p. 85) mra8nróv 
capki, damaĝ Oedrntt,  mepvypamróv 
TOPAT amrep iypamrov TVEVPATL, TOV 
avrov emiyerov kal oUpáviov, Op@mevov 
kal voovpevoy, xepyróv kal dxoprrov, 
«rJ. See also the Christological 
passage, Ephes. 7. 


6. dyndrdpyror| The preponder- 


344 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS 


[ur 


€ ^ , \ M! y / or e ^ e 
nuas TaÜnrov, TOV kaTa Tavra TpOTOV OL N AS VTO- 


uetvavra. 


IV. Xia uñ ducereicOwoav: uera Tov Kupiov ov 


^ ” 
aUTwV QpovruoTñs ëc'o. 


pndoev avev yvwuns cov yi- 


> ^ v [4 
vécÜw, unè cv vev Oco yvwuns TL mpacce Omep5 


I kara mávra tpbrov] GLg Sev-Syr; mévra [Antioch]; omnia omnimodo ZA 


(thus inserting another mávra). 


GLg; gropter =; def. A; see the lower note. 
5 OeoÜ yvóums] g; yrouns 0co0 Ps-Chrysost ; 


43 TNS youns g. 


0coU yruuns or yvuuns Oeo ZA; beot (om. yrauns) GL. 


ance of authority forbids the inser- 
tion of the balancing clause ó yas 
06 Wndadnrov, however tempting ; 
and indeed the run of the sentence 
is against it. For rò ayndadnrov 
stands alone before the antithesis 
Tov amabi ...Tra0nróv, just as previously 
tov dxpovov stood alone before a 
similar antithesis roy dóparov...óparóv. 

IV. ‘Beaguardian to the widow. 
Let nothing be done without thee, 
and do thou nothing without God. 
Let your meetings be held more 
frequently. Address thyself to each 
singly. Despise not slaves: yet the 
slaves themselves must not be puffed 
up, nor desire to be set free at the 
common cost.’ 

3. Xjpa]] On the care taken of 
widows in the early Church see the 
note on Smyrn. 6. 

peta tov Kupwov] ‘after the Lord, 
who is before all ‘the Father of the 
fatherless and Judge of the widows,’ 
Ps. Ixvill. 5 (comp. cxlvi 9). The 


Syriac translator in writing ÉN 


‘metul’ for pera has consulted the 
sound rather than the sense. Other 
examples of this substitution have 
been pointed out to me in the Syriac 
versions of Aristotle (?) and Iso- 
crates in Lagarde Anal. Syr. p. 150 
1:6; paz. 25. 


3 Xijpar] G; ai xpa g. perà] 
4 yvouns] G Ps-Chrysost 


mpücce] Gg; 


4. Qpovrorügs] ‘guardian, pro- 
tector, trustee} a semi-official term : 
comp. Diod. Sic. Exe. xxxvi ad fin. 
(II. p. 611) rà» yàp dAXov orparnyov 
eioÜ0rev diddvat mpooráras rois òp- 
$avois kai yvvai£iv éprjuous ovyye- 
vóv, ovTos éavróv o/rev avéderée 
ppovriatyy, Clem. Hom. xii. IO vd 
þpovrioràs moujcas pe kal eis “Pduny 
katranelvas 899ekaerij (Clement is here 
speaking of his father) It corre- 
sponds to the Latin ‘curator’; e.g. 
povricpa = ‘ curatio, Conc. Chale. 
Can, 2 (Labb. Conc. IV. p. 1682, ed. 
Colet.) Like curator, it may refer 
to the guardianship of orphans or 
widows, etc., as here, or to the direc- 
tion of public works, or to the 
management of finance, e.g. Boeckh 
C. Z. G. 3612 ppovticriy Apovcov Kai- 
capos, where the officer intended 
was probably ‘curator’ (or * procura- 
tor’) ‘fisci’ to this prince. 

pndev k.r...]] Quoted in the Hor. 
de Uno Legisl. 4, attributed to 
Chrysostom and printed in Mont- 
faucon Chrys. Of. VI. p. 410. For 
the sentiment comp. Magn. 7 with 
the note. 

6. evorader| ‘be firm.’ The word 
occurs two or three times in the 
LXX ; also in Hermas Mand. v. 2, 
Stim, vi. 2, vii, Clem. Hom. Ep. 


Clem. I5 evoraeirwoay ov oi émi- 


iv] TO POLYCARP. 


ove Toacces. cjoTdÜe. 
véo Owoav. 
dovAas un U7reprnoaver 
arn eis Oo£av Ocot 


Tp&rre Ps-Chrysost. 
evoTabhs G; evorabés (apparently) L*. 


6 mpácces] G; mpárreis g. 


345 


TUKVÓTEpOV Guvaywryat yı- 
éË dvóuarTos mdvras Gite. SovAous Kai 
adr\rAa pndé a’rol pvowicbwoay, 
7 À ov OovAevérecav, iva kpeiT- 


evordbe] gZA ; 
8 vrepynpdver] Ireppdve G. puos- 


obcÓccav] GLg; contemnant ZA. These last two authorities use the same word 


here by which they have rendered Umepnpaver above; 
9 àÀNY] GLg Dam-Rup 4 Anton 6; d\n’ 
mhéovy] G Anton; Actor Dam-Rup; zAeova g* Nicon (see 


meaning of the sentence. 
òs ZA. 
Cotelier). 


Bara €Spaiou. The substantive ev- 
ord@eva occurs Clem. Rom. 61, 65 
(59. It is naturally a favourite 
Stoic word ; e.g. in M. Aurel. v. 18 
emOerkyUevos Heyadoppoovyny evora- 
Get, vi. IO céBo kal evoraÜà, and in 
Epictetus frequently, CH9S SW oy p 
Tivos ov éyw xpeíav ;...ro0 evorabety, 
TOU Kara piow Éxew ry Oivoiav, rob 
M rapáccecÓa.. Yet it is said to 
have been especially affected, if 
not invented, by Epicurus and the 
Epicureans: Cleomedes Theor. Cycl. 
li. 9o, Schol. Venet. on Hom. ZZ. v. 2, 
quoted by Lobeck Phryn. p. 283, 
where several examples of this word, 
which with its congeners was ab- 
horrent to purists, are collected from 
later classical writers. It was com- 
mon ground for the drapagia of the 
Epicurean, the drdOea of the Stoic, 
and the ecipyyn of the Christian. 
mukvorepov k.r.A.] See for this in- 
junction the note on Ephes. 13, where 
the meaning of mukvórepov is dis- 
cussed. See also Magn. 4 with the 
note. 
- . gewayoeyaí] ‘gatherings, meetings. 
The word is applied to Church ga- 
therings among Jewish Christians, 
who would naturally adopt the name 
of the ‘synagogue,’ in James ii. 2; 
see Trench JV. 7. Syn. § 1, p.1 sq. 


but A alters the whole 


See also Zest. xii Patr. Benjani 
ev ouvaywyais eĝvõv (the prophecy 
relating to S. Paul). In Ignatius 
however it is not employed as a 
technical term, but resembles the 
use of émwvrayoyi in Heb. x. 25 uù 
€ykaraXeimovres rjv emiruvaywyny é- 
avróv k.T..; comp. Hermas Mand. 
Xi órav ZÀ09 ó dvOpwmos ó €xav TO 
mvevpa TO Oeiov els cuvaywynv avopaev 
dvkaiwy (and several times in the 
context), Theoph. aZ Autol. ii. 14 
Ocückev 6 Ocds TO KOoL@ kvpawopévo 
-.Tas gurayeyás, eyouévas 8€ ekkKÀT- 
cias ayias, èv ais kaĝámep Auuéaw x.T.À. 

7. €f óvógaros] Like the Athe- 
nian general at Syracuse, Thuc. vii. 
69 fva čkaorov dvekdAew marpó0ey re 
€movouá(ev kal avrovs ÓvopgacTi kr.A. 
See the note on é£ óvóparos, Ephes. 
20. 

9. mAÀéov dovdevérwoav] A remi- 
niscence of 1 Tim. vi 2 un karadpoveí- 
recav Ore ddedpoi eow, àXÀà paddov 
9ovAevérocav: see also 1 Cor. vii. 21 
€i ka Ovvaca €AevOepos yevér dar, 
Haddov xpijoat, according to one, 
though not the most probable, in- 
terpretation (see Æpistles to Colos- 
stans ‘etc. p. 324 sq). See also 
Ephes. 6 sq, Col. iii. 22 sq. 

kpeirrovos édevOepias| 1 Cor. vii. 22 
amedevOepos Kupiov éarív, 


346 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [1v 


3 A ^ / \ , , > \ 
Trovos €AevÜepías aro Oeo? Tvxwauv: un EpaTwoay amo 


^ ^ > - e \ ^ s > 
TOU kowoU éXevÜepoUa bar, iva un SovAOL EevpeOw@ow êri- 


Gotas! 


A A NN, 
r ard Ged róxocw] GL Anton; bd 0eo0 r(xccw Dam-Rup; tvxwow ard 


8coü g; TUXWOL mapa TOD coU Nicon. 


desiderent L; ament ZA. For the v. 1. aipérwoay in g see the Appx. 
For the reading u) rood in some texts of g see Appx. 


GLZAg*. 


I. amo tov kowov| ‘from the 
common fund, the public money? 
See Apost. Const. iv. 9, where it is 
said of the disposal of the alms of 
the Church, aépor(opeva ypýpara 01a- 
Táccere els ayopagpoùs áyiwv, pudpevot 
OovAous «.7-A. As the money avail- 
able for this purpose was limited, 
it was necessary to select cases of 
special hardship; and a general 
anxiety of slaves to obtain their 
emancipation in this way was to be 
deprecated. For this sense of ro 
kowov see e.g. Herod. vii. 144, 
Thucyd. vi. 6, Polyb. x. 17. 2, Orig. 
Comm, in Matt. xv (Il. p. 674) ; and 
even without the article, so that 
amò kowoü is ‘from the common 
stock, Xen. Azad. iv. 7. 27, v. 1. 12, 
Arist. Pol. ii 9. Others would take 
rò kowòv here to be ‘the community,’ 
and Lucian Peregr. 13 ràv Xpwrriavóv 
oteA\Ovray dio Tov Kowod is quoted 
in support of this (see Zahn Z. v. A. 
P. 333). But with éAevéepoto0a. we 
should certainly expect tro rod kow- 
vou, not amo Tov kowo), in this sense. 
Other interpretations, which have 
been proposed, do not deserve dis- 
cussion. 

V. ‘Shun the evil arts of false 
teachers, and warn thy flock against 
them. Admonish wives to be faith- 
ful to their husbands, and husbands 
to cherish their wives. Let not those 
who remain in single chastity parade 
their virtue. Let those who marry 
seek the approval of the bishop for 


épárocav] Gg* Dam-Rup Anton; 
5 mo.ov | 
6 tov 


their union, Let all things be done 
for the honour of God.’ 

4. Tas kaxorexvias| The meaning 
here is not obvious in itself, but is 
shown by the parallel passage, Phz/ad. 
6 dhevyere odv Tas kakorexvías, where 
it is a warning against the schis- 
matical designs of the false teachers. 
See Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 8 (p. 340) 
ote pin r or@pdrAos avtTn kakorexvía, 
etre “EAAnves elev etre kai PBapBapor 
copicrai (with reference to the 
heresy condemned in 1 Tim. vi. 
3 sq), Theodt. H. Æ. i. 1 ris rovrov 
[rod SuaBddovu] xakorexvías vmovpyós 
avepayn (speaking of Simon Magus). 
So too kakoréxves, Hippol. Haer. vi. 
9, also of Simon Magus. It was 
used especially of ‘magical arts,’ 
and of these most commonly as con- 
nected with heretical teaching ; e.g. 
Euseb. Vzź. Const. ii. 66, quoted by 
Jacobson. There is something to 
be said for giving it this very definite 
sense here, as is done e.g. by Hil- 
genfeld A. V. p. 206. Witchcraft, 
sorcery, and the like (yonreia, ap- 
pakeía) were highly attractive in 
these regions; and against them 
Christian teachers waged internecine 
war from the first (see Acts xix. I9, 
and the note on Gal. v. 20); comp. 
Ephes. 19 édvero müca payeia. Thus 
xakorexvíau. would correspond with 
the Latin ‘maleficia; e.g. Tac. Ann. 
ii. 69 *carmina et devotiones...alia- 
que maleficia ; see also Heumann 
Hanalex. des Rom, Rechts s. v. But 


v] TO POLYCARP. 


347 


V. Tas KakoTexvias (eUye, u&ANov Oe TEPL TOU- 


TWV ii 7rOLOU. 


Tais daócAQbats uov mrpoosNaNeu 


ayarâv TOV Kvpiov Kal TOTS ovußiois apkeio ĝa c'apki 


Kupu] GLAg; zz domino nostro 2. The reading of > is a corruption 


e. TD 


fore yal, as A shows; the corruption would be suggested by Col. iii, 


STD 


18, 20. 


it may be doubted whether these 
arts were practised by the heretics 
in question, and the parallel passage 
(Philad. 6) must fix the interpreta- 
tion. Cureton (C. Z. p. 172) thinks 
that it means ‘nothing more than 
an improper means of gaining a 
livelihood’ (comp. Strabo vii. p. 301 
for the general sense of the word), 
including however magical arts a- 
mong these; and so Zahn (Z. v. A. 
P. 321). The emendation of Bunsen, 
‘ras kakoréxvovs ‘coquettish women,’ 
has met with no favour. In a list 
of practical exhortations we need 
not look for any .close connexion 
with the preceding or following 
topics. 

pàXXov dé «.7.A.] This qualifies the 
previous prohibition, ‘Shun them 
indeed, but do not forget to warn 
your hearers against them’; where 
tovrey refers to the foregoing kako- 
rexvías, and not (as it is taken by 
Pearson and some others) to what 
follows. For padXov dé comp. 1 Cor. 
xiv. I, 5. The fidelity with which 
Polycarp observed this injunction in 
after-life appears from the account 
of him left by his scholar Irenæus, 
ili. 3. 4 mroÀAo)s amd rv mpoetpruévov 
aiperikdv éméopevrev emt ryv éxkAnolay 
Tov Oco0, piay Kal ovy» ravryv dÀj- 
Oevay knpí£as vo [azro ?] róv amocTó- 
ov mape$éva. The reading py 
moto, as the critical note shows, has 
no authority and therefore need not 
be seriously considered, though it 


has found favour with some modern 
critics. 

5. opiriav mowo?) ‘hold discourse, 
as Justin Dial. 85 (p. 312) rov dmó 
Tav ypapay ràv mpodntikdy óp (as 
movovpevor, 2b. 28 (p. 245) dró re 
TOY ypajóv kal Tov mpaypuárov rás Te 
drovelEets kal ras óutÀ las TOLOUpaL 
For this use of 6uAla, ‘a conver- 
sation,’ ‘discourse,’ and so even 
a ‘sermon, ‘homily, comp. also 
Justin Dial. 68 (p. 294), Clem. Hom. 
Ep.Clem. g, 145° 18,19, ¿b Q 20, 
Theoph. ad Autol. ii. 1, Clem. Alex. 
Strom. iv. 13 (p. 603). In Prov. vii. 
2I RAE op) (a it is a translation of 
np» ' instruction. 

6. tots cvpBíow] The word súp- 
Bus is common for a husband or 
a wife in this age and even earlier ; 
comp. Diod. Sic. iv. 46, Philo de 
Congr. Erud. Gr. 12 (1. p. 527), Test. 
xZ Patr. Jud. 23, Clem. Hom. xiii. 
5, xiv. 6, II, xx. 18, Hermas Iss: 
ii 2. In the inscriptions during the 
Roman period it is especially fre- 
quent. In those of Smyrna alone, 
to which place this letter was written, 
Iefindwiteseveral times; Gain G, 
3265, 3270, 3318, 3320, 3347, 3349, 
3361, 3364, 3380; and in those at 
Troas, from which it was written, 
though very few in number, it oc- 
curs twice, 3586, 3588 b. I mention 
these facts, because Donaldson 
(Apostolic Fathers p. 388) has al- 
leged its use as an argument against 
the genuineness of the Greek text of 


348 


\ , 
KAL TVEUMATL. 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


^ , 
Omolws Kal Tots aOÓeNQois pou mapay- 


^ Pec ^ M , 
yere èv ovopate Incov Xpur ToU ayarav Tas ovußiovs, 


c ó Kýpioc THN EKKAHCIAN. 


2 'Igco0 Xpicrot] GL*g; pref. domini nostri BA. 
4 Ths capkós roô Kuplou] GLZA Antioch 3 


GLg; ecclesiam suam ZA. 


Dam-Rup Anton r; 70d kvplov ris capkós G. 


af , . > € 
EL TLS ðvvaTat €v ay- 
3 Thy éxkdyolav] 


èv dxauxnola] GZAg 


[Antioch] Dam-Rup Anton; add. domini L (the word has probably crept in 


from the preceding clause). 


Hermas, and an evidence of a later 
date. To the Christians it would 
perhaps be an especially welcome 
term, because it would cover those 
unions of slaves which are called 
contubernia, and which the Christian 
Church regarded as not less sacred 
and inviolable than wedlock among 
the free-born, though the Roman 
law did not recognise such a thing 
as marriage among slaves; comp. 
esp. Apost. Const. vii. 31 (speaking 
of slaves) ei uév oiv Zxet yvvaîka 1) ñ 
yuvij dv0pa, 0(0ackécÜocav dpkeia bat 
éavrois. On this subject see Allard 
Les Esclaves Chrétiens p. 152 sq, 
p. 274 sq, and Colosszans p. 321. 
The passage from the Apost. Const. 
just quoted seems to show that 
Ignatius had especially in view such 
cases, where the union being ignored 
by the law naturally led to great 
irregularities. 

ápkeiaQa] ‘to be content.’ Besides 
Apost. Const. viii. 31 (see last note) 
comp. Alexander in Joseph. B. F. ii. 
7. 4 ov è oix dpkeaÓcica rovro [sc. 
r$ yay), Epiphan. Ancor. 104 (p. 
107) p) Gpxoupérns rois é£o0ev dvdpa- 
ow, quoted by Pearson. The Anglo- 
Latin translator has stumbled, and 
translates it ‘sufficere, as if dpketv. 

3. 9s oó Kúpıos x.r...] A reminis- 
cence of Ephes. v. 29, where however 
the correct reading is xka60Às xai ó 
Xpioròs Trjv exkAnoiay. 

et tus Ovvarae x.r.A.] Comp. Clem. 


5 kal éà»] GLAg Dam-Rup Anton; éay 


Rom. 38 6 áyvós èv rjj capkà fro kal 
uù ddafoveverOo, with the note (comp. 
76. $ 48), Minuc. Felix 31 ‘Casto 
sermone, corpore castiore, plerique 
inviolati corporis virginitate perpetua 
fruuntur potius quam gloriantur. In 
this place dyveía is clearly ‘virgin 
purity, like ayvós in Clem. Rom. 1. c.; 
though the words themselves will 
apply equally well to the chastity 
of married lite) (eioymlitei: 5; mpeg 
iii. 2, Clem. Rom. 1, Polyc. PAZ. 4). 
The language of S. Paul (1 Cor. vii. 1 
Sq) is quite sufficient to explain the 
state of things as it appears in Igna- 
tius half a century later than the Apo- 
stle's time. A few years afterwards 
Justin Martyr, Apol. i. 15 (p. 62), 
says moÀÀo( tives kai moXXai é£mkov- 
Tora, kai éfOoprykovro)rat, oi ek mai- 
day euabnrevOnoay rà Xpwró, apOopor 
Siapévovot’ kai eÜxopat karà Tay yévos 
avOpémev roi )rovs deiEar: see also 
Athenag. Suppl. 33 to the same 
effect. For the ever-increasing and 
somewhat extravagant feeling which 
prevailed in the Church during the 
second and third centuries on this 
point, see Probst Kirchliche Disct- 
piin p. 129 sq. On the other hand 
there is no indication here of an 
‘order’ of virgins, such as we meet 
with soon after. See also on this 
point the note on Smyrn. 13. 

4. Ths capkós tod Kupwvu] ‘the 
flesh, the body, of the Lord’; which 
is explained by 1 Cor. vi. 15 sq ovk 


v] TO POLYCARP. 


Ti 


349 


, £ 3 A ^ ` : ^ 
vett MEVELY els TINY THS G'aokos lov, Èv dkav- 


5 xnaía MEVETW' 


(om. Kal) X. 


SEN , E , \ LA 

EAV Kavxynaomnrat, amwAETO’ kal Eav 
^ , ^ , ” 

yvwo bh mAEOV TOU ETLOKOTOU, epOaprat. 


, ` 
mpémet Që 


6 yvoc00] GZg Dam-Rup Anton; inveniatur A (probably 


a misunderstanding of the Syriac, rather than a corruption of the Armenian, as 
Petermann supposes); vzdezi velit L (where L departs from its usual literalism and 


gives a paraphrase). 
Z; sine A; rp g. 


otàare Öri rà copara vuav nN Xpia- 
TOU cori ;...Bo£ácare 6) Tov Oeòv èv 
TÔ oodpate úuőv: see [Clem. Rom.] 
ii. 14. It is true of all Christians 
that their flesh is the Lord's, not 
their own nor anothers; but it is 
especially true of those contemplated 
here: comp. Tertull. de Virg. Vel. 16 
*Nupsisti Christo, illi tradidisti car- 
nem tuam, Cypr. Zpist. lxii (p. 699 
Hartel) *Membra Christo dicata et 
ad aeternum continentiae honorem 
pudica virtute devota’; comp. Me- 
thod. Conv. iii. 8, iv. 5, v. 4. 

5. €av yooh kr] ‘if it be 
known beyond the bishop’; where the 
nominative to yvoo6j is ‘his purpose 
or vow of chastity,' as implied in the 
preceding words. Just as persons 
intending to marry are to marry 
‘with the approval (yrdugs) of the 
bishop,’ so persons devoting them- 
'selves to a single life are to take the 
bishop into their counsels, but no 
one else; comp. Magn. 7 nde dpeis 
üvev TOU éÉémigkómov kal rdv mpea[Bv- 
Tépayv jundev Tripágaere, poe meipaonre 
eoydv te paiverOa lia ópiv. The 
precept of Ignatius thus contrasts 
with the usage of a later age, where 
the public profession of such vows 
was an essential feature in the sys- 
tem. If mAjy be the right reading, 
the interpretation which I have 
given seems to be necessary. For 
similar elliptical usages of mAj» 
(where the context explains the 
meaning) comp. Thuc. iv. 54 émirpé- 


TAéov] GL Dam-Rup Anton; extra (praeter) y 33b 


Vat mep copay adray mày Oavarov, 
Herod. v. 71 vmeyytous mv Oavárov, 
Plato Resp. v. p. 469 oxudevew...rods 
TeAeuTHoavtas mAjv ÓnXov, [Arist.] de 
Plant. i. 4 (p. 825) of 8e rómow oí 
Vrvxpoi, ei kai oÚro, Td Onotov mou 
more, rjv ék Tov évavríov, Polyb. xii. 
22. I pakpòv àv ety Aéyew závra, mÀrv 
TeÀées OAiyov (comp. xi. 25. 6). 
There is no sufficient reason how- 
ever for displacing the reading mAéoy 
here; comp. Magn. 10 ario ovduare 
kaAeira, mrÀéov rovrov. And if mdéov 
be adopted, the passage should still 
probably be interpreted in the same 
way. The Greeks were very loose 
and elliptical in their comparative 
clauses; see the examples in Kühner 
IL p. 850 sq. The Oriental versions 
must either have had zv, or must 
have interpreted mAéoy in this way. 
On the other hand several modern 
critics take it otherwise, ‘if he be 
better known than the bishop,’ ‘if 
he become more famous than the 
bishop'; but I cannot think this at 
all a natural expression in the pre- 
sent context. See the passages in 
the next note. 

6. éd6aprai] ‘he is corrupted, i.e. 
‘his chastity is violated by the very 
publicity given to it,’ the word 6ei- 
pew being chosen for its special 
meaning; comp. e.g. Rev. xix. 2. 
For the sentiment comp. Tertull. de 
Virg. Vel. 3 ‘Omnis publicatio vir- 
ginis bonae stupri passio est,’ 74. 13 
‘utique primo illicitum, ut gloriae 


350 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v 


= ^ \ A , \ , he 
TOS '*yauoUci Kal Tals yamovTals META YVwuNS TOU 


2 ` [34 ^ [74 Q , o 4 
émirkorou Tyv Éveciv trovicba, iva 0 yapos y kara 


> , 
Kvpiov kai ur kar émuiQuutav. 


ywéo Ow. 


VI. 


I yauovoas] g; yauovuévas G Dam-Rup Anton. 

3 Kipvov] g2A; Gedy G Dam-Rup Anton. 
kar émibvulav] GLEA; Kara (kar!) ale xpàv émiOuulay 
mavra] GLAg; add. 6é È. 
GLg, Antioch 14; oóutv ó 0eós Dam-Rup 5. 


Dam-Rup Anton; om. L. 
L see the Appx. 
Dam-Rup Anton. 


Rup; add. mpocéxy S,AZ; see above Š r. 
TQ» broraccopévwv] GL[S,]2[A]ge Dam-Rup; 
TQ èmiokóry] G; émicxdmy (om. rë) g Dam- 


éyà dàvriyvyov Dam-Rup. 
TQ bmoraccouévo Antioch. 


libidinosum; gloria enim illicitum 
est eis quorum probatio in omni 
humiliatione constat, 2. 14 ‘ipsa 
concupiscentia non latendi non est 
pudica; patitur aliquid quod non 
virginis sit etc.) Cyprian de Had. 
Virg. 9 (p. 191 sq) *maculis te con- 
cupiscentiae carnalis aspergis, cum 
integritatis candidata sis et pudoris, 
Method. Conv. xi. I ov0é ye, ómórav 
..Umepaipnra. uovodpevos aùr Ón 
rovro To dvvacOar Tov Tis capkós 
UmekKavaT@Y kpareiv, kai mavras ovdEv 
nynrat, Tid’ atiysater yap 
adriy UBpiCav vWndoppocivy k.T.A. 

I. Tots yapos] On the sanction 
given by the Church to marriages in 
the early ages see Probst Sakra- 
mente p. 438 sq, Bingham Azz. xxii. 
£e estis mter 

yapovoas| In so reading I have 
followed the MSS of the interpolator's 
text, whereas the MS of the genuine 
Ignatius has the more correct ya- 
pooupévacs. The familiar distinction 
(e.g. Pollux iii 45 yas pèv émi rod 
avôpòs Aéyerat yypacba Që emt rhs 
yvvawós, ov yaunOjva.) apparently 
holds universally in classical writers, 
except where some reversal of the 
natural relation is implied, as when 
the henpecked husband in Anti- 


d'yvetav 


^ (A / 
To émickOTw pocéxere, iva Kal 


, E \ Q A 
MAVTA ELS TLUNV EOU 


e € M x 
f | o Oeos5 
2 6 yduos] GZAg 
For 


5 ó Oeós piv] 
6 duty] GLg Antioch Dam- 
dvripuxov éyó] GLg Antioch ; 


phanes says éynpdyny (see Porson on 
Eurip. Med. 264); comp. also Clem. 
Alex. Paed. iii. 3 (p. 264). Accord- 
ingly Irenæus writes v. 9. 4 vóudn 
yapora ov dSvvarat, yaum0ñva, dé dv- 
vara [the passive however is for- 
bidden by Pollux l. c.] órav €dOn 
kal mapaXQjN'grau avr)» ò vupdios, 
where the Latin translator has ‘sponsa 
assumere sponsum non potest, as- 
sumi autem a sponso potest.’ This 
distinction however is not observed 
in the N. T., but the active is used 
of the woman by S. Paul, 1 Cor. vii. 
29, 34 dt ds Ai Mus IS an in 
Mark x. 12 yamjon dAXov is unques- 
tionably right, though most texts 
have yapnO7n ario. This last in- 
stance betrays a tendency in later 
transcribers to return to classical 
forms; and, as in these small matters 
the Mss of the interpolator are gene- 
rally more trustworthy than that of 
Ignatius himself, I have adopted 
yapovoas. 

2. kata Kópov] As Clem. Alex. 
Strom. ii. 12 (p. 549) dAAotos Se ó 
kata Tov Kúpiov yápos. Ignatius is 
apparently thinking of S. Paul’s 
words 1 Cor. vii. 39 uóvov èv Kupio. 


3. «ls tuv Oeo] See the note 
on Ephes. 21, 


IO 


‘His ranks. 


vi] 


TO POLYCARP. 35! 


LES 2 / 5 \\ m ^ 5 
UM. dvripvyov yo rav UTOTAGTOMEVWY [76] èri 


, 7; , 
oko o, 7rpea BuTepors, OLaOvots* 


7 , ^ \ ^ 
MÉpos *yévovro a xev mapa Oeg. 


GvvaOXetre, OUVTPEXETE, 


, e ^ 5 , \ 
ouveyeiperbe, ws Oeo? oixovduor kai 


Rup [Antioch]. 


Dam-Rup; kal uer aóràv. GL. 
L; om. S,ZA Dam-Rup. 


For Zi see the note on Æphes. x KeKTHoOa. 


> 2 lea \ 
MET aGUTOV [OL TO 
TUYKOTIATE GXXijXois, 


, ^ 
G'UM7T GO X€T6, acvykouu&o e, 


, N e 
Tapeðpot Kal Ùry- 


7 mpecpurépoirs] GL; mpeoBvrépots re kal Antioch; ez 
presbyteris et SEA; mpecBureply g Dam-Rup. 


LET’ avray] S,ZAg Antioch 
8 exév] G; &ew g* Antioch; capere 
Tapa, 


Oe] g* (with a v.l. mapa 0eoü); apud deum S,ZA; èv des GL Antioch Dam- 


Rup. 
S4. 


VI. ‘Give heed to your bishop. 
I devote myself for those who are 
obedient to the officers of the Church. 
Be united one with another in doing 
and in suffering, in toil and in rest, 
as stewards of God. Strive to please 
your Captain; do not desert from 
Your Christian graces 
are your arms. Invest your good 
deeds as savings; that you may re- 
ceive a bounty in accordance there- 
with. Be long-suffering one with 
another. Give me joy in all things.’ 

5. Toe émurkómo k.rA.] Ignatius 
here turns from Polycarp individually 
and addresses the whole Church of 
Smyrna. In the subsequent part of 
the letter, whenever he has any mes- 
sage directed specially to Polycarp, 
he mentions him by name; eg. $7 
mpémet, lloÀvkapme k.r.A., and Š 8 vo) 
méumovtos avróv IloÀvwkdpmzov. Like 
the Pastoral Epistles of S. Paul, this 
letter was obviously intended to be 
made known to the Church also. 
Polycarp (¿Z 13) apparently puts 
it in the same category with the 
Epistle to the Smyrnzeans, speaking 
of the two as ras émisroXàs "Tyraríov 
tas Teupbcioas "piv úr avrov. For 
the admonition see Phzlad. 7. 

iva kal k.r..] See the note on 
Smyrn.  gaANov 86 K.z.À, 


9 cvwa0Xere] cuvabNhre G. 
gvykoutüa0e, ruveye[pes0e] GLEZAg; om. S4. 


cvrpéxere] GLZAg; om. 


6. árvriyyvxov] Comp. $ 2, and see 
the note on ZZ/es. 21. 

7. per aj)róv x..A.] A biblical 
expression; comp. Matt. xxiv. 51, 
Luke xii. 46, Rev. xxi. 8, There can 
be little doubt, I think, looking at 
the authorities, that the correct read- 
ing here is apa Ge@ ‘in the presence 
of God, for it explains all the others. 

8. cvykomire] This word pre- 
pares the way for evva6Aeire, cvvrpé- 
xere since koma is used especially 
of the toilsome training for an ath- 
letic contest; comp. Phil ii. I6. ode 
eis kevóv €Spapov ovdé els xevdy ékom[- 
aca, Col. i. 29 eis 6 kal koma dyove- 
(duevos, 1 Tim. iv. IO els roÜTo kom- 
pev kal dywwCoueba, | Clem. Rom. } 
il. 7 oi moda Komuicarres kal kaAóe 
dyewwrápevo So Anthol. III. p. 166 
M) TpÉXe, py koria. The metaphor of 
the athletic training, etc., probably 
continues to the end. Thus cvykoi- 
paoGe, awveyeipeate, will refer to the 
uniform hours of going to bed and 
getting up prescribed by the trainer 
to the athletes under his charge. 
Any reference to ‘death’ and * resur- 
rection, such as some commentators 
have found in these words, seems 
altogether out of place. 

IO. Oeo oikovopo.] The expres- 
sion occurs Tit. i. 7; comp. 1 Cor, iv, 


352 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vi 


: loé Ü seobe, dd ov kai Ta ovwna 
PETAL. AOETKETE W TTPATEV » ap ov 


, , € ^ , e ^ ^ , 
kouiceoÜe. uiris Uudv ðerépTwp evpeby. TO Barrio ua 


r dpéckere © orpareverbe] GLg; placete [ez] et servite ei S4ZA. 


2 kopl- 


ceobe] g* (with a v.1. kouloņncðe) [S4][Z][A], and so app. Antioch 9 (in a loose 


reference) komurdueba; koulcec0e GL. 


I, I Pet. iv. ro. The reference here 
is not to the Christian pastors, but, 
as the context (esp. avriyvyov kr.) 
requires, to the whole brotherhood, 
according to the language of 1 Pet. 
iv. IO ékaaros Kabds &Aafev yápıopa, 
els éavroùs aùrò SiakovouvTes, às kaAoi 
olkovomoe mouxidns xapitos eoo. 
Pearson supposes a reference to the 
three orders of the ministry, the 
oixovouor being bishops, the rapedpor 
presbyters, and the vmnpéra: deacons ; 
but how then is the plural olkovdpor 
to be explained? 

mapedpoa| ‘assessors’ of God; a 
stronger expression even than S. 
Pauls Oeo cuvepyoi (I Cor. iii. 9, I 
Thess. iii. 2 v. 1), but it is immedi- 
ately qualified by tanpéra. For van- 
pérns in connexion with oikovdpos 
comp. I Cor. iv. I. 

I. dpéckere Kk.r.A.] ‘please the 
Captain under whom you serve, pro- 
bably a reminiscence of 2 Tim. ii. 3, 
4, ovdels oTparevopevos eumrÀékera, Tate 
ToU Blov mpaypareíats, va TQ orparo- 
Aoyijcavri apéo. 

rà owena] ‘soldiers pay, as e.g. 
I Cor. ix. 7 ris orpareverar ¿(ot 
oYrovtows moré; Luke iii. 14; and pro- 
bably the reference is the same in 
the other two passages where the 
word occurs in the N. T., Rom. vi. 
23, 2 Cor. xi. 8. So always in the 
LXX, I Esdr. iv. 56, 1 Macc. iii. 28, xiv. 
32. Itis the Greek equivalent to the 
Latin ‘stipendia’; for the word o2- 
sonia in Latin seems never to have 
acquired this meaning. The deriva- 
tion of the word explains its use. 
The soldier's reward for his service 
was twofold; (1) a ration in kind, 


Oecéprep ebpe05] GAg*; rebellet 


which was an allowance of corn 
(otrowérpnua) for making bread, and (2) 
a small payment in money (oyrdwov), 
by which he might purchase a relish 
(óprvov) to be eaten with his bread: 
as in Polyb. vi. 39. 12 sq oyrowov Š of 
pév me(oi AapBavovct...curopeTpovvrat 
oi pev me(ol k.r.A., C. G: 3137 rd 
re nerpypara kai rà oWeva (an in- 
scription found at Smyrna itself); 
comp. Dion. Halic. A. A. ix. 36. 5 ró 
T Oyówiov Tj oTparu kai TO dvri TOU 
sirov cvyxceprÜ6év...dpyvpiov (where 
the rations could not be supplied in 
kind). In Greek o y/ovía is the act of 
purchasing da, while oyavoy is the 
money for purchasing them and is 
used almost exclusively of soldier’s 
pay. In Latin however the derived 
word odsontum has a different sense. 
From dyeveiy the Romans adopted 
obsonari, ‘to purchase delicacies, to 
cater, and from this they used the 
substantive obsonzum to signify food 
so purchased, ‘delicacies,’ without 
reference to the meaning of the cor- 
responding Greek 6yevor. 

2. Oecéprop|] For the same me- 
taphor see Clem. Rom. 21 un Aurorak- 
Tey nas ard Tod OeAjpatos adrod, 2b. 
Š 28 róv avropodo’vtav am avroð, 
Clem. Hom. xi. 16 6 p) rowdy roy vópov 
€k TOD p7) mioTevew TQ Oe Aurorakrez 
(comp. Ep. Clem. 12, 17). 

'The adoption of Latin words in a 
Greek writer is natural in technical 
and more especially in military terms 
(e.g. here, and demdoura, dkkerra, be- 
low); and from Ignatius who was in 
charge of a erparwerikóv Táyua and 
bound to a soldier night and day 
(Rom. 5), nothing else was to be ex- 


vi] TO POLYCARFE. 


353 


e m , e [74 , e 
VMWV MEVETW ws OTA, 5 TITIS Wes 7€piKeQaXaía, 1 


> n e , ere \ e » 
ayarn ws Sopv, Å Uzrouovi] ¿ç TavoTAia* 


S425 otiosus inveniatur L. G has a mar. 


rendering of L. 


Ourécnra G. 


pected. For similar instances see 
Epictet. iii. 7. 30 Katodp uot ko Š (ke À= 
Xov €ypawe, i£. iii. 24. 117 7) opOiva- 
ríov gerai ae i) of emiOdovres èv TO 
KamiroMo emi rois ómrik(oig (omgu- 
kiows? ‘officiis’), Herm. Vis. iii. r ¿m 
ToÜ cV p Nr eA (ou čkero kcpBikdptov 
AuvoÜr kai érdve Aevríov eénmouévov 
Nivov kapracwov, Mart. Polyc. 16 kop- 
Qékrop, Symmachus Eccles. ii. 8 me- 
kovAca (comp. Hieron. Op. VII. pp. 
34, 726), Evang. Nic. 2 sq Kovpcop, 
Siyva, dakecAtov, etc; besides the 
instances familiar to us in the N. De 
€.g. centurio, euraquilo, flagellum, 
legio, lintium, membrana, paenula, 
praetorium, quadrans, semicinctium, 
sudarium, etc. The only other in- 
stance in Ignatius is é£eusAdpiov ; see 
the note on ZZZe¿s. 2. The gloss 
apyos which appears on Oecéprop in 
the Greek Ms is taken from Ps-Ign. 
Tars. 9. 

3. és oma] ‘fas your shields, 
as the context requires. The Latin 
translator rightly renders it scutum. 
Comp. Xen. Anab. i. 2. 17 ékéNeuce 
mpoBahécOa rà dada (where however 
it might include spears as well), Polyb. 
i. 22. IO dmép rv Opidakrov brepribe- 
pevot Tas (rus rà» mov. This sense 
seems to be more frequent in Helle- 
nistic Greek; Lxx 1 Kings x. 17 
Tpiakóoia Sma xpvcü k... Ps. xc. 
(xci). 5 ómÀo Kvkddoe oe 7 adnOeva 

avro) (and several times elsewhere 
in the LXX), Aquila Hos. xi. 8 ónÀo 
kvkÀAoco oe (where the Lxx has Urep- 
aom@ gov) Test. xi Patr. Levi 5 
dé por ómXov kai poudaiav, Barnab. 
12 rinow oiv Movarjs év éd év brdov. 


IGN. II. 


\ , 
Ta OEeTooITa 


ginal gloss dpyàs to decéprwp, whence the 
TÓ Barrioua...repKxepadala] GLZg; e£ (sed) fides 
maneat vobiscum sicut arma, et spes sicut galea S,A, 


4 derdotra] g*; 


See also Macar. Magn. Zfocr. ii. 7 
(p. 6) miorw £yovres rà Eibos kal zov 
Tov cravpór. This meaning of ózAov 
is preserved both in the derivative 
ómAMrns ‘bearing the heavy-shield’, as 
opposed to the TeÀracT?s ‘bearing 
the light-target,’ and in the secondary 
meaning of the word itself *a medal- 
lion, like the Latin ‘clypeus; e.g. 
CO GI T24 cikóra ypamTyv ev ómÀo 
(see Boeckh’s note, IL. p. 664). This 
Sense explains pevérw; ‘Hold out 
your baptismal vows, your baptismal 
privileges, as a shield before you. 
Do not throw away your best defence, 
and incur the reproach of a Baracus 
in this sacred warfare.’ 

4. mavorhia] Here ‘the com- 
plete body - armour, breast - plate, 
greaves, etc: for nothing else re- 
mains. Patience protects the whole 
spiritual man, wherever the blow is 
amed Compq AASS Z 
Prob. etc. 7 (Ruinart P- 465, Ratisb. 
1859) odd€ yàp Svvacae rjv zavonMav 
pov BÀ re; rvoAós dv, 

This passage was doubtless sug- 
gested by Ephes. vi. 13—17, which 
it closely resembles, though the parts 
of the armour are differently assigned 
in the metaphor. The resemblance 
to I Thess. v. 8 is less, Comp. also 
Isa x17 

rà Óenócira] When a donative was 
accorded to the soldiery, one half 
only was paid at the time, the remain- 
ing half being placed in a savings- 
bank attached to the cohort. This 
money was said ‘deponi apud signa’ 
(Sueton. Dom. 7, Veget. ii. 20); and 
the fund was managed by a special 


23 


354 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [v1 


e ^ , . ^ , ` of ^ »! E , 
Uudv Ta Epya MOV, tva Ta AKKETTA UMW aEla KOMI- 


onobe. paxpobuuncare oov peT dNNiNov ÈV TPAŬTNTL, 


ws ó Oeos uel uâ. 


, € ^ ` Lå 
Ovaiunv Uudv Ola TAVTOS. 


1 rà ëpya ouv] Gg; opera bona [S,JZA; opera (om. ouv) L* (but the varying 


position of vestra in the Mss should be noticed). 


Ta ükkerra bua aka] 


GL; add. 0606 g; donum (or dona) dei, sicut justum est S,2; dona a deo (om. 


d£) A. 


Anton; mpaéryte G Antioch o. 
g; ws kal Antioch. 


officer entitled ‘curator fisci (eg. 
Orell. Zzscr. 3462). We read also of a 
‘librarius depositorum’ (Dzg. 1. 6, 7), 
perhaps the clerk who kept this de- 
posit account. The deposits how- 
ever, as entered in the name of any 
soldier, would include other items 
besides, e.g. other portions of dona- 
tives voluntarily so deposited, prize- 
money, etc. The ‘peculium’ thus 
accumulated was paid over to the 
soldier at his discharge, or an equi- 
valent in land given to him. See 
Becker and Marquardt Rom. Alterth, 
Ill. 2, p. 429. ‘Accepta’ would thus 
be the sums placed to his credit and 
ultimately paid over to him. The 
Castrense Peculium is the subject of 
a work by H. Fitting (Halle, 1871). 
It was the special privilege of this 
kind of property (‘quae sunt parta 
labore militiae’), that it was secured 
to the man himself, and was accord- 
ingly exempted from the patria po- 
testas, on the principle enunciated 
in [Juv.] xvi. 58 sq, ‘Ipsius certe 
ducis hoc referre videtur, Ut qui for- 
tis erit, sit felicissimus idem, etc.’, 
where the fact is stated. The excep- 
tional character of this kind of pro- 
perty gives its force and appropriate- 
ness to the image here.  Cotelier 
moreover aptly quotes Veget. ii. 20 
*Miles...qui sumptus suos scit apud 


2 pakpoÜüvwjeare] G; maxpoOunetre g Dam-Rup 8 Anton ro. 
otv] GLg; om. S,ZA [Dam-Rup] [Anton]. 


mpatirnte] g* Dam-Rup 
3 ws] GLS,ZA Dam-Rup Anton; kai 


ne] S;XAg Dam-Rup Anton Antioch; om. G; 


signa depositos, de deserendo nihil 
cogitat, magis diligit signa, pro illis 
in acie fortius dimicat, etc.’ Those 
who deserted or were dismissed for 
misconduct would forfeit all this 
accumulated property. For the me- 
taphor comp. August. Op. V. Appx. 
p. 150 ‘Milites igitur Christi sumus, 
et stipendium ab ipso donativumque 
percepimus etc.’, in a sermon by an 
unknown writer. The metaphor of 
the szeuum (cvoonpov) appears in the 
companion epistle, .Szzyzz.. 1. 

I. dé] ‘due’, i.e. ‘correspond- 
ing to the deposita; as in [Juv.] xvi. 
56 * Hunc labor aeguus provehit et 
pulcro reddit sua dona labori, speak- 
ing of this same thing. 

3. ue pàv] sc. paxpobvpei, as 
above iva kai ó Geos dpiv sc. mposéyy 
(see the note). I should not have 
thought it necessary to explain the 
construction, if Jacobson had not 
quoted Phil. iv. 5 ó Kuptos &yyvs, ap- 
parently led astray by the Armenian 
mis-rendering ‘quasi Deus sit in 
mediis vobis,’ 

évaiuny] See the note on Æphes. 
2: 

VIT. *I hear that the Church of 
Antioch has peace at length ; and 
the news has gladdened me, if only 
I am allowed to finish my course. 
Summon a council, and elect a trusty 


t 4 JP 


vii] TO POLYCARP, 2255 


, \ [2E Z @ s ^ 
VII. Creidi] 5j ékkNgala 5" èv Avrioxcía Ts Cv- 
, > , e x # ` ^ ^ ° ~ 
5 pias eipnvever, Ws €OnAWOn pot, Sid THs 7TOOGCUXTS UMOV, 
5 5 / 3 , °. 2 , ^ , 
Kayo evluuorepos éyevouny ¿v auepiuvig Oceov, éavirep 


Š \ ^ ^ ^ 5 z. > x e n , , ^ 
la OU 7raÜetv OcoU EMLTUXW, els TO eUpeÜrvat ue ev TH 
t 


dub. L. 


TavTós] Here X 


E; ger orationem 
translates 
Brecióus A. 


person to carry your congratulations 
to Antioch. This is God's work. I 
trust to your compliance; and know- 
ing your zeal, I have thought few 
words sufficient. 

4. 'Emeib) x..A.] On this matter, 
which is mentioned in all the letters 
written from Troas, see the notes to 
Philad. 1o. 

'6. duepysvia cod] For this geni- 
tive @eov, describing the character 
of the preceding substantive, comp. 
Magn. 6 óuovoía Əeo0 with the note. 

7. Gcov émiriyo}] See the note 
on Magn. I. 

€” rjj airyoet tuay] ‘through your 
supplication” For the expression 
see Ephes. 20 éav pe kataéiaon "I. X. 
ev Th mpocevx? únóv, Philad. 8 bdo 
€v Th mpocevy;j Ündv Ôikarwb iva, 
Smyrn. II Qa é TÜ Tpocevx? )pdv 
Ocoü emirúyo. The word atras 
occurs only once elsewhere in Igna- 
tius (Zra//. 13), but he uses it rather 
than zpocevy? here because he had 
already exhausted the latter word in 
the context. For the idea of ‘disci- 
pleship,’ as the final result of martyr- 
dom, see the note on Ephes. 1 bid 
| TOU emiruxeü SuvnOd padnrns eivai. 
In the connexion Oi tod malev... 
Mani, Ignatius probably has in his 
mind the proverb za6/juara palpata; 
comp. e.g. Æsch. Agam. 177 rov 
mader pá8os Oévra xupiws Cxew (comp. 


buoy pri.] GLZS,Ag; 
breaks off, and has only two sentences more, Š 7 xpioriavòs 
K.T.M. and 8 8 domdfoua rüv uéANovra K TEN 
L (which prob. represents the gen., 
ôa with the accus. correctly øropter) ; 


quay Dam-Rup Anton [Antioch]. 


5 Od Tis mpocevy ns] 
since L commonly 
0i Ti mpocevyiw G; 


20. 257) Herod. i. 207 rà Oé pot 
TaÓjuara  éóvra aydpura paénpara 
yeyovee, Philo ge Leg. Spec. 6 (I1. p. 
340) iv èk rod mateiv pan, with other 
passages quoted by Wetstein and 
Bleek on Heb. v. 8 éyadev ap àv 
errabey. 

This reading is to be preferred, both 
on account of the parallel passage in 
the companion epistle, Smyrn. Yr, 
and by reason of the combination of 
authorities for it. If it had stood in 
the interpolator’s text alone, it might 
have been classed with such wilful 
changes of Aya for béna above $ 2, 
ayvorarns for dyvigopat Ephes. 8, 
StadvOjvac for va Rom. 2, where 
similarity of sound has suggested the 
substituted word. But the coinci- 
dence of the Armenian Version shows 
that it was already in the text of 
Ignatius. On the other hand it has 
not the authority of any Ms of the 
Latin Version, as commonly repre- 
sented. At the same time the other 
reading, ev r$ dvagrdoet, would make 
very good sense; comp. Ephes. 11 
ev ois yévorró poe ávaofvat èv Tj Tpos- 
«vx? vpóv. The opposition would 
then be between ma6eiv and dvágracuts, 
as in Rom. 4 éà» málo.. .dvaorýropat 
ev aùr® éAeVÓepos. And for úuðv 
paOnrnv (which in this case must be 
taken together) comp. Æphes. 3 with 
the note. 


to 
Os 
Í 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vir 


356 
2 e ^ , » , e. 
aire. Uuav pabytyv. mpere, lloNvkapze Ücouaka 
5 ^ , M 
pucróTaTe, ouuBovrAtoy ayayev Ücompeméo aov Kat 
^ , A > \ Z of w af 
XELOTOVATAL Tiva OV ayamnTOV Nav EXETE kat &OKVOV, 
e , ^ ^ ^ 
ds Surmoetat Ocodpopos kaXeio at ToUrov kara&£uocat, 
[24 M 5 , / ° ^ \ ” 5 , 
iva ropevÜeis ets Cupíav do€aon vuwv Tnv &okvov dya- 
E ^ \ e ^ > f , 
mnv eis S0gav Ocol. YptoTiavos éavroU é£ovoiav ovk 


> ^ , ^ \ of XS 
éyer dXXa. Oeo o'xyoNa(e. TovUTO TO ëpyov Ocot éow 
r airájce] g*; precibus A (the same word which is used just before to trans- 
late dua THs mpocevx5js); ávacráce. GL (there is no v. l. in the Mss of L; see 
the Appx). pabnriv] gLA; maðnrýv G: see also Smyrn. 5 for a similar 


error. 
qui $15 eos qui A; el twa g. 


mpére] GLAg; add. zibi zeztur Si. 3 Twa ðv] GL; Zum 


2 


4 kaAeta0ci] GLg; fieri A; ut sit et vocetur 


Or kara£udecu] g*; kara£ucee (an itacism) G; dignificari L* (Mss); uic 


persuadeatur (lit. hic persuadeatur) Sy; al. A. 


G; def. A. 


I. mpére] See the note on 
Ephes. 2. 

Ocopakapwrórare| See the note on 
Smyrn. 1. 

3. xeworovjca( rwa] Similar in- 
structions are given in the companion 
letter, Smyrn. 11. Polycarp himself 
refers to this intended delegate, PAz. 
13 Eypawaré por kal vpets kal Iyvarios 
tva, edy ris amépyxnrac eis Zvpíav, 
rà map Wv arokouion ypdupara: 
ómep moujoo...etre €yo eire OV TEL We 
mpeo Beíc ovra kal mepi pv. 

4. Oco0pópos] ‘Goa’s courier? The 
word is used here in reference to 
the special mission, which he was 
promptly (doxvoy) to execute. In 
Smyrn. 11 he is styled Geompec Burns. 
On the other hand in PAZad. 2 
Oco0póuor is used of the Christian 
course generally. Lucian seems to 
be referring to these directions of 
Ignatius, de Mort. Peregr. 41, where 
he says of Peregrinus, previously a 
Christian, but now a Cynic, $aoci de 
marais oxeüóv rats évOó£ots wéde- 
civ émucTOÀAàs Stamépwat avrov 


6 Oco] gLS,; xpicrov 


xpwriavós] G Dam-Vat 7 Dam-Rup 10; ó xpwriavós g; 
christianus L[Z]; christianus enim Sı; ergo christiano A. 


éauToŬ 


^ 

OtaOnkas  Twüàs Kal mapawéseis Kal 
, , > ` , 

vópovs-* kaí Twas émi rovro mpea B ev- 


^ > , 
Tas Tov Éra(pov xetporóvyoe ve- 


KpayyéXovs kal veprepodpopovs 
mpocayopevaas. 
kara£iQsai] ‘to commission’, ‘ac- 


credit’; comp. Philad. 10 òs kara£ie- 
Onoerae ths Tova’tns Stakovias of a 
similar person. For the use of this 
word in Ignatius generally see the 
note to Ephes. 20. 

5. mopevleis eis Supiav] The ob- 
ject of this mission is more distinctly 
stated in Phzlad. 10, Smyrn. 11, as 
the congratulation and encourage- 
ment of the Church at Antioch. The 
delegate was to bear a letter from 
the Smyrnzans. 

7. Oe oxoXá(a] ‘devotes his 
time to God’; Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 
IO (p. 236) 7 dyapos povw c xoAd(e TÓ 
Geo. The sentiment here has refer- 
ence to the Smyrnzans generally, 
but to the individual messenger 
more especially. 

O«o0...kai vudv] “of God, as well 
as of yourselves) where Oeo) ex- 


ro 


vir] 


M € ^ [74 5 N 
Kat vwy, OTav avTO dmaprionre. 

, e/ e/ , E] KL 
X«purt, OTL ÉTOlMOL.6OT€ cis eUzroilay 
T; \ e ^ M ¥ ^ 3 7 
ELOWS UMwY TO GvvTOVOV THs dÀnÜclas 


YVeaumatwv Tapexcdrera. 


VIII. 
yparbat. 


TO POLYCARP, 


SISTI 


Z \ ^ 
TlIOTEVW yap Tij 
^ J; 
Oed awicoucayv. 
> , / e ^ 
OU óÓALyoy uuas 


N P. ^ E 5 
"Emel vacas Tale €KKAngíiats ovK nouyvnOnv 
\ \ 3 ^ 
à« TO e£al vns mAeiv ue darò Tpwados eis 


S ° M £ ^ 
Ne&moNw, ws rò 0éAnua TPOTTATCEL, ypawes Tails 


efovolay] GL Dam-Vat Dam-Rup; é£oveíav éavroü g. 


TO Oe Dam-Vat Dam-Rup. 


tlonre] GS,AÀg; perfecti estis 
probably read avrol), 
córrovov] G; eóvrouov 
(‘videtur legisse érouioy? Petermann; 
txt GA; add. of» Lg. 
aliis L. 


plains and justifies the preceding 
Ge@ oxoAd(et. 

TH xapirt] ‘the Divine grace’; 
see below § 8, and the note on 
Syra. 12. 

9. Oe üávíkovcav] See the note 
on Philad. 1. 

IO. Tò ovvrovor] ‘intensity, direct- 
mess’, properly ‘ tension’ ; comp. Philo 
Leg. ad Cai. $ 20 (p. 565 M) rò Taxos 
kal ovvTovoy Tis omovdns. This there- 
fore is probably the reading here, 
rather than rò cvvropoy ; but the words 
are constantly confused. Sometimes 
they occur together; e.g. Plut. Mor. 
P. 759 D avvrovoy Óuo) kal oúyronoy 
evpykévat zopcíav eis Qperúv, Clem. 
Alex. Paed. i. 3 (p. 103) ras cuvrdpous 
ddovs kal avvrovovs els diôiórnra, Julian. 
Orat. vi. (p. 225 C) rjv evropov, 
Pyciv, odov kai aívrovov erù rjv dpe- 
THY eioLovaLy. 

Ths adnGeias] ‘your sincerity, ‘your 
fidelity’; comp. Polyc. Phil. 4 ore- 
yovoas Toùs éavróv dvdpas èv ráon 
dXjÜcí(a. In the LXX ddjOea is a 
frequent rendering of TIWN, ‘sted- 
fastness,’ ‘constancy,’ which is also 


7 9e6] Gg; 


To0ro|] GLe; Aoc enim Si; et hoc A, 
8 avrà] g*S,A; abra G; 25? (avr@ or a?rol) L* (see the next note). 


arap- 


(dmapru- Ore) L (so that the previous word was 
IO ews] txt gL; add. otv G; nam et scio A. 

g*; compendium L; pracparationem ( promptitudinem) A 

see the v. l. in Rom. 5). 

I4 Tais dumpooder] Gg; guae Supra nos sunt A; 


12 "Emei] 


translated by mlørıs in other places. 

dv OMyev w.r.A.] See the note on 
Rom. 8. 

VIII. ‘I am prevented by the 
hurry of my departure from writing 
to all the churches. I charge thee 
therefore to direct the churches in 
front to send delegates or letters, as 
circumstances may allow, to Syria. 
I salute all individuals, especially 
the widow of Epitropus with her 
family, and Attalus. I salute the 
delegate who will go to Syria, and 
Polycarp who will send him. I pray 
for a blessing on you all Abide in 
the unity of God. I salute Alce. 
Farewell.’ 

I3. mAÀeiv] The letter therefore is 
written from Troas; and the pre- 
ceding ;óvwjüp» is an epistolary 
aorist; see Zahn Z, v. A. p. 283. 

eis Neázrouv] The port-town of Phi- 
lippi (Acts xvi. 11), where he would 
take the great Egnatian road across 
the continent to Dyrrhachium ; see 
Philippians p. 47 sq. 

14. Tò OéXnua] ‘the Divine will’: 
see the note on Æphes. 20. There is 


THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS [vut 


358 

5 ^ , , > 

Eumpoobey éxxAnoiats, ws OcoU yvwuny KEexTnpeEvos, ets 
N ^ e \ , 

TO kal avTovs TO av’TO Troujcai—oi uev Ouvapevot 


\ N \ ^ € , N 
meCovs méurpat, oi 0€ émiaToAas ða TØV UO cov TEM 


£ [74 ^ > , ” e » p 
mouévæv, iva Sogacbjte aiwviw Epyw—ws aELOS WY. 


> , / \ \ ^5 
"AomaCopat mavTas ÈE OvouaTos, Kat THY TOU Erm- 


e ^ a \ ^ , : E is 
TpOTOU O'UV OA TW olkw QUTHS KAL TØV TEKVWY" aATTAa- 
1 


: ecu. 
I els TO kal avrovs k.7.M.] For the reading of L see the Appx. 2 TÒ auro] 


GA; roro g; om. (?) L*. 


GLg*; guomodo et digni estis A. 


4 bofacOnre] GAg; glorificeris L. al- 
wviy ëpyy] GL; èr alwvly čpyy g; in operibus aeternitatis A. 


ós à£ws dv] 
6 ray rékvov] GLg. Petermann trans- 


lates A filiis (= rékvois), but the case is ambiguous and may be either filiorum or 


filiis. 


7 rov uéddovTa....ropeverbar] GLg (but g omits 70d); eum fratrem qui 


paratus est ire in Syriam A (esse for ear ) ; dum qui dignatur tre ad 


antiochiam pro me, sicut praecepi tibi 2 (but E, for praecepi tibi reads praecepist? 


no reason for departing from the or- 
dinary use of Ignatius, and explain- 
ing it here of the will of the emperor 
or the Roman authorities. 

rais eumpoodev exxdynolas| ‘the 
churches lying in front, i.e. nearer 
to Syria than Smyrna itself. The 
writer naturally imagines himself 
looking towards Antioch, whither the 
delegates are to be sent. Ignatius had 
been unable himself to write to any 
of these, except Philadelphia, since 
they lay at too great a distance from 
Troas. For čumpoosĝev comp. Xen. 
Anab. v. 6. 9 moXeuíov modday čp- 


mpoobev óvrov. Uhlhorn (p. 31) refers. 


to Herod. vii. 126 máens tis €umpoo- 
dev Evpómgs, but he himself prefers 
explaining it by the Semitic use of 
Dp ‘in front,’ ie. eastward. This 
is quite unnecessary. Other expla- 
nations which have been suggested 
hardly deserve consideration. 

I. Oeod yvy k.t.d.] “Possessing 
the mind of God? For Oeoü youn 
see the note Ephes. 3. 

3. méppa] sc. mepgyárocav, ie. 
*Let those who are able to send 
messengers, send them, and let the 


others send letters) The sentence, 
of pev duvapevot...atovia €pygo, must 
be regarded as parenthetical, so that 
œs a&tos àv will be connected with 
yparpers...0s Oeod yvøuny kekrnuévos, 
and refer to Polycarp himself. Much 
unnecessary difficulty has been made 
about this singular á£os àv by trans- 
lators and commentators. 

0ià Tay k.r.A.] i.e. by the hands of 
the messengers whom Polycarp will 
send to the several cities, to inform 
them of the wish of Ignatius. The 
letters of the several churches will 
thus be collected, and placed in the 
hands of the Smyrnzean éeoOpópos, 
who will carry them to Syria; comp. 
Polyc. PA. 13, quoted above on Š 7 
xeuporovijcaít Tuva. 

4. tva KTN] ‘that ye) i.e. all 
who participate in this mission, ‘may 
be glorified by an ever-memorable 
work. 

5. eé dvoparos| See the note on 
§ 4. 

Ty ToU `Emurpómou] ‘the widow,’ 
rather than the wife, ‘of Epitropus, 
as the words following seem to show. 
The name appears to be very rare; 


IO 


vii] TO POLYCARP. 


359 
Coua "ArraNov cÓv dyannrov pov’ ao7aCouat Tov 
uéM\ovTa reae uaa TOU Eis Cupia Topever bar: 
écTaL ij xdpis LET aUTOU dia vravTÓs, kal Tou TéuTOV- 
Tos avTOv lloXvkaprrov. appetunt Unas Ova rayos év 
Oeo nuov loo? XpisTto evxyomat, év o Olapuelynre év 
domátouat "AAkgv TO 


OeoU xal 


EVOTNTL €TLOKOTN. 


” af 5 
moOnTov pot Óvoua. eEpowabe ¿y Kupiw. 
t 


nobis by the change of a letter). 
Ovameivare or diamclvere (sic) g*. 
“AXkny] adrxnv G. 
g; mihi L; pov G; 
Kuppe] GLg; om. A. 

Subscription mpòs IloMkapmov G. 
see the Appx. 


but I find one Ti. Claudius Epitro- 
pus in an inscription, Muratori MCLI. 
Io. Perhaps the word is wrongly 
taken as a proper name; and we 
should rather translate, *the wife (or 
widow) of the procurator, Mention 
is made in the inscriptions at Smyrna 
of an officer called émírpomos otpa- 
Tyyós Or éÉmírpomos THs oTpatnyias 
(C. 4. G. 3151, 3162), and perhaps 
this ofücer may be meant. Another 
Smyrnzan inscription speaks of o 
emírponos Tov ZeBaoro (C. Z. G. 3203). 
This woman is not improbably the 
same with Gavia mentioned in the 
companion epistle, Suzyrau. 13 Toy 
otkov T'aovias K.T.À. 

7. “Arradov] This name appears 
many times in inscriptions and coins 
belonging to Smyrna, C. Z. G. 3141, 
3142, 3239, 3288, 3289, 3299, 3304, 
33531) Mionnet HI. pp: 232,- 233, 
Suppl. Vi. p. 309 (?), 344. The coins 
belong to the time of M. Aurelius. 

Tov péAdovta k.r.X.]| The Geodpo- 
pos, about whom he has given direc- 
tions in the preceding chapter. The 
Syriac epitomator, having struck 


II XpuTQ] xpwrroÜ G. 


There is no aspirate in LAg; see Smyrn. 13. 
al. A. See also Smyrn. 13, Rom. ro. 


There is no subscription in LA. 


à auelymre] G ; 
12 émuskorn] GLg*; émukómou A. 

13 Moe] 
éppwabe èv 


For g 


out the whole of the preceding pas- 
sage which explains who is meant, 
substitutes here *him that is thought 
worthy to go to Antioch in my stead, 
as I commanded thee.’ His abridg- 
ment rendered some explanation ne- 
cessary ; but his language would 

suggest to the reader that the person 
in question was intended to succeed 
Ignatius as bishop. There is no 
reason to think that the epitomator 
himself intended this, or that this 
was anything more than a piece of 
slovenly wording, such as character- 
izes his abridgment elsewhere. 

9. 5 xdpis] ‘the Divine grace, 
as in Š 7 muorevw TH xdpırı (see the 
note). 

II. ©e6 judy] See the note on 
Ephes. inscr. 
évórnr. Oeo] See the note on 


123 
Pitlad. 8. 
émukomg] ‘superintendence? | He 


had begun the letter by speaking 
of Polycarp as émeokomquévos vm 
Oeo) k.r.. There is therefore much 
propriety in his ending with Óuapeívgre 
K.T.A. The reading ézioórov however 


360 


is ancient, as the Armenian Version 
shows, though its presence in any 
Greek texts has no authority. It 
would make good sense; comp. 
Smyrn. 9 Ocóv kai èriokorov eidévat, 
Trall. 7 obcw dywpiorors [Oco0] IN- 
cov Xptorov kal roð émuckómov. But 
the alteration of ëézmurkom into èm- 
ckórov would be so much more 
natural to a transcriber than the 
converse, that I have not hesitated 


IGNATIUS TO POLYCARP. 


[viu 


to adopt émicxomy in preference. 

“Adknv] See the note on Smyrn. 
"n. 

Tò moÜnróv pot krA.] So Rom. 
Io, Smyrn. 13. Similarly Eusebius 
speaks of his friend Pamphilus as 
TO moÉewóv poi Ovopa, Act. Pamph. 1, 
6 (Of. Il. 1441, 1445, Migne). 

I3. €ppwobe] See the note on 
Ephes. 21. 


L-— o = 


ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


OF 


S. IGNATIUS. 


PSS Or MART VRDOM 


or 


Sera eS: 


I. 


HE ACTS OF MARTYRDOM of S. Ignatius appear in five 
forms. 
1. The ANTIOCHENE ACTS. These are extant in three lan- 
guages. 
(i) GREEK; Parts. 1451 (formerly Colbert. 460). From this ms 
the Acts were first published by Ruinart (AZ. Prim. Mart. Sinc. 1689, 
p. 605 sq). No other Greek ws of these Acts is known to exist. 
(ii) ZATIN; attached to the Anglo-Latin Version of the Igna- 
tian Epistles discovered and published by Ussher in his edition (1644) 
from two MSS. 
(iii) SYR/AC; first published in part by Cureton (Corp. Zen. 
p. 222, London, 1849) and afterwards entire by Moesinger (Supplementum 
Corporis Ignatiani, 1872, p. 7 sq). .Four Mss of this version are 
known to exist, of which two are imperfect at the end. 
As these Antiochene Acts incorporate the Epistle to the Romans, 
a full account of the mss in the three languages has been given already 
in the notices of the Mss of the Ignatian Epistles. The original Greek 
is printed below; and the Latin and Syriac will be found in the Ap- 


pendix. 


364 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


2. The Roman Acts, which are extant in the original Greek and 
in a Coptic Version. 


(i) GREEK. Of this I am not aware of more than three Mss. 

(a) Vatic. 866. From this ms Dressel first published these Acts 
in his edition of the Patres Apostolici (1857). He thus describes it: 
< membraneus, folis dimidiatis 395, saeculi x. Ex eo (fol. 185—188) 
* Acta Martyris Ignatii? deprompsi inedita. Alia insunt martyria, epis- 
tolae sanctorum, similiaque adhuc parum cognita." 

(0) Bodl. Laud. Graec. 69, fol 245 b—255 a. This ms is de- 
scribed in Coxes Catal. Cod. Graec. Bibl. Bodi. p. 552 sq’. It is 
a large fol. in parchment, of the 11th century, and contains a Mar- 
tyrology for December. The Martyrdom of Ignatius is preceded by 
paptipiov trod ayiov Bovndatiov kai moreta dyaidos fol. 240 b, and 
followed by Bios koi paprúpiov THs ayias paptupos avactacias Kal TOV oùv - 
aùr paptupyocavrwr èv poy fol. 255 b. Ussher gave some extracts from 
this Ms in his ZgzatZ et Polycarpi Epistolae 1644, and in his Appendix 
Jgnatiana 1647 ; but, notwithstanding the interest of the subject, it has 
lain unexamined since. I have collated it throughout for this edition. 
The iota is adscript, not subscript. 

(c) Paris. Bibl. Nat. Graec. 1491 (formerly Colbert. 450), fol. 86 a, 
col. 2— fol. 93 b, col. 2. (See the Catal. Bibl. Reg. 11. p. 338.) It is 
a folio in double columns in a bold cursive hand, without iota adscript 
or subscript, and appears to have been written in the 11th century. The 
Martyrdom of Ignatius is preceded (fol. 64 b) by Bios rod oalov Tps 
npav Braciov, and succeeded (fol. 94 a) by rod ociov rps wv koi 
Opodoyntod Oeoddspov Karyxnois émitad.os eis THY avroð pytépa. The 
volume is mainly occupied with the Acts of saints and martyrs who are 
commemorated in the latter half of December. This copy of the 
Roman Acts has never, so far as I am aware, been noticed before. 
I have collated it throughout for this edition. It is quite the most 
important authority for the text. 


(ü) COPTIC. These Acts are extant in the two principal dialects 
of the Coptic language, (a) the Memphitic and (8) the Thebaic or 
Sahidic. 


+ Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 2, note 2), misled Acts are contained in two Oxford Mss. 
by Smith p. 45, supposes that the Oxford If Zahn has rightly apprehended Smith’s 
MS which Ussher used was Barocc. 192; meaning (for his words are somewhat 
and, as Grabe (Spicil. 11 p. 4) refers to the ambiguous), Smith is certainly in error; 
Laudian MS for the Acts of Martyrdom for the Martyrdom of Ignatius in Barocc. 
quoted by Ussher, he infers that these — r9a is that of the Metaphrast. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 365 


(a) The Aemphitic is found in Vatic. Copt. \xvi. This Vatican Ms 
is described by Quatremére Recherches sur la Langue et la Littérature de 
l'Egypte p. 128 sq (Paris 1808), and by Assemani in Mai Script. Vet. 
Nov. Coll. v. Appx. p. 161 sq (see also Bibl. Orient. 1. p.618) Itisa 
parchment ws in fol, of 313 leaves, written in various hands, and 
contains a Martyrology for the Egyptian month Epiphi. The Martyr- 
dom of Ignatius begins the volume (fol. 1). The third document in 
the volume has a note appended to the effect that it was given to the 
church of S. Macarius in Scete, A. Mart. 641 (A.D. 925); and the fifth 
is stated to have been written A. Mart. 634 (A.D. 918). At the close of 
the volume is a note bearing the date A. Mart. 741 (A.D. 1025). A 
transcript of this ms, made by Tuki, belonged to the Borgian collection 
(Cod. xviii)', and is described by Zoega Catal. Cod. Copt. Mus. Borg. 
p. 19. This transcript is now probably in the Naples Library, with the 
other patristic and kindred mss belonging to the Borgian collection. 
Professor Guidi, with his habitual kindness, made a transcript of the 
Vatican Ms for me; and from his transcript this Coptic Version was 

` published for the first time in my first edition. It will be found in the 
Appendix in the third volume of the present edition, p. 281 sq. 

(8) The Sahidic or Thebaic is preserved in Zaurin. Papyrus r, 
in the Egyptian Museum at Turin ; described by Peyron in his Zexicon 
Linguae Copticae p. xxv. It isa papyrus of 63 leaves and contains 
(1) ‘Martyrium S. Ignatii Antiochiae Episcopi’; (2) * Martyrium S. 
Gioore'; (3) * Historiam, seu potius fabulam virginis Eudoxiae impera- 
toris Constantini sororis, quae post Persas a fratre devictos Hiero- 
solymam contendit etc; haec vero contigerunt anno 365 post Christi 
resurrectionem.’ 

This Sahidic text has been published since the appearance of my 
first edition, with a translation, by F. Rossi in his Papyri Copti del Museo 
Egizio di Torino, in the part bearing the title Vita d? Sant’ Ilarione e 
Martirio di Sant Ignazio, Torino 1886, being taken from the Memorie 
della Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino, Serie 2, Tom. XXXVIII. 
From this I have taken the various readings for my apparatus criticus 
in the present edition. 

The earlier part of these Coptic Acts (as far as § 3 Oro dzíarov) in 
both dialects was published by Revillout in the Revue Exgyptologique III, 
P- 34 sq (1883), the Thebaic text being placed below the Memphitic on 
the same page. The two texts were taken from the two mss described 
above, and indeed I am not aware of any other ws of either version. 


1 Tattam in a letter to Cureton (Corp. Cod. xviii of vol. Ixvi Vatic. in Zoega's 
Len. p. 362) writes loosely, ‘It is marked Catalogue of the Borgian mss’. 


366 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Though Revillout’s publication had appeared before my first edition 
(1885), I was unaware of the fact. My own text of the Memphitic Acts 
had been passed through the press some time before its appearance. 

It is evident at once that these two versions are not independent the 
one of the other. Not only do they follow the same text with the same 
insertions and omissions, but they render the Greek in the same way. 
The one therefore must have been taken from the other; and further 
examination shows that the priority should be assigned to the Thebaic. 
Though here and there we stumble on a passage which seems to point 
to the Memphitic as the original, yet these are capable of being ex- 
plained otherwise. On the other hand the phenomena which indicate 
that the Thebaic is the parent of the Memphitic are too numerous and 
decisive to be set aside. Occasionally the Memphitic preserves a purer 
form of the Egyptian text where the existing Thebaic Ms is corrupt ; 
but, as a rule, the Thebaic text is found to be older and closer to the 
original Greek. 

From what has been said, it will have appeared that the two cannot 
be regarded as independent authorities; but as each manuscript is 
mutilated in parts by the loss of a leaf or leaves, they supplement each 
other, and no part is wanting to both versions. The Memphitic omits 
a considerable portion of the 6th chapter; the Thebaic is defective at 
the beginning and leaves out parts of the roth and r1th chapters. 
There are likewise smaller omissions in other parts. i 

Cureton (C. Z. p. 362), while giving an extract from Peyron, speaks 
of these Coptic Acts as if they were a translation of the Colbertine or (as 
I prefer to call them) the Amtzochene Acts, though Peyron's own words 
ought to have saved him from this erroneous identification. Zoega 
(l. c.) writes somewhat carelessly, * Auctor videtur esse Heron quidam, 
nam circa finem inter alias invocationes S. Ignatii legitur apres: 
Aumekupipi apon Memento filit tui Heronts.’ The fact is that the Acts 
are followed by the Prayer of Hero, of which these words form part ; 
but there is nothing to connect the Acts themselves with Hero. Zahn 
(Z. v. A. p. 3, note 6) is perplexed by this statement of Zoega, as 
repeated by Tattam, and says that, if the statement be correct, this must 
be different from any known Martyrdom of Ignatius. 


3. The BorrANDpisT Acts, extant only in Latin. A portion of 
these was published by Ussher in his Appendix Zgnatiana (1647) from 
a Cotton MS. This was, I suppose, Otho p. viii (see the Catalogue 
p. 369), since charred and rendered illegible by the fire. They were 
afterwards given in full in the Bollandist Acta Sanctorum Febr. 1, ‘ex 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 


367 


pluribus eisque vetustissimis codicibus mss desumpta, et cum Rosweydo 


olim, tum nobis communicata : 


eorum praecipui sunt Lobiensis, Audo- 


marensis, Ultrajectinus, aliusque Burgundicus a Chiffletio nostro trans- 


missus’. 
who collated several manuscripts. 
be numerous. 


The most convenient and best text is that of Funk (1881), 


Manuscripts of these Acts seem to 
Sometimes they are attached to the Latin version of the 


interpolated and spurious Ignatian Epistles: e.g. Troyes 4125 Brussels 
5510; Brussels 703 (perhaps a transcript from the preceding) ; Paris. 


Bibl. Nat. 1639 (formerly Cold. 1039). 


These Mss have already been 


described among the authorities for the text of the Ignatian Epistles. 
Sometimes the Acts of Martyrdom are apart from the epistles: e.g. 


Bodi. Laud. Lat. 
Sangall. 454 '. 


4. The ARMENIAN Acts, first published by Ja B. 


31, fol. 118 a; Laud. Miscell. 114, fol .61.b; 


Aucher in his 


Armenian Lives of all the Saints of the Armenian Calendar (Venice 
1810—1814), and reprinted from him by Petermann in his edition of 


_ Ignatius (p. 496 sq). As these Acts contain the Epistle to the Romans, 
they have been already noticed in the account of the authorities for the 
text of the Ignatian Epistles. 


5. The Acts or THe MrTAPHRAsT. As these also contain the 
Epistle to the Romans, they have been noticed already in the account 
of the Mss of the Ignatian Epistles. 


The short Latin Acts, published by Moesinger (Suppl. Corp. Zenat. 
p. 18 sq) from a Ms in the Vallicellian Library at Rome (see z^. p. s), 
may be dismissed at once; as they are put together from Rufinus' 


1 It is necessary to warn readers who misled by Petermann. This paragraph 


use Petermann's edition for these Acts, 
that he has omitted a long paragraph, 
*Fuerunt autem custodientes ... pejores 
fiunt', at the end of § 3 (p. 487) without 
any notice of the omission. It appears 
in its proper place in the Bollandist Acta 
Sanctorum. p. 29 sq, but is omitted by 
Ussher (p. 5), because Ussher was only 
concerned with those parts which were 
taken from the Antiochene Acts, and 
this piece comes from the Roman Acts. 
Petermann seems to have copied Ussher 
and omitted it through inadvertence, as 
his purpose is to give these Acts com- 


plete. Zahn (Z—@. A. p. 18, note) is 


certainly appears in the only two mss 
which 1 have consulted for this part, 
Laud. Lat. 31, and Laud. Miscell. 114. 
So again in $ r Petermann (p. 484) and 
Zahn (¿ e.) treat the words ‘secundus 
post apostolos factus, qui post Euodium’ 
as an interpolation in the Bollandist mss, 
whereas they were probably omitted by 
Ussher though found in his Cotton ws, 
because there was nothing corresponding 
to them in the Antiochene Acts. The 
alternative hypothesis, that some later 
scribe interpolated them from the Roman 
Acts, is highly improbable, 


368 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Latin version of Eusebius and the account of Ignatius in the Mar- 
tyrology of Ado (see Zahn 7. v. A. p. 30). 


2. 


The next point is to determine the mutual re/ations of the five 
documents described in the last section. And here our task is easy. 
The two first-mentioned Acts, which (for reasons which will appear 
presently) I have called the Aztiochene and the Roman respectively, are 
quite independent the one of the other; while the remaining three are 
combinations of these two more or less modified'. 


1. The first of these five documents begins with an account of 
the successful administration of the Antiochene Church by Ignatius 
under the persecution of Domitian and during the early part of Trajan’s 
reign ($ 1). We are then carried forward to the ninth year of Trajan. 
The emperor, elated by his victories over the Scythians and Dacians, is 
exasperated by the refusal of the Christians to worship the gods of 
heathendom. Their subjugation is necessary to crown his triumphs. 
He is now at Antioch, preparing for his expedition against Armenia and 
the Parthians. Ignatius is summoned before him. After some alterca- 
tion, which turns entirely on the word 6«o$0pos, Trajan condemns the 
saint to be carried a prisoner to Rome and there to be thrown to the 
wild-beasts. With much thanksgiving he invests himself in his chains 
(§ 2). The narrative of the journey to Rome is given at some length. 
It more resembles the progress of a conqueror than the transportation 


1 Ussher seems to have rightly divined 
the relations of the Bollandist Acts (which 
he read iu the Cottonian Ms) to the two 
independent works which I have called 
Antiochene and Roman Acts respectively 
(see his preface); but he was unacquaint- 
ed with the Armenian Acts and does not 
appear to have paid sufficient attention 
to the Metaphrast. To Zahn (A v. A. 
p. 10 sq) belongs the credit of having 
first stated distinctly the relations of the 
five documents to each other. Some 
years before Zahn's book appeared, I had 
myself investigated these relations and 
arrived at the same results. Indeed a 
careful comparison of the documents 


themselves can only lead to one con- 
clusion. On the other hand, Aucher 
confidently maintained that the Armenian 
Acts were translated from the original 
document, of which all the others were 
abridgements or modifications (see Peter- 
mann pp. 496 sq, 545); but it must be 
remembered, as an excuse for this very 
untenable view, that he was unacquainted 
with the Roman Acts which are the key 
to the solution. About the time when 
Zahn’s book was published, Kraus ( 7%eo- 
log. Quartaischr. LV. p. 115 sq, 1873) 
discussed the various Acts of Ignatius, 
but did not trace their relations. 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 369 


of a convict. From Antioch he goes to Seleucia the port-town, where 
he takes ship for Smyrna. Arrived at Smyrna, he enjoys the society of 
Polycarp, formerly his fellow-disciple under the tuition of S. John. 
Here he receives delegates from the churches, and exhorts them to 
second his desire of martyrdom (§ 3). As a reward for their kindly 
attention, he writes letters of exhortation to them. At this point the 
Epistle to the Romans is inserted to show the spirit of his letters (S 4). 
From Smyrna he is hurried forward by his guards to Troas ; thence by 
ship to Neapolis; thence by land through Philippi and Macedonia to 
Epidamnus, where again he embarks. The course of the vessel is 
through the Adriatic and Tyrrhene seas to Portus. As they pass by 
Puteoli, he desires to land there, so that he may tread in the footsteps 
of S. Paul; but adverse winds prevent this. At Portus he disembarks 
($ 5). Leaving this place, he and his companions are met by ‘the 
brethren’ who had heard the Tumour of his coming. He entreats 
them not to interpose and rob him of his crown. Immediately on 
his arrival he is carried to the amphitheatre. It is the great ‘thir- 
teenth’ day, and the spectacle is already drawing to a close. He 
had prayed that his remains might not give any trouble to the breth- 
ren. His prayer is granted. The beasts devour all but the more solid 
bones. These are carried back to Antioch, and preserved as reliques 
there ($ 6). 

This happened on the xiii Kal. Jan., in the consulship of Sura and 
Senecio r. His companions, who relate the facts, were comforted 
during the night following by various appearances of the martyred 
saint. They write this account to the Antiochene Church, that the very 
day of the martyrdom may be religiously observed (8 7). 

Thus it appears that in these Acts the centre of interest is Antioch. 
Antioch is the scene of the interview and condemnation ; at Antioch 
the martyr's remains are deposited and venerated. It will be seen also 
hereafter, that these Acts were probably written at Antioch, and that 
their principal circulation at first was in this city and neighbourhood. 
I have therefore called them the Antiochene Acts. 


2. The second of these documents likewise gives the date as the 
gth year of Trajan, but the consuls are differently named, Atticus Surba- 
nus and Marcellus. Ignatius, the successor of Euodius as bishop of 
Antioch, is sent to Rome in custody of ten soldiers of the body-guard, 
of whose cruelty he complains in his letter. He is taken through Asia, 
and thence to Thrace and Rhegium ($ 1). From Rhegium he sails to 
Rome. At Rome he is heard by Trajan in the presence of the senate, 


IGN. II. 24 


370 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


The emperor attempts at first to bribe him; he will make him high- 
priest of Jupiter and share his sovereignty with him, if he will recant. 
Ignatius refuses (§ 2). Then ensues a long altercation between the 
emperor and the saint, in which the senate from time to time joins. 
Ignatius ridicules the myths of the gods and assails their morality. 
Trajan intersperses his part of the dialogue with arguments more power- 
ful than words; he threatens and inflicts a series of the most excruciat- 
ing tortures, but without producing any effect. This interview extends 
over several long chapters ($$ 3—9). The emperor ends by condemn- 
ing him to starve in prison three days and nights, that he may be 
brought to his senses. The senate confirms the sentence (§ 9). On the 
third day Ignatius is led into the theatre in the presence of the emperor, 
the senate, the prefect, and the Roman mob. At the last moment he 
is offered his release, if he will deny his faith. He refuses. Two lions 
are let loose upon him. ‘They crush him to death, but do not devour 
any part of his flesh. This was done, we are told, that his reliques 
might shield from harm the city, ‘in which Peter was crucified and Paul 
was beheaded and Onesimus was perfected’ (§ 10). 

But Trajan is dismayed at his own act; and to increase his dismay, 
letters arrive from Pliny informing him how the innocent Christians 
press forward in crowds to suffer death for their faith. So he allows the 
body of the saint to be buried. The Christian brethren deposit it in 
a place where they can meet together safely from time to time to com- 
memorate his martyrdom (§ 11). 

After this the writer adds the testimony of Irenzus and Polycarp to 
the circumstances of Ignatius’ life (tacitly borrowed from Euseb. Z. Z. 
iii. 36); and the whole closes with the mention of the day of the com- 
memoration—the rst of Panemus (July)—and the name of the martyr's 
successor Hero (§ 12). 

As in the former case the interest of the story centred in Antioch, so 
here it centres in Rome. In Rome the saint is heard and condemned 
by the emperor; at Rome his body is preserved. I have therefore 
designated these the Roman Acts. By this designation however it is 
not meant to imply that they were actually written in Rome. They can 
hardly have been composed before the beginning of the fifth century at 
the very earliest ; and long before this time Greek had ceased to be the 
vulgar tongue of the Church in Rome. There are some indications 
indeed, as I shall point out hereafter, that these Acts were written at 
Alexandria ; but, whether intentionally or not, they are subservient to 
the interests of the Roman Church, 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 371 


These two Acts of Martyrdom are quite independent, the one of the 
other. They unite indeed in assigning the martyrdom to the 9th year 
of Trajan; but in all the other details they are not only distinct, but 
contradictory to each other, agreeing only in the main facts of a journey 
to Rome, an interview with Trajan, and a martyrdom in the amphi- 
theatre. 

In the remaining three documents in which these two conflicting 
accounts are combined in different ways, the patch-work is more or less 
apparent. 


3- The clumsiest form of the combined narrative appears in the 
Bollandist Acts. In this recension little or no attempt is made to fuse 
the Antiochene and Roman Acts. In the incidents at Antioch and 
the journey to Rome the former account is followed (Mart. Ant. 88 1—5), 
with two unimportant exceptions in 8 I—a notice giving the succession 
to the see of Antioch and a paragraph relating to the cruel treatment of 
his guards—both these being insertions from the Roman Acts (see 
above, p. 367, note). As soon as Ignatius arrives in the metropolis, 
the latter account is taken up and continued to the close (Mart. Rom. 
S$ 2—12). Thus the end of the first document and the beginning of 
the second are knocked off; and the two, thus mutilated, are joined 
together. The narrative at its joining runs thus : ‘ Denique una die et 
ea nocte prosperis ventis usi pervenerunt ad urbem Romam : et nun- 
tiaverunt imperatori de adventu ejus. This sentence is made up of 
Tovyapody èv pag wuépg kal vvkri Tj) aur] oUpíois avemous TPOTXpYNTALEvor 
from Mart. Ant. 5, followed by mapayivovras [v. 1. Tapeyévovro] èv rH 
Poun’ Kat TpooyveyKay TH avToKpdropt thy adiéw arro from Mart. 
Rom. 2. The result of this agglutination is utter incongruity. Trajan 
appears first at Antioch and then at Rome, but how he got from the one 
place to the other does not appear. Ignatius has an altercation with 
him in both cities. The condemnation takes place twice over. The 
editors of the Acta Sanctorum can only explain this startling incongruity 
by supposing that some chapters have been displaced. Generally these 
Acts of Martyrdom are a corrupt rendering, first of the Antiochene, and 
then of the Roman account, running off occasionally into paraphrase. 
The day of commemoration is altered in the last paragraph to the 
Kalends of February in accordance with the Roman usage. 


4. The Armenian Acts are a more successful attempt to amalga- 
mate the two narratives. The compiler is not satisfied with agglutina- 
tion, as in the former case, but aims at fusion. He strives to work in 


24—2 


372 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


all, or nearly all, the incidents of both accounts, and yet to guard the 
unity of the story. From the Antiochene Acts he has taken the whole 
account of the interview with Trajan at Antioch, the journey to Rome, 
and the martyrdom, borrowing here and there an incident or an expres- 
sion from the Roman Acts. To the Roman Acts he is indebted for the 
lengthy altercation between the emperor and the saint, with the account 
of the tortures inflicted on the latter in the course of this examination. 
This portion of the story however he has transferred from Rome to 
Antioch, inserting it in the midst of the conversation between Trajan 
and Ignatius as given in the Antiochene Acts, and thus the incongruity 
of the Bollandist Acts, which relate two interviews with Trajan at 
different places and two condemnations, has been avoided. Occasion- 
ally the compiler has inserted notices which have no counterpart in 
either the Antiochene or the Roman narrative, and these he perhaps 
invented himself. But with one or two exceptions (see below, p. 373), 
the insertions are slight and unimportant. The Armenian version 
is unfortunately so edited that it is not always easy to separate the 
notices inserted by the editor Aucher from the body of the Armenian 
text which he had before him. One chapter (Š 50), which gives an 
account of the authorship of this document, is described by Peter- 
mann as ‘additamentum editoris’; by which expression he probably 
means Aucher, as Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 24) takes him to mean. In this 
chapter it is stated that the copy before the writer was ‘translated from 
the Greek.’ If this statement is Aucher’s own, we should be glad to 
know on what authority he made it. If we may judge from his 
language in his preface (see Petermann, p. 496), he had no authentic 
information on this point, but offers it as his own decided opinion. 
There is no reason however for questioning its truth’. The amalgama- 
tion of the two narratives is much more likely to have been the work of 
a Greek compiler than of an Armenian translator. 


This Armenian Martyrdom is made up as follows: 

$$ 1—5 (pp. 497—505, ed. Petermann), ‘Paulo ante...male pereant, 
from Mart. Ant. SŠ 1, 2," Apri diadeEapévov ... kakds dzoAoQvrau : but the 
notice $ 1 ‘etenim Evodium excepit’ is taken from Mart. Rom. 1; in 
8 3 a paragraph is inserted from Mart. Rom. r (see above, p. 367, note); 
and in 8 5, where Mart. Ant. 2 has ws òè cata mpdcwrov éorn Tpaiavod, 
it substitutes ‘et ut stetit coram Trajano e£ senatu, in order to account 
for the senate taking part in the proceedings as represented in Mart. 


1 The hypothesis of Zahn (Z. v. A. p. mediate Syriac version, has been con- 
21), that it was translated from an inter- sidered already. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 373 


Rom., which is afterwards followed. In § 4 it is ‘worthy of notice that, 
whereas in one place Ignatius voluntarily goes to Trajan (after Mazz. 
Ant. 2 éxovoiws nyeto), in another he is represented as ordered into the 
emperor's presence (after Mart. Rom. 2 exéhevoev...cioaxOjvar airóv). 
There are also amplifications and explanations (e.g. that Trajan suc- 
ceeded Nerva) due to the redactor himself, if not to Aucher, 

8 5 (p. 505) *qui et Antiochenorum ... christianismum, from Mart, 
Kom. 2 ò rjv "Avrtoxéov ... els Tov XptoTtavio pov. 

8 6 (p. 505) ‘Ignatius dicit, Deo vestitum ... malitiam daemonum,’ 
from Mart. Ant. 2 "Lyvártos eîmev Oddels Ücodópov ... karaXio eru9ovAas. 

SS 6—35 (pp. 505—533) ‘Utinam possem ... ego vice fiam, from 
Mart. Rom. 2—10 elbe, Baoided, otós +e Q ... Ov ToOdy dme mpos 
aùróv. But here again to prepare the way for the transition to the 
Antiochene narrative, we have an insertion in § 34, ‘etenim festinabat 
in Armeniam et ad Parthos, taken from Mart. Ant 2 o Tovód£ovra... 
eri “Appeviay kal Hdpĝovs. In this portion of the Armenian Martyrdom 
there is also a long passage inserted (SŠ 9, ro, p. 509) ‘sicut et prius- 
quam crucifigeretur ... argillam illuminationi oculorum dabat inservire,’ 
which is not found in either of the Greek narratives, and which contains 
an account of our Lord’s miracles somewhat irrelevant to the matter in 
hand. So again § 17 has no counterpart in either the Roman or the 
Antiochene Acts. 

SS 36—46 (pp. 533—541) * Trajanus dicit; Cruci affixum...festinabat 
deinde intrare in theatrum, from Mart. Ant. 2—6 Tpatavós eter’ 
Tov cravpoÜÉvra ... «1x09 perd amov8js eis cà aupearpov. At the end 
of $ 41 the redactor has inserted a note of his own to the effect 
that Ignatius calls himself G«eoóópos in the superscription of all his 
epistles. 

Š 46 (p. 541) ‘et stans in medio populo dicebat ... panis purus,’ from 
Mart. Rom. ro ed) mpos tov Shpov...dptos kabapòs yivopar. 

SS 47, 48 (pp. 542, 543) ‘et quum haec dixisset ... proverbiorum 
auctor dixit.’ This portion of the narrative, the account of the actual 
martyrdom and the reliques, presented the greatest difficulty in the 
fusion, since the two Greek narratives directly contradict each other. 
The redactor fuses them as follows : 


Armenian. Greek. 
* Et quum haec dixisset, koiradro.eirovros avroU M. A. ro. 
bestiis ferocibus projiciebant ovros Ünpciv dpots mapa Tdv 
eum impii carnifices ; a0éov mape[JaAXero M. A. 6. 


E $753 ^ € $; x ` 
et accurrentes duo leones suffo- ¿ópanov èr avrov oi Aéovres Kal 


374 


Armenian. 


cabant beatum, et absumserunt 
sanctum corpus ejus, 


et implebatur desiderium ejus 
secundum dictum divinae scripturae 
quod desiderium justorum accepta- 
bile est. Etenim volebat ut absu- 
meretur a bestiis et non molesta 
fieret collectio corporis ipsius fra- 
tribus; et secundum desiderium 
promtitudinis ejus itidem et fecit 
Deus. Etenim quum absumsissent 
bestiae totum corpus sancti, paul- 
lum quidquam e magnis ossibus reli- 
querunt, quod postea abstulerunt in 
Antiochenorum urbem, thesaurum 
incomparabilem in testimonium 
gratiae sanctae ecclesiae relictum.’ 

‘Sed tunc conventum instituen- 
tes sancti fratres qui Romae erant, 
quibus et scripsit beatus ut non 
impedimento fierent ipsius bono 
proposito, et tollentes reliquias 
sancti posuerunt in loco quodam, 
in quo accidebat congregatis una 
laudare Deum et filium ejus unige- 
nitum et sanctum spiritum in me- 
moriam decessus sancti episcopi et 
martyris; etenim et memoria jus- 
dorum cum laude, proverbiorum 
auctor dixit.’ 


ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Greek. 


¿£ Exarépwv TV pepav TpooTETOVTES 
arérvigav povov, ovK ¿Quyov è av- 
ToU TOv capkàóv M. R. ro. 

os zapavrd Tod ayiov papTupos 
"Lyvaríov mhypotobar thy éribvpiay 
Kata 70 yeypappévov émiOupia de 
kalov dekTy, iva pydevi THY a8eA- 
pôv éraxOns dua THs ocuÀÀoyñs TOD 
Aeulávov yevyta, Kalas paras èv 
Tj émuctoAn ryv idlav émeÜvper ye 
véaÜa, TeAelwowv. póva yap Ta. Tpa- 
XUTepa TOY ayiov avroð Xeujávov 
mepiercibOn, drwa eis tHv `Awvru- 
xeav arexopicOn kai év Anvad kare- 
TéÜw, Onoavpos atipnros vro TS èv 
TG paptupt xapíros TH ayia éxxAnola 


katarepbevra M. A. 6. 


ot òè Kata tyv Pøunv aderXdoi, 
ois kal émreováAxe. dae M) TapaLTy- 
c'aj.évovs avrov TNS ToÂovpévys pap- 
Tupias amoorepyoat €Azridos, Xa[Bóv- 
TES aVTOD TO oôpa aar é0evTo | ëv TOTH| 
évOa nv ov abpoilopévovs aivety rv 
@eov kai tov Kupuov nudv “Incodv 
Xpuwrrov kai 70 dyvov sveüpa. [vv. ll. | 
émi TH TeAewoe TOD ayiov émurkó- 
mov koi paptvpos `Lyvoríou` wv? m 
yàp Oikaíov pet éykopíov M. 
Jem Ty: 


Thus in this section the Antiochene story is followed as regards the 


two main points in which it differs from the Roman—the devouring of 
the body with the exception of the harder bones and the translation of 
the reliques to Antioch. At the same time portions of the Roman 
story relating to both these points are introduced with modifications. 
(i) The wild beasts in the Roman story are said to *crush him to 
death only’ (dwézwav póvov), this mode of death being invented to 
account for the body being preserved whole. The incident of the 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 375 
‘crushing’ is retained, but the qualifying adverb ‘only’ (móvov) is omitted, 
and the beasts proceed to devour the body. (ii) The deposition of the 
reliques and gatherings of the Roman brethren to commemorate the 
martyr are also adopted from the Roman story; but the account is 
introduced by the words ‘sed tunc, to show that this was only their 
temporary resting-place, prior to their translation to Antioch, 

Š 49 (pp. 543—545) ‘et dum nos noctem...Januarias,’ the account 
of the appearances of Ignatius to his friends on the night after the 
martyrdom, from Mart. Ant. 7 éyévero 88 rañra ... pakapisavres vOv 
ayvov ; but the date is transferred from the beginning to the end of this 
section; the day is altered from xiii Kal. Jan. to ix Kal. Jan. (apparently 
to suit the Armenian Calendar); and the names of the consuls are 
omitted. 

8 50 (p. 545) is an addition of the editor, as already stated, 

Š 51 (pp. 545, 547) ‘Novit ejus martyrium ... gavisuros esse,’ from 
Mart. Rom. 12 bev Oë avro ... dpednOyoecbe, the passage of Eusebius 
containing the testimony of Irenæus and Polycarp respecting Ig- 
natius. 

Š 52 (p. 547) runs ‘Pone verba Polycarpi addit Eusebius Wud qui- 
dem, quod de sancto Ignatio erat et martyrium ejus Aucusque ; excepit 
episcopatum Antiochiae Heron.’ This corresponds to Mart. Rom. 12 
roro 'Lyvaríov +ó papripiov ... "Hpov, where however the name of Eu- 
sebius is not mentioned. The editor then continues ‘At pone has 
Eusebianas sectiones rursus profert collectio [i.e. Actorum] tanquam ex 
ore genuini auctoris sic.’ The words which follow are an amalgama- 
tion: 


‘Memoriam Deo dilecti et pro- xol écTw ý} van ToU Oeopihe- 


bi athletae Ignatii in Hrotitz men- 
sis die primo [secundum Graecos 
Decembr. 20] manifestavimus vobis 
et diem ut tempore martyrii con- 
gregati participes fiamus ... in sae- 
cula saeculorum. Amen.’ 


erárov Kal yevvaíov uáprvpos “Lyva- 
tiov pyri avéjo veounvia M. R. 12. 
epavepicapev vpiv kal THY ýuépav 
Kal TOV xpóvov, iva Kata TOV kupov 
TOU papTupiov cwvvayópevou KoWwVd- 


apv M. A. 7. 


peev...€ls aidvas. 


This date, rst Hrotitz (ie. July), taken from the Roman story, is 
quité inconsistent with the previous date, ix Kal. Jan., modified from 


the Antiochene. 


5. The two documents last mentioned, while combining the 
Antiochene and Roman stories, appropriate not only the incidents but 


the very language of these narratives. 


The Acts which bear the name 


376 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


of Symeon the Metaphrast use the materials much more freely’. With 
a higher literary aim, the author recasts both the diction and the inci- 
dents, toning down the ruggedness of the one and rejecting the more 
revolting features of the other. But though he alters without scruple, 
it is easy to trace the influence of one or other of the independent 
narratives throughout the main part of his composition. Like the 
author of the Armenian Acts, he borrows the dispute with Trajan from 
the Roman story and transfers it in like manner to Antioch. The 
discussion however is much curtailed, and the tortures are omitted. 
At the commencement he introduces the story that Ignatius was the 
child whom our Lord took up in His arms and blessed (§ 1); and at 
the close, where he mentions the translation of the reliques from Rome 
to Antioch (§ 24), he seems to be recalling the language of S. Chrysos- 
tom in his panegyric on the martyr (Of. 11. p. 600 B, ed. Bened.). 
With these exceptions, he does not appear to employ any other sources 
of information but the two independent Acts of Martyrdom, which he 
amalgamates. 

Our first impulse is to suppose that the Metaphrast had before him 
not the two independent narratives, but the same combined narrative 
which.the Armenian translated from the Greek into his own language. 
The discussion on the name ®eodopos from the Antiochene story is 
interrupted in the same way by interposing the altercation with Trajan 
from the Roman story ; and in the account of the scene in the theatre 
and the disposal of the reliques there is a similar juxtaposition of 
features derived from both narratives. But a closer examination dispels 
this first impression. The Metaphrast preserves portions from each 
story, which are not found in the combined narrative of the Armenian 
Acts. ‘Thus for example these last-mentioned Acts have nothing corre- 
sponding to Š 4 xal ri éore Oeodopos ; and 20. ri dé fpeis; ov cot Soxodpev 
x.t.A. of the Metaphrast, which are adopted and adapted from Mart. 
Ant. 2, or again to Š 27 dxovoas òè oAAà x... of the Metaphrast, which 
is taken from the account of Pliny’s letter to Trajan in Mart. Rom. 11. 
Nor again is the sequence the same in the Metaphrast as in the Arme- 
nian Acts. Thus in § 4 of the Metaphrast we have in close proximity 
two pieces of conversation, a? otv ó èv éavrQ tov Xpwrróv repipépwv; vai, 
dot, yéyparrtar ydp’ "Evoucjac «.7.d., and Ov ei koi aùròs éréyvos ... povi- 
Morepa, which appear at an interval of 30 chapters and in the reversed 


1 It did not seem worth while to reprint tions of Cotelier, Petermann (p. 472), 
the Acts of the Metaphrast in the present Dressel (p. 350), Zahn (p. 316), and 
volume, as they have no independent Funk (11. p. 246). The text of this last 
value. They will be found in the edi- edition is founded on fresh collations. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 377 


order in the Armenian version (§ 36, and § 6). It seems probable 
therefore that the Metaphrast fitted together the two stories for himself ; 
but if he used a combined narrative, it must have been somewhat diffe- 
rent from that which was in the hands of the Armenian translator. 


3: 


It remains to enquire whether either of the two Acts of Martyrdom, 
which alone have an independent character, the Antiochene and the 
Roman, deserves any consideration as regards hestorical credibility. 


And here we may at once dismiss the Roman Acts, for internal 
evidence condemns this work as a pure romance. The exaggerated 
tortures inflicted on the saint, the length and character of the discourses 
attributed to him, and the strange overtures made to him by the emperor, 
all alike are fatal to the credit of the narrative. 

Moreover, the writer is not even consistent with himself. He gives 
the year of the emperor’s reign and the names of the consuls at the 
time of the martyrdom (§ 1, see the note). The one date is irrecon- 
cilable with the other. He states also that letters reached Trajan from 
Pliny after the martyrdom. The receipt of these letters is represented 
as following. so immediately on this event, that they influence the em- 
peror in the disposal of the body (811). This statement again cannot 
be harmonized with either of the dates given in the opening chapter. 
The year of the emperor's reign points to A.D. 106, or IO5 at the 
earliest; the names of the consuls give A.D. 104: but the proconsul- 
ship of Pliny in Bithynia, and the consequent letters respecting the 
Christians, cannot date before about A.D. 112 (see below, p. 393 sq). 

Nor is there any reason for supposing that this document was 
founded on an earlier writing or tradition. Zahn indeed has en- 
deavoured to show this (Z. v. A. p. 31 sq), but his evidence to my mind 
fails to establish his point. 

(1) His first witness is Jerome. This father (Catal. 16), after giving 
an account of the letters of Ignatius which is taken altogether from 
Eusebius (ZZ. Z. iii. 36), adds; ‘Quumque jam damnatus esset ad bestias, 
- ardore patiendi, cum rugientes audiret leones, ait, Zyumentum Christi 
sum ; dentibus bestiarum molar, ut pants mundus inveniar. Passus est 
anno decimo (v. l. undecimo) Trajani: reliquiae corporis ejus Antio- 
chiae jacent extra portam Daphniticam in coemeterio. So at least this 
father’s text is read in the common editions. In like manner our 


378 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


martyrologist ascribes these same words to Ignatius ($ ro), when he is 
actually in the amphitheatre and sees the wild beasts let loose’. And 
as Jerome was several times at Antioch from A.D. 373 onward and held 
intimate relations with the Antiochene Church, it is argued by Zahn 
that he derived this tradition from Antioch itself, where also he learnt 
about the burial place of Ignatius. 

But what was Jerome’s position with relation to Ignatius? There is 
no evidence that he had ever seen the Ignatian letters. He only twice 
elsewhere quotes or attempts to quote Ignatius. The one quotation 
(Comm. in Matth. i. $ 1, Op. Vil. p. 12) is a stock passage from Zf/es. 
19, and occurs in a work of Origen Hom. vi in Luc. 1 (Op. 111. p. 938), 
which Jerome himself translated. The other (adv. Pelag. ill. 2, Of. 11. 
p. 783) is a mere blunder; for the words which he ascribes to Ignatius 
belong to Barnabas, and here again he probably owed the quotation to 
Origen, misnaming however the author. In this very notice of Ignatius 
in the Catalogue he borrows the whole of the preceding account of the 
life and letters from Eusebius; but even thus he falls into a strange 
blunder. Misled by an expression of Eusebius (rj Xuvpvaíov éxxAnoia, 
idiws re TO raúrys powyyovuévo Hoivkápro), he identifies the Epistle to 
the Smyrnzeans with the special letter to Polycarp, and consequently 
quotes as from the latter a passage which Eusebius gives as from the 
former (Smyrn. 3). When therefore we find that his account of the saying 
of Ignatius in the amphitheatre has likewise a parallel in the narrative 
of Eusebius, which he might easily misunderstand so as to bear this 
sense, we are led perforce to conclude that here also he was indebted to 
this same source. The words of Eusebius are: ‘And Irenæus also 
knows of his martyrdom and makes mention of his letters, saying thus : 
As one of our own people said, when he was condemned to wild beasts for 
his testimony (poprvpíav) to God; I am the wheat of God, and I am 
ground (¿À Qopa) by the teeth of wild beasts, that T may be found pure 
bread. The saying occurs in Rom. 5, whence Irenzeus doubtless de- 
rived it; but the language of this father, though not incorrect, is suffi- 
ciently ambiguous to mislead one unacquainted with the letters, and 
Jerome accordingly, if the common text be correct, has transferred the 
saying to the time of the martyrdom, embellishing it with a rhetorical 


1 Pearson (Vind. Zen. p. 189) suggests this view untenable. With more cogency 
that Jerome did not really mean to as- Pearson urges (pp. 189 sq, 610) that it 
cribe these words to Ignatius at the time does not matter what Jerome meant, 
of martyrdom ; but if we retain the com- since his information is derived at second 
mon text, which Pearson had before him, hand from Eusebius. 

I agree with Zahn (p. 32) in considering 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 379 


flourish of his own, ‘quum rugientes audiret leones.’ But the correct 
text appears to be ‘et ardore patiendi rugientes audiret leones,’ and 
this probably means that in his eagerness for martyrdom the saint 
already heard by anticipation the roaring of the lions. The author of 
these Roman Acts, who likewise had Eusebius before him, though not 
unacquainted with the epistles themselves, has made the same mistake 
Which Jerome is supposed to have made. 

(2) The second passage, to which Zahn refers, is taken from the 
panegyric of Chrysostom on Ignatius. The words of Chrysostom are : 
‘Therefore that all the inhabitants of Rome might learn these things 
in deed, God allowed the saint to be martyred (reXeww6yvar) there. 
And that this was the reason, I will make good (rotro murtuicopar) 
from the very manner of his death. For he did not receive the sen- 
tence of condemnation (rjv xaradicdloveay éd€aro Widov) outside the 
walls, in a dungeon (é Bapá6po), nor in a law court, nor in any corner; 
but in the midst of the theatre, while the whole city was seated over- 
head, he underwent this form of martyrdom (rov tod paprupiov Tporrov), 
wild beasts being let loose upon him that he might erect a trophy 
against the devil before the eyes of all, etc. (Of. 11. p. 599).’ These words 
are taken to mean that the actual conviction of the saint took place 
at Rome, as represented in the Roman Acts. This interpretation 
seems to me to be more than doubtful in a highly rhetorical passage 
as this is^ But even if it were correct, the passage would only 
show that Chrysostom drew his own inference from the letters, just 
as the author of our Acts did. The expression kardkpvros (Rom. 4, 
Trall. 3, Ephes. 12) is most naturally interpreted to mean that the 
conviction had already taken place; but this inference that the final 
sentence had been pronounced is not quite certain, and the fears else- 
where expressed by Ignatius lest he should be robbed of the martyr’s 
crown by the interference of the Romans might easily suggest the 
opposite conclusion, as it has done to some modern critics. 

Nor can any inference, I think, be drawn from another passage of 
Chrysostom (p. 600 a), ‘He considered the mouths of these (the wild 
beasts) to be much less savage (moAAó ... yuepwrepa) than the tongue of 
the tyrant. And reasonably too (xai pda cixotws); for while it invited 
him to gehenna, their mouths escorted him to a kingdom.’ ‘There are 


1 The expression z karaðıkáýovsav Tporov bmémewe, suggests the former mean- 
&üé£aro y/j$orv is as applicable to the exe- ing. Moreover the preceding words, ékec 
cution as to the delivery of the sentence ; TeAeLWOHvaL, ÈE abroÜ ToU Tpbmrou THs reXev- 
and the expression which balances it in Tis, have no reference at all to the trial, 
the antithetical clause, rò» rot japruplov but refer solely to the actual martyrdom, 


380 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


indeed passages in our Acts ($$ 2, 5) to which the allusion might con- 
veniently be referred. But this contrast between the temporal and the 
eternal tortures was an obvious commonplace of martyrologies; and 
the threats and blandishments of a tyrant were almost a necessity in 
such a scene. The elements moreover of Chrysostom’s rhetoric are 
found in the language of Ignatius himself, Rom. 5, 6, 7, where he defies 
the present tortures for the sake of the future kingdom and denounces 
the attempts of ‘the prince of this world’ to corrupt his mind and divert 
him from his purpose. 

(3) Zahn’s third argument is built on a coincidence with the spurious 
Epistle to the Antiochenes. In the Acts of Martyrdom (§ 6) Ignatius, 
addressing Trajan, describes the Christians as ‘obedient to rulers 
whereinsoever the obedience is free from peril’ (vrotaccopevous dpxovow 
èv ots axivdvvos 9 vrotayy); while to the Antiochenes he is made to 
write (Š 11), ‘Be ye obedient to Cæsar, whereinsoever the obedience is 
free from peril’ (rà. Kaicapi vrord-yqre èv ois axivdvvos xj vrotayy). Such 
a coincidence of course cannot be accidental; and Zahn supposes that 
the saying in these Acts and the injunction in the letter were both 
derived from a common tradition. He puts aside the alternative solu- 
tion, that the writer of the Acts took the saying from the spurious 
epistle, arguing that the martyrologist is only acquainted with the Epistle 
to the Romans of the seven older letters, and that therefore we cannot 
suppose him to have had any knowledge of one of the later and spurious 
epistles. Now it is true, that he does not elsewhere betray any distinct 
acquaintance with any other Ignatian letter besides the Epistle to the 
Romans; but his subject matter naturally led him to quote this and 
this only. The same is the case also in the Menza and elsewhere, 
whensoever writers are especially concerned with the martyrdom and 
the facts connected with it. In such cases the argument from silence 
ceases to have any value. But I observe that Rhegium is twice men- 
tioned by our martyrologist (Š r ézi tiv Opdkmv kai ‘Pýyiov, Š 2 " Apavres 
ovv ao ‘Pyyiov); and the name of this same place occurs in one of the 
spurious epistles (Philipp. 15 avvrvxdv epi ‘Pýyiov), but no where else 
(so far as I remember) in connexion with the history of Ignatius. More- 
over in these Acts and in the spurious epistles alike it is the only 
place named between the same limits—Thrace or Philippi to the East, 
and Rome to the West. But more important still is the fact, which 
Zahn overlooks, that our martyrologist quotes the Epistle to the Romans 
from the interpolator's recension. ‘This, I think, is clear from § 2 where 
Ignatius says, ov ydp tov viv àyomá aidva, GÀXd Tov rtp ¿wo daro avóvro. 
kal dvaaTávro. Xpwrróv, compared with a passage in Rom. 6, which stands 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 381 


in the genuine Ignatius éxetvoy Lyra «àv Vmép wv dzoÜavóvra, ékéivoy 
Géo rov 80 Huds avacrávra, but is read by the interpolator éxetvov lyre 
Tov Vmip wv dzoÜavávra kal dvacrávra. Moreover in other passages 
our martyrologist reproduces expressions that were first inserted into 
the Epistle to the Romans in the interpolator's recension, though they 
have also crept into the text of the genuine Ignatius in later authorities ; 
e.g. comp. § 2 oure Baorrelas koomiks èpieuai with Rom. 4 pendev émi- 
Ovpety Koopuxdv, ib. ri yàp adednOjooua ¿Qy tov Koopov dAoy kepbjac 
Tv 08 Yuyýv pov uo ÜQ with Rom. 6 ri ydp wheretrar avOpwros éàv x. TAN 
Š 3 9 piv mpóorkapos 6 &è alóvios with Rom. 3 rà yap BXerópeva ™poo- 
kapa rà 0 uù) Berdpeva aidvia, 8 IO otros yap éorw davacias kal ów, 
os aiwviov with Rom. 7 dprov lwis...xat rópa... dévvaos Lon. It is 
worthy of notice also that the rare word &Xemós occurs both in 
these Acts $ 1o and in Ps-Ign. Antioch. 6 (though only as a various 
reading), and that 2 Cor. vi. 14 Sq is quoted both by our martyrologist 
$ 4, and in Ps-Ign. Ephes. 16. 

But, if this narrative must be relegated to the region of pure ro- 
mance, is it possible to determine the place or time of writing ? 

As regards the /ace, our first impulse is to attribute it to Rome, 
since Rome is the centre of interest in the story (see above, p. 370). 
But inasmuch as there is every reason to suppose that the Greek is the 
original language of the document, and it is certain that the Roman 
Church had ceased to speak Greek commonly long before this narra- 
tive can have been written, this hypothesis must be abandoned. 
Certain indications seem to me to point directly to Egypt, and therefore 
probably to Alexandria, as its birth-place. "The date of the anniversary 
is given according to the Macedonian, and therefore Alexandrian, 
nomenclature of the months as the rst of Panemus (for there can be 
little doubt that this was the original form of the notice, and that it has 
been altered to Dec. 20 in some authorities to conform to the later 
Greek festival of the martyrdom). There is good reason also for 
believing that this day, the 1st of July, corresponding to the 7th of the 
native Egyptian month Epiphi, was the day assigned to Ignatius in the 
Egyptian calendar, which in this respect differed from all the other 
known calendars whether Eastern or Western. Again, the emphatic 
attack on the animal worship which prevailed in Egypt (§ 4) seems to 
show a local interest in this form of paganism, just as in the earliest 
Sibylline Oracles, which emanated from Egypt, we find the same pheno- 
menon (prooem. 60—65, 70 sq, iii. 29 sq, v. 77, 278 sq). Lastly, we 
find this narrative translated into the Coptic, whereas on the other 
hand the Antiochene story of the martyrdom does not appear, so far as 


382 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


we know, to have found its way into the native Egyptian Church. The 
relations between Alexandria and Rome were sufficiently close to 
account for the circulation of these Acts in the Western Church, while 
the special prominence assigned to Rome in the narrative would secure 
for them a favourable reception there. ‘To account for this prominence 
no recondite motive need be sought. A romance writer, founding his 
story on the single fact that Ignatius was martyred at Rome, would 
naturally assume that his trial also took place in the metropolis and 
that his reliques were deposited there. The one inference which may 
be safely drawn from this treatment is the complete isolation of the 
writer from the influences of Antiochene sentiment and Antiochene 
tradition’. 

The Zie of writing can only be determined within very rough limits. 
The writer is evidently acquainted with the Lclestastical History of 
Eusebius. Several facts and expressions in the opening chapter (e.g. 
pera. eripseheotarns dpovpdv pudrakys, aro Xvopías émi vv "Popaíov vw, 
ms eis tov Xpıoròv évexa paptupias, Quà rs Asias) are taken from this 
father’s account of Ignatius (Æ. Z. ili. 36); and the notice of the 
correspondence between Pliny and Trajan, together with the testimonies 
from Irenæus and Polycarp and the name of Ignatius’ successor, at 
the close, is derived from the same source (7. Z. iii. 33, 36). More- 
over, as we have seen, there are good reasons for believing that the 
writer was acquainted with the interpolated recension of the Ignatian 
Epistles, which probably belongs to the latter half of the fourth century 
and cannot well have been earlier. These facts furnish us with a 
terminus a quo. For the terminus ad quem, the Coptic papyrus at Turin 
may perhaps prove an important witness; but of its probable date I am 
not able to say anything. Failing this, we have recourse to quotations 
and references ; and here our earliest witnesses are Latin writers. The 
account of Ignatius in the Martyrology of Ado (t A.D. 875) is largely 
taken from this story. Ado however had it before him, not in its 
original form, but in the combined narrative of the Bollandist Acts. 
This is also the case with other Latin Martyrologies of the 9th cen- 
tury and later, such as the so-called Bede and Usuard. We must 


1 Any one writing at the close of the — Antiochene tradition point not to the 
4th century or after, if he knew anything — Colbertine [i.e. Antiochene in my nomen- 
of Antioch, must have known that it — clature], but to the Vatican [i.e. Roman] 
claimed to have the reliques of Ignatius. Acts, The tradition may be worthless ; 
This consideration seems to me to be but, such as it is, it must be looked ud 
decisive against the conclusion of Zahn altogether in the former. 

(Z. v. A. p. 53) that all traces of a fixed 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 383 


therefore allow time for its combination with the Antiochene Acts 
and for translation into Latin before this date. ‘The corresponding 
Greek witnesses are later. The Menwa for Dec. 20 show a know- 
ledge of the Roman as well as of the Antiochene Acts ; but whether 
they were used separately, or in a combined form, may be open to 
question. Zahn (Z v. A. p. 28) argues from the expression ovSypots čvvér 
(p. 143, ed. Venet. 1863), that the compiler must have used the same 
combined narrative which is preserved in the Armenian version. The 
Armenian Acts (§ 31) also introduce the epithet ferrezs ungulis, where 
the Greek has merely rots óvué, (Š 9). But this inference from the 
insertion of a single obvious word is not conclusive. In § 4 this same 
epithet is supplied by the Coptic version. In the Menology of Basil 
Porphyrogenitus also (circ. A.D. 980), under Jan. 29, a knowledge of 
these Acts appears (Patrol. Graec. CXVII. 284, Migne). The Laus Heronts 
is another and probably an earlier witness ; but of its date we have no 
evidence. Ussher was disposed to assign it to the author of the spurlous 
and interpolated Ignatian letters (Zen. et Pol. Mart. p. 1 31). It has 
seemed hitherto to be a sufficient answer to this hypothesis that the 
Laus Heronis, existing only in Latin, was probably written originally 
in this language (Zahn Z. v. A. P- 38). But the discovery of a Coptic 
version alters the case. It is not very probable that a Coptic version 
would be translated from Latin, and we are led therefore to postulate a 
Greek original. Ussher’s hypothesis however has nothing to recommend 
it. We might with greater plausibility urge that this document pro- 
ceeded from the same author as our Acts, to which it is attached in 
the Coptic version. But however this may be, the writer seems to be 
acquainted with our story; for he speaks of Ignatius as ‘confounding 
Trajan and the senate of Rome! On the whole we may say that these 
Roman Acts cannot well have been written before the fifth century, 
and probably were not written later than the sixth. 


The claims of the Antiochene Acts deserve greater consideration. 
Their substantial genuineness has been maintained by Ussher, Pearson, 
and Leclerc, among earlier critics, and by a considerable number of 
more recent writers. But the objections which have been urged against 

them of late, more especially by Uhlhorn (Die Lenatianischen Briefe p. 
248 sq) and Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 41 sq), must be felt to have the greatest 
weight ; and the only question which can now be seriously entertained 
is whether—though spurious in their present form—they may not have 
incorporated some earlier and authentic document and thus contain a 
residuum of fact. This question will now be considered, 


384 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


1. The internal evidence is decidedly adverse to their claims to be 
regarded as an authentic document, either wholly or in great part. 
The difficulties under this head are as follows. 

(i) These Acts are not consistent with themselves. They give the 
year of Trajan in which the martyrdom occurred (§ 2), and the names 
of the consuls for the year (§ 7). But the two are not easily recon- 
cilable (see the note on $ 7 Xéópa xoi Sevexiwvos «.7.d.). Still no 
great stress can be laid upon this discrepancy, since the names of the 
consuls might easily have been a later insertion. 

(ii) They contradict the genuine Epistles of Ignatius. Eusebius 
has rightly inferred from the letters that the martyr was carried over- 
land through Asia Minor (H. Z. iii 36 rv 9v `Acías dvaxopudyv... 
mo.ovpevos); and in this he is followed by the author of the Roman 
Acts. But these Antiochene Acts state that he set sail from Seleucia 
the port of Antioch, and went by sea straight to Smyrna (§ 3). This 
statement conflicts directly with several notices in the epistles. "Thus 
Ignatius in one passage says that *even those churches which did not 
lie on his route went before him from city to city’ (Rom. 9). As the 
letter is written from Smyrna, the expression is wholly irreconcilable with 
the sea voyage of our martyrologist (see the note, p. 232). Again, 
writing to the Philadelphians, he speaks of certain things which hap- 
pened when he was among them (Jag. 7), and throughout this 
epistle a personal visit to Philadelphia is implied (see above, pp. 241, 
251, 265, 266, 267) ; but for such a visit the sea voyage leaves no place. 
Moreover in a third passage (om. 5) he speaks of travelling ‘by land 
and sea'—an expression which is explicable indeed, but appears 
somewhat strained, if we adopt the account of our Antiochene Acts 
(see the note p. 211). And generally it may be said that the incidents 
of the journey, more especially the movements of the delegates 
from the different churches, are involved in the greatest difficulties 
by this sea voyage. Another point of conflict with the letters is 
the notice of Polycarp. In the epistles Ignatius apparently makes 
the acquaintance of Polycarp for the first time (oye. 1); in our Acts 
on the other hand they are represented as having been fellow 
disciples under S. John in years gone by (§ 3). Again, the notices of 
the persecution in the two documents are not in harmony. In the 
epistles the Churches of Asia Minor appear to enjoy quiet, and even 
to the Church of Antioch peace is restored while the saint is still on 
his journey (PAad. ro, Smyrn. x1, Polyc. 7). But in our Acts the 
persecution is coextensive with the empire. It is a resolute determi- 
nation on the part of Trajan to crush the Gospel, as he had already 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 385 


crushed the Dacians and Scythians, as he intended shortly to crush the 
Parthians (§ 2). 

(ui) Not less irreconcilable are the incidents in these Acts with 
external history. History is silent about any visit of Trajan to Antioch, 
or any expedition against Parthia, at this time. His actual campaign 
against the Parthians, on which occasion he made a long sojourn at 
Antioch, took place several years later than the date assigned to the 
martyrdom in these Acts, whether the year of Trajan’s reign (§ 2) or the 
names of the consuls (§ 7) be taken to determine the time. In either 


peror's earlier campaigns in the North and his later campaigns in the 
East, during which interval he was residing in Rome and Italy, and 
busying himself chiefly with public works (see below, p. 407 sq). So 
also the account of the persecution, to which I have already referred, 
is too far removed from the actual occurrences to have proceeded from 
a contemporary writer, however prejudiced. It is equally irreconcilable 
with Trajan’s own rescript to Pliny, in which, so far from entertain- 
ing this dogged purpose of stamping out Christianity, the emperor 
betrays a temporising policy, being desirous as far as possible to 
minimise the judicial proceedings against the Christians, and with 
the account of Eusebius, who correctly describes the sufferings of the 
believers under Trajan as confined to particular localities and due to 
popular excitement (A. £. ili. 32 wepukós kai card modes éÉ avactdcens 
Ouo). 

(iv) Moreover, the language used from time to time is such as a 
contemporary writer could hardly have employed. The opening chap- 
ters for instance, giving the political events which form the setting of 
the narrative, are conceived altogether in the manner of a historian 
writing long after the occurrences, A contemporary, addressing con- 
temporaries, would not have introduced this elaborate statement which 
was superfluous alike for himself and for his readers. The same remark 
applies also to the notice of the reliques at the end. Here the incon- 
gruity reaches a climax. The document professes to be a narrative 
written by companions and eye-witnesses (SŠ 5, 6, 7) soon after the event 
for the sake of certifying their readers —apparently the members of the 
Antiochene Church—as to the exact date of the martyrdom, that so 
writers and readers might all meet together and keep the festival on the 
right day (§ 7). But under these circumstances why should they tell 
their readers that only the harder bones had been preserved, and that 
these ‘had been carried back to Antioch and deposited there in a sar- 
cophagus as an invaluable treasure’ (§ 6)? Later ages might be in- 


[oN ILS 25 


386 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


terested in such information, but to the persons addressed it was quite 
superfluous. 


2. Nor are these Acts discredited by their internal character alone. 
The external testimony is notably defective. Not a single witness to 
their existence has been adduced till the close of the sixth century. 
They were unknown to Eusebius who, as we have seen (p. 384), cor- 
rectly sends Ignatius by land to Smyrna, thus contradicting the story of 
our Acts in one of its main features. Moreover Eusebius says nothing 
of the altercation with Trajan, of whose intervention he betrays no 
knowledge. Lastly; when he has occasion to mention the account of 
Polycarp’s martyrdom, he speaks of it as the earliest written narrative 
of the kind with which he was acquainted (ZZ. Z. iv. 15 avayxaotarov 
òè abro0 rò rédos èyypápos 7dn Pepopevov yyodpar Bev umum TIS 
icropias xatafécOa). We cannot but infer from his language on this 
occasion that if he had likewise had this Ignatian martyrology in his 
hands he would have felt an equally strong ‘necessity’ to insert 
extracts from it. Nor again does it appear to have been known at 
Antioch at the close of the fourth century ; for Chrysostom in his pane- 
gyric on S. Ignatius makes no use whatever of its incidents, but on the 
contrary assumes, like Eusebius, that the saint journeyed to Rome mainly 
by land (ai kara tyv 000v wodes...eféreurov k.v.X., TOOTA SuddoKwY kara 
: Tücav TOW, Tals èv TO péso Kemmévars TOAETW aracats SidaoKados x.T.À.), 
though his language is not so explicit on this point as the historian’s. 
This father does indeed mention the translation of the martyr's remains 
from Rome to Antioch (p. 600 B)—of which Eusebius says nothing— 
and here is a point of coincidence with our Acts ; but this, whether true 
or false, must have been a vulgar tradition of the Antiochenes quite 
independently of any written sources of information. Nor again is there 
any reason for supposing that Jerome (Vir. ///. 16) was acquainted with 
this narrative. He too, like Chrysostom, mentions the reliques as being 
at Antioch ; but inasmuch as he speaks of their lying ‘in the Cemetery 
outside the Daphnitic gate,’ he must have derived his information from 
some independent source, probably from oral tradition. Nor can any 
inference be drawn from the fact that Jerome uses the expression *quum 
jam navigans Smyrnam venisset’; since he, like the author of our Acts, 
would independently assume that Ignatius was conveyed to Smyrna in 
the easiest and most usual way, though a more careful reading of 
Eusebius, whose text was before him, might have saved him from the 
error. 


The first coincidence of any value appears in Evagrius who wrote at 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 


387 


the close of the sixth century, and this is explicit enough. The notice 
is significant and deserves to be given at length’. 


‘At that time also,’ 


! Evagr. ZZ. E. i. 16 Tére kal "Tyvdrwos 
Ó Bearréctos, ws "edy T@‘Prrope cov éré- 
pois tordpyrar, émerðh ye ws éfloóNero Ta gov 
[MS rddwv] ras Gv Onplow éc xnkàs yarré- 
pasév TQ THs ‘Pounsdupibedrpy [éreXeus01] 
Kal [Érevra] dua rôv Uroepbévraw ad po- 
Tépwv orv, & Tpos Thy "Avrióxov Te- 
Koi 0m, èv Tq KaÀouuévo Kotunrnply [kare- 
TEOn], uerar(8erat odors torepov xpóvots, 
ÜmoÜeuévov ToU mavaydbov Geop Oeo8ocíq 
Tov Ócoóópor uelfoct TUTO Q4 TuLais, iepóv 
Te wdhat Tots daluoow åveruévov (Tvxatov 
Tots émuxXeop[ots dvbuacro) rq AOoPopw kal 
Maprupe dvabeiva: kal onkos ebayhs kal 
TEMEVOS &yiov T "Lyvarlo Tó rdda Ty- 
xao» yéyove, TOv lepóv adrod NewWdvey 
ETà mourns lepüs ava Thy TÓNW èr 
oxjmaros évexOevrwy kal karà rò TEMEVOS 
TeÜÉvrewv. Oev kal OnmoreAys éopri) kal 
mávónuos edppocivn MEXpls dv TeNetrat, 
TpÒS TÒ Heyaorperéstepov rod iepdpxou 
Tpnyopiov ravrnv ¿ËdpayTros. yéyove dé 
Tatra éxetOev evOev[........, ], T00 Oeo ràs 
ócías Gv åylwv Tysdvros pXNHAS K.T.À. 
ToUro Ò dpa Ñv Tò oikovouovuevov Tapa TOO 
guTipos Oeo0, ws dv kal riv Mewaprupy- 
Kórww 7} divapus &xdnros Z, kal roô &ylov 
MÁprupos rà eùayi Aeljava, eùaye? mere- 
vex0etev xdpq, kadtNorw Tenere, TIMOLA. 
The passage is translated literally in the 
text, without any attempt to improve 
upon the style of Evagrius which is as 
bad as possible. The words which I 
have inserted in brackets [] seem to be 
required to complete the sense. The pas- 
sage is obviously mutilated, as the break 
in the construction after éxe@Oev e&Oev 
shows, though commentators do not 
appear to have noticed the fact. By 
this mutilation an apparent confusion is 
created between the original translation 
of the bones from Rome to Antioch, and 
the later translation of them from the 
Cemetery of Antioch to the Tychzeum in 


writes Evagrius, 


‘the divine Ignatius (as 


this city. Hence the erroneous heading of 
the chapter, "Orws 6 8codópos *Tyvdruos èk 
‘Pouns dvaxopcbels mapa Oeo8ocíov èv 
" Avrtox elg kareré@y, which must have 
been added after the text was mutilated, 
The mutilation had already taken place, 
and the false heading had been prefixed, 
before the time of Nicephorus Callistus 
H. E. xiv. 64 (Migne's Patrol. Graec. 
CXLVI. p. 1212), who derives his account 
from Evagrius; for (1) The heading to 
his chapter is substantially the same; (2) 
He writes dca 8? cTeppórepa kal áópórepa 
epieXéAeurro TOv doréwy ékeigd wy [i.e. 
év 'Póuy] ékpómrero, and adds kal oy 
€ketÜüev åpáuevos [9e€000s10s] civ Nam pa 
TH TOUTI ém riv "Avrióxov åvýyaye Xpovov 
TapappuévTos moXÀo0, kal ¿y TQ kaXovuévq 
kouumTwopie cepas karartOnow, iepóv Te 
tuya Saluoow áveuuévov, Ó Tots eX coplots 
Tuxatov dvouacro, TQ beopópy kal uáp- 
Tupt éxaplyero, thus making Theodosius 
transfer the reliques from Rome to 
Antioch, and identifying the sepulchre 
in the Cemetery with the Tychzeum. It 
may be well to add by way of caution 
that in the opening sentence of Nice- 
phorus, “Hy óë r$ rére kal 6 0codópos 
"Lyvários. èk `Póums eis Ti» Keovacravrivov 
ávekouifero, the word Kevoravrirov must 
be regarded as a mere scribe's blunder 
for "Avrióxov (assisted perhaps by the 
contractions). This appears both from 
the parallel passage of Evagrius and from 
the context of Nicephorus, which through- 
out contemplates Antioch and not Con- 
stantinople as the place of translation. 
The Bollandist editors have argued from 
this Kwvorayrivou as if it were genuine. 
For the meaning of ài in the opening 
sentence of Evagrius, 0tà r&v UroAe.püéy- 
Twv áOporépev écrdv, see the note on 
Magn. 2 044 Aauá. It is not easily trans- 
lated in its connexion here. 


2p 


388 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


recorded by Joannes Rhetor and others) —forasmuch as he had met his 
death in the amphitheatre of Rome finding his tomb in the bellies of 
the wild beasts in fulñlment of his own wish, and afterwards, so far as 
regards the tougher bones that remained, which were conveyed back to 
the city of Antiochus, had been deposited in the Cemetery, as it is 
called— was translated long years afterwards, when the good God put 
it into the mind of Theodosius to honor the God-bearer with higher 
honours, and to dedicate to the victorious martyr a sanctuary given over 
from ancient times to the demons, and called the Tychzeum (or Temple 
of Fortune) by the people of the place. Thus the ancient Tychzeum is 
made into a consecrated shrine and holy precinct dedicated to Ignatius, 
his sacred reliques having with sacred pomp been conveyed through 
the city on a car and deposited in the precinct. Whence also a 
public festival and general rejoicing is celebrated down to our own 
times, the archbishop (high-priest) Gregory having exalted this festival 
to greater magnificence.’ ‘This then has providentially been so ordered 
by God our Saviour, that the power also of those who have suffered 
martyrdom might be clearly manifest and the sacred reliques of the 
holy martyr might be translated to a sacred place, being honoured with 
a most beautiful sanctuary.' 

The historian Evagrius himself wrote about the close of the sixth 
century. His history reaches down to A.D. 594, and no later event 
in his own life is on record. The Gregory, whom he mentions, was 
his contemporary and friend, and held the patriarchate of Antioch from 
about A.D. 570 Or 571 tO A.D. 593 or 594. Joannes Rhetor, whose 
authority he quotes, was the author of a history which comprised the 
period from the commencement of the reign of the younger Theodosius 
to the earthquakes and fire at Antioch in A.D. 526 (Evagr. ZZ. Z. iv. 5). 
The translation of the bones of Ignatius, which is recorded, took place 
in the reign of the younger "Theodosius who succeeded to the empire 
as a child, when 7 years old, and reigned from A.D. 408 to A.D. 450. 
'The incident is related immediately after the notices of Isidore of 
Pelusium and Synesius of Cyrene (i. 15) and immediately before the 
account of Attila's invasions. Thus, as a rough approximation, we may 
suppose that the translation to the Tychæum took place about A.D. 
430—440. 

The account here given by Evagrius of the preservation of the 
tougher bones and the conveyance of these reliques from Rome to 
Antioch is TD not independent of the story of our supe o 
(S 6 uova yap Ta TpaxúTepo, TOV ayiwv QUTOÜ Acuj/'àvov wepteAcipOn, à QGTLVO. 
els Tiv "Avrióxeuxy am.ekopía On K.T.À.), and may have been taken directly 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 389 


from it. The alternative remains, that both alike were derived from some 
common source, e.g. the account of Joannes Rhetor ; and this solution 
is far from improbable. However this may be, the narrative of Evagrius 
is highly suggestive as to the origin of these Acts. The translation 
of the martyr’s bones from the Cemetery outside the Daphnitic Gate 
to the Tycheum by Theodosius m would arouse curiosity with 
respect to the history of the reliques. The saint had been devoured 
by wild beasts at Rome, and the presence of his bones at Antioch 
needed explanation. The document would be compiled to gratify this 
curiosity and to supply this explanation. Either at the time of the 
translation, or more probably at some later date, when public interest 
was excited on the subject, as for instance when the patriarch Gregory 
added new splendours to the festival of the martyr, the narrative would 
make its appearance. To this subject I shall have to return again, 
when I come to speak of the change in the day of the saint's com- 
memoration. 

At a later date this document obtains a wide circulation. It finds 
its way into the Aenea. It is translated into Syriac. It is used by 
the Metaphrast. It is combined with the Roman Acts in different 
ways; and, thus combined, it is read not only by Greek-speaking 
Christians, but also in Armenia and in all the Churches of Latin 
Christendom. 

It has been seen then, that these Acts have no claim to be re- 
garded as an authentic narrative. But the possibility remains that they 
may have embodied some earlier document and thus may preserve a 
residuum of genuine tradition. Such a residuum, if it exists at all, 
will naturally be looked for in those portions which profess to be related 
by eye-witnesses, and in which the first person plural is employed. 
But, even when so limited, the hypothesis of authenticity is involved 
in great difficulties. As Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 42 sq) has truly remarked, 
the first person plural in this document does not justify itself in the 
same way as in the Acts of the Apostles. There it is suddenly dropped 
at Philippi, and resumed again at the same place after an interval of 
several chapters and a lapse of several years (Acts XVI. 17, XX, 5). 
Here on the contrary there is no such propriety in its presence or 
absence. If the writers were, as many critics suppose, Philo and 
Rhaius Agathopus, whom we learn from the letters to have been in the 
martyrs company at Troas (Philad. 11, Smyrn. 10, 1 3) the ‘we’ might 
be expected to appear, while the martyr was still on the shores of the 
Ægæan (see above, p. 279). Asa matter of fact, its first occurrence is 
where we should least look for it—on the Tyrrhene Sea, as the ship is 


390 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


approaching the Italian shore (Š 5 ovpious avejous Tpooxpyadpevor Nuets 
piv x.t.d.). Still the objection is very far from being fatal; while on 
the other hand there is at least a naturalness in its introduction without 
any attempt to justify or explain it. Moreover I cannot help feeling 
impressed with the air of truthfulness, or at least of verisimilitude, in some 
incidents in the latter portion of the narrative which have excited the 
suspicions of others. Thus Hilgenfeld (4. V. p. 215) argues that the 
desire of landing at Puteoli, attributed to Ignatius, is due to the writer's 
wish ‘to make his journey to Rome as like as possible to that of the 
Apostle.’ To my mind it suggests the very opposite inference. It is 
not easy to see how two journeys from the shores of the Levant to 
Rome could differ more widely. S. Paul goes by sea to Melita; 
Ignatius crosses over Macedonia and Epirus to Dyrrhachium. S. Paul 
lands at Puteoli; Ignatius is prevented from landing there and dis- 
embarks at Portus. The two journeys in short have nothing in 
common, except the fact that both travellers were on the Adriatic and 
Tyrrhene seas. The voyage of Josephus (Vita 3) bears a much closer 
resemblance to S. Paul’s. On the other hand, if this is not an authentic 
tradition, it shows some artistic skill and very much self-restraint in the 
martyrologist, that having an unfettered license of invention as regards 
his incidents, and remembering, as evidently he does remember, the 
express desire of the saint to tread in the footsteps of S. Paul (Zphes. 
I2 ov yévowó por Vd Ta txvyn evpeOjvo), he not only refrains from 
representing it as fulfilled, but even emphasizes the disappointment of 
the hope. So again, objection has been taken to the appearance of the 
saint to his friends on the night after the martyrdom: (§ 7), as if this 
were impossible in an authentic document. But here too I cannot but 
think that such an apparition was in the highest degree natural after 
the agonizing scenes of the day, and with the tension of feeling which 
they must have left behind in the mourners. If I mistake not, scores 
of parallels could be produced from contemporary and genuine narra- 
tives of the deaths of saints and martyrs in later ages. At the same 
time it is very difficult to separate these incidents from the inauthentic 
references to the reliques and to the day of commemoration with which 
they are closely connected, and which also are given in the first person 
plural (§ 7 é$avepóoapev viv «.7.r.). Still I should be disposed to 
believe, that the martyrologist had incorporated into the latter portion 
of his narrative a contemporary letter of the martyr’s companions con- 
taining an account of the journey from Philippi and the death, though 
freely interpolating and altering it, where he was so disposed. But 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 391 


one consideration is so serious as to be almost fatal to this hypothesis, 
It is extremely improbable that such a document should turn up in the 
fifth or sixth century, though wholly unknown to previous ages. 


4. 


The Chronology of Trajan’s reign requires investigation as a prelimi- 
nary step towards any discussion respecting the time of the martyrdom 
of Ignatius. The labours of Borghesi, Mommsen, and other recent 
critics, have contributed greatly to a more satisfactory arrangement of 
the dates of this period; and the ZZsZ¿ as given by previous writers 
such as Clinton, require considerable modification in consequence. 
The investigations of Borghesi are scattered up and down his works, to 
which frequent references will be given below. Mommsen’s Fasti of 
this reign will be found in his article Zur Lebensgeschichte des jüngeren 
nius in Hermes 111. p. 31 sq. From it I have mainly taken the names 
of the consuls, but not without verification. Under each year I have 
given the typical and important inscriptions, so that the reader may test 
for himself the epigraphical evidence on which the chronology rests’, 


dates given with either his earlier or his 


! For this purpose I have made 
later theory respecting the tribunician 


especial use of the more recent standard 


collections of inscriptions, where the 
genuineness and accurate transcription 
of the documents can be depended upon, 
more especially the Corpus Inscriptio- 
num Latinarum of the Berlin Academy, 
compiled by Mommsen and his fellow- 
labourers. The full and well arranged 
indices of this admirable work have 
been of the greatest use. At the same 
time the reader needs to be warned 
that the years A.D. affixed to the several 
inscriptions, whether in the text or in 
the indices, cannot (at least so far as 
regards Trajan's reign) be accepted with- 
out verification. The years in the text 
and indices frequently do not agree; 
and even in the parts for which Momm- 
sen himself is personally responsible it is 
sometimes impossible to harmonize the 


years. Thus in C. 7. Z. 111. p. 866 (comp. 
Pp: 1110, 1124) June so of Trib. Pot. xi 
is assigned to A.D. 108, whereas it belongs 
to 107 on either reckoning; and in C. Z. Z. 
HI. p. 102 sq Mommsen reckons accord- 
ing to Borghesi's computation of the tri- 
bunician years, not according to either of 
his own. In the volumes for which 
Mommsen is not personally responsible, 
there is still less constancy of reckoning 
in the dates A.D. affixed to the inscrip- 
tions. Klein's Fasz Consulares (1881) 
had not yet appeared when these sheets 
were passed through the press for my first 
edition. Otherwise I should have been 
saved some trouble. I have made use of 
this work, where necessary, for this second 
edition. 


392 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 
CONSULS. Ec EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 
A.D. | C. Antistius Vetus Domitian slain Sept. 18. Acces- 
96 | T: Manlius Valens (x) sion of Nerva. 
A.U.C 
849 
A.D. | ZA. Nerva Augustus 11 | 1 | Trajan adopted about October. 
97 |Z. Verginius Rufus 11 The rst year of his Z7z6. Pot. 
A.U.C begins then (2). 
850 
A.D. | limp. Nerva Augustus iv | 2 | Nerva dies towards the end of 
98 | Zmp. Nerva Trajanus January (3). Accession of Tra- 
A. U.C. Caesar (afterwards 4u- jan at Cologne. He is already 
851 gustus) II Imperator and Germanicus (Plin. 
Paneg. 9). The title Pater Pa- 
triae assumed this year. 
C. Z. L. II. 4933 AVG. GERM . PON- 
TIF. MAX . IMP. TRIB. POTEST. II. 
COSPI. P. Bas COMP ISAT2SA 
4934, HI. 3924. 
A.D. | A. Cornelius Palma 3 | Trajan enters Rome. 

99 | Q. Sostus Senecio C.J. L. vi. 563 AVG.GERM.P.M. 
AUC: TR. B. TIT. COS- ISE. PS CORIDI 
852 IH. p. 863 (Aug. 14), 1X. 728. 

Orelli 449 AVG . GERM. PONT. MAX. 
TRIB. POT. COS. IL. Pa P. DES. HI. ; 
comp. Cohen Méd. Imp. it. 
P. 53- 
A.D. | Imp. Nerva Trajanus| 4 | Pliny’s Panegyric in September. 
100 | Augustus II : C. 7. L. vi. 451 AVG. GERM . PON- 
A.U.C. | Sex. Julius Frontinus 11 TIFICI. MAXIMO. TRIB. POT. IIII. 
853 COS . 11. DESI[C . 1111] (Dec. 29); 
comp. II. 4990, III. 1699, VIII. 
10186, ro210, X. 6819, 6820, 
Ephem. Epigr. 11. p.334. See 
| also Cohen 11. pp. 53, 82 sq. 
A.D. |Zmp. Nerva Trajanus| 5 | The First Dacian War breaks out 
ror | Augustus Iv (4). Trajan leaves Rome in 
A.U.C. | Q. Articuletus Paetus March. Jmperator ii, 
854 | C. Z. L. VI. 1239 AVG. GERMANIC. 


PONTIF. MAX. TRIB. POTEST. V. 
COS. III. P. P. (several times). 
C. Z. L. vi. 2184 [TR . POTES]TATE, 

V..IMP (11, COS Sills Pars 


OF 


IGNATIUS. 393 


A.D. 
IO2 
AUT. 


855 


CONSULS. 


EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 


L. Julius Ursus Servia- 
nus 11 
L. Licinius Sura ur (s) 


Continuance of the First Dacian 
War. Jmperator iii, iv. 

C. Z. L. X. 6931 AVG . GERMANICVS : 
PONT. MAX. TRIB. POT. VI.IMP. 
I . COS. HII . PATER . PATRIAE ; 
comp. X. 6926, 6927, 6928, 
Cohen 11. p. 57, no. 35255953) 
AVG.GERM.P.M. TR.P.VI, with 
R. IMP. IIIT . COS . III. DES. v. 
pos pu S CE 


A.D. 
IO3 
a One 
856 


Imp. Nerva 
Augustus v 
M’. Laberius Maximus n 


Trajanus 


The title Dacicus (perhaps at the 
close of the previous year). Re- 
turn and Triumph of Trajan. 

C. Z. Z. ur. p. 864 [p]acicvs. pon- 
TIFEX. MAXIMV[S. TRIB]VNIC. PO- 
TESTAT. VII. IMP.IIII. P. P. COS. 
v (dated Jan. 19). 

C. Z. L. 11. 4796 AVG. GER. DAC. 
PONT.MAX.TRIB. POT. VII.IMP. 
IHI. COS. V. P. P.; comp. ir. 
4797» VI. 955, 1239 $; VIII. 5325, 
X. 7472; Cohen rr. p. 85, no. 
540 Sq. The inscription, C. 7. 
L. V. 7151, which belongs to 
this year, has IMP. XII, but xi 
must be an error for 1111. 


A.D. 
104 
A.U.C. 
857 


Sex. Attius Suburanus n 


| M. Asinius Marcellus (6) 


C. Z Z. Vi. 956 AVG . GERM. DA- 
CICO. PONT. MAX. TRIB. POT. VIII. 
IMP.IIII. COS, V. P. P. OPTVMO. 
PRINCIPI. 


A.D. 
105 
A.U.C. 
858 


Ti. Julius Candidus Ma- 
rius Celsus 1 

C. Antius A. Julius Quad- 
ratus II 


The Second Dacian War breaks 
out. Trajan leaves Rome in 
June (7). 

C. Z. L. ut. p. 865 sq avevstvs. 
GERMANICVS . DACICVS . PONTI- 
FEX . MAXIMVS . TRIBVNIC . PO- 
TESTAT . VIII. IMP. III. COS. V. 
P.P.(May 13); comp. C. Z7 Z. 
V. 854, VI. 957, VII. II94, X. 

890. 


394 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 
CONSULS. Be EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 
A.D. |Z. Ceiontus Commodus| xo | The Second Dacian War con- 
106 Aurelius Annius Verus tinues. Conquest of Arabia 
PCNA GN Goin eis Cerialis Petraea by Palmas about this 
859 time (8). 
A.D. | L. Licinius Sura 1n rr | End of the Second Dacian War 
107 | Q. Sosius Senecio 11 (o) | (if not at the close of the pre- 
A.U.C. ceding year). Trajan is now 
860 Imperator vi. 
C- Z. L. 1X. 36 AVG. GERM. DACE 
[P]ONT.MAX.TRIB. POT. X1. IM[»]. 
VI.COS. V. P. P., at Brundisium. 
C. Z, ZL. 111. p. 867 AVG. GERMANIC. 
DACICVS . PONTIF; MAXIMVS. TRI- 
BVNIC . POTESTAT . XI . IMP . VI. 
COS. V. P. p. (June 30); comp. 
Vill. 7967, 8315. 
A.D. | Ap. Annius Trebontus | 12 Orelli 787 AVG. GERM.DACICO. PON- 
108 Gallus TIFICI. MAX. TRIBVNIC . POTEST. 
A.U.C. | M. Atilius Metilius Bra- XII. IMP. VI.COS.V.P.P. DE- 
861 dua VICTIS { DACIS I COMP- LONARE 
TIITO274027- 
A.D. | 4. Cornelius Palma 1 13 | C. Z. L. vi. 1260 A[vc]. GERM. 
109 |[Q. Zaebius] Tullus DACIC . [PO]NT . MAX . TR. POT. 
AC. XIII. IMP. VI. COS Van POEM 
862 AQVAM . TRAIANAM . PECVNIA . 
SVA.IN.VRBEM. PERDVXIT. 
C. Z. Z. 1X. 6005 AVG.GERM. DAS 
ci[c].PoNT. MAX. TR. POT. XIII. 
IMP.VI.COS.V.P.P.VIAM. ET. 
PONTES. BENEVENTO . BRVNDI- 
SIVM . PECVNIA. SVA ; comp. C. 
LL. vL 4352, vim S464 ER 
6003, X. 6853. 
A.D. | Ser. Scipio Salvidienus| 14 | C. Z L. ux. p. 868 AVG. GERM. 
IIO Orfitus DACICVS . PONTIF . MAX . TRIBV- 
A.U.C. | M. Peducaeus Priscinus NIC. POTESTAT. XIII1. IMP. VI. 
863 cos.v.P.P.(Feb. 17); comp. 


IX. 37, X. 6835, 6839, 6846. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 395 


CONSULS, ata EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 
A.D. | C. Calpurnius Piso 15 | Pliny assumes the government of 
III | M. Vettius Bolanus Bithynia (ro). 
A.U.C. C. Z. L. IX. 5947 AVG . GERMAN . 
864 DACICVS . PONTIF . [M JAXIMVS . 
TRIB. P[orE]srATE . Xv . IMP. 
VI. COS. V. P. [P. S]vBsTRVCTIO- 
NEM .CONT[RA.L]ABEM. MONTIS. 
FECIT. 
A.D. | Imp. Nerva Trajanus | 16 | Persecution of the Christians in 
II2 Augustus VI Bithynia. Statue erected in the 
A.U.C. | 7: Sextius Africanus Forum of Trajan and inscribed 
865 (C. Z L. vi. 959) avevsto . 
GERMANICO . DACICO . PONTIF , 
MAX. TRIBVNICIA. POTEST . XVI. 
IMP.VI.COS.VI.P.P.OPTIME. 
DE. REPVBLICA . MERITO . DOMI. 
FORISQVE; comp. C. Z. L. VI. 542. 
C. Z LZ. vut 10117 oprimvs . 
[Av]G . GERM . DACIC . PONT . 
[MA]|x . TRIB. POT . XVI . IMP. 
VI.COS.VI.P.P.,at Hippo in 
Africa. 
A.D. | Z. Publilius Celsus n 17 | The Column of Trajan dedicated 
II3 | C. Clodius Crispinus and inscribed (C. Z. Z. vr. 960) 
A.U.C. AVG . GERM . DACICO . PONTIF . 
966 MAXIMO. TRIB. POT. XVII. IMP. 
VI. COS. VI. PVP. 
In the autumn Trajan starts for his 
Parthian expedition (11), passes 
through Athens and Asia Minor, 
and winters at Antioch. 
A.D. | Q. Minntus Hasta 18 | Armenia and Mesopotamia subju- 
114 |Z Manilius Vopiscus gated. Trajan marches to Adia- 
AUC bene. Operations of Lusius. 
867 The senate confers the title of 


Optimus (12) upon Trajan. He 
is afterwards designated Parthi- 
cus (13). -This year also he is 
Imperator vii, viii, ix. He win- 
ters again at Antioch. 


ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


CONSULS, 


TRIB. 
POT. 


EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 


C. I. L. 111. p. 869 OPTIMVS. AVG. 
GERM. DACIC. PONTIF. MAX . TRI- 
BVNIC . POTESTAT . XVIII . IMP. 
VIL: COS . VI. P.P. (Septet), a 
military diploma at Carnuntum 
in Pannonia. 

C. I. L. 1X. 1558 OPTIMO. AVG. 
GERMANICO . DACICO . PONTIF . 
MAX. TRIB. POTEST . XVIII . IMP. 
VII. COS. VI. P. P. FORTISSIMO. 
PRINCIPI. SENATVS. P.Q. R., 
on the arch at Beneventum. 

C. Z. L. 11. 2097 OPTIMO. AVG. GERM. 
DACICO. PARTHICO. PONTIF. MAX. 
TRIB. POT. XVIII. IMP. VII. COS. 
VI. PATRI . PATRIAE, in Baetica. 

Borghesi Œuvres v. 22 OPTIMVS. 
AVG. GERMANICVS. DACICVS. PON- 
TIFEX . MAXIM . TRIB. POT. XVIII. 
IMP.VIIII. P. P. FACIENDAM. CV- 
RAVIT, at Ferentinum. 

Eckhel vi. p. 449 epicr. kal. ceB. 
rep.Aak. with R. 10YAIEWN.TOON. 
Kal. AAOAIKEWN . BZp (the r62nd 
year of Laodicea began in the 
autumn A.D. I14). 


A.D. 
IIS 
A. U.C. 
868 


L. Vipstanzus Messalla 
M. Vergilianus Pedo 


ze 


The great earthquake at Antioch, 
in which Pedo is killed (14). 
In the spring Trajan starts for 
a fresh campaign. The Tigris 
crossed and Adiabene reduced. 
Trajan's stay at Babylon. He 
enters Ctesiphon. The title 
Parthicus confirmed. The sen- 
ate votes honours liberally. JZzz- 
perator x, xi, and perhaps xii. 

C. Z L. vi. 543 OPTIMI . [AVG . 
GERM . DA ]cict . (Id. Jan.). 

C. ZZ 1X. :5894 OPTIMO EN COE 
GERMANIC.DACICO. PONT. MAX. 
TR. POT. XVIII. IMP.IX. COS. VI. 
P . P. PROVIDENTISSIMO . PRIN- 
CIPI. SENATVS.P.Q.R., on the 
arch at Ancona; comp. x. 6887. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 397 


EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS, 


Ephem. Epigr. 11. P- 38 sq (1876) 
OPTIMO . AVG. GER. PARTHICO . 
DACICO. PONTIF. MAXIM.TRIBVN. 
POTEST . XVIIII . IMP . XI. COS. 
VI. P. P. (a correction of C. Z. Z. 
II. 1028), in Baetica. 

Fabretti Zzser. Aed. Pat p. 398, 
no. 289, OPTIMVS . AYG. GER | DA- 
CICVS . TRIBVNIC. POTEST. XIX. ` 
IMP.XI. COS. VI. P. P. FACIVN- 
DVM . CVRAVIT. 

Boeckh Corp. Inscr. Graec. 4948 
L, 16 . AYTOKPATOPOC . KAICAPOC . 
NEPOYA . TPAIANOY . APICTOY . CE- 
Bactoy . TEPMANIKOY . AAKIKOY . 
TOXHN . A (Pachon 30 = May 
24). 


= ee 
TRIB. 
CONSULS. doy 
A.D. | Z. Lamia Aelianus 20 
TREO Am. Vetus 
ACU.C. 
869 


Trajan’s expedition to the Persian 
Gulf. He returns to Babylon. 
Revolt of the subjugated na- 
tions. Operations of Lusius and 
other lieutenants against the re- 
volt. A king given to the Par- 
thians. Uprising of the Jews in 
Cyrene, Egypt, and Cyprus. 
Imperator xiii. 

C. Z. L.X. 16340PTIMO. AVG. GERM. 
DACIC . PARTHIC . PONT. MAX. 
TRIB. POTEST. XX . IMP. XII.COS. 
VI. PATRI. PATR., from Puteoli. 
There is a similar Tunisian in- 
scription, Borghesi Bull, Inst 
Corr. Archeol. 1859, p. 1265 
comp. CoA VT 621. 

C. Z. L. ni. p. 870 oPTIM . ave. 
GERM . DACIC . PARTHIC. PONTIF. 
MAX. TRIB. POTESTAT.XX.IMP. 
XIII . PROCOS. COS. VI. P. P. (Sept. 
8), at Wiesbaden. 

Cohen IL p. 54 OPTIMO. AVG.GERM. 
with R. DAC. PARTHICO . P. M. 
TR.P.XX:COS.VI.P.P. 


398 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 
CONSULS. pie EVENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS. 
A.D. | Q. Aquilius Niger 21 | Lusius crushes the rebellion of the 
117 | M. Rebilus Apronianus Jews. Illness of Trajan. He 
A.U.C. leaves the army under Hadrian 
870 andreturns homeward. His death 


(1) For the consuls of this year see C. /. LZ. vi. 17707. 


at Selinus in Cilicia, August 11. 

C. Z, Z. YX. 3915 OP LIMO TANGI 
GERMANICO. DACICO . PARTHICO. 
PONT.MAX.TRIB. POT. XXI. IM[P. 
XII]. COS. VI. PATRI . PATRIAE, 
but it should be Imp. XIII. 

The following inscription (which I 
give in full) belongs to a statue 
voted in his life-time, but com- 
pleted after his death; 

C. Z. L. 11. 2054 IMP . CAESARI. 
DIVI. NERVAE. F. DIVO. TRAIANO . 
OPTVMO . AVG . GERM, DACICO. 
PARTHICO . PONTIF . MAX. TRIB. 
POTEST.XXI.IMP. XIII. COS. VI. 
PATER. PATRIAE. OPTVMO. MAXV- 
MOQVE . PRINCIPI . CONSERVA- 
TORI. GENERIS. HVMANI . RES. 
PVBLICA. ARATISPITANORVM. DE- 
CREVIT . DIVO . DEDICAVIT, in 
Baetica. 


Dion 


(lxvii. 14) gives Gaius as the preenomen of Valens, but see Borghesi 


CEuvres VI. p. 159. 


(2) The tribunician years of Trajan are the backbone of the 
chronology of his reign, and it is therefore important to determine how 


they were reckoned. 


The ¢ribunicia potestas was conferred on Trajan about the end 
of October A.D. 97', three months before the death of Nerva, which 


1 This follows from a comparison of 
Aur. Victor. Ez. xii. 9 ‘Hic [Nerva] 
Trajanum in liberi locum inque partem 
imperii cooptavit; cum quo tribus vixit 
mensibus, with Plin. Paneg. 8 ‘simul 
filius, simul Caesar, mox imperator et 
consors tribuniciae potestatis, et omnia 
pariter et statim factus es, quae proxime 


parens verus [i.e. Vespasianus] tantum in 
alterum filium [Titum] contulit" (comp. 
$ 9 ‘jam Caesar, jam imperator, jam 
Germanicus, absens et ignarus!) Thus 
Trajan was adopted as son and made 
Cæsar about the same time, perhaps even 
on the same day. Then after a short 
interval he was associated in the empire 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 


took place towards the end of January A.D. 98. 


399 


Accordingly older 


numismatists and chronographers (e.g. Eckhel and Clinton) commonly 
reckon the 2nd tribunician year from Oct. 98 to Oct. 99, the 3rd 


from Oct. 99 to Oct. roo, and so forth. 


This mode of computation how- 


ever fails to explain certain inscriptions and coins where the number of 
the tribunician year is one in advance of the reckoning as required by 


this hypothesis ; 


and fresh discoveries are constantly adding to these 


examples. Later writers therefore have busied themselves to find 
some other solution which would explain these phenomena. 


I. Borghesi first applied himself to the problem (Œuvres v. 


I9 sq; 


see also his letter to Henzen Bull. Inst di Corrisb. Archeol. 1859, 
P. 119 sq). His hypothesis is that Trajan renewed his tribunician 
power at his accession (Jan. 27 or 28), so that his second tribunician 
year was from the end of January A.D. 98 to the end of January 99, 
the broken piece of a year from the end of October 97 to the end of 


January 98 counting as the first year. 

2. Borghesi's hypothesis covered most of the examples which 
the older view failed to explain, but not all (CECA Z TONS 
given above under A.D. 103). To account for those which still 
remained, Mommsen (Hermes unt. p. 128 sq) substituted Jan. r for 
Jan. 27 or 28. In other words he supposed that Trajan renewed 
his tribunician power with the beginning of the new year next after 
he had assumed it, so that the 2nd tribunician year coincided exactly 
with A.D. 98, the third with A.D. 99, and so forth. One or two examples 
however resisted this hypothesis also ; but Mommsen was persuaded 
that the inscriptions in these cases were either spurious or misread or 
miscut. 

3. Another hypothesis was started by Stobbe in an article Diz 
Tribunenjahre der Römischen Kaiser P: 1 sq in Philologus XXXII, 1873. 
He maintained that some extraordinary event, especially the association 
But the in- 


and the tribunician power. Mera raüra would be satisfied even if Nerva 


terval was so brief that Aurelius Victor 


can speak of the adoption and the asso- 
ciation in the empire together as taking 
place three months before Nerva's death. 
This account is quite consistent with 
Dion's narrative Ixviii. 3, 4, 0 Nepovas... 
avéBn re els rò Kamiráov kal &y yeyo- 
v1cas...Toavavov rovoüuaw* kal werd Tadra 
êv TQ ouvedply Kaloapa re abróv dréderte 
K.T.\...0ÜTw ev 0 Tpatavós Kaîsap kal perà 
ToÜro avroxpdrwp é-yévero, The expression 


proceeded straight from the Capitol to the 
Senate, while the merà roüro requires an 
appreciable, though not necessarily a long, 
interval. It appears from Pliny's lan- 
guage that the ‘tribunicia potestas! was 
conferred at the same time (‘pariter et 
statim’) with the association in the ‘im- 
perium.’ There is no ground whatever 
for deferring the ¢ribunicia potestas to the 
next January, as Stobbe does (Philologus 
XXXII. p. 34 sq, 1873). 


400 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


of a colleague in this office, would lead the emperor to a fresh assump- 
tion of the Zribunicia potestas. Thus he supposed that Nerva would 
begin a new tribunician year, when Trajan was associated with him 
in the office. He believed however that this association in the tribu- 
nician power took place not, as is generally assumed and as the 
authorities seem naturally to imply, contemporaneously, or nearly so, 
with the adoption, ie. in October or November 97, but in the early 
days of January 98. This assumption was made to account for the 
fact that the 4th consulate of Nerva (i.e. January A.D. 98, for this 
emperor died towards the end of the month) is found connected not 
only with Trib. Pot. ii, but also with Trib. Pot. iii, in inscriptions. 
On this hypothesis therefore the 1st tribunician year of Trajan actually 
began on some early day in January a.p. 98; but by a fictitious 
reckoning this rst year was counted as the 2nd year, the previous 
three months since his adoption as Cæsar being thus retrospectively 
regarded as his first year. This hypothesis is far too artificial to 
commend itself, nor does it explain any phenomena in the inscriptions 
of Trajan's reign. which Mommsen's solution had left unexplained. 
But Stobbe has the merit of endeavouring to treat the question of the 
tribunician years of the emperors connectedly as a whole. 

4. Lastly, Mommsen in a later work (Römisches Staatsrecht Yt. p. 
756, 1ste-Aufl. 1875 ; 11. p. 775: sq, 2te Aufl) 1877 [11. p? 799 sqpste 
Aufl. 1887]) has replaced his former hypothesis by another. He now 
supposes that Trajan’s second tribunician year began not on Jan. 1, 
A.D. 98, but on Dec. 10, A.D. 97. This latter day, Dec. 10, was the 
ancient day for the election of the tribunes, and Dionysius (Az. 
Rom. vi. 89) says explicitly that it remained so in his time (do7ep Kai 
péxpt TOD kaĝ’ jus xpóvov yiverat). Now Dion Cassius (liii. 17) tells us 
that the years of the emperors’ reigns were counted by the tribunician 
power *on the assumption that they received it year by year together 
with those who for the time being held the office of tribune’ (8? aùrñs 
kai *) é£apíüpxois rÀv érüv THS apxtjs avràv, ws kar éros arv perà TOY del 
Onuopxovvrov apBavovrwv, rpoBaiver). It appears therefore that, as a 
rule, the tribunician years of the emperors commenced with Dec. ro. 
Dion himself seems not to be aware of any other mode of reckoning. 
This however was not the case with the earlier emperors, who reckoned 
their tribunician years from the day of their accession (dies imperii). 
Such apparently was the computation adopted by all the emperors of 
the first century. At what time and for what reason then was a change 
made? The association of Trajan with Nerva in the sovereignty 
appears to have been the starting point for the new reckoning. It 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 401 


was a matter of paramount convenience that the two colleagues in 
the tribunician power should compute their tribunician years from the 
same point of time. The difficulty had never occurred before. When 
Tiberius was associated with Augustus in the tribunician power, and 
again when Titus was associated with Vespasian in the same, this 
was done on the anniversary of the dzes imperii. But when Nerva 
adopted Trajan, the political emergency was so pressing that the 
recurrence of this anniversary, which was then some ten or eleven 
months distant, could not be waited for. The tribunician power was 
therefore conferred upon him at once. But in order that the years 
of Nerva and Trajan might synchronize, both the colleagues re-assumed 
the tribunician power on the next Dec. 10, this being the ordinary 
day for the election of the tribunes ; and the practice, thus initiated, 
became general with succeeding emperors. This hypothesis is con- 
firmed by an inscription in Ephem. Epigr. Y. p. 339 IMP-NERVAE- 
CAESARI-AVG.PONTIF.MAX.TRIB.POT-III.COS.II. The third consulate 
of Nerva fixes this inscription to a.p. 97, since he was consul for the 
fourth time in A.D. 98. But his second tribunician year only began 
in the middle of September 97. Therefore between this time and the 
end of the year he must have re-assumed the tribunician power; and 
such a re-assumption would appropriately be made on Dec. ro. 'Thus 
the inscription belongs to some date between Dec. ro and Dec. 3r, 
A.D. 97. 

It may be a question which of the rival claimants for the vacant 
place should be preferred— whether Borghesi’s theory, or the early or 
later hypothesis of Mommsen ; but there can be no doubt that the older 
method of reckoning the tribunician years, from the actual anniversary 
of the first assumption, must be finally abandoned. The following 
facts show its inadequacy. 

r. The base of a statue set up to Trajan at Aratispi in Baetica 
gives the emperor's honours (C. Z Z. 1. 2054; see above, p. 398) 
TRIB.POTEST.XXI-IMP.XIII-.COS.VI. Coins also bear the inscription 
AHMAPX.EZ.KA; see Eckhel vr. p. 456. Now, as Trajan was 
invested with the tribunician power in October 97 and died in 
August 117, he held this rank somewhat less than twenty years, and 
a 21st year of his tribunician power is only explicable on some 
"hypothesis as regards the mode of reckoning, which anticipates the 
actual anniversary’. 


! Two recorded inscriptions however Mommsen Z. R. N. 5619 (C.Z. L. IX. 3915) 
exceed the 2rst year, and these are OPTIMO . AVG .GERMANICO. DACICO. PAR- 
not explicable on any reckoning. (1)  THICO. PONT. MAX. TRIB. POT SORT. 


IGN. II. 26 


402 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


2, The military diplomas sometimes give the month and day, as 
well as the consuls of the year; and by this means we are able to 
compare the tribunician years with the consular years. The comparison 
is decisive. Thus the inscription, C. Z. Z. ur. p. 868, Henzen 5443, 
gives TRIBVNIC-POTESTAT-XIII1-IMP-VI-Cos-v, and is dated 13 Kal. 
Mart. of the consulate of Salvidienus Orfitus and Peducaeus Priscinus, 
Le. A.D. 110. Thus again in C. Z Z. rri. p. 865, Henzen 6857, we have 
TRIBVNIC.POTESTAT-VIHI-IMP-IV.COS.V, the date being 3 Id. Mai 
of the consulate of C. Julius Bassus and Cn. Afranius Dexter; but 
these appear elsewhere (C. 7. L. vi. 2075) as the consules suffecti of 
A.D. 105. Henzen himself wrongly ascribes this inscription to A.D. 
106 (p. 375). Again in a military diploma, C. Z. Z. ur p. 863, dated 
19 Kal Sept, Trajan is styled TRIBVNIC. POTESTAT. III. COS. It. The 
consuls of the year indeed are not named here, but cos. mn fixes it 
to A.D. 99, since the emperor was consul for the third time in A.D. 100. 
Again in another, C. Z. Z. 1i. p. 870, dated 6 Id. Sept., he is described 
as TRIB.POTESTAT.XX ; and this must refer to A.D. 116, since Trajan 
was no longer living in September 117. 

This point therefore must be regarded as settled. But hitherto 
no facts have been mentioned, which are not equally consistent with 
Borghesi’s theory and with either of those put forward by Mommsen. 
'This is not the case however with others. 'Thus in the inscription 
C. Z. L. ni. p. 864 (see above, p. 393), a military diploma dated 
14 Kal. Febr. (= Jan. ro) of the consulate of M’. Laberius Maximus 11, 
Q. Glitius Atilius Agricola 11, Trajan is designated TRIBVNIC- POTESTAT- 
VII-IMP-IHI-COS.V. This evidently belongs to the year 103, the emperor 
having retired at once from the consulate to make room for Atilius 
(see Mommsen Hermes 111. p. 128). The only alternative is to trans- 
pose the consuls for the years A.D. 103 and A.D. 104, as older critics 
did; but Mommsen has shown that this transposition is inadmissible. 
Borghesi’s theory therefore fails to explain this example. But this 


COS . VI. PATRI. PATRIAE . SENATVS. Asan official inscription was not likely to 


POPVLVSQ . ROM. found at Avezzano. 
Orelli (I. p. ror) treats it as spurious. 
Probably it has been wrongly transcribed. 
Mommsen says ‘scribe TRIB. POT . XXI. 
IMP.XII'. But we now know that TRIB. 
POT. XXI requires IMP.XIII, and this 
better explains the error, some letters 
having been dropped in transcription 
TRIB. POT. X [XI.1IMP .] XIII. COS. VI, 
if not left out by the stone-cutter himself. 


omit the imperatorial titles, this explana- 
tion seems very probable. (2) Renier 
4. A. 1842 (C. 4. L. vilte 2356) ave. 
GERM . DAC. PART . PONT. MAX . TRIB. 
POT . XXIII. IMP. XVIII.COS.VI.P.P. 
at Thamugas. This again, if correctly 
transcribed, can only be explained by 
carelessness of the stone-cutter or of the 
transcriber. It ought perhaps to be 
TRIB . POT. XVIII. IMP. VIII. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 


inscription does not enable us to 


403 


decide between the earlier and later 


of Mommsen’s hypotheses, since it would be satisfied by either. At 


this point however a Jegend on a coin 


DO. 354) comes to our aid: 
P-M-TR-P.VII, with the R. 


(Cohen Méd. Imp. m. p- 57, 


IMP-CAES-NERVA. TRAIAN-AVG-GERM- 
IMP -TII  COS- III - DES. V. P- P.S.C, 


Here 


the date is fixed as the last part of A.D. ro2 by Cos.rrI-DES. vy. 
Therefore the 7th year must have begun earlier than Jan. r, A.D. 103. 
When he was maintaining his earlier hypothesis, Mommsen had ques- 


tioned the deciphering or the genuineness of this coin (Hermes l.c.) 


2 


but he was afterwards satisfied by M. Waddington that it was neither 


Spurious nor misread (Staatsrecht X. 


D. 777, note 1). There are 


other coins also (Cohen rr. P- 57; NO. 355; p. 85, no. 539), though less 


certainly authenticated, with similar legends. 


This fact is in favour 


of Mommsen's later theory as against his earlier, and combined with 
the arguments which have been mentioned already (p. 400 sq) invests 


it with a high degree of probability. Some 


difficulties indeed still 


remain, but these are perhaps less serious than on any other hypothesis. 


! It would not be surprising if in the 
earlier years of Trajan's reign we found 
some wavering in the inscriptions between 
the old reckoning and the new. But 
I am unable to understand many of the 
statements of Mommsen Staatsrecht 11, 
P- 776, note2. The diploma (HBL tiam 
p- 862) of Feb. 20, A.D. 98, may perhaps 
be regarded as an example of the reten- 
tion of the old reckoning, as it gives 
TRIB. POTEST . COS . II, where the absence 
of any number suggests the first year of 
the tribunician power, though according 
to the new reckoning it was the second. 
But, inasmuch as it is the exception, 
not the rule, when the number of the 
tribunician year is given on the coins of 
Trajan (though it appears commonly in 
diplomas), the instance is not conclusive. 
Mommsen goes on to say that we possess 
no documents of the years 99—102 which 
are decisive as between the old and the 
new systems. He then instances the di- 
ploma (C. Z. Z. 111. p. 863) of Aug. I4, 
which has Trib. Pot. iii, and says that on 
both systems this belongs to roo, not 99 
[as he himself gives it in C. 7. Z. L c.]. 
But it is fixed to A.D. 99 by the addition 


COS. II, for Trajan was cos. in A.D. 
too; and according to the old system 
Aug. I4, A.D. 99, would belong to the 
?nd tribunician year. Again he adduces 
another diploma, Orelli 782 (yz 
VI. 451, given above, p. 392), bearing 
date Dec. 29, with Trib. Pot. iv, and 
says that this again would belong to 100 
on either reckoning. It is indeed fixed 
to A.D. roo by the specification cos . 111. 
DESI[G. 1111]; but Dec. 29, A.D. IOO, 
would fall in the fft% tribunician year 
according to the new reckoning, as the 
year began on Dec. ro. If therefore 
Mommsen’s later theory be correct, either 
there is some stone-cutter's error here, or 
in this instance the old system has sur- 
vived. [Mommsen has corrected him- 
self on both these points in his last 
edition, 1887, 11. p. 800, note its] 

At the same time Mommsen omits to 
mention some inscriptions which, if cor- 
rectly transcribed, are opposed to his 
theory. Thus C. 7. Z. 11. 2352 of Julipa 
in Baetica is given TRIB.POT.IIII.COS. 
IHI. Here we must read cos. III, if it is 
to harmonize with either of Mommsen’s 
theories; though, as it stands, it is con- 


26—2 


404 


ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


We may therefore accept it provisionally. So far as regards the Ignatian 
question, the differences between the three solutions are unimportant. 
In the tables given above the inscriptions dated by the tribunician 
years are assigned to the years a.p. with which they roughly coincide. 
If Mommsen’s later theory be correct, these may possibly belong 
in some cases to the last twenty-one days of the preceding year. 
If Borghesi’s view be adopted then they may fall within the first 


twenty-seven days of the following year. 


divergence. 


This is the limit of possible 


(3) See the note on Mart. Ant. 1 "Apri dvadesapevov K.T.A. 


(4) The First Dacian War must have broken out after September 
A.D. roo, when Pliny’s panegyric was delivered, since the panegyrist 


makes no mention of it. 


Until quite recently, this was the nearest 


approximation to an exact date, which the evidence supplied. But 
some lately discovered fragments (A.D. 1867—1871) of the Acta Fra- 


trum Arvalium afford more precise information. 


Here we find these 


officials sacrificing Q. ARTICVLEIO - [PAETO] - SE[x - ATT]IO-SVBVRANO - 
COS + VIII. K APR- IN - CAPITOLI[O : PRO- SALVTE - ET - REDIT |V - ET - VICTORIA: 
IMP. CAESARIS: NERVAE: TRAIANI: AVG: GERM -, and lower down the object 
of the sacrifice is defined ‘itu et reditu et victoria imperatoris etc.’ 
(C. Z7. L. vi. 2074; comp. Henzen Act. Frafr. Arv. pp. 117, 124 sq). 
This is the year ror, Trajan having retired from the consulate to 


make room for Suburanus. 


The sacrifice therefore takes place on 


March 25, A.D. 101; and it is evidently synchronous, or nearly so, 
with the emperor’s departure from Rome, as the whole context shows. 
This First Dacian War seems to have been brought to a close 


towards the end of the year roa. 


The title Dacicus at all events 


appears then, if the evidence can be trusted. The following coins 
and medals given by Cohen illustrate the course of events. 


(a) p. 57,no. 354. 
P. VII 


IMP:CAES: NERVA: TRAIAN: AVG:-GERM-P-M-TR: 


R. IMP-IIII- COS- IIII- DES. V. P- P- S. C- 


sistent with Borghesi's. The case is simi- 
lar also with Z. R. JV. 2487 (C. Z. L. x. 
1633) AVG. GERM.DACICO.PONT.MAX. 
'TRIB.POT.XV.IMP.VI.COS.VI.P.P. 
OPTIMO . PRINCIPI, which is reconcilable 
with Borghesi's view but not with either 
of Mommsen's. Here however cos.v 
would set all straight, and it appears 


from Mommsen's own collation that this 
reading is given in one transcription. 
Both these examples would be explicable 
on the old system of reckoning by com- 
plete years from the day of the first as- 
sumption of the tribunician power, but 
this view must be regarded as definitively 
abandoned. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 405 


(b) P- 57, no. 355. IMP: CAES: NERVA- TRAIAN - AVG: GERM - DACICYS. 
P...- VIIP 
R: IMP-HII.COS-III.DES.V.P.P.S.C. 


(c) p.85, no. 339. IMP-CAES- NERVA -TRAIAN - AVG- GERM - DACICVS- 
P.M. 
R. TR. P. VII-IMP.IIII.COS-IHI.DES.Y.p. p. 


All these belong to a.p. 102, aS COS:IHI.DES.V. shows. 


Of these (a), on which the title Dacicus is wanting, is certainly 
genuine, and belongs to Dec. ro— Dec. 31 of the year (see above, 
P. 401). The others are not so well attested; but, if genuine and 
correctly read, (b) (c) must also fall within this same period. The 
devices on the reverses of both represent the subjugation of Dacia. 
It would appear therefore that the final submission of Dacia and the 
title Dacicus belong to the very last days of A.D. ror. Mommsen at 
one time (Hermes 11. p. 131) threw discredit on all three alike; but 
now that he accepts the first as genuine (see above p. 403), the ground 
for objecting to the others (the combination of TR.P.vrr with COS - III) 
has been cut away. Two other types of coins, likewise bearing the 
name DACICVS in conjunction with COS- III, i.e. not later than A.D. 102, 
are also given by Cohen, p. rs, nos. E 


(5) For the consuls of this year see the note on Mart. Ant. 7. 


(6) On the names of the consuls for this year, and on their trans- 
position with those of the preceding year, see the note on Mart. 
Rom. 1. 


(7) The outbreak of the Second Dacian War is determined by 
the same means as the first, the recently discovered fragments (A.D. 
1867—1870) of the Acta Fratrum Arvalium; C. Z. L. vi. 2075 (comp. 
Henzen Act. Frair. Arv. p. 124). Here we find these officials assem- 
bled AD.VOTA - SVSCIPI[ENDA - PRO-IT]V - ET - REDITV- [tmp - c]arsa[Ri]s 
etc, some day during the Nones of June (i.e. between June 2—5) in 
the year ros. This therefore is the time of the emperor's departure 
from Rome for the Second Dacian War. 

The close of this war is not so easy to determine. Unfortunately 
no inscriptions have yet been discovered belonging to the roth tribu- 

-nician year (A.D. 106); so that the information is deficient just where 
it is wanted. The sequence of the imperial titles is imperfect in 
consequence. On May 13, A.D. 105, immediately before he starts for 
the Second Dacian War, Trajan is still Zzfezafor iv. On June 30, 
A.D. 107, he is Zzperafor vi. These two additional attributions of the 


406 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


title are doubtless due to the second subjugation of Dacia by Trajan 
himself, and to the reduction of Arabia Petreea by Palmas. On this 
point there can hardly be two opinions. But it is doubtful which 
of these two events preceded the other. No trustworthy inscriptions 
bearing the designation /mperator v have been discovered; for, 
though the words inscribed on the bridge at Alcantara (C. Z. Z. 11. 7 59) 
are certainly TRIB-POTES:VIII-IMP.V-Cos-v (the tribunician year being 
written vill, and not vii, as it has been read; see Reniers note 
on Borghesi Œuvres Iv. p. 122), this must be a stone-cutter's error, 
since Trajan was still Zmperator iv in the following year, and pro- 
bably therefore 1MP.1v should be substituted for rwP.v. Here there- 
fore we receive no assistance as regards the matter in question. 
Mommsen (C. Z. Z. rn. 550), combining the sequence of Hadrian’s 
honours as recorded in an Athenian inscription with the account 
of the same in Vit. Hadr. 3, arrives at the result that the Second 
Dacian War extended into A.D. 107; and his inference, though far 
from conclusive, is plausible. Dion at all events remarks that Trajan’s 
operations in this second war were characterized by caution rather 
than by speed, and that he only conquered the Dacians after a long 
time and with difficulty (ovv xpóvo xoi pods, lxviii. 14). On the other 
hand Julian (Caes. p. 327) makes Trajan say that he reduced this 
people ‘within about five years’ (émpáx09y dé mor rò epyov roro èv 
éviavtots elow mov Tévre); and five years reckoned from the outbreak 
of the First Dacian War would bring us to about midsummer A.D. 106. 
To meet this difficulty, Mommsen suggests that the interval of peace 
between the two wars is not reckoned in the five years; but this 
solution seems impossible. It does not appear necessary however to 
take Julian’s off-hand statement au pied de la lettre. On the other 
side Dierauer (p. 106, note) decides positively that the war must have 
been concluded before the end of 106, because Sura, one of Trajan’s 
generals in this war, was consul in 107. 


(8) Dion Cassius (lxviii. 14), after describing the Second Dacian 
War, adds, xara òè rov avrov xpóvov kai Mdàpas rhs Xvopías àpxov tHv 
"ApaBíav rjv mpos TH Ilérpo éxeipwoaro k.r.X. This is not very precise. 
The epigraphic evidence again, as will have appeared from the last 
note, admits of our placing the subjugation of Arabia Petrza at 
any time between about midsummer A.D. ros and midsummer A.D. 
107. The testimony of the Chronicon Paschale p. 472 (ed. Bonn.) 
here comes to our aid. Under the consulship of Candidus and 
Quadratus (i.e. A.D. 105) it states that the people of Petra and Bostra 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 407 


reckoned their years from this date. This probably means, as Clinton 
Says, that the year of the Seleucidze which began in the October 
falling within this consulship was counted as the rst. year of the 
Petrean era. The fact would imply that Arabia Petrza was conquered 
and made a Roman province some time between Oct. ros and Oct, 
106. Whether early or late in this period, it would probably be 
before the close of the Second Dacian War. If so, Jmperator v 
belongs to the conquest of Arabia, and Jmperator vi to that of 
Dacia. 


(9) For the consuls of the year 107 see the note on Mart 
Ant. 3. 


(10) For the date of Pliny's propreetorship in Bithynia, and the 
persecution of the Christians connected therewith, see the note on 
Mart. Rom. 11. 


(11) It may now be regarded as an established fact that Trajan 
as emperor only made one expedition to the East, and that this took 
place in the last years of his reign. This is the opinion of almost all, 
if not all, critics who have approached the subject from an independent 
point of view (without reference to the Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius); 
e.g. Eckhel D. V. vi. p. 450 sq, Francke Geschichte Trajans pp. 16 sq, 
253 sq, Dierauer Geschichte Trajans p. 1 52 sq, Mommsen C. Z. Z. mm. 
p. 103 sq. And even among those who accept these Acts as genuine 
in the main, many have been led to infer that there is an error in 
the date there given, the 9th year of Trajan. It is Pearson's great 
merit that, with the very imperfect and confused materials before him, 
he yet discerned the main fact correctly, that an earlier expedition 
of Trajan to the East was impossible. His view required that the 
19th year should be substituted for the gth, and in this he is followed 
by Clinton and others. The only point of difference among these 
writers has reference to the exact year in which Trajan started for 
the East. Thus Eckhel and others placed his departure in the autumn 
A.D. 114, being misled by their mode of reckoning the tribunician 
years. With the new light thrown upon this point, we may now regard 
it as certain that he left Rome in the autumn of 1 12: 

The reasons for concluding that this was the first and only expedi- 
tion of Trajan as emperor seem quite conclusive. (i) Dion Cassius 
represents his departure for the East as taking place after the erection 
of the column (A.D. 113), and says nothing of any earlier expedition. 
(ii) There is not the slightest indication in the genuine coins and in- 


408 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


scriptions of any such Eastern expedition, or indeed of any important 
military operations of any kind, in the interval between the close of 
the Second Dacian War and the autumn A.D. 113. Thus for instance 
there is no accession to the emperors titles. He is /mferator vi 
in June A.D. 107, and he remains so as late as A.D. 113 when the 
column is erected. The next accumulation, Z/perafor vii, first 
appears A.D. 114. (iii) In accordance therewith, so far as we are able 
to trace the movements of the emperor during the interval, we find 
him in Rome or Italy. The correspondence of Pliny with the 
emperor (A.D. 111—113), which falls in this interval, indicates this. 
The medals and inscriptions too, which belong to this period, represent 
him as actively engaged in public works at home, e.g. the forum 
bearing his name at Rome, the Aqua Trajana, the great roads and 
harbours of Italy, etc. 

On the other hand Tillemont (Zmpereurs 1t. p. 196 sq, p. 562 sq) 
sends Trajan to the East several years earlier and makes him enter 
Antioch in January A.D. 107, thus antedating the conquest of Ar- 
menia and Mesopotamia, which really took place A.D. 114, by seven 
years. With the mixture of genuine and spurious documents accessible 
to Tillemont this position is intelligible. But such views are not so 
easy of explanation in later writers. Quite recently (A.D. 1869) 
Nirschl (Das Todesjahr des Hi. Ignatius) has made an elaborate attempt 
to prove that Trajan made three several expeditions to the East, 
A.D. 107, A.D. IIO, and A.D. 116. And even De Rossi (Zuser. Christ. 
Urb. 1. p. 6 sq) is disposed provisionally (for he speaks with caution) 
to assume one earlier Parthian expedition with Tillemont in order to 
save the credit of the Ignatian Acts of Martyrdom. ‘The arguments 
by which it is attempted to sustain the theory of an early expedition 
or expeditions to the East are as follows. 

(i) Our information respecting Trajan's reign is very deficient. 
Dion Cassius, our chief authority, or rather his abbreviator Xiphilinus, 
does not give events in sequence, but groups them. Hence all the 
campaigns in the East are put together. This however is not an 
accurate statement of the case. The historian (lxviii. r7), after de- 
scribing the construction of the forum and the erection of the column, 
proceeds peta è rara éorpdrevoey èr 'Appevíovs xal YIdpÜovs. 
Hence it was not before the close of A.D. 113 according to this repre- 
sentation. Thus there is a direct notice of time. Nor is there any 
ground for supposing that the abbreviator tampered with the sequence 
of the original. The order of Xiphilinus is the order of Zonaras also. 
Thus it must be regarded as Dion's own. Moreover the sequence of 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 409 


events, as given by Dion, is confirmed in all respects by the genuine 
coins and inscriptions. It should be added also that Julian ( Caes. 
P- 328) only speaks of one Parthian expedition, which he assigns to 
Trajan's old age. The words which he puts into Trajan's mouth are 
these: pds IlapÜvatovs dé, mpiv piv adixetobar Tap avtadv, ovK ouv 
8etv xpijoÜot mois ÓmÀots, adixodor Ot eres Dov oùðèv Ud THs nXukias 
koX vOe(s, KQLTOL ài:8óvrov Mot TOV VO Lov TO py orparever Oar. 

(ii) The Ignatian Acts of Martyrdom are themselves put in evi- 
dence. This arguing in a circle would be quite legitimate, if these 
Acts approved themselves as genuine in all other respects. But, as 
we have already seen (p. 383 sq), they are discredited by various 
considerations, apart from this difficulty about the date. 

(ij) The evidence of other Christian writers is alleged. More es- 
pecially stress is laid on the testimony of John Malalas (p. 270 sq, 
ed. Bonn.), who states that Trajan made an expedition against the 
Parthians in the r2th year of his reign (éreotparevoe TÔ (9 érev THs Bacu 
Actas avrod) leaving Rome in October, reaching Syria in December, and 
entering Antioch on Jan. 7. Of the blunders of Malalas I shall have 
much to say hereafter. At present it will be sufficient to remark that 
the events recorded as taking place on this occasion are obviously 
the same as those narrated by Dion, though mixed up with much 
fabulous matter by Malalas; and that Dion, as interpreted by the 
monuments, places this campaign in A.D. 114. Moreover Malalas 
convicts himself. For afterwards, when mentioning the earthquake 
which happened during a subsequent winter spent by Trajan at Antioch, 
he places it two years after his arrival in the East (pera B ern rhs 
vapovaías ToU Berordrov Bactrdéws Tpatavod ths émi Tv avaroAjv), and yet 
dates it Dec. r3, A.D. 115. Of the other Christian authorities cited 
it may be said generally that they either prove nothing or are based 
on the story of Trajan's interview with Ignatius at Antioch. To the 
former class belongs Eusebius, who in his Chronicon (p. 162, Schoene) 
places the martyrdom of Ignatius in A.D. 107, there or thereabouts, 
But, as he knows nothing about the appearance of Ignatius before 
Trajan at Antioch or elsewhere, his testimony has no bearing on 
Trajan’s movements. As regards the latter class of writers, the case 
presented itself to them thus. The Antiochene tradition or Antiochene 
Acts of Martyrdom relate that Ignatius was brought before Trajan at 
Antioch. Now Eusebius says that he was martyred about A.D. 107. 
Therefore Trajan must have been in Antioch at that time, preparing 
for his Parthian campaign. In fact these writers were in the same 
position as Tillemont or Nirschl with regard to the evidence ; and, like 


410 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


these modern writers, they drew this as a critical inference from state- 
ments which they accepted without sifting. One authority however 
is not so easily explained. The compiler of the Chronicon Paschale 
(p. 471 sq, ed. Bonn.) places the martyrdom of Ignatius in the con- 
sulate of Candidus and Quadratus (ie. A.D. 105) Then under the 
following year (A.D. 106) he writes, =oÀéuou xaderod émiBavros 7H Pwpavig 
ind llepcóv kal Tédwv koi érépov &vGv, Tparavos amepxójevos eis TOv 
tovtov vóAeuov x.r... The Goths here are doubtless the Dacians'. This 
is the correct date for the Second Dacian War, which commenced in 
the previous year and was not yet ended (see above, p. 405 sq). Against 
these Trajan conducted the expedition in person. But he could not 
march at once against both Dacians and Persians, and the writer 
cannot have meant this. Perhaps this * Persian’ War here mentioned 
represents the operations of Palmas in Arabia, which were really 
synchronous with the Second Dacian War. Or it may be an echo 
of some previous Christian writer, who sent Trajan to the East at 
this time in order to satisfy the exigencies of the Ignatian story. Under 
any circumstances it is valueless as against the plain inference drawn 
from more authentic sources of information. 

(iv) Lastly; certain medals and inscriptions are cited. They pro- 
fess to belong to a much earlier date than A.D. 114, and yet they bear 
the legend TIGRIS, or INDIA, Or PARTHICVS, Or REX. PARTHIS- DATVS, 
or other words which point to an eastern campaign of Trajan. It 
is sufficient to say that they are discredited by the channels through 
which they come to us, that their genuineness has never been esta- 
blished, that in some instances they convict themselves, and that 
generally they are confuted by the eloquent silence of a large and 
everincreasing mass of epigraphic and numismatic evidence, which 
betrays no knowledge of such stirring events’. 


(12) The designation Ous is an important landmark in the 
chronology of this reign. The two following notices have reference 
to it. 

(i) Pliny Paneg. 2 writes, ‘Jam quid tam civile, tam senatorium, 
quam illud additum a nobis Optimi cognomen ? quod peculiare hujus 


1 Julian (Caes. p. 327) calls the Da- nobis Gruterus, Muratorius, Mediobarbus 
cians ‘Getz’ throughout; ró re l'eruüv ^ obtrusere, volet contexere. Non habent 
kal rò llapüwov rpómatov, rfs roy ery fabulae monstra magis obscoena, chimae- 
tBpews, Trò Vera &üvos é£éiNov. ras, cerberos, centauros, quam inauspi- 

? Eckhel vi. p. 451 sq -*Bellam catus is partus erit, wt mec pes nec caput 
enimvero Trajani historiam quam quis ex uni reddatur formae. 
catalogis seu lapidum seu numorum, quos 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 


4II 


[Trajani] et proprium arrogantia priorum principum fecit’; and again 
c. 88 ‘Justisne de causis S.P.Q.R. Optimi tibi cognomen adjecit? 


Paratum id quidem et 
neminem 
senatus in Optimi nomen.’ 
September A.D. 
reign. 


(ii Dion Cassius (lxvii. 23), 
Trajan ra re ddda eyndiero abr Todda 93 Dou, 
oÜv dpuwrToy, €rovónacev, and a little lower down, 


in medio positum, novum tamen. 
ante meruisse...Adoptavit te optimus princeps in suum, 
As Pliny's panegyric was delivered in 
100, this must refer to the very beginning of Trajan’s 


Scias 


aS abridged by Xiphilinus, says of 


x S > » 
KAL OTTLUOV, ELT 


` > 2; , 
Kal ovopacÓ09 uev, 


émet) kai rjv NíowBw cide kai rds Bárvas, Iop8uós- TOAAG 8$ uGAXov 
él Tj TOU Orripov Tpoonyopia 7 rais adXaus cvjmácats...eceuvivero. 
As these events are related after Trajan's first campaign in the East, 
they seem to belong to a date not earlier than A.D. 114. 


Thus there is a difference of 


some fourteen years in the two 


accounts ; and yet the language of both writers is so alike, that they 


seem to be referring to the same incident. 


the monuments, 


that the solution of the difficulty appears, 


It is only when we examine 
On the 


coins and medals of the early years, at least as early as the sth con- 
sulate (A.D. 103 sq), we find frequently the legend OPTIMO- PRINCIPI, 


and so occasionally in inscriptions. 


To this use of the word Pliny must 


be alluding. But in the later years, in coins and inscriptions alike, 
OPTIMVS appears no longer as an epithet, but as an inseparable part 
of the name ; and, as such, it precedes even Augustus, so that the order 


is IMP.NERV-TRAIAN-OPTIM-AVG-GERM DAC. [PARTHIC. ]. 
nomenon first makes its appearance in the 18th tribunician 


This phe- 


year, 


le. A.D. 114, the point of time to which Dion is referring’. 


1 Several types of coins are given by 
Fabretti Col. Traj. p. 292 (see Francke 
Geschichte Trajans p. 16) with APICTOC 
before ceBactoc, dated AHMAPY. EZ, Iz. 
As they are not cited by Eckhel and 
others, I presume that they are not re- 
garded as genuine. Noaccredited inscrip- 
tion hitherto discovered exhibits this title 
before the 18th tribunician year. Still 
its appearance in the ryth would not be 
- altogether irreconcilable with Dion’s ac- 
count. Though Dion mentions the be- 
stowal of the title at the end of his 
account of the eastern campaign of A.D. 
114, and the natural inference is that it 
was not bestowed till some time during 


that campaign, still it is quite conceivable 
that he intended to group together all 
the honours bestowed on Trajan by the 
senate after his departure from Rome, 
and so this might belong to the last 
months of A.D. 113. 

[Since the above was written the in- 
scription C. Z. Z. VIII. ror17 (see above, 
P. 395) has been published, in which this 
title appears in the r6th tribunician year. 
Wilmanns, the editor of this volume, 
writes, *Offendit Optimi nomen ea ra- 
tione positum, quam tam nummi quam 
tituli ab anno demum 114 proponunt. 
Fortasse titulus conceptus a. 112 post 
intervallum incisus est eoque tempore 


212 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


(13) The date of the assumption of the title * Parthicus’ presents 
some difficulties. Dion Cassius (lxviii. 23) in the abridgment of 
Xiphilinus, as quoted just above, says that he was designated (wvo- 
pácÓ) Parthicus after taking Nisibis and Batne. He does not 
say by whom this designation was given. Zonaras (xi 21) however 
represents it as conferred by the senate, + jfovMj...llapÜwov avrà 
érikAnow bero; but this may be merely his own inference from the 
words of Dion. According to the arrangement of the events which I 
have adopted (p. 413 sq), this would be towards the end of A.D. 114. 
At a later point Dion (Xiphilinus), describing a subsequent cam- 
paign (lxviii. 23), says that when the emperor entered Ctesiphon as 
victor, he was saluted (émevopác09) imperator, and ‘confirmed the 
epithet of Parthicus’ (rjv éikAyow To) llap0uxo0 éfefjawscaro). This 
would take place in the following year, A.D. 1r5. 

The expression éfefawócero implies that there was some uncer- 
tainty about the use of the term. Perhaps we may infer that though 
it was employed unofficially, yet the emperor did not adopt it himself, 
or allow it to be adopted in official quarters, when it was first bestowed 
upon him. The monuments confirm this supposition. In the year 
II4, in a military diploma of Trajan dated Sept. 1st, with IMP . VII, it is 
wanting’. So also in the inscription on the arch at Beneventum, erected 
by the senate, likewise with IMP.ViI, it is absent. Even later in this 
same year, when the emperor’s titles have risen to IMP-Ix, it does 
not appear in an inscription set up at Ferentinum in Trajan's own 
name. Yet before the date of this last-mentioned inscription, and 
while Trajan is still only IMP. vit, it appears on a monument in Baetica. 
Thus, unless we have here some stone-cutter's error, this first bestowal 
of the title, whether by the senate or by the army, must have occurred 
in sufficient time to allow the news to travel to Spain before the close 
of the year 114. In the following year we find the same fluctuation. 
In an inscription set up by the senate on the arch at Ancona?, in 
another (recorded by Fabretti) which was inscribed by the emperor's 
own orders, and in a third (an Egyptian inscription bearing date 
May 24) which likewise has an official character, it is wanting ; while 


interpolatus. It is perhaps simpler to ^ AVG, and IMP. VII, show that the former 


suppose a stone-cutter’s error in the XVI. 
See the next note for an example.] 

1 These inscriptions are given above, 
p. 396 sq. In C. Z. L. 111. p. 869, dated 
Sept. r, the one side of the tablet has 
XVIII, and the other xvir, for the tribu- 
nician years. The titles of Trajan, opr. 


is correct, and the latter the stone-cutter’s 
blunder. 

? See above, p. 396. 

3 Boeckh, C. Z. G. 4948, given above, 
P. 397. The Egyptian year began on 
Aug. 29, and the second year of Trajan 
in Egyptian reckoning would be from 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 413 


again in another Beetican inscription' it appears. The provincial 
and unofficial character of this last is evident from the circumstance that 
PARTHICO is placed before DACICO, whereas its proper place is later. 
In the following year (A.D. 116) all the monuments have the title. 
One of these, a military diploma, bears the date Sept. 8. The capture 
of Ctesiphon therefore, and the official acceptance of the title by 
Trajan himself, must have preceded this. But the exact date of this 
incident is not determined for us by the inscriptions hitherto discovered. 
So far as their evidence goes, it may have occurred in the early part 
of this year 116, or in the later part of the preceding year 115. 


(14) The year of the great earthquake at Antioch is fixed as A.D. LI 
by the notice in Dion (lxviii. 24) that Pedo the consul perished in it. 
And Dion's account is so far confirmed by Malalas, that the latter 
gives the date as A.D. II 5. Moreover the calamity happened according 
to both these authors while Trajan was wintering at Antioch. But 
the alternative still remains that the winter in question was 114 or 
LI$, le. that the earthquake took place at the beginning or the end of 
115. If Malalas is worthy of credit, it happened on Dec. 13 of this 
year. But several modern critics (e.g. Eckhel vi. p. 423 sq, Clinton 
Fast. Rom. sub ann. 115, Borghesi (Œuvres v. p. 19) on various 
grounds reject his statement, and place it at the beginning of the year, 
in January or February. 

The degree of credibility which attaches to statements of Malalas 
in general will be discussed hereafter. It will then be seen that 
in this particular notice the day of the month is not consistent with 
the day of the week. But still the possibility remains, that Malalas 
has given correctly the month and day of the month; and this view is 
taken by many critics of consideration, e.g. by Von Gutschmid (in 


116, in which the title Parthicus is 
wanting. 

1 Ephem. Epigr. 111. p. 38 sq, quoted 
above, p. 397. This inscription had 
previously been deciphered incorrectly 
(e.g. in C. Z. L. rmt. 1028). Its cor- 
rect decipherment has antiquated much 
that has been written on the title Par- 
thicus; e.g. by Borghesi Bull. Corr. 


Aug. 29 A.D. 98 to Aug. 28 A.D. 99, 
the broken year preceding the Egyptian 
new year’s day counting as the first year; 
see Raoul Rochette Yournal des Savans 
1824, p. 240 sq, Mommsen Staatsrecht 
II. p. 778. According to this reckoning, 
May 24 of the rgth year would belong to 
A.D. 116, as given by Letronne, Franz, 
and others. But I agree with Dierauer 


(p. 167, note) that the official character 
of this inscription suggests the reckoning 
by tribunician years. Thus it must be 
referred to A.D. 115. Otherwise it would 
be the only verified inscription of A.D. 


inst. Archeol. 1859, p. 119 sq, by Noel 
des Vergers C. R. Acad. Inscr. et Belles 
Lettres 1866, p. 85, and by Dierauer, 
p. 166 sq. 


414 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Dierauer Geschichte Trajans p. 157 sq), by Dierauer, and others. 
This view seems to me to present serious difficulties. 

The coins and inscriptions show clearly that Trajan set out for 
his eastern campaigns in the autumn A.D. 113, not A.D. II4, as main- 
tained by Eckhel and Clinton; for their error about the reckoning 
of the tribunician years led them to post-date it by a year. In August 
117 he died. Within this interval therefore we have to arrange all the 
incidents of these campaigns. For these incidents Dion is our only 
trustworthy authority; and as there is no reasonable ground for 
supposing that he gives these events out of their chronological order, 
we may follow his sequence. 

* After these things,’ says Dion, ‘he made an expedition against the 
Armenians and Parthians’ (lxviii. 17). The completion of the Forum 
and the erection of the Column have been mentioned just before. On 
his way eastward Trajan stays at Athens, where he receives an embassy 
from Osrhoes, asking the crown of Armenia for Parthamasiris. From 
Greece he passes to Asia and Lycia ; from thence to Seleucia (c.-17). 
While he is in Antioch, he receives overtures from Augarus of Osrhoene. 
This is obviously therefore the winter A.D. 112. The subsequent events 
are as follows. 

(a) The expedition begins. Entering the enemy’s territory, Trajan 
is met by satraps and kings who are the bearers of presents. The 
whole country of Armenia submits without a battle (a&ax(), and the 
emperor enters Satala and Elegia, its strongholds. The humiliating 
interview at which Parthamasiris was deposed is described at length. 
It takes place at Elegia (c. 18, 19, 20). Trajan then goes to Edessa, and 
there sees Augarus and receives overtures from other kings (c. 21). 
Other negociations with petty princes are mentioned while he is in 
Mesopotamia. From Mesopotamia he marches against Adiabene. 
Lusius gains possession of Singara and other places without a battle 
(apaxi). Adenystree, a strong fortress, opens its gates to the Romans, 
the garrison having been massacred (c. 22). The emperor receives 
the title of Optimus from the senate. After taking Nisibis and Batne, 
he is also designated Parthicus (c. 23). 

(B) While he is residing at Antioch, an earthquake lays the 
city in ruins. The consul Pedo is killed. Trajan himself escapes 
through a window. ‘The shocks last for several days, during which 
he lives in the open air in the hippodrome (cc. 24, 25). 

(y At the approach of spring (vx +ó čap) he sets out on his 
march into the enemy's country. Vessels built at Nisibis are car- 
ried on carts to the Tigris. A bridge across the river is constructed 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 415 


with much difficulty (erurovwrara) in the face of the opposing bar- 
barians; and the Roman army crosses. The whole of Adiabene is 
teduced, including the scenes of Alexander’s exploits, Arbela and 
Gaugamela. After this the Romans advance as far as Babylon itself, 
not meeting with much opposition from the natives, because Parthia 
had been wasted by civil wars and was torn asunder by factions. 
Trajan surveys the wonders of Babylon. He then designs digging 
a canal between the Euphrates and the Tigris, that his boats may 
pass through for the construction of a bridge; but this design he 
abandons on account of the engineering difficulties, and the boats 
are carried overland. He then enters Ctesiphon, on taking which 
he is saluted Zmperator and ‘confirms’ the title Parthicus. The senate 
votes him honours liberally. After taking Ctesiphon, he sets out 
towards the Red Sea (ie. the Persian Gulf). He acquires without 
trouble the island Messene in the Tigris; but owing to the difficulty 
of navigating the river, he is in great peril. However he reaches the 
Ocean, which he explores, and sees a vessel sailing for India. He 
writes an account of his exploits to the senate. His despatches to 
them, announcing victories, follow in such quick succession that 
they cannot understand the tidings or even pronounce the names. 
They however vote him honours freely, and prepare to erect a tri- 
umphal arch, Meanwhile, during his journey to the Ocean and back, 
all the places which he had taken revolt. The bad news reaches 
Trajan while at Babylon. Accordingly he sends Lusius and Maximus 
to quell the revolts. Maximus is slain in battle; Lusius ‘among many 
other successes’ recovers Nisibis and besieges and sets fire to Edessa. 
Seleucia is taken by the leutenantgenerals Erycius Clarus and 
Julius Alexander. Trajan, now fearing fresh difficulties from the 
Parthians, gives them a king of their own. After this he marches into 
Arabia, and attacks the city of the Atreni, which had revolted from 
him. Here however he encounters enormous difficulties and is unsuc- 
cessful. He leaves the place. Not long after his health begins to 
fal Meanwhile there is an uprising of Jews in Cyrene, accompanied 
by wholesale massacres. The same thing happens also in Egypt and 
in Cyprus. Lusius is sent by Trajan and puts down the insurrection. 
Trajan prepares for another expedition; but his sickness increasing, 
“he sets out on his return to Italy, leaving Hadrian in Syria in command 
of the army. He dies at Selinus in Cilicia. 

Now the winter at Antioch (8) separates the events enumerated 
in the paragraphs (a) and (y) respectively; and supposing this to be 
the winter of 112, we should get two whole years for the operations (a), 


416 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


while only one year and a half would be left for all the campaigns 
(y. But this is quite disproportionate to their relative difficulty and 
extent. The operations (a) were confined to a range of territory which 
compared with the subsequent campaigns was limited, for Trajan does 
not seem to have advanced beyond the borders of the Greater Armenia, 
and it is not clear that he himself entered Adiabene at all. Not a 
single battle appears to have been fought; no delay in crossing great 
rivers is recorded ; not one siege is mentioned; and altogether the 
operations resolve themselves into a straight-forward bloodless march. 
But the incidents (y) are wholly different in character. They extend 
from Cyprus and Cyrene to the Persian Gulf. There are subjugations 
and revolts and subjugations again. There are boats to be built and 
dragged overland, and rivers to be bridged, and cities to be besieged. 
Trajan and his generals appear now here and now there—over vast 
tracts of country. Dierauer speaks of the ‘astonishing rapidity’, the 
‘breathless haste’, of Trajan's movements (pp. 173, 181). But with 
this apportionment of the time, we have something more than breathless 
haste; and it may fairly be asked whether human energy could have 
crowded all these operations within the limits thus assigned to 
them. 

The same result seems to follow from an investigation of the 
chronology of the emperor’s titles. We have seen (pp. 396, 411) 
that Optimus occurs on more than one inscription belonging to the 
year rr4, and one of these, a military diploma found at Carnuntum 
in Pannonia, bears the date Sept. 1. The designation Parthicus on 
the other hand is less frequent. Hitherto it has been found only on 
one monument belonging to this year, a non-official inscription in the 
province of Baetica (see above, p. 412 sq). It must therefore have 
been given in sufficient time to get known in Spain before the close 
of the year. 

These facts are in harmony with the meagre notice of Dion, in 
which he represents both titles as conferred during the first part 
of the eastern campaign, and Optimus as preceding Parthicus. But 
the date of the latter title has an important bearing on our investigation. 
It was conferred, says Dion, after he had taken Nisibis and Batnz, 
i.e. after he had overrun Mesopotamia and while he was close to the 
frontier of Adiabene, so that the operations (a) were already drawing 
toa close. Indeed it seems probable from Dion's account that he left 
Lusius to complete them, while he himself returned to Antioch. This 
being so, the operations (a) are all exhausted in the year 114, and nothing 
is left for 115. 


Mas 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 


So again with the successive titles of 


A. D. 


417 


Imperator. In the years 


II4, 115, Trajan rises from Imperator vi to Imperator xi, if 


not to Imperator xii, so that the title is conferred five times, if not 
SIX; whereas in A.D. 116, 117, there are only two fresh accumulations 


at most. This ratio of five to 


two, or possibly of six to one, would 


be out of all Proportion to the respective Operations (a) and (y). On 


the other hand, if all the events (a) 
the three fresh titles vii, viii, and i 


Supply all that the history requir 


titles would still remain for the nu 


A.D, II5, TIÓ: 


were comprised in the year I14, 


X, which belong to that year, would 
; and four accumulations of the 
merous operations (y) of the years 


On these grounds I have assumed that the winter of the earthquake 


5. 


was II$, not 118; and the incidents are arranged accordingly in the 
chronological table, The distribution of the subsequent events however 


which fall to the years 115, 116, 
and here conjecture must step in. 


by the monuments, 


117, is still left undetermined 
It seems 


probable however that the entrance into Ctesiphon, which was the 
crowning triumph of the expedition, took place at the close of 115, 
and that the winter II$ Was spent in this city. This is a reasonable, 


though not certain inference from the language of Dion. 


He says 


that Trajan after leaving Ctesiphon set out to visit the Red Sea (i.e. 
the Persian Gulf) but that “owing to the wintry season (or the stormy 


weather) 
he was in some peril.’ 
conclusive in itself as to 


and the rapidity of the Tigris and the reflux of the ocean 
The expression vd Xeu49vos is not indeed 
the season of the year'; but in conjunction 


with the description of the danger it points naturally to the winter 
or the very early spring. The documents are quite consistent with 


1 Dion Cass. lxviii. 28 jad 5e 0j xe- 
Lavos Tis Te Tod Tiypidos ófórwros kal 
THS TOO wkeavod dvappolas éxwwddbveuce, 
Volkmar (Rhein. Mus. N. F. X11. p. 508), 
answering Francke, says * Und worin liegt 
nun das Ueberwintern? Sollte der ge- 
lehrte Historiker wirklich gedacht haben 
in mO xXemdvos? Es heisst nicht etwa 
ÜmÓ Tl] Xeuwdva, sondern durch einen 
Sturm etc.’ But (r) Dion would certainly 
never have made xeuwv feminine. (2) 
He would not have used the accusative 
case, unless he had meant something dif- 
ferent, e.g. *under cover of winter’, or 
*at the approach of winter’. (3) The 
article is as frequently omitted as inserted, 


IGN. II, 


when winter is intended; e, g. Thucyd. vi. 
34 eLwoOjvar dv T dpa els xeuava. In 
fact dd [rod] xeudvos may have several 
meanings ; (r) ‘stormy weather’, e.g. Thu- 
cyd. vi. 104 ràs vats boas erbynoay bmà 
TOU XELMOVOS, Antiphon Tetral. i. 2. | 
(P: 116) of óvervxobrres, ómórav bev wd 
Xtu4dvos toviow, edvdlas yevouévns Ta- 
ovra. : (2) ‘severe climate’, as at high alti- 
tudes, e.g. Herod. viii. 138 obpos kéerau, 
Bépjuov ofvoua, &Barov vro Xetmovos: (3) 
‘winter season’, e.g. Thucyd. ii. ror jad 
Xetm@vos éraNavmápet (comp. c. 102 Todde 
Tod xeuwcvos), Herod. iv, 62 úmoyvogrée, 
yap 0) alel bard rv xeudbwvov. 


27 


418 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


this view. The oficial assumption of the title Parthicus was, as we 
have seen (p. 412), coincident with the entrance into Ctesiphon. This 
title is not wanting on any document belonging to the year 116. 

Nor again do the inscriptions which bear the name of the consul 
Pedo offer any impediment to this solution, as some critics seem to 
think. If the earthquake occurred during this winter, he must have 
perished soon after he had assumed office, probably not later than 
February. The news might not have reached Rome before March. 
Of the documents bearing his name, some merely mention him as 
the eponym of the year (e.g. C. Z. Z. vi. 1984, 2404, 2411). These 
therefore have no bearing on the question. The only two which have a 
date both belong to the month of January (C.Z Z. vi. 543, dated 
Id. Jan., and vi. 43, 44, dated v Kal. Febr.), while he was probably 
still alive, but at all events before his death was known at Rome. 


D. 


The day on which S. Ignatius was commemorated is a fit subject for 
investigation, for it has, some indirect bearings which are not unimpor- 
tant. It varied at different times and in different places. 


I. OCTOBER 17. This was the original day observed as the anniver- 
sary of the saint's martyrdom in Syria and Greece, as will be evident 
from the following facts. : 

(i) Chrysostom in his panegyric on S. Ignatius states that the 
festival of the martyr followed immediately on that of S. Pelagia ; Hom. 
in S. Ignat. (Op. 11. p. 562 sq). The grace of the Spirit, he says, sets 
before us its banquets of the martyrs in rapid succession (cuvexets xjuty 
kal éradAnAovs tas TGV paprópwv maparévat tparéćas). Only the other 
day it was a young virgin Pelagia who entertained us ; to-day the valiant 
Ignatius has succeeded to her festival (mpév yotv jus xdpy copo véa 
kai amepóyapos 7 pakapia paptus IeAayia...ciotiace’ onpepov mad civ 
èkeívns éoprijv © pakdptos oros kai yevvatos udpTus "lyvártos diedéfaro), 
The persons, he adds, are different, but the table is one. 

This statement created a difficulty. The Pelagia here mentioned 
was doubtless the saint of Antioch, in whose honour Chrysostom de- 
livered two orations which are extant. But, whereas the day of Igna- 
tius in the Greek calendar is December 20, neither this nor any 
other Pelagia is commemorated in December or even in the preceding 
month in any known calendar. The days assigned to Pelagia of 


OF S, IGNATIUS, 419 


dar, and that in Chrysostom’s time the day of commemoration was 
different. Zahn (Z v. A. P. 53), who took this view, supposed that the 
original commemoration was in June. The first point has since been 
established beyond question ; but the original day of Ignatius is dis- 
covered to have been October 17, as will appear from the documents 
quoted in the sequel. This accords with a marginal note in a ms of 
Chrysostom’ s Homily on S. Pelagia, which gives pyvi oxtwBpio x’, as 
the date of its delivery (Of. 11. p. 584). 

(ii) The Syriac ms Brit, Mus. Add. 12,150 is described in 
Wright's Catalogue of Syriac MSS p. 631. It is probably the oldest 
dated ws in existence, having been written A.D. 411. At the close of 
the volume, which contains portions of the Clementine Homilies and 
Recognitions, the Books against the Manicheans by Titus of Bostra, the 
Theophania and Palestinian Martyrs of Eusebius, etc., in Syriac versions, 
is a Syriac Martyrology, in which the names of the Western martyrs are 
arranged in the order of the Syrian months. This Martyrology has 
been published and translated by Wright in the Journal of Sacred 
Literature vu. pp. 45 Sq, 423 sq. Under the month Former Teshri 
(October) we have, among other names ; 


8. At Antioch, Pelagia. 
I7. Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, of the number of the ancient con- 
fessors. 


Attention was called to this entry by Zahn (Zen. e Pol. Ep. pp. xiii, 
343, 381), who thus in his later work corrected his earlier conjecture as 
to the time. 

Here then we have found what we sought. The ms, as we have 
seen, dates from the early years of the 5th century ; but the Martyrology 
itself, even in its Syriac dress, must be much older. It is full of errors 
arising from the confusion of Syriac letters having similar forms, and 
therefore probably is removed by several stages of transcription from the 
original Syriac document. But this Syriac document itself was a transla- 
tion from the Greek (see Zahn Zgw. e? Pol. Ep. p. 381). We shall 
probably therefore be correct in assigning the work to a date not later 
than about the middle of the 4th century. At all events it will be older 
than S. Chrysostom's panegyric; and it seems to have emanated from 
Antioch or the neighbourhood. 

(ii) In the Syriac translation of the Antiochene Acts of Zgnatzus, 

27—2 


420 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


published by Moesinger (p. 12, l. r; comp. p. 15 for the translation), 
the date of the martyr’s death, which in the extant Greek and Latin 
copies of this same document is given December 2o, appears as ‘the 
seventeenth of the Later Teshri’ (ie. November). Comparing this 
statement with the previously mentioned Syrian Martyrology, and 
bearing in mind that no calendar places the commemoration of the 
saint on November 17, we can hardly doubt that it is a slip for the 
Former Teshri, so that here also the same date (Oct. 17) is given. The 
translator doubtless substituted the day of commemoration which was 
still kept by his own church for the day which he found in the Greek 
document before him (see below, p. 423). Thus the commemoration of 
Oct. 17 survived, in some Syrian Churches at least, long after the Antio- 
chene Acts were composed. 

(iv) I have also found this date of the festival preserved in a 
Jacobite Syriac calendar in the Vatican Ms ,Syz. xxxvii, described in 
Assemani Bibl. Apost. Vatic. Cod. MSS Catal. Pars i. Tom. ii. p. 244, 
a volume of miscellaneous contents brought from Mesopotamia. On 
p. 250 sq is ‘Kalendarium per anni circulum festorum Domini et 
sanctorum ordinatum a sancto Jacobo Edesseno.’ It contains these 
notices ; 


Oct. 15 ‘Isaiah of Aleppo; and the decease of Mar Asia [sow 
the Physician] who is also Pantaleon; and Ignatius of Melitene who is 
also the Runner!; and Mar Phineas of Hah.’ 

Oct. 17 ‘The Prophets generally; and Hosea the Prophet; and Igna- 
tius Nurono; and Theophilus of Alexandria.’ 


Jan. 29 ‘Burial of the bones of Ignatius Nurono; and Severus the 
Capharseean, Archimandrite of Kartamin; and the Martyrs of Galatia.’ 


The celebration of the other Ignatius two days before was probably 
due to an attraction. We shall meet with other instances in the calen- 
dar of this tendency to bring into proximity saints bearing the same 
name. Of Jan. 29, as the day of the translation of our Ignatius from 
Rome to Antioch, I shall have to speak hereafter. 

(v) A search through the Syriac calendars in the British Museum, 
which Dr Wright kindly undertook at my request, has brought to light 
one interesting entry. 

The ms Add. 17,134 is dated A.D. 675, and was probably written 
by the hand of the famous Jacob of Edessa himself (see Wright's 
Catalogue of Syriac MSS p. 330 sq). It contains chiefly Hymns of 
Severus and others (among these a Hymn on Ignatius, and another on 


! See Assem. Bibl. Orient. 11. pp. 351, 36s. 


OF S, IGNATIUS, 42i 


Basil and Gregory); but beginning on fol, 84 z is a calendar of Saints 
Days ‘perhaps written by a different hand. It furnishes these notices ; 


VARY ce na mamma oise ean xc 
fol 84a + agria vata valveta 
VaT mnis: man eizh> ims hars 

fol. 855 > oum DAs tot 


*On the rst of the Later Kanun [January]; Of the holy fathers 
Ignatius, Basilius, Gregorius, and the rest,’ 

“On the 17th of the Former Teshri [October]; Of the holy (ones), 
Ignatius, Gregorius, Basilius. 


S. Basil died on the first day of the year 379, and his commemora- 
tion was and is kept accordingly on Jan. 1, while Oct. 17, as we have 
seen, was the festival of Ignatius' Here then they make common 
cause—each sharing his festival with the other. This phenomenon 
illustrates other notices respecting Ignatius. Of the 125 Zpithronian 
Orations, delivered by Severus of Antioch and preserved in Syriac 
versions, six (9, 37, 65, 84, 102, 116) were spoken on the festival of 
S. Basil and S. Gregory? (Wright’s Catalogue p. 534 sq, Cureton C. Z 
P. 215 sq, p. 247 sq). Respecting four of these we are told that they 
were delivered in the Church of Ignatius, that is, no doubt, in the 
ancient Tychzum, which had been converted into a Christian church, 
and whither the bones of Ignatius had been translated from the Ceme- 
tery. In one case it is distinctly said that the delivery of the oration 
on the Cappadocian fathers in this church was ‘according to custom,’ 
while in three reference is made to Ignatius, and the preacher dwells 
on the resemblance of Basil and Gregory to this early martyr of Antioch. 
This habitual association of their names by the great Monophysite 
patriarch of Antioch may have suggested a corresponding arrangement 
in the calendar of the great Monophysite father of Edessa. At all 
events the two cannot be independent. But, however this may be, 
these notices show that Oct. 17 continued to be the festival of S 
Ignatius after the Monophysite schism, and had not yet been sup- 
planted by Dec. 20. 


1 The day of Gregory Nazianzen is was not instituted till the rrth century. 
Jan. 25. On Jan. 30 the Greek Church 2 These six homilies were evidently 
(besides their several commemorations) delivered on Jan. 1, for they appear be- 
commemorates in common Basil, Gregory, tween homilies on the Nativity and the 
and Chrysostom ; but this common festival ^ Epiphany. 


422 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


(vi) Another trace of this day appears in the Bollandist Acta 
Sanctorum Feb. x (1. p. 14, ed. nov.), where, after mention of the proxi- 
mity to S. Pelagia’s day in S. Chrysostom's time, the editors say ‘Neque 
in Junio neque in Octobri ulla S. Ignatii in martyrologiis reperitur 
observata solennitas, si quaedam annotata Mss excipiantur Carthusia- 
norum Bruxellensium, in quibus xvii Octobris traditur B. Ignatii 
martyris translatio. As the day of the martyrdom was already fixed 
for them in their own calendar at a different time, these Carthusians 
would naturally assume that October 17 must be the day of the transla- 
tion of the reliques. But whence they derived their information, I do 
not know. 


2. DECEMBER 20. This is the common date of the martyrdom, 
which prevailed in the Greek and other Eastern Churches at a later age. 
The Menea contain two festivals of our saint. 

Dec. 20. The anniversary of the martyrdom (Mvyjun To) ayiov 
NINE "Lyvaríov ToO Ocopdpov). 

The orixou are 

Aéovatv, "Lyvárte, detrvov TpovréÜns, 
Koívove Seirvov pvorikod, Oapaovs Aéov. 
Hixads "Lyvartos dave yaupnàfot Xeóvrov. 

Jan. 29. The return of the reliques-((H 'Avaxopa8y rdv Aeulávov tod 
aylov tepomaprupos "Lyvaríov tod 9eodópov). 

The orixou are 

Xapis A€ovow, “Tyvarie, tapPBopors 
Zot cwparos AvroÜci Kal murrots pépos. 
T5 9 évary émadvovdos 'Lyvar(o cixads Túx0m. 

This second festival is almost as prominent in the Menza as the 
first. 

The Armenian calendar agrees substantially with the later Greek as 
regards the day of the martyrdom, though it exhibits slight variations. 
In the Armenian Acts of Ignatius ($ 49) the date is given ix Kal. Jan., 
ie. Dec. 24. It has been suggested above that this was an alteration 
made arbitrarily from xiii Kal Jan. (Dec. 20)—the day given in the 
original Greek from which this portion of the Armenian Acts is taken— 
because Dec. 24 was the Armenian day of commemoration at the time 
when the translator or transcriber lived. Just in the same way we have 
seen (p. 420) that the Syrian translator in this very passage has substi- 
tuted another day, to bring it into conformity with the usage of the 
Syrian Church. The day in the Armenian calendar was originally, we 
may suppose, identical with the day in the Greek; but the beginnings 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 423 


of the Armenian months at that time did not exactly synchronize with 
the beginnings of the Greek months. In the same way Dec. 20 is Choiak 
24 in the Egyptian, and Tahsas 24 in the Ethiopic calendar (see below 
P. 425 sq). In the Armenian Menologies, if I am correctly informed, 
the day is given Dec. 20, conformably to the Greek calendar. On the 
other hand in two Armenian calendars reprinted in Assemani (Bib 
Orient. 111. p. 648, p. 654) it is neither Dec. 24 nor Dec. 20, but Dec. 17. 
Whether this slight variation again can be explained by some fluctuation 
in the Armenian year or not, I am unable to say. It should be observed 
however that this last date agrees with some early forms of the Latin 
calendar (see below p. 430). In the two Armenian calendars last men- 
tioned there is also a second day of commemoration for this saint ; 
Jan. 29 in the one (p. 645), and Jan. 3o in the other (p.649). This 
second commemoration corresponds to the festival of the translation 
in the Greek calendar. 

The earliest document which gives December 20 for the martyrdom 
is the Antiochene Acts of Ignatius (§ 7 TH po Sexatpidv kadavdav "Iavvov- 
apíov). Notwithstanding the various reading of the Syriac version 
mentioned above (p. 420), the existing Greek and Latin texts un- 
questionably give the date which stood originally in this document ; 
for this xiiith before the Kalends is mentioned in the body of the work 
(Š 6 9 Aeyopévg 7H "Popaixg povi tpurxadexéry), where it belongs to the 
texture of the story, and where the number is left undisturbed by the 
Syriac translator himself. 


3. Juty1. This appears to have been the anniversary of the 
martyrdom, as commemorated in the Egyptian Churches, 

The correct text of the Roman Acts of Martyrdom is unquestionably 
(Š 12) kai éarw 9 prijj Tod Ocopireararov Kai yevvacov páprvpos "Lyvoríov 
papi mavéuo veouqvía, ‘in the month Panemus on the rst day, as it 
appears in P, the best of the three Greek mss. The retention of this 
date is the more remarkable, because this document is inserted in a 
hagiology for December (see above, p. 364) ; its place having been adapted 
to the later usage of the Eastern Churches as regards the commemora- 
tion of Ignatius, but the corresponding change in the month and day, 
which was thus required, having been overlooked. So too the date is 
"given in the Memphitic version, necovar Aumrañor eujasMowt epog 
BATS MIPWMEOC SE MAMEMOC? KATA HEpEeAuroo HMI AE MECOT [4 LETHAL, 
‘the first of the month which is called according to the Romans Pane- 
mus, but according to the Egyptians the seventh of Epiphi [Abib].’ 
The Macedonian names of the months prevailed in Egypt; and in 


424 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Macedonian nomenclature July was Panemus. The Egyptian equivalent 
was Epiphi; but the native Egyptian months only coincided roughly, and 
Epiphi began on June 25, so that Panemus 1 = Epiphi 7; see Clinton 
Fast. Hellen. 111. pp. 360, 363, Ideler Handb. d. Chron. 1. p. 143 sq. 
So too the heading of these Acts in this Coptic Version describes the 
martyrdom as taking place &cow Z Wmra&or enum, ‘on the seventh of 
the month Epiphi.’ And again the corresponding notice in the Avmenzan 
Acts of Martyrdom (§ 52), taken from these Roman Acts, runs ‘Me- 
moriam Deo dilecti et fortis propugnatoris Ignatii in Hrotitz mensis die 
primo [secundum Graecos Decembr. 20] manifestavimus vobis etc.’ 
(p. 547, Petermann). Hrotitz is the last of the Armenian months, but 
the Armenian year commenced with August, so that here again we have 
the date July 1. The words in brackets therefore (an addition, I 
suppose, of the editor Aucher) do not give the Greek equivalent in 
time, but communicate the information that the day was different in 
the Greek calendar. It has been observed already (p. 375) that this 
statement is quite inconsistent with an earlier notice in these same 
Armenian Acts (§ 49), ‘Facta est res haec ante ix [secundum Graecos 
xiii] Kalendas Januarias’ (p. 545), taken from the Antiochene Acts. 

'This then (July 1) was the original date for the martyrdom in this 
document; but in the other Greek mss VL it is altered to conform to 
the later Greek usage pyvi AekepfDpéo eixadi, and L also adds the day of 
the translation of the reliques Jan. 29, évex0évrev 8 èv "Avtioxeia T@v 
tisiov avto Xeujavov pyvi "Iavvovapio eiat evvary. 

This same day, Epiphi [Abib] 7, was also, I do not doubt, the 
original festival of the martyrdom in the native Coptic Churches. 
Melchite Coptic calendars indeed, as we should expect, follow the 
later Greek usage, giving Dec. 20 for the martyrdom, and Jan. 29 for 
the translation. Two such are given in Mai, Script. Vet. Nov. Coll. 
IV. H. pp. 50, 52, and p. 169, respectively. In the present Jacobite 
Coptic calendar also the martyrdom of Ignatius is commemorated on 
Choiak 24 (Dec. 20), and his name has disappeared from Abib 7 
(July 1), which commemorates only Shenuti (see Malan's Documents 
of the Coptic Church, pp. 16, 34, of the calendar)'. The translation is 


1 This is also the case in Brit. Mus. dar Epiphi is wanting. Conversely in 
Add. 5996, where Shenuti alone is com- Brit. Mus. Oriental 1 321, dated A.D. 
memorated on Epiphi 7. In Brit. Mus. 1:346, a lectionary with calendar, She- 
Oriental 425, dated A.D. 1307, a MS of nuti alone without Ignatius is comme- 
the Gospels with a calendar appended, ^ morated on Epiphi 7; but the month of 
Ignatius is commemorated on Choiak 24; ^ Choiak is not included in this volume. 
while owing to a mutilation of the calen- 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 425 


not mentioned at all. But in other Coptic calendars the original 
Egyptian day, Epiphi 7, is preserved. Probably documents may be 
extant in which this is the sole day of commemoration. But in those 
which I have noticed the later Greek usage is combined with the original 
Egyptian, so that there are two days of commemoration, July 1 and 
Dec. 20. This double commemoration appears, for instance, in a 
Jacobite Coptic calendar (in Arabic) given in Mail c., where we have 
under Abib 7 [July z] ‘Sancti Ignatii et Scenudii abbatis’ (p. 31), and 
under Choiak 24 [Dec. 20] ‘Sancti Ignatii’ (p. 21). A second example 
appears in another Coptic calendar (in the Arabic language), likewise 
given in Mai, 2. pp. 103, 117, which under Abib 7 has ‘Martyrium 
Ignatii papae Romae, qui Petrum excepit imperante Trajano,’ and 
under Choiak 24 ‘Martyrium sancti Ignatii patriarchae Antiochiae, 
discipuli sancti Johannis evangelistae) The designation ‘Papa Romae’ 
is a hasty inference from the statement that he succeeded S. Peter. 
This last quoted calendar is stated to be ‘juxta recensionem factam 
a patre Michaele episcopo Atribae et Meligae, et ab aliis sanctis 
patribus’ (p. 93). This Michael flourished about A.D. 1425. The 
alternate ascendency of Melchites and Jacobites for some generations 
in the Egyptian Churches will explain this intermingling of different 
usages. 

So far as I have observed, the Ethiopic calendars all commemo- 
rate Ignatius on both days, Tahsas 24 and Hamlé 7, corresponding 
to Dec. 20 and July r respectively. So for instance the calendar 
given in Ludolf, p. 389 sq (see pp. 402, 421). But they most 
commonly add a third commemoration also, Hamlé r (June 25). This 
is the case with the Ethiopic Synaxarion described in Dillmann’s 
Catal. Cod. Aethiop. Bibl. Bodl. p. 37 sq, where we have the following 
entries ; 

Tahsas 24 * Martyrium Ignatii, patriarchae Antiocheni’ [p. 49]. 

Hamlé 1 * Commemoratio Martyrii Ignatii patriarchae" [p. 63]. 

Hamle 7 ‘ Martyrium Ignatii, patriarchae Romani post Petrum’ [p. 64]: 
and similarly in Zotenberg Catal. des MSS Ethiop. de la Bibl. Nation. 
pp. 169, 189, 190. 

Several such Ethiopic Synaxaria are described in Wright's Catal. of 
Ethiop. MSS in the Brit. Mus. p. 152. At my request Dr Wright 
examined them with a view to the notices respecting the commemo- 
ration of Ignatius, and has furnished me with the following translation 
of the entries. 

Tahsas 24 ‘And again on this day the holy and illustrious Ignatius, 
patriarch of Antioch, became a martyr.’ 


426 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


‘He was the disciple of the blessed Apostle John the Evangelist, 
and ministered unto him in preaching, and went with him to many cities. 
Thereafter he appointed him patriarch over the city of Antioch; and he 
preached therein with life-giving preaching, and converted many unto the 
knowledge of the Lord, and baptized them with the Christian baptism, 
and enlightened them with knowledge, and showed their error unto those 
who worshipped idols.’ 

‘And the heathen were enraged with him and accused him before 
king Trajan (Trabyanos), the wicked Cæsar; and they said unto him: 
Ignatius abolisheth the worship of thy gods, and teacheth the people and 
bringeth them into the Christian faith of Christ. 

‘Then he sent and bade him come unto him. And the king said 
unto Ignatius: Why hast thou done this? and why hast thou abolished the 
worship of my gods? and hast brought all men into the worship of 
Christ? And Ignatius said unto him: Zf z£ were possible for me, I 
would bring thee too, O king, into the worship of Christ, the King of 
all, that I might make thee a friend of His. And the king said unto 
him: Let this talk alone, and sacrifice unto my gods; and if not, I will 
torture thee with great torture. And the holy Ignatius said unto him: 
Do unto me, O king, all that thou pleasest; because, as for me, Í will not 
sacrifice unto thy filthy gods, and I am not afraid of thy torture, neither 
of thy fire nor of thy lions; and thou art not able to divide me from the 
love of Christ, the living King? 

‘And when the king heard this, he became very angry, and ordered 
him to be tortured with great torture. And they tortured him with much 
torture, and placed coals of fire in his hands, and seized him with pincers 
(or fleshhooks) a long time, whilst the fire was in his hands; and after 
this they burned his sides with brimstone (6etov) and oil, kindled with 
fire. And after this they lacerated all his body with knives of iron.’ 

‘And when those who tortured him were weary of torturing him, 
they cast him into prison, until they could do with him according to all 
that they wished; and he remained in prison many days. And there- 
after they remembered him and brought him forth, and set him before 
the king,’ 

‘And the king said unto him: O Jenatius, if thou couldest see the 
gods, their beauty would please thee. And the holy one said unto him: 
If thou wouldest believe in Christ, He would make thee raise the dead 
and heal the sick. And the king said unto him: There ¿s no worship 
which ¿s better than the worship of the sun. And the holy one said unto 
him: How £s it better to worship the sun, which hath been created, and to 
forsake the Creator, whose kingdom doth not fail? And the king said 
unto him: Thou speakest not well, but by thy transgression thou drawest 
all the people of Syria unto the worship of Christ. And the holy one 
was angered, and said unto him: O hing, because I have drawn the 
people from worshipping idols and have brought them unto the worship 
of Christ, the Creator of heaven and earth, who was before the world, 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 427 


thou art angry with me and orderest me to sacrifice unto thy gods and 
thy filthy idols! But as Jor me, I will not obey thy order, and I will 
not sacrifice unto devils, but I will sacrifice unto my God, who ¿s in 
truth, Father and Son and the Holy Spirit? 

‘Then the king was angered, and commanded that they should let 
loose upon him two hungry lions, so that they should not leave even a 
morsel of his flesh. And when the holy Ignatius saw the lions coming 
nigh unto him, he cried out with a loud voice, and said to the people: 
Hearken unto my voice, O men of the city of Rome who are assembled 
here, and know that it is not because of pride and vainglory that I 
patiently endure this torture, but my patience is because of my Lord 
Fesus Christ, my God. And lo, my soul desireth that these lions should 
crush me like wheat, because my soul desireth now to go to my Lord Fesus 
Christ.’ 

‘And when the king heard what he said, he marvelled and was 
astonished and said: How great ¿s the patience of the Christians under 
these tortures! Who is there of the heathens who could patiently endure 
these tortures for the gods? 

“Then those lions came near to the holy one; and when they saw 
him, they stood still in terror. And afterwards one of them stretched out 
his paw upon his neck and seized him. Then he delivered up his soul 
into the hand of Christ his God with joy, and He fulfilled for him his 
prayer, and it was not possible for those lions to touch a morsel of his 
body, but it is preserved in the city of Rome until the second coming 
of the Lord Jesus Christ.’ 

‘And after this they buried the body of the holy Ignatius in the 
cemetery which is outside the city, with hymns and psalms. And he 
accomplished his martyrdom well for the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; and they wrote his contest that it might be profitable for him 
who reads it and for him who remembers his name. And they made 
for him a festival in every place, and he intercedes for them in all their 
afflictions, because he hated the life of this world. May his holy bless- 
ing be with ezc. 

*Hail to Ignatius, the chosen of God 

Who preached the truth unto those who had gone astray! 
The heathen, whilst they made sport of him, 
Burned his side with boiling oil and sulphur, 
And also placed in his hands coals of fire! 


Hamlé 1 ‘And again on this day was the martyrdom of Ignatius the 
patriarch, may his blessing be with ezc.? 
Hale 7 ‘And again on this day the holy father Ignatius, patriarch 


1 mss consulted, Brit. Mus. Oriental ? Orient. 659 has Agnatyos; Orient. 
660, 667, 656, 658; see Wright’s Cata- 657, Guatyos; Orient. 661, Zmagt yos; 
logue p. 182 sq. and Orient. 670, Agrtyos. 


428 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


of the city of Rome, became a martyr, who was after Peter, in the days 
of king Trajan (Trabyanos).’ 

‘For when this king heard concerning this father that he taught all 
the nations and brought them into the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ (to 
whom be glory) and rejected the worship of idols, he bade him come, 
and said to him, Sacrifice unto the gods; but he hearkened not unto him, 
neither did he obey him. And he made him many promises, and was 
indignant with him; but he heeded not his promises, and feared not his 
indignation. And after there had been much talk between them, and 
he would not agree with him about his apostatising, then he brought 
him to the lions. And the holy Ignatius commanded his people, and 
strengthened them in the right faith. And one of the lions drew nigh 
unto him and seized his neck; and he delivered up his soul into the 
hand of the Lord. And thereafter that lion came not near him at all. 
And they carried away his body with much honour, and placed it in a fair 
spot, which the Lord had prepared for it.’ 

‘Hail to Ignatius, who inherited (oz occupied) the throne of Peter, 

The grace of which is exalted above all thrones. 

While he was polluting the sacrifice of abominable idols, 
As the consummation of his martyrdom a lion killed him, 
But did not thereafter come near to his body to touch itt? 


This triple commemoration may be easily explained. The date 
Hamlé 1 is a repetition of Hamlé 7, according to another mode of 
reckoning. Strictly speaking Panemus (July) 1 corresponded to Hamlé 
7; but roughly Panemus was regarded as equivalent to July. Hence 
by a careless transference the Egyptian day of commemoration Panemus 
r became Hamlé 1; and this day, having been borrowed directly or 
indirectly from some Greeco-Egyptian calendar, was set down without 
noticing that Panemus 1 was already represented by Hamlé 7. 

It should be noticed that both the accounts of the martyrdom 
(under Tahsas 24, and under Hamlé 7) are derived almost entirely from 
the Roman Acts. This is an additional indication of the Egyptian 
origin of those Acts (see above p. 381). 


4. FEBRUARY 1. The ultimate usage of the Latin Churches is 
represented in the Martyrology of Ado (t A.D. 875); 


Feb. r ‘Eodem die apud Antiochiam, beati Ignatii episcopi et martyris.’ 
Dec. 17 *Translatio S. Ignatii episcopi et martyris qui tertius post 
beatum Petrum apostolum Antiochenam rexit ecclesiam. 


See also his Liber de Festiv. p. 191 (Migne), where an account of the 


1 Orient. 670, f. 78 a, col. 2; collated with Orient. 661, f. 106 b, col. 3, and 
Orient. 657, f. 147 5, col. 2. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 429 


saint is given, and the same days are mentioned, The account con- 
cludes, ‘ Reliquiae ejus Antiochiam relatae jacent extra portam Daphni- 
ticam in coemiterio ecclesiae, xvi Kalendas Januarias delatae) The 
days are the same in Usuard; and so Notker gives Feb. 1 for the 
martyrdom, but the two last months in the year are wanting in his 
calendar. 

Thus comparing it with the final Greek calendar we find the final 
Latin calendar substituting Feb. 1 for Dec. 20 as the day of the 
martyrdom, and Dec. 17 for Jan. 29 as the day of the translation. 

But this result was only attained after much fluctuation. In the 
oldest Latin calendars there is no mention of this saint at all (see 
Zahn Z 2. A. p. 27sq). This is the case for instance in the Hierony- 
mian Martyrology. In the original Beda (Op. v. 1134, Migne), Dec. 17 
is given as the day, not of the translation, but of the martyrdom’; 

xvi Kal. Jan. ‘Natale S. Ignatii episcopi et martyris qui tertius 
Antiochiae post Petrum apostolum episcopus duodecimo Trajani anno ad 
bestias vinctus Romae [l. Romam] missus est. Reliquiae tamen corporis 
ejus Antiochiae jacent (extra portam Daphniticam in coemeterio ec- 
clesiae); 

, while no other day is commemorated in connexion with this saint. 
The same is also the case with Rhabanus Maurus (Of. IV. 1186, Migne), 
who repeats almost the same words; and with Wandalbert (Migne's 
Patrol. Lat. CXX1. p. 622), whose verses on Dec. 17 are, 


‘Ignatius sanctus deno sextoque triumphat, 
Antiochenae urbis pastor martyrque, ferarum 

Quem dentes panem vivum fecere; sequuntur 
Quem fuso ob Christum Rufus Zosimusque cruore’; 


where the companionship of Rufus and Zosimus with Ignatius is taken 
from Polycarp Phil. 9. These facts seem to show that, when Dec. 17 
first appeared in the Latin calendar, it was intended for the martyrdom. 
How this day came to be selected, we can only conjecture. But I 
think it may be explained as a confusion of Oct. 17 and Dec. 2o, the 
two days of the martyrdom in the earlier and later Greek calendar. 
On the other hand Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 28) suggests that it is due to 
attraction, the commemoration of another martyr bearing the same 
name having already, as he supposes, been fixed on Dec. 25 (see 


1 In the poetical Martyrology however, 2 See however the same phenomenon 
attributed to Bede (Of. v. 606, Migne), in some Armenian calendars noticed 
Dec. 20 is given; ‘Ter decimas Daciani above, p. 423. 

Ignatius aeque Kalendis,’ 


430 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Martyr. Hieron. Dec, 25, Hieron. Of. xr. p. 545). Meanwhile in other 
calendars in the West Feb. 1 had been fixed for the martyrdom of 
Ignatius of Antioch. This day must have been selected arbitrarily 
without any reference to tradition ; but it would be suggested, as Zahn 
supposes (l. c.), by proximity to the festival of the African martyr bearing 
the same name Ignatius or Egnatius (see Cyprian gisi. xxxix. 3, 
p. 583 Hartel) who was already commemorated on Feb. 3 (see the 
Bollandist Act. Sanct. Februarius r. p. 325 sq, ed. nov.)’. Again, Feb. 1 
appears as the commemoration of Polycarp’s martyrdom in some 
early Latin calendars (e.g. Martyr. Hieron.), and the memory of Ignatius 
of Antioch was inseparably connected with that of Polycarp. Thus the 
earlier Latin calendars exhibit two days as claimants for the martyrdom 
of Ignatius of Antioch, Dec. 17 and Feb. 1; and the ultimate form of 
the Roman calendar is, I am disposed to think, an attempt to reconcile 
these rival claims. Feb. 1 was allowed to retain the martyrdom, while 
Dec. 17 was compensated with the translation. This last adjustment 
would be the more easy, because those martyrologies which give 
Dec. 17 as the day of Ignatius include in the appended account of 
the saint the notice of the deposition of his bones at Antioch as related 
by S. Jerome. In this way ‘Translatio’ would be inserted on Dec. 17, 
and ‘Natale’ (where it occurred) would be removed. 

From this account it will have appeared that the commemoration 
of Ignatius of Antioch only obtained a place among the festivals of 
the Latin Church at a comparatively late date, and even then with 
many fluctuations. But in these islands several centuries more elapse 
before he is recognised ; and indeed he seems never to have obtained 
a firm footing in our northern calendars, whether Celtic or English. 
This appears, I think, from the calendars published in Hampson's 
Medii Aevi Kalendarium, and in Forbess Kalendars of Scottish Saints. 
Even in those which belong to as late a date as the 14th century 
his name is frequently wanting, and S. Brigid still retains sole posses- 
sion of Feb. 1. 


The lesson from the Gospels, appropriated to the commemoration 
of S. Ignatius, was Mark ix. 32—40.. This appropriation was owing 


1 Cyprian (l. c.) tells us that this Egna- 
tius was already commemorated in his 
time; ‘Sacrificia pro eis semper, ut me- 
ministis, quotiens martyrum passiones, et 
dies anniversaria commemoratione cele- 
bramus.' His day of commemoration how- 


ever in the early Carthaginian calendar 
of the sth century appears to be June r4, 
not Feb. 3. But he was transferred to 
Feb. 3, before Ignatius of Antioch was 
assigned to Feb. r; see Zahn Z v. A, 
p. 28 sq. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. | 431 


to the legend, founded on a misinterpretation of the name Oeopdpos, 
that Ignatius was the child whom our Lord took up in His arms 
and blessed. The legend appears in the Menæa and in the Meta- 
phrast’s Life, and through these channels it obtained currency as 
the recognised tradition of the Church. This lesson is assigned to 
his day, Dec. 20, in the Jerusalem Syriac Lectionary (p. 478, ed. 
Miniscalchi Erizzo), of which the date is A.D. 1030. So too in another 
Melchite Syriac Lectionary, dated A.D. 1216, of which an account 
is given by Assemani Bibl. Vat. Cod. MSS Catal. 1. p. 103 sq; see 
p. 121. In a Syriac Praxapostolos, likewise Melchite, described by 
Assemani (lc. p. 137 sq), of which the date is A.D. 1041, and which 
was written in the neighbourhood of Antioch, I find a lesson from 
Heb. iv. 14 sq "Exovres oov dpxiepéa péyav k.r.X. assigned to Dec. 20 
*Coronatio episcopi Ignatii? Again, in the Augsburg (Munich) ws 
of the interpolated Ignatian Epistles [g,] a marginal note points to a 
lesson taken from Ignatius himself, Rom. 4 éyà ypddw x.r.X., as ordered 
to be read êv r$ uviju) Tod ayiov "Tyvaríov. 


It will have appeared from the above account that the translation of 
the remains plays an important part in the commemoration of the 
saint. A few words therefore will be necessary respecting the history 
of the reliques, in order to clear up some points relating to the 
Calendar. Three distinct translations, real or imaginary, must be 
kept in mind. 

1. The translation from Rome to Antioch. Of this incident 
Eusebius betrays no knowledge at all. At the close of the fourth 
century however, if not earlier, it was believed that the saint was 
buried at Antioch. Jerome in his Catalogue (S 16), written A.D. 392, 
says explicitly ‘The remains of his body lie at Antioch outside the 
Daphnitic Gate in the Cemetery.’ As this is the only statement 
respecting Ignatius which he superadds to the particulars given by 
Eusebius (see above p. 3775sq), it may be presumed that he derived 
it from local sources ; and perhaps he may himself have seen the real 
or reputed tomb of the martyr. This belief supposes a translation. 
Accordingly S. Chrysostom, when he pronounces his panegyric on 
Ignatius, delivered while he was still a presbyter at Antioch (A.D. 
386—397), dwells at some length on the return of the reliques from the 
metropolis. Just as an athlete, he says, is carried home in triumph 
after his victory with cheers, and not allowed to set foot on the ground, 
so also the cities in succession, receiving Ignatius from Rome. and 
bearing him on their shoulders, escorted him as far as Antioch, praising 


432 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


the crowned victor. At the moment, he continues, he brought ad- 
vantage and prosperity to all those cities through which he passed ; 
but from that time forward to the present day he enriches the city of 
Antioch (Og. 11. p. 600). In all this however there is nothing which 
suggests that Chrysostom was building upon any definite tradition. 
His language looks like a mere imaginative effort by which a skilful 
orator would dress up the bare fact of the restoration of the body to 
Antioch. Whether the bones of the saint were actually so restored 
or not, it is impossible to say. Such a belief, where there is no evi- 
dence of its existence before the close of the fourth century, is not 
entitled to serious credit. The mere name found on a tombstone 
would be sufficient to start the belief, where the disposition was ready. 
However from this time forward the translation from Rome to Antioch 
became a settled belief. It was commemorated, as we have seen, on 
Jan. 29 in the Greek and Syrian Churches probably as early as the 
fifth century; and in the Latin Churches also at a later date it appro- 
priated a day to itself, Dec. 17. 

2. The translation from the Cemetery outside the Daphnitic 
Gate to the Tychzeum within the city. This second translation is 
so far historical, that some bones believed (whether truly or not) to 
be those of Ignatius were so translated. This took place, as we have 
seen (387 sq), some time during the first half of the fifth century 
under Theodosius the younger. 

3. The translation from Antioch to Rome. "This must be con- 
sidered as a pure fiction, of which the growth is easily traced. The 
Acts of Martyrdom, which I have called the Roman, were written, 
as we have seen, not before the fifth century. By this time it was 
the stedfast belief in Antioch and the neighbourhood, that the 
reliques of the saint reposed in his own city. But the Roman Acts 
were composed probably in Egypt, and certainly without any know- 
ledge of Antiochene belief. The writer therefore, being unfettered 
by any tradition, supposed that, as the saint had died at Rome, so 
he was buried there. This was the natural supposition. Accordingly 
he dressed up his statement in an attractive form. Before the oth 
century however these Roman Acts, clumsily combined with the 
Antiochene Acts, had been translated into Latin (see above pp. 371, 
382) and circulated in the West. A story so acceptable to Roman 
feelings could not be overlooked ; and it soon became a settled belief 
in Rome that the body of the martyr lay in the city where, as these 
Acts express it, ‘Peter was crucified and Paul was beheaded and 
Onesimus was perfected.’ But by this time the Antiochene story 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 433 


of the translation to Antioch was also an established belief far 
beyond the region of Antioch and its neighbourhood. To reconcile 
the two therefore, it was necessary to suppose a retranslation at some 
later date. As to any such retranslation history and legend alike are 
silent ; but the body, being at Rome, must have got to Rome somehow. 
Accordingly Baronio in his notes on the Martyrologium Romanum 
modestly suggests that they were removed from Antioch to Rome 
under Justinian, when the former city was devastated by Chosroes 
and the Persians, A.D. 540. This however is impossible, as the 
Bollandist editors (P. 35) point out, since half a century later Evagrius 
speaks of the saint’s body as still at Antioch. In another passage however, 
in his Annales, Baronio States the case so as to evade this difficulty. 
Under the year A.D. 637, having occasion to speak of the Saracenic 
capture of Antioch in the time of Heraclius, he writes, ‘Plane his 
temporibus, quibus sive a Persis antea, sive ab Arabibus postea iisdem 
Mahometanis et Sarracenis captae sunt nobilissimae civitates Orientis, 
Alexandria, Hierosolyma et Antiochia.. accidit ut...complura sanctorum, 
tum martyrum, tum confessorum, corpora translata fuerint in occi- 
dentem... Romam autem translatas tunc fuisse venerandas reliquias 
Ignatii martyris Antiochia, constans fama vetusque traditio, potius 
quam scripta, significant, where the previous description leaves his 
‘une several centuries to move about in. But it is clear from his 
account that he had not found this tradition (if tradition it could 
be called) in any writer even of moderate antiquity. Of the numerous 
churches in Rome and elsewhere in Western Europe, which profess 
to have different bones of this martyr, an account is given in the 
Bollandist Acta Sanctorum Feb. 1. p. 36 sq. The most persistent, 
and perhaps the most ancient, claim is that put forward by the Basilica 
of San Clemente at Rome, which is asserted to possess the main reliques 
—the body—of the martyr. There is a certain propriety in the story 
which assigns a common resting-place to the remains of the two great 
Apostolical Fathers. Only a few years ago (A.D. 1868), when owing 
to the excavations in this ancient basilica the reliquary supposed to 
contain the bones of the two martyred saints had been for a time 
displaced, it was restored to its old position with much pomp. On 
this occasion the reliques of Ignatius were carried in solemn pro- 
cession into the Flavian Amphitheatre, where he himself had suffered, 
and back again to the church. Of this latest ‘translation’ an account 
is given in Mullooly’s Saint Clement and his Basilica p. 305 sq. 


It has appeared from the above investigation that the original 
IGN. II, 28 


434 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


day of commemoration was October 17, and that this day afterwards 
gave place to December 20. How and when did the change take 
place? The account of Evagrius, quoted above (p. 386 sq), suggests 
the answer to this question. We are told by this historian that from 
the time when the reliques were translated to the Tychæum by Theo- 
dosius to his own day a public festival was observed with general 
rejoicing and that his contemporary the patriarch Gregory had added 
to the splendours of this festival. It is the natural inference from 
his language that the day so observed was the anniversary, not of 
the martyrdom, but of the translation to the Tycheum. If so, it was 
probably December 20, as Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 53, Zen. et Pol. Ep. p. 358) 
suggests. The previous translation from Rome to Antioch was already 
commemorated on Jan. 29, in addition to the commemoration of the 
martyrdom on Oct. 17; and as three distinct festivals for this one 
saint were felt to be excessive, Oct. 17 would fall into disuse, and the 
commemoration of Dec. 20 would come to be regarded as the 
anniversary of the martyrdom. 

The only anniversary therefore, which has any claims to con- 
sideration as the true day of the martyrdom, is Oct. 17. Nor is this 
date improbable in itself. Ignatius wrote his Epistle to the Romans 
on August 24 (Rom. ro); and he was about to embark at Troas at 
the time. This interval of between seven and eight weeks would be 
long enough, and not too long, for the journey from Troas to Rome 
and for the necessary delays which might occur on the way or 
after his arrival. On the other hand the later day of commemo- 
ration, Dec. 20, for which the Antiochene Acts are our earliest 
authority leaves an interval of nearly four months—a delay not 
easily reconcilable with other notices in these same Acts; for this 
document represents the journey as hurried and the sentence as 
executed immediately on the saint’s arrival in Rome. But even the 
observance of Oct. 17 cannot be traced back earlier than the later 
decades of the fourth century; and there are reasons for thinking that the 
commemoration had not then been established very many years. It is 
not indeed impossible that the initiators of this festival may have had 
authentic information as to the day of the martyr's death; but after 


the lapse of more than two centuries this cannot be regarded as 
probable, 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 435 


6. 


The year of the martyrdom is not altogether independent of the 
day; but it has a still more direct bearing on the main question of 
the Ignatian controversy, and deserves special consideration. 

So long as the personal interview with Trajan at Antioch was 
accepted without question as an accredited truth, it formed a definite 
starting point, from which investigations respecting the date of the 
martyrdom issued. Taking this assumed fact as his basis, Pearson 
in his posthumous disquisition (de Anno quo S. Ignatius a Trajano 
etc., first printed from his papers by Smith in S. Zematü Epistolae 
Genuinae etc. p. 58 sq) endeavoured to show that Ignatius was 
condemned in the earlier part of A.D. 116 and suffered at Rome at 
the close of the same year. He proved conclusively, as against Ussher, 
who had dated the martyrdom A.D. 107, that Trajan's departure for 
the East took place several years afterwards, and that this early 
date therefore was untenable. Of other statements in the Antiochene 
Acts, which conflict with this result, e.g. the names of the consuls, 
which belong to A.D. 107, and the reference to the subjugation of the 
Dacians, which took place in this or the preceding year, he says 
nothing. Doubtless he regarded these Acts as interpolated’; but his 
dissertation seems to have been left unfinished, and hence his silence’. 

Pearson's dissertation held its ground as quite the most important 
contribution to the subject till recent years. But it turned wholly on 


! This opinion is definitely attributed 
to Pearson by Smith, p. 42. 

* In his earlier work (Vind. Zen. p. 
346) Pearson writes, ‘supponendum im- 
primis Ignatium...tandem ab imperatore 
Trajano, in expeditione Parthica ad be- 
stias condemnatum, et ab Antiochia 
tractum, si quid scripserit in itinere satis 
molesto partim Smyrnae, partim Troade, 
et quidem decimo imperii Trajani, vul- 
garis aerae Christianae septimo post cen- 
tesimum anno, anno Christi vero, ut 

ego quidem existimo, 113, epistolas Scrip- 
sisse.” Jacobson (Zar. Apost. 11. p. 569, 
note) explains this as meaning that Pear- 
son believed Ignatius to have been taken 
from Antioch to Rome A.D. 107, but to 
have written his epistles A.D. 113. But 


he cannot have entertained a theory so 
irrational as this. Pearson’s words are 
loose, and we may suspect some mis- 
print; but they must mean that Ignatius 
was carried to Rome and wrote his 
epistles A.D. 107, according to the ge- 
neral opinion, but A.D. 113, as he him- 
self believed. He seems to have been 
already meditating the theory which he 
puts forward in his posthumous disserta- 
tion, but it did not affect his immediate 
argument, and he could therefore pass 
the subject over. So again in Vind. Zgn. 
P: 435 he provisionally accepts the com- 
mon date, A.D. 107. Smith states in his 
preface that Pearson at one time agreed 
with Ussher in placing the martyrdom 
in this year, 


28—2 


436 i ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


the interview at Antioch, as related in the Antiochene Acts of Mar- 
tyrdom. The credit of these Acts however has been irretrievably 
damaged by recent criticism; and with their authority the only 
grounds for regarding the interview at Antioch as historical have 
disappeared. It was unknown to Eusebius, and apparently also to 
Chrysostom’; and it appears for the first time in these very Acts, 
which cannot well be assigned to a date earlier than the fifth or sixth 
century. It was a fiction too, in which a hagiologist would be sorely 
tempted to ifídulge. The dramatic gain of confronting the saintly 
sufferer with his imperial persecutor was too great to be resisted. 
The martyr lived at Antioch, and Trajan visited Antioch. What more 
natural than that the two should have stood face to face? Moreover 
there was an ambiguity in the language in which the fact of the 
martyrdom was handed down, favourable to this assumption. It was 
related to have taken place ézi Tpatavod, and this might mean equally 
well ‘in the presence of Trajan’ or ‘in the time of Trajan.’ Thus all 
the elements of the fiction were ready to hand. 

Recent criticism has thus given its death-blow to the interview at 
Antioch, which was at one time regarded as the central fact of the 
Ignatian history. One attempt however has been made in an un- 
expected quarter to reverse the verdict. Volkmar endeavours to revive 
this corpse of an exploded fiction; no longer however from a con- 
servative point of view, from which it was defended by older critics, 
but with the destructive aim of closing for ever by an a priori nega- 
tive the question of the genuineness of the Ignatian letters. Owing 
to the important consequences which thus flow from it, rather than 
to any inherent probability which it can claim, his theory requires a 
full investigation once for all. 

John Malalas (CZromogr. xi. p. 275, ed. Bonn.) states that the 
earthquake at Antioch in Trajan’s reign took place ‘on the 13th of 
the month Apelleus, which is also December, on the first day of the 
week, after cock-crow, in the 164th year according to the reckoning of 
the said Antiochenes, two years after the arrival of the most divine 
king Trajan in the East.’ The year 164 of the Antiochene era is 
A.D, TID. 

After some intervening matter the same writer (p. 276) adds; ‘Now 
the said king Trajan was residing in the said city (Antioch) when the 


1 Op. 11. p. 600 THs roÜ rvpávvov yós- — tyrants name, and he does not say 
ans (see above p. 379 sq). The whole whether the interview took place at 
passage looks like a rhetorical venture. Rome or at Antioch, 

Chrysostom betrays no knowledge of the 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 437 


visitation (1 Oeopnvia) took place. And in his presence (oz under him) 
at that time the holy Ignatius, bishop of the city of Antioch, suffered 
martyrdom (or bore his testimony) ; for he was exasperated against him, 
because he reviled him’ (€uaptipyoe è ext abrod tore ó &yuos. "Lyvdrtos 
0 émíckomos ts mÓÀeos "Avrtoxeías*  ))yavákrqae yàp kar avrod, Om 
éAovddper avróv). 

Combining these statements with the fact that in the normal Greek 
calendar Ignatius is commemorated on the 2oth of December, Volk- 
mar frames his theory (Handbuch der Einleitung in die Apokryphen 1. p. 
49 Sq, p. 121 sq; comp. Zur Chronologie des Trajanischen Partherkriegs 
in the Rheinisches Museum N. F. XII. p. 481 sq, 1857). He is convinced 
that Ignatius was not sent to Rome at all, but was condemned and 
executed at Antioch. The populace, he supposes, lashed into fury by 
the earthquake, demanded the life of Ignatius as a propitiatory offering 
to the gods. Trajan yielded to their fanaticism ; and within a week 
of the calamity their victim suffered martyrdom in the amphitheatre. 
From this it follows that the letters must be spurious, for they pretend 
to have been written during the journey to Rome. 

This theory, notwithstanding the slender basis on which it rests, 
is maintained with great assurance by Volkmar; but it has not 
generally been received with favour. The anonymous author of 
Supernatural Religion however has given it his unqualified support, 
regarding it as ‘demonstrated’ (r. p. 268), but not alleging any new 
arguments’; and it may be worth while to enquire what is thought to 
constitute demonstration in this case. 

1. In the first place then it must be remarked that John Malalas 
did not write earlier than the latter half of the sixth century. His 
probable date as an author is the age of Justin r (see Mommsen in 
Hermes vi. p. 381) who reigned A.D. 565—578; though some critics 
have placed him much later (see Fabric. Bibl. Graec. vir. p. 447, ed. 
Harles) His date therefore constitutes no claim to a hearing. But 
his statement is directly opposed to the concurrent testimony of all 
the preceding centuries, which without a dissentient voice declare that 
Ignatius suffered at Rome. This is the case with all the writers and 
interpolators of the Ignatian letters; of whom the earliest is placed, 
even by those critics who deny their genuineness, about the middle or 
in the latter half of the second century. It is the case apparently even 


! On the other hand Renan (Zes question d'Ignace, n'a-t-on pas prétendu 
Lvangiles p. xxxiv) says of the extra- corriger les traditions du 11° siècle avec 
vagances ofthe Tübingen school,*Dansla ^ Jean Malala?' 


438 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


with the heathen satirist Lucian, who writing soon after A.D. 165 
caricatures the progress of Ignatius through Asia Minor in his death of 
Peregrinus'. It is the case with the authors of the two Acts of Martyr- 
dom, which, written independently of each other and agreeing in little 
else, are united in sending the martyr to Rome to die. It is the case 
necessarily with all those fathers who quote the Ignatian letters in 
any form as genuine, among whom are Irenæus and Origen and 
Eusebius and Athanasius and Basil, besides numbers of later writers. 
It is the case especially with Chrysostom, who on the day of the 
martyr's festival pronounces at Antioch an elaborate panegyric on his 
ilustrious predecessor, and with Severus, who preaching likewise at 
Antioch in the very church where the martyr's remains rested, or were 
supposed to rest, turns aside from his main subject to eulogize him, 
assuming throughout the traditional belief respecting the place of his 
martyrdom (Cureton Corp. Jen. p. 247 sq). All these writers lived 
before, and many of them several centuries before, the time when 
Malalas wrote. One of the earliest, Origen, writing about a century 
after the event, directly affirms that Ignatius was martyred at Rome 
(Op. 111. p. 938 Tov èv TO dwwypd èv Popy Onpiows paxnodpevov). 

But Malalas, it is said, resided at Antioch, and therefore was 
favourably situated for obtaining correct information. So did Chrysos- 
tom—a successor of Ignatius in the see of Antioch—some two cen- 
turies before Malalas. So did Severus—likewise a successor in the 
same see—nearly a century before Malalas. So did Evagrius, who, 
if the earliest date be adopted, was his contemporary, and who 
coincides with all preceding writers in placing the martyrdom of 
Ignatius at Rome. So almost certainly did Joannes Rhetor, whom 
Evagrius quotes among his authorities, and who must have written 
some years at least before Malalas. If therefore the testimony of 
Malalas deserves to be preferred to this cloud of witnesses, it can only 
be because he approves himself elsewhere as exceptionally sober and 
accurate and trustworthy in his statements. 

2. As a matter of fact however, he is the very reverse of ali this. 
Several tests of credibility may be applied to his narrative, and he fails 
to satisfy any one of them. The questions which the problem suggests 
_ are these. Is he generally trustworthy where he touches upon Christian 

history? Does his account of Trajan’s doings harmonize with the 
notices of credible secular historians? Lastly; Are his statements 
at this particular point consistent with themselves? 

(i) His notices of early Christian history are, almost without ex- 


1 See above, pp. 206, 213, 356. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 439 


ception, demonstrably false or palpably fabulous. The following are 
all the notices bearing on the history of the Church during the reigns 
of Nero and Trajan, with the exception of the supposed ‘recall’ of 
S. John from Patmos by Nerva (p. 268); and they will serve therefore 
as a standard by which we may gauge his general credibility in such 
matters. 

(a) ‘During the reign of the same [Nerva] Manes appeared, etc.’ 
(p. 268) This heresiarch really flourished about A.D. 260—270, so 
that he is ante-dated by at least a century and a half’. 

(2) ‘And in like manner during his reign gladiators and their 
exhibitions were prohibited; and the exhibition of hunts («uvyyiwv, 
venationum) was devised in their stead.’ The gladiatorial shows were 
not abolished till the time of Honorius (Theod. ZZ. Z. v. 26), three 
centuries after the reign of Nerva, owing to the courage of the monk 
Telemachus. There is indeed in the statute-book an order of 
Constantine (Cod. Just. xi. 44) dated A.D. 325, ‘omnino gladiatores 
esse prohibemus’’; but it evidently was not acted upon. Of Nerva's 
successor Trajan we are told, that at the celebration of his triumph 
after the close of the Dacian wars povoyaxoe púpiot syyavícavro (Dion 
Cass. lxviii. 15). The origin of the misstatement in Malalas may be 
partially explained from Dion Cass. lxviii. 2. 

(o) ‘Until the second year of his [Trajan’s] reign the holy John, 
the Apostle and Divine, was appearing and teaching in Ephesus, being 
bishop and patriarch; and having disappeared (aav éavróv roujoas) 
he was no more seen of any one, and no man knoweth to this day what 
came of him, as Africanus and Irenæus, men of the greatest wisdom, 
have recorded’ (p. 269). Africanus and Irenzus assuredly never wrote 
anything of the kind. As regards Africanus, we have not the means 
of confronting this statement with the fact. Irenæus merely says that 
John survived to the time of Trajan (ii. 22. 5, iii. 3. 3); of his mys- 
terious disappearance not a word. 

(4) Having mentioned the persecution under Trajan (p. 269), he 
afterwards states that Trajan, while he was at Antioch laying his plans 
for the war, received a letter from Tiberianus, governor of Palestine, 
relating to the Christians, in consequence of which he put an end to 
the persecution. The letter is given in full (p. 273). The story is 
generally acknowledged to be a fiction, and the letter a forgery’. 


1 Some of these fabulous statements investigate their source. 
he shares in common with the Paschal 2 See Euseb. Vit. Const. iv. 25. 
Chronicle (p. 469 sq, ed. Bonn.). It is ? The genuineness of this letter has 
unnecessary for my present purpose to recently found an advocate in Wieseler 


440 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


(e) The next statement relating to Christian history is the notice 
of the martyrdom of Ignatius (p. 276) with which we are concerned. 

(f) In the very next sentence Malalas introduces an account of 
further persecutions. He relates how Trajan had five Christian women 
burnt alive ; the emperor then mingled their ashes with the metal from 
which the vessels used for the baths were cast; the bathers were seized 
with swooning fits in consequence; the vessels were again melted up, 
and out of the same metal were erected five pillars in honour of the 
five martyrs by the emperor’s orders. These pillars, adds Malalas, 
stand in the bath to this day. As if this were not enough, he goes on 
to relate how Trajan made a furnace, and ordered any Christians, who 
desired, to throw themselves into it—an injunction which was obeyed 


by many. 


* At that time,’ he concludes, ‘the holy Drosine and many 


other virgins were martyred’ (pp. 276, 277). 
From the company in which it is found, some estimate may be 
formed of the antecedent trustworthiness of Malalas’ statement relating 


to Ignatius. 


(ii) Again; the statement is mixed up with the narrative of Trajan’s 
campaigns in the East, and it is therefore pertinent to enquire what 
degree of credit is due to this narrative. 


(Christenverfolgungen der Cäsaren p. 
126 sq, 1878); but his advocacy cannot 
be considered successful. The arguments 
against itare as follows. (1) Eusebius is 
ignorant of any such systematic persecu- 
tion as this letter supposes; though it was 
not likely to have escaped him as a 
native of Palestine. We must infer too 
that Hegesippus said nothing about it. 
Otherwise Eusebius would have known 
of it. (2) The exaggerated expressions 
condemn themselves; ‘I am exhausted 
with punishing and slaying the Galileans,’ 
‘they do not cease informing against 
themselves that they may be put to 
death,’ ‘I got tired of warning these per- 
sons and threatening them that they 
should not give information to me. The 
letter is evidently founded on Pliny’s re- 
presentations to this same emperor and 
exaggerates them. (3) The titles by 
which Trajan is addressed are at least 
suspicious, and savour of a later age, 
vui, 0evoráro, though they might stand. 


(4) Tiberianus himself is designated ‘ gov- 
ernor of Palestina Prima’ (7yeuov rod 
mpwrov Ilakaorwav &0vovs); whereas 
this division of Palestine into different 
provinces is not known to have taken 
place till much later. Marquardt (Rom. 
Alterth. IV. p. 261, ed. 2) escapes the 
difficulty by supposing that this desig- 
nation was no part of the original docu- 
ment, but was due to Malalas himself. 
Wieseler (p. 129) endeavours to show 
that Palestine may have been so divided 
at an earlier date than is generally be- 
lieved. If the document had come to us 
on earlier and more trustworthy authority, 
we should have felt bound to give full 
consideration to such possibilities, though 
they could hardly have been regarded as 
satisfactory solutions; but, where the sole 
voucher for its genuineness is a blunderer 
and fabulist like Malalas, they are power- 
less to remove the objections. This being 
so, the document stands self-condemned 
by its extravagance of language. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 441 


Malalas first gives an account of the previous events by which 
Trajan was provoked to undertake his eastern campaign, wholly ir- 
reconcilable with the trustworthy narrative of Dion. He then states 
that Trajan left Rome in the October of the rath year of his reign 
(p. 270). The reth year would be a.p. 108, if the tribunician years 
are counted, or A.D. 109, if the starting point be his actual accession 
to the throne. Neither year can be reconciled with the coins and in- 
scriptions, or with the account of Dion. From all these authentic 
sources we learn that he did not set out on his eastern expedition till 
the autumn, A.D. 113. He makes Trajan arrive at Seleucia, while the 
Persians are holding Antioch. At Trajan's instigation the Antiochenes 
rise up by night against their Persian masters, and slay them. The few 
survivors set fire to a part of the city. Trajan orders the carcases of the 
murdered Persians to be burnt outside the walls at a distance, and drums 
to be beaten throughout the city to drive away the unrighteous spirits 
of the slaughtered Persians. After this he entered Antioch, we are 
told, ‘through the Golden Gate, as it is called, that is the Daphnitic, 
wearing a crown of olive boughs on his head, on the 7th day of the 
month Audenzus, that is January, being the sth day of the week, at 
four o'clock in the day: and he ordered the drums to be beaten for 
3o days every night, giving directions also that this should be done 
every year at the same time in remembrance of the destruction of the 
Persians.’ ‘These things,’ so he concludes, ‘have been recorded by 
Domninus the chronographer’ (p. 272 sq). 

These ‘Persian Vespers,’ as they have been happily called, have 
no point of coincidence with contemporary history, and are plainly 
fabulous. Von Gutschmid (Dierauer Geschichte Trajans p. 157, note) 
conjectures that they may refer to some incident in the later campaign 
of Valerian against the Persians [a.p. 258—260], but this is mere 
conjecture. One inference, I think, may be fairly drawn from the 
story as told by Malalas. It is a legend founded on a snatch of a 
popular ditty, ‘Away, away, Gargari, Fortune’ (aye, dye, T'apyap, 
®oprovve), which he introduces into his account. All this nonsense, 
it will be observed, is accompanied by the utmost precision of 
dates. r I 

The remaining notice respecting these eastern campaigns is not 
reconcilable in its details with Dion’s account; but its main incident, 
the creation of Parthemaspates (so he writes the name) as king of the 
Parthians, is historical. It should be added that Malalas represents 
Trajan as sacrificing a beautiful virgin, Calliope by name, ‘for a 
redemption and purification of the city’ (Uzip Xírpov kai azrokaÜapua oU 


442 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


+s odews), and then erecting a statue of her in bronze gilt, apparently 
represented as impersonating the Fortune of Antioch (p. 27 5). 

(iii) The third criterion was self-consistency. Even this simple test 
is not satisfied by Malalas. 

For instance, this very date of the earthquake, with which we are 
mainly concerned, is consistent neither with itself nor with a previous 
date given by this author. He represents it as taking place ‘on the 
thirteenth of December, the first day of the week, after cock-crow', in 
the year 164 according to the Antiochene reckoning [ie. A.D. 115], 
two years after the arrival of Trajan in the East’ (p. 275). But the 
13th of December was not a Sunday in this year. The only years 
during Trajan's reign, in which Dec. r3 fell on a Sunday, were A.D. 100 
and ro6. Moreover, this was not two, but five or six years at the least, 
after Trajan’s arrival, according to his own previous reckoning ; for he 
makes him arrive there at the close of his 12th year, Le. A.D. 108 or 
109, as we have already seen (pp. 409, 441). It should be added that 
in a previous date which he has given (see above, pp. 409, 413) there 
is the same inconsistency between the day of the month and the day of 


the week, Thursday Jan. 7. 


January 7th was not a Thursday in 
A.D. I09 Or IIO, either of which years he might mean. 


The only 


years in which this day fell on a Thursday during Trajan’s reign were 


A.D. Ior and 107”, 


1 Volkmar (Rhein. Mus. N. F. XII. 
p- 490) falls into the error of translating 
a’ werd áNekrpvóva, ‘hora prima matutina,’ 
whereas the practice of Malalas elsewhere 
(to say nothing else) shows clearly that a 
means ‘the first day of the week.’ 

2 Von Gutschmid (in Dierauer Ge- 
schichte Trajans p. 157 endeavours to get 
over the difficulty in this way. Malalas 
gives two dates; (1) Trajan's first entry 
into Antioch, Thursday Jan. 7, he having 
left Rome in the previous October in 
the 12th year of his reign; (2) The earth- 
quake at Antioch, Sunday December 13, 
A.D. II5, two years after the arrival of 
Trajan in the East. To meet these facts 
Von Gutschmid makes the following hy- 
potheses; (i) As regards the first date, 
we must read 17 for 12, Ari [Am1 ?] for 
Atl. Thus we get the 17th year of Trajan 
for the date of his departure from Rome. 


(ii) As regards the ‘two years,’ the chrono- 
graphers in their computations generally 
reckon by current years, so that the ar- 
rival in the East would be in A.D. 114 
at the close of the year, and the entrance 
into Antioch on January 7, A.D. 115. 
(iii) This being so, a transposition sets 
everything right. The Thursday and the 
Sunday must change places. Jan. 7, 
A.D. I15, was a Sunday, and Dec. 13, 
A.D. 115, was a Thursday. The two 
dates indeed are not close to each other 
in Malalas, but probably they were much 
nearer in the authority from whom he 
obtained them. 

We need not stop to enquire whether 
any weight is still due to statements 
which can only be rectified by a com- 
bination of hypotheses like this; since 
Von Gutschmid’s solution depends on 
the date A.D. rr4 for the emperor’s 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 443 


3. But again; while the general fidelity of Malalas is thus dis- 
credited, it cannot be said that his particular statement here carries 
with it any appearance of probability. I have already pointed out 
(P. 413 sq) what serious historical difficulties attend the assertion that 
the earthquake took place at the end of the year 115. The represen- 
tation moreover, which the Story gives of Trajan’s character, is altogether 
untrue to the life. Nor indeed, if the emperor had so desired, would 
he have found time at such a crisis to try and to execute Ignatius in 
the manner suggested. If Volkmar's theory were correct, only seven 
days elapsed from the outbreak of the catastrophe to the execution of 
Ignatius in the amphitheatre. But what was the state of things at 
Antioch at this time? The earthquake, Dion tells us (Ixviii. 24 sq), 
continued for many days (¿zà «Ae(ovs :juépas ó ceps éréxev) ; Mount 
Casius was seen to reel and split, and appeared as if it would fall and 
bury the city; there was a subsidence of other mountains ; the emperor 
himself had escaped through a window, and was camping out of doors 
in the hippodrome; a great part of Antioch was overthrown; crowds 
were buried in the ruins; no nation escaped unhurt, says Dion, for 
owing to the presence of the emperor people had flocked thither from 
all parts of the Roman dominions. He states moreover that, as the 

shocks were repeated for many days and nights (¿zà rodAds suépas xoi 


Whether Von Gutschmid's emendation of 
17 for r2 is correct or not, I need not 


departure from Rome, and this is now 
shown to be erroneous. The inscriptions 


given above (p. 394 sq), combined with 
the account of Dion, prove conclusively 
that the emperor left Rome in the 
autumn A.D. 113, and wintered at An- 
tioch A.D. 113, Dierauer sees the dif- 
ficulty (p. 158, note), and speaks of it as 
the ‘only misgiving (nur ein Bedenken) 
which arises as regards this solution. 
But, as this date is the very pivot of the 
whole, the explanation falls to pieces 
when it is removed. In C. de la Berge's 
Essai sur le Règne de Trajan pp. 160, 
174 sq (Paris 1877) the inconsistency is 
still greater. He places Trajan’s arrival 
-in the East A.D. 113, and yet accepts Von 
Gutschmid’s solution as ‘decisive.’ To 
this end, he taciély takes Malalas’ date 
for the entry into Antioch as referring to 
Trajan’s second winter there, whereas 
Malalas distinctly gives it of his first. 


stop to enquire. 

Wieseler offers another explanation (p. 
viii sq) of the date Sunday Dec. 13, A.D. 
115. Malalas says wyvl’Ameddaly TQ kal 
AekeuBpio vy. In an old Tyrian calendar 
(for which see Ideler Hand. d. Chron. 1. 
P: 435 sq) he finds that Apellzus r3 cor- 
responds to December 30, and December 
3o was a Sunday in A.D. 115. He sup- 
poses therefore that the reckoning was 
according to this older calendar, and 
that Malalas erroneously treated Apellæus 
as exactly conterminous with December, 
following the calendar of his own day. 
This solution does not commend itself ; 
but, if it were true, the date of the earth- 
quake would be useless for Volkmar’s 
purpose, as it would fall ten days Zazer in 
the year than the supposed day of the 
martyrdom. 


444 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


vóxras), the sufferings of those buried alive were intense, some being 
mangled to death, others perishing from famine, before they could 
be extricated. Yet we are asked to believe that in the midst of 
this confusion a venatio was held in the amphitheatre, in which a 
victim formerly condemned by the emperor was thrown to the wild 
beasts. 

4. But again; the last prop, on which Volkmar's theory rested, 
has been knocked from under it by the discovery that the anniversary 
of Ignatius’ martyrdom, as kept in the early Antiochene and Syrian 
Church, was not December 20, but October 17. The only day there- 
fore which has any claim to be regarded as authentic (see above, p. 434) 
is wholly unconnected with the earthquake.  Malalas himself in fact 
says nothing about the day of the martyrdom, nor does he hint that 
the earthquake had anything to do with it, but on the contrary ascribes 
the death of Ignatius to the abuse which he poured upon the emperor. 
The combination is Volkmars own; and it is thus shown to be a 
baseless fabric. 

5. Lastly; if any other argument were needed to complete the 
evidence by which the falsity of the theory is shown, it is found in 
the fact that the error of Malalas can be easily explained by the 
ambiguities of the Greek language. The words gaprvpetv, paprupia, 
which were afterwards used especially of martyrdom, had in the earlier 
ages a wider sense, including other modes of witnessing to the faith. 
Again, the expression ézi Tpaiavod is also ambiguous, as has been 
already noticed (p. 436), and might signify equally well *during the 
reign of Trajan, or ‘in the presence of Trajan’.’ It seems probable 
therefore, that Malalas stumbled over one or other of these expressions, 
which he found in some earlier writer, and misinterpreted his authority 
accordingly’. 

Under cover of the latter ambiguity more especially the blunder of 
Malalas would easily shelter itself. The common mode of expressing 
a date is ézi rovrov [o9 avroxpdropos|, éri rovrov [róv úmdrov]; and the 
following passages relating to the persecutions of Trajan's reign, which 
I have gathered from different historians and chronographers, will be 
found, if I mistake not, eminently suggestive, as pointing to the cause 
of the error in Malalas. 


1 The same ambiguity appears in Ori- ? The former ambiguity is suggested by 
gen, quoted by Euseb. ZZ. E. iii. 1, rl de? Lipsius (S. 7. p. 7), the latter by Zahn 
mept llaóXov Aéyew...év r? `Póum émi — (Z.2. A. p. 67), to account for the error 
Népwvos uepaprvprkóros ; : f Malalas. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 445 


Hegesippus in Euseb. Æ. Z. iii. 32 otTw paprupe érdv dv éxardv 
cikoow èri Tpaiavod Kaícapos kal vrarixod “Artiko (speaking of Symeon 
the son of Clopas); where, as applied to Trajan, ézi can only mean 
‘during the reign of, though as regards Atticus it might signify ‘in 
the presence of,’ as in fact it does in a subsequent passage of Hege- 
SIppus, KarnyopyOy...émt Artiko ToU vratikod, Kal émi modais neEpais 
aixilouevos euaptipycer. 

Chron. Pasch. p. 471 "Emi rovrov roù Tpaiavod koi Mapkos ó evayye- 
AaTys...Tupl KateKatOyn kai obtws êpaprópņoev: and lower down, after 
mentioning Symeon son of Clopas, this chronographer adds, óuoíws 82 
kai “lyvarios " Avrtoxéov èriskoros èv "Póno épaprépqocv. 

Theod. Presbyt. (Photius 27A 1) "yvártos 8$ ézi Tpaiavod tov dc 
poprvpíov 7OAncev ayóva. 

Georg. Hamartol. Chron. 135 (p. 339, ed. Muralt) “Ext avrod [ro 
Tpaiavod] Xvpeàv 6 Tod Kedra ó èv ‘Tepooodvpous èriokoros kai "Lyv&rtos 
0 Geoddpos épapripro ev. 

Georg. Syncell. Chron. p. 656 (ed. Bonn.) Lyvértos 6 0eodópos ff 
éríakoros "Avrtoxeías ¿z Tpaiavod TO Umtp Xpıoro? kareoréhôn paptupio. 
“ArcLavdpetas 8 èriskoros Képdwv črn Ý. odtos èm Tpaiavod éuapripyoer 
êv TO Kar aXràv duwypa. 

Niceph. Chron. Comp. p. 747 (ed. Bonn.) Ext rovrov [rod Tpaiavod] 
"Tyvarwos 6 beopópos ¿v “Pdun enaptupnoe Ünptow Bopa rapadobeds. 

Suidas s. v. Dionysius Areopagita. Maprupiv TG mèp Xpiorod rehet- 
ovrat émi Tpaiavod Kaícapos, óre kai 0 Oeoddspos Lyvártos. èv “Pdun tov rûs 
abavacias SuyOdyoev aydva. 

Now let us suppose that John Malalas, or some previous writer 
whom he copied, had before him in a chronography of Trajan’s reign 
a sentence running “Emi roúrov [róre] euapripyoev "Lyvártos 6 THs "Avrto- 
xeías érioxoros. Being fresh from the fact that Trajan spent a winter 
at Antioch, and knowing nothing else about the death of Ignatius, he 
would easily, we might almost say inevitably, draw the conclusion that 
the martyrdom occurred at Antioch, and that émi rovrov signified ‘in 
the presence of this emperor.’ If we suppose róre also to have had 
a place in our hypothetical chronographer, it may have referred, when 
im situ, to some previously mentioned incident in the persecution, e.g. 
the martyrdom of Symeon son of Clopas, as in fact it does refer in 
Zonaras xi. 22 rovrov [Tpaiavod] xparotvros Supedy 6 rod KXorá...épap- 
Tupyoey k.T.À....ró me kal 6 Oeopópos ‘Tyvdrwos x.r.X.— But, when separated 
from its context by Malalas or his predecessor, it would assume quite 
a different reference. 

This supposition that the error of Malalas is due to his having mis- 


446 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


understood his authority is rendered still more probable from another 
consideration. John, surnamed Madabbar, was bishop of Nikiou 
(Pshati) in the later decades of the 7th century (Renaudot Hist. Patr. 
Alexandr. Jacob. pp. 176, 177, 182) and wrote a Chronicle which he 
carried down to the Arab conquest of Egypt. This work is extant in an 
Ethiopic translation made from the Arabic (Zotenberg Catal. des MSS 
Ethiop. de la Bibl. Nation. p. 223 sq, Wright Catal. Ethiop. MSS Brit. 
Mus. p. 300 sq). In great portions it runs parallel with John Malalas, 
so that the two accounts were evidently derived from the same source’. 


1 The following extract from this 
Chronicle is taken’ from the British Mu- 
seum MS, Orient. 818, f. 61 a. The Paris 
MS does not exhibit any variations which 
affect the sense. The translation I owe to 
the kindness of Dr Wright. 

Chapter 73 [read 72]. ‘After the death 
of the good king Arwás [Nerva], Endrë- 
yanos reigned. He was a lover of idola- 
try, and the third of those who persecuted 
the Christians. Many were martyred 
everywhere, and he condemned them in 
numbers. Moreover, the saint of God, 
Ignatius [Agnátyós] the patriarch of An- 
tioch [Angók1yá], who had been ordained 
after Peter the chief of the Apostles, he 
sent to the city of Rome in chains, and 
delivered him to the lions.? 

‘Further, he took them (women) and 
questioned them, and said to them, Whom 
do ye worship, and in whom do ye trust, 
that ye run and are in haste to die? They 
answered and said, We die for Christ’s 
sake, who will give us everlasting life, and 
will raise us up from this corrupt body. 
And he was filled with wrath, because he 
was a heathen and did not desire the 
revelation of the resurrection. So he 
ordered the bodies of the holy women to be 
cast into the fire; and the very earth upon 
which the bodies of the holy women fell 
he ordered to be gathered up and thrown 
into the (vessel of) brass of the lighter of 
the public bath, which he had built (and 
called) by his own name. And after- 
wards, when any one bathed in this bath, 


it emitted a smoke (07 vapour) ; and then, 
when he smelled this smoke, he fell 
down, and they had to carry him out; 
and every one who saw it, marvelled 
thereat. Moreover the Christians mocked 
at the heathen and boasted in Christ and 
glorified Him with His saints. But when 
Éndréyánós knew this, he changed the 
lighters of the bath and removed hence 
the brazen vessels in which were the 
ashes of the bodies of the holy women. 
And he put the ashes of the bodies into 
five stelae of brass [Malalas p. 277 Tà 
86 mpGra xarkla avaxdoas (dvaxwved- 
cas?) émolnce orýňas xaXküs mévre Tals 
avrats yuva] and set them up in this 
bath; and he used to watch and try to 
disgrace the martyrs, saying, They are not 
mine, nor their God's, and they died with- 
out knowledge. And at that time there 
were martyred his daughter Atrasts [Apo- 
ow} in Malalas], and Y6na the daughter 
of the patrician Filásanrün. And yet 
many other virgins suffered martyrdom at 
the hand of this infidel by the burning of 
fire.’ 

‘And while Éndréyánós was at An- 
tioch, the earth was sore afflicted and 
trembled because of the anger of God in 
the night, because he was impure, three 
times; and not merely Antioch but also 
the island of Rfités (Rhodes). In like 
manner moreover there was an earth- 
quake after cockcrow.’ 

There seems to have been some mutila- 
tion in the Ms from which the Ethiopic 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 447 


This is the case with the narrative of the persecutions in Trajan's reign. 
Yet John Madabbar expressly places the martyrdom of Ignatius at 
Rome, and records it before, not after, the earthquake. 

A similar explanation will apply to another document, which (at 
least in its present text) agrees with Malalas in representing Ignatius 
as martyred at Antioch. The British Museum Ms Add. 14, 643 
(described in Wright’s Catalogue of Syriac MSS p. 1040) contains a 
Syriac Chronicle, of which the first part is an epitome of the Chronicon 
of Eusebius (translated by Roediger and published in Schoene rr. p. 
203 sq) and the second part, with which alone we are now con- 
cerned, is a separate series of notices in chronological order derived 
from other sources. This second part is published by Land Anecd. 1. 
p. 2 sq, with a translation (p. 103 sq) and notes (p. 165 sq) The 
part relating to this period runs as follows in Land's translation (p. 
116). 


Anno 420 [A.D. 109] obiit dominus Ioannes evangelista. 
[This is clearly a miswriting for 410 — A.D. 99; since elsewhere the 
notices are in chronological order.] 

Anno 415 [A.D. ro4] persecutio in Christianos gravissima intenta est a 
Trajano rege improbo. Martyrium imprimis passus est Simeon filius 
Cleopae episcopus Hierosolymae. 

Anno 419 [A.D. 108] Trajanus Armeniam subjecit. Eodem anno Ignatius 
Antiochiae [i.e. in Antiochia] martyrium subiit, qui discipulus erat 
Ioannis evangelistae. 


The Ms which contains this chronicle belongs probably to the 
middle of the 8th century; it contains a list of caliphs reaching down 
to Hisham A.D. 724—742 ; and the last notice in the part with which 
we are concerned belongs to A.D. 636. 

The statement here may have originated in the same way as in 
Malalas; or the change in a single letter in the Syriac would make 
the difference 3 for “J, ‘in Antioch’ for ‘of Antioch. This latter is 
a very common blunder with Syriactranscribers. "The Ignatian Epistles 
alone furnish several examples of it. 


Thus, the interview of Ignatius with Trajan having no claim 


translation was made, for the story of the appended to the work, the passage is thus 
martyrdom of the five virgins wants a epitomized; ‘Concerning the death of 
beginning. It is clear from the sequence Ignatius the God-clad and the women 
of the Chronicle that Trajan is meant by who were martyred with him.’ 
EndréyAnés. In the index of chapters 


448 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


to be regarded as historical, we have lost our one criterion. of 
date from comparison with external chronology, and are obliged to 
fall back on the notices of Christian chronographers and martyro- 
logists. 

And here we cannot help being struck with the fact that both the 
Antiochene and the Roman Acts agree in the 9th year of Trajan. 
This agreement is the more remarkable, because they agree in scarcely 
anything else, and neither can possibly have been known to the writer 
of the other. Nor is the value of the fact diminished, but rather 
enhanced, when we find that the two martyrologists give different 
names of consuls, which in neither case belong to the oth year; for 
thus it appears that this 9th year was the one fixed element in the 
common tradition, while everything else was left to the caprice or 
the ignorance of the writer. Moreover in the case of the Antiochene 
Acts this 9th year has an additional value, because it has survived 
the confusion in chronology introduced by the necessity of making 
the condemnation synchronous with Trajan’s Parthian expedition—a 
necessity arising out of the writer's belief that Ignatius was condemned 
by Trajan himself This 9th year also is the date in the Chronicon 
Paschale p. 471 (ed. Bonn.) where moreover the consuls for the 9th year 
(A.D. 105) are correctly given, Candidus and Quadratus. It appears also, 
though amidst much confusion, in a Syriac Chronicle, Brit. Mus. Add. 
14,642 (described in Wright's Catalogue, p. 1041). The ws belongs to 
the early part of the roth century, but the chronicle itself only reaches 
down to A.D. 797 (at which time it was probably compiled), though 
with later additions down to A.D. 811. Cureton (Corp. Jen. p. 221; 
comp. p. 252) gives the extract ; * And also Ignatius, when he had ruled 
I5 years, was cast to beasts at Rome, and Heron stood in his stead. 
In the 9th year John the Evangelist departed this world, having con- 
tinued in the episcopate 7o years; and Ignatius and Polycarp were 
his disciples ; and the life of John was prolonged to the oth year of 
Trajan.’ Here the chronicler has obviously blundered over some 
previous authority; and transferred the 9th year of Trajan from the 
martyrdom of Ignatius to the death of S. John. 


Does this coincidence imply a wide-spread and very early tradition 
in favour of the gth year? Or can all these authorities be traced to 
some one common and comparatively late source ? 

We naturally turn to the Chronicon of Eusebius as the work which 


exercised the widest influence in these matters, and we ask whether the 
solution can be found here. 


nm 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 449 


This portion of the Chronicon is as follows ; 


Ol. | Ann. Abr.| Traj. 
220 2116 3 s- Trajanus de Dacis et Scythis triumphavit, 
£ 2117 4^ | A. Trajanus Daciam in provinciam redegit. 
2118 5 z. Romanorum ecclesiae episcopatum excepit v Alex- 
i 2119 6 ander annis x. 
221 2120 7% | k. Romae aurea domus incendio consumpta est. 
2I2I 87 |Z Terrae motus magnus factus Menesiae terrae iv urbes 
2122 9 concussit, Eliam, Mirinam, Piitanem, et Cisem, et 
2123 IO Graecorum Opuntiorum et Oritarum (urbes). 


Trajano adversus Christianos persecutionem movente, Simon 
Cleopae (filius) Hierosolymitanae ecclesiae episcopus martyrium 
subiit, cui successit Iostus. Itidem [Ignatius] Antiochensium 
episcopus martyrium passus est, post quem iii Antiochensium 
episcopus constitutus est Eron. 


Plinius Secundus, cuiusdam provinciae praeses, multos e 
Christianis mortis reos fecit etc. 


“The probable inference from this arrangement is that Eusebius had 
no definite information as to the exact year or years in which the occur- 
rences recorded in the two paragraphs beginning ‘Trajano’ and 
‘ Plinius’ took place. He put together the three known events bearing 
on the persecution of the Christians under Trajan; (1) The martyrdom 
of Symeon; (2) The martyrdom of Ignatius; and (3) The sufferings 
in Bithynia. He supposed that they took place somewhere about this 
time; but, not being able to give an exact date, he left them unde- 
termined, placing them at the end of the 221st Olympiad, which coin- 
cided also with the round number ro of the years of Trajan. This 
account is in accordance with his treatment of these incidents in the 
History, where they are not only undated, but recorded in a different 
order: (r) Martyrdom of Symeon (iii. 32) ; (2) Persecution in Bithynia 
(ili. 33) ; (3) Martyrdom of Ignatius (ii. 36). When we come to discuss 
the date of Polycarp's martyrdom, we shall find that Eusebius treats it 
in the same way. 

Being thus left loose, they were liable to be assigned to any of the 
neighbouring years by later scribes and redactors. Thus Jerome in 
his revision of the Chronicon separates them, attaching the martyrdoms 
of Symeon and Ignatius to the roth year, and the persecutions in 
Bithynia to the 11th. Accordingly in his Catalogue c. 16 he writes of 
Ignatius, ‘passus est anno decimo Trajani’; for, though the word is 
printed *undecimo' in Vallarsi, this editors note clearly shows that 
the best Mss read ‘decimo, and the Greek version also has Oekdro. 
In like manner also they are divided in Zohrab's version of the Ar- 


IGN. II. 29 


450 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


menian Chronicon, but here the martyrdoms of Symeon and Ignatius 
are assigned to the 9th year, while the Bithynian persecution is left at 
the end of the roth. 

These facts are perhaps sufficient to account for the coincidence of 
the authorities mentioned above in naming the oth year. 

The writer of the Avtiochene Acts was largely indebted to the 
Chronicon. The historical setting of the martyrdom is borrowed mainly 
from it. The mention of Ignatius as the pupil of S. John and the 
fellow-pupil of Polycarp is probably derived thence (see the note on 
8 r'Iodvvov pabyrys). The reference to the victory over ‘the Dacians 
and Scythians’ (§ 2) is plainly taken therefrom. Even the exaggeration 
érépwv voAAóv eOvav (Š 2) may have been due to it, if we may suppose 
that the author’s copy contained a notice corresponding to that which 
appears in Jerome’s revision immediately after the mention of Trajan’s 
making Dacia a province; ‘Hiberos Sauromatas Osroenos Arabas 
Bosforanos Colchos in fidem accepit, Seleuciam Ctesifontem Babylonem 
occupavit’,’ where events which occurred many years later are gathered 
together out of their proper chronological place in order to enhance 
the effect. And altogether the idea of making the subjugation of the 
Christians the crowning idea of Trajan's ambition is suggested by the 
sequence of the notices in the Chronicon. 

To the Chronicon the author of the Roman Acts also betrays his 
obligations. Though generally in his narrative he has drawn more 
largely from the Lcclestastical History of Eusebius (see the notes §§ r, 
Io, II, I2), yet the manner in which the Bithynian persecution and 
the correspondence of Pliny with Trajan are introduced cannot be 
traced to this source, and must be due to the Chronicon. Our hagiolo- 
gist’s point of view requires that the letter from Pliny should come 
immediately after the execution of Ignatius ($ rr). A glance at the 
extract given above (p. 449) from the Chronicon shows at once whence 
he derived the inspiration that the emperor's rescript to Pliny might 
be used to account for the disposal of the martyr's reliques. On the 
other hand in the L£cclesiastical History the persecution in Bithynia, 
with the account of the correspondence, is given before the martyrdom 
of Ignatius : two chapters intervene: and there is nothing to suggest the 
connexion which our author establishes between the two events. 

Thus the acquaintance of our two martyrologists with the Chronicon 
seems clear. And the same is plainly also the case with those chrono- 
graphers who give the oth year of Trajan for the date of the martyrdom. 
The obvious inference therefore would seem to be that all these 


1 The notice in Jerome is obviously taken from Eutropius viii. 3. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 451 


writers alike derived this date from the Chronicon, to which they were 
certainly indebted, directly or indirectly, for other facts. 'The only 
objection to this otherwise simple solution lies in the fact that Eusebius 
does not assign the martyrdom to the oth year specially. Still the 
manner in which he arranges the events might very naturally lead to 
its special attachment to this year, as we have seen to be the case in 
Zohrab (see above p. 449) The 6th, 7th, and 8th years are each 
supplied with their special notice. The 9th year is the first vacant 
year, and the notice of the martyrdoms of Symeon and Ignatius, which 
were found hanging loose, would be attached to it so as to fill the void. 
It seems fairly probable therefore that we may ultimately trace to a 
particular interpretation, or recension, of the CZzonicon of Eusebius all 
the notices which assign the martyrdom of Ignatius to the oth year of 
Trajan. 


But what grounds had Eusebius himself for placing the martyrdom 
where he does in the Chronicon? Wieseler (Christenverfoleungen d. 
Casaren p. 125 sq), who himself would date it in the roth year [the 
IIth tribunician year] of Trajan, A.D. 107, alleges Eusebius as *the 
most trustworthy witness’ for this date. But Eusebius, as we have 
seen, is not so precise. He only places it thereabouts. Wieseler 
further supports this view on the ground that Pliny's letter implies 
previous persecutions of the Christians during Trajan’s reign. This is 
not impossible; but Pliny's language itself only implies that the 
emperor had decreed proceedings against * heteerize’ generally’, in which 
the Christians might or might not be involved. Moreover, so far as 
regards Eusebius, it is clear that he had not, and did not profess to 
have, any definite idea of the relative chronology of these persecutions 
under Trajan which he relates in proximity, since he gives the Bithynian 
martyrdoms in one place before, and in another after, the death of 
Ignatius (see above p. 449). Of the Bithynian persecution he knows 
nothing, except what he has learnt from the account of Pliny's letter 
and Trajan's rescript, as read by him in a Greek translation of Tertullian 
(ZZ. E. ü. 33). He cannot even tell the name of the province, and he is 
obviously quite ignorant of the date (see the note on Mart. Rom. LI) 
In the same way Wieseler urges in favour of his view the fact that 
‘the martyrdom of Symeon the son of Clopas...according to Eusebius 
and Jerome happened a short time before; and that ‘according to 


1 Plin. Zp. X. 97 ‘secundum mandata says ‘cognitionibus de Christianis interfui 
tua hetaerias esse vetueram’; see Trajan's numquam,’ he may be referring to the 
own language, ib. X. 43. When Pliny persecution of Domitian. 


29—2 


452 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Waddington (Fastes des Provinces Asiatiques p. 720) the consular 
Herodes Atticus, under whom he was martyred, was consular legate 
of Palestine in the years A.D. 105—107.’ Here again the answer is 
the same; that Eusebius does not profess to give these martyrdoms in 
chronological sequence, for in the ZZis/ozy he interposes the Bithynian 
persecution (which happened about A.D. 112) between the two. More- 
over, when we come to examine Waddington’s argument for the date 
of Herodes Atticus’ government in Palestine, it amounts to nothing 
more than this; that Eusebius represents him as putting Symeon to 
death about the 9th or roth year of Trajan, and that, as the years 
A.D. 105—107 are unoccupied by any other governor whose name has 
been preserved, we may suppose Atticus to have ruled there during 
this period. Wieseler’s attempt therefore to establish a definite date 
for the martyrdom of Ignatius on the authority of Eusebius must be 
regarded as unsatisfactory. 

On the other hand, Harnack in an important contribution to the 
subject (Die Zeit des Ignatius etc, Leipzig 1878) arrives at conclusions 


diametrically opposed to those of Wieseler’. He has investigated the ` 


Eusebian list of the Antiochene bishops as a whole; and, if we could 
accept his inferences, Eusebius would be deprived of all authority as 
a witness respecting their chronology. He remarks that the dates of 
accession assigned to the Antiochene bishops in the Chronicon have 
a suspicious relation to those assigned to the Roman bishops. In the 
earlier part of the list each Antiochene bishop is placed 4 years (i.e. 
one Olympiad) after some Roman bishop; in the latter part each 
Antiochene bishop is placed one year before some Roman bishop ; and 
the point of transition from the one arrangement to the other is after 
the accession of the Antiochene bishop Philetus (Ol. 249). This is 
a rough abstract of Harnack's statement of the facts ; and his inferences 
are as follows. The Chronicle of Julius Africanus is known to have 
been .brought down to the third year of Elagabalus, Ol. 250 (see 
Clinton Fast. Rom. 1. p. 233); and we have also information that 
Africanus used Olympiads in his arrangement of dates. Clearly there- 
fore Eusebius borrowed the earlier dates of the Antiochene bishops 
as far as Ol. 250 from Africanus. By this discovery the authority of 
Eusebius is replaced by that of Africanus. So far there is a gain in 
the exchange, for an earlier authority has been substituted for a later. 


1 After the sheets for my first edition — (1879). The speculations of Harnack 
had passed through the press, two papers and Erbes are discussed by R. A. Lipsius 
by C. Erbes appeared in the Fahrb. f. ib. VI. p. 233 (1880). On Lipsius! own 
Prot. Theol. V. p. 464 sq, p. 618 sq view see below, p. 468, note. 


—— c— 


n(———á—" ———————Á"'Á—"—"— 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 453 


But this gain is more than neutralised by the other facts thus elicited. 
From this symmetrical relation of the dates referring to the Roman and 
Antiochene sees it is clear that Africanus invented the latter on some 
artificial plan. Thus his authority is deprived of any weight. In the 
interval between composing his Chronicon and his History Eusebius 
discovered that he was leaning on a rotten reed in following Africanus. 
In the later work therefore he rejected the dates of accession, so far as 
regards the Antiochene bishops, and was content to give their sequence, 
merely noting in a rough way their synchronism with the bishops of 
the other great sees and with contemporary events. On the second 
part of the list Harnack does not say very much ; but he ascribes the 
artificial arrangement here directly to Eusebius himself (p. 19, note 1). 

In one respect Harnack seems to be unquestionably right. Euse- 
bius evidently had no list of the Antiochene bishops, giving the lengths 
of their respective terms of office, as he had in the case of the Roman 
and Alexandrian sees. This fact had been already noticed by Zahn 
(Zen. v. Ant. p. 56 sq). But on the other hand it is equally evident 
that he possessed some previously existing tables containing the dates 
of accession of the Antiochene bishops, or at least information which 
enabled him to construct such tables, and was not utterly without 
chronological records, as he confesses himself to be in the case of the 
Jerusalem bishopric (Chron. 11. p. 172 sq, Schoene), for which he contents 
himself with giving the sequence of bishops, and does not attempt to 
assign dates. With regard to the Antiochene see he stood in an 
intermediate position. Beyond this point Harnack's inferences are 
very questionable, but they at least deserve careful consideration. 

Before entering into an examination of its details however we are 
struck with an antecedent objection to the theory as a whole. As 
regards its adoption and its abandonment alike, it is burdened with 
improbability. As regards its adoption; for is it likely that two persons 
independently should hit upon a similar artifice of placing the Antiochene 
bishops at regular intervals after or before certain Roman bishops, while 
nevertheless the second person was taken in by the device of the first? 
As regards its abandonment; for in his ZZis/ory Eusebius treats the later 
Antiochene bishops exactly as he has treated the earlier. Here too 
as in the former case, he is content to give rough synchronisms without 
assigning exact dates as in the Chronicon. But though he might be 
supposed to have detected the artificial character of Africanus’ dates in 
the meanwhile, there is no room for the theory of subsequent detection 
as a motive for the abandonment of his own dates. 

When we pass from such general considerations to an investigation 


454 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


of details, our difficulties increase. ‘The chronological relation of the 
Antiochene to the Roman bishops in the Chronicon, as stated by 
Harnack, stands thus : 


Order. Antioch. Intervals. Rome. A: Abr. | Order. 


1 | Euodius 3 years after Peter 2055 
2 | Ignatius 2085 ay on 5 Linus 2082 I 
3 | Hero 2123 408 D Alexander 2119 5 
4 | Cornelius 2144 TED, X Telesphorus 2140 7 
5 | Eros 2158 Au ees 2 Pius 2154 9 
6 | Theophilus 2185 eon " Soter 2180 II 
7 |Maximinus 2193 4 9059 959 Eleutherus 2189 I2 
8 |Serapion 2206 a 2 Victor 2202 I3 
9 |Asclepiades 2228 I year before | Callistus 2229 I5 
1o | Philetus 2233 4 years after Callistus 2229 I5 
II | Zebinus 2245 r year before | Pontianus 2246 17 
: e Peng | 2270 Xystus perm 23 
I4 | Demetrianus 2272 
I5 | Paulus 2278 I year before | Dionysius 2279 24 
16 | Domnus 2283 
17 | Timzus 2288 I year before | Felix 2289 28 
18 | Cyrillus 2297 199325 3 Eutychianus 2298 26 
19 . | Tyrannus 2319 contemporary 
of Eusebius 
e p. 


In this table the numbers of the last column give the order of 
succession of the Roman bishops named, S. Peter not being counted. 
The dates are given in the years of the era of Abraham, in accordance 
with the practice of Eusebius in the Chronicon. 

In this list Harnack draws the line after Philetus, at which point 
he supposes the earlier arrangement to be exchanged for the later. It 
will therefore be necessary to consider the two parts of the list 
separately. 


(1) The first list contains ten bishops; and the numbers repre- 
senting their chronological relations to the corresponding Roman 
bishops are, 

3 3 4 45 4 5 4 4 [1], 4 


Here there is a great predominance of the number 4, and it might 
be increased by supposing with Harnack that in other cases the date 
of accession had been accidentally displaced by a year. "This supposi- 
tion is not extravagant in itself, for displacements certainly occur 
frequently elsewhere in these tables. But we have no right to postulate 
it as the basis of a theory not otherwise probable, since a displacement 
is as likely to have occurred in a 4 as in a 3 or a 5. 


ii 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 455 


Moreover, the date of Hero's accession must be withdrawn ; for 
Eusebius, as pointed out above (p. 447), does not give any definite 
date for the death of Ignatius and accession of his successor, but men- 
tions it at the end of the 221st Olympiad (the tenth year of Trajan) 
as having occurred thereabouts'. If then we deduct this date, and if 
-n the case of Asclepiades we substitute the number of years after the 
preceding Roman bishop, as in the other cases, we get; 


3 3 [ ] + 4, 5, 4 4 12, 4. 
Thus five out of ten give the number 4. This is no doubt a larger 
proportion than the doctrine of probabilities would suggest. But then 
in historical records, as in games of chance, events are constantly 
found recurring with a frequency far in advance of any such calculation. 


(2) The second list contains nine names. In this list five 
examples occur, where the artificial rule supposed to prevail in this 
part is observed. But from these five two must be deducted. The 
dates of Timaeus and Cyrillus do not occur in the Armenian Version, 
which is taken as the authority for the original Chronicon of Eusebius, 
and Harnack therefore supplies them from Jerome's recension. But 
Jerome's recension, as a whole, would not have borne out his theory. 
Its figures are as follows’; 


Zebinus 2245 | 5 years before | Pontianus 2250 
ear hee 2268 | 1 year before | Cornelius 2269 
Demetrianus | 2269 | 1 year before F ohai 2270 
Paulus 2277 | 5 years before | Dionysius 2282 
Domnus 2283 

Timeeus 2288 | 6 years before | Felix 2294. 
Cyrillus 2297 | I year before | Eutychianus| 2298 
Tyrannus 2319 


1 This is also the view of Harnack doubt’? Is Eusebius likely to have had 


himself (pp. 9, 23, 38, 67), and yet he 
writes (p. 23), ‘Without doubt in the 
source [the document used by Eusebius, 
presumably the Chronography of Afri- 
canus] the accession of Hero was as- 
signed to the Olympiad corresponding 
. to the Eusebian Ann. Abr. 2123. To 
this Eusebius bears witness in the fact 
that he has placed this event at all events 
after the Ann. Abr. 2123. But inasmuch 
as he has not ventured to record it under 
this particular year, it follows that he 
was not certain here) But why ‘without 


information independently of Africanus 
at this point in the list which he did not 
possess for the later dates? If he had 
such information, this very circumstance 
gives a higher value to his testimony. If 
he had not, and if the uncertainty was 
expressed by Africanus, then this frank- 
ness inspires confidence in Africanus. 

2 I have here taken Schoene’s text. 
There are slight variations in the Mss, 
but they do not assist Harnack’s theory. 

3 These bishops are called Fabius and 
Demetrianus by Jerome in accordance 


456 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


In using Jerome’s figures Harnack has made an arbitrary selection. 
In dealing with the first pair of bishops, he takes the date of "Timaeus 
from Jerome, but retains that of Felix as it stands in the Armenian. 
With the next pair however, Cyrillus and Eutychianus, his treatment is 
different. Here he has taken Jerome’s date for the Roman bishop, as 
well as for the Antiochene. This substitution of the Hieronymian date 
2298 in place of the Armenian 2296 for Eutychianus is unintelligible on 
his own principles, and must have been an oversight; yet without it the 
example falls to the ground. But indeed Harnack’s confidence that the 
missing Armenian dates for Timzeus and Cyrillus would have agreed 
with Jerome's is not justified by the facts. The presumption is quite 
the other way. For six out of the eight preceding bishops, from 
Asclepiades to Domnus, Jerome's dates, whether we take the years of 
Abraham or the years of the Roman emperors, differ from those of the 
Armenian version’. After these reductions are made, there remain in 
nine accessions only three examples of this interval of one year, which is 
supposed to betray an artificial arrangement in the latter part of the 
list; and, considering the very rapid succession of the Roman bishops 
during the earlier years of this period, such a proportion can excite 
no misgiving. In Jerome's list also there are three examples, but 
they are all different ; and the fact exemplifies the accidental character 
of such recurrences. 

But again; there is no clear frontier line between the earlier 


and later lists, such as Harnack's theory requires. 


with Euseb. Z. Z. vi. 39, 46, etc. The Ar- 
menian Version on the other hand names 
them Fabianus and Demetrius. The 
former are their correct names; the latter 
are probably due to confusion with the 
bishops Fabianus of Rome and Demetrius 
of Alexandria, who are nearly contempo- 
rary and are sometimes mentioned in 
proximity with them. 

1 The difficulty which attends the date 
assigned to the last name in the list should 
be mentioned here. The accession ot 
Tyrannus the successor of Cyrillus is 
placed by Jerome in the r8th year ot 
Diocletian, which began Sept. A.D. 301; 
but Cyrilus appears on the scene in 
the account of the martyrdom of the 
Quattuor Coronati, who apparently suf- 
fered Nov. 9, A.D. 306 (see Harnack 
P. 53 sq). The narrative further states 


On the one hand 


that he had been already three years a 
prisoner in the mines of Pannonia. Eu- 
sebius was probably some forty years old 
at this time; he was already actively en- 
gaged in literary work; he took an eager 
interest in the history of the martyrs; and 
he was in constant communication with 
Antioch. This being so, it is quite in- 
credible that he can have been ignorant 
of the true date of the death of so impor- 
tant a person as Cyrillus. We must con- 
clude therefore either that Jerome does 
not reproduce the date of Eusebius in this 
instance, or that Tyrannus was appointed 
to succeed to the see during the life-time 
of Cyrillus. But this last mode of solu- 
tion, if admissible, may possibly apply in 
other cases where the same difficulty ex- 
ists; e.g. in the case of Maximinus the 
successor of Theophilus. 


= 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 457 


Asclepiades, though belonging to the first list, is an example of the 
artificial arrangement which marks the second, On the other hand 
Demetrianus and Domnus, though included in the second, betray the 
characteristic feature which distinguishes the first, as Lipsius (Jenaer 
Literaturzeitung, April 6, 1878, p- 201 sq) has pointed out; for 
Demetrianus is placed Ann. Abr. 2272, four years after the accession of 
the Roman bishop Stephanus Ann. Abr. 2268 [other Antiochene and 
Roman bishops however having intervened], and Domnus Ann. Abr. 
2283, four years after the accession of the Roman bishop Dionysius 
Ann. Abr. 2279. 

But besides the fact that there is no such clearly drawn line of 
demarcation, separating the list into two parts at the very date when 
Africanus wrote, the phenomena at the supposed point of juncture are 
not such as to favour the theory that Eusebius was indebted to a ficti- 
tious table of this chronographer for the first part The great work of 
Africanus was carried down to A.D. 220 or 221, at which date (or 
within a year or two) it was written. About the same time, during 
the reign of Elagabalus (A.D. 218—223), we read that he was instru- 
mental in rebuilding Emmaus under the name of Nicopolis, and that 
he went as a delegate (evidently to the emperor) on this business 
(Euseb. Chron. n. p. 178, Hieron. Vir. ZZ, 63, Chron. Pasch. p. 499). 
About the year 220 therefore his literary activity and his political 
influence alike were at their height. It is not too much to assume 
that he was 4o years of age at least at this time. If so, he must have 
been born not later than about A.D. 180. But from another circum- 
stance we may infer that his birth was some years earlier than this. 
Origen was born about A.D. 185 (Clinton Fast. Rom. 1. p. 183), and 
Africanus (Routh Rel. Sacr. 11. p. 225) calls him his ‘son.’ Moreover, 
as a native of Palestine, Africanus was favourably situated for ascer- 
taining the chronology of the Antiochene Church. He was a traveller 
too; for, besides the embassy just mentioned, we know that he went 
to Egypt before writing his Chronography, attracted thither by the 
learning of Heraclas (Euseb. 77. Æ. vi. 31). A diligent and acquisitive 
investigator, who took so much pains in the cause of learning, could 
hardly have been mistaken, or seriously mistaken, about the dates of 
those Antiochene bishops who flourished during his own youth or 
- manhood. How does this consideration bear on the dates given in the 
Chronicon of Eusebius ? 

The accession of the last bishop before he wrote, PHILETUS, is 
placed A.D. 215, ie. five years before his Chronography ended, and 
(as we must suppose) while he was already engaged on his work. If 


458 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


therefore this date be his, we may safely assume that it is correct. Any 
other supposition would be irrational. Yet it exhibits the supposed 
schematism, for it is placed 4 years after the Roman bishop Callistus. 
In this case therefore the period is accidental. Though an exact Olym- 
piad, it is not due to the fact that Africanus reckoned by Olympiads. 
Tracing the succession backwards we come next to ASCLEPIADES, 
whose date is A.D. 210. Here the schematism attributed to Africanus 
is not observed. He is placed not four but twelve years after the pre- 
ceding Roman bishop Zephyrinus. He stands however one year 
before the next Roman bishop Callistus, in accordance with the 
supposed schematism of the latter part. What account can we give 
of this fact, if Harnack’s theory be true? Harnack himself believes 
that Eusebius here altered the date as given by Africanus (see p. 28). 
Eusebius, he supposes, had some ‘sort of tradition’ that Serapion, the 
predecessor of Asclepiades, lived beyond the 4th year of Zephyrinus; 
accordingly he moved the accession of Asclepiades forward and, 
abandoning the schematism of Africanus in this instance, made the date 
conform to his own schematism. This seems to me an improbable 
supposition. Eusebius elsewhere (Æ. Æ. vi. rr) gives an extract from 
a letter to the Antiochenes written by Alexander, afterwards bishop 
of Jerusalem, in which he says that the Lord had lightened his bonds 
‘in the season of captivity’ (kara tov Kaipov ths eipkrás) by the news 
that Asclepiades had been appointed their bishop. The confession of 
Alexander is placed by Eusebius himself in the Chronicon (11. p. 176) 
during the persecution in the roth year of Severus, ie. A.D. 203. We 
may waive the question whether Eusebius was right or wrong in so 
dating Alexander’s imprisonment. For our immediate purpose it is 
enough that he did so. ‘Thus the only tradition which Eusebius is known 
to have possessed, bearing on the matter, so far from leading him to 
substitute a later date, would have prevented him from doing so. The 
curious fact is that, if Africanus had dated the accession of Asclepiades, 
according to his supposed schematism, four years, instead of twelve, after 
Zephyrinus, the date (A.D. 203) would have entirely satisfied the con- 
temporary allusion in Alexander’s letter. As it is, critics (e.g. Valois on 
Euseb. Z. Z. l. c., Clinton Fast. Rom. 1. pp. 209, 211), whether rightly or 
wrongly, condemn the date A.D. 210 as impossible, and themselves place 
the accession of Asclepiades seven or eight years earlier’. These con- 


1 Harnack himself argues that the date substitute it. He suggests that the see 
in the Chronicon must be nearly right, remained vacant for a time, and he places 
since Eusebius would not otherwise have the accession of Asclepiades about A.D. 
altered the schematism of Africanus to 209 (p. 46 sq). This however does not 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 459 


siderations seem to show that Eusebius found this date already in his 
authority, and did not himself invent it. If this authority was Afri- 
canus, the date must almost necessarily be correct ; for it is only ten 
years before his Chronography was published. 

The predecessor of Asclepiades was SERAPION. The date of his 
accession, A.D. 190, accords with the supposed schematism, being four 
years after the accession of the Roman bishop Victor. Here again 
there is a high probability that Africanus would have had correct 
information ; but, as we are now getting back into his youth or his 
boyhood, the certainty is less than in the previous cases. When how- 
ever we come to test the statement by known facts, we find not only 
that it does not conflict with any historical notices, but that it must 
at all events be within a year or two of the correct date. The facts 
are as follows. Eusebius (ZZ Z. v. 19) places Serapion among the 
writers who took part in the Montanist controversy in the reign of 
Commodus (slain Dec. 31, A.D. 192), saying that he became bishop 
of Antioch during the times of which he is speaking (èri trav dyAov- 
Mévov xpóvov), and alleging for his statement a constant tradition 
(karéxe. Adyos). In a later passage (H. Z. v. 22), after mentioning the 
accessions of Victor of Rome and Demetrius of Alexandria, both which 
he places in the roth year of Commodus (A.D. 189), he adds that ‘con- 
temporary with them the afore-mentioned Serapion still continued to 
flourish at that time, being eighth bishop of the Church of the Antiochenes 
after the Apostles’ (kaf ods kai rs "Avrtoxéov. éxxAnoias OyÓoos amo Tdv 
azocTóXov 6 mpócÓev 399 Sednwpévos eri Tóre Xapamíev émicKoros 


Tov ToU wypo Karpov). Harnack infers 
from this that Serapion must have sur- 


explain the notice in Alexander’s letter. 
This difficulty, if I understand him rightly, 


he meets elsewhere (p. 14) by supposing 
that Eusebius was wrong in connecting 
the imprisonment of Alexander, during 
which he heard of Asclepiades’ accession, 
with the great persecution in the 1oth 
year of Severus (A.D. 203). The alter- 
native would be to suppose that Alexander 
was detained several years in captivity 
(A.D. 203—210). One or other hypothesis 
seems necessary if we are to maintain the 
date of Asclepiades’ accession as given in 
the Chronicon. 

Eusebius (ZZ. Z. vi. 12) mentions Se- 
rapion writing to a certain Domninus who 
had lapsed from Christianity to Judaism 
‘at the time of the persecution’ (mapa 


vived the persecution of Severus (p. 46). 
The inference may be correct; but the 
necessity which he has felt of postulating 
some other event to satisfy the reference 
in Alexander’s letter suggests misgivings 
as to the certainty of the allusion in the 
very similar case here. 

Altogether we may take warning by the 
perplexities which these strictly genuine 
and contemporary records create—not to 
condemn hastily the dates of the Chroni- 
con in other cases, even where the prima 
facie interpretation of authentic notices 
seems imperatively to demand it, e.g. the 
accession of Maximinus. 


460 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


éyvopitero). Again, Eutychius patriarch of Alexandria (see Harnack 
p. 45), a late and untrustworthy writer indeed, but here apparently 
relating a historical fact, states that Demetrius of Alexandria wrote to 
Gabius [Gaius] bishop of Jerusalem, Maximus [Maximinus] patriarch 
of Alexandria, and Victor patriarch of Rome, on the paschal compu- 
tation (4an. 1. p. 363 sq, ed. Pococke). If these statements be true, 
Maximinus the predecessor of Serapion must have survived the 
accession of Victor (A.D. 189), and yet Serapion must have succeeded 
before the death of Commodus (A.D. 192). These notices combined 
point to about A.D. roo, as the date of Serapion’s accession. 

Serapion was preceded by Maximinus, whose accession in the 
Chronicon is assigned to A.D. 177, four years after the Roman bishop 
Eleutherus. This is almost demonstrably wrong. ‘Theophilus the 
predecessor of Maximinus in his extant work (ad Autol. iii. 27) cites 
a chronography of Chryseros which closed with the death of M. Aurelius, 
and himself carries down his reckoning to that event ; so that he cannot 
have written his third book till the first year of Commodus (A.D. 180) 
at the earliest. The only escape from the contradiction would be the 
supposition that he vacated his see for some reason or other during 
his lifetime. On the other hand it is not probable that he lived very 
much later than this date, inasmuch as his name is not mentioned in 
connexion with the Montanist controversy which raged soon after. 
The reckoning of the Chronicon therefore would seem to antedate the 
accession of Maximinus by about five years. 

With regard to the six earlier accessions we have no contemporary 
or trustworthy notices which enable us to test the accuracy of the 
dates. Of these six, the dates assigned to the first two do not satisfy 
the supposed schematism; the third is not assigned to any precise 
year; the fourth and fifth agree with the assumed rule, being placed 
four years after Telesphorus and Pius, the 7th and gth Roman bishops, 
respectively ; while the sixth again violates it. Thus of these six earlier 
dates only two afford examples of this schematism. 

As the result of this examination, we are led to the conclusion that 
in this first part of the list as far as Philetus, the authority followed 
by Eusebius cannot have been Africanus, unless the chronology here is 
genuine in the main, though not necessarily accurate in its details. 
If it was a fictitious list, the authority followed must have been some 
later writer who was less favourably situated for obtaining correct 
information. 

From these facts it will have appeared, unless I am mistaken, 
that Harnack’s theory is not built on a secure foundation. For the 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 461 


general predominance of the interval of four years, i.e. one Olym- 
piad, there is indeed some show of evidence. But it does not 
necessarily point to any deliberate artificial arrangement on the part 
either of Eusebius himself or of a previous authority copied by him. 
The frequent recurrence of the number 4, if not accidental, might be 
explained in the following way. The primary authority—whether 
Africanus or some one else—arranged his chronography by Olympiads. 
He knew roughly that such and such an Antiochene bishop succeeded 
to the see of Antioch, when such and such a Roman bishop occupied 
the see of Rome, and he placed them in the next Olympiad accordingly. 
The exact year in the Olympiad to which the accessions of the Antiochene 
bishops are assigned in the Chronicon of Eusebius would then be due to 
this previous writers form of tabulation, which was misunderstood by 
his transcribers or successors and is lost to us. 

Beyond this point we are not at liberty to assume any artificial 
arrangement. All the accompanying facts forbid us to suspect either 
Eusebius himself or his previous authority of deliberate invention. 
'There is no appearance of artifice in the Olympiads themselves, which, 
for the accessions from Euodius to Philetus inclusive are as follows ; 


Olezorua 01222232, Ol 22154400227. 14013 230,,3,012237.22, 
1523922,.,015245,:3; OL 2494 14,01. 240. 2: 


Nor again does any suspicion attach to the order of succession of 

the Roman bishops selected, which 1s as follows ; 
O, I, 5, 7, 9, TI, 12, 13, 15, 15. 

It should be observed also that where Eusebius does not know 
a date, or at least does not believe that he knows it, he indicates his 
uncertainty. Thus in the case of the bishops of Jerusalem he masses 
them together at intervals, giving their names and the order of succes- 
sion, but not attempting to fix the dates of accession ; and as regards 
this very see of Antioch, in the case of Hero the successor of Ignatius 
he is satisfied with indicating a rough proximity, without naming a 
precise year. Moreover in his preface to the whole work he cautions 
his readers against attaching too much weight to individual dates, 
where much must necessarily be uncertain. The Scriptural saying, * It 
is not yours to know the times and the seasons, holds good (so he 
considers) for the chronology of all times, as well as for the Second 
Advent (Chron. 1. p. 3, ed. Schoene). 

But, though this recurrence of the number 4 may perhaps be due 
to some cause such as I have suggested, the possibility remains that its 
frequency here was a mere chronological accident. From this point of 


462 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


view the following example from the recent history of France may not 
prove uninstructive’. 

1643 Accession of Louis xiv. 

1715 Accession of Louis Xv. 

1774 Accession of Louis xvi. 

1793 Accession of Louis xvi (end of French Monarchy), 

1804 Accession of Napoleon as Emperor. 

1814 Accession of Louis XVIII. 

1824 Accession of Charles x. 
Here we have a schematism, of which the principle is the recurrence 
of the number 4 in the units. The majority of the dates already fulfil 
this condition. The rest may be brought into accordance by adding 
or subtracting one in each case. But what supposition is more natural 
than that the events should have been accidentally displaced by a 
year in some transcription of the tables? We have a right to expect 
only one occurrence of the same unit 4 in ten dates, and here we have 
four in seven (or if we commence with the accession of Louis xvi, 
the beginning of the revolutionary period, four in five), with a rea- 
sonable presumption that originally it occupied the remaining places 
also. Moreover, if the fictitious character of this chronology thus 
betrays itself by its artificial arrangement, what shall we say when we 
observe the inordinate length of time assigned to the earliest names? 
Not less than 131 years are given to two sovereigns alone. This, 
it may be safely said, is without a parallel in European annals. The 
greatest length of time occupied by any two successive reigns in the 
preceding history of the French Monarchy appears to be 86 years. The 
average duration of a reign, from Hugh Capet downwards till we arrive 
at this point, is 21 or 22 years. Even the chronology of the regal 
period in Roman history is not guilty of any such extravagance. Thus 
the condemnation of this table is complete. From this point onward 
a different principle prevails. ‘The new French Monarchy begins with 
Louis Philippe, A.D. 1830. This king dies A.D. 1850, and his death is 
followed in the next year by the Coup d'État, which results in the 
establishment of the Second Empire. This Second Empire ends, and 
the new French Republic begins, A.D. 1870. Here, it will be observed, 
there is an interval of 20 years between each event. 

This example will serve as a caution against too rapid inferences 

from the recurrence of numerical peculiarities in history. But indeed 


1 A striking example of chronological symmetry is given in Seeley's Expansion 
of England, p. 266 sq. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 463 


any ordinary chronological lists furnish abundance of such warnings’. 
There is no end to the tricks which authentic history plays with 
numbers. Few European states are safe from the suspicions which 
these freaks of chronology may stir in the minds of critics in the remote 
future*. 


In the above criticisms I have argued provisionally on the assump- 
tion that the Armenian dates give the chronology of Eusebius himself F 
but, as I have elsewhere shown?, this assumption is burdened with 
difficulties, and another aspect of the question is presented in the 
following communication which I received from Dr Hort, when my 
first edition was going through the press. 

‘Harnack’s theory takes for granted the truth of Lipsius's assump- 
tion that the Roman episcopal chronology of Eusebius's Chronicle is 
- to be found in the Armenian version, not in the Hieronymian Chronicle. 
This has always seemed to me an improbable view: but it would 
acquire fresh strength if the Antiochene chronology, which is approxi- 
mately the same in both versions, were shown to be founded on the 
Armenian dates of the Roman chronology. On all accounts there- 
fore it is worth while to ascertain whether the relations between the 
Antiochene chronology and the Hieronymian dates of the Roman chro- 
nology exhibit any correspondences like those which have been pointed 
out by Harnack. The following table will furnish provisional means 
of comparison. It gives both the Armenian and the Hieronymian dates 


Prussia? Accession of the great Elector 
Frederick William A.D. 1640; Accession 
of the great King Frederick II A.D. 1740; 
Accession of Frederick William IV A.D. 
1840. Is it too much to assume that 
this schematism was drawn up when the 


1 The recent chronology of the two 
archiepiscopal sees of England for in- 
stance may be taken as examples. The 
dates of accession to the see of Canter- 
bury since the middle of the last century 
are 1758, 1768, 1783, 1805, 1828, 1848, 


1862, 1868, where five out of eight have 
the same unit. The three preceding ac- 
cessions bear the dates 1737, 1747, 1757. 
The see of York again exhibits in suc- 
cession these dates; 1747, 1757, 1761, 
1776 [1777], 1807 [1808], 1847, 1857, 
where the dates in brackets are as I find 
them in another list. Here not only have 
five at least out of seven the same unit 7, 
but in two cases the same years, 47, 57, 
are repeated in succession in two succes- 
sive centuries. 

2 What can be more suspicious for in- 
stance, than these dates in the history of 


hopes of the national party centred in 
Frederick William IV as the sovereign 
of a united Germany? The date of his 
accession is, we may assume, correct, 
or at least roughly so; and the chrono- 
grapher, writing at a crisis when he was 
expected to take his rank with the two 
most illustrious sovereigns of the past, 
adopted this date as his starting point 
and placed the accessions of the triad at 
intervals of a century, filling in the inter- 
mediate dates at his pleasure. 

3 See S. Clement of Rome 1. p. 222 sq 
(ed. 2). 


464 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


in years of Abraham for Antioch, and replaces the Armenian by the 
Hieronymian dates for Rome. Schoene’s text is followed, the years given 
in mss cited by him, where they are different, being added in brackets. 


“It will be seen at once that the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh 
Antiochene dates exactly synchronize with Roman dates: the cor- 


Antioch Arm Hier. Rome Hier. 
Euhodius 2058 Peter 2058 
2060 (59) 
Ignatius 2084—5 | Linus 2084 
2085 
Anencletus 2096 
Clemens 2108 
Euarestus 2115 (4) 
Hero 2123 2123 
Alexander 2125 (6) 
Xystus 2135 
Cornelius 2144. 2144. Telesphorus 2144 
Hyginus 2154 (5) 
Eros 2158 2158 Pius 2158 
Anicetus 2173 (1) 
Theophilus 2185 2185 Soter 2185 
Maximinus 2193 2193 Eleutherus 2193 
Serapion 2206 2206 (5) 
Victor 2209 
Zephyrinus 2217 (6) 
Asclepiades 2227 (5) 
2228 
Philetus 2233 
2234 
Callistus 2236 (5) 
Urbanus 2241 (o) 
Zebinus 2245 2245 
Pontianus 2250 (48) 
Anteros 
Fabianus 2255 
Babylas [2270] | ? 
Fabius 2270 2268 Cornelius 2269 (8) 
Demetrianus 2269 
Lucius 
Stephanus 2249 
[Xystus II. 2271] 
2272 
Paulus 2277 (8) 
2278 
Dionysius 2282 (I) 
Domnus 2283 2283 (4) 
Timezeus 2288 
Felix 22 
Cyrillus 2297 94 
Eutychianus 
Gaius 2298 
Marcellinus 2313 
Tyrannus 2319 
Eusebius 2321 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 465 


respondence is all the clearer because the Armenian and Hieronymian 
dates for Antioch are identical. The first, second, and third require 
examination. 

‘The Armenian list for Antioch starts in the same year as the list for 
Rome; the Hieronymian list two years later in Schoene’s text, one year 
later in Pontac’s text and the excellent Cod. Freherianus. The difference 
cannot however be original, for the appointment of the first bishop 
of Antioch must have been taken to accompany or follow immediately 
the departure of S. Peter from Antioch for Rome: the intervening 
Hieronymian article is on the preaching of S. Mark, ‘interpres Petri,’ 
in Egypt and Alexandria, and the three articles were evidently intended 
to form a single whole. The year intended to be common to all three 
was apparently not 2058, but 2059. Without this change the Roman 
date cannot be made to agree with the 25 years of office assigned 
to S. Peter in the Hieronymian Chronicle; while comparison with 
other lists shews that xxv is not itself a corruption of xxvi. In the 
Armenian mss (see Aucher's edition, 11. 268 sq) the three years 2057, 
2058, 2059 form a separate compartment, the right-hand portion of which 
is entirely taken up with the articles on S. Mark and Euhodius ESO 
that the displacement is easily accounted for by considerations of 
space. Moreover, if we put S. Peter's date entirely out of sight, 2059 
remains evidently the most probable Eusebian date for Euhodius ; since 
it accounts for both 2058 and 2060, and in the Antiochene (unlike 
the Roman) episcopates there is no reason to suppose that the dis- 
crepancies between the two forms of the Chronicle are due to anything 
but accidents of transcription. 

“The beginnings of the second episcopates likewise approximately 
coincide. Linus is clearly referred to 2084, the last year of Nero, 
assumed as the date of S. Peter's martyrdom: the Hieronymian article 
on Ignatius is attached in a singular manner to the Olympiadic numeral 
answering to 2085 (see Schoene's note), but apparently should rather 
be regarded as part of an overflow from the too numerous articles of 
2084: the Armenian position of Ignatius is at 2085, but evidently by 
a mistake of transcription, for the article interrupts a single long sen- 
tence about Vespasian, and the existence of a dislocation at 2084 is 
proved by the interposition of the reigns of Galba and Vitellius before 
the death of Nero. Eusebius doubtless placed both Ignatius and Linus 
at 2084. 

* At the third Antiochene episcopate there is a real breach of syn- 
chronism, though only to the amount of two years: the Armenian and 
Hieronymian records agree in placing Hero at 2123, while Alexander 


IGN, II. 30 


466 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


of Rome stands at 2125. Here Eusebius had a historical landmark 
independent of any artificial co-ordination with Roman chronology, for 
Hero became bishop of Antioch in consequence of the death of 
Ignatius. He mentions the succession in connexion with the martyr- 
dom; and as the martyrdom was said to have taken place under 
Trajan, he includes the record of it in what he has to say about what 
passed as Trajan’s persecution. 

* Accordingly the first seven Antiochene episcopates stand related to 
Roman episcopates in the manner shown by the following list. 


Euhodius 2059 Peter 


Ignatius 2084 Linus 
Hero 2123 

2125 Alexander 
Cornelius 2144 Telesphorus 
Eros 2158 Pius 
Theophilus 2185 Soter 
Maximinus 2193 Eleutherus. 


‘Such a series of exact coincidences speaks for itself, and cannot be 
accidental. The one exception occurs in the one place where it could 
not but occur: an artificial distribution was required only through 
defect of knowledge; and if Eusebius supposed himself to have direct 
or indirect knowledge of the date of such an event as the martyrdom. 
of Ignatius, the beginning of the next episcopate was already deter- 
mined for him. This and the accession of Euhodius, as due to 
S. Peter’s removal to Rome, were doubtless his two early fixed points. 
Between them he had to place the accession of Ignatius, and the perse- 
cution under Trajan might easily suggest the persecution under Nero, 
in which S. Peter suffered martyrdom; and Linus was recorded to 
have succeeded him. This juxtaposition of the two sees, sanctioned 
by S. Peter’s traditionary connexion with both, would supply a helpful 
resource for the following Antiochene episcopates in the absence of any 
evidence. If Eusebius found the date of Serapion’s accession recorded 
or in any way indicated as 2206, he might take his first two dates, reckon- 
ing backwards, from the two Roman episcopates immediately preceding 
2206; and then, observing five more to remain while only two dates 
were needed, he might adopt every alternate Roman date. The pro- 
cess here supposed would account naturally and precisely for the actual 
facts; but of course the borrowing of the Antiochene from the Roman 
dates, with the single inevitable exception, is all that can be safely 
affirmed. In the rest of the list we find no such coincidences, where 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 467 


historical attestation is wanting. The single absolute synchronism which 
occurs in this part—that of Fabius and Cornelius—was attested by the 
fact, unquestionably known to Eusebius, that their respective pre- 
decessors, Babylas and Fabianus, both perished in the short Decian 
persecution. 

“At the accession of Clement of Rome, the fourth on the list if 
S. Peter is included, the Armenian date precedes that of Jerome by 
five years, and during the next nine episcopates, to Eleutherus inclu- 
sive, the interval is always either four or five years (Alexander making 
only an apparent exception), owing to the fact that the fundamental 
term-numerals are all but identical in the two lists throughout this 
period. This is the reason why the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Antiochene 
bishops appear to stand about an Olympiad in advance of corre- 
sponding Roman bishops, when Armenian are substituted for Hiero- 
nymian dates in the Roman chronology. Of course Julius Africanus 
vanishes with the Olympiads. But even if the Armenian chronology 
is retained, two of the Olympiadic intervals become incorrect as soon 
as the Armenian dates are tested critically instead of being simply 
copied as they now stand. The term-numerals show conclusively that 
the Armenian year for Alexander is not 2119 but 2120, and for 
Eleutherus not 2189 but 2188; so that the intervals would be of five 
and of three years, not of four years in both cases.’ 


I cannot doubt that this is the right solution in the main. The 
Chronicon and the History appear to have been completed within a 
year or two of each other; and Eusebius must have been employed 
upon them at the same time’. This being so, it would be strange if 
they presented two widely divergent chronologies of the early Roman 


bishops. This difficulty disappears if we suppose the Roman episcopal 


“present persecution.’ Again in Prac. 
Ev. x. 0. 11 there is a reference to 
the Chronicon; yet indications are not 


1 The Chronicon was carried down to 
the vicennalia of Constantine, A.D. 325 
(11. p. 191, Schoene); the History, unless 


internal evidence is altogether delusive, 
was written before the death of Crispus 
(A.D. 326). Eusebius indeed appears to 
have issued two editions of the Chronzcon, 
as he certainly did of other works, e.g. the 
Martyrs of Palestine and the Two Books 
of Objection and Defence read by Photius 
(Bibl. 13). Thus in the Zclog. Prophet. 
i. 1 (p. 1 Gaisford) Eusebius directly refers 
to the Chronicon; yet elsewhere in this 
same work, i. 8 (p. 26), he speaks of the 


wanting that the Praeparatio and De- 
monstratio were written during the per- 
secution and in the years immediately 
succeeding (Tillemont Æ. Z. Vu. p. 
53 sq). But this hypothesis of an earlier 
edition will not explain the difficulty ; for 
the Armenian represents one which was 
contemporary with the History, since it 
mentions the vicennalia (I. pp. 71, 131). 
On this subject see S. Clement of Rome 1. 
p+ 224 sq (ed. 2.) 


30—2 


468 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


dates of the Armenian version to be due either to accident or to 
some later revision or to both causes, But, even supposing that 
the Armenian version did give the original Eusebian dates for the 
Roman bishops, the possibility would still remain that for the dates 
of the Antiochene bishops Eusebius copied some previous writer 
who had arranged the Antiochene chronology according to another 
list of Roman bishops—a list afterwards substituted in the Chronicon 
by Jerome for that of Eusebius’. As regards details, the procedure 
which Hort suggests, but does not insist upon, to account for the 
synchronism of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Antiochene bishops with 
the 7th, oth, 11th and 12th Roman bishops respectively, seems to 
me to attribute too elaborate an artifice to Eusebius. Eusebius or 
his authority must have known, as we know, that Theophilus was 
contemporary with Soter and Maximinus with Eleutherus. He may 
have believed or known also, what we do not know, that Cornelius was 
contemporary with Telesphorus and Eros with Pius. In placing their 
accessions over against the same year, he or his authority merely adopted 
an inexact, or rather too exact, way of expressing these rough syn- 
chronisms in a tabular arrangement where assignment to a definite 
year was convenient. His treatment of the Jerusalem bishops, where 
he had no chronological data, ought, I think, to liberate him from the 
suspicion even of the moderate artifice which Hort’s suggestion ascribes 
to him in the case of the Antiochene bishops. We are bound to 
believe that for the latter he had some data, however rough and 
imperfect. With this exception, which however does not affect the 
main question, Hort’s solution has everything to recommend it. It is 
free from the difficulties which beset Harnack’s theory, and it explains 
the phenomena better. 


One other objection is brought by Harnack (p. 70 sq) against the 
early part of the list in the Chronicon. The average duration of office 
assigned to these early Antiochene bishops is unusually long. If we 
suppose Theophilus to have died about A.D. 185 «the Chronicon places 
his death A.D. 177, but for reasons already stated it seems necessary to 
advance the date by some years), we have then a period of more than 
75 years for four bishops alone, Hero, Cornelius, Eros, Theophilus, or 
an average of 18 or ro years apiece. This is an unusually long time. 


1 This is in fact the view which has press for my first edition, but before they 
since been maintained by Lipsius (see were published. See S. Clement of Rome 


above, p.452 note), whose paper appeared I. p. 224 (ed. 2) on the difficulties which 
after these sheets had passed through the attend this hypothesis. 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 469 


He infers from this that the original chronicler had before him 
simply a list of the names of the successive Antiochene bishops; that 
he felt bound to represent the earliest of these persons so named as 
appointed directly by Apostles; and that he was obliged accordingly 
to stretch out the duration of their tenure of office on the Procrustes- 
bed of this necessity so as to cover the period, though in fact the 
earliest name belonged to a date much later than the Apostolic times. 
On this principle he rectifies the chronology thus. If we reckon the 
duration of office at an average of twelve years, this gives 48 years 
for the four, and we are thus carried back to about the time of the 
martyrdom of the Roman bishop Telesphorus for the death of Ignatius. 
Or again; if we place the death of Theophilus in the middle of the 
episcopate of Eleutherus, and reckon back the duration of four 
episcopates in the Roman list, we are brought to about a.p. 138, 
ie. nearly the same date, for this same event. ‘In the Alexandrian list,’ 
he adds, ‘a similar reckoning leads to a similar date.’ As the result 
of this calculation, he considers that the death of Ignatius may be 
placed in the reign of Hadrian, or even of Antoninus Pius (p. 71). 

But, even if we allow that the length of the period constitutes a real 
difficulty in the Eusebian chronology, the solution does not seem to be 
the most probable under the circumstances. It is more natural, as 
well as more in accordance with experience, to suppose that some 
links in the chain have been lost, than that the links are continuous 
but have been stretched out to lengthen the chain backwards. Thus our 
original chronicler may only have been able to recover a name of a 
_ bishop here and there, in connexion with some fact which enabled him to 
- fix approximately their respective dates; and, as he was not acquainted 
with any other names in the early annals of the Antiochene episcopate, 
may have assumed that there were no others. This is a matter of 
common occurrence in the lists of official personages in their earlier 
stages, where the historical record is imperfect. 

But in fact the period of 75 years, though longer than the average 
of four episcopates, has been again and again attained, and sometimes 
largely exceeded, in authentic records about which no doubt can be enter- 


tained’. We may compare for instance the annals of the other Eastern 

1 [n the recent annals of the English 80 years, and from A.D. 1783—1862, or 
episcopate for instance, notwithstanding ^ 79 years, though in all cases the arch. 
the practice of frequent translations, we bishops were translated from other sees; 
have far more surprising phenomena. in Vork from A.D. 1761— 1857, or 96 
Thus in the see of Canterbury four epis- years, and again from A.D. 1776—1862, 
copates extend from A.D. 1768—1848, or or 86 years, though again all were trans- 


470 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


patriarchates, Alexandria and Jerusalem, at the first moment when 
we reach the broad daylight of history and no cloud of obscurity hangs 
over the dates. This is probably as fair a parallel as the case admits. 
At Alexandria then we have Demetrius, Heraclas, Dionysius, Maximus, 
extending from A.D. 190—283, or 93 years; Alexander, Athanasius, 
Petrus 11, Timotheus r, from A.D. 313—385, or 72 years; Timotheus r, 
Theophilus, Cyrillus, Dioscorus, from A.D. 377—452, or 75 years: and 
at Jerusalem Narcissus, Alexander, Mazabanes, Hymenzus, from A.D. 
190—298, or 108 years; Hermon, Macarius, Maximus, Cyrillus, from 
A.D. 300—388, or 88 years; Cyrillus, Joannes r, Prayllus, Juvenalis, 
from A.D. 348—458, or rro years; Joannes 1, Prayllus, Juvenalis, 
Anastasius, from A. D. 388—478, or 90 years. In fact at Alexandria 13 
successive bishops, from Demetrius to Cyrillus inclusive, cover from 
A.D. 190—444, le. 254 years, giving an average of between r9 and 
20 years; and at Jerusalem 13 successive bishops, from Narcissus to 
Anastasius inclusive, cover from A.D. 190—478, ie. 288 years, giving 
an average of more than 22 years’. 

From the preceding investigation it will have appeared generally 
that there is no sufficient ground for suspecting an artificial arrange- 
ment of the dates of accession; but that, if it exist at all, it is not of 
such a kind as to affect the substantial accuracy of the chronology, 
though it may have caused a displacement of a few years in any given 
case. Of the capricious invention of names, or the arbitrary assign- 
ment of them to particular epochs irrespective of tradition, there is no 
indication. The information may be incorrect; the tradition may be 
hazy; but this is a different matter. Our guarantee of substantial 
fidelity will be the rough accordance of these dates with extraneous 
and authentic notices. If this ordeal be applied to the list, its general 
credibility does not suffer. From Theophilus onwards we are able 


lations; in London from A.D. 1675— 


from A.D. 1727—1824, or 97 years, and 
1761, or 86 years, though all the four 


again from A.D. 1744—1845, or ror years, 


were translations; in Winchester from 
A.D. 1734—1827, or 93 years, and again 
from A.D. 1761—1869, or 108 years; in 
Durham from A.D. 1632—1730 (with the 
vacancy of one year), or 97 years, and 
again from A.D. 1660—1750, or go years; 
in Chichester from A.D. 1731—1824, or 
93 years (70 years being occupied by two 
episcopates alone); in Bath and Wells, 
where longevity seems to prevail, from 
A.D. 1703—1802, or 99 years, and again 


though all were translations; in Lincoln 
from A.D. 1787—1869, or 82 years, 
though all were translations; in Worces- 
ter from A.D. 1781—1861, or 80 years, 
though all were translations. These ex- 
amples might be multiplied. 

1 No account is here taken of intruders 
who were thrust into the sees during the 
lifetimes of the regular bishops, as e.g. 
in the case of Athanasius, 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 471 


to test every name, though the test is sometimes rough; and in no 
case is the divergence from known or suspected fact very wide. In all 
cases, which we have means of verifying, the Antiochene episcopates 
were contemporary with the Roman episcopates with which they are 
co-ordinated. 

But the value of Harnack’s investigations is quite independent of 
the particular theory which he founds upon them. He has raised 
definitely the question what degree of credit is due to the chronology 
of the early Antiochene bishops. He has collected the data for a 
satisfactory answer to this question, so far as it can be answered. And 
above all: he has set the relation of this chronology to the Ignatian 
controversy in its proper light. 

With this last point alone we are directly concerned. The question 
which critics henceforth must ask is this. If there be a conflict be- 
tween the very early date assigned to Ignatius in the traditional 
chronology of the Antiochene episcopate, and the phenomena of the 
Ignatian epistles regarded as a genuine work of Ignatius, so that the 
two cannot be reconciled, which must give place to the other? To the 
question so stated there can, I think, be only one answer in the end. 
The evidence, internal and external, for the genuineness of the Ignatian 
epistles is twenty times stronger than the evidence for the early 
Antiochene chronology. Elsewhere I have given reasons for the 
belief that no such conflict exists. But, assuming for the moment 
that the epistles do betray a later date than the chronology of the 
Antiochene episcopate assigns to Ignatius, it is not the genuineness 
of the epistles but the veracity of the chronology which must be 
surrendered. 

Meanwhile, if we consider this chronology in itself (irrespective of 
its bearing on the Ignatian controversy), it is reasonable to take up 
an intermediate position between Wieseler and Harnack. We cannot 
with Wieseler tie down the date of the martyrdom to the precise 
year A.D. 107, for indeed there is no reason to think that Eusebius 
himself intended this. But neither can we with Harnack allow it 
such latitude as A.D. 138, because the evidence, while it disproves 
the chronology as a strictly accurate statement, confirms it as a rough 
approximation. Even as a rough approximation however, its value 
-will diminish as we go farther back. The dates of the first century, 
the accession of Euodius A.D. 42, and the accession of Ignatius A.D. 69, 
deserve no credit. Both alike, we may suppose, were due to specu- 
lative criticism, rather than to traditional report. If Hort’s synchron- 
ism with the Roman bishops be not accepted, these two accessions 


472 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


may be explained in another way. The first would aim at giving 
the date when the Antiochene Church first received a definite con- 
stitution, this date being inferred from the Acts of the Apostles’; 
the other would represent the close of the Apostolic age as marked 
by the destruction of Jerusalem’, Ignatius being regarded as still a 
disciple of the Apostles and as appointed by them to the episcopate. 
The dates during the first half of the second century on the other hand 
may be accepted as rough, but only very rough, approximations. The 
first of these, the death of Ignatius, does not profess to be more than 
this. Not making any extravagant claims, it is the more entitled 
to credit. If it comes to us on the authority of Africanus, it is 
highly valuable, because Africanus lived in a neighbouring country, 
and must have been born within a single lifetime of the alleged 
date. However this may be, we have the indisputable testimony of 
a contemporary of Africanus to the same effect. Origen (Hom. in 
Luc. c. i, Op. 111. p. 938 A) speaks of ‘Ignatius who was second bishop 
of Antioch after the blessed Peter, and during the persecution (év 
TQ Swyp~o) fought with wild beasts in Rome. From this statement 
the date of the martyrdom may be inferred approximately*. Origen, 
it should be observed, had himself resided at Antioch before this 
(Euseb. Z. E. vi 21; about A.D. 226, see Clinton Fast. Rom. 1. pp. 
239, 241). If in addition to these facts we bear in mind that common 
tradition assigned the martyrdom to the reign of Trajan, we shall be 
doing no injustice to the evidence by setting the probable limits 
between A.D. r1oo—118, without attempting to fix the year more 
precisely *. 


1 The famine prophesied by Agabus 
(Acts xi. 28) is placed in the Armenian 
the year before, and in Jerome the year 
after, the accession of Euodius. In the 
Acts this prophecy and its fulfilment are 
recorded in the same paragraph which 
describes the foundation of a church at 
Antioch. This approximate synchronism 
was probably sufficient to suggest the date 
for the accession of the first bishop of 
Antioch. 

? 'The accession of Ignatius is placed 
one year before the destruction of Jeru- 
salem in the Armenian, and two years 
before in Jerome. The final dispersion 
of the surviving Apostles, which imme- 
diately preceded the overthrow of the city, 


would be thought a fit moment for the 
consecration of the last bishop of Antioch 
who was a disciple of Apostles. 

3 The expression ¿ë r Siwy leaves 
open the alternative of the reigns of 
Domitian and Trajan; for any subsequent 
persecution would be too late for the 
second bishop of Antioch after S. Peter. 
As no one has ever placed the martyr- 
dom under Domitian, we may safely as- 
sume that Origen intended the persecu- 
tion of Trajan. 

There is no ground for the surmise 
of Harnack (p. 67) that Origen derived 
his information from Africanus. 

4 If Malalas were a more trustworthy 
writer, we might be disposed to listen to 


OF S. IGNATIUS, 473 


7. 


The two Acts of Martyrdom which I have designated the Antiochene 
and the Roman respectively are given in the following pages. The 
other three, having no independent value, are not reprinted here. 


The authorities for the text of the ANTIOCHENE ACTS are: 


(0 Zhe Greek MS [G] which I have collated anew for this 
edition. 

(2) Zhe Latin Version [L], of which a revised text will be found 
in the Appendix. 

(3) Zhe Syriac Version [S] which also is re-edited in the Ap- 
pendix. 

(4) Zhe Bollandist Acts [B], which comprise a Latin version of 
a considerable portion of the Antiochene Acts (see above, pp. 366, 371). 
They will be found in the Acta Sanctorum for Feb. t. 

(5) Zhe Armenian Acts [A], which also comprise a very large 
portion of these Acts (see above, pp. 367, 371 sq). Petermann’s re- 
print of Aucher has been used for these. 

(6) Zhe Acts of the Metaphrast [M], which are compiled partly 
from these Acts (see above, pp. 367, 375 sq), and may be used oc- 
casionally for textual purposes. 


As G is a late and poor ws, the different versions LSBA are highly 
important aids to the construction of a text. Of these L is valuable 
on account of its literalness. On the other hand SBA frequently offer 
better readings, and generally may be said to preserve older forms of 
the text. But the license which they have taken with the original 
lessens their value; and I have only recorded their readings where they 
appeared to represent variations in the Greek. No weight attaches to 
M ; for, where his text coincides with our Acts, it is evidently founded 
on a comparatively late ms closely resembling G. 

These Acts were first edited in the original Greek by Ruinart (Act. 
Mart. Sinc. p. 605 sq, Paris, 1689) from the Colbert ms G, the Latin 


him when ó coQós OcóQuxos ó xpovoypdpos of Malalas about Africanus and Irenæus 
is adduced by him (x. p. 252, ed. Bonn.) quoted above (p. 439). Otherwise Theo- 
as stating that Anianus succeeded S. philus might have been looked to, as a 
Mark as bishop of Alexandria. Theo- primary source of information respecting 
philus of Antioch, who shows himself a the Antiochene bishoprics. As it is, 
chronographer in his extant work, is Harnack (p. 43 sq) seems to me to treat 
doubtless meant; but this is probably a the statement of Malalas with too much 


blunder akin to the erroneous statement ^ respect. 


474 ACTS OF MARTYRDOM 


Version having been previously published by Ussher (A.p. 1644) to- 
gether with the Ignatian Epistles which it accompanies. Subsequent 
editors contented themselves with reproducing the text of Ruinart. 
Jacobson recollated G, but did nothing more for the text. Zahn first 
made use of the versions for the correction of the errors in the Greek 
Ms, and thus produced a much superior text to those of his prede- 
cessors. He did not however exhaust all the good readings which 
they would yield. A further use of them is made in this edition. 
The readings éwfev, and Ayvé (for Mve), in $ 6, with several others 
elsewhere, are now introduced into the text for the first time from 
these versions. 


The authorities for the text of the Roman Acts are these ; 

(1) Zhe Three Greek MSS [V |[L|[P], described above, p. 364. 

(2) The Coptic Versions [C], of which an account is also given 
above, p. 364 sq. These are the Memphitic [C,,] and the Thebaic or 
Sahidic [C,] In passages where the two agree, or where only one is 
extant, the symbol used is C simply. 

(3) Zhe Bollandist Acts [B], in which is incorporated a very large 
portion of these Roman Acts (see above, pp. 366 sq, 371). 

(4) The Armenian Acts [A], which likewise contain a large portion 
of these Acts (see above, pp. 367, 371 sq). 

(5) The Acts of the Metaphrast | M], in which use is made of the 
Roman Acts (see above, p. 375 sq); but the coincidences are very rarely 
close enough to have any value for textual purposes. 


The Greek text of these Acts was first printed in full by Dressel 
from V. Extracts had been given before from L by Ussher (see above 
p. 364). Zahn improved upon Dressel’s text here and there, chiefly 
by corrections from AB ; but with the imperfect materials before him 
he was unable to do much, and the text has remained hitherto in a 
very bad state. "Thus it has been disfigured by such corruptions as 
KvOjvy (Kicipóvi, Zahn) for Kvvocospy (S 1), tod Alov for 'IA(ov (S r), 
èuppóvov for čuhpovos (Š 2), xaA«Q for xoAkét. (Š 3), Mo?aéos for prjoews 
($ 6), while in one place (Š 3 «i xai éoravpu6n x.r.X.) several lines had 
dropped out owing to a homceoteleuton. The superior materials at 
my disposal have enabled me to give an entirely new and, as I hope, 
greatly superior text. Of the Greek mss P, which is here made known 
for the first time, is quite the best, while the full collation of L is also 
important. The Coptic Versions preserve a text in some respects more 
ancient than any other authority, and from them I have extracted 
readings which, though evidently correct, do not appear elsewhere, 


OF S. IGNATIUS. 475 


The chronological notices at the beginning and end of these Acts in 
my text assume entirely new forms, which are not without an interest 
for the Ignatian controversy. 

Though these Roman Acts are quite valueless as history, they are 
interesting as a specimen of apologetics. For this reason I have 
thought it worth while to add full explanatory and illustrative notes, 
which hitherto they have lacked. 


The variations of the versions (which in some cases are very con- 


siderable) are not given unless they have a bearing on the Greek text or 
possess some interest of their own. 


Wie h Aes Sai AM iie ic 
ats "n Pb fie Ww D VW 
t MS YI pial PI ‘tha b un vt au T "ee 


"ldem » cs vial) Diet el 7 


* VL 
A "ESO Eun * ` 1 > 
GRO- YTV n6 22862 «Mus. d Lohnt dicte w. 10 ailai. y 
ge ý s“ usv. j rere 4e P M ly a Ip 
: EE dan. mig yanai 8 ovd uth Nu d [n vef wm. WIR 4 dri RES 


x 
t 
n 

A 


did D Weit PT Tixtsuint pelt 5d Ë 


MAPTYPION 


ITNATIOY 


A. 


L "Apri dvadeEauevou ryv ‘Pwpaiwv dpxnv Tpaia- 


^ a | , e ^ > , 5 , 2 SEEN 
vov, FyvaTus 0 TOU dTocaTONov "leavvov. uariis, dvnp 


MAPTYPION iFNATIOY a] paprópuov ToU áylov lepoudprupos lyvartov Tod Beopópov 
G; martirium sancti ignacii episcopi antiochie sirie L* 5 martyrium zgnatii episcopi 
imperante traiano (in regno traiani) in roma urbe S* (but with vv. 11), 

2 dmocróNov] G ; add. evangelistae S ; add. et evangelistae LA[B]. 


I. "Apri Ouaüefauévov x.r.A.]] The 
death of Nerva, with the consequent 
accession of Trajan, took place on 
Jan. 25, A.D. 98 (Chron. Pasch. 1. p. 
469, ed. Bonn.), or probably two days 
later (Reimar on Dion Cass. Ixviii. 
3); see Clinton Fast. Rom. 1. p. 
84. 

2. “Iwdvvov pa6grjs] See again 
Š 3 éyeyóvewav yap mada nayra 
"Iodvvov with the note. This is the 
earliest direct statement that Ig- 
natius had S. John as his master. 
Older writers say not a word of it, 
though we should expect some refer- 
ence to it, either in the scattered 
notices of Irenzeus or in the memoir 
of Eusebius or in the encomium of 
Chrysostom, if it had been true. 
Moreover the absolute silence of 
Ignatius himself respecting this A- 
postle, while he mentions S. Peter 
and S. Paul by name, is unfavourable 
to its truth. A highly probable ex- 
planation of the origin of the story is 


given by Zahn Z. v. A. p. 46sq. Eu- 
sebius in his Chronicon (II. p. 162 
Sq), speaking of S. John, says peé’ 
ov Ilammías ‘lepamoXirns kal IloAvkap- 
mos Zppvgs émígkomos dkovarai aro 
éyvopiCovro (Syncellus has here pre- 
served the exact words of Eusebius, 
as the Armenian Version shows). 
This becomes in Jerome's edition 
‘post quem auditores ejus insignes 
fuerunt Papias Hieropolitanus epis- 
copus et Polycarpus Zmyrnaeus et 
Ignatius Antiochenus We may 
however question whether, as Zahn 
assumes, Jerome himself supposed 
Ignatius to have been a disciple of 
S. John. In his notices of Ignatius 
and Polycarp, Vzr. ZZ $$ 16, 17, he 
twice states the fact of Polycarp, 
‘auditor Joannis’, ‘Joannis apostoli 
discipulus’, but abstains from stating 
the same of Ignatius, notwithstanding 
the temptation. It seems more pro- 
bable therefore that he rapidly added 
‘et Ignatius Antiochenus’, intending 


478 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [1 


¿v Tots Tacw dmocTOMKkOs, ékv(Qépva mv ékkAna lav 
'Avruoxéov' Os TOUS Tahar Xeuuvas pods Tapayayav 
Tdv TOÀNGv èri Aoueriavod Siwypwv, kaharep KuBeEp- 
yytns ayabos, TU olakt ijs Trpog'evxiis Kal THS vo relas, 
Tij c'wexela THs SWacKarlas, TH TOVW TQ TVEVMATIKW, 
Tpos THV Carny TÜS dvTikeuuévnus. ČVTETXEV Suvapews, 
dedorkws uy TWA Tv ONvyoxrUxev t] dKEpaloTepwv a7ro- 


r èv] L[A]BS* (but with a v. 1); qv G. éxuBépya] txt L[A][B]; preef. 
kal G[S]. 2 'Avrioxéov] txt L[S]LA]B ; add. ¿muuexQs G. és] LA(?); 
om. G ; z S; al. B. 5 TH cvvexela] L; pref. ka G[B]; pref. guz ez [A]. 
S translates as if it had read ris cvvexoüs kal rj didacKxadia; but perhaps the 
translator connected +s vnorelas T ovvexela together; at all events his text 
seems to have omitted xal here. TQ Tóvo] G; robore L (so also it 
translates róvp ad Mar. 4); TG móvp AB; rGv móvov S. Pref. e£ AB; om. 
GLS. TQ mveuuarug] LAB; rà» mvevuariüv S; TQ wv (—mvebuart) G. 
6 rs dvrtikeruévns ávreéixev Suvduews] Zahn; adversantis se opposuit potentiae L* ; 
potentiae (gen.) inimici restitit S (potentiae inimici being a loose paraphrase of rs 


to understand merely ‘insignis fuit’ 
with it, though the form of the sen- 
tence suggests a close connexion 
with all the preceding words. He 
excuses his work as ‘tumultuarium’ 
in his preface and says that he 
‘notario velocissime dictavit". A 
similar addition to the language of 
Eusebius is made, as Zahn points 
out, in the Syriac abstract (II. p. 214, 
Schoene), ‘post quem, qui eum au- 
diverant innotuerunt Papias Ierapo- 
litanus et Polycarpos episcopus eo- 
rum qui Smyrnae sedem (suam) col- 
locaverant, praeterea autem Ignatios 
episcopus Antiochenorum’; and this 
renders it probable that the name of 
Ignatius was added in some Greek 
copies of Eusebius, the addition be- 
ing perhaps suggested by the con- 
nexion of the names in Euseb. H. Z. 
iii. 36. From such an addition, loosely 
worded or carelessly interpreted, the 
story would take its rise. It is re- 
peated in the Chron. Pasch. p. 416 6 


"Ieávvov Tov Oeoddyou ywjcus pa8nrrs 


yeyoves, in the Hymn of S. Joseph 3 
(Anal. Sacr. Spic. Sol. Y. p. 389) 
padnrevbeis...7@ tepopayropt kai Oeo- 
Aóyo «7.A., and in the Menea Dec. 
20. So also in two Syriac chronicles 
(Cureton C. 7. pp. 221, 252; comp. 
Land Anecd. Syr. 1. p. 116), belong- 
ing apparently to the seventh and 
eighth or ninth centuries respectively 
(see Wrights Catal. of Syr. MSS 
in the Brit Mus. pp. 1040, 1041), 
and in the Syriac writer Solomon, 
author of the Bee (Cureton C. Z. 
pp. 220, 251), who flourished about 
A.D. 1220 (Assem. Bibl. Orient. IIL. 
p. 309). On the other hand Socrates 
(H. E. vi. 8) says of Ignatius merely 
Toîs amootTóňois avrois ovvõérpipev, 
and Gregory the Great regards him 
as a disciple, not of S. John, but of 
S. Peter, Est. v. 39 ad Anast. 
* magistrum ejus apostolorum princi- 
pem, ‘ejusdem principis discipulum’ 
(Of. VII. p. 320, Venet. 1770). 

I. dmocroMós] Said of Polycarp 
in Mart. Polyc. 16, and of Barnabas 


Io 


1] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 479 


, x > / \ Oe MN ^ ^ 
Bann. Toryapouv nudpaivero uev èri TW TNS €kKAna ias 
5 , , \ , ^ ^ 
acaAeUTO, Acdrnoavros mpos öňtyov oU Siwypod, 
31 A Oe e e M € , ^ s 5 \ 
10 X aXXev ðe ka’ éavrOv ws uno THs övrws eis Xpio- TOv 
5 , 5 , \ ^ , ^ ^ 
ayamns épavvauevos pundé Ts ceNelas ToU pan rob 
, , M \ 
Tagews. évevoet yao Tyv od MapTuplou “yuouéwny 
e , , \ ^ ^ 
ouoNoyiav mA€ov avTOY TrpocouweoUcav TO Kupiw. 


dvtixermévns Suvduews); adversabatur (om. 77s dvrikeuiévs and Ovvduecos) As incum- 
bentem ... sua virtute avertebat (Thy ayrixemevny avretyev Ováue) B; T2» vrte- 
keuévnv dvreîyev G. The corruption of ris dvrukeuuévgs into rJ» åvrikeruévnv 
has led to the rejection or alteration of Ovváuetos. 7 dkepatoréptov] There 
is no sufficient reason for thinking with Zahn that the versions had different read- 
ings, though they translate loosely; e.g. he supposes magis simplices of L to 
represent døeňesrépwv, but dképatos is always translated sémflex in the Vulg. of 
the N. T.; Matt. x. 16, Rom. xvi. 19, Phil. ii. 1g. 9 AwdjcavTos] Xo- 
$cavros G. Io 77s övrws] GS; vere (=svTws, om. THs) L; in plenum 
[B]; om. A. I2 *ywouévmv] G; factam B; si contigerit et evenerit super 
ipsum S; om. L[A]. I3 TÀéov] So G, not màeîov as commonly given. 

mpocoweioÜücav] The infin. adducere in L does not imply a v. 1. Tpocotke.Qcau (as 


, Zahn), but the genius of the Latin language would suggest the change. 


by Clement of Alexandria (Stvom. ii. 
20, p. 489). Tertullian distinguishes 
apostolici or apostolici viri from 
apostoli, using the term with the 
meaning ‘disciples of apostles’ (e.g. 
de Praescr. 32, adu. Marc. iv. 2), 
though Clement calls Barnabas åró- 
orodos and admocrodikds in different 
places. Our martyrologist probably 
means ‘a true disciple of apostles in 
all respects Comp. Trall. inscr. 
Ev aTroaTONKe xapakrijpt. 

2. mapayayov] ‘having passed by, 
escaped, or perhaps ‘having turned 
aside, diverted” For this latter mean- 
ing see Herod. i. 91 ov oid re éyévero 
grapayayeiv poipas. 

3. tev moAAóv] The persecution 
of Domitian, unlike that of Nero, 
consisted of repeated attacks; see 
Clem. Rom. I ras aigwidious kai émaA- 
Ajdous [yop ]évas ziv cuppopas K.T.. 
with the note. There is no satisfac- 
tory evidence however that it extend- 
ed beyond Rome; and the martyrolo- 


gist’s accuracy therefore is not above 
suspicion. 

5. rove] ‘tension’, ‘inflexibility’ ; 
comp. Ps-Ign. ad Mar. 4 mapaxaÀ@v 
mpoobewat T róvo, where there is the 
same v. l. mév@ as here. The word 
is put into the mouth of Ignatius 
himself in the /7ezcea Dec. 20 éBéas, 
dOAnta- Mndels OxAeíro, pndeis pov 
Opoyret róv róvov (p. 141, ed. Venet. 
1863). Itis used by Plutarch to de- 
scribe the ‘atrocem animum Catonis’, 
Vit. Pomp. 44; comp. also Aristid. 
Op. I. p. 524 róv róvov tis yrodpns. 
Though the word might suggest a 
continuation of the nautical meta- 
phor of the previous clauses (comp. 
Herod. vii. 36), it is difficult to find 
an appropriate application of such 
an image here. 

II. ys reÀAeías x..A.] See Trall. 
5 ov...mapa roUro jm kai paOnrns cipt, 
Rom. 5 viv dpxopat pabnrýs etvau, ib. 4 
róre écojat paOnts ddnOds k.r.., With 
the notes on EZ/es. 1, 3. 


480 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. (1 
d0ev éreaw oAlyous ETL Teapapleviay ™ éxkAnoia, [rai] 
Avyvov dixyny ÜcikoU Tyv ékaoou poriğor Stavoray Sia 
Ths Tov ypapav éEnyioews, émervyxavev THY Ka 
eUXTv. 

II. Tpaiavot yap peta rara é¿vvaTe ér& Tis 5 
aŭro BaciWelas émapÜévros émi TH viKn TH KaTa 
CkvÜdv kai Aakdv kal érépev zroNNov éÜvov Kal vopi- 
cavros ¿TL Ae(zew av’Tw® Tpos MATAV UmoTayny TO 
Tøv Xpirtiavwv Üeooe(jés ovocnua, ei pn THY TOV 


1 kal] GLA; om. S[B]. 3 ypaQóv] LSB; bev ypaddv G; scripturarum 
sacrarum A. For éreriyxavev rGv kar! ebxnv S has quae revelabantur ipsi per precem 


(in prece). 
(iv for ix). 
num in L* (but see Appx). 

A (thus giving both readings). 


multas et diversas L; diversarum B; def. A. 


add. decere ipsi et S. 


5. éwvárg ere] See above, p. 448 
sq. 

7. ZkvÜàv xai Aakóv| For the 
chronology of the Dacian Wars see 
Borghesi Ceuvres IV. p. I2I sq, 
Henzen Ann. dell’ Inst. di Corrisp. 
Archeol. XXXIV. p. 137 sq, 1862, 
Mommsen Hermes III. pp. 45, 130 sq, 
(S07 seri Lata ns O eh 
Dierauer Geschichte Trajans p. 63 
sq (in Büdingers Unters. z. Rom. 
Kaisergesch. vol. 1), besides Clinton 
and older writers, e.g. Tillemont £n- 
pereurs Il. pp. 553 sq, 560 sq, Eckhel 
Doct. Num. Vi. p. 414. Recent dis- 
coveries have added to our knowledge 
on this subject; see above p. 404 sq. 
The First Dacian War began A.D. 
101 and ended A.D. 103 (or at the 
close of A.D. 102); the Second was 
waged during the years 105, 106, and 
(as Mommsen thinks) 107 also. 

The mention of the Scythians here 
in connexion with the Dacians is 


5 yàp] GLA; 8e (vero) SB. 
The sentence is translated fost novem annos in S, and fost quartum an- 
7 ^akav] GSB; thraces L; dacos (vel thraces) 


9 & um] txt LSAB; preef. kal G. 
dauovwv] G; daemonum suorum. A; daemoniacam L; 


évvdrw| GSAB; quarto L 


érépov morir] GS (comp. M); alteras 
voutoavros| txt GLA[B]; 
TOV 
al. BS. IO ÉXovro] 
borrowed from Euseb. Chron. M. p. 
162 dent de Dacis et Scythis 
triumphavit! They are not men- 
tioned, $ £ far as I am aware, in any 
B or monuments relating to 
the period. In the Metaphrast’s 
Acts of Ignatius they displace the 
Dacians, who disappear altogether. 
See above, p. 410, and comp. Hodgkin 
Italy and her Invaders 1. p. 84 sq. 

érépov moAAGv éÓvó»] This is a 
rhetorical flourish ; but during the 
Second Dacian War (A.D. 105 or 
106) Palmas the governor subjugated 
Arabia Petrea and added it to the 
dominions of Trajan, Dion Cass. 
lxviii. 14 (comp. Chron. Pasch. 11. p. 
472); see above, p. 406 sq. 

9. ei py kirt] Euseb. Z. E. x. 8 
«i pn rois daipoor Ójew aipoivro. 
See however the upper note. 

I5. Otdyovra k.r.A.] It is clear that 
our hagiologist places the Armenian 
expedition and consequent residence 


r] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 481 


10 daiuovwy T éNovro T. A 1 t ma j Í 
u €AOLTO' T NaTpelav pera avrov Ureutiévat 
^ , ^ \ e [4 
TOV éÜvav, Õwyuov [Vmouévew] dreAnoal vro ]s, z&vras 


\ 5 ^ ^ D , » ^ 
Tous evoeBws Covtas i] Óvew n T€eAevTávy KaTnvayKacey. 


TOTE Toivuy poBnbels UTED Tis 


o *yevvatos Tov 


\ \ / 
kaTa Tv ’Avtioxeav, e7ovóa(ovra Qé èri 


kal [lap8ovs. 


^ , = P ^ 
[ Tou Baoiréws|- Tis e, KaKOOaiMOV, Tas 


> , > 
Avtiyéwy éxxAnolas 


^ Z e 3 
Xpia-ToU TTPATLWTNS Ékovaiws iyero 
` oe / y 
1577008 Tpaiavov, duyovra uev kar 


5 ^ M M 
€K€LVOV TOV Katpov 


"Apuevtav 
t M M D .. ^ 
ws ÒE kara mpdcwnmov éotn Tpaiavot 
NMETEDAS 


G; cogeret LSA ; inclinaret B 3 So that all the versions would seem to have had 


another reading, possibly é7et-you. 


(which are too loose to allow any inference); def. B. 


comminans (as if àmeujcas) L. 


š aA s š 4 
I2 Tovs evoeBus (Gvras] G; ipsos dez cultores existentes (aùroùs ebcefeis övras) L; 
dei cultores B; christianos A 3 sanctos S. 


18 rod BaciXées] GLB; om. S[A]. 


ignatius S* (as a v.1.) AB. 


II vrouévew] G; om. L; dub. SA 
dmeNjcavros] G ; 
márras] txt LSAB ; pref. 6 $óBos G. 

I4 oTpatiwrns] txt GL; add. 
Add. 


/fraianus dixit LB; add. dixit illi (tratanus) S* ; add. ez senatu, interrogabat eum rex 
et dicebat A (see above, p. 372); om. G. 


of Trajan at Antioch immediately 
after the end of the Dacian Wars. 
This however is not consistent with 
the known facts. The Dacian Wars 
ended A.D. 107 at the latest; while 
the Eastern expedition did not com- 
mence till the autumn A.D. 113. 
The interval of six or seven years 
was spent by the emperor at Rome 
or the neighbourhood. On the at- 
tempts which have been made to 
interpolate an earlier expedition to 
the East and consequent residence 
at Antioch in this interval, see above 
p- 407 sq. 

18. kaxodaipor] ‘wretch’, ‘mise- 
rable creature’; a common mode of 
address. The word however pro- 
perly means ‘one possessed by an 
evil genius or fate’, especially when 
this evil genius urges him on to his 
ruin by infatuation; comp. Dion 
Chrysost. Ovaz. xxiii. p. 514 dmoxpwai 


IGN. II. 


por Ó TL hypar üvÜpemov evdalpova 
eiva. A. dp’ ob 6 daar dyaĝós ëou, 
roürov evdainova eivai pis, ov è poy- 
Onpos, kakoDa(uova; and again p. 515 
dvayk?) kakoOa(uova dáekew  ékeivov 
kak@ Oa(uov. ovvecevypévov kai Àarpeú- 
ovra, Arist. PZuf. 850 oípot kaxodaipov 
Kat Tpis kakoOa(uov...kal nuptákts... 
otra ToÀvjópe cvykékpagat Salpor. 
See also Gataker on M. Antonin. 
vii. I7. In this sense it is taken up 
by Ignatius in his reply. ‘Ignatius’, 
says Leclerc, ‘vocem Christianorum 
more interpretatur, quasi Trajanus 
kakoOat(uova dixisset €vepyoU.evov, ut 
loquamur, ecclesiastico more, seu a 
malo daemone obsessum. But the 
passages which I have quoted show 
that he is hardly justified in adding 
*qua in re, quod cum pace sanctis- 
simorum manium dictum esto, non- 
nulla tamen cavillatio fuisse videtur. 
Kaxodaiwey is the direct antithesis to 


3I 


482 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [u 


orovüa(wv Owrá£eis VrepBaive pera TOU Kal €TEpOUS 
dvarelbew iva raks | dzroNoUvrai 5. 'lyvarıos eimev 
OJóeis 0cooópov dmokae? kakodatp ova: apertnkact 
yap uakpav dro Tøv Sovkwy ToU OcoU Ta Qatuta, 


> € Z > , X ` 
et 0é, OTL TouTots ÉraxÜrs eiut, kakov ue POS TOUS 5 


oe ^ \ \ ” , 
Oa(uovas amoKkaNels, c'uvouoAoy@` Xpirtov yap exw 


, ` , , > £ 
¿moupavtoy DacuiNéa Tas TouTev KaTaduw émiouAras. 
.. ^ / / x 5 , 
Tpaiavos eimev: Kal ris éotrw Geodopos; 'lyvaTios 
° N DA 5 y .. M 
dzekptvaTo: ‘O Xpıorov éxwv év oTépvois. Tpatavos 
59 € ^ P ^ N ^ \ af 
€urev* Hyeis ouv ool okov uev KATA vovv pn €x ELV 
, T , 7 \ \ y. E 
Ücovs, ois kal ypwucla avujuaxois mpos TOUS TONELLOUS ; 
> \ , ^ ifa ^ \ 
"Iyvatios eirev: Ta damonua Tøv éQvov Geovs mposa- 
/ e , > \ e , 
ryopevels TAAVW {LEVOS* ELS yap €OTLY Oéeos O 7TOLQO XS 
> À N ^ X , \ 
TOV oUpavov Kal tyv ynv kai Tyv ÜaXaccav Kal 
S A * meres ^ en 
mavra Ta v avtots, kal eis Xpiotos “Incovs ó vios 
I brepBalve] VmepBévew G. pera ToU k.T..] cum et alteros persuadere L; 
mera TÒ k.T.M. G; the other versions SAB probably had 70d, for they render 
loosely ¿Z aliis persuades. 4 pakpav] Zahn; longe LB; longo intervallo S; om. 
G. The procul sunt of A is doubtful, and possibly represents d$ecrjkact alone. 
5 el dé] GLSA ; scio quidem. (ola) B. kakóv] txt L[S][A]; pref. «at G; 
preef. propterea B. 6 &xov...Tàs...karaNóo] GLAB; éxw...7dv...karadvorvra S. 
Siizts] GLSB; s7t Ms vals A. 14 Tò ovpavov] GLB; pref. rara 
ravra karà S ; def. A. 16 aro] LSB; rod 0eoG G (comp. M); def. A. 


ov] o? G. QuMas] amicitia L; amicitiam B; in amore S; amoris A; 
BactNelas G (comp. M). 18 rv] txt LSABM ; add. éuj» G. 


Geopopos. The word is naturalised in valent to èv orépvois, èv kap8ía, which 
earlier English writers; e.g. Shake- occur in the context. 


speare Richard the Third i. 3 ‘Hie I8. Tov dvactavpdcavra] ‘who sus- 
thee to hell for shame and leave pended om the cross, who crucified’; 
this world, Thou cacodzemon.’ comp. I Pet. ii. 24 ras ápaprías nav 


3. Oeopópov] ‘one who carries God aùròs dvnveyKey èv T@ Tdparte avrov. 
within him’: see the notes on Ephes. The preposition in dvaotavpody (as in 
inscr, 9. The word should not be  dvaexoAomi(ew) always has this mean- 
treated directly as a proper name ing in classical writers (e.g. Herod. 
here, but is general, as the context vi. 30, Thuc. i. 110, etc.), and so also 
shows,=Twa tov Tov Oeòv év xapBía in Josephus B. % ii. 14. 9, v. II. H 
dopovvrov. Ant. ii. 5. 3, xi. 6. 10; see Bleek on 

IO, xara voy] ‘in our mind’, equi- Heb. vi. 6. The Greek and other 


IO 


I5 


11] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 483 


> ^ € , I ^ .. 
AUTOV O povoyevis, OU THs QuX(as dvalumv. Tpaiavos 


Áo S A ” / , 
errev: Tov a-TavpeÜEvra Aeyeis. émi llovríov [liNéov; 


, , ^ A \ , , 
Iyvarios eîreve Tov avarTaupwoavTa Thy duapTiay 


\ ^ , e ^ Y ^ 
Mera TOU TAUTNS EUPETOU Kat MATAV KaTadiukacayTa 


, \ \ ~~ 

20-da:uovKiy kaklay Uro TOUS Todas Tov QUTOV Èv Kapoia 

x , .. \ > Ld ^ " 

popovvTwv. Tpaïavos elev? Cu ovv év éavtTe popets 
\ , 7 > š 

TOV Xpiwróv; 'lyv&ris ebrev. Nal- Yeypanta yap, 


€NOIKHCO EN aYTOIC Kal éumepimardco. Tpaiavos 


> , > , z , € e^ 
«7eQnvaTo* ’lyvariov 7Tpocera£auev, Tov èv éavrG 
4 
/ T2 \ . 4 , e 
25 Nêeyovra mepipépev Tov ETTavpwuevov, Oéajuov úÚ7O 
^ , af 

TTPATWTw@Y yevouevov yesha Tapa THY peyadny 
e £ : ^ / / > of 5 
Pon, Bpwpa yevnsóuevov Onpiwy eis OV kal eis 


, - /, , e , 5 
TE0p\~W ToU Ónuov.  TavUTus d aylos aptus émaxovoas 


^ 5 / \ ^ > Lad 
TNS a7O0Qacews pera xap&s Bonser: CUxapiua T 6 COL, 


20 kak(av] LS; malitias A; mXávqv. kal Kaxlay (oval p. 21 óopeís] 
$épes G ; gestas B; circumfers (wepipépers) LA (comp. M); amictus es...et indutus 
S. The versions BS seem to require $opeis, which accordingly I have substituted 
for dépeis. 22 Tov Xpwróv|] LSABM ; +ó ecravpe0évra G. The vv. ll. 
mepipépers and Tòv oravpwhévra seem both to have been suggested for the sake of 
conformity to the sentence below, roy èv éavrd Méyovra meptóépew Tov écravpa- 
pévov. 26 orparwrav] GLAB; poguaiev S. ueyarny] This 
epithet appears in all our authorities, GLSAB. 27 els Üyav kal els répyiw] 
in spectaculum et in oblectationem A; delectentur (delectetur) videntes quid acciderit ei 
S; zz spectaculum (eis yw) L; els répyw G[M]; pro avocatione B. 28 uáprvus] 
GLSB (comp. M): om. A. 


ancient commentators seem to be 
agreed in giving a different sense, 
‘crucify anew,’ to the word in Heb. 
l c, but this meaning is entirely 
without a parallel in earlier or con- 
temporary usage. 
20. vmd ro)s mó0as] Rom. xvi. 20 
, M ^ € ` ` , 
` G'uurpiVret Tov Saravay wrod rods móðas 
[771572 
23. évowgco| Taken word for 
word from 2 Cor. vi. 16, where it is 
a loose quotation from Levit. xxvi. 
II, I2, kal Onow cv oKyynv pov èv 
€ ^ A» , > € ^ ^ 
UpAV. ..Kat €éumepurarnao ev Viv ; comp. 


Ps-Ign. Hero 6 ceavrov ayvóv mípei, 
Gs Ocod oikyTýpiov x.r.A. See also 
Ephes. 15 às aùrod èv uiv karotkoQv- 
ros, tva pev a)ro) vaol, with the 
note. 

25. mepupépew x.r.A.] Comp. 2 Cor. 
iv. IO mávrore THY véxpwow ro) "Ingo 
ev TQ c'pari mepifépovres. Trajan is 
made to speak the language of S. 
Paul. 

29. dmopacews] ‘sentence’ (from 
dropaive), as e.g. Dion Cass. xlvi. 6 
tas ràv Ówacróv dmoQáces; comp. 


Mart. Rom. 9. 
31—2 


[u 


, [74 / ^ , , , ^ 
OécoTa, OTL ue TeXNel@ TH 7pós DE deam Tuumoat 


484 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


- / , , 
karnEloo'as, TH aTOTTOAW TOV avXw Séopois ovv- 
om ^ ` ` 5 / 
Óxc'as ciónpots. TavTa eimwv Kal per euQpocguvns 
y yi ta was 
mepibéuevos Ta erud, émevEauevos mpoTepov TN ÉK- 
1 ; j 0é ç T) jwv TH Kupiw 
KAnoia kal TavTny wapabepuevos uera OakpU 9 Kupio, 
> , ^ e , e \ 
WOTED KpLos émrlonfos ayeAns kaXnüs nyoumevos, UTO 
- 7 / / 
Onpiwdous a-TpaTwrrucijs SELVOTNTOS ouvnpraceto, Onptois 
5 5 5 f \ 7 
wmoBopors éri THY ‘Pøunv drayOnoopevos mpos Bopay. 
DOR 


, ^ , \ \ 5 £ > 
émiÜvula tov mabous, katehOwv amo 'Avrioxetas ets 


^ ` ^ 
Mera moñs Toivuv poÜvuias kai yapås, 


\ Z 5 ^ əl ^ , z \ \ 
ryv CeNevketav ékeiÜev €LX€TO TOU TAOOS* KAL TPOTXWV 
, ^ , , ^ ^ 
uera ToÀUv kauaTOv TH Cuvpvaiwy model, avv. 7roXAn 
t t 


- - sl \ e/ , 
x«pa KataBas THs vnos Éoevóe TOv ayiov lloXvkap- 


I TH mpós oe &yámy] GL; amore tuo SA, and ¿z tua dilectione B (as if they 
had read ry of áydmq). 2 ovvdnoas] G; et Zgastz [S]; colligari (corrupted 
into collocari) L* (probably reading cvvdjoa, just as drodoiva in $ 4 is translated 
reddi), and similarly alligari B, ligari A. 4 émeviduevos] G; oranmsque L. 
A connecting particle is also supplied by SAB in different ways, but they count 
for nothing in such a case. 8 óuofóposs] crudivorantibus L* ; aiwoBopos G ; 


6. domep xpi emionuos| Mart. 
Polyc. 14 mpoodebels, Gamep Kpuos éri- 
onwos èk peyddov moipviov eis mpos- 
opary, from which passage our mar- 
tyrologist has probably borrowed 
the image, though the application 
is different. 

7. Onpiddovs erparworikfs K.T. À.] 
Rom. 5 Onpwpaya...dedepévos Aeomáp- 
Sous, ó eorw OTPATLOTLKOY Taypa. 

8. @poBdpors| ‘carnivorous’, as e.g. 
Philo de Somn. ii. 13 (p. 670) dpkrov 
tis 7) Xéovra...é£aypiaívet kai avepebiter, 
drs Ooivay kal evoxiav GpoBdpors avn- 
Aeeorárgv evtperion éavróv: and so 
epoBopía Tatian ad Graec. 2. But 
aiuoBópows is unobjectionable in it- 
self (comp. e.g. Aristot. Hist. An. 
viii. II, p. 596, 4 Macc. x. 17), and 


perhaps should be retained. It oc- 
curs in the Mart. Rom. 7; comp. 
Euseb. H. E. viii. 7 év Ónpoiv aipoBo- 
pos. The same v.l. aipoßópov, dpo- 
Bópov, appears in Alciphr. £s. iii. 
2I. 

IO. tov máÓovs] ie. not ‘of his 
own martyrdom’, but ‘of the Passion 
of Christ’, as a gloss in the Syriac 
translation has correctly interpreted 
it; comp. Rom. 6 emirpéaré nov pi- 
pyri eva. Tod má0ous roð ƏeoÜ pov. 

katehOov x.r.A.] As Acts xiii. 4 
kath Oov eis [rv] ZeAevketav, exeiOev ve 
amrém\evoar, 

I2. Tj Zpvpvaiev modec] On the 
impossibility of reconciling this sea 
voyage from Seleucia to Smyrna 
with the notices in the epistles see 


IO 


uri] 


ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 


485 


e C 17 > , \ x , 
mov TOV CMupvatwy ézickomOV TOv cuvaxpoaTiv Üed- 
0 = , , M , \ z , 

15 aoVal’ eyeyovecav yao madar pwabytal ’lwdvvov. 
5 fe \ \ ^ ^ 
Tap w kaTaXÜeis kal mvevuartıkÕv QUT( KOWWVTAS 


y. \ ^ ^ > 
XAT aov Kat ois decMois éyKavywUEVOS, TApPEKANEL 
^ ^ ^ , ^ ^ 
cvvaOXetv TN avTOU 7rpoÜéaei, udora uev kowi ácav 
t 


2 , E a M \ [14 ^ 
ékkAnatav (éOe£ioUvro yao TOV &vyiov dua TOV émioKoTwY 


\ / \ , e ^ , , , 
20kal 7rpec(Qvréoev kai Siaxovey ai THs Asias modets 


A 59) Z Z > , , 
Kat EKKANC LAL, TTAVTWY ETELYOMEVWYV Tpos QUTOV, et TWS 


, , , ^ 3 lÀ A) 
Mépos xaplouaTos NaBwou TVEUMATIKOU), éCoaroéTos 0€ 

` e/ , [74 \ ^ / ^ 
TOv &yiov lloNvkapzov, iva Sid +@v Onpiwy Oarrov 


5 M ^ , , > ^ ^ / 
aQavns TO KOTUW "yevouevos éupavio bñ TO TMPOTWTW 


25 TOU. Xpirrov. 


` erudelissimis (?) [B] (which paraphrases); om. A. The equivalent for 65plots dpo- 


Bópos in S is NIY NWN ferae voraces. 


Bopáv] Boppáv G. 


I2 pe- 


Ta moNv káuarov] GLB; cum (3) multo labore (mera ToXXo0 kauárov) AS*. 


"Zuprvalov] euvpréov G; zmyrnacorum A; zmyrnam S. 
naeorum LB; cuvpvéov (sic) G; zmyrnae [S]A. 
praef. roÜ &ylov årosróňov GA; add. apostoli B; praef. apostoli S. 
abc] GLSA; zre ad (cweM0ctv?) B. 


14 Zqwpralov] smyr- 
15 'lodyvou] txt L (comp. M); 
18 oup- 


20 kai prim.] GS[B]; om. 


LA. 21 d mws] G; ut fortasse SA; ut Bs si quo aliquam. L (as if et 


mov (?) TL). 


above pp. 232, 241, 251, 265, 266, 267; 
comp. p. 211. 

I4. Tv cwakpoarjw] See the note 
on Š I 'eávvov pants. The dis- 
parity of age is an additional objec- 
tion to the statement here, and the 
opening of the Epistle to Polycarp 
implies that Ignatius had not seen 
him before his visit to Smyrna. The 
Menea Feb. 23 say of Polycarp, 
obros épaOnrevÓn TO Geohoy@ "lodvvy 
kal evayyeduor oiv '"yvarío T Oeo- 
. pope. 

x 18. cuvaddeciv wr...] See his own 
language in Polyc. 6 ovykomare à- 
ArjAots, avvaÜOAcire. 

aoa, ékkAggíav] ‘every church’, 
Rom. 4 Eyð ypáDo mácais rais 
exkAnolacs kal évréANopat TATW, Ort 


eyo ékàv úmep Oeo ámoÜvjoko k.r.A. 
It could hardly mean ‘all the 
Church’, as Leclerc takes it; see 
the note on Ephes. 12 év mdon èri- 
c TOM. 

I9. ôa tov émwkómev k.T.A.] For 
the preposition comp. Š 4 da róv 
nyoupevey below, and see the note 
on Magn. 2 6 Aapa. See also the 
note on Lphes. 1 dme(Arda. 

22. pépos xapicparos k.r.A.]] Rom. 
i. II tva rt peradd xápwrpa Üpiv mvev- 
parcKor. 

e€apéerws] As in Smyrn. 7, Trall. 
I2; comp. PAz/ad. 9. 

24. d$avjs «.7.A.] Suggested by 
Rom. 3 kal Tóre moros eivat, óray 
kómp u) paivopat k.r.À., Z0. 4 Ore ovè 
TO c'Gjid pov ó kómpos Overat. 


486 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [iv 


^ e > \ 4 
IV. Kal ca)ra oUTws CXeyev, [kal] obTws Öte- 
e^ 5 , ` \ ` 
pLapTUPaTO, TOTOUTOV ETTEKTELYWY THY TPOS XpiorTov 
° , e ^ / , , ` vm 
dyarnv, ws ovpavoy uéAXew émiNagaveoOat Oud TNS 
^ ^ ^ , e \ ^ 
kaA5js OmoAoylas Kal THS TØV TUVEVXOMEVWY UTED TNS 
` , ^ , ^ \ \ \ = , 
abAnoews or0vürs, amodouvat ðe Tov jua Üov Tats ExKAN- 
^ if ^ \ ^ , 
clais Tals UzavTucdcais avTM dla TOV T'youpevov, 
> , ` > , 
ypapjucrev | eUxaplaov éxmeuplevtwy mpos auTas, 
^ f y 
TVEUMATLKHV MET eÚXHS kai MAPALVETEWS d7r0GTaCOvTOV 
r ^ \ , € ^ .. ^ 
yap. Toryapovv Tous mavTas OpwY eUvoikds OvaKel- 
, > , \ , [i ^ > , 
M€vOuUS mepi aUTOV, poBnbeis Mn TOTE N TNS aüeNQoTnros 
ç ` ` , > ^ \ 5 , A 
atopy thy moos Kúpiov avroU crovónv éxkov,n, Karns 
t 
, / 5 ^ [4 ^ , “e ` ` 
dvewxGeions a’ta@ Qupas ToU uapTuptou, ola mpos THY 
$ / > / e , e y 
éxkAnolay mio TéAAet Pwuatwv vsrorérakrat. 


[Here follows the Epistle to the Romans] 


I kal sec.] GS; om. L; al. A; def. B. Ouapróparo] GL; duenapripero S; 
al. A; def. B. 2 mpos Xpwróv] G; circa (mepl) christum L; christi [S]A ; 
def. B. 3 uéXNew] G; quidem (uév) L; def. B. Zahn accepts uév, but méd- 
Aew (or uéNXNwov) seems to be recognised by the paraphrases, e ses [cordis] ejus (erat) 
ut assequeretur caelestia S; donec fiet mihi caelestia apprehendere A. 6 aire] 
GSA; christi L* (the Mss); def. B. hyovuévwv] L wrongly connects this 
with the following words and translates, er praecedentes literas, thus referring it 
to the collection of letters to which the Martyrology is appended. 7 ebxa- 

3. THs kaXs opoÀoyías] The ex- proripias] ‘public entertainments’, 
pression is taken from 1 Tim. vi. 12, ‘shows’. The word denotes a ‘dis- 
13, in which latter verse it is used play of public spirit’, ‘an act of 
of our Lord's witness before Pilate. munificence’, ‘a benefaction’ (e.g. 

8. anoorafovrey xápw] Prov. x. C. Z. G. 108), whether in the form 
32 xethn avdpav Owaíev dmoorá(e: of a public building (Plut. JZ 
xapiras, quoted by Zahn. So we Dizon, 29 rjv dwXoriulav kai rò avaOnpa 
meet with evá(ew xdpw or xdpiras tod rupávvov), or of a largess, or of 
elsewhere. a public spectacle or entertainment 

12; dveox6elans xr.A.] I Cor. xvi. as the case may be. For the last of 
2 Cor. ii. 12, Col. iv. 3; comp. these meanings comp. Plut. Vit. Mic 
Apoc. iii. 8. 3 xopnylas dveAduBave kai a 
I5. karapríioas] ‘have quieted’, apxtas érépas re Toravrars prroripias 
literally ‘adjusted’; see the note on róv 8fjuov K.T., Vit. Phoc. 31 duXo- 


Ephes. 2. Tyslas Twàs érewre Kal Samdvas UTooTh- 
18. xpirropdpos|] See the note on ya, yevónevov aywvoberny, Lucian 
Ephes. 9. 


Asin. 53 év j Tas porlas T yev 


IC 


v] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 487 


até 5 
I5 Ve Katapticas roivuv, ws 5"BovAero, Tovs èv 
€ , ^ a » ^ > ^ c 
Pwun Tdv ddehpwv kovras Sid Tis ETLOTOANS, OUTWS 
> N > \ ^ , e ^ 
avayOeis dmo Ths Cuvpyns (kareei^yero yap md cv 
TTPATLWTWY Ò xXpLaTOpopos doa Tas pirotipias èv 
^ / f e TEN 5. ws) ^ 
TH peyan TONEL, iva èr dWEot TOU ònuov ‘Pomaiwy 
\ $ Si ^ S 
20 Ünpaiv dypiois mapacobels ToU arepavou Tis Quatoa vns 
dia TovavTns dOAnoEws émvrÜ ) 1 n Towad 
t " 7 XU) 7pocécxe Tñ Tpwadr. 
D > - x M Z 
erra ékeiÜev karaxÜels mè Tyv NeazoANw, dia Piir- 
£ , ~ 
mNTlwv Tapw0evev Maxedoviav men kal THY ”Hrepov 


plorwv] S; eùxapıorôv GL; ebxapwriav A; def. B. S translates the whole 
clause & deduxerunt eum cum (3) literis gratiarum-actionis with its characteristic 
looseness, as if it were ékméumovres for êkmeuphévrwv; but if it had read à ypap- 
MÁrev (as Zahn supposes and as he himself reads), it would probably have ren- 
dered by "3, not by the simple 3. 8 dmocrajóvrov] G[A] (but rendered 
` paraphrastically); amplexantes (Ao ragouévov) L; communicantes-invicem et addentes 
[S]; def. B. Io mepl] G[A]; ad (mpds) L; adversus S. 16 akov- 
tas] GSA; absentes (&móvras) L; def. B. 18 erparwràv] GLA[M]; 
boualev S; def. B. év rj meyddn moder] LA; év r$ ueyáNm poun G; ro- 
manorum S; def. B. 20 TNS ÕIKALOTÚVNS did TOLAÚTNS dONhoews] justitiae per 
tale certamen LA ; justitiae in (3) hoc certamine S; rs åONhoews G (the words dixaco- 
Gúyms Ó.& Totaúrms have been omitted by homoeoteleuton); def. B. 22 da 
¿Aur [oy] per philippenses L; per philippesios B, but with a v. l hil- 
ippos; dia pitrrwv GA(?)[S] (and so M). 23 Te(f] "eft G (not zrepl, 
as it has been hitherto read). Critics have restored re from the versions, which 
all (LSBA) read thus; and so too M. 


epòs Seomérns. With this meaning Neapolis, though the port town of 


it corresponds to the Latin munera ; 
see Lactant. Div. /zst. vi. 20 ‘vena- 
tiones quae vocantur munera’, with 
Lenglet-Dufresnoy's note; and Eu- 
seb. Mart. Pal. 6 ras pidrorivous béas 
...Whetov Tt kai mapado€ov xpfjv vrap£a: 
rais diAorysiats, where, as here, the 
subject is a martyrdom. There is an 
approach to this sense in Demosth. 

de Cor. p. 312 xopnyetv, tpinpapyeiv, 
— eladépew, pyõepmâs idroryuias pýre 
idias pnre 0npoaías droXelrec ba. 

22. Nedmodw] As S. Paul does in 
Acts xvi. Ir. See the language of Ig- 
natius himself Polyc. 8 dua rò é£ai- 
vns mA pe dro Tpwddos eig NearoAu. 


Philippi, belonged itself to Thrace 
rather than to Macedonia; see P/z/- 
zZpians pp. 49, 50. 

dua duurmQcíev] Polycarp men- 
tions the stay of Ignatius at Philippi 
in his letter to this church $ 9 (comp. 
8 I. The spurious letters to the 
Tarsians (S 10), to the Antiochenes 
(Š 14), and to Hero (§ 8), profess to 
have been written from Philippi; 
and the pseudo-Ignatius writes after- 
wards to the Philippians themselves 
from the neighbourhood of Rhegium 
(Philipp. 15). 

23. Tiv "Hmetov] The word is 
probably intended as a proper name 


488 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


r> ^ / \ 

THY Tpos ’"Erisauvov: ov év Tots mapaÜaXarTiows vnos 

» ` , 5 - , ` 

¿muruyay ëmer TÒ’ Aóotarucóv réNatyos, kdkeiÜev emiQas 
= , ` , 

ToU TvppnwwoU kai TapapelBwyv via ovs TE kat TONEIS, 


4 ^ € / , 5 \ \ 3 ^ 
UrodeayOévTwy TH ayiw llorióNeov, aros pev é£eA0etv 


[v 


? c H £ 
éomevdev, kar iyvos BadiCew éÜéNwv coU amooqoNou 5 


, e MES \ , ^ np / 

[ avow]. ws 0€ émimecov (Qiatov zrveUjua oU TUVEXWPEL, 
^ E / > , / \ , 
Tis unos k mpúuvns Ézrevyouévgs, PaKaploas THY EV 
, l4 ^ / ^ $ ^ > , u , A 
ékeiyo TH TOT TØV ddEAPaY deam OVTW TApETNEL. 

t 
^ 5 ^ ° , M A ^ > ^ 3 2 SEA 
TOvyapoUv EV MLE nuépg koi vukTi TH AUTH, OUpLOLS ave 
7 € ^ M 3I , , 
pois TPOTYXPHTAMEVOL, METS MEV GAKOVTES a7 1youe0a 


r 00] cujus L (wrongly translated, as if Epidamnus had been masc.); e ¿z [A]; 


atque exinde [B]; tunc S; om. G. 


et civitates LS; et insulas multas (vjoovs re moddas?) A; def. B. 


Xov] GLA[B]; om. S. 
S; ter perficiebamus A; al. B. 


here. As such, it would still have a 
tendency to retain the definite ar- 
ticle. 

4. wroOeuOévrov| Acts xxi. 3 dva- 
dávavres (v. l. dvaQavéwres) è tiv 
Kvompov. So aperire, Virg. Æn. iii. 
206, 275 ; and of the opposite, zd. iii. 
291 * Phaeacum abscondimus arces. 

IlorióAov] The word IloríoAo: is 
the proper Greek form (e.g. C. 7. G. 
5853, an inscription at Puteoli it- 
self) corresponding to the Latin Pu- 
teoli, which is derived from putei 
(Strabo v. 4, p. 245, arò róv hpedrav); 
but its ancient Greek name was 
Auwaidpxeia, There seems to have 
been a vulgar tendency however to 
insert a v into the name in Greek ; 
and in this form it became a fertile 
source of legend. Thus it is written 
IIovrióy in Act. Petr. et Paul. 12, 14 
(p. 5, ed. Tisch.), and a miracle is 
founded on this bad spelling, rjv mó- 
Juv éketviy Tùv Kadovpévny XH ovrióAqv 
TemovTiopévyvy, and again èk rhs Tó- 
Aews IIlovrióÀns ths movrioÓcí(ans 


3 vicous re kal modes] G; insulas 
6 Ilav- 


10 dmnyoueba] G; abducimur (&mayóue0a) L; ibamus 
16 orpariérar] GLA; pwuaîo S (as before, 


dmýyyeňav r6 Kaioape eis “Puyu ore 
IlovrioAn émovr(o0n. So here also 
in the Bollandist Acts § 5 the passage 
appears ‘Et cum inde ascenderet ad 
Tyranicum, ostensum est sancto Pon- 
tiolo episcopo, quod ipse transiturus 
esset ; et obviam ei exiens festinabat 
sequi ejus vestigia, tanquam apostoli 
Pauli; et non potuit sequi, spiritu 
navis prorae incumbente: et Ignatius 
beatificans in eo loco fratrem suum 
in dilectione ita navigavit.’ Thus the 
seaport is transformed into a person, 
the bishop apparently of Tyranicum 
(=Tuppnukoy‘ the Tyrrhene Sea’), who 
puts out to sea to follow Ignatius, 
but is prevented by adverse winds 
and receives a passing benediction 
from the saint on ship-board. There 
must have been a corrupt reading 
T@ ayio llovrióAe, and this S. Pon- 
tiolus was made into a bishop by 
some scribe to account for his sudden 
appearance on the scene. The Bol- 
landist editors are content to sug- 
gest Puteolono (Puteolano?), and 


IO 


v] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 


489 


/ reel ^ » 045 ees L ^ ES 
OTEVOVTES emt TW aP nudov uéAXovri Xwplouw@ Tou 


if 
Ouxaiou vives ba, 


^ \ > 5 \ E / 
Tw ÒE KaT’ evyny dréßawev amevàovri 


- > ^ ^ / t e 
Ó&TTov avaywonoat TOU Kocpov, iva $0aon Tpos öv 
t 


nyarnoev Kvpiov. 


, ^ > \ / 
KaTamAevoas youv eis TOUs Atuévas 


€ » ^ 5 VA 
Pwuaiwv, ueXXovVans Anew Tihs dkaÜaprov diroTtiplas, 


e 


X ^ e \ ^ , > 
Ol MEV OTpaTIWTaL UTEP THS Boad’Tntos jo YaXXov, 


e QT RENE A Z e 
6 6€ érmiskoros Xalpwv KkatTerelyouow vmijKover. 


yI. 


'EkeiÜev yoov éwbev opjunÜévres aro TOU kaA- 


, 
oupevou [lóprov (OtemreQypuo To yap iin TQ Kata TÓ 


for we should doubtless read N'IN for N'DiT3). 
UT'kovcev, as it has hitherto been read), and so obediebat L. 


17 bmkovev] G (not 
18 &wOev 


opyndévres] see below; excitati (expergefacti) inde primo mane A$ expulsi 
(éw0évres taken for wobévres) L; édó0gcav G; mane (tempestive) duxerunt eum 


- OAD IPN) S. 


leave the context as it is. Two copies 
at least of these Latin Acts, which I 
have seen, omit episcopo, which is 
therefore a later introduction ; Paris 
Bibl. Nat. 1639, Bodl. Laud. Lat. 31. 

5. kar ixvos k.r.A.] Suggested 
by Zes. 12 IHaíXov...o$ yévowró pot 
Und rà ¿XQ evpeOqvac; see the note 
there. His imitation of S. Paul is a 
frequent topic in the Menga Dec. 20. 
See the Hymn of S. Joseph 5 (p. 389). 

IO. nueis] This is the first occur- 
rence of the first person plural. On 
the difficulties connected with it, see 
above, p. 389 sq. 

I8. €wOev oppnOévres] This con- 
jecture suggested itself to me from a 
comparison of the various readings. 
The Armenian translator had before 
him the uncorrupted text; of which 
also the Syriac is perhaps a loose 
paraphrase. But some letters hav- 
ing dropped out by homoeoteleuton, 
ec[0eNopmH]OeeNrec became ew- 
OeNrec, which was treated as if 
egÓévres by the Latin translator, and 
altered into éd0gscav by the Greek 


scribe in order to get a finite verb. 
At all events it is clear from the au- 
thorities that &oev ought somehow 
to be brought into the text. 

19. Ilóprov] Owing to the gradual 
silting up of the Tiber at Ostia, it 
became necessary in early imperial 
times to construct an artificial har- 
bour for Rome. This work was car- 
ried out mainly by Claudius (Dion 
Cass. lx. 11), and called Portus Au- 
gustt. It was considerably to the 
north of Ostia, on the right branch 
oftheriver. Trajan afterwards added 
an inner basin which was called 
after him Portus Trajani (Clem. 
Hom. xii. 10). In the neighbour- 
hood of this twofold harbour grew 
up the town of Portus—the present 
Porto—with which the name of Hip- 
polytus is connected. But it would 
hardly, I think, have been mentioned, 
as it is in our martyrology, at the 
date of Ignatius’ death, when Trajan's 
part of the work can only have been 
very recently constructed, if it ex- 
isted at all. Déllinger Hippolytus 


490 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vi 


dylov papTupa) cvvavrOjev TOTS aded pois poby Kal 
xapa TETANPWMÉVOLS, xaipovauw uev eo ois nELouvTO 
tis ToU Ocodópov avvrvxías, poBoupevors dé. oTi TEP 
él Odvarov To.wvTos yero. Tu 06 Kal TapnyyedAEv 
jovxdtew, Céovor Kal Aéyoucu kaTaTavew TOV Onpuov 5 
mpos TO un Erin Tey dmovéoOar Tov Sikatov' ous eUQUs 
yvous TQ TVEÚUATL Kal TAVTAS doracapevos, aiTnoas 
Te map avTwv Tv dNnÜwnv dyannv, TNelova TE TOV 
éy TH émioroA Siadex Geis kal meiras un Povnrat TO 
orev0ovri mpos Tov Kupiov, olrw pera *yovukMatas 
avTOv Tov ddeAPwov Tapakahécas TOv viov ToU Oeo 


^ ^ ` ^ ^ ^ , 
UTép Tøv éxkAnoLwy, UTEP THS TOV OwwypuoU katTamTav- 


2 dj&oüvro] dignificabantur LA; d&Gvro (sic?) G; al. S. The edd. have re- 


tained 7£&óGvro, without correcting the accent. 
(éovoi] GL; sed illi fervebant (féover dé) A (thus chang- 
ing the participles into finite verbs); bidens quod ferverent S. 


SA; jouxdfovow G. 


5 novxasew] silere L, and so 


6 ois] quos 


L; et eos qui illa cogitabant S; et...cogitationes eorum A; ôs G. The renderings of 
SA suggest that some words have dropped out, such as oŭrw $povoüvras or raüra 


and Callistus p. 72 sq (Eng. Trans.) 
gives reasons for supposing that there 
was no town at Portus even as lateas 
the third century. 

9. py POovaca] Rom. 5 ug6év pe 
Mwoa TÓv dpatdv K.T.À., ib. 7 
Bacxavia èv vpiv u) Karotkeiro. 

I8. tpickadexarn] i.e, the *thir- 
teenth beforethe Kalends of January’, 
as stated in 8 7. The Saturnalia 
had originally occupied one day 
only, xiv Kal. Jan. (Dec. 19). But 
Caesar's reforms in the calendar, by 
adding two days to the month of 
January, had caused some uncer- 
tainty and confusion with respect 
to the right day of celebration ; and, 
in order to meet this difficulty, by an 
edict of Augustus they were extend- 
ed backward to three days, xvi, xv, 
xiv Kal. Jan. (Dec. 17, 18, 19); see 
Macrob. .Saz. i. 10. 2—6, 23. After- 


wards the festival was still further 
prolonged by the addition of the 
Sigillaria, which commenced xiii 
Kal Jan. (Dec. 20). In this way 
before the close of the reign of the 
emperor Gaius the festival extended 
over a fifth day (Sueton. CaZzg. 17, 
Dion Cass. lix. 6, lx. 25), the Sigillaria 
occupying two days ; and ultimately 
four days were assigned to the Sigil- 
laria, so that the whole festival took 
up seven days (Lucian, Saturn, 2, 25), 
xvi—x Kal.Jan. (Dec. 17—23) ; comp. 
Macrob. i. 10, 24 ‘Sigillariorum ad- 
jecta celebritas in septem dies discur- 
sum publicum et laetitiam religionis 
extendit! This part of the festival 
derives its name from the ‘sigilla’, 
little images of clay or of sweetmeats 
or of precious metal, which were ex- 
posed for sale at the fair and given as 
presents. The ‘thirteenth’ therefore 


vi] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 491 


Tews, UTED THs TeV adeApwv eis adArAovs d'y Tous, 
amnyOn pera aovügs eis TO aupiléatpov.  eira eus 
15 €uBAnOEls kara TO mda TpOTTayMa TOU Kaicapos, 
MéeAAOVCwY kara7avey TOV PiroTyuuwy (ñv yap ém- 


Parns, ws éOokov», 1 Aeyouévn Tj “Popaikn dev 


N 4 e 
TpiokarðekaTn, Kal? nv omovõaiws ovvnerav), oŬTws 
t 
\ 5 - ` ^ in^ 
Ónpciv  dyots mapa Twv  dÜÉéev  mapedANeTo, ws 


, > ^ 
paptupos 'lyvaríou mAnpotabat 
\ > if \ ` > D , 
THY émiÜvuiav kara TO yeypauuévov èmiðymia AIKALOY 


\ ^ / 
207a0aVTa TOU aryiou 


, [74 ` ^^ 5 A S ^ 
AekTH, iva pnoevt Tøv ade Pav émaxyÜns dia THs 
^ ^ , , ` 5 ^ 
avAXoyns TOU Aevvavov yevntat, kalws placas EV TH 
5 ^^ \ LOL > is / A / i 
ETLOTO\N THY iOiav. érreOuuer yever Oar TeNclwouv. pova 
dtadoyrfouévous. I9 mapa Tay á0écv] as Zahn correctly; ab hominibus qui 
sine deo S; ab impiis L; mapà TQ vað G. A has certainly deo, though changing 


the form of the sentence. Smith had conjectured mapa r&v dvociwy or åvóuwv from 
' L, but AS supply the right word; and dðeos is translated impius by L in Trall. 3, 


though not in Zrall. 10. In G some letters have been dropped rwva[Ge]wfy]. 


was the first day of the Sigillaria and 
the middle day of the whole festival, 
and seems to have had, at least in 
later times, a special distinction ; 
Macrob. Saturn. i. 11. 50 ‘ideo 
Saturnalibus talium commerciorum 
coepta celebritas septem occupat dies, 
quos tantum feriatos facit esse, non 
festos omnes: nam medio, id est 
tertio decimo Kalendas, festum pro- 
bavimus etc. During the festival 
there were gladiatorial and other 
contests of the arena; Auson. Ec. 
de Fer. 32 sq ‘Aediles plebeii etiam 
aedilesque curules Sacra sigillorum 
nomine dicta colunt ; Et gladiatores 
funebria praelia notum Decertasse 
foro ; nunc sibi arena suos Vindicat ; 
extremo qui jam sub fine Decembris 
Falcigerum placant sanguine Caeli- 
genam’, Lactant. Div. Insi. vi. 20 
‘venationes quae vocantur munera 
Saturno sunt attributae’ (see the note 


on $wXoriuas above, Š 5). For the 
customs of this festival see Mar- 
quardt Rom. Alterth. IV. p. 459 sq, 
Forbiger Hellas u. Rom 1. 2 pp. 
157 sq, 183 sq. The coincidence is 
purely accidental in 2 Macc. xv. 36 
éxew € émionuov rjv Tp katüekárqv 
ToU dwdexarou pnvos. 

I9. Tóv d0éov] As this reading is 
unquestionably right, it is unneces- 
sary to discuss the proposed inter- 
pretations of ró vag. 

20. mapavrà] ‘along with the 
evenis’, ‘then and there’, ‘forth- 
with’; see the note on Trall. 11. 

21. émOupia Kk.r.À.] From the LXX 
Prova, 

23. dóÓdcas k.r.À.] ‘already in his 
epistle’. The reference is to Rom. 
4 pndev xaradimwow k.r.A. On the 
whole subject of the reliques, see 
pp. 396 sq, 431 sq. 

24. reAeiogw] The word was early 


492 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [v 


^ ^ I 
yap Ta TpayúTepa Tøv dylwv avToU Xew/avev Tepie- 


, e > ` "A , > / 0 \ > 
AeipOn, ATIWA €ls TNV VTLOXELAV amekouloUn Kal €V 


^ A \ > y. e \ ^ 3 ^ 
Anvo KaTETEON, Onoavpos ATLUNTOS UTO TNS EV TW 


4 ( j ayia ékkNnoia karaXewpÜévra 
MapTupt XaApLTOS TH AYIA EKKANCLE p ° 


r &ylev abrod] GL; justi (rod dixalov) S; om. [A]. 
glossocomo S; vw G; def. A: see the lower note. 


3 Mà] capsa L; 
5 Tp dexarpiav ka- 


Aav8Qv "lavvovapiov] GL; ante ix (secundum graecos xiii) kalendas januarias A; 


decimo septimo tishri posterioris S. 


After 'lavvovaplev add. rovrécrw OekeuBplo 


eikáü. G; add. zd est decembris 24 vel 20 A (an addition of the editor?); txt L. 


used with a special reference to mar- 
tyrdom ; see Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 4 
(p. 570) TeAelwou Tò paprüptov Kadov- 
pev, ox Ott réXos TOU Bíov 6 avôporos 
CAaBev, ws of orrol, GAN’ Gre TéAeuvov 
čpyov ayamns evedeifaro, quoted by 
Jacobson. So too the verb, as e.g. 
Euseb. Æ. Z. iii. 35 ro0 Supedvos róv 
dnrwbévra reXewÜévros rpómov, viii. 6, 
and frequently. See Suicer 7hes. s. 
VV. TeAetoüv, reAeloats. 

pova yap k.r.A.] For the relation of 
this account to the statement of 
Evagrius 47. E. i 16, see above 
pp. 387 sq, 434. 

2. évAmvà] ‘in a coffin’, ‘a sarco- 
phagus’. I have restored this read- 
ing from the versions for év dive. 
Jacobson writes, ‘êv Ai«vo hariolatur 
Noltius?, but Nolte was on the right 
track. For Agvós, ‘a coffin’, see 
Phrynichus Bekker Anecd. p. 51 
Anvovs’ ov póvov ev ais rods Borpus 
marovolv, dÀÀà kat Tas Tov veKpav 
gopov’s aro Ts ÖpOLOTNTOS THs kaTa- 
okeuns : comp. Pollux Ozon. iii. 102, 
viii. 146, x. 150. In the last passage 
Pollux quotes Erastus and Coriscus 
writing to Plato, Agvóv 'Acaíav capko- 
gayov Aí(0ov, and also Pherecrates 
Agr. 12 móÜcv dnvods roca/ras Aj- 
popari (Meineke Fragm. Com. I. p. 
260). The word occurs several times 
in the inscriptions; C. Z G. 1979, 
1981, 1993, 1997 e, 2209, 2210, Journ. 
of Hell. Stud. Vin. p. 374 (1887). 


There is the converse itacism in our 
MS in the same word, used as a proper 
name, Ps-Ign. ad Mar. 4 rà pakapi 
mára Ave (for Aive). 

3. vmod ths RTA] ie. ‘by the 
Divine grace as manifested in the 
case of the martyr.’ 

6. Svpax.t.A.] The year intended 
is A.D. 107, in which the consuls 
were L. Licinius Sura III, Q. Sosius 
Senecio I1; see Mommsen in Hermes 
Ill. p. 138, Ephem. Epigr. N. p. 715. 
In the common lists (e.g. Clinton) 
they are called C. Sosius Senecio Iv, 
L. Licinius Sura III, after a spurious 
inscription ‘in antiqua figulina’ given 
by Panvinio Fasti p. 217 ‘L. Licinio 
Sura lil, C. Sosio IV But it is quite 
certain from a genuine inscription 
since discovered, that Senecio was 
never consul more than twice, and 
that his praenomen was Quintus ; see 
Borghesi in Bull. dell Inst. di Ar- 
cheol. 1853, p. 184 sq. The words 
TO Oevrepov therefore refer to Seve- 
ki@vos alone; and the number of 
the consulship in the case of Sura 
has been omitted through careless- 
ness or ignorance. The expression 
has sometimes been interpreted as 
meaning the second year in which 
Sura and Senecio were consuls to- 
gether ; so Hefele (in some editions), 
Uhlhorn (p. 254), Nirschl ( Zodesjahr 
p. 8), and at one time even Borghesi 
himself (Œuvres 1. p. 507), though he 


vii] 


VII. 


ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 


493 


> i j \ ^ ^ ^ 
Cyévero 96 TaUTa TH moo OekaTpi$v ka- 


Xavóav ` lavvovapiev, Vmarecvóvr ev mapa ‘Pwyatows Cúpa 


\ £ \ / 
kai Cevexiwvos To Sevtepov. ToúTwv aitorrat ryevomevot 


A 7 n 
Mera Oaxpvwy Kat’ oikóv Te 7ayvuyloayTes Kal zroXAa 


\ , N , 
Mera -*yovuKNicias Kal  Oenaoews TAPAKANETAVTES TOV 


7 Zeveklewos] S; senecio (abl. =cevextov) L; cedexlou G (which punctuates cípa. 
Kal cedexlou TÒ Be/repov, so as to confine rà debrepoy to the second name); def. A. 


9 yovuKNolas] ^yovvkNgotas G. 


afterwards corrected his mistake (see 
the other references in this note). This 
interpretation seemed to be favoured 
by an inscription on a lead weight 
in the Borgian Museum, SOSETSVRA 
COSIT, taken to mean ‘Sosio et Sura 
consulibus iterum’, but Borghesi 
(see De Rossi Zzser. Christ. Ure. 
Rom. 1. p. 4 sq) points out that this 
would require the order IT . Cos, 
and that IT therefore stands for 
‘Italica libra". In fact Sura and 
Senecio never were consuls together 
more than once. In Clinton indeed, 
and in other lists, the consuls for 
A.D. Io2 appear as C. Sosius Sene- 
cio III, L. Licinius Sura 11; but this 
is conjectural, the old lists giving the 
former name Servillus, Severianus, 
or Zvpuavós. An inscription disco- 
vered since Clinton's time (Corp. 
Inscr. Lat. VI. 2185) shows that the 
consuls of that year were C. Julius 
Ursus Servianus Ir, L. Licinius 
Sura II; see Visconti Ann. dell’ 
Inst. di Archeol. 1860, XXXII. p. 440 
sq: and this agrees with the notice 
of the consulate in Spartian. Vit 
Hadr. 3 ‘Praetor factus est sub 
Surano bis Serviano iterum consu- 
libus’, though Spartianus has here 
assigned the praetorship of Hadrian 
to a wrong year (see Visconti l.c., 
Mommsen C. 7. L. 111. p. 102). The 
two consulships of Senecio were in 
99 and 107, The second and third 
of Sura were in 102 and 107, as we 


have seen ; but his first cannot have 
been an ordinary consulship, as it 
does not appear in the fasti, and 
its year is therefore unknown (see 
Mommsen in Hermes Ul. p. 129, 
note 3). His three consulships are 
mentioned, C. Z. Z. 11. 4536—4548, 
HI. 356. For this Sura see Borghesi 
Guvures V. p. 34 sq, C. Z. L. I. p. 
602 sq, VI. p. 315 ; comp. Julian Ces. 
p. 327 ; for Senecio see Borghesi VIII. 
p. 367. Both Sura and Senecio were 
highly honoured by Trajan; Dion 
Cass. lxviii. 15, 16. 

This consulate (A.D. 107) is not 
reconcilable with the statement § 2 
€vváro éren Trajan was adopted by 
Nerva and assumed the tribunician 
power in the autumn 97 (see above, 
p. 398); Nerva died at the end of 
January 98. "Thus Dec. 20, A.D. 107, 
fell not before the roth year of his 
reign, on the strictest reckoning, and 
the rrth of his tribunician power, 
whatever mode of reckoning the 
years we adopt (see above, p. 399 sq). 
Nor can the two notices be recon- 
ciled by supposing the events which 
intervened between the point of time 
designated in § 2 and the martyrdom 
to have extended into the following 
year of Trajan’s reign ; for the date 
assigned to the martyrdom, Dec. 20, 
A.D. 107, is not towards the begin- 
ning, but at the very end of the roth 
year. 


494 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


[vir 


Kupiov mAnpopopneat Tous dGÜeveis ruds mi Tots mTpo- 
yeyovoow, puikpov ddvrrvocavres, oi pev é£atQvns. émi- 
cTdvra kal vepurrvocópevov yas éÜXémounev, oi de 
Taw émevyopevov rjuitv écpdpev TOV LAKapLOV 'lyvaruov, 
cdot 0 a-ra(ouevov Up’ idpwTos ws k kaudov TOANOU 
TApayEVOMEVOY kai TAPETTWTA TQ Kupiw pera TOXMfs 
[ e ppnatas kal aveKNaAnTou doEns* aAno OE Tes à | 

^ ^ > , \ Z \ » ^ 
yapas raUra iðóvres Kal cuuPBadovTes Tas Oves THY 
Ovetpd rav, vuvicavres TOV Oeóv TOV doTnpa TOV dya- 
Gov kai paxapioavtes Tov «iov, épavepwoapuev úv 
kal THY jMepav Kal TOV xpóvov, tva KaTa TOV katpóv TOU 
paptuplou cuvaydpuevor Kowwvamev TO GOANTH kai 
yevvalw paptupe XpwroU Kataratnoaytt TOV Õıa Borov 
kai Tov THs QiNoxploTou avtou émiÜvuias TeXeuooayTu 

3 éBXérouev GS; videbant LA. 


A transposes). 
tion of idiom. 


4 éwpduer] G; videbant LS[A] (but 
In this case and the last the change of person is simply a ques- 

5 Aor 08 crafouevoy Ud’ idpSros] GSA; om. L. 6 ue- 
Tà...l0Óvres] 27 (l. cum?) multa confidentia et ineffabili gloria. impleti autem gaudio 
haec videntes L; perà moNMs Tolvuv xapüs Tatra lidvres G; et haec videntes magno 
gaudio implebantur omnes A; gaudio magno. et quum haec autem vidissent S. 
It appears therefore that a whole line has dropped out in GS. 8 ovu- 
BaXóvres...rQüv óvepárev] GS; om. L (a line probably omitted, the eye passing 
from the vu- of cupBaddyres to that of duricavres); intelligentes bonam et mirabi- 
lem. revelationem A (the translator seems to have had the clause, and to have 
changed it because it did not harmonize with his form of narrative). I4 kal 


I. rods doOeveis 5uás] ‘us, weak  doGeveis refers more naturally to the 


men as we were’; comp. Clem. Rom. 
6 ai doGeveis for the definite article, 
and see the note on [Clem. Rom.] 
ii. 19 oí doopor. Objection has been 
taken to this narrative on the ground 
that these eye-witnesses did not need 
to be convinced of the saint’s death 
(e.g. by Grabe .SAzzzZ, 11. p. 22, and 
Zahn Z. v. A. p. 43). But, on the 
supposition that this part of the 
narrative is a fiction, our martyr- 
ologist was not so stupid as to make 
such an obvious blunder; and rods 


need of assurance respecting God's 
providence and righteousness after 
this execution of an innocent man, 
than to the certification of a fact 
patent to their eyes. 

5. cratópevov x.r.d.] The image 
is taken from the athlete, just as in 
the dream of Perpetua on the eve 
of her martyrdom (Act. Perp. et 
Felic. 10) she sees herself anointed 
for the contest, ‘coeperunt me favi- 
tores mei oleo defrigere, quomodo 
solent in agonem.’ 


5 


vi] ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 495 


< 2 i£ m e ^ , fe 
15 Ópóuov év Xpio o ’Inocov TO Kvpie wudv: OU ob Kai 
e fe. ^ Me Š / \ \ , a \ ^ PY. 
MeV OU TH TaTpL 1] Ó0£a Kal TO kpacos Gy TW ayiw 
/ ^ E 
7VevuaTi eis aiwvas. Amy. 


Tóv...juGv] G, and so substantially SA; ef hudus insidias in finem prostravit 
[glorificantes] in ipsius venerabili et sancta memoria dominum [nostrum] jesum 
christum L*, 15 & Xp... huv] GA; dominum [rostrum] jesum christum 
[L]; zz iesu christo domino nostro S. ôr of kal peð’ 08] GL; cuz et per quem 
S; cui A; wed’ oô [M]. 16 rQ rarpl] GL; deo patri S; cum patre A. 
7 óta kal rò kparos] GLA; gloria et honor et magnitudo S. 17 mveúuarı] 
txt GSA; add. zz sancta ecclesia L. 

Subscription. Finds martyrii sancti domini ignatit episcopi antiochiae. et deo 
gloria S. There is none in G, and none is recorded for A. For L see the Appx. 


MAPTYPION 


IFNATIOY 


B. 


E > ^ oe ^ , 
I. '€v éra éwatw tis Bacuxelas Tpaiavov Kai- 


, ^ , 5 , Š , of > 
0O«00S, TOUTEOTL TNS OK ou Tria os EUTEOW ETEL, EV 
poss 1 


MAPTYPION I[NATIOY 8] paprópuov Tod aylov (add. iepoudprvpos LP) lyvarlou 
(add. rod Ocopdpov L) ¿muskómou (apxrericxdrov L) dvrioxelas LPV; martyrium 
sancti ignati qui dicitur theophorus, id est ds qui fert deum, is qui erat episcopus 
antiochiae post praedicationem apostolorum, qui complevit martyrium suum in roma 


septimo mensis epiphi in pace dei. 
I éyvárg] LC: méumro PV. 


amen C. 
Tpaiavo0] LPV; Ya v rpa.ra toc (perhaps a 


confusion between Sa. vtr pra rtoc Zad77272, and Sv paura toc /razaz) C, but else- 


I. "é»áro] The Coptic version 
shows that this is the right reading. 
So long as it was found only in L, 
it was open to grave suspicion ; and 
Zahn (Z. v. A. p. 16) seemed justified 
in inferring that it was an arbitrary 
correction of the scribe, who else- 
where has altered the narrative so 
as to make it conform to the Anti- 
ochene story (Š 10 emapá£avres karé- 
Oovro k.r.A.). But this solution is no 
longer possible. This version also 
shows how the corruption arose ; for 
it is written with the numeral e (ép- 
váro), Which would easily be altered 
into € (réurre) Hence the not un- 
frequent confusion of 5 and 9 in 
Greek documents. For several in- 
stances of this interchange as affect- 
ing the Chronicon of Eusebius, see 
Hort in the Academy, Sept. 15, 1871, 
P. 435. This common corruption 


suggests an easy correction in the 
heading of the letter of M. Aurelius, 
Euseb. H. Z. iv. 13 'Appévos...Ónpap- 
xwüjs éfovoías rò méumrov xai [rò] dé- 
karov, Umatos TÒ rpirov. If čvvarov be 
substituted for mépmrov, the letter (if 
genuine) will belong to A.D. 165, and 
the emperor’s titles will be in strict 
accordance with history. 

Tpaiavod] The tradition, so far as 
it is worth anything, points con- 
sistently to Trajan as the emperor 
under whom Ignatius suffered. The 
confusion in the Coptic seems to be 
due to an Egyptian mode of represent- 
ing the Greek A, and does not be- 
token any wavering in the tradition. - 
Thus the A of Darius is written in 
the hieroglyphics NT: see Lepsius, 
Künigsbuch p. 172. So also in the 
Orac. Sibyll. viii. 65 tov péra rpeis 
dp£ovct mavvararov jap Zxovres, OUvo- 


1] ROMAN ACTS. 


e 7 , / ^ 
vrateia “Arrixov CoupBavov kai MapkéAXov, 


where the emperor's name is consistent] 


lower note. 


407 


2 
Iyvatios 


y given Tparanoc in these Acts; see the 
2 Touréote THs oxy ddupwmiddos devrépy ere] quod est secundus 


annus ducentesimae vicesimae tertiae olympiadis C ; deurépw érew P; kal 8evrépo rec 


V 5 devrépw ust L, 
C; évvrarías V. 


év ómrare[g] P; èv ómarlgq L; in consulatu (smatra) 
3 'Arríkov] LPC[B]; árrkov V. 


ZoupBavod] 


surbonis (cophum) C; xal govpBavoÜ L; ka) covpBotvov P; kal covpBlvov V; om. 


[B]. 


pa mgpócavres émovpavíoi Ocoto, the 
connexion between the name of the 
Antonini and Adonai is much closer 
than the commentators generally 
seem to be aware, because the latter 
might be represented in Egyptian 
writing (and probably in Egyptian 
pronunciation also) as 4z:Zoziaz. 

2.  Tovrécri x.r.] I have re- 
stored these words from the Coptic 
version. The different Greek texts 
betray their history. The lacuna is 
left unmended in P, though Oevrépo 
ére. is meaningless after gre TEUTTO. 
The mutilated text is then patched 
up in different ways: (1) In L pap 
is substituted for £re in order to 
make some sense; (2) In V xai is 
inserted before 9evrépo rex, and évv- 
marias is substituted for èv ózaría (or 
Umateia), so as to read ‘and in the 
second year of the consulship of etc. 
The substantive évvzaría (or évvma- 
Teia) does not occur elsewhere, nor 
is it justified by the occurrence of 
the verb évvzarevew (Plut, Mor. p. 797 
ots ópÜGs évvmareóev); for the verb 
signifies ‘to spend the consulate in,’ 
and is only explained by its context. 

The first numeral in the Coptic is 
not easily deciphered, but it can 
hardly be anything else than == 200. 
The 2nd year of the 223rd Olympiad 
however does not correspond either 
to the consulate named or to the 9th 
year of Trajan, but is A.D. 114. We 
must therefore suppose that our hagi- 
ologist got his dates from different 
sources; (1) the oth year of Trajan 


IGN. II. 


from Eusebius, if not from tradition 
(see above p. 450 sq); (2) Olymp. 
223. 2 directly or indirectly from 
some chronographer who believed 
the story of the interview at Antioch, 
and consequently gave this year as 
being the date of Trajan's sojourn 
there. Having got these dates from 
different sources, he put them to- 
gether without enquiring whether 
they coincided. The alternative 
would be to read CKA for CKT. We 
should thus get A.D. 106. It was not 
uncommon in these ages to give the 
Olympiad years with the names of 
the consuls; e.g. Socr. F. Z. i. 40, 
li. 47, iv. 38, etc. 

3. 'Arríkov k.t.A.] The true names 
of the consuls for this year, A.D. 104, 
are Sextus Attius Suburanus I, 
Marcus Asinius Marcellus, as ap- 
pears from a Greek inscription re- 
cently published, Wood's Dzscoverzes 
at Efhesus Inscr. vi I, p. 36; see 
Mommsen Hermes U1. p. "ev ee but 
as it is probable that our hagiologist 
himself did not write the names cor- 
rectly, I have given in the text the 
nearest approximation which the au- 
thorities countenance. The name 
Suburanus is rightly given in Idatius, 
but corrupted into Suranus, Urbanus, 
and Zvpiavós, in the other consular 
lists. His first consulate was A.D. IOI, 
when he was suffectus; see C. KL. 
VI. 2074. The substitution of Azzi- 
cus for Attius may perhaps have 
been owing to a reminiscence of 
Hegesippus as quoted by Euseb. 


32 


498 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [1 


, ^ , , \ | , 
ÉéTLOKO7OS THS "ÀAvrioxetas Ocvepos uera TOUS QTO- 


5 Nic ep 
aTóNovs yevopuevos (Evddiov yap SuedéEaTo) pera ém- 


~ ^ \ \ M 
pereatatns Qpovpav dqvXaküs dro Cupias émi Tyv 


^ \ e/ 
‘Pøpaiwv mov capeméudQOn tis eis Xpwrov &veka 


papTupias. 


> \ 5 ^ 
rav 06 oi QvXaccovres avTOv Tpaiavov 


/ / M 5 0 A SET 7 \ 0 , 
7 POTLKTOOES Qéka TOV apl MOV, AVN Epot TIVES KaL HPlov 


I Tis 'Avrioxelas] C; rhs èv ávrioxelg aylas rod Oeod éxxAynolas LP; rijs 


dytioxéwy Tod Oeo ékkMmoias V. 
ov P. 
ópovpoovAakfs V. 

pale» mów] V Euseb.; 
xpwróv V. 


2 E)ó0tv] VC; eóó0wv LP. 

dad Zvplas] LPV Euseb.; om. [C]. 
pounv LPC. 
6 mporikropes] Cs begins at this point. 


To)s åmosróňovs] LVC; Tod dámooTó- 

3 $povpdv $vAakfs] LP Euseb.; 
4 ‘Pw- 
Xpwróv] LP Euseb.; Tür 
roy ápiuóv] 


txt LPVB; add. Aae autem sunt nomina eorum, cornelios, phison, jubinos, sedos, 


bautos, lelarchos, palmas, lymen, barbaros, lymppos (sic) Cm. 


ZT. E. iii, 32, where Atticus is twice 
named as the legate of Syria who 
under Trajan condemned Symeon 
the son of Clopas to death. 

Modern writers for the most part, 
following Noris and Fabretti, have 
transposed the consuls of 103 and 
104, as they appear in all the ancient 
lists, owing to a spurious inscription 
- on a coin, and have assigned Subu- 
ramus I1, Marcellus, to A.D. 103, giv- 
ing Imp. Nerva Trajanus Aug. V, 
M’. Laberius Maximus 1r, the pro- 
per consuls of A.D. 103, to A.D. 104 
(see CTE ETT p 8645920820072 
VII. 1193). So eg. Clinton, Eckhel 
Doctr. Num. VY. p. 415 sq, and even 
Borghesi Œuvres III. p. zo. Momm- 
sen (Hermes 11. p. 126 sq) has vin- 
dicated the old lists and restored the 
consuls of these two years to their 
proper places. 

In no case however can this con- 
sulate be reconciled with the year of 
Trajan’s reign as given just before, 
whether zéuzrQ or évváro be read. If 
the reckoning be by tribunician years, 
the date of the martyrdom (July r) 
would fall in the one case in A.D. 
IoI and in the other in A.D. 105. 


` MévavOpos. 


(Cs transposes and 


If on the other hand the Egyptian 
computation be followed (see p. 412, 
note 3), as is not improbable, July 1 
in the 5th year would be A.D. 102, 
and in the 9th A.D. 106. 

I. émíokomos k.r.A.] From Euseb. 
H. E. ii. 36 'Llyvdrws tis kar! 'Avrió- 
xeuav IIérpov dvadoyns Sevtrepos thy mi- 
ckomijv KekAnp@pevos, compared with 
26. ii. 21 róv èr 'Avrwoyeías Evodiov 
mwporov karagTávros, Sevtepos èv rois 
dnAoupevors "Tyvártos éyvopi(ero. 

2. pera émipedeorarns k.r.A.] From 
Euseb. Z. Z. iii. 36 Aóyos & yeu roð- 
Tov darò Suplas êm) rrjv Popalwy modu 
dvameud6évra Onpiwv yevérOar Bopàv 
THs els Xpiorov paprvpías €vekev. ovTos 
8j ovv rjv SC "Acías ávakojüÓnv per 
émwuueAeaTár]s dpovpàv dudakis mor- 
oUpevos K.T.À. 

6. mporíkropes] ie. ‘protectores? 
* body-guards! ; see Ephem. Epigr. v. 
p. 121 sq, 647 sq; comp. Menander 
Exc. p. 418 (ed. Bonn.) ó O€ ye rv 
pebopiov eydpevos mporíkrap (8yXot 8€ 
mapa ‘Pwpaious Tov és roüro karaÀeyó- 
pevov a&ias, tov Bacidewv mpooke- 
maotnv) k.r.h. This writer was him- 
self a ‘protector’: see Suidas s. v. 
Comp. also Cod. Theod. 


Io 


1] ROMAN ACTS. 


, / 
TpOTOUS ÉXovTes* 


, : , ms 5 \ \ f \ 
Makaptov’ ékeiU€v TE mi TH Opakny kai 
n 
^ \ £ e / 
Yns Kal Garacons, UT. OVTES 


VUKTOS, 
TOV CRT VOY 


varies the forms of some of these names.) 
7 Ov 'Aclas] L Euseb.; dca THs dcías PV, 

bakdprov] PVC; om. L (having already inserted +à dy.ov after ot kal). 
Opdxny] PV; rh» 0pákww L. 


Tov TpóTov V. 


ER: C; ôe V. 
vromiesovres PV; daromalfovres L. 
huépas LP. 


Exdotyy Tuépav. 
sancto C. 
diam BC; 650.407 rpoalpecw L. 


Vi. 24. 9 ‘Devotissimos protectores, 
qui armatam militiam subeuntes, non 
solum defendendi corporis sui, verum 
etiam protegendi lateris nostri sollici- 
tudinem patiuntur (unde etiam f7o- 
fectorum nomen sortiti sunt), inglori- 
osos esse non patimur’. For this 
office and its duties see Gothofred’s 
paratitlon and notes Cod. Theod. 
Lib. vi. Tit. xxiv (IE p. 130 sq), 
Ducange Gloss. Lat. s. v. protector, 
They are styled in the inscriptions 
‘ protectores Augusti? or ‘Augus- 
torum' (e.g. Corp. Insc. Lat. 111. 327, 
3126, 3424); the name of the empe- 
ror being sometimes added e.g. ‘pro- 
tector Aureliani Augusti? (2d. III 
327); also ‘protectores lateris divini’ 
(z6. III. 1805, an inscription of the 
year A.D. 280). A soldier so serving 
was said ‘protegere? (zd. III. 6194 
‘deinde protexit". We read also 
of the ‘protectoria dignitas’ being be- 


. stowed on veterans (Cod. Just. xii. 


47. 2); and altogether the ‘protec- 
tores’ were treated with the highest 
honour (Cod. Fust. xii. 17. 1,2). The 
career of such a person is sketched 
out in C. Z. LZ. III. 371 militavit in 
vexilatione Fesianesa annis xxiii, 


499 


A \ > 9 , , 5 ` 
ot kat Ò 'Acías Qéouuov "yov TOV 


/ M 
‘Pjyiov Sia 
\ e /? 
TOV ÓG10V "uépas kai 


/ e Uy / > , e RN 
KatTOL Ka EKAOTTNV  7TONLV EVEOVETOUMEVOL UTO 


5 5 PENS 7 f. ^ 
arn’ oUO€v TOUT(V €7rpaUvev QUTQOV Tas 


Onplwv rpómovs] LPCB; Onpisdn 

TOV 
8 re] 
9 Urwmid fortes] 
huépas kal vukrós] VC; vvkrós kal 


IO Kal? éxdornv móNw] LPV; but, as C has KATA TOAIC, 
perhaps we should read xarà móXv ‘from city to city.’ 

II ddekpav] txt LPVB; add. scilicet ut darent indulgentiam 
aùrov] LPCB; rd» ávquépov V. 


B has quotidie— ka" 


Tas Ópyás] PV ; zracun- 


unde factus protector, idequi (l. in- 
deque or idemque) militavit in schola 
protectorum annis quinque. For 
the ‘schola protectorum’ see also 
Cod. Theod. vi. 24. 3, Cod. Fust. xii. 
17. 2, Amm. Marcell. xiv. 7.9. These 
officers appear in the martyrdoms of 
a later age; eg. Act. SS. Philem. 
et Apoll. 9 ó Awokderiavds dréoreide 
mpotixtopas mpos avrüv év rj Onfaiài 
--.0t mrporíkropes avveAafov avrov RTN, 
quoted in Ducange Gloss. Lat, s. v.: 
see also his Gloss. Graec. s.v., and 
comp. Ps-Prochorus Act. Yoann. p. 
48 (ed. Zahn). But the name is an 
anachronism in the time of Trajan. 
In the inscriptions the office is men- 
tioned under Gallienus A.D. 267,C.Z.L. 
HI. 3424. Spartianus (Vit. Carac.) 
writes § 5 ‘cum protectoribus’, and 
8 7 ‘inter protectores suos’, speaking 
of Caracala; but perhaps he was 
unconsciously attributing to a former 
age an institution with which he was 
familiar in his own time. 

8. 'Pfyov] See above, p. 380. 

9. wWmerdtorres] ‘oppressing, mal- 
treating’, comp. 1 Cor. ix. 27, where 
there is the same v. l. ómomié(o, as 
here. See Lobeck Pryn. p. 461. 


32—2 


[1 


5 5 5 ÀN , - 5 , 
dpryds, GAN’ dvnkéo-rows Kat avyndecow dpOadrpors é£e- 


500 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


° ° \ > i 
ON8ov toy viov, Qç mov Kal avTos év émioTOMNm 
MapTupet Néywv Amo Zypiac Méypi “P@muHc OHPIO- 


may@ Ald rie Kal Baddccne [drdmenoc], Endede- 

MÉNOC AEKA AEOTIAPAODILC, OlTAMEE eici CTPATI@TIKON 
a M > t t 

cTimdoc’ ol kal €YEPFETOYMENO! yeilpoyc riNON- 


TAI. 
II. 


ae , \ , ^ > , ` af 
Tr Palu. Kal mpoonveyKay TW avrokparopi THY ¿Q £u 
[4 t 


fg , Ja 5 

"Arrapavtes ouv ék ‘Pyyiov mapayivovrai év 
> ^ 5 € [4 5 ^ > LÁ 

«UTOU. Kal ékéAevaev ó avToKpaTwp eicayOnvat avTOv, 
^ vi / \ > , S 

Tapovons Kal THS CVyKANTOV, Kal now mpos avTOV 

\ ES y. e \ , / , > , 
Cu & 'lyvarios 6 Tyv '"Àvrioxéov mow  avaocaTov 


Z e \ > 5 ` E \ 5 ^ [4 ^ ` 
MONTAS 5 WS KAL ELS akoas EMAS éAOetv OTL TWAGAV TNV 


5 ' ^ € ^ > \ 
Cupiav ueréBaXes dro ToU ÉNANNUO MOU Els TOV XDLOTI- 


, 3: D > ey x” 
avio uov. "Iyvatios eimev’ Ci0e, BactArev, oios TE hunv 


` 1 dvnkéoros| üvikécrois P; dvecxéoros L; Zmpudentibus (avadéow or perhaps a 
paraphrase of dvnxéorous) C; d&rákrois V. The clause stands crudelibus oculis et 
manibus (l. Zmmanibus?) in B. avyreéow] aviredow LP; immisericordibus C ; 
dva.déow V. For B see the previous note. 3 uaprvpet] LPCB ; ypage V. 
Onprowaxa| PB; 0mpiouaxcv LV; dub. C. 4 dyomevos] V; FxOnv L (a 
change necessitated by the previous @npupyaxav); om. PB (with Rom. 5). For 
Onpiopax o... àyóuevos C has zer facio (or faciens) cum feris. 5 otruvés eloi] V 
[C]; otrués éore L; 8 écriv PB (after Rom. 5). oTpatiwtikoyv aTiQos] LP; 
orpariwTtikòv r&yua V (after Rom. 5); militaris custodia B; milites C. 6 yl- 
vovral] LVCB; éyévovro P. 8 'Amápavres] LP; dpavres V; zol- 
lentes B. *Pmylou] txt PV; add. ròv d^ytov L; add. +ó ó(kawov C; add. beatum 
ionatium [B]. mapaylwovrat] LV; mapeyévovro P[C]. 
kKparopt] txt CB; add. rpaiavo LPV. IO ékéħevoev] LP ; éxédevce V. 
11 kal pri] PV[M]; om. LB; al. C. $9cw] P; dno LV. 
txt PVC[B]A; add. rod uh céBec0at 0coís L. 
def. B. 14 Zuplavy] PVCBA ; àvaroNip. L. I5 hun] PV; elut 
L. 16 kal cé] here PV[A]; before otós re L[B]. PETAOTHCAL... 
kal mpooayayew] L; peraBadetv...xal rpocayayelv V; peracrihoas...rpocayayev P; 


9 avro- 


¿uàs] VCA; huey LP; 


2. év émwroÀj] The reference is 
to Rom. 5. 

6. oripos] This word seems to 
have been substituted by the author 
himself for r&yua of Ignatius. The 
expression orpati@rikoy aTiQos occurs 


Euseb. Mart. Pal. 4. Our hagiolo- 
gist shows himself a diligent reader 
of Eusebius. 

I2. avdoraroy moujcas] Acts xvii. 
6 oi Tiv oixoupevny dvacrarócavreg 
otro. kai evOdde mapeow. 


5 


13 Toras] | 


i] ROMAN ACTS. 501 


Kal cé uera Toa dz THS elowAoAaTpeElas Kal Tpoca- 
yayewv To Tov ÜAcv Oe kai irov XpioTo? mapa- 
oTHoat Kal io Xvpoépav Gol KaTaO'TÜcaL TüV aoxny. 
Tpaiavos éimew Ei Bovre MOL yapitas Katabécbar Kai 
20€V Tots uois piros keTapiÜueio at, uerariÜéuevos is 
yveuns tavtns Osov Tots Üeois, Kal éon dpyiepevs TOU 
Meya&Xov As kal Baoirledces ody €uol. — "lyváctos 
ei7rey* Xdprras eT TapéXEW, Basıeù, Tas un Ba- 
mToUTras puyýv, où Tas dTra*yoUc'as eis aiwviov koňactv. 
25 Tds Qé émayyeňias oov, as émnyyeidw diddva [TUR 
ovdevos Noryou dias xpivw: ole yap beois ois où yiwo- 
oKw AaTpEVw, ovre 6 Zevs ó aós Tis ¿cuy émíarapat, 
obire Bacirelas koomiks éQieuar ti ràp &bernOH- 


COMAJ ÊAN TON KÓCMON AON KepAHco THN Aé 


avertere...et introducere B 3 conuertere. ..et offerre A; convertere...ad offerendum C. 
amo] PV; om. L. eldwdodarpelas] V Lis; eldwdodaTpias P. I7 TÓV 
ov] LPVBAC,; om. Ca Tapacrhoa Kal...Karacrioa]| TApacTHaas... 
Katacrhoa L; T0vjcas...karaaTíjsat P ; KaTaorhoat Kal...rovjoae V ; constituere ac 
acere A; facere...ut corroboretC. B is deficient in the first clause and has consti- 
uere in the second. 18 lexvporépav] LP; icxupusrépay V. go] LP 
BA; cov VC. 20 karapiueic0c.] PV; cvvapueto 0a. LC D] : connumerari 
B; aestimari A. Meraru0éuevos THs yvugs raúrns] LP[A] comp. [M]; perari- 
0éuevos Ti» *yvóuq V. The demonstrative pronoun appears in CB, but whether 
they had the gen. or accus. is doubtful. 23 det] PVCBA ; ë? L. Ba- 
oet] LP; BaciXets V. 24 puxqv] LPVCB; om. A. alwviov] 
L; alwiav P; rjv alóvuov V. 27 Aarpedw] V; sacrifico B; Narpetow 
LPC; def. A. Zeis 6 ods ris] P; zeus quidem, quem dicis (zeus iste quem dicis 
nunc Cs)...cujusmodi sit (reds 6 obs, dais P) C; feds boris L; ó feds domus V; ara- 
mazdum omnino, quisnam sit A ; Jovem, quis sit B. 28 whehnOjoouac] P ; 
SpehnOjoouat L; Spedos Oroua V ; brodest mihi B; lucrabor AC. 29 Tov 
kócuov brov] LP; Xov ròv kócpov V; mundum totum [A]Cs; totum mundum B; 
hunc mundum totum Cm. The order differs in the different evangelists. kep- 
Snow ri» 06] LV; Zucrer et BA; Kepojoas ri» P; dub. C. 


23. Tas u) BAamrovcas &T..] See Rom. 6 ovdéy pe ahednoe: rà mépara 
Mart. Polyc. 10 ðeððáypeba yap dp- roù kopou ovdé ai Bacideia rod 


xas kal eLovoias vmó cod reraygé- — alóvos rovrov, and 7. 4 viv pavddve 
5 PA ^ ^ 

vais TIV karà TÒ mpocÜkoy, THY uÑ dedepevos pndev emiOupciv [koopuxdy 7) 

BXámrovacav ñus, arrovépeuy. párawov] See above, p- 381. 


28. ovre Bacidelas x.r.A.] Comp. Tí yàp &pedrnOjcoua}] Taken from 


502 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [u 


^ . \ Gy £ "C [a 
vvydN Moy ZHMI@Od; Tpatavos eizev: Coias pot 


aicÜrnoews Euppovos àpuoipos eivat, Qa. TOUTO é£evreAt- 
Ces wou Tas émayyedtas. ev, édy eis ayavaKTyoly Me 
dyayns, marais aikiais OE TYLwpNnTOMaL, oU [LOVOY WS 
dvijkooy, GANA kai ws dydpwrov Kal ws où mTeEomeEvoY 
iepás cuykAnjtou čoyuarı Kat Ovovra |0eots]. ’ lyvarıos 
eimev: Tolet rò 9okoüv cor, Basiret, yw yap ov vw. 
oUre ydp mip ovre c'avpós oUre Onpiwy Üvuós ovTE 
apaiperis perv meirovoiv me droaTivau amo Ocot 


r (quco09] PVC; dmorécoas Snuew0e (sic) L; perdam BA. 2 ëuppovos] 
LP; uppóvov V (?), in which the edd. have acquiesced. Ova roûro] VC ; kai 
6a roôro LPBA. é£evreM(evs] LP; éġeoreňtġeis (sic) V ; annullas (v. 1. anni- 
hilas) B (‘legisse videtur é£ovev(feis? Zahn); contemnis A. The wordin Cm, Uj C0 UJ*f, 
vituperare, contumeliis afficere, is a rendering of é£ovóevotv, Job xxx. r, but would 
stand quite well for é£evreMgeu. 3 éàv] dv here, P; éàv before eis, V; om. L; 
sz A; dub, Gs def. B: 4 aydyns| PV; dyes L. Tipwphooua] PVA ; 
tiuwploacbat (sic) L (necessitated by the previous dyes for éàv aydyns); dub. C; 


def. B. 
in CAB. 
búovra] L[B]; o? Oúovra PVC[A]. 


5 ws où] LP; uh (om. ws) V. There is nothing corresponding to ws 
6 õóyparı] LPB (senatusconsulto); õóypası C; decretis A; om. V. 
The omission or insertion [OT]OT- would be 


easy by a clerical oversight ; or it might have been inserted to avoid ambiguity. 


0cois] LPCBA ; om. V. 


Matt. xvi. 26. See Rom. 6, where 
this passage from the Gospel is in- 
terpolated. 

8. ovre yàp mip k.rA.] Adapted 
from Rom. 5. 

IO. ov yap tov vOv k..A.] See 
Polyc. PAi/. 9 où yap róv viv Hyanrnoay 
aiva, G\Aa Tov vmép juv aroĝavóvra 
kai Ov npas vd roð Ocoü dvacrávra, 
For the first part of the sentence see 
also 2 Tim. iv. Io dyamrzcas róv viv 
aióva, and for the second Ps-Ign. 
Rom. © ékeivov (ytd Tov vmép nuav 
ámoÜDavóvra kai avacravra. 

I5. Òr oikovouíav| See Ephes. 18, 
with the note. 

17. aùrika yoðv &r.] Comp. 
Clem. Hom. vi. 21 obres reAevrrcav- 
rog [roð Ads] róv tapov Kpñres èri- 


It should perhaps be omitted notwithstanding this weight 


Oevügww* ev Oe r) Mecomorayía ketvrat 
"Hios uév tis ev” Arpous, Betyn 0é vis 
ev Kappas, “Epuñs ev Alyómro tis 
dvÓpemos, "Apps ev Opákp, 'AdpoOírg 
ev Kompo, 'AckMjmis ev "Emidavpo, 
k,T.À. ; comp. v. 23, Clem. Recogn. x. 
24. 'The passage which follows in 
our martyrologist has many close 
resemblances to the Protrepticon of 
Clement of Alexandria. Ultimately 
it may have been derived from the 
arch-rationalist Euhemerus himself, 
since Cicero de Nat. Deor. i. 42 in- 
forms us ‘Ab Euhemero et mortes et 
sepulturae demonstrantur deorum; 
So likewise Lactant. E477. 13 ‘Eu- 
hemerus qui de sacris inscriptionibus 
veterum templorum et originem Jovis 
et res gestas omnemque progeniem 


11] ROMAN ACTS. 503 


vr > ` > ^ > Aa 
10 C(WYTOS. où yap TON NYN FAT aina, QAAR TOV 
° ` E] ^ , , A 
UTEP éuoU dzoÜavovra kal Quya oraya Xpia-Tóv. 


III. 


0 \ 2 , y » 
eot aÜavaTol ciow* 


c 7 e e ^ > c ° 
H cuycAnTos ebmev: 'Hyeis olüauev Ti oi 


` ` ^ ^ e 
au ÒE Tes ons, dips OTL O 


N 5 ia > > 
osos amelavev; ‘Iyvatios eters 'O . éuós Kvpios, et 


15 kai a7éÜavev, Or oixovoulay twa drméÜavev, dra Sid 
Tplwy juEepwv avert oi Se VueTEpor Ocol dzéÜavov uèv 


ws Üvirrot, ovk nyépOnoav é. avtixa yov Zevs utv èv 
of authority. 7 elev] PV; etre L. 
Jicabo); praef. diis B; add. oùðè rpockwG dalwoow L. 
Tarpoc Ch. 
A; praevalebunt C (translating droorjva: as if moería) ; rowdow V. II 
kal àvacrávra] VCA; om. P ; e£ quz a deo resuscitatus est B; kal Tjj Tpltn huépa 
13 dns] LPCAB; ¿ms V. 14 &mé0ayey] LPVAB; 
15 Ov olkovoulay rwà] PAB; ë olxovoulay V ; dua 


où 0úo] txt PVCA (sacri- 
8 eravpós] LPVC,AB; 
9 meloovow] P; melowor L; persuadent B; possunt persuadere 


àvácravra L. 

add. gui deus est C. 

THY cwrnplay judv éxovolws L, comp. [M]; secundum (karà) oeconomiam propter 

nostram salutem C. dméBavev, àXXà did Tprdv T)uepiv àvéar?] V, and so 

substantially AB (but they both omit the previous ef kal dmé0avev), comp. [M]; 
` amébavev (alone) L; resurrexit tertio die C; 0€ duepdv rpuóv máNw dvéorn (alone) 
m. 17 3ryéphgcav dé] txt LPCBA ; add. ws 0eot V. aùrika yor] PV; 

ut sciatis C ; quod manifestum est, quia B ; idem utique (aùròs yov?) A; duéNet L. 


collegit; item ceterorum deorum this tomb of Zeus at Gnossus was 


parentes, patrias, actus, imperia, 
obitus, sepulcra etiam persecutus 
est : quam historiam vertit Ennius 
in Latinam? (comp. Div. Inst. i. II). 
His work was doubtless a rich store- 
house of materials ready to hand for 
the Christian apologists (comp. e.g. 
Clem. Alex. Profr. 2, p. 20, Minuc. 
Octav. 21). 

Zebs pev k.r.A.] Callim. Hymn. ad 
Fov. 8 sq Kpfjres del yreüo rav. kal yap 
rá$ov, d dva, seño Kpfres érekrg- 
vavro, av ©’ ov Oaves (with Spanheim's 
note), a passage quoted by Athenag. 
" Suppl. 30, by Clem. Alex. Protr. 
p- 32, and by Orig. c. Ce/s. iii. 43, and 
alluded to by Tatian ad Graec. 27. 
Chrysostom Hom. in Ep. ad Tit. 3 
(Op. XI. p. 744) ascribes these verses 
to Epimenides. The inscription on 


ZAN KPONOY according to Lactan- 
tius ZZ 13, on the authority of 
Euhemerus as reproduced by Ennius 
(comp. Div. /z5£.i. 11). Pythagoras is 
said by Porphyry (Vit. Pyth. 17) to 
have written on the tomb some verses 
(émtypappa émexápafev émi TH Tape), 
which began *98e Oavàv keirau Zàv ov 
Ala ktkAjnokovow. Hence Chrysostom 
(l. c.) gives the actual inscription on 
the tomb as 'EvraüÓa Zav keirai ov 
Ala kixAnokovor. See Hoeck Kreta III. 
p- 335 sq (comp. p. 297 sq). Comp. 
also the mockery of Lucian Timon 
6, de Sacrif. ro. This was a com- 
monplace of apologists and others 
in their attacks upon the pagan 
mythology; e.g. Clem. Hom. M. cc., 
Clem. Recogn. lc. Athenag. l.c., 
Tatian Lc, Theoph. ad Autol i. 


504 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


[1 


Końtn TéQam+au, ’AskAýmios Që kepavvoßornņĝeis év 


Kuvocovpn, ‘Appodirn év law uera Kuúpoou ré0arrat, 


‘HpaxAns rupi dyndNwrat. 


1 09] PLCBM ; om. VA. 
Kepauy@ Bybels V (comp. M). 


\ ^ of 
TOLOUTWY yap Tiuwpiðv aELOL 


KepavvoBodnbels] P ; KepavywBodnOels (sic) L ; 
2 Kuyocoúpn] P ; Kkowobdpy L; kvOdvg V ; 


Ke€noeovpoc Cs; 0...e07pHC Cm (the word being mutilated) ; cithaerone (v. 1. 


cithero) B; kitheron monte boeotiae A. 


Iá] LPVBMC;; papho cypri A; ráóo 


Qu. Kuwópov] V ; kvrfjpov P; RomHpoc Cs; kópov L ; cennis (ux&mmmoc) Cm; 


cyrene (secundum alios; venatore) A; venatore (= xuvryo0) B. 
LPVC ; add. zz tyro B; add. zm alio iterum loco etc. A. 


IO, ii. 5, Clem. Alex. Pro?r. 2 (p. 32), 
Minuc. Octav. 21, Tertull. pol. 25, 
ad Nat. ii. 17, Cyprian Quod Idola 
etc. 2, Firm. Matern. 7, Arnob. adv. 
Gent. iv. 14, 25, Lactant. IL CC, 
Euseb. Praef. Ev. ii. 2. 48, iii. 10. 21, 
etc. So too Orac. Sibyll. viii. 48 dv 
Kprjry kavxrpa rádovs rj ddcpopos Ee 
(a passage quoted by Lactant. Div. 
Inst. i. 11), where the Sibyllist in- 
cludes Cronos and Rhea. Celsus 
complained of the treatment of this 
myth by the Christians; Orig. c. Cels. 
lil. 43 Àéyet rep) nuay re karayeXà pev 
TOY mpogkvvoUvrov Tov Aia, ère) ráQos 
aùroð év Kpyrg Oeikvvra, Kai ov8ey 
jrrov o€Bopev Tov ánó rod rádov, oix 
eiüóres mós kal kaÜó Kpfjres TÒ roto0ro 
mowvow. Origen controverts his 
tropological explanation of the story. 

I. êv Kuvogovpn] Cic. de Nat. 
Deor. ii. 22 ‘Is [ie. ‘Aesculapius 
secundus’, for he mentions three], 
fulmine percussus, dicitur humatus 
esse Cynosuris’: comp. Clem. Alex. 
Protr. 2 (p. 26) otros pèv oop [o 
*AgkAjmvos| Ketrar Kepavywbels èv rots 
Kuvocoupidos ópíow, Lactant. LE pit. 8 
‘Cynosuris, ut Cicero ait, sepultus, 
cum esset ictu fulminis interemtus’ 
(comp. Div. Inst. i. 10). The place 
intended was perhaps the Spartan 
Cynosura, on which see Müller Dozz- 
ans II. p. 48 (Eng. Trans.) Leake 


3 avndrwrat] 
yàp] PVCs: zezur B; 


Travels im the Morea 1. p. 178, 
Boeckh C. Z Ga. 1. p: 6005 MO HIBIE 
may have been the Cynosura of 
Arcadia, as Curtius (Peloponnesos 1. 
P. 391 sq) with some reason sup- 
poses. There can be no doubt but 
that the right word is preserved by 
P. The ultimate Latin and Arme- 
nian reading ‘Cithaerone’ is an at- 
tempt to get an intelligible name 
out of a mutilation or corruption 
KYOHPH Or KY6HPw, to which the 
readings of LV point, but no tradi- 
tion placed the death or burial of 
JEsculapius on Citharon. As re- 
gards the termination, I have retain- 
ed that which alone the authorities 
support here; but in the parallel 
passages it is -pís -pidos, or -pa -pov. 
2. peta Kwípov| Cinyras held 
the foremost place in Cyprian legend. 
The myths respecting him are mi- 
nutely investigated in Engel's Kypros 
Il. P. 94 sq (comp. 26. I. p. 203 
Sq). The story was variously told. 
The main points however are these. 
Cinyras was the founder of Cyprian 
civilisation and the institutor of the 
worship of the Paphian Aphrodite; 
he was the ancestor of the Paphian 
priests, the Cinyradz; he was the 
beloved of the goddess herself; he 
met with a violent death; and he 
was buried in the sanctuary of Aphro- 


ur] 


ROMAN ACTS. 


505 


e ^ D , 5 > ^ e ^ 

uvuwv noav ot Geol, émet ákparrets Kal kakozrotol [Uo xo] 
N , , ^ e > 

kat avOpwrwv Ooper ó è ñuéreoos Kupios, ei Kal 

° , 5 5 5139 € ^ 

éoTavpweÓn Kal drréÜavev, dXX &ei£ev Tiv éavToU Ovva- 


. \ ^ ^N \ 2 J > 
piv «vagas k veKpwy kai TOUS dveNóvras avTOv QL 


eL A= om. Lg. 


4 vuav] here, LP; after 6eot, V. 
P. bmjpxov] LV; sunt C; erant A; fuerunt B; om. P. 


érel] LV; émeói 
5 6 dé T)uérepos... 


épydrat kaklas] LPCBA (but A contains also much additional matter); om. V 


(obviously owing to the recurrence of 6 8e #uérepos Kupuos). 


PBCsA:; add. éxovelws LCm; def. V. 
THY éauro0 Obvaju» edetev L. 


dite, where also the remains of his 
descendants lay. On this last point 
see Clem. Alex. Protr. 3 (p. 40) Iro- 
Aepatos è 6 roð *Aynoapxov ev TO 
mpórQ Tay Tepl Tov duXomáropa èv 
Tlade@ déyer ev r@ THs Adpodirns iepĝ 
Kuvópav re kai rovs Kiwopov dmoydvous 
kexnoedoba. So too Arnob. adv. 
Gent. vi. 6, who mentions the same 
fact on the same authority of Ptolemy, 
and obviously copies Clement. The 
Christian apologists, in their attacks 
on pagan mythology, frequently al- 
lude to the love of Aphrodite for 
Cinyras and represent her as a harlot 
whom he deified; Clem. Alex. Protr. 
2 (p. 5) 6 Kémpios 6 vnowwrtns Kwvpas... 
rà mepi rrjv Adpodirny paxAóvra öpyia 
ek vukrÓs "juépa .mapaOo0vau ToApnoas, 
irormovpevos Oevacar mópvnv moita 
(comp. zd. pp. 13, 29), Arnob. adv. 
Gent. iv. 25 ‘Quis rege a Cyprio, 
cujus nomen Cinyras est, ditatam 
meretriculam Venerem divorum in nu- 
mero consecratam. ..prodidit?' (comp. 
ib. v. 19), Firm. Matern. ro ‘ Audio 
Cinyram Cyprium templum amicae 
meretrici donasse etc. and Euseb. 
Praef. Ev. ii. 3. 14, 15, who quotes 
Clement of Alexandria as above 
cited. The apologists do not gene- 
rally speak of the death or burial of 
the goddess, but are content to refer 
to her being wounded by Diomed. 


6 dméOavev] txt 
GAN &ei£ev T3» éavroÜ Obvajguv] P ; adda 


The tomb however is mentioned in 
Clem. Hom. v. 23, vi 21, Clem. 
Recogn. x. 24, and in the passage 
of Caesarius corresponding to the 
reference in the Recognitions, Dial. ii. 
Resp. 102 èv Kirp thy Kump kKoTp@ 
ëv Taho keiuiévqv, ev dé Opaxn "Apny Tov 
THs apas émavupov, where he makes 
merry with the names. [The only 
reference given in Engel (II. p. 75) is 
‘Klemens v. Alex. Recognit. B. 13. 
Kap. 24 ’Adpodirns ó rapos Seixvurat 
ev Iapo.? It would hardly be possi- 
ble to crowd more blunders into a 
single reference. The quotation is 
taken from the Metaphrast’s Martyr. 
Ignat. § 7 (and therefore derived ulti- 
mately from our martyrologist) and 
appears in Cotelier's note as an illus- 
tration of the statement in Clem. 
Recogn. x. 24. With Clement of 
Alexandria it has not any, even the 
remotest connexion.] I do not find 
any references given from classical 
writers, which mention this tomb of 
Aphrodite. The reading kvvgyob is 
apparently an emendation or a fur- 
ther corruption of kuynpov, itself cor- 
rupted by itacism from xuwvpov ; but 
it seems to be intended for Adonis. 
Though in one form of the legend 
Adonis was the son of Cinyras, yet 
(so far as I am aware) he was never 
represented as buried in Paphos. 


500 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [uu 


^ ` e / N 5 > 
Yucov Tiwepnodjevos* Kal oi pev UMETEPOL cot am 
^ > dé Z e \ 
avroU Sixkny eicempaxÜnaav ws epyaTat Kaklas, O ÒE 
> £ ` H ` $ / 
MET EPOS Kupuos cunpeOn kara capka úro davÜpw«v 
^ - ` / ^ Ñ 
TOVNPwV oU pepovTwv avToU Tous ÉAeypovs, MATAV MEV 
5 X € \ , 
evepyeriav TApETXNKWS, dyapuoTneis dè UTO aqgrioTeov. 
.. $. 5 ^ E ^ x / 
Tpaiavos eimev: Eyo cor mapaw® éxkNivat Tov Qava- 
TOV Kal TOOTOpaMElY TH Con ’Iyvatuos elev? Karos 
poo opapu , n. Yy 
^ a £ ` \ x A 0 [4 
grapaivéis pot, faciNeU: evyw yap Tov aiwviov Vava- 


| mpocdevyo TH aiwviw Cw 
TOV Kal mTpoapevy n Ç n. 


4 deypous] P ; éhéyxous LV. 
...kal dxapuornOels V; al. CAB. 


uoc] L; mapauwels we P; uot mapaweîs V. 
$ebyo] LPCA; púyw VB (?). 
9 tporpevyw] PV; mpoorpéxw L; festino in Cs; festino ire in Cmi 
Io eist] LP ; eici Vs. 
dé kal] V ; similiter autem et B; caros kal L; otros P; def. CA. 


[A]. 
vov P. 
curro ad s al. B. 


alóvios] PV ; h 06 átótos L. 


IO. ó pév mpookapos x.r.A.] See 
the interpolated text of Rom. 3, where 
the words of 2 Cor. iv. 18 are intro- 
duced. 

15. T@ Sexarpeis k.r.A.] For the 
allusion see Hom. ZZ. v. 385 sq 7À7 
pev "Apns, Ore pw 7Qros kparepós T 
"EduáATQs, maides 'AXojos, Trav kpa- 
repà evi Seopa, xaAkéo Ò ey kepáp.o dé- 
dero rpiokaiðeka uvas, Firm. Mat. 12 
*Oti et Efialtae edicto Mars...ferrea 
catenarum vincla sustinuit’, Tertull. 
Afol.14 ‘Martem tredecim mensibus 
invinculis paeneconsumptum’ (comp. 
ad Naf.i 10). When our martyro- 
logist adds da potyeiay, he apparent- 
ly confuses this binding of Ares by 
the Aloidz with the other binding of 
the same god by Hepheestos, as told 
also by Homer Od. viii. 295 sq. The 
adultery of Ares with Aphrodite is 
a frequent topic of the apologists ; 
Tatian ad Graec. 34, Athenag. Suppl. 
21, Minuc. Oc£. 23, Firm. Matern. 12, 
Cypr. ad Donat. 8, Lactant. Div. Inst. 


I4 duelvov] Vs; Guelvo LP. 


Tpaiavós eimev' 


mca» mev...axapioTndels 06] LP; m&cav 
6 co] LV; ce P. 8 mapa ets 
Bacc] LP; à Baoe V[C][B] 

aldviov] LVCAB ; av@pem- 


II ovrw 
12 7) 06 
0éNes] V ; om. 


elrev] PV ; eire L. 


i. Io (comp. Epit. i. 8), Arnob. v. 41, 
43, Clem. Alex. Protr. 2 (p. 29). 
Arnobius (l. c.) deals with the alle- 
gorical interpretation which heathen 
apologists put upon the story. 

16. rà memeOnuévo k.r.A.] ffo the 
blacksmith with the crippled feet? 
The reference is to the common 
story of Hephzestos, as told from 
Homer (ZZ. i. 590 sq) onward. Allu- 
sions to the lameness of this god 
and its cause in Christian apologists 
appear in Tatian ad Graec. 8, 
Theoph. ad Autol. i. 3, Minuc. Octav. 
22, Firm. Matern. 12, Arnob. iv. 24, 
Clem. Alex. Protr. 2 (p. 25). For 
this sense of memednpévos, ‘maimed, 
crippled’, see Hom. ZZ xiii. 435 mé- 
Snoe 0€ $a(üa yuta (comp. iv. 517). 

yadxei] Hepheestos is so called in 
Hom. ZZ xv. 309. Again in Od. viii. 
273 he goes to his ‘smithy’ (85 p 
(pev eis xaAkeQva). So too his festi- 
val at Athens was called yadketa. See 
also Tertull. ad Wat. i. 10 * In Vulcano 


5 


ur] ROMAN ACTS. 


507 


M 7 3i N 7 > ^ 
ro Kat wooo cisiv Odvaroi; "lyv&ris cimert Avo, ó uv 
/ e \ 2 td 7 ` 
mpookaipos, 6 ÒE aiwvios* oUT@ ðe Kal (wal dvo, j uev 
5 , e de 3207 .. ` t ^ 
OAvyOxpOvios, N OE auovtos. Tpaiavos eirev' | Oücov 
^ ^ \ \ 7 / 2 D ^ 
Tots Ücois kai Tas Tiuwplas ÉkkNwov: OU yap ei OV THS 
/ B. 57 , > / a 
yepovaías dueivwv. “Iyvaruos eirev: [lolois Ceots 0éNeus 
, A ^ ^ ^ M 7 $ / 
15 va ; TW ðekaTpeTs Byvas òla MOotxELAV EV 7riÜo KaTELO- 
, A- obi ^ / \ / SEES ^ 
Gerri ; 7] TW METEÒNMEVY TAS Bases XaNKET 5 5 TW 
> Z ^ ^ M e \ \ 
«O'TOX10O «VTL TNS MAVTIKNS KAL VTO YUVALKOS vuciÜüévmi s 
» Ae \ 2 , 5 # » ^ M 
7 TO ro liravov Quo pévo dydpoyuvw 3 N TOTS Ta 
[4 4 
LPCAB. 15 dexarpeis] PV; ôekà kal rpeîs L. C omits the words dexa- 
Tpels uvas. kareupxÜOévri] V; xabeipx0évre LP. 16 xake] fabro- 
ferrario C; xadxG LPV; aeneis vinculis A (but he seems to have omitted 7, and 
perhaps some other words, and thus to have referred xag to Ares in the pre- 
vious clause) ; dub. B (who omits many words, perhaps this included). 17 ve 


kyOévri] PV; nrrndére L. 18 diacrwpévw] PV; óucmouévg L. For 7 
TQ brd T. Sacrwpevg AB translate as if they had read 755 vro T. ðasmwuévns. C 


agrees with the Greek Mss. 


faber ferri consecratur.’ There can 
be no doubt that the Coptic has pre- 
served the correct reading. The 
text of the Greek MSS, ‘chained with 
brass’, does not suit the legend. 

rQ dotoxncarte k.r.A.] Apollo, who 
did not foresee the death of Hya- 
cinthus whom he killed unintention- 
ally, and was a slave to his love for 
Daphne who escaped his embraces. 
The reference is explained by paral- 
lel passages in the apologists; Tatian 
ad Graec. 8 raw oe viv, ó Aap 
v)v dkpacíav tov "AsoXAoevos viký- 
caca reyEas avrou MA pavtikýv, 
Ore m; mpoyvous Tà mep gè TÜS agro 
TÉXVNS OUK dvaro.  Aeyéro pot viv ò 
ékarnßóňos mas “YaxwvOov duexpyoato 
Zédvpos k.T.À. (comp. 20. $19), Athenag. 
Suppl. 21 à payee kai cope kal Tpoci- 
dds rois Aois Ta éaópeva, ovK épav- 
reiow ro) épop.évov Tov povor, dAAÀà kal 
Zkrewas avroyew tov (Xov, Theoph. 
ad Autol. i. 9 Arddava...tis Adds 
épóvra kal rov YakivOou pópov ayvoovrra 


[Justin] Or. ad Graec. 2 6 Anroidys, o ) 
pavruev emayyeápevos, é éavTov mreySev 
Ore Wevderau’ Adv ediwéer, Tv où 
karé\aBe, kai TH epopéev@ aùròv [fépo- 
pévo advrod?] Alakidy OpnoKevovts tov 
avtod Odvarov ovK épavrevcaro, Clem. 
Alex. Protr. 2 (p. 27) Aadyn yap é&é- 
huye povn kai róv pávrw Kal Ty POopay, 
Firm. Matern. 12 ‘Dafnen divinans 
deus nec invenire potuit nec stu- 
prare^ 

18. rà vd Tirdvov x.r.A.] i.e. Dio- 
nysus: comp. Diod. Sic. iii. 61 Toy 
Qeóv [Avdvucoy] ex Aros kai Anpmrpos 
rekvoÜévra ScacmacOjvac piv vmó T&v 
Twrávov, máNw Ò vd rs Anunrpos 
TOV pedGy avvappoaÓévrov k.r.À. (with 
Wesseling’s note); comp. 20. v. 75 
dtacrépevov tro Të Tvrávov, and see 
Pausan. vin 18. A Vall 5 LOL 
Christian writers see Clem. Hom. vi. 
2 rov Avdyucov...ov tro Tirdvey é- 
omapaxdar Aéyovaw, Clem. Recogn. x. 
2o ‘Persephonae...ex qua Dionysum 
genuit, qui a Titanis discerptus est,’ 


[ru 


508 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


'[Mou oikodouo «iw Telyn Kal Tov polov dsroorepn- 
Üciciv; 7) Tals Ta dvdpwv Eprya puuovuévais, Ta OE TOV 
Jr a éxAabouevats ; ee Aéyew Qeous 
yónras Kal eee malðwy kai stages eis derÓv Kai 
TaUpov kai xpvaOv kai k/kvov Kal Opakovra, [ws Une 5 


Aéyere,] uera(aNXouévovs, ovK ér ayab@ Twi, GAN 


duaAvoer ahAOTPiwY yauwv" oùs Exonv (QüeNvrre- 


3 \ \ \ ^ 
aba, oUXi č Kat mpooKuvely. 


I TMov] A; HALoc Cs; OvASOC Cm; Alou LP; roô Alou V; def. B. 
dmoarepybetaw] txt PVCA[B]; droerepnüetat 
4 kal radpov] LPCB; 
xpvoòv] LP VCs; et leonem (morsi for mosh) Cm; om. [A][B]. 
òs duels Aéyere] LPV ; om. CAB. 


Sopjnoacw] P ; olkodoujoact LsV. 
TOv épyacbévrwy L. 


om. LP[B]C. 


Clem. Alex. Prozr. 2 (p. 15) of Tiraves 
duonacay rt vnmiayov ovra, ws 6 THs 
reXeríjs momrhs "Opes now 6 Opá- 
kios K.T.À., where the story is given 
at length (comp. zó. p. 19 maðiov 
úno Turávov ĉiaomaøpevov) ; Arnob. v. 
I9 ‘ut occupatus puerilibus ludicris 
distractus ab Titanis Liber sit etc.’ 

avüpoyóve] Suidas 'Avópóyvvos. 
6 Atovuoos K.T.. So Cosmas explains 
āvðpoyúvovs in Greg. Naz. as a re- 
ference to Bacchus; see Greg. Naz. 
Of. 1V.pp.402, 403 (ed. Migne). Comp. 
also Porphyr. in Euseb. Praef. Ev. 
lii. II. 11 6 0€ Auóvvgos.. ETTU Onhvipop- 
gos, pnviay thy mept Thy yéveow Tov 
dxpodpvay dppevoOnruv Svvayw. He 
was also called dipopdos, Diod. Sic. 
iv. 5. The effeminacy of Bacchus is 
held up to scorn in [Justin] Orat. ad 
Gent. 2 (p. 38) Avovdcov rò Ondvkév, 
Arnob. vi. 12 ‘Liber membris cum 
mollibus et languoris feminei disso- 
lutissimus laxitate’, Firm. Matern. 
7, 12, Clem. Hom. v. 15. 

Tois Ta 'IMov x.t.A.| The ‘Laome- 
donteae perjuria Trojae; when Posei- 
don and Apollo the builders were 
defrauded of their wages; Clem. 


A af 
TOUTOLS UVuwV EVXOVTAL 


olko- 


Tavpov V ; om. [A]. 5 kal 
kal kókvov] VA ; 
9 ów] here, LP; before 


Alex. Profr. 2 (p. 30) Aaopé8ovr. Ó 
eOnreve IIooeidàv kai ' AmóAXov, kaÜámep 
dxpeios oikerns, unde eAevÜepías Orjmrov- 
Oev ÓvvgÓcis rvxeiv mapa Tov mporépov 
Oeomórov* 'IA(ov Te(x 
dvokoOougcáryv TQ Ppvyi, Lactant. 
Div. Inst. i. 10 ‘Nonne [Apollo]... 
turpissime gregem pavit alienum, et 
muros Laomedonti exstruxit cum 
Neptuno mercede conductus, quae 
illi negari potuit impune etc.?’, 
Minuc. Oct. 23 ‘Laomedonti vero 
muros Neptunus instituit nec mer- 
cedem operis infelix structor accipit? 
(whose words are repeated by 
Cyprian Quod Idola etc. 2), Firm. 
Matern. 12 * Mercedem fabricatorum 
murorum Neptunus a superbo rege 
non recipit’. Sometimes the two are 
spoken of as building the walls, 
e.g. Hom. JZ¿ vii 452 rò éyà kal 
$oiBos 'AmzoAAev pe Aaopédoyte To- 
Acccauev dOAjxoarre (comp. Pind. OZ. 
viii. 31) ; but where the story is told 
at length (ZZ. xxi. 442 sq), Poseidon 
is represented as building the walls, 
while Apollo tends the cattle. 

2. rais rà dvÜpóv k.r...] Athene 
the warrior and Artemis the hunter ; 


, ^ à 
TOTE Kal Ta 


ui] ROMAN ACTS. 509 


al *yuvaikes, iva Tyv cwppocvvny | pity puraEwow. 
ro Toaiavos eîrev: "Evo oor Tmapaitios tis eis rovs Ücovs 
Bracdnuias yéyova, pn aixiCopevos ce. 
mev Clpnkd cor kal mada, Ott éToluws Eye mpos 


5 , > 
Iyvatios ci- 


^ 34 y, \ ^ , 2 
Tacav aikiay kal gravrotov Üav&rov tpdomov, éeuÓn 


omevdw mpos Tov Otoóv. 
IV. Tpaiavos €um €v* 
Ojon. 


Thy cwppoctyyy, V. 


\ 75 ^ ^ ^ 
mpiv ouv mabeiv, perat ceavTov. 


IO 0cobs] twice in L. 


'Cav ur Ovens, peragueNn- 


Li 
"lyva ios 


II alku(óuevos] LP; atkı- 


odpevos Vs aixicapévous (or alxtfouévous) B. The nom. sing. was read by CA. 


12 mada] PVCBA ; mav Xéye L. 


Toluv Qavárov rpómov L; omnem mortem B. 


15 Ovoys] LP; ices V. 


tov V. 


comp. Justin Or. ad Graec. 2 (p. 39) 
di8dEare "AOnvay kal"Aprepuv Tü Tov 
yuvauk@v épya kai Aróvurov Tà avdpav. 
4. ets deróv x«.t.A.] The amours 
and transformations of Zeus were a 
fertile theme of invective for Christian 
writers in their attacks upon pagan- 
ism. The fullest list is in Clem. 
Hom. v. 13, from which I extract the 
particulars referred to in our martyr- 
ology, Abytvy 7j Aroro mneiudtet 
yevópevos aeros...Aavan TH “Axpioiou 
xpvaos emeppuy...Kaddorot Tfj Aukd- 
ovos 1 'yp.o6n Aéov...E)pomy Tf Poi- 
vixos Sia Taúpov cwi]AÓev. ..Neuéaet 
Ti Oeoriov, gi kal Anda vous Beton, 
KUKVOS Ü x9v yevópevos *EAévgv erek- 
vocaro.. Tlepoepovny avrós éxvuppever 
THY Óvyarépa, aùròs 6potwbets Spaxkovte 
where jj x?» is added by the author 
himself in ridicule ; comp. Clem. Re- 
cogn. x. 22. See also the invec- 
tive in Arnob. ad Nat. v. 20 sq. 
So too [Justin] Orat. ad Gent. 2 ém 
"Avrión ner ds cdrvupos, kal Aavág 
Xpveós, kal em  E)pomy ravpos jv, 
émrepoUro 0€ mapa Andg, Tertull. A pol. 
21 ‘squamatum aut cornutum aut 
plumatum amatorem, in aurum con- 


13 mavroîov Pavdrov Tpomov] PVCA; Tav- 
14 Tov] txt LPCAB; add. à6áva- 
16 ceavtod] PV; oavrot L. 


versum, Jovis enim ista sunt numina 
vestri’, Firm. Matern. 12 ‘deus suus 
in cygno fallit, in tauro rapit, ludit in 
satyro etc.’; see likewise Tatian Orat. 
ad Graec. 10, Athenag. Suppl. 20, 21, 
Clem. Alex. Profr. 2 (p. 31), Tertull. 
ad Nat. ii. 13, Arnob. vii. 33, Lactant. 
Div. Inst. i. 11, Epit. 10, 11, Euseb. 
Theoph. ii. 15, iii. 61, with the verses 
of Greg. Naz. Of. II. pp. 366, 456, 
ed. Caillau (see the commentary of 
Cosmas in Migne’s ed. of Greg. Naz. 
Op. IV. pp. 404 sq, 580 sq). The 
passage of Homer (ZZ xiv. 315 sq), 
in which Zeus mentions his various 
loves, is quoted by [Justin] Cok. ad 
Graec. 3 (p. 3) and Athenag. Suppi. 
21. For the transformation into the 
dragon, which marked the climax of 
this god's turpitude, see esp. Clem. 
Flom. v. 14, Tatian Or. ad Graec. 10, 
Athenag. Suppl. v. 20, Clem. Alex. 
Protr. 2 (p. 14), Arnob. v. 21. The 
eagle is connected in Clem. Hom. v. 
13 (quoted above) with Ægina, but 
other Christian writers associate it 
with the better known myth of 
Ganymede. 


510 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [1v 


eizev: Ci un èpeðounv éuavrob, émolouv Ó MPOTETATTES. 
Tpaiavos etmev: Tats pohuPiow aixicacbe avtov Ta 


ueradpeva. 
rov eis Oeóv robov. 


"Iyvatios etrev? *Errérewas poi, Baoirev, 


.. 7 ^ af ` 

Tpaiavos eimevt Tots ovu€t Tas 
^ [74 , 

mAeupas avTou kacra£avae kat dAaT. avatpivvate. 


e e ^ M M / 
’lyvárıos eîrev' "ONos jov ó vous mpos Ocov avaTeTaTat, 


1 9] LVC[A][B]; & P. 
alkicac0c] LP; aixicare V. 
num A; év kuply LP. 

Aart] LP; 
Tov Oedy P. 


2 poNvBicw] L; podroBlow P; modiBéow V. 
4 els Ocdv] VB; in christum C; ad domi- 
Tots óvu£&] LPVB ; ferrets unguibus AC. 
&Xcw V; sale CA; lapidibus asperis B. 
drvarérarai] VP; rérara L. 


8 d- 
6 Oeòr] LV; 
8 oris 0cois] txt LPVC.A ; 


add. haec verba enim nihil proderunt tibi Cm; add. nam ista praesumptio non 


te juvabit B; see below p. 512, 1. 2. 
PVCAB; om. L. 


Nevers we O0cat] here, PVCAB ; reede we Ovew after motos 0eots, L. 


2. porrvBiow] ‘leaden bullets’, 
attached to the thongs of the lash ; 
comp. Basil. Hom. zm Gord. Mart. 
4 (Op. 1I. p. 145) káXei, hyoi, Snutovs* 
mov O06 ai podrvBides; mod dé ai pd- 
ottyes; Passio S. Acaczi Š 11 (quoted 
in Ducange Gloss. s.v.) ó Stkaoris 
eiev, KAácare 


poXvBtaw. 


avTov Tas cwuvyóvas 
Previous editors have 
altered the form into podvBdiow 
here. The insertion of the 6 is un- 
necessary: see the note on [Clem. 
Rom.] ii. 16, p. 332. Whips so 
weighted were called Alumbatae in 
Latin; see Gothofred on Cod. Theod. 
Ix 5 (Le p270): 

9. mois Alyumriav kz] The 
animals here enumerated are; the 
calf (Bovdiov) the emblem of Osiris, 
called Apis at Memphis (Herod. ii. 
38, iii. 27 sq) and Mnevis at Heli- 
opolis (Plut. Mor. p. 364, Diod. Sic. i. 
84, 88); the goat Mendes of the 
Mendesian nome (Herod. ii. 42, 
46, Diod. i. 84, Strabo xvii. p. 802, 
812); the ibis sacred to Thoth, at 
Hermopolis (Herod. ii. 67, 75) ; the 
ape, the cynocephalus (Strabo xvii. 


IIoto:s 0cots$] LPCAB ; om. V. Taxa] 
9 Abyvrriov] LP; ray abyvrriov V. KE- 
Bov- 


p. 812, Horapollo i. 14—16) and the 
cercopithecus (Juv. Saz. xv. 4), the 
former certainly, the latter apparently, 
sacred to Thoth, at Hermopolis and 
at Thebes; the asp sacred to Neph, at 
Thebes (Plut. Mor. p. 380 sq, comp. 
Herod. ii. 74); the wolf sacred to 
Osiris (?), at Lycopolis (Plut. Mor. 
p. 380, Diod. i. 88, Strabo xvii. p. 
812); the dog supposed to have 
been sacred to Anubis, at Cynopolis 
(Herod. ii. 67, Diod. i. 87, Plut. Mor. 
368, Strabo xvii. p. 812); the lion sa- 
cred to Djom, at Leontopolis (Strabo 
xvii. p. 812, Diod. i. 84, Plut. Aor. 
p. 366); the crocodile sacred to 
Savak, in Crocodilopolis and the 
Arsinoite nome (Herod. ii. 69, 148, 
Strabo xvii p. 811, Diod. i. 84, 
89); some of these animals being 
also worshipped throughout Egypt. 
A convenient list of the animals of 
Egypt, sacred and not sacred, is 
given in Wilkinson’s Ancient Egyp- 
tians V. p. 116 sq. The following are 
among the references to the animal 
worship of Egypt in early Christian 
writers ; Clem. Hom. vi. 23, x. 16 


on 


IO 


rv] ROMAN ACTS. 


gin 


\ a , / > Ley 
Kat wy Tacyw OYyov ov T7rouOUMqL. 
Ovcov Tots Ocois. 


Tpatavos eizev: 
"Iyvatwos eirev: [lolos Ocot; Taxa 
Tots Aiyurtiwy Kedevers ue Boat Bovdiw kal Tpayw, 
(Bid kai mOjnkw Kal doli tofoNo, 5j Aúkw kai KUVL, 


, \ 74 ^ ^ ^ D 
Aéovri Kal kpokoOetAo, N TO Flepou@ rupi i 0aXac'ans 


õlu] P; Bot LV. rpáyq, 186] hirco, ibidi B; tpd-yw. 7B. V; Tparyw kal i89 P; 
rpáywo 3j iby L; Airco A; hirco et ibidi C (oe obo in Cm, but read ovorhovs). 

IO Ti82ko] Vs; miky L; T00(ko P. orl] P; kal ác tóc. LV[C]A ; 
aut aspidz [B]. 7 Miko] LP; e lupo C; lupo BA; om. V. kvvt] 
LP; kuv V. rr Aéovri] LPVC ; om. BA. kpokoüetNo] LVCAB ; 
Kpoxodt\w kal kükvc P. TO IIepewd mpi] add. guem adoravit heraclitus (heraclius 
Cs, eracledes Cm). There is no trace of this addition in the other authorities ; see 
the lower note. 7 Oardoons tarı] LPC, (but om. 7) VAB; aut aquae thalletis 
(itea A Aue, i.e. of Thales) Cm where Cs has woadacca. After óorc add. aut 


terrae aut cereris B; add. demetri terrae A : txt LPVC. 


(comp. Clem. Recogn. v. 20), Athenag. 
Suppl. 1, Theoph. ad Autol. i. Io, 
Clem. Alex. Protr. 2 (pp. 34, 39) 
Paed. iii. 2 (p. 253), Tertull. ad Nat. 
ii. 8, adv. Mare. ii. 14, Orig. c. Cels. 
i. 20, vi. 80, Minuc. Octav. 28, Lactant. 
Div. Inst. v. 21, Euseb. Praef. Ev. 
iii. 4 6 sq, ii 11. 45 Sq. See 
also Orac. Sibyll. Prooem. 60 sq, v. 
73 sq, 278 sq. Celsus complained 
of the ridicule which the Christians 
threw on the animal worship of 
Egypt, Orig. c. Cels. iii. 19 «at $c 
ye pâs TOV pey Alyuntiay karayeAav, 
Kairot rroÀÀà kai où paha mapexovrov 
aiviypara x.r.A. It is strange that our 
martyrologist in his enumeration has 
omitted the scoff at the *cats and 
weasels,’ with which other early 
writers barb their invective against 
this animal worship (e.g. atÀoupot kai 
yadai, Clem. Alex. Protr. 2, p. 39). 

BovBíg] On the form see Lobeck 
Phryn. p. 86 sq. 

II. TÓ llepaiko mupt| See Clem. 
Alex. Protr. 5 (p. 56), Firm. Matern. 
5. As the introduction of Heraclitus' 
name appears only in the Coptic ver- 
sions, and can be explained by the cor- 


ruption in the Memphitic of @aAaccHe 
into @aAAHc in the next clause, which 
introduced the name of Thales and 
thus suggested the introduction of 
Heraclitus also, it should probably 
be rejected. Yet curiously enough we 
have the same connexion in Arnob. 
adv. Nat. ii. 9, 10 ‘Qui cunctarum 
rerum originem ignem esse dicit aut 
aquam, non Thaleti aut Heraclito 
credit ?...Vidit enim Heraclitus res 
ignium conversionibus fieri, concre- 
tione aquarum Thales, Lactant. Dzv. 
Inst. ii. 10 ‘Heraclitus ex igne nata 
esse omnia dixit, Thales Milesius 
ex aqua’, Tertull. adv. Marc. i. 13 
‘ut Thales aquam, ut Heraclitus 
ignem'; comp. de Anim. 5, Justin. 
Coh. ad Gent. 3 (p. 4), Clem. Alex. 
Protr. 5 (p. 55 sq). The Memphitic 
scribe has confused the name of two 
philosophers together, Heraclitus and 
Heraclides. How easy such a con- 
fusion would be, appears from Tertull. 
de Anim. 9 ‘Non ut aer...etsi hoc 
Aenesidemo visum est et Anaximeni, 
puto secundum quosdam et Hera- 
clito, nec ut lumen, etsi hoc placuit 
Pontico Heraclidi! This Heraclides 


512 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [1v 
5 e ^ £, A .. \ 
üõarı, 9 xXOoviw lIXovrewvt ñ Cou krerrn 5 Tpatavos 


Ky a [14 ^ ^ , / 
cirer  Eirov cou Ort Osov. Tata yap oe Aéyovra 


5 7 > 5 , [74 3 , 291 
ovdey óvijoet. *Iyvarwos erev: Clyróv eoi [| 871] où Ovw, ove 
- ^ ^ \ \ , e > 1 
apiorauat TOU Ocov Tov évos Kat MOVOU, OS ETOIHCEN 
TON OYPANON KAl THN TAN, THN 0AAACCAN KAl MANTAS. 


` 3 > 


^ e^ DA /, M , Z ^ ^ 
TA EN AYTolc, OS EXEL raa ns a'apkos é£ovatav, To? Oeo? 
^ n , \ 5 ^ ` 
TON TINEYMATON Kal (JaciXécs mavros aioOnToOU Kal 
^ m \ > y P , 5 ^ 
vontov.  Toaiavos eimev: Tt yap [ce] KwAver kakeivov, 
E 3 \ Z A ^ , 
cimep Eotw, eov aéBew Kal ToúTous oUs kowi mavres 
° oS e > , D ‘H \ Š , 
omodoyoumev 5 `lyuvaqus eirev: guoin dlayvwors, 1o 
[24 d , 5 / ^ 5 ^ ` ^ ^ 
örav ñ kalapa, ov cuvyKpiver TH aAnOeia TO Wevdos, TH 
\ ^ ~ \ , a ` 
wrt TO OKOTOS, TH YAUVKEL TO TIKPOV. “ot yap 


r x0ov(p] LPCA; éixPovlw V (which gives a wrong sense); om. B: see the 
lower note. IDvobro»:] LPAB ; mAdrow V; yama (oy (?) Cs; montibus Cm 
(itrTWOT). “Epun] LV; épuet P. 2 Ort 00cov] L; 00cov V ; quod 
sacrifica (i.e. Osov ox bre 00cov) CA; wa ériOdoys P; om. B. Tatra ydp oe 
Aéyovra] PV ; etenim ista dicere te A; quia ista multiloguia B; haec verba enim quae 
dicis C; öra yàp dv Xéygs L. 3 voe] dvjon P ; ce dvlynor L; ôpeňńoe (sic) 


V. There is a future in CAB. Etróv co] LVCAB; om. P. öre] 
LB; om. PV; dub. CA. 4 ToU Oeo] PV; Oeo L. 5 Tiv 
0dXaccav] VCmAB ; pref. kal C;LP, and so Dressel without any reason. 6 às 
&xe...é£ovolav] here, CAB; after ravrós aicOyrod [kal vonrod], LP V. ToU 


Oco0] róv 0cóv LPV. IF this be the original reading, the writer must have forgotten 
the beginning of his sentence. 7 kal Baoréws] kal Baoiiéa LP ; Tod Bacihéws 
V; regis (om. kal) Cs; def. Cm. The conjunction appears in AB. aicOnrod kal 
vonto] LVABCs; aic@yrot (om. kal voyroü) P; invisibilium Cm (obviously defective 
here). 8 ce] LVCAB; om. P. 9 0cóv] V[B]; Geds LPCA, but, 
though so highly supported, this is not the reading required by the sense. II TỌ 
gurl] PV; pref. ovde L; pref. e? [A][B]; pref. aut C. And so again with rà 


is mentioned also Clem. Alex. Protr. 
5 (p. 58), Hippol. Haer. x. 7, Minuc. 
Octav. 19. 

I. 7 xÓovío x.rA.] The inser- 
tion in the Armenian and Latin may 
be explained by a repetition of sylla- 
bles, so as to read $ x6ovi À xOovio 
k.T.À., or by a corruption of 4 x6ovío 
into 7) yOovi 7 x... When the men- 
tion of Earth as an object of worship 
was once introduced, the explana- 


tion ‘Demeter (Ceres)? would follow. 
Previous editors have acquiesced in 
émuxOovío : but émux0óvujoç, meaning 
férricola, is no epithet of Pluto, 
though it might be of Plato. 

4. émoínsev kq] From Exod. 
noes Tle 

6. tod Oeod róv mvevuárov| Num. 
xxvii. 16; see the note on Clem. Rom. 
58 (64). 

7. mavrós 


K&r.M.] | See Ps-Ign. 


Iv] ROMAN ACTS. 513 
TavTa un SiaKpivoveww émnpTntat TO oval. tic yao 
cyYMÓoNHcic Xpict@ mpóc BeAíap Ú tic Mepic 


ENUOnOo META àámicrOoY; Tic Ad cYrkará0ecic NAQ 
Oeco$f meta ECIADAWN; 
V T .. ^ Ld T A Aw. , ^ x ^ 
š patavos €i7rev T'AwGaGVTES AVTOU Tas yelpas 


A 7 5 \ , 5 ? F af ^ 
TT. NPWOATE auTas TUDOS. lyvarıos €ecrev* Ove TUP 


\ » y / of 
kavcTiKOV ovTe Onpiwy <dddvTes ovTE TKOpPTLO MOS 


5 A » VEE TA ^ i ^ 
20 0g Técv OVTE dXegcuoi COU TOU acopuaTOs, OVY ai TOU 
Š oN if / / ^ N \ 
taBoXou  koXdaes, ueTaoooucli, ue Ths mpos Oeov 


/ \ 2 
ayanns. Tpatavos etmev: llémvpov aiw Bavavres 


\ / 5 Ye ^ 
Kat uaXazavres, é£aN,avres Tds mAEvpas aToÜ pé- 


yuke. 12 TQ yhuxel 7d mikpóv] VAB; +ó yuke? 7d mikpóv P; TQ yuke? 
TQ mwpó L; dulce amaro C (but it transposes also, lucem tenebris). I3 ia- 
kpivovow] LP; ôrakpivovsi Vs. 14 Xporo] PVB; xpwrro0 L. Both 
readings occur in 2 Cor. vi. rs, but ypiorod is correct. BeMap] LVCA ; 
BeMav P; belial B. All three readings occur in 2 Cor. vi, 15, but BeMap is cor- 
rect. 15 dmlorov] LPCAB (as in 2 Cor. vi. 15); dalorwy V. va] 
LPCAB; vawr V. 16 perà eiàóNev] LPAB (with 2 Cor. vi. 16); kal 
eldédots V ; dub. C. 17 Tas xeipas] LP; xetpas V. 18 mAnpw- 
care] LP; micare V. avras| LP; om. V. I9 kavorikòv] LP; 
TÒ kavoTiKOv V. ckopmıouòs] VC[B] (but CB have singulars in the other 
clauses) ; cxopmicuol LP (with Rom. 5); def. A. 20 ócTÉéov] txt L; add. 
ov (offre P, oùôè C?) ovyxoral (cvykor1; C) ueXàv PVC (from Rom. s); def. A. In B 


the clauses stand zeque dissipatio membrorum. neque confractio ossium. 
dAecuol...ccparos] LPVCB (but CB have a^ecuós); om. A. 
diaBddov koMáceis] LPVAB (with minor variations in AB); om. C. 


ore 
ovx ai ToU 
21 META- 


cTrácovcw] PVC; separabit A; melowow dmoornva L; poterit me separare B 


(from Vulg. of Rom. viii. 39). 
eis L. 
&avres VÀ ; incendentes B; om. C. 


Philipp. 5 0...-mücav aicOnriv kai vonrny 
Hús karacgkevdaas. 

8.. kdketvov  k.r...]] This was a 
compromise which the  heathen 
apologists constantly put forward 
in the declining years of polytheism; 
see e.g. Macar. Magn. Afacr. iv. 20, 
26, where this father replies at length 
to the ‘sophism’ that Oeós oùk àv 
povápxns kvpíes exAnOn, ei py edv 
Tpxe- 

IGN. II. 


rhs] PV ; ¿mó rhs L. mpos| PV ; 


23 kal waddéavtes, é£áyavres] L; kal waddéavres é£diiare kal P; kal 


13. Tó ovat] So Dionys. Corinth. 
in Euseb. ZZ. Z. iv. 23 ois rd oval 
keitat. 

tis yàp k.r.À.] From 2 Cor. vi. 15, 
16,a passage which is also quoted in 
Ps-Ign. EZes. 16. 

I8. Oire mip «.r.A.] Adapted from 
Rom. 5. 

22. iale KTA.) Euseb. Mart. 
Pal. 4 Xivois eraig Ocüevuévois TO móe 
avrod Kadiwpaytes rip vparrov k.r.À. 


eo 


514 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [v 


£are. '[eyvdrios eîmevt Aoxeis uot, BacWev, dyvoetv, 
dr. Ocóc év éuol (9v otw, ds Kal Ovvapuv emrxopnyet 
wor kal OTEPpOTTOLEL THY uxny pou o) yap dv oios TE 
nen pepe cov Tas Bacavous. Tpaiavós emer" Ciò- 
peos TAXA TIS eî kal dmegkNnukos: 5 yap àv EVEOLOWS 
Nourdv, Tos mwAw Ww dAyuVopEvos, Orar Tots Geots. 
'"Iyvários eirev:. Oux ws un aig Üavouevos, Basiret, TOV 
Bacavwy pépw kai kaprepao TavTas, GAN ÈNTIÒL TOV 
pedNovTwv deyaÜdv Tis mpos Qeov evvolas émtkovd- 
Covens mov Tas dóvvas* oUre yap Tip PAéyov ovTE 
UOwp émukAvCov oBéoa morè Suvycetat THY mpos Oeov 
uov dyamnv. Tpaiavos eimev: ’Cvéykavres Up Kal 
dmAwoavTes eis TO EOados THY dvÜpoktav, oT5caTe ÈT 


5 ` M > , [74 » [74 05 P te \ 
arv Tov ‘Iyvatiov, tva kav ovTws eun cigal MOL kat 


2 Ocós] LP; 6 Oeds V. ¢év] LPCA ; vita (fw) B; om. V. èri- 
xopnye? mo] LP (émexwprye? P); uot. émexopyye V. 3 arepporroet] P ; 
oreporoe? L; oreppàv moe? V 5 confortat BA ; facit...novam C pov] here, 
LP; before tiv Wux7y, V. où] LP; otre V. 4 onpeos] ccónpatos 
P; ctdnpods L; cups V. 5 dmeckAnkws] V; dmeokNuós L; åre- 
okAnpuxas P. évedldws] LP ; évedidovs V. For these parallel forms see 
Veitch Greek Verbs s. v. 61d6w, Ol0cju. 6 porwpw] P; uóNoyw LV. 
bsa] PV; kal &0ves LA; dub. C; al. B. 8 raíras] here, P; after 
pépw, L; raüra here, V. &Nr(à....drya0 Gv] LP (but ére) for éXrtóc P) ; 
é\rldu rv ayabay after evolas, V. The word ueNXMóvrov is represented in CAB. 

9 THs] LP; ws THs V ; al. ABC. ro uov] LV[B]; wor P; om. [A]; al. 
(v préyov] PV; kará$Xeyov L. obre sec.] PV; obx L. The ver- 
sions have a conjunction, but in such a case they have no weight. 
ayarnv] LP[A]B]; &y&vm«v (om. pov) V. 


I2 pov 
14 Tov '"Lyvártov] here, 


3. orepporoet] The word occurs 
Polyb. v. 24. 9, and elsewhere. 

4. idnpeos| Euseb. Laud. Const. 
I6 8 11 ris ovTw oidnpios THY puy ; 


I (Of. I. p. 422) ñv py wodAAR TH THs 
coppoovyns avotnpornti ameokAnkvia 
Tux) [y vvxy] So Hesych. dres- 
kAgkós: — dvawgÜjros xov. Hence 


For the form see Steph. Thes. s. v. 
p. 224 (ed. Hase et Dind.), Lobeck 
Phryn. p. 208. I have adopted it 
here, because it explains the read- 
ings of all the Mss. 

5. dmeokAgkós] ‘hardened, obdu- 
rate} as e.g. Chrysost. de Sacerd. vi. 


mpos idocodpiay...dmeckAnkoT@s “xet, 
Synes: EfZst. 138, p. 275 (see Lo- 
beck Phryn. 119). In its primary 
physical sense it is not uncommon; 
eg. Euseb. H.E. ix. 8 of pév are- 
okAnkoTes domep ei0oAa vekpà ade 
kàkeige Yrvxoppayobvres. 


v] ROMAN ACTS. 515 


15 Orar ois Üeois. To kavowOv coU 


TUpOS Tov eis a aa Me àyet TOD aiwviov kal ao Bé- 
OTOU TUOS, KalT OL TPOTKaLpoOV Ov. 


5 , > 
ag as eT €v* 


Toaiavos eîrev 
Bo: YONTELA TE TI karappoveiv Tov Bacdver " 
yap av eiEaus "uv -ocaUra map ruav aixirbels. 

20“Iyvarios eimev? Oi Saiuovas a7roo-Tpedbouevot ws dro- 
ordras Oeo kal elwa Pòõervorópevoi TS Qv elev 


yónTes, Eiré [uoi]. pets yap urov oi Tara c'e3o- 


^ á / e Sb 
evot Tois ToLovTols AoiQopruaatv UmOkeioÜe: jul 8€ 
z \ JESS va jm `í 
vevomobeTnTat bapuakoyc u) èv Cv unóé ènaoiaoyc 
M t 2 ^ \ ,' 
25 NOE KAHAONIZOMENOYC, GÀÀG kal TON TA TEPIEpra 
TPATTONTON TAC BIBAOYC karakaíeiN ElwOapEY as 
5 / > a > \ Z DG ^ ° 
ETLOPNTOUS.  OUKOUV OUK yw *yOns, aAN Upeis oi 7rpoo- 
LV; after er$care, P. Kav] LPC; kal V; wel B; saltem A. 
cita] PV ; reoOels het L; credat et.. consentiat B; mebn (om. <a C; al. A. 
Perhaps we should read reels elta. Hot] EBC:; wou P; om. VCg; 
al. A. 15 bca] PV; Aca L. 16 T00.. 
ToÜ mupds Kal aiwvlov kal dcécrov V ; ignis (veri) aeterni et inextinguibilis C ; 
verissimi ignis [B]; inextinguibilis ignis [A] (the sentence being greatly altered). 
18 yonreia oé rui] P, and so app. C ; guod incantator es et A; yonrelas éort V; hoc 
maleficiorum esse B; *yogrelav eva Tó L, 7j yap] h yàp V ; 7j yap P ; ¿met L, 
19 eéas] PV ; 7£as L. 21 eócAa] PV; eióoAa L. 22 wo] L VG ; 
om. PB; def. A. TaÜra] here, PL; after padov, V. 23 Noro- 
puas] LPC[A]B; Anpwdjuacw V. 24 &dv] PV; édy L. 25 KNN- 
Oovifouévovs] V ; ANREDE UU L; kMOorifouévovs P. 27 émupWous] L; 
émapárovs P ; dor oppyiraus V ; corruptores A; quos et audire execramur B (apparently 
a combination of dzoppijrovs and pace sc pes (G oi] LP; om. V. 


meum 


.mupós] LP; éxelvov 


, ^ > , / 3 , 
COpevos kal otoviópevos, þappakós, eTa- 


I6. rov aiwviov k.T..]] See Mart. 
doy emaodny K.r.A.; comp. Exod. xxii. 


Polyc. 11 6 0e WodvKapros* Tp ámreiAets 


TO TpPÒS opav KaLopevoy k.T.À. 

23. odopynuacw] The sense seems 
to require this word here; but in 
Suidas s.v. Aeóvrios the word Agpoe- 
dypara occurs without any v.l., and 
in Anast. Sin. Hodeg. 8 (p. 60) ro 
moÀvÓp/AMgróv cov Anpwdnua seems 
certainly to be right. 

24. dappakovs x.7.A.] Deut. xviii. 
- IO Sq oUx evpeOjoerat ev col...kAnOovt- 


I8 dappakovs ov mepuroujcere. 

25. tov rà K.T.\.] See Acts xix. 
I9, whence the words are borrowed. 

27. émiwprrovs] ‘infamous’; as 
Euseb. ZZ Æ. ix. 5 émippnra Tua 
yuvackapia eÉ dyopâs k.r.A., V. C. iii. 
55 Gppyroi Te kal Émíppyrow mpáées 
(comp. Z. C. 8). The word occurs 
in this sense as early as Xen. Oecoz. 
4. 2 at ye Bavavorkai Kadovpeva [réy- 


33—2 


516 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [v 


a A 7 SONNEN 5 A N? es 
kvvoUvres Tois Oai(uocuw.  Tpaiavos eimev 5 TOUS 
5 M , \ 5 Ga 
Geos, “Iyvarte, amékapov eis oe Aowrov, kat dopo 
/ \ V ^ / 3 
molars xpiicoual cor Baravois mpos TO WELT TE cigar 
, < N y 
TOS TPOTTATTOMEVOLS OOL. "Iyvatios eirrev? Mn xapve, 
^ N M / N £ , » ^ 
Bacirev, aAN m Tupi mapadioov N Eier TEMVE n Bula 5 
of 5N , 5 Ol e 05 e/ / RAE 
¿kpurTe ñ Onpiois ¿kólÓou, tva. meals OTL TOVTWV "piv 
\ \ \ \ \ 5 7 
ovdey Sewov Sia Tyv mpos Oeov ayarny. 
. \ > 5 / 3 , , 
VI. Tpaiavos eimev: Tiva éNmr(óa exdexn, lyvartıe, 
° / (a , e 7 / 
TovTois évazoÜviakcov ois TATXWY UTOMEVELS, OUK EXW 
2 ^ M \ £ 
Neve. “Iyvarios eîmevt Oi deyvooüvres Tov émi TayTwY t 
\ \ \ , e ^ 5 ^ M > ^ 
Ocov kai Tov Kúpiov [ñun] Incovv Xpirtov a&yvoovow 
e ES , £ e 
kal Ta Toquacpéva ois evoeBeow  deyaÜa: 00ev év- 
^ , / \ e 5 ^ <> ° \ 
Talla povov AoyiCovTat THY UTAapEW avTov eat wS kat 
- > y , SM \ ^ \ \ 3 £ Š 
Tdv ddoywy Çwwv, ovdev 0€ kpe?rrov pera Tyv évÜevóe 


> ` , € ^ \ e £ \ 
aTrahAayny pavracovra. nuets ÒE oL YIVWOKOVTES THY 1 


i vù Tobs 0eoús] P; maroùs (for uà rous) 0coós L; per deos CAB: os 


feoùs V. 2 els oè Nouróv, kal] P; eis cë Kal Nouróv V ; XNouróv els cë kal 
L; els oè kal (om. Aourdv) A; els cé C ; al. B. 3 Got Bacávoss] P ; Bacávots 
kara coü L; Bacdyos V; al. B; def. C. ela] PV ; héa L. 4 co] 
V5 ce P; om. L. 6 ékpurre] LP; émíppurre V. 7 mpos cov] 
PV; els róv 0cóv L; dei BA ; in deum Cs; in christum meum Cm. aydrny | 
PVAB; quay ayarny L. 8 éxdéxn] LP; éxdéxer V. 9 ëxw] LVB[C]; 
&xov P; def. A. TO TOV éml...... Kip judy I. X.] LPB (but P om. 74v); 


deum qui super omnia et logon ejus (add. viventem Cm) jesum (add. christum Cy) domi- 
num nostrum C; deum A; Tov Pedy Tov éml mrávrov kÜpvov p.v Y. X. V. 


I1 dyvo- 
odow] LP; dyvootc. V. 12 Tots evoeBéow] LPAB; om. V; al. C, 


13 pó- 


va] kai émíppygro( eic: Shave an ill kaorñpas k.r.A., of the sufferers under 
name. In Pollux iii. 139, v. 159, vi. Diocletian. 
127, its synonyms are érifógros, èri- 25. oonuépar x.r..] Euseb. Prae. 
peprrros, émovetüurros, erioyos. This — Ev. i. 3. 10 sq eiaéri re viv avfer kai 
reading is to be preferred here, both emio...) re... ékkAo(a...Oofa(ouévg 
as being the most difficult and as ex- re donpépar kai els dzravras Tà voepov 
plaining all the others. kal évOeoy $ós...àmaorpamrovca k.r.À. 
5. ij mup Kk.z.A.] See Euseb. H.E. 26. karà TO aùrò x.r.A.] Euseb. 
viii. 14 dvarAávres mip kal oíünpov Kai Ep. ad Caesar. 10 (Of. IL 1544, 
mpoonrodcers Onpas re dypiovs kai Óa- Migne) dvvdper mávra ğvros dei re Kara 
Aarrns BuOovs dmworouás re peddv kai — rà atta kai doattws eyovros. Our 


20 


25 


vi] ROMAN ACTS. 57 


evoéBevav louev Ori. pera ñv évreüUev. dmadrdayhy 
avacTavTes aidioy Conv éFouev év Xpiot@ dveri 
kat adiadoyov, nS dTéOpa oduyn Kat Av» Kal OTEVAY MOS. 
Tpaiavos etmev: “Ey karaNvoas Uudv tiv aipeotv 
dwakw vuas cwdpovely kal un SiapayerOar Tots ‘Pw- 
Maiwy oyası. “lyvatios eîmev Kal ris Svvarat, 
Baoirev, oikoðounvy Oeo Katadioa Kav [yap] èr- 
XEtonon Tis, ovdev mAéov avr mapet ij TÒ Oeoudyov 
eivai. 6 yap ypirTiaucpos OÚ uóvov où KaTadvOnceTaL 
úro avOpwrwy, dXN oonuépa Övvduet XpiToÜU eis 
avEnow émidwoe kal uéyeÜos* kard TO avTO Kal wrav- 
TWS ëxwv mpoKowel, NapTpoTnToOs O OÙ Kal TEUVOTNTOS 
ékAduwV uapuapvyds* mAHCOHCETAI YAP ñ CÝMTACA 


TOT rNÓÀNa!| TON Kypion, óc YAWP TOAY KAaTa- 


vov] here, LP[C;][B] (where the sentence is altogether mistranslated) ; after eiva., 


V5 om. A; def. Cn. kai] PV; om. LIC]; dub. A; al. B. 14 COo] 
PV[A]; om. L (but the parchment is torn) ; al. BC. kpeirrov] LA; bonum C ; 
mAéov PV; def. B. év0évàóe] LV; évreü0ev P. 17 àveANur] LV ; 
dvekXeur1j P. 19 r5» alpeow] PVC; Thv alpeow kal rhv Opynoxelay L; cultum 
et haeresin A; def. B. 22 olkodouyv 0co0] LP; 0€00 oikodouny V. yap] 
EVA: om. PC def. B; 23 mMéov avro] LP; avrQ mAéov V. | úT- 
áp£e] LP ; jmápxe: V[A] ; def. B. There is a future in C. 25 dvOpwrwr] 
LP; rov dv0pómcv V. 26 émiodce] PVC(?)A (but a pres. tense); om. L; def. 
B. rò aŭro] LP; ra aura V. 27 Tpokóye] LPCA ; mpoxorny V ; def. 
B. 28 éx\durwy)] LP; éxAdumouca V. $ ovpraca] P (with Is. xi. 9 LXX) ; 


h ovumaca yh L; cúuraca ù yn V ; def. B. The word zerra appears in CA. 


author is very Eusebian in his lan- agrpamtotoas pappapvyás, Vit. Const. 
guage in this passage, as elsewhere. iii. Io. 


Probably xai has been omitted before mAgsÓjcera, yàp] From Is. xi. 9 
xara in our text, as frequently; see — évezArjo6r k.7.A. 
Clement of Rome p. 448, Appendix. 29. karakaAoNra,] For this opta- 


28. pappapvyás] Euseb. Zaud. tive of hypothesis comp. Deut. xe. 


2 M > ^ 
Const. 1 Š 1 pôs @ dup’ aóróv åra- II ds derós ckemácat voooiay avrov. 


erpámrov dpprrow dkrívev pappapv- It seems to be commoner with cel, 
yais, Š 2 róv aud’ aùròv pappapvyais Num. xxii 4, Deut. xxviii. 29, etc. 
(comp. 12 Š 12), Epist. ad Const. (Op. See Thiersch de Pent. Vers. Alex. 
IL 1545, Migne) ras rocaírgs déias p.101. For its use in classical writers 
re kal déns Tas dmoariABovoas kai am- see Jelf 8 426, Kühner Il. p. 191 sq. 


518 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vi 


KaAYwai Baddccac. OÚ kads Oé, QaciXeU, aiperw 
dmokahéls TOV ypıoTianouóv: TOAU yap alpegis xpt- 
TTIAVITMOU KEXWpLTTAL. xYpLETLavopos Sé TOU ÖVTWS 
övros OcoU ériyvwois rrt kai TOU povoryEevous vioU 
aUTOU Kal THs kara GapKa oikovouias aUTOU Kai mun- 
Tews, TUVETOMEVWY Kal TOV THS TONTELAS KADY T 
dóiaN-eva Tc Üpnokela. Tivas 06 uwv éqvos COTAT Kal 
vONeuov ayaTwvTas, oUxi O6 Ugooraocopuévovs apyou- 
ow, €v ois dkivüvvos 1j UToTay), óuovooUvras eipnvuas 


5 ^ ^ ^ 5 / ` > Ü ^ 
év Tots QuAuKOlS, TACIN agroTivyUvTas TAC ódelA ac, TH 


1 6é] LPA; yàp V; om. C; def. B. 3 Kexwpicrat] A description of 
heresy follows in C, which is not found in the other authorities. òè] LPC; yàp 
VA; al. B. Üvrws üvros] P; övros övrws V 5 existentis in veritate C; veri 
[B]A; óvros L. 5 olkovoulas] LCA; ériügutas PV; conversationem. B. 
punoews| LP; mysteriorum doctrinae bonae A; jwovaées V; moyses B (see the 
lower note); al. C. 6 cwerouévay] PV; émouéyo L. TOV TÍjs] 
LP; rijs TQ» V. 7 ddiavetorw Opnoxela] LP; aw evora Opuwkela (sic) V. 
There is a lacuna from this point to nearly the end of the chapter in Cm. rlvas] 
LP; riva VAB; guemnam Cs. 8 dàyamGvras] L; &yarârv PV. ox 
06] LV; ¿ÀN oix P. 9 & ois] LP (as in Ps-Antioch. 11); ubi B; quatenus A; 
ots. V ; al. Cg. ójtovooüvras] P; óuovootvres LV. elpnvuik@s] PV; elpuixds L. 
IO $Uwkoós] LPBA; $vAákos V; al. Cs. The sentence is rendered loosely & 
consensus noster est in pace et amore vivere erga nos invicem in A, but Zahn’s conj. 
(fjv kal didixGs for év rois Pidtxots is not needed. Tücw] here, P; kal 
mücw here, L; mc after àmorelvovras, V. The conjunction is omitted in [B][C.]. 


I. où kaAós de k.r.à.] This mode without a reference to the previous 
of speaking would hardly be intelligi- —catechetical instruction; and so oí 
ble to Trajan or his contemporaries. pvovpevor, of pepunpévor, 20. vi. 15, vii. 
The word atpeg:s was neutral, like our 22 6 els róv avtod Odvaroy pvovperos, 
‘persuasion,’ and had not necessarily vii. 38 of karà Xpuordy pepvnpévon viii, 
any depreciatory sense. More than 8, while of dutnrovare ‘the unbaptized’ 
two centuries later Constantine in vii. 25. Of baptism also it is used 
Eusebius (Æ. Æ. x. 5. 21) expresses Sozom. ZZ. Z. i. 3 dpwfjrows pèv pinow 
his displeasure at those who are xarà róv vópov rìs éxkdynotas, rois 8€ 
making schisms by separating from pepvnpévois TÓ uù áu apapreiv, and 
‘the Catholic heresy’ (r?s aípécees in other writers. No sense can be 


THs kaÜoAukrs arodiicrac Oat). extracted from the reading Moucées, 
5. punoews| ‘initiation? i.e. in- which is retained by previous editors. 
struction in His Gospel and admis- 7. Ééyves] On the difference in 


sion to His Church. In Apost. Const. meaning of ywoéoxew with the infin. 
vii. 42 púņots is used of baptism, not (‘to judge’) and with the part. (‘to 


5 


vi] ROMAN ACTS. 519 


TON DóÓpoN TON OdOPON, TH TON $ÓóBoN TON $0BoN, 
TH TO TÉAOC TO TÉAOC, TA THN TIMAN THN TIMHN, 
/ \ > ' > > 
OTEVÕOVTAS MHAENÌ MHAEN OPEIAEIN H TO AFATÁN 
> , , ` ` ^ . ^ 
AÀAAHAOYC; dedidayueba yao Tapa Tov Kupiou Hwy 
A 7 ` , > ^ H \ \ > \ 
I5 My MOVOY TON TTAHCION AT AT ÁN, aia Kal TON €YOPON 
> ^ \ Y ^ > A 3 
EVOP ETEN Kat TOYE MICOTNTAC ATAMAN KAL eYye- 
CÓAI YTEP TAN ETHPEAZONTWN HMAC KAl AIMKONTON. 
, / , \ ^ ^ 
TL dé OOL TPOTEKPOVTEY TO TOU XpPLOTLAVLO MOV KnOUY Ma, 
5 , of 5 , 7 , / / 
é£OTe npEaTo, eimé. apa pn Ti vemrepov cuUBEBnKeEV 
E \ \ * P, 7 > Abe ex > \ \ e , 5 
20 EML TNV wualwv aQXHvs5 OUXL oe sj ToNvapyXla Ets 


åmorlvvuvras] dmotivywres P; dmorwviovres L; dmoreivovras V. TQ] 
LP[A]BC, (as in Rom. xiii. 7); ros V. So in all the four places. II TQ TOV 
pbBov Tov péßov] here, LV (but V has rots) B; after ras peds, P; after rò réXos, 


AC, (with Rom. xiii. 7). 
ABCs; om. P. 
PVABG;; om. L. 


plov uv] txt PB; add. inood xpicrod LV; christo Cs; domino A. 


mAnolov] PVBC;; Tovs Anolov LA. 
Tovs éx0povs LA. 


12 TQ TO TÉNos TO réNos] LV (but V has rois) 


I3 omevdovras] PV; omevdovres L. bender] 
3] PV; e uh L (with Rom. xiii. 8). I4 Kv- 
15 Tov 


Tov éx0pàv] PBCs; rv éxOpav V; 


16 ebepyerév...&yamüv] LPB; kal evepyeretv (or 


evrroetv) Tos pucoÜvras ACs; evmorety kal evepyerety robs pucotvras 7juüs V. 


edyecbar}] PV; mpoce’xecba L. 
mpocékpovaev] LP; mpocéxpovce V. 
P; é£órov LV. 
PV; cuvéBy L. 
ápxi» popalo L. 


perceive, discover’) see Kühner II. 
p. 629 sq. The reading here how- 
ever is doubtful. 

8. únoraooopévovs x.t-A.] Comp. 
Ps-Ign. Antioch. 11, from which the 
words appear to be taken; see p. 380. 

IO. maow tas dpeidas x.7.A.] From 
Rom. xiii. 7, 8. 

15. pù) póvov k.A.] See Matt. v. 
43, 44, Luke vi. 27, 28. 

^ 20. ojyi8é xr.A.]] The argument 
is used by Melito Fragm. 1 énavOnca- 
ca d¢ [j Kal” ruas prrocogia] rois aoís 
Zoveot karà tiv Avyovorov ToU co 
mpoyóvov peyadny dpyjv, éyewj8n pa- 
Mora rj oj Bacireia aiowy dyaóv. 


ciré] txt PVBA; add. wo LCs. 
20 éri] PV; wept LB. 
dé] txt LP; add. kal V; add. potius B; al. Cs. 


18 dé] PV; yáp L[B]; om. ACs. 
700] LP; om. V. 19 é£óre] 
cvuBéfnkev] 

‘Pwualtwv ápx5v] PV[B]; 


ékrore yap eis péya kai Aagmpóv TÒ 
€ , > , , 
Papaioy nvéyO@n kpádros x.r.X., pre- 
served by Euseb. H.£. iv. 26. See 
also Orig. c. Cels. il. 30 mA Oos eiprj- 
uns yéyovev apEdpevoy dmó Ths yeverews 
avroð, evrpemifovtos Tov Oeo? rf) didac- 
, > ^ N o» to fae € \ e , 
kaAíg avrod rà €Oyn, iv dro Eva yévgrat 
^ € , (A ^ M M ` 
râôv ‘Papaiwy Baowéa, kai pù dua TÒ 
mpopdcer rev TodkGy BaciXeidy. Öpik- 
rov rv éOvev mpós aAAnAa k.r.À....kal 
+ [4 ^ ` > , 
cadQés ye Ott Kara THY Avyovarov Pası- 
Aeíav 6 Inos yeyevunrat, Tod, iv otras 
> $. € , ` ^ , 
dvopác o, opaA(cavros dua «às BaciAcias 
rovs mOoAAoUs Tov emt ys. The argu- 
ment is dwelt on elsewhere by Euse- 
bius, Zheoph. ii. 65 sq, iii. r, 2, V. 52, 


520 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vr 


povapylay uerémecev; Kal Auyouoos 6 Tros TpOry ovas 
ep oU ò NMETEPOS TOTP éréxOn ék rapÜévov KaL éye- 
-vero 6 mowny Oeos Adyos kal &vÜpwrros Oi judas, povov- 
ovyi aiwva ONov éBacirevoev, vevrikovra OAOIS vav- 
TOIS Kal ENTA Tpos pnolv QAXAotS eË KpaTnoas TNS 5 
‘Pwpuaiwv apxüs, kai uovapxncas ws ovdels érepos THY 
mTpo a/TOU; oU zv QUXov avTw UreTayn, Kal m mTpo- 
Tépa dpuüfía Tdv éÜveov kai TO mpos aAHAOUS avTwV 
picos dueNvOn ék THS TOU o'wrüpos rjuov émiónpías ; 


VII. 


3 kai] LPB (but with a v. 1.); d» V; al. A; al. Cs. 


° , D \ ^ [74 af 
H auykAntos eizev: Nai, raUTa ovTws EVEL, 


4 Oras éviavrois] 


PV; öňovs éviavrods L. 5 ém7a] LPVBC;; sex A. ë] 
sex A; érrà PB[Cs]; om. LV. 6 'Pouatev] LP; ràv boualev V. 

7 kal 7 k.T.A.] Cm resumes here. mpotépa] LP; mpérepov V. 8 trav 
é0vóv] here, LV (written é0óv in V); before dutta, P; al. C. rò] txt 
PV[B]A[C]; add. mpórepov L. avrav] LP; om. V. II ebmras] 


V; dixisti CAB; dfs LP. 
sed illud B. 


Praef. Ev. i. 4, v. 1, Dem. Ev. iii. 7. 
30 sq, Laud. Const. 16; see also his 
Comm. im Ps. quoted below in the 


adAG roüro] LVCA; AN’ ékelvo (sic) P; 
13 eUmev] txt LPVA; add. et guid fecit incongruum Bs et 


tion of his sole sovereignty, povapx7- 
cas af’ o) mpos TH "Akrío évixnoe Téo- 
capa kal recgapákovra érn Oekarpugv 


note on oí zuérepo. Aóyo.. Comp.  7epóv Oéovra. The whole term of 
Dante Monarch. i. 16 (17). power might be said to extend over 
4. mevrüjkovra K.r.A.] | Reckoned jovovovyt alva Non: for aidv cor- 


from the death of Julius Caesar, as in 
Jos. Ant. xviii. 2. 2 émra 8€ kai mevrij- 
kovra TNS dpxfjs ETN, mpos ots phves ĉÉ 
"jpepaiv Ovoiv mAe(oves, rovrov Që avrÓ 
TOU Xpovov recaapeakaíiüeka érr avvíjp- 
éev 'Avrdwios. Theophilus (ad Autol. 
ill. 27) reckons it 56 years, 4 months, 
I day; Tertullian (adv. Jud. 1) says 
56 years. Eusebius in the Zecles¢- 
astical History (i. 9) makes it 57 
years; but in the Chronicon (M. p. 
139, Schoene) 56 years and 6 months. 
This last is also the reckoning in the 
Chron. Pasch. p. 360 (ed. Bonn.) 
See the next note. It was actually 
57 years, 5 months, and 5 days; see 
Clinton Fast. Hell. 111. p. 280 (276). 
Dion Cass. (lvi. 30) gives the dura- 


responds to the Latin saeculum, which 
was used loosely, sometimes denot- 
ing a generation or a third of a cen- 
tury, sometimes the period of a man’s 
life, sometimes a longer recurring 
interval such as the 110 years of the 
secular games. Jerome on Ezek. 
xxvii. 36 eis róv aiàva (Of. V. P. 324) 
says, ‘usgue in saeculum, unius sae- 
culi tempus ostendit, quod juxta aeta- 
tem hominis annorum septuaginta 
circulo supputatur.’ 

5. émsrà] This reading is retained 
in accordance with the preponderance 
of authorities. But the adoption of 
éé with the Armenian would bring 
our author into exact accordance 
with Euseb. Chron. l.c. and Chron. 


I: 


I5 


20 


vir] ROMAN ACTS. 521 


€ iS) | be > \ ^ 5 La) [74 
ws el7as, ldyvaTri€. arXAa TOUTO AYAVAKTOUMEV, OTL 


A) ` ` \ i? 
THY mepi Tous OMeous Opnokeiav Katédvoev. ’ lyvarıos 
5 è 7 \ /, [74 ^ 
cimev' “WU NauTpa *yepovata, WoTEp TA doYWTEPA TOV 
€Oveov kaÜvrréra£ev Trh 'Pwuaiev doyn, nv oi nué 
; n YU pXn» "v ot nuérepoi 
^ € 9 “H Gs [74 
Aoyou ci& HpáN PABAON aTOKANOUVGLY, OUTWS KAL TA TU- 
` ^ / / 2 
pavwka THs Tovnplas mvevuaTa é£ dvðpwmwv dmýňasev, 
[74 \ , / \ \ £ 
€va Kat uovov KaTayyeiAas Tov émi TavTwy Oeov. kal 
5 ^ / ` ` ^ ^ > - 
OU TOUTO povov, dňa Kal Tis Tikpas aUTOV ÓQouÀe[as 
°. , e / \ ^ af , ^ 
aT :XXa£ev, aipoBopwy Kai dvnXedv Ovrcov aitav. où 
~ 7 à ~ P ~ A > 
Tw OavaTw Tøv PiATaTwv Uuwy eveTpupwoay ; ovK 
quid malum accidit C. I4 kaOvréra£ev] P; ka0vméra£e V ; vméra£e L, 


I5 rà rvpavvikà THs movnplas mwveóuara] LPB; vim malorum et insanorum dae- 
monum. A; spiritus erroris, qui daemones sunt, tyranni existentes etc [C]; ra movnpa 


here, and mvetuara after é£jAace, V. 
åmýňacev] P; dmirace L; é£fAace V. 


V. üvrov aùrov] LV; abrGv óvrov P. 


see the lower note, 


Pasch. 1. c., with whom he is likely to 
have agreed. 

éé] I have followed the Armenian 
here, as it agrees with both Josephus 
and Eusebius. The Greek and Latin 
texts seem to have altered the num- 
ber of months to conform to the 
number of units in the years (émrá). 
The presence of the word daddos 
shows that some number had a place 
here. 

I4. of npeérepor Aóyoi] Ps. ii. 9 
Towaveis avro)s év paBdm otdnpa, 
which was interpreted as foretelling 
the Roman domination: see esp. 
Euseb. (O2. v. p. 89, Migne) ad loc. 
páB8ov è cidnpav thy “Popaioy 


> ; 
dpxny eivai dau, êmikpareoTépav yevo- 


LEVNY perà THY TOD corpos juv émi- 
paveray’ èé exeivoy yap ray kar €Om 
moAvapXlav Kal Tov karà opas €Ovap- 
xiG». karaNvÉeiw Gv 7 'Popaíov épováp- 
xnoe Baoteia k,.A. So too [Ada- 
mant.] Dial. i. (Orig. Of. 1. p. 818). 


16 è] LP; ¿mó rær V. 
19 dvndewv] LPCA(?)B; dvidéwv 
20 éverpupwcav] so LPV; 


In Clem. Alex. Paedag. i. 7 (p. 134) 
and Origen Sel. in Psalm. ii. 3 (Of. 
IL. p. 542) it is differently interpreted. 

I9. aipoßópov] See the note on 
Mart. Ant. 2 bpoBopots. 

20. everpypecay| The ‘Alexan- 
drian’ form of the 3rd pers. imperf. 
for éverpójev; comp. Bekker A zecd. 
p. 9I éAéyocav, éypáQocav, kai rà ó- 
pora “AdeEavdpeis Aéyoucu where Ly- 
cophr. Alexandr. 21 éexá(ocav is 
quoted. So John xv. 22, 24, etxocav, 
Rom. iii 13 é0oo)cav (from the 
LXX). For this form, which is more 
common in the aorist, see Kühner I. 
p. 531 sq, Winer Š xiii. p. 91 (Moul- 
ton) The correctness of the reading 
here is assured by the consistent 
accentuation in the MSS, as well as 
by the imperfects in the parallel 
clauses. Dressel substituted éverpv- 
$fcav, for which Zahn (correcting 
the false accent) writes êverpúpnoav. 


522 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vir 


éuvALois zoXéuots Us éulawov; ovK da'xnpovetv Ups 
vayyka ov yvuvoùs Oeacrpl(ovres, Kal Tas yuvatkas pav 
yvuvds ws Èv aixuadwola TOUTEVOVTES, aluagi KOL- 
youvtes THY yiv, Kal Tov kaÜapóv dépa dkaÜapatious 
r vas pri.] here, PV; after ¿uóuMots, L. 3 moumevovres] LPB (?); Top- 
mebovras VA (?); al. C. aiwacw] PV (atuacr) A (sanguine) BCm; def. Cs; 


om. L. Kowodvres] PV ; kuvoüvres L. 4 Tov Kkabapdy áépa] LPV; 
communem aerem B; arem Cm; def. Cs; omnium animas semper (del for dépa) A. 


I. éudvrlors moMépows k.r..] Eu- come across. It may have some- 


seb. Laud. Const. 9 S 2 aipact kal 
Qóvow euburtors tas éavràv émdAnpovy 
xepas, 2. 13 Š 7 Toùs avrap otkous êp- 
$vA(o:s porvvew dóvow, speaking of 
the same thing. 

5. EZkv6as] The people of the 
'Tauric Chersonese; see Strabo vii. 4 
(p. 308) rj» Tavpugv kai SkvOexnv 
Aeyouévy» xeppóvgcov, and again ot 
Tadpot, kvOwv €0vos. Comp. Tertull. 
Scorp. 7 ‘Sed enim Scytharum Dia- 
nam...hominum victima placari apud 
saeculum licuit, Athan. c. Graec. 25 
(Op. I. p. 19) Zkófa yàp oi kaXov- 
pevor lTavpetot T) map avrois mapÜévo 
kaAovpéry K.r.À. 

7. Trjv TG Kpóve x.r.A.] Cronos 
was the Molech of the Phcenicians 
and Carthaginians, to whom they 
constantly offered human victims. 
An occasion is recorded (Diod. Sic. 
xx. 14, Pescenius Festus in Lactant. 
Div. Inst. i. 21) when two hundred 
persons were sacrificed by the Cartha- 
ginians, while three hundred more 
offered themselves voluntarily for 
sacrifice. References to human vic- 
tims immolated to Saturn are fre- 
quent in the apologists; e.g. Justin 
Apol. ii. 12 (p. 50), Tertull. Apol. 
9, Minuc. Octav. 30, Lactant. Div. 
Inst. l.c., Euseb. Laud. Const. 13, 
Athan. c. Graec. 25. But this par- 
ticular sacrifice to Saturn by the 
Romans (vpeis) is not explained by 
any other passage which I have 


thing to do with the usage in prime- 
val Latium mentioned by Varro as 
reported in Macrobius .Sa£. i. 7. 31, 
“cumque diu humanis capitibus Di- 
tem et virorum victimis Saturnum 
placare se crederent propter oracu- 
lum in quo erat, kal keaAàs Aidy kal 
TQ marpi méumere ora, Herculem 
ferunt...suasisse illorum posteris ut 
faustis sacrificiis infausta mutarent, 
inferentes Diti non hominum capita 
sed oscilla...et aras Saturnias non 
mactando viro sed accensis lumini- 
bus excolentes, quia non solum virum 
sed et lumina dara significat, inde 
mos per Saturnalia missitandis cereis 
coepit? (comp. i. I1. 439) Butithe 
apologists are silent about the sacri- 
fice of this damsel. On the other 
hand they repeatedly mention a 
human victim as offered in Rome 
itself to Jupiter Latiaris even in 
their own time; Justin l c. (?), 
Tatian ad Graec. 29, Theoph. ad 
Autol. ii. 8, Tertull. Apol. 9, Scorp. 
7, Minuc. Octav. l.c, Firm. Matern. 
26, Lactant. lc. Even this last 
writer speaks of the practice as still 
existing. Nor is the statement con- 
fined to Christian apologists. Por- 
phyry also gives it as a well-known 
fact, de Abst. ii. 56 fr. ye vüv ris 
ayvoet karà THY peyadny mow TH TOÔ 
Aariapíov Aws éopr) ada(ópevov áv- 
Opemov. This passage of Porphyry is 
directly quoted by Eusebius Praep. 


vit] 


ROMAN ACTS. 


523 


5 0oXoUvres ; Epwrncate CkvÜas, ei pn TQ "Aprémde dv- 
t 


, 3! 7 ^ 5 - 
Opwrovs ¿Quoyt ravTws yap, Kav vmels apvnobe ais- 


te \ ^ , /, [4 t 
xvvouevoi Tnv TG Kpovw cpatTouerny zrapÜévov, "€A- 


&ka0apctais] LVCmB; axabapolas P; zmmunditie A; def. Cs. 


PV; @wdouvres L. 
(Jortasse...quidem, for mévrws...xdv?). 


indic. may be defended by the analogous use with édy, ray. 


5 OoXNotvres] 


6 Kady] kàv P; om. LVC; guogue (kat?) B; dub. A; 


àpvíj0e] àpveéicüe LPV, and the 
7 "EXMyves] 


LPC; pref. kal V ; praef. sed et nunc etiam A; add. quoque B. 


Ew. iv. 16. 10, and is repeated word 
for word by him without any signs 
of quotation in Laud. Const. 13, 
Theoph. ii. 64, so that he adopts the 
statement as true for his own time. 
[The last passage of Eusebius stands 
in Lee's translation (p. 123) ‘Whom 
has it escaped, that even to this time 
a man is sacrificed in the Great City 
(Megalopolis) at the feast of Jupiter 
Latiaris? For even up to this time, 
it was not only to Jupiter in Arcadia 
nor to Saturn at Carthage, that they 
all commonly sacrifice men’ etc. 
Thus translated, Eusebius is made 
to assert that the sacrifice to Jupiter 
Latiaris took place in the Arcadian 
Megalopolis. But of this extraordi- 
nary blunder he is quite innocent. 
The Syriac here freely translated ‘to 
Jupiter’ represents the Greek rois 
Avxaious ‘at the Lyczea,’ an Arcadian 
festival of Zeus. The reference to 
human sacrifices in Arcadia is quite 
a separate notice in Porphyry him- 
self (de Abst. ii. 27), and is given as 
a separate quotation by Eusebius 
elsewhere (Praef. Ev. 1. c.), though 
immediately after the mention of 
Jupiter Latiaris. Nor can we sup- 
pose that he intended to refer to 
the same sacrifice in the two suc- 
cessive sentences here. The confu- 
sion is Lee's own.] Somewhat later 
however Athanasius c. Graec. 25 (1. 
p. I9) writes of mada: ‘Papatou roy 
KaXovpevoy Aariapiov Aia avOpwrobvat- 
ats éÜpijakevov. The reason why we 


hear nothing else of it in classical 
writers seems to be explained by the 
language of Tertullian Aol. 9, ‘Ecce 
inillareligiosissima urbe Aeneadarum 
piorum est Jupiter quidam, quem 
ludis suis humano produnt sanguine. 
Sed, bestiarii, inquitis. Hoc opinor 
minus quam hominis. An hoc tur- 
pius, quod mali hominis?’ The vic- 
tim was a criminal condemned to 
the wild beasts, and this was his 
mode of execution (comp. [Cyprian] 
de Speci. 5 ‘nonnunquam et homo 
fit hostia latrocinio sacerdotis’ with 
the context). There is an interesting 
correspondence of Stanhope, Peel, 
and Macaulay, on this human sacri- 
fice to Jupiter Latiaris, in Earl Stan- 
hope's Miscellanies p. 128 sq, but it 
does not go below the surface. Ex- 
amples of human sacrifices in the 
earlier history of Rome are noticed 
by Minuc. Oczav. lc., (ritus fuit... 
Romanis Graecum et Graecam, Gal- 
lum et Gallam, sacrificii loco viventes 
obruere) Two soldiers of Julius 
Caesar also, who had mutinied, were 
sacrificed êv rpóre rwi iepovpy(as by 
the pontifices and the priest of Mars 
in the Campus Martius (Dion Cass. 
xlii 24) Tatian also (l.c.) refers to 
the cultus of Diana near Rome as 
belonging to the same category. He 
must be referring to the goddess of 
Aricia, whose priest procured his 
office by the murder of his prede- 
cessor: see Preller Rom. Mythol. p. 
278 sq. 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vir 


524 


Ayves éykavyovrat éml Tals ToLlavTats avOpwrobucias, 
mapa BapBapwy TO TOLOUTOY TaparaBovTes kakov. Tpat- 
aves eîrevt Ny) Tovs Oeovs, ékm Ayr opa oe, Iyvarie, THS 
moAumablas, ei Kal un érrawe THs OpnoKelas. ’ lyvarıos 
enev: Kal ti karéyvws Tis OpnoKelas uwv TS Ocias ; 
Tpaïavòs eimev “Ori tov ðermórTnv iov où mpooKu- 
VETTE, OUTE TOV oUpavóv, oUTE THD iepav c'eAnvgv THY 
f 5 £ <> À / s [74 

mavtotpopov.  'lyvarios etmev: Kai tis av éXorro, 
Bacirev, mposkvverv HALoy TOV ÈV OXNMATL évTa, TOV 
aic Oro. UTorimtovta, Tov amoadAovTa Kal TG ÈK 
mupos dvadkauBavovra Tñ amoBAnbetoay depuotnTta, 
Tov €kNewv. VTomevovTa, TOV um OuVauEVOY TOTE dyuet- 
vai Tüv éavToU Takw mapa Tüv yvwOunv TOU ÈTITAT- 

I dvOpwrobvatats] LP; advOpdmuv Ovotus V. 


paraBdvTes] LV; Aafóvres P. 
clause requires ce in the former. 


270| LV; om. P. Ta- 
3 ce] VC (?); cov LPA(?)B(?). The latter 
’'Iyvárıe] here, PVC; after 0eoús, LB; 
om. A. 4 Todvpablas] PV ; moXvua0etas L. 5 kal rl] PVCAB; 
ri (om. xal) L. 7 obre sec.] LP; zegue [C][A][B]; o? V. 8 Tav- 
Tórpooov] P; má»rpooov LV. 9 7Xov] P; róv qwov LV. IO als- 
Oce] LP; év aic0ce V. Tov dmofáNNovra] LC[B]; kal &moBdA- 
hovra PV; def. A. After dmoBáXNovra L adds rà?» 0épumv. I2 ÉEKAet- 
ww vrouévovyra] PB; éxXelyeis vmrouévovra L; éxAelWer obmouévovra V (doubtless 
a corruption of ékdelers vmouévovra); cujus lumen deficit aliquando opus quod 
dicitur afud vos eclipsis C; def. A. more àuea] PVC; mutare B; 
dvtoa (sic) rore L; def. A. I3 émiratrovros| LP[B]; ézvrá£avros V. 
14 TeAew] here, LP; after 0póuov, V. 15 vépeow] P; védeot LsVs. ws] 
1. "EAnves] A large number ofin- Const. 16810, Lactant. Div. Inst. i. 21, 
stances in Greece and elsewhere are See Renan L’ Eglise Chrétienne p. 3. 
collected in Clem. Alex. Protr. 3 (p.36) 9. èv oxnpate ovra] See Clem. 
and in Porphyr. de Adstin. ii. 54 sq. Hom. xvi 17, xvii. 3. 8. 9, for this 


These writers and others are quoted 
on this subject by Euseb. Praef. Ev. 
iv. I5 sq (comp. Laud. Const. 13, 
Theoph. ii. 53 sq). See Wachsmuth 
Hell. Alterth, II. 2. p. 224 sq, on 
these human sacrifices among the 
Greeks. They were put down gene- 
rally (cyxedov...rapa maow) in the 
reign of Hadrian; Porphyr. 1. c., 
Euseb. Praef. Ev. iv. 15. 3, Laud. 


phrase. 

I5. os Oéppw k.r.A.] Ps. ciii (civ). 
2 ékreivov Toy oUpavóv oat Oéppuv. 

I6. œs kapapay K.r.A.] Is. xl. 22 ó 
oT!jcae às kapuápav TOY o)pavóv. 

17. os kuBov] Job xxxviii. 38 (LXX) 
kekóAAmka 0€ adrov [i.e. Tov o/pavóv] 
@omep Albo kúßov(or Au&ókvfdov) ; comp. 
Ap. Const. vii. 35 oiSev odpavds tov 
eri pndevds avróv kapapdcavra às Albo 


Ic 


vir] 


ROMAN ACTS. 


525 


TOVTOS QUT AET vy 600 : joavos oe Ü 
TO TENE TOV OpOuov; o)pavós O6 møs 

, , , e P ; 
15 TPOOKUVNTOS, Ó védeoiv KaduTTOMEVOS, OV Åc AéppiN 


n e M \ e , EJ 
EZETEINEN O OnpLoupyos KAL WC KAMAPAN ETTHZEN Kal 


E ; TES o Bs Z of \ / 

óc KYBON 3Opacev; n ceXnuvgv av£ovcav Kal peiovuévny 
M f \ / , 5 s e. 

Kal QÜOivoveav Kal TaÜeow vroKepevny; GAN STL TO 


^ » \ ^ ^ 
pws Exovow Aapurpov, Sia ToUTO TpockvveiaÜa. ódei- 


5 A 5 \ 
20 AovGtv, ov mavTws adAnOyjs 6 Novos. 


cis avow yap 


5 / 5 Yë , 
ayÜoo7ots, CAA. oUk eis mposkúvnow éO000no'av: merai- 


\ , `Ó \ 
yeu kat Oeppatvery TOUS Kap7rOUS mpoceraxÜncav, Aau- 


, \ e / \ i \ , 
TOvVELY THY nuépav Kal pwriCey TNV VUKTA. 


\ € 
Kal Ol 


> 7 ` ^ 5 ^ > ^ 5 / ` 
darépes [O06] Tov ov/pavoU eic cHmeia éraxOncav Kai 


, > / 
zeovrev eis TapauvOlay, 


LP; woe V (from Ps. ciii (civ). 2). 
add. rv &rávrov P; def. A. 


t > n M 5 ` \ ^ ` , 
25€1C KAIPOYC KAL Els TPOTAS Kal TWV TNV ÜaXaccav 


PANDY \ / 
ovoev Y TOUTWY POO KUVH- 


16 ómutoupyos] txt LVB; add. ejus C; 


17 KUBov] LPV; cuppam B; fornicem (RATNE; 
comp. Is. xl. 22) Cs; CRAMA Cm; def. A. 


fópacev] LV; &pacev P. 


ceX$jvqv aütovcav] LVCB(?); sem 9 atEovca P (and so the nom. throughout); 


def. A. 


18 ó6lvovcav kai] LP (but P $6(vovca, see above) B; om. V; def. 


A. In C the whole sentence runs unam.. quae diminuitur (deficit) et repletur et 


subjicitur passionibus, quae indiget saepe. 


adn’ ori, V. 
24 00] LCA; om. EVB.: 


19 Aajmpóv] here, LP; after 


23 Thy vókra] txt PVCAB; add. oùxl 06 kal mpookuveicba: L. 
kal els kuipoùs] PVC (the sentence being somewhat 
changed, and C, having Rapnoc for karpoc) AB; om. L. 


26 eis 


rapauv0lay] here, P; before rGv Tj», L; mapagv6(av (om. eis) here, V; fro conso- 


latione B; al. C. The prepos. appears in A. 


V; et nihil A; nihil itague (otv) BCn. 


kvBov (v. 1. A«okvfdov) ; Vitruv. v. Pref. 
‘Is (cubus), quum est jactus, quam in 
partem incubuit, dum est intactus, 
immotam habet stabilitatem, The 
Coptic suggests às o«qvrjv (comp. Is. 
xl. 22), while the Latin points to some 
late Greek word signifying a ‘vault’ 
-or ‘dome’; see Hesych. kovm iov: 
kapápa 1j ert róv ápa£óv ywopery ; Suid. 
kiBeÓOpov: Onkny newraóv; and comp. 
Ducange Gloss. Med. et Inf. Lat. s. 
vv. ‘cufa, cupa, cuppa, cupla, cup- 
pula, etc. See Lobeck Pathol. p. 242. 
alfovcav k,r.A.] See Apost. Const. 


oùðèv 68] PLCs; ddd’ oi6dy 


vii. 34 6 yfv éÓpácas kai oùpavòv 
éxretvas...ovpavos 6€ às kapápa Te- 
mynypévos Hyhdiora da Tpots &vekev 
mapaj,vÓ(as, pas è xai Aus eis 
upas Kapmav yovns yeyévnvra, ce- 
Ajoun 9 els kaupà» TpoTNY aU£ovca 
kal petoupern KTA, Euseb. Laud. 
Const. 1 8 5 cednn re vmoxopoUca TO 
héeyyos 9A(e, xpóvev Te mepiððois pet- 
ovpévr) kai má) u av£opévr K.T-À. 

24. els onpeta k.t.A.| See Gen. 1. 14. 

25. tpomas] Deut. xxxiii. 14 7Atov 
tporayv, Job xxxviii. 33 rpomás ovpa- 
vob: comp. James i. 17. 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vr 


526 


e ^ ^ ^ Ac 
Tov, oUx Vðwp Ó TMoceddva kaXeire, où 7rüp ò “Hat 
^ A [74 ^ 5 ^ A 
OTOV KaNEITE, OUK dnp ov “Hpav kaXetvre, ov yn mv 
^ 5 , M ^ 3\ 
Anpntpa kaXevre, oU Kaprol’ Tavra yap TAUTA, KAV 
, [74 [4 > 
mpos avo'raciv ruerépav yéyovev, Opes lapra eiow 
Ny of 
kai &vrvxa. 
VIII. 


e 3 5 , \ 5 IV \ 
apyats, OTL OV el O avacTaTwWoAas THY dvaTONQv un 


i) B ^ ” 2 
Tpaiavos etrev: Oik apa Kkadws édevyov év 


/ 6: \ > ^ 
cé9ea Qa, Tous Ücovs ; “Iyvatios cirev: Kai dyavakrets, 
Gy ^ e Ny \ ^ ` 
© Bacirev, OTL TA uN Óvra TPOTKYYNTAa vrapawoÜpev un 

\ \ 5 / \ ^ \ 

céfew, dXXa Tov Oeov Tov arAnOwov, Tov CavTa, TOV 

= c n `) ae eA 5 mg 

TOMNTHY oUpavoU Kal yns, kai TOV povoyevh viov aUTOÜU ; 

, ` [14 > \ 7 o Woo 

pon yao aŭrn aXnu0rs Opnokela kparoUca kai OuoXo- 
M ^ 7 

yovuévn, Ocio TE Kal 7rvevuaikots Soypuacw aBpuVo- 

e H ^ [i exe a sf 
pévg: 4 06 kaf Uuas SidackaNia Tov EAAnVIG MOU eos 


1 0] LP; dy V. So in both places. . Tlocevdava] LV; mocedéva P. 
"Hoacrov kaħeîre] LPC (which uses the same word throughout), and so B attaches 
all the substantives to one verb vocetur; jpacctov Aéyere V. The words are varied 
also in A, but the variations do not seem to follow V. 2 dip) P; dépa V. 
The clause oùk dhp dv pav kaAetre is omitted by L alone. "Hpav kaXetre] PC; 
dpav óvouáfere V; def. L. For AB see the note on“Hg@aiorov kaXetre above. 
yf] P; y8v LV. 3 kaprol] P; kaproús LV. mávTa yap Tatra] 
P; ratra yap távra LV. 4 mpós cvoracww Tjuerépaw yéyovev, jos] PB 
(usum for cvoracw); els aróħavow Querépay yeyévyvra, duws L; kàv $ mpds cú- 
cracw Tuerépay, GAN’ Guws V; quamquam ad victum nobis ordinata sunt, sed A; 
etiam si (Ra Cm) creavit ea ad sustinendum vitam nostram C. elow] LP; eict 
V. 6 oix dpa] oók dpa LP; où V; mon C (add. oym Cs) AB. ëe- 
yov] PV; elpyka L. év apxaîs] PV ; in initio B; é£ àpxñs LC (?) primo A. 
7 Wi] PV; rod wy L. II kal rv] LPCAB; rà» (om. kal) V. viðv 
ajro0] PV ; aùroô viòv L; filium ejus (add. dominum nostrum Cm) jesum christum 


2. ov "Hpav KTA) Clem. Hom. 
vi. 8 ó djp...óv erovoudgovow "Hpav. 
See also to the same effect Athenag. 
Suppl. 22, Tatian. ad Graec. 21, 
Tertull. adv. Marc. i. 13, Arnob. iii. 
30, etc. ; in which passages also the 


taken up by the Stoics and by the 
Neoplatonists; Plut. Mor. p. 877 
(quoted by Euseb. Praef. Ev. xiv. 14. 
6), Cic. de Nat. Deor. ii. 26, Athenag. 
1. c, Porphyry in Euseb. Praef. Ev. 
ii. II. I sq, etc. In Tertullian's 


rationalising accounts of the other 
deities are dealt with. This expla- 
nation is attributed in the first place 
to Empedocles, but it was afterwards 


time it was no longer confined to 
philosophers, but ‘Ipsa quoque vul- 
garis superstitio communis idolo- 
latriae...ad interpretationem natura- 


IO 


vii] ROMAN ACTS. 527 


DA E] 74 / ae 
15 TroNvÜcta , EVAVATPETTOS, ATTATOS, TeEpipepouern, èr 
> ^ 7, e ^ ° \ > , 
ovOepua BeBawae €eo'T"kKkvia* N yap ANEZEAELKTOC 
, a ^ \ 5 3 
TAIAEiA TAANASTAL TØS yap OUK éoTW mavToloy 
^ \ `x , 
Wevdoroyiov TETANPWMEVN, TOTE pev Aéyovca SwoEeKka 
= A R ^ , id 
eivat Tous kaÜoXov Tov koo ov Üeovs, marv 0€ vrXelovas 
^ .. 7 5 / 
2zoumeAnpuia; Tpatavos etmev: Ovxéte cov pépw Tiv 
5 £ £ ^ y e Aa ^ / 
adNaCoveiav: Oeuwtws yap rnjiQv korakepropets, TTWUVALA 
y ^ e ^ , ^ Coy > ^ , 
AOYwy vikav nuas OéNcv. Ovcoy ovv: apKel yap [oor], 
e/ , ^ ` 
0c« kaTepnropevcas Huwy. €L O6 uN Ye, TANAW Oe 
5 , [74 / ié 7? 7 
aikırauevos VaTEpov Onpiois zrapaówaw. ’lyvarıos etrev: 
ly , 5 ^ M > - A 5 jj 
2 LJ 
5 exe em ee Kal OU A a eTay verry ; 
3 > - , 
éyw yap Xpirtiavos cimi Kal ov Ovw rrovnpots daimoow, 
, M ^ M 5 ` A ` , ^ 
dXXa 7pockuveo tov adAnOwov Ocov TOv matépa Tov 
; = A ^ \ ; ; $ 
Kupiou [uev ] noot. Xpurrov, Tov pawrticantda uot $ Ó c 


C. Add. kal rò äyıov (add. avro0 V) rvefua LPVA ; om. CB. I2 uóvm 
yap abr] LP; atrn yàp uóvg V. adnOys] LV; ddnOwh P. kal 
óuoNovyovuévy] PVC[A]; èp’ ots óuoNoyoOuev L, and so app. [B]. I5 dora- 
Tros] LPC(?)BA(?) ;. aeráres V. mepupepouévy] PV; pref. ride ka- 
keîge (sic) L; add. ab omnibus partibus A; al BC. 16 éornkvia] 
PV; éorixvia L. dveiéNeykros] LP: áve£éNekros V. 17 Tu] 
P; éore LsVs. 18 Wevdoroy.wy] Wevdod\oywr P; falsiloguio B; Wevdwy 
Ayav L; Aóyeov Wevdwy V; dub. AC. memd\npwuern] LB[C]; merda- 
vnuevn PV; al A. 1g cáNMw 06] VBA; móre 5é kal L. The whole . 
clause rdw 6é...0revAndvia is much amplified in C, and wholly omitted in P. A 
long interpolation appears in C at this point. 21 ddagovelay] P; àXa£o- 
viay LV. aropsMa] V; crouvMg LP. 22 co] LVC&AB; om, 
PCs: 23 karepnTópevoas] LP; kareppnTópevoas Vs. ye] LV; om. 
ies 24 Onplows] LPA; add. oe VB[C]. mapaddcw| LVCA()B; 
mapabare P. -25 Méxpi] LP; ¿os V. mAnpots] LPCAB; mToreîs 
V. 28 huar] LPAB; nostri Cs; mei Cm; om. V. uo] LP; 
ue VB; dub. AC. 


lium refugit, et dedecus suum ingenio 16. 5 yàp x. A.] From the LXX 

obumbrat, figurans Jovem in sub- of Prov. x. 17. 

-stantiam fervidam et Junonem eius 23. Katepnropevoas| ‘deluged us 

in aéream, secundum sonum Graeco- with your rhetoric’ The word is 

rum vocabulorum, etc.’ (l.c.). used by late classical writers, as 
14. deos rodvbeia] Comp. Euseb. Plutarch and Lucian. 

Laud. Const. 3 axpiBds yap üÜeov Tò 28. róv doerícavra| Hos. x. 12 

modvoeov, and see the note on Trall. oricare éavrois Has yrdcews. 

3 rois abéous. 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [vir 


528 


rN O c € O C, TOV A2NOIZANTA MOY TOYC Ób0aÀAMoOYC eic 


' A ^ , 
KATANOHCIN TON O0ayMacioN aUTOU' TOUTOV GéBw 
^ \ / \ , \ 
kal Tiud* avtos yap Oeds ¿ou kal Kupwos kai Bacı- 
\ \ , , 
A€Us KAL MONOC AYNACTHE. 
.. / 5 end 
IX. Tpaiavos eimev: KpaBatrorupias oe dvaip®, 
/ f. LY , > ^ 
ci un petavonons. — "lyv&rios eîrevt Kadov, & Basiret, 
Gag ^ : i € X $ 0 ^ . A 4 LR \ 
5» ék kakav peTavoia, x; 0€ EE dyalwv VrodiKOs: émi Ta 
\ \ / ^ , oe YN \ / 
KpelTTW yap XPN Tpéxew uas, OVK ETL Ta xetpova. 
5 / » PENSA T s. \ m. M T. ^ x 
evoeBelas duewov ovdev. Tpatavos eimev: Tots óvu£u 
^ ^ , , > S / 
TOV V&rov aUTOU KaTa~avaTeE Néyovres avTQ* Tela Oni 


^ ^ ^ ^ X \ , 
TO a’ToKpaTopl, Kat ÜUcov Tots Ücois kara TO oyua 


^ , 
TNS TUYKANTOUV. 


2 0avuaciev] LV; 0avuárev P. 
yàp Tus Kal céBw V. 
(om. yàp) Cs; dub. A. 


> , a '€ \ M òd ^ 
Iyvatios etmev: Cyw T0 ðoyua Tov 


Tolürov oéBw kal ruo] LP[C]B[A]; abróv 


3 aùròs yàp] VCmB; oros yap L; bru oros P; hic 
éoTw] P; éore LsV s. 


4 kal wdvos Suvacrns]| 


et solus potens AB; e£ potens (aomactHe Cs, THMATOC Cm) solus C; ó uakáptos 


kal uóvos Suvdaorns LPV (taken from 1 Tim. vi. 15). 


kpaSBarorvplaus P; xpaBaroruplas V. 


There is a future in CB, a present in A. 


8 xpn] here, PV; after judas, L. 


5 Kpaßarrorvptais] L; 

drap el] V; aveh@ éà» LP. 
7 úróðkos] LP; add. éorw V. 

ovk] LV ; GAN ovk P. 9 ev- 


ceBelas üuewov ovdév] LPCAB (but evoeBelas 06 LCs; evoeBelais yàp PB); om. V. 


Tots üvv£w] P; rots óvv£&k LsVs; ungulis B; ferreis ungulis [A]; om. C. 
võrov auro0] here, PV; before rois örvén, L. 


kara£écavres Méyere V; dub. CA. 


I. Tov dvo(favra k..A.] Ps. cxviii 
(cxix). 18 dzrokáAviyov rous dOarpovs 
pov kal Katavonow ta Üavpágia èk Tov 
vópov Gov. 

4. póvos duvacrns|] From r Tim. 
vi. 15. The versions might seem 
rather to suggest duvards as the word 
here; but, inasmuch as the Coptic 
frequently substitutes one Greek form 
for another, and the Latin translates 
duvdaorns by ‘potens’ in r Tim. 1. c., 
I have preferred the latter word as 
more likely to have suggested the 
interpolation pakdptos kai, which must 
be rejected. 

5. Kpafarromvpíaw] ‘gridirons? 
No other example of the word is 


IO Tov 
kara£üvare Aéyovres] LPB; 
I5 mapavoue] LP; add. ue V. 


given. For xpáfgarros see Lobeck 
Phryn. p. 62. As regards the ortho- 
graphy, I have adopted the form 
which has the highest support in the 
MSS of the N. T. and is confirmed by 


the quantity of the Latin ‘gvabdaius.’’ 


6. Kandy, k.r.A.] See Mart. Polyc. 
II, which is closely followed here. 

9. Tots dvvEw] ‘claws? We find 
this instrument of torture at least as 
early as Tertull. 4207. 12 *Ungulis 
deraditis latera Christianorum" (see 
Oehler’s note, and comp. § 30), Cy- 
prian Z. 10 (p. 491 Hartel) ‘lanian- 
tes ungulas, 2d. 20 (p. 532) ‘in poena 
ungularum fortiter est confessus, and 
elsewhere. 


5 


IO 


55 


Ix] ROMAN ACTS. 529 


3 ^ ` 
ECONTAI 0€01 


Oyk 


Ld M 2 A Ne , "On < P. 
ETEPO! TAHN EMOY kat ‘O OyciázoN 0e6olc Ge Plone 


Gor 


Oco? poBotua ro Xéyov: 


é£oAo0peyOdcerat OurKANTOU O€ Kal Baoihéws mapa- 
vouety keNevovrev oUk dkoUc* oj AH wu yap mpócaomow 
Ayndctoy, of VOMOL Siayopevovaw, kal ok écu meta 
TOAA@N èni kakia. Tpaiavos eizev "O£os cv dAatv 


Z 3 a A e , 5 
kaTayeaTe auTou TwY TAHyoV. — lyvamios eimev:. Tlav- 


M e \ ^ ^ ^ e / / 
Ta Ta umep TNs TOU Oeo oOmoroyias uor yıvõueva 
> ` [i ^ T "7 > 3 \ 
oloTa ws molov eivai poteva: ok &ii4 yao Tá 


TAOHMATA TOT NIN KAIPOY TPOc THN MÉAAOYCAN 


, > , iss \ D A 
AGZAN ámokaAYmrecOatr Tpaïavos eimevt Perai cav- 


A , / \ I. ^ 
TOU Norov, avOpwre, Kai ELOV TOTS TPOTTATTOMEVOLS 


16 akoóoc] LPAB; akoúvosw VC. My] LP; Metye V. 17 of 
vouot] LP; lex B; lex nostra (leges nostrae) A; ol Oetor vóuo V ; lex (leges) de C. 
The recurrence of similar letters ore€ros would explain the insertion or omission 
diayopevovow] PV; Ouvyopebovot L. 18 àAciy] P; áXcl 
IQ karaxéare] LP; karaxéere V. TOv whyyov] PV; 
20 74| LPCAB; raóra V. por] here, LP; 
after mdvra, V. 21 oleTà ws puc Ov] oiorà ws mio Ody drya€Gv por P; oleo 
os uron L; congregantur mihi in mercedes C; tot ws mobav V; scio quia merces 
(ota. ws uuo Adv?) B; scio quod...mercedis (oda bs mohd?) A. 23 doka- 
AómTea0at] LP; aroxadudOjvar V (with Rom. viii. 18). 
Tov V. 24 dvOpwie] written ave, LP; dvep V. 


of betor. 
V; ddare L. 
Tals wAnyais L. 


cavroü]| LP; ceav- 


I3. Oùk éoovra x.r.À.] Exod. xx. 3, 
and Exod. xxii. 20. 

I6. ov ANUN k.r...] Levit. xix. 15 
où AngpN yg Tpóscmov oude 
Oavpacets mpoc@moy Suvacrov : comp. 
Ecclus. iv. 27-47) AaBys mpórorov ôv- 
vágTov. 

17. ovk €on k.r...] Exod. xxiii. 2, 
but zAeióvov changed into v0AAóv. 

I8. “Ogos x..A.] Our hagiologist 
may have taken this from Euseb. 
H.E. viii. 6 Eos Aowróv 705 róv 0aTéov 
vropawopevav a)roÜ c)v xal áAari 
$pavres karà róv Ouacamévrev To 
caros pepov évéxeov, an incident in 
the persecution of Diocletian. 

21. mpofeva] With a genitive of 


IGN, II. 


TTOXOU 


the thing provided ; comp. Philostr. 
Vit. Apoll. iv. 3 mpo€evos rois dÀXows 
ToU éppaiov, Alciphr. Z. iii. 72 mpó- 
Éevov eivat ths Kowwvias, Schol. on 
Arist. Nub. 243 rà Ovomemra tov 
ciríov vócov mpokeva yivera. In 
Æsch. Suppl. 809 rade ppoiwia Trpo- 
eva móvov, the word is a conjectural 
emendation; and it is discredited 
by the fact that all the other exam- 
ples of this use are late. On the 
other hand the occurrence of the 
verb mpoćevetv in this metaphorical 
sense is much earlier and more fre- 
quent. 

ouk a&ia KrA] From Rom. viii. 
18, 


34 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [1x 


530 


Tol, €zrei YElpoTW KATA gov xpnaopuat (aa dvow. 'lyva- 
Ti0s €lrev? Tic im&c ywpice: md TAC aramHe TOY 
Xpictof; @Alyic H CTENOYWPIA H AIMPMOC H AIMOC 
H rYMNÓTHC H KINAYNOC H MAdyalpa; TETEICMAI rap 
O Ti OYTE zoh OYTE BANATOC éexoTHoal uE TAS cú E- 
Belas Suvijcerar, Oappovvta TÅ Suvaper TOU XpirTov. 
Tpaiavos cimen’ Oin vikali ue TH kaprepía ; QuXóvicov 


yo e E 5 af 
yap Çõov ó avOpwrros. ' lyvarıos eimevt OvK olopat, 


M [74 , T , e/ ^ [4 
ANQ guo T€Uc0 OTL EVIKNOA Kal iKnow, iva yas OTr0G OV 


uerafU evoeBetas kai doe(deías. Tpaiavos eimev: Aa- 


, ERE \ , 3 s , > , 
Bovres QUTOV Kat mepilevTes AUT W cíónpa, €N ZYAO 


TOYc móAac AYTOY ACHAAICAMENO! BAAETE AYTON 


> n 2 , , \ \ 5 N e 
eic THN €CMTEPAN PYAAKHN, KaL punoels avTOV ÖAwWS 


^ ^ / ^ ^ 
èri TiS cipkTs OpaTw* Kal TpEls mépas Kal pets 


, ” \ Id \ [4 \ 4 [14 
yvkras apTov un PayeTw Kal UÓwp MN TuiéTrw, OTTWS 


I co] LV; cov P. érd] PVB; sin minus A; wa wh L, and so app. 
G. xelpoow] P; xelpoo, LV. kara cov] here, LP; after ypjooua, V. 
xphoopa] PV; xphowmar L. 3 Xpicrot] PVA; 0co0 LBC. There is the 
same v. l. in Rom. viii. 36. Ñ Siwyuds] here, PVBA (with Rom. viii. 36) ; 
after Muós, L; om. C. 4 yàp] PVB (with Rom. viii. 38); dé LC; om. A. 
5 éxornoa] PV; amroorjoa L. In Rom. viii. 39 it is xwploas 6 duv%- 
oera] LP; 0vyy0jo erac V. Oappotvra] LP; 0appijcavra V. 7 oly] P; 
ote. LV.- pirovixoy] V ; victoriae amans Cm; victoriosum Cs; duXóvewov LP; 
tolerabile B; def. A. 8 olouat] V; otuac LP. 
LPABC,; add. zz veritate Cm; add. rQ 0eQ V. 
L; £z victoria vici (as if vix@v évixnoa) C. 
yes] LPAB; sciam Cs; mew095s V; def. Cm. 
VABC;; aoeBelas kal edoeBelas LP; def. Cm. 


9 T0 TeUc] txi 

éviknoa] PVAB; kal évixnoo 
kal] txt VCAB; add. rddw LP. 
IO evdceBelas kal doeBelas 
rr oldnpa] txt LP; add, 


kal V, év Ethw] here, P; èv r EdAw (after adrov) L; eis rò EvAov (after 
do QaNaápevot) V. 13 écerépav] PV; écorépav L. I4 ópáro] PV. 
ópáro L. 15 kal Jowp wh Tiéro] LPC (but Cm transposes this clause witl 


the former) AB; om. V. orws| LP; tva V. 


16 Tas Tpeîs qucpas 
txt VAB; add. xai [ins. tas L] rpéis vukràs LP; haec C. 


mapaBrnGels 


2. Tis nas xopícet K.r.A.| Rom. wise diddveccos is a much commonei 


Vili. 35, 38. 

7. quXówkov] This word, rather 
than $uAóveikov, is suggested by the 
context, as in Arist. Ae. i. II kai 
TO viküv TOv, oU povoy Tots duXovíkois 


dÀÀà macw (comp. i. 6, 10). Other- 


word. 

II. ev iA x.r.A.] The language 
is taken from Acts xvi. 24. 

18. dropdcewas avroð) ‘sentenci 
against him.’ For arodacts see Mart 
Ant, 2, 


Ix] ROMAN ACTS. 531 


uera Tas Tp€is "uépas Onpiois mapaBrAnOels ot Tws oU 
nv UmeEéAÜn. 5 GUyKANTOS emeve Kai "nuets GUE 
Vo, ths aropacews ajo) vywópeÜa* mavras yap 
nuas évúßpiısev uera ToU aŭTokpaTopos, un el£as Orar 
20 TOTS Üeois, ANN’ elvan XP Tiavos dueBeBawoato. ’lyva- 
TIOS Eimer’ EyAorutoc ó Oedc kai marHp TOY Kypioy 
HMON luco? Xpicro$, ðs TH TONAN avTOU ayabornTt 
HElWoEV ue kowwevov TOV maÜrnudTov TOO Xpia-roU aŭ- 
TOU yeverOa Kal paotupa THs OedtnTos avroð dnb 
5 KAL TLOTOV. 
X. Tñ pir" timépa ó Tpatavos mpockaXeodyuevos 
THY GVYKANTOV Kal TOV Érapxov 7póeuu émi TO dup- 
Oéatpov, cuvdpauovtos kal coU Əñuou T&v ‘Pouaiwv 
jkovcav yap bt 6 èriskoros Cupias péet Onpio- 
o ua xéty* Kal mrpoa-Ta rre TOV &yiov 'lyvatiov eicaxOnvaa. 


P; mwapadodels L; BAnOels V. oTws] LP; obre V. 
TÓ (5v P. 17 bme£éA0n] V; jme£éA00. P; bmo£éA0o L. 
gacews avroU] PC; hujus sententiae B; huic verbo A; THs kar (kara V) adrov 


Tov hv] LV; 


18 dro- 


amopucews LV. Yuóne0a] here, PV; after ovuwndor, L. 19 vú- 
Bpicev] LP; évégpwe V. pera] txt PVCAB; add. kal L. dtas] 
PV; #éas L. 20 elvat] here, LV; after xpwrtavós, P. dveBe- 


Bauósaro] P; diaBeBawwodueros L; diaBeBarovmevos V; confirmans B; dub. CA 
(whether they had a part. or finite verb). 21 ó Oeós] LVCAB; xüptos 


(kc) P. 22 avrov] here, PV; after dyaoryr:, L. 23 ġëlwoev] 
P; Hélwoe V; Karnitwoe L. 24 adnOn] LV; dÀq0wóv P. 26 Ty] 
PB; Kal ry LCA; rq ôè VB. ó] LE; om V. 27 Kal Tov 


érapxov] PV; et praefectum BCs; et praefectos Cm (xs for wy); Kal ròv Umapxow 
L; om. A: see the same v. l. ¿mapxot, Ùrapxou in Clem. Rom. 37. éri] 
LV; es P. | 28 Top] LP; om. V. 30 mpoordrre. Tov dy.oy 
"ILyváriov elcax05vo«] LP; et sedens pro tribunali jussit adduct sanctum zgnatium 
B; mandatum dedit ducere in tribunal ignatium [A]; kal éxéXevaev ó abroxpdtwp 
cloaxOnvar aùròv V ; et jussu regis ( jubente rege) induxerunt sanctum ignatium C. 


to the city prefect, though Dion 


21. EvAoynros x.r.A.] From I Pet.i.3. 
calls him sodiapxos, so as to keep 


23. Kowovov kK.T.X.] See 2 Cor. i. 


7; comp. Phil. iii. ro. 

27. tov Émapxov] ‘the prefect, i.e. 
the ‘praefectus urbi,’ the highest offi- 
cial under the emperor. The term 
used absolutely would naturally refer 


érapxos for the ‘praefectus praetorio’; 
see Mommsen Staatsrecht IL p. 
1013. 

29. 0 émíekomos Supias| The ex- 
pression is taken from Ign. Rom. 2. 


34—2 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [x 


532 
iip Oavpatw OTi 
dAÀa 


Kav VUV meia Ont pot; O7rws Kal TOV TPOKELMEVOV KAK@V 


ws 66 eGeacaTo, ëpn mas aUTOV'. 
qus uera TOGavTas aiklas Kal TOTQÚTNV Aipov. 
da) A ays Kal nuas E idous. 'Iyvatios eimev' 
YCouas pot uopqprv pèr xew avOpwrou, TpOTrOUS oe 
ANWITEKOS TAlVYOYTOS uev ™ Képkq em JOUXEV OVES oe TH 
yvwun, (eruca gus TNATTOMEVOS Kal BovXcue- 
Mevos pnoev Uytés. GKOUE your AXovrov uera mra ppnaiass 
WS OUOELS LOL Novos ¿ori Tov Oynrov kai ETLKN POU Biou 
dpTOs yap 
OAos avTOU 


` , “< A ^ » \ > , 
dua 'InaoUv ov wow" amet mpos avTOv: 
> > , ^ E / 
¿oru dÜavacias kai Toma Qus aievtov. 

\ 
Kal 
c A \ / \ z^ " à 
vTepopé cov Ta BacanaTnpia, Kal THs Oo£ns cov óiua- 

, .. \ > E ` > \ v~e / 
atTuw.  Tpatavos etzev: Crey ahaCwv kal vreporTns 
add. atrov LV. 


\ ` > , / \ Z ^ 
eiui kai Tpos a/TOv Éékrérakd [ov THY Oiavoiuxv 


I é0cácaro] P; ëġn] PVCB; add. ó Tpaiavós 


L[A]. 2 ts] PV; gets L adda Kav] LPCAB; kal V. 3 vv] 
LVCAB; wyoüv P. 4 ñus] txt PC; add. rot Morro LV A; al. B. &£eis 
pirous] LP; (Nous &&ews V. 5 rpómovs] PV; rpómov L; mores BA; al. C, 
6 àXómekos] LP; áXeroÜ V. calvovros] LPAB; celovros V ; al. C: see the 


lower note. 8 Xovràv] LPC; jam B; nunc Cm; om. VA. 9 écrw] LPCAB; 
éora V. TOU ÜvvToU kal ¿muckñpou Blov] PV CB (but ¢emporalis B, possibly 
reading é¿muka[pou for émuxjpov); roð 0avárov L. A translates ego mortis deinceps 
curam. non gero et non vitam hanc curo, as if the translator had both readings before 
him. Blov] txt PB; add. rovrov V[C][A]; al. L. ro 7006] LPA(?)B; 
robov V; dub. C. arem] LV; darinuc P. &pros] LPCB; o?ros V ; al. 
A. 15 éorly] here, LP; éoru (after àNagóv) V T pocOjcavres avrov] LCB; 
om. PV. Add. Tẹ máA^o L; om. PVCB. 16 édcare] LV, and so app. 
CB (/axate); éNácare P. 17 éd0n] L; dimissae sunt B; é0ed0m V; Hber P, 
and so perhaps C (which translates guum autem vidit beatus [add. ignatius Cm] feras 


duas [leones duo Cm] venientes super ipsum). The reading 7A6ev seems to be am 


6. dXémekos| This reading is re- hand e«íovros would seem to require 


quired; since the adjective d\wzod 
(‘fox-like’) would be out of place. 
For dAemós see the note on Ps-Ign. 
Antioch. 6. 

catvovros] The dative decides the 
reading, for this is the common con- 
struction with saívew, e.g. caívev 
oup? Hom. Od. xvii. 302, caivew Kép- 
ko Arist. Eg. 1031. On the other 


the accusative. 

9. ToU Üvmro) k,r.A.] Euseb. H.E 
i. 2 rovrov tov Oynrov kai émiknpor 
Biov, Laud. Const. 4 Š 5 rà Ovgrà xa 
emíknpa. 

IO. dpros ydp éarw k.r..]] Comp 
Ign. Rom. 7, which has probably 
suggested this language. 

13. ths 0ófgs] The constructior 


x] ROMAN ACTS. 533 


15g Tlv, 7rpocóncavres avTOv Ovo Aéovras èr avTov 
arate, ömws Noe Aci pavov aUToU VroAcirwvTa. ws 
06 éan Ta Onpia, Oearauevos ó pakapios ëpn mpòs TOV 
ónuov: "Avópes ‘PwuaToi, oi Tovde Tov dyavos earal, ov 
avAns éveka Tivos mTpačews 7] uouons ravra TO X0, 
20 AAN Eveca evoeBelas’ airos yap eiut ToU. Ocot, kai Sv 
dddvtwv Ünpiev aédijOopa, iva poros kaÜapós yévwpat. 
dkovwy Oé Tara 6 Tpaiavos meyadws éEemANTTETO 
Aéywr: Meyadn ñ romov) Tøv eis [tov] Xpwróv éAmt- 
Covtwy: Tis [yap] “EAAjvev fj BapBapwv úréuewev To- 
25 aUra 7raÜetv éveka Oeov idiov, oia ovTos mèp ov meri- 
crevkev vaa Xe 5 “lyvatios elev? Oùk dvôpwrivns 


A , > M , ^ / \ y 
Ovvauews éai TO OTÉy&w ToiaUTa, mpoOupias 0€ plovns 


emendation of e\@y which was corrupted from ean. Add. én’ avrov L[C]B; 
om. PV. Geacduevos] P; add. avrà V ; add. ravra L. 18 oi] 
PE: om. V. Tov] LP; om. V. IQ Évexá rwos] LP; ruwós evexa 
V. mpá£ews 3) uouphs] L; opera et...damnum [A]; mpdéews B (translating 
pains mpáteos pravitatem); actionem. (mpü£is)...quam fect C; poupns V; uoppis 
P. 21 yérwpat] LP; yivouac V. 22 dkoócv] PV; àkobcas 
L. 23 TG» els Tov Xpwrüv éXmipóvrov] LP (but om. róv L); eorum qui 


credunt in christum Cm (but wao t, though properly meaning miTevewv, is some- 
times used to translate éArlfew, e.g. Ps. xc (xci) 4, just as é\rlfew is frequently 
translated ‘trust’ in the E. V.) ; zz christum credentium B; TO» xputiavev VCs. 
24 yap) LPV ; om. CB. bréuewev] P; bméuevev V ; bméuewev àv L. 
roaira] PV; rocaüra LB; hos labores (cruciatus) C. 25 merlorevkev] LP; 
merlorevke V. 27 TÓ oréyew ro.aüra] L; TÒ oréyew ravra Cs (eso a rta v, 
as in 1 Cor. ix. 12) zanta toleravi B; Tò orépyew rà Towatra V; Taira (simply) P. 
The sentence is translated in Cm as if oUk dvOpwalyns Suvdpews éore mpoÜvula uóvn kai 


TGT. K.T.À. 


mpoontuew Twos occurs in ZElian from Rom. 4; but it is here taken 
H. A. iv. 22, where it is altered by from Iren. v. 28. 4, as quoted by 
the editors. The word belongs to Euseb. Z. Æ. ii. 36. See above, p. 
the category of verbs denoting de- 377 Sq. 
preciation and contempt; comp. 27. créyew] ‘to sustain’; see the 
Kühner II. p. 326 sq. note on I Thess. ii. I. The con- 
17. a6] for eid. The irregu- fusion between oréyew and erépyew 
larity with respect to the augment is appears in MSS elsewhere; see Steph. 
not a serious objection to the adop- Thes. s. v. eréye p. 690 (Hase et 
tion of this reading. Dind.) Here créyew is better adapt- 
20. gîros ydp ei] Ultimately ed to the sense, 


534 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [x 


, > e / ^ M 
kai mioTews éQeXkopuévus eis oponÜeav Xp ToU. Kat 


^ > ^ 5 / ” 35 , \ e Aé kat 
TAUTA CXUTOU €LTTOVTOS &Opa uov €7r «v'TOV OL AEOVTES 


^ ^ > if / 
éË ¿kapay TOv uepdv poa rea óvres dzémvi£av [LOVOV, 


, 5 ^ ^ ^ [74 X y 
oUk &Üryov ðè aŭro Tøv capkdov, iva TO deElWavoy 


r els óuoi0euav Xpicrod] els Boj Oevay xpurroÜ P ; els BohÂerav xpróv LVC;. The 
sentence is translated fide attrahente et adjutorio (v. 1. auxilio) christi in B, and fides 
quae attrahit nobis christum adjutorem (Bon0dv) in Cm. See the lower note. 2 aù- 
ToU elmovros] LP; eimóvros aùroô V. ér] LP; mpós V. avrov] At this point 
Cs breaks off, two pages being lost. ol Xéovres] here, LV; after dpamov, P. 
kal é£ ékarépov...év 4] PVCB (minor variations in these authorities are given in the 
following notes); kal ¿Ë ékarépev TOv mp cTapá£avres karéOovro airoÜ ws mapauTa 
ToU àylov u&prvpos lyvartov mAnpodoba THY eUxxv Kal THY émi0vulay karà TÒ yeypap- 
uévov, érOuula Sixatov ðekrý* Wa wormep &ypadev èv tH ¿mucroNQ ò dyos pndevt TOv 
adedpav émax0els (sic) evpefeln Sua THs cvANovyfjs TOD Neujávov* karà yap Thy avTood 
alrnow mova Ta Tpaxdrepa Qv àylwv abrod daréwy mepiedelpOn. | drwa, puħakrhpiov 
dternpotvto TH pwualwy jeyadrord\e év Ñ k... L. This substitution is taken 


I. eic opondevav] i.e. ‘drawn to 
conformity with (the sufferings of) 
Christ, in accordance with his own 
wish Rom. 6 émwrpéyaré pow pintny 
eivat Tov mabous roð Oeod pov. I have 
been led to this conjectural reading 
by the fact that Ignatius twice uses 
oon decay Oeod in the sense of ‘con- 
formity with God, Magn. 6, Polyc. 1, 
and that in the latter passage the 
Greek MS substitutes Bone for 
opondevav. Moreover é$eAkouévgs. els 
BonGevay Xpwróv is awkward alike in 
expression and in order, while im- 
portant authorities have Xpucrod. 

2. čðpapov x.rA.] On the rela- 
tion of this account to the divergent 
story of the Antiochene Acts, see 
above, pp. 372 sq, 431 sq. The Ms 
L has interpolated from the latter 
here and below, p. 538, 1. 3. 

5. gvdakrypioyv] ‘a preservative, 
an amulet’; comp. e.g. Plut. Mor. 
P. 378 rò THs “IotSos pudaxriprov 
ô meptarrer Oa pvÜoXoyobaw aur, 
Dioscor. v. 158 (159) pvdakrnpiov be 
Tepiappart auró at yuvatkes Xpóvra, 
ib. 159 (160) dvAaxrilpu.. «Hp Tepi- 


amrópeva, Euseb. L. C. 9 Š 8 domep ru 
$óBnrpov xai kakôv ápuvvrüptov...rfjs 
“‘Popaiay dpx0s kai ths kaÜóAov Bası- 
Nelas pudaxripiov, V. C. i. 40, ii. 9, iii. 
I. The presence of the saint's bones 
was to guard the city from harm. The 
word gvAaxrnpiov always has an ac- 
tive sense (e.g. Plut. Mor. p. 820 riufs 
QvAaxrrpuov, tb. 821 dvAakriüjpuov. ..rais 
modest), so that there can be no doubt 
about its meaning here. The ‘phylac- 
teries’ mentioned in the Gospel (Matt. 
xxiii. 5) seem to have been so called 
originally, because in pursuance of a 
literal fulfilment of the Mosaic pre- 
cept they were designed to preserve 
the law in memory (Exod. xiii. 10 
$vAdfec0e ròv vópov, Deut. vi. 2 
QvAdegeoÓe mávra rà Sikaidpara, 3 
Qua ša, Toiv, 17 pudacowy duddén 
Tas évroÀàs k.r..; comp. the explana- 
tion in Justin Dial. 46); but the 
word and the mode of wearing them 
would at a later date suggest no 
other idea but that of amulets to 
protect the wearer. On vħakrýpiov 
see also Colossians p. 69. 

7. eredewwOn] The name of One- 


x] ROMAN ACTS. 535 


, ^ pA ln AN eae y > 
OR sen QvXakT)piov Th Pwuaiwy  ueyaXozÓóANet, év 
Q , 1 \ ^ > 
n kai llérpos éotavpwOn Kat Ilavros ameTunOn THY 
` Nis , 
kepaArgy kal "Ovgouuos éreXeus0n. 
XI. 


ek X , [74 oe 5 ^ Z: \ , 
NTTOMEVOS. hkeL 06 AUTH ypappata mapa Ixwiov 


° \ .. \ 2 \ 2 ay R 
O àé Tpaiavos éEavactas év Qaugacue nv 


substantially from Mart. Ant. 6. For A see p. 372 sq. 

unpor L. dmémw£av]P ; add. avrà» V[C][B]; al. L. 
BC ee B: om. V; al L. 5 ein] PCB; 5» V; al. L. 
modec] LPCB ; móe: V. 6 ametunOn TH kepar] PV; Thv Kepadyy 
daeTundn L. 7 érederwOn] PV ; Japidatus B; rH TOv oKEhGv KNdoer TÒ 
TéNos éóéËaro L; om. C. Add. èv 06£y xpw o0 LPV ; om. CB. 8 é£a- 
vagTàs...ékmNyrróuevos] PV; é£avéory 0avuátov dua kal ékmrNyrróuevos L; exsurgens 
admiratione perculsus discessit B; surrexit.. existens in magna admiratione, etiam 
autem (rc 00). perculso (wdnocewv) eo et admirante etc. C (as if ere ékmMgrrouéve. 0€ 


3 pepav] PVCB; 
4 92] 
eyano- 


"ket K.T.À.). 


9 aire] txt LP[C]B ; add. kal V. 


IDuvtov] VB; 


pilinio (uyAswsOC) C; trawviov L; meoviou P. 


simus occurs twice in the Menea. 
On Feb. 15 he is commemorated 
alone. Here he is called a slave 
Dirjpovos dvdpis ‘Popalov mpos ov 
ypahet ó aytos drósroňos THatios ; he 
is arraigned before Tertullus ‘the 
prefect of the country’; and he is 
sent to Puteoli and there put to 
death by having his legs broken. 
This is also the story in the Meta- 
phrast. On Nov. 22 again the 
Menea commemorate ‘the holy 
Apostle Philemon and those with 
him, Apphia, Archippus, and One- 
simus) They are here related to 
have suffered at Colossz; they are 
brought before Androcles the govern- 
or of Ephesus, and after undergoing 
other tortures are stoned to death. 
Though no special details are given 
about Onesimus, he is not dissociated 
from the others in the list. The 
Latin Martyrologies make Feb. 16 
(not Feb. 15) the day of his com- 
memoration ; and they represent him 
as put to death by stoning, not how- 
ever at Puteoli, but at Rome. They 
celebrate Philemon and Apphia alone 


on Nov. 22; but, like the Menea, 
they represent them as stoned to 
death at Colossz. These facts will 
explain the glosses which have been 
substituted for erehetdOn. 

9. Aker 06 a)rQ k.r...] The whole 
of this account is taken from Euse- 
bius H. E. iii. 33, whose language 
our author follows in the main, for- 
getting even to change the oblique 
narration (mpós à Tov Tpaiavoy .r.À.). 
But, though the account is taken from 
the History of Eusebius, the sequence ` 
of eventsis suggested by the Chronicle. 
of the same author ; see above, p. 449. 
At the same time the notices relating 
to Ignatius are our martyrologist’s 
own insertions in order to connect 
the correspondence of Pliny and 
Trajan with the fate of the martyr. 
Eusebius himself does not derive his 
information direct from Pliny, but 
from a Greek translation of Tertul- 
lian Afol. 2, which he quotes. His 
knowledge is so entirely derived at 
second hand, that he does not even 
know the name of the province 
which Pliny governed, Chron. YI. p. 


536 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [xr 


Ceko/vOov wyeuóvos, kiwgÜévros éri TG TwAnOE Tøv 
yevouévev MapTUpwY kai ömws UTtp THs TriG'Tecs GER 
oUvTO, dua Oe év Ta/TG Junv/ovros unóév dvociov [Noe 
Tapa TOUS VÓMOUS TpaTTEW QÜTOUS, TAIVY TO YE dua TH 
éw dueyepouevous tov Xpiatov oU Oeo? Sixny vuveiv: 
[Urep rovrov dixny Vméyew]| TO 96 poryevey kai po- 
vevew Kal Ta Guyyern covrois dÜégwra mAnuueNýuara 


> \ , , , E , 
Kal QUTOUVS damayopevet, MAVTA TE TWOATTELV akoXovÓows 


I Hyeudvos] LP; dryeudvos V. 
lii. 33); vexnOévros L; al. C. 


kwn0évros] P V B (comp. Euseb. H. Z. 


2 yevouévcov] PV ; yuouédyorv L. kal 
óres] LC; örws P; òs drpwrws V ; om. B. 


dvypoüvro] P ; dõlkws dvacpodyro 


L; ávcupe0évrov VB; dant se sponte (ipsos) ad mortem sine timore pro fide etc. C. 


3 Taŭro] LP Euseb.; 7G avrà V. 
vuovra PV; al. C ; def. B. 

L; contrarium legibus B. 

LP Euseb.; éóg V. 

al. C. Add. «al V ; om. LP. 


unvýovros] Kal unviovros L; an- 


4 Tapa Toùs vouous] PV Euseb.; mapávopov 
Tó ye] Euseb.; rò LP; ro0 ye V. 
O.eyetpouévovs] LV B Euseb.; ôrarnpovuévovs P ; 


5 še] 


Tov Xpicrdv] PV Euseb.; xpwrórv L. 


Tob Oeo? Gikmv] V ; Oeod dixnv Euseb.; sicut deum C; rod 0co (om. dixnv) PB (app., 


for it has caussa christi dei hymnos canebant) ; 


TOV povoyevh vióv rod Oeod L. 


tuveiv] CB Euseb.; mpockvveiy LP V. Perhaps we should read rpooumvety, 
6 úrèp] LP; kal bmp V ; def. CB, which omit the clause Umép...bméxew, wanting 


also in Euseb. 
adéunra LP. 
AovHws are omitted in L. 


162 ‘Plinius Secundus cuiusdam pro- 
vinciae praeses. 

THAwiov Sexovvdov] This refers to 
the celebrated letter, Plin. Æpist. x. 
97. The date of Pliny's Bithynian 
government was variously placed by 
older critics from A.D. 103 or 104 
(Tillemont, Clinton) onward. But 
a recently discovered inscription (C. 
J.L. MI. 777) has decided the time 
within narrow limits ; see Mommsen 
in Hermes Ill. p. 55 sq. It appears 
from the correspondence of Pliny 
and Trajan (Plin. EZsz. x. 81 ; comp. 
51, 68, 7o) that Calpurnius Macer 
was governor of the neighbouring 
province, Moesia Inferior, at the 
same time that Pliny held office in 


Toórov] V; add. uóvov LP. 
8 re] PCB Euseb.; ôè V. 
adxodovws] V[C][B] Euseb.; kai dxodovOws P ; 


7 béura] V; 
The words re mpárrew dko- 


Bithynia; and the inscription just 
referred to, belonging to this pro- 
vince and bearing the date A.D. 112; 
mentions him as propretor. As 
the length of the tenure of such 
offices was from two to three years 
at the outside, a closely approximate 
date is ascertained. Arguing on this 
basis and following the sequence of 
the letters, Mommsen concludes that 
the correspondence extends from 
about Sept. rrr to Jan, II3 ; so that 
the letter relating to the Christians 
will have been written in the autumn 
or winter of 112 from Amisus or 
the neighbourhood. On the impossi- 
bility of reconciling this date with 
the other indications of time given 


xi] ROMAN ACTS. 


Jo 


e M T, .. \ 9 1519: 5 , 
TOV lpatavov éT éÉvvoias Aa- 


[tots vouos]. pos à 


ro BovTa Ta kara TOY uakdpiov [kai aytov] “Iyvatiov (ñv 
yap Tpouayos THY Xovráv MaoTupwyv), Soyma TotoÜTov 
T€Üewévai, TO XpiaTiavwyv QUXov un ex(nTeio Oar pev, 
éuzrecov òè koNd(eoÜat. ro 06 AelNyavov ToU pakaptov 
l'yvariov ékéXevaev Tots ÜéXovauw mpos Tanu dve) éo- Qa, 


, , of ° \ \ \ ° > c 
15 akwuTws exe. ol ÒE KATA TNV Pony ade ol, ols 


def. L. 9 Tots vouos| B Euseb.; om. PVC; def. L. mpos à 
Tov] LP Euseb. (see also BC in the next note); mpds aùròv V. én’ èv- 
volas] P; èr évvolg V; &yvowav L. The renderings of this sentence in the versions 
are tratanus vero his auditis poenitens de his quae in beatum et sanctum ignatium in- 
gesserat B (as if it had read peravola Xafóvra) ; haec autem quum cognovit traianus 
ex epistolis plinii et consideravit apologias beati ignatii C (which implies some part 
of évvaa). 10 rà kara] LV, and so prob. CB (see the last note); om. P 
(by homoeoteleuton). kal yuy] LPVB ; om. C. 
LP; add. mpoBavra V; dub. CB. I2 reÜewévai] LP; reOnxévarc V. 
xporavov] V Euseb.; trav xpwriavav LP. um] B Euseb.; om. LPVC: 
see the next note. I3 éumeoor 06 koXd(ec0cc] Euseb.; si quis tamen in- 
cideret puniretur B; éumecov dé uù kohagerOar P; evpebev dé wh koddfecdar LC; eù- 
Tò 06 Meliyavov] Cs resumes here. 


"yvártov] txt 


TOU “akapiou] 
14 €xéNevoev] P; éxéXevce LVs. 
mpos raphy avedécba] LP; tollere ad 
I5 åkwňúrws] PV ; 


pebev 06 uh avatpetoOa V. 
VC; sancti B; Tot aylov kal uakaptov LP. 
Oéħovow] P; Oédovor V ; é0éXNovat L. 
sepeliendum B ; sepelire C; mpos raphy (om. àveNés0au) V. 
adxodUTws L. 


by our martyrologist, see above, p. 
377. See more fully I. p. 50 sq. 

5. Tov Oeod Oikmv] ‘after the man- 
ner of God, ‘as God, according to 
the classical usage of Siknv. But 
this use seems to have puzzled a 
later age, so that dikny is struck out 
in some texts. The correctness of 
the reading Oikny is verified by the 
text of Eusebius. The Latin of 
Tertullian (4207 2), from which 
this is ultimately derived, stands 
in the authorities generally *ad 
canendum Christo ef Deo; which 
Oehler retains and attempts to de- 
fend, but the emendation 'z£ Deo’ 
for ‘ef Deo’ is certain ; for (1) Pliny's 
own words are ‘carmenque Christo 
quasi Deo dicere; (2) The Greek 


translation of Tertullian, as quoted 
by Eusebius, is róv Xpiróv cod 
Oikgv )pveiv; (3) The natural order 
otherwise would be not ‘Christo et 
Deo,’ but * Deo et Christo.’ 

I2. py ék(greioÜav uév] The vari- 
ous readings show that our author 
originally copied Eusebius, but that 
his text was subsequently corrupted 
by successive stages. The um was 
first displaced and transferred to the 
second clause, so that the sentence 
then ran ék(greicÜau uév éumeoov de 
pn koAá(ec0av; but this was felt to 
be absurd, and it was emended by 
substituting first evpedev for éymeoóv, 
and then dvaupeic@a for koAá(ea6a:. 
The un is omitted in the Armenian 
Chronicon (M. p. 162). 


538 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [xi 


kal €TEGTAAKEL WOTE M mapavria auévovs aUTOV TNS 
paprupias THS moouserns dmostephoat éAridos, Na- 
Bovres avtov TO cua aréÜevro e qum) évOa nv e£ov 
dOpoiCouévovs aivety Tov Oeov kai Tov X pia Tod auTou 
éz] TH TEAELWOEL TOU dylov émicKOT OU Kal pLapTUPOS 
"Iryvacrtov: MNHMH yap AIKAIOY MET ÉTKOMIQON. 

XII. Olðev 96 aŭro TO uapTvpiov kal Eipnvatos 
d Aovysovvov ézíckozos, kal TwY ÉmiGTONOV aUTOU 
puvnpuovever A€ywv oŬTws’ EilpukéN ric TON HMETEP@N 
Ald THN mpóc OeóN MAPTYPIAN KATAKPI0e]c mpóc 
OH Pd OT ZITO. CN TOY (SVG O Y Kal Al ÓAÓNTON 
O@HPIWN AAHOBOMAI, TNA Ka0apoc APTOC FÉNOMAI. 


I éreoráAkei] V 5 commendaverat B; éméoraNkev L; dmeoráAke: P; scripsit C. 
dore] PV; ws L (see the note on drrocrepfcat). mapaitnoapevous| V ; Tapn- 
rnoapevous P; maparrnoduevo. L. The rendering in C is guod si prohibueritis me 
mori in christum, privabitis me spe ad quam respicio (but Cs is mutilated). avrov] 
LV; a)rQv P. ris uaprvplas rhs ToÜ0ovuévos] LP; ris vo0ovuévqgs uaprvplas 
V. 2 árocTepíjaa«] arosrephoet V; dmroarepeto0at P; amocrepyoee L. eNr(Oos] 
here, PV; before dmrogrepijcee, L. 3 Tò copa] PVC; reliquias sancti [A]; 
Tà TepiNeufOévra rv &ylev NeWavwv L; see above, p. 534, l. 2. èv rómQ] 
VA (?); om. LPB; dub. C. The recurrence of similar letters -estroestronop 
might have led to the omission. nv é£óv] PVB; accidebat A; karé 
pevov é£ àv L (obviously corrupt). C translates «££ solebant congregari etc. 
4 a0poifouévovs] LVCAB; óp0pifouévovs P. kal tov Xpwróv avrod] C; 
et filium ejus unigenitum A; kal Tov kÜpuov quay inoody xpuwróv LPV ; e£ domi- 
num nostrum jesum christum filium ejus B. Add. kal Trò dytov Tveüua LPVA ; 
in spiritu sancto [B]; om. C. 5 ayiov] txt LPCAB ; add. xai maka- 
plov V. kal] txt LPCAB ; add. uakaplov V. 6 ókatov] LPC; 
Oixalwy VA; al. B. éyxwplwv] PA; add. vivera. LV; add. esz [C] ; al. B. 
7 96] PVCB Euseb. ZZ. Æ. iii. 36 ; om. L[A]. avrod] here, L, Euseb.; 
after uapróptov, P ; in both places, V. kai] LPAB Euseb.; om. V[C]. 
Elpnvatos] PV ; eipwatos L; ó elpnvatos Euseb. 8 Aovydovvou] V ; Xovy- 
Odvov P; Xovyóóvov L[C]; Jaudom A; lugdunensis B; def. Euseb. kai] 
PVB Euseb.; om. C (?); às kal L (8s being a repetition of the preceding syllable); 
sed et A. 9 Hipnxev] PL; etomke Vs; dixit CA; ws elme Euseb.; sicut... 
ait B. 10 mpos Ocdv] Euseb.; mpos 0co0 V ; secundum deum B; els 0eóv LP; 
in christum Cs; quae ducit in christum Cm; dez A. karakpiÉels mpòs 0mpla] 


6. pwjun yàp kr.X] From Prov. this chapter, containing the testi- 
Nye monies of Irenzus and Polycarp, is 
7. Oibev dé k.r.A.] The whole of taken from Eusebius ZZ. Z. iii. 36. 


5 


IO 


xu] ROMAN ACTS. 539 


Kal po sinus Oé, éÉvíckozos dv Tis èv Cuvovn 
TapolKkias, TOUTWY uéuvnTat Pitirmnoiots ypapwy: 
15 Tapakarw OYN TANTAC YMáC, &AeA ol, rei&apyeiN 
Kal ACKEIN MACAN YTOMONHN, HN elàere kar 
ODBAAMOYC OY MONON ÉN TOC MaKaploic |rNario 
Kal “Poydw Kal Zwcimw AANA Kal ÈN SAAOIC TOÀ- 
Aoic Toic ëZ Y MÀN Kal éu ayt Mayao kai roic 
20CYN AYT@ memicTeYKOCciN, STI OYTO! TANTEC OYK 
EIC KENON EAPAMON, AAA EN TICTE! KAI AIKALOCYNH' 
Kal OTI EIC TON OEIAOMENON AYTOIC TÓTON EICIN 
Tapa Kypia, @ Kal cyNéma00N' OY fap TON NTN 
HrATHCAN AIDNA AAAA TON YTIEP HMO@N ámoOa- 


> 


` , \ 
25NONTA XPICTON KA] ANACTANTA ETTOOHCAN. Kat 


LPBA Euseb.; mapadofels els Onpia V; (morti) damnatus ut daretur feris 
(€ II ToU Ocot] LP; Oeod Euseb.; de CBA ; Tov 0co0 pov V. 13 9é] 
PV[C]B Euseb.; om. LA. érickoros Qv] LPC ; ó érloxomos V ; episcopus 
A[B]; def. Euseb. év Zu)pry] LPC; cepwprvalev V 5 smyrniarum (sic) B ; 
smyrnaeorum urbis A ; def. Euseb. 14 TovTwr] VC; rovrov airway Euseb.; 
Touro P; rovrov (not however here, but before kal moAókapmos) L; tala A; ejus 
B. pépynrat Pdirmnctos ypdowv] LP (both however writing $owrmwtois) ; 
commemorat et dicit...in epistola quam philippensibus scripsit A; meminit scribens 
philippensibus ( philippis), dicens ita C; meminit... philippensibus scribens ac dicens 
B; péurnrar èv TÀ Qepouévg avrod mpós pirermyolous émwroNG packwy auros phuace 
Euseb.; uynuovever éywr V. 15 oy mavras] LBA Euseb. Polyc.; om. PVC. 
16 eldere] V ; Vere LP. 17 Iyariy] LV; byvártov P. 18 ‘Potoy 
kal Zwotuw) LPVC (but om. xal wotu C,) B Euseb.; fwoluy kal poipy A Polyc. 

adda] LPCAB Euseb. Polyc.; om. V. 19 Tots pri.] PVCAB Euseb. Polyc.; 
om. L. bucv] LPCAB Euseb. Polyc.; uv V. avr@] txt L Euseb. Polyc.; 
add. 7@ PV. kal rois ov abrQ TerioTevkócw] P (but aùroîs for aúr@) V; e£ 
omnibus illis qui crediderunt ex ipso C ; et ceteris qui cum eo crediderunt B; kal rois 
Aourois dmocTóNois Temewcpévovs Euseb. Polyc. A; om. L. The reading of our 
martyrologist seems to be an emendation of a corrupt text of Eusebius, me- 


miorevxdow being obtained from memeuuéyvous. 21 &Ópauov] txt CB 
Euseb. Polyc.; add. où (ovdé L) els kevóv éxomíacav LPVA (from Phil. ii. 16). 
GAN] PsVs; adda L. 22 elo] PV; elei L. 24 Wyarnoay 
alva] LP Euseb. Polyc.; aiva ?ryármoav V. 25 Xpwróv] PVCAB; 
om. Euseb. Polyc.; add. ràv uovoyev viov Tod beo L. avacrTávra] txt 


PVCA ; pref. ô quads và roô Geo Euseb. Polyc. ; pref. a deo B; pref. ry rptrg 
qepa L. 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. [xi 


540 
t Í Tac È CEN | TAC TEM- 
pera fpa xea € tac énicroAac IrNatioy 


pbeeicac HMIN YT AYTOY Kal AAAAC, ÓCAC E1XOMEN 


c ^ > + € ^ ` 
TAP HMIN, [émictToAAc] ETEMYAMEN YMIN, KABOC 


&NeTrelAacOe: AITINEC YTOTETALPMENA! EICI TH ETIE 
CTOAH TAYTH' éZ ON MET AAA @®PEAHOHCECHE’ TEPIE- 
tf \ € \ A > \ , 
yoYci ráp TICTIN KAI YTOMONHN THN €iC TON Ky pion 
H M Q N. 
^ 2 / ` , 2 Š dé be > 
Tovto lyvariov TO MApPTUpLOV LAOEXETAL OE MET 


\ [74 Va oo, e 
aùrov Tyv '"Àvrioxeías. émiokomyy “Hpwv. kai ea Tw. h 


, > 
pn Tov Oeobixeora+Tou Kal yevvaiov uaprTupos ` lyva- 
tiov unvi llavéuw veoumvia. 

r óe] V[C]; om. LP; al. B Euseb.; def. A. 2 ùr avtod] LV Euseb.; map 
avrot P. 3 émioToAàs] LPV; om. BC Euseb.; al. A. éréuwapev ] 
LPBA Euseb. Polyc.; éreuya VC. 4 Umoreraypévac elol] L Euseb. (with v. 1. 
elaiv) ; elow imorerayuéva, PV. 5 tatty] LV; atr7 (sic) P. ueyáňa] 
L Euseb.; ueyáXos PV. mepiéxovoi] LVB Euseb. Polyc.; mapéxovot P; eru- 
diunt...super C; def. A. 6 Kúpov huv] txt BCs Euseb. Polyc. (the two 
latter adding åvńýkovsav); add. inoviv xpwróv LPVCm; def. A. 8 Touro] LPC; 
ToLoUTov yap V ; al. AB. diadéxerac 0e wer avróv] PV Euseb.; merà dé (om. dé 
C) rijv aŭro redelwowy diadéxerar LC (at least Cm, but the text is corrupted in Cs); 
excepit A; def. B. 9 'Àvrtoxeías émwkomiv] PVA Euseb. ; episcopatum urbis 
antiochiae C; émisxoryy àvrioxéov L; def. B. "Hpev] V ; heron A; jjpwv 
(sic) P ; npor Cm; on pot Cs; etpov L; pes Euseb.; def. B. II umi Ilavéug 
veounvia] P (but, as usual, without any ¿£ subscript); Zo mensis qui vocatur 
secundum romanos panemus, secundum aegyptios autem septimo epiphi Cm; primo 
mensis qui vocatur panemus qui est epiphi secundum linguam aegyptiorum Cs; 
kalendis februarii [B] (but one Ms adds sed translatio corporis eius mom minori 
obsequio decimo sexto kalendas januarii colitur); in hrotits mensis die primo (qui 
dies initium est) [secundum graecos Decembr. 20] A; pyri OekeuBplo K V; umi 
dexeuPply elkddu évexÜévrew dé èv dytioxela TÕv Tiulwv adrod ew Wdvwr pyri lav- 
vovapiq elkad. évvarn L. Add. in christo Jesu domino nostro C ; add. év xpurTQ 
inood TQ kvplq "uv, Q h 00£a. kal TO kpáros els ros aldvas TOv alQvav. duń L; add. 
Xapire TOÔ kuplov quw ico xpioroð Q 9 óta k.T.X. V; add. praestante domino 
nostro jesu christo, qui vivit etc. [B]. 

8. duadéxerar 0€ k.r.A.] This sen- 
tence also is from Eusebius l.c. 
9. kal €or K.T.A.] This is doubt- 


is Dec. 20 according to the later 
Greek usage (see above, p. 422 sq), 
to which L adds Jan. 29 as the day 


less the original reading of our Acts. 
The day of Ignatius is given accord- 
ing to the Egyptian calendar as 
Panemus (ie. July) 1st: see above, 
p.423. In different recensions it is 
altered according to the usages of 
different churches. In LV the day 


of the translation of the reliques from 
Rome to Antioch ; while in B it be- 
comes Feb. 1 after the Latin calendar 
(see above, p. 428), where again at 
least one MS adds Dec. 17 as the day 
of the translation according to the 
Latin calendar. 


IO 


II S SN SIPIN Te O NS: - 


Te EL PISELES Oss SG Neer 


2, ACTS» ORSMARTYRDOM, 


(1) ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 
(2) ROMAN ACTS. 


Peo l STOP el GN ASL US: 


i 


PO meio DIDIESTANS) 


GNATIUS, who is also Theophorus, unto her which hath 
been blessed in greatness through the plenitude of God the 
Father ; which hath been foreordained before the ages to be for 
ever unto abiding and unchangeable glory, united and elect in 
a true passion, by the will of the Father and of Jesus Christ 
our God; even unto the church which is in Ephesus [of Asia], 
worthy of all felicitation: abundant greeting in Christ Jesus 
and in blameless joy. 

1. While I welcomed in God [your] well-beloved name, which 
ye bear by natural right [in an upright and virtuous mind] by 
faith and love in Christ Jesus our Saviour—being imitators of 
God, and having your hearts kindled in the blood of God, ye 
have perfectly fulfilled your congenial work—for when ye heard 
that I was on my way from Syria, in bonds for the sake of 
the common Name and hope, and was hoping through your 
prayers to succeed in fighting with wild beasts in Rome, that by 
so succeeding I might have power to be a disciple, ye were 
eager to visit me:—seeing then that in God's name I have 
received your whole multitude in the person of Onesimus, 
whose love passeth utterance and who is moreover your bishop 
[in the flesh]—and I pray that ye may love him according to 


544 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


Jesus Christ and that ye all may be like him; for blessed is He 
that granted unto you according to your deserving to have such 
a bishop :— 

2. But as touching my fellow-servant Burrhus, who by 
the will of God is your deacon blessed in all things, I pray 
that he may remain with me to the honour of yourselves and 
of your bishop. Yea, and Crocus also, who is worthy of God 
and of you, whom I received as an ensample of the love which 
ye bear me, hath relieved me in all ways—even so may the 
Father of Jesus Christ refresh him—together with Onesimus and 
Burrhus and Euplus and Fronto; in whom I saw you all with 
the eyes of love. May I have joy of you always, if so be I 
am worthy of it. It is therefore meet for you in every way 
to glorify Jesus Christ who glorifed you; that being perfectly 
joined together in one submission, submitting yourselves to your 
bishop and presbytery, ye may be sanctified in all things. 

3. I do not command you, as though I were somewhat. 
For even though I am in bonds for the Name's sake, I am 
not yet perfected in Jesus Christ. [For] now am I beginning 
to be a disciple; and I speak to you as to my school-fellows. 
For I ought to be trained by you for the contest in faith, in 
admonition, in endurance, in long-suffering. But, since love 
doth not suffer me to be silent concerning you, therefore was 
I forward to exhort you, that ye run in harmony with the mind 
of God: for Jesus Christ also, our inseparable life, is the mind 
of the Father, even as the bishops that are settled in the ` 
farthest parts of the earth are in the mind of Jesus Christ. 

4. So then it becometh you to run in harmony with the 
mind of the bishop; which thing also ye do. For your honour- 
able presbytery, which is worthy of God, is attuned to the 
bishop, even as its strings to a lyre. Therefore in your concord 
and harmonious love Jesus Christ is sung. And do ye, each 
and all, form yourselves into a chorus, that being harmoni- 
ous in concord and taking the key note of God ye may in 
unison sing with one voice through Jesus Christ unto the Father, 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 545 


that He may both hear you and acknowledge you by your good 
deeds to be members of His Son. It is therefore profitable for 
you to be in blameless unity, that ye may also be partakers of 
God always. 

5. For if I in a short time had such converse with your 
bishop, which was not after the manner of men but in the Spirit, 
how much more do I congratulate you who are closely joined 
with him as the Church is with Jesus Christ and as Jesus 
Christ is with the Father, that all things may be harmonious 
in unity. Let no man be deceived. If any one be not within 
the precinct of the altar, he lacketh the bread [of God]. For, if 
the prayer of one and another hath so great force, how much 
more that of the bishop and of the whole Church. Whoso- 
ever therefore cometh not to the congregation, he doth thereby 
show his pride and hath separated himself ; for it is written, God 
resisteth the proud. Let us therefore be careful not to resist the 
bishop, that by our submission we may give ourselves to God. 

6. And in proportion as a man seeth that his bishop is 
silent, let him fear him the more. For every one whom the 
Master of the household sendeth to be steward over His own 
house, we ought so to receive as Him that sent him. Plainly 
therefore we ought to regard the bishop as the Lord Himself. 
- Now Onesimus of his own accord highly praiseth your orderly 
conduct in God, for that ye all live according to truth, and 
that no heresy hath a home among you: nay, ye do not so 
much as listen to any one, if he speak of aught else save 
concerning Jesus Christ in truth. 

7. For:some are wont of malicious guile to hawk about 
the Name, while they do certain other things unworthy of God. 
These men ye ought to shun, as wild-beasts; for they are mad 
dogs, biting by stealth; against whom ye ought to be on your 
guard, for they are hard to heal. There is one only physician, 
of flesh and of spirit, generate and ingenerate, God in man, true 
Life in death, Son of Mary and Son of God, first passible and 
then impassible, Jesus Christ our Lord. 


IGN, II. 35 


546 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


8. Let no one therefore deceive you, as indeed ye are not 
deceived, seeing that ye belong wholly to God. For when no 
lust is established in you, which hath power to torment you, then 
truly ye live after God. I devote myself for you, and I dedicate 
myself as an offering for the church of you Ephesians which is 
famous unto all the ages. They that are of the flesh cannot do 
the things of the Spirit, neither can they that are of the Spirit 
do the things of the flesh; even as faith cannot do the things of 
unfaithfulness, neither unfaithfulness the things of faith. Nay, 
even those things which ye do after the flesh are spiritual; for 
ye do all things in Jesus Christ. 

9. But I have learned that certain persons passed through 
you from yonder, bringing evil doctrine; whom ye suffered not 
to sow seed in you, for ye stopped your ears, so that ye might 
not receive the seed sown by them; forasmuch as ye are stones 
of a temple, which were prepared beforehand for a building 
of God the Father, being hoisted up to the heights through the 
engine of Jesus Christ, which is the Cross, and using for a rope 
the Holy Spirit; while your faith is your windlass, and love is 
the way that leadeth up to God. So then ye are all com- 
panions in the way, carrying your God and your shrine, your 
Christ and your holy things, being arrayed from head to foot in 
the commandments of Jesus Christ. And I too, taking part in 
the festivity, am permitted by letter to bear you company and 
to rejoice with you, that ye set not your love on anything after 
the common life of men, but only on God. 

IO. And pray ye also without ceasing for the rest of 
mankind (for there is in them a hope of repentance), that 
they may find God. Therefore permit them to take lessons at 
least from your works. Against their outbursts of wrath be ye 
meek; against their proud words be ye humble; against their 
railings set ye your prayers; against their errors be ye stedfast 
in the faith; against their fierceness be ye gentle. And be not 
zealous to imitate them by requital. Let us show ourselves 
their brothers by our forbearance; but let us be zealous to be 


TO THE EPHESIANS. iy 


imitators of the Lord, vying with each other who shall suffer the 
greater wrong, who shall be defrauded, who shall be set at 
nought; that no herb of the devil be found in you: but in all 
purity and temperance abide ye in Christ Jesus, with your flesh 
and with your spirit. 

II, These are the last times. Henceforth let us have rever- 
ence; let us fear the long suffering of God, lest it turn into a 
judgment against us. For either let us fear the wrath which is to 
come or let us love the grace which now is—the one or the other ; 
provided only that we be found in Christ Jesus unto true life. 
Let nothing glitter in your eyes apart from Him, in whom I 
carry about my bonds, my spiritual pearls in which I would fain 
rise again through your prayer, whereof may it be my lot to be 
always a partaker, that I may be found in the company of those 
Christians of Ephesus who moreover were ever of one mind with 
the Apostles in the power of Jesus Christ. 

I2. I know who I am and to whom I write. I ama convict, 
ye have received mercy: Iam in peril, ye are established. Ye 
are the high-road of those that are on their way to die unto 
God. Ye are associates in the mysteries with Paul, who was 
sanctified, who obtained a good report, who is worthy of all 
felicitation ; in whose foot-steps I would fain be found treading, 
when I shall attain unto God; who in every letter maketh 
mention of you in Christ Jesus. 

13. Do your diligence therefore to meet together more 
frequently for thanksgiving to God and for His glory. For 
when ye meet together frequently, the powers of Satan are 
cast down; and his mischief cometh to nought in the concord 
of your faith. There is nothing better than peace, in which 
all warfare of things in heaven and things on earth is abo- 

lished. 
; 14. None of these things is hidden from you, if ye be perfect 
in your faith and love toward Jesus Christ, for these are the 
beginning and end of life—faith is the beginning and love is the 
end—and the two being found in unity are God, while all things 


35—2 


548 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


else follow in their train unto true nobility. No man professing 
faith sinneth, and no man possessing love hateth. The tree is 
manifest from its fruit; so they that profess to be Christ’s shall 
be seen through their actions. For the Work is not a thing of 
profession now, but is seen then when one is found in the power 
of faith unto the end. : 

15. It is better to keep silence and to be, than to talk and. 
not to be. It is afine thing to teach, if the speaker practise. 
Now there is one teacher, who spake and it came to pass: yea 
and even the things which He hath done in silence are worthy 
of the Father. He that truly possesseth the word of Jesus 
is able also to hearken unto His silence, that he may be 
perfect; that through his speech he may act and through his 
silence he may be known. Nothing is hidden from the Lord, 
but even our secrets are nigh unto Him. Let us therefore do 
all things as knowing that He dwelleth in us, to the end that we 
may be His temples and He Himself may be in us as our 
God. This is so, and it will also be made clear in our sight 
from the love which we rightly bear towards Him. 

16. Be not deceived, my brethren. Corrupters of houses 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Vf then they which do 
these things after the flesh are put to death, how much more if 
a man through evil doctrine corrupt the faith of God for which 
Jesus Christ was crucified. Such a man, having defiled himself, 
shall go into the unquenchable fire; and in like manner also 
shall he that hearkeneth unto him. 

17. For this cause the Lord received ointment on His head, 
that He might breathe incorruption upon the Church. Be not 
anointed with the ill odour of the teaching of the prince of this 
world, lest he lead you captive and rob you of the life which is 
set before you. And wherefore do we not all walk prudently, 
receiving the knowledge of God, which is Jesus Christ? Why 
perish we in our folly, not knowing the gift of grace which the 
Lord hath truly sent? 

18. My spirit is made an offscouring for the Cross, which is 


TO THE EPHESIANS. 549 


a stumbling-block to them that are unbelievers, but to us salva- 
tion and life eternal. Where ¿s the wise? Where ts the disputer? 
Where is the boasting of them that are called prudent? For 
our God, Jesus the Christ, was conceived in the womb by Mary 
according to a dispensation, of the seed of David but also of 
the Holy Ghost; and He was born and was baptized that by 
His passion He might cleanse water. 

19. And hidden from the prince of this world were the 
virginity of Mary and her child-bearing and likewise also the 
death of the Lord—three mysteries to be cried aloud—the 
which were wrought in the silence of God. How then were 
they made manifest to the ages? A star shone forth in the 
heaven above all the stars; and its light was unutterable, 
and its strangeness caused amazement; and all the rest of the 
constellations with the sun and mòon formed themselves into a 
chorus about the star; but the star itself far outshone them all; 
and there was perplexity to know whence came this strange 
appearance which was so unlike them. From that time forward 
every sorcery and every spell was dissolved, the ignorance of 
wickedness vanished away, the ancient kingdom was pulled 
down, when God appeared in the likeness of man unto newness 
of everlasting Z;fe; and that which had been perfected in the 
counsels of God began to take effect. Thence all things were 
perturbed, because the abolishing of death was taken in hand. 

20. If Jesus Christ should count me worthy through your 
prayer, and it should be the Divine will, in my second tract, 
which I intend to write to you, I will further set before you the 
dispensation whereof I have begun to speak, relating to the 
new man Jesus Christ, which consisteth in faith towards Him and 
in love towards Him, in His passion and resurrection, especially 
if the Lord should reveal aught to me. Assemble yourselves 
together in common, every one of you severally, man by man, in 
grace, in one faith and one Jesus Christ, who after the flesh was 
of David’s race, who is Son of Man and Son of God, to the 
end that ye may obey the bishop and the presbytery without 


550 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


distraction of mind; breaking one bread, which is the medicine 
of immortality and the antidote that we should not die but live 
for ever in Jesus Christ. 

21. I am devoted to you and to those whom for the honour 
of God ye sent to Smyrna ; whence also I write unto you with 
thanksgiving to the Lord, having love for Polycarp as I have for 
you also. Remember me, even as I would that Jesus Christ may 
also remember you. Pray for the church which is in Syria, 
. whence I am led a prisoner to Rome—I who am the very 
last of the faithful there; according as I was counted worthy 
to be found unto the honour of God. Fare ye well in God the 
Father and in Jesus Christ our common hope. 


2r 
TO THE MAGNESIANS. 


GNATIUS, who is also Theophorus, unto her which hath been 

blessed through the grace of God the Father in Christ Jesus 

our Saviour, in whom I salute the church which is in Magnesia 

on the Meander, and I wish her abundant greeting in God the 
Father and in Jesus Christ. 

1. When I learned the exceeding good order of your love in 
the ways of God, I was gladdened and I determined to address 
you in the faith of Jesus Christ. For being counted worthy 
to bear a most godly name, in these bonds, which I carry about, 
I sing the praise of the churches ; and I pray that there may be 
in them union of the flesh and of the spirit which are Jesus 
Christ’s, our never-failing life—an union of faith and of love 
which is preferred before all things, and—what is more than 
all—an union with Jesus and with the Father ; in whom if we 
endure patiently all the despite of the prince of this world and 
escape therefrom, we shall attain unto God. 

2. Forasmuch then as I was permitted to see you in the 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 551I 


person of Damas your godly bishop and your worthy presbyters 
Bassus and Apollonius and my fellow-servant the deacon Zotion, 
of whom I would fain have joy, for that he is subject to the 
bishop as unto the grace of God and to the presbytery as unto 
the law of Jesus Christ — 

3. Yea, and it becometh you also not to presume upon the 
youth of your bishop, but according to the power of God the 
Father to render unto him all reverence, even as I have learned 
that the holy presbyters also have not taken advantage of his 
outwardly youthful estate, but give place to him as to one pru- 
dent in God; yet not to him, but to the Father of Jesus Christ, 
even to the Bishop of all. For the honour therefore of Him that 
desired you, it is meet that ye should be obedient without 
dissimulation. For a man doth not so much deceive this bishop 
who is seen, as cheat that other who is invisible; and in 
such a case he must reckon not with flesh but with God who 
knoweth the hidden things. 
| 4 It is therefore meet that we not only be called Christians, 
but also be such; even as some persons have the bishop’s name 
on their lips, but in everything act apart from him. Such men 
appear to me not to keep a good conscience, forasmuch as 
they do not assemble themselves together lawfully according to 
commandment. 

5. Seeing then that all things have an end, and these two— 
life and death—are set before us together, and each man shall 
go to his own place; for just as there are two coinages, the one 
of God and the other of the world, and each of them hath its 
proper stamp impressed upon it, the unbelievers the stamp of 
this world, but the faithful in love the stamp of God the Father 
through Jesus Christ, through whom unless of our own free choice 
we accept to die unto His passion, His life is not in us :— 

6. Seeing then that in the aforementioned persons I be- 
held your whole people in faith and embraced them, I advise 
you, be ye zealous to do all things in godly concord, the bishop 
presiding after the likeness of God and the presbyters after 


552 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


the likeness of the council of the Apostles, with the deacons 
also who are most dear to me, having been entrusted with the 
diaconate of Jesus Christ, who was with the Father before the 
worlds and appeared at the end of time. Therefore do ye all 
study conformity to God and pay reverence one to another ; 
and let no man regard his neighbour after the flesh, but love 
ye one another in Jesus Christ always. Let there be nothing 
among you which shall have power to divide you, but be ye 
united with the bishop and with them that preside over you as 
an ensample and a lesson of incorruptibility. 

7. Therefore as the Lord did nothing without the Father, 
[being united with Him], either by Himself or by the Apostles, so 
neither do ye anything without the bishop and the presbyters. 
And attempt not to think anything right for yourselves apart 
from others: but let there be one prayer in common, one suppli- 
` cation, one mind, one hope, in love and in joy unblameable, which 
is Jesus Christ, than whom there is nothing better. Hasten to 
come together all of you, as to one temple, even God ; as to one 
altar, even to one Jesus Christ, who came forth from One Father 
and is with One and departed unto One. 

8. Be not seduced by strange doctrines nor by antiquated 
fables, which are profitless. For if even unto this day we live 
after the manner of Judaism, we avow that we have not received 
grace: for the divine prophets lived after Christ Jesus. For this 
cause also they were persecuted, being inspired by His grace to 
the end that they which are disobedient might be fully persuaded 
that there is one God who manifested Himself through Jesus 
Christ His Son, who is His Word that proceeded from silence, 
who in all things was well-pleasing unto Him that sent Him. 

9. If then those who had walked in ancient practices 
attained unto newness of hope, no longer observing sabbaths 
but fashioning their lives after the Lord's day, on which our life 
also arose through Him and through His death which some men 
deny—a mystery whereby we attained unto belief, and for this 
cause we endure patiently, that we may be found disciples of 


TO THE MAGNESIANS. 553 


Jesus Christ our only teacher—if this be so, how shall we be 
able to live apart from Him? seeing that even the prophets, being 
His disciples, were expecting Him as their teacher through the 
Spirit. And for this cause He whom they rightly awaited, 
when He came, raised them from the dead. 

IO. Therefore let us not be insensible to His goodness. For 
if He should imitate us according to our deeds, we are lost. For 
this cause, seeing that we are become His disciples, let us learn 
to live as beseemeth Christianity. For whoso is called by an- 
other name besides this, is not of God. Therefore put away the 
vile leaven which hath waxed stale and sour, and betake your- 
selves to the new leaven, which is Jesus Christ. Be ye salted in 
Him, that none among you grow putrid, seeing that by your 
savour ye shall be proved. It is monstrous to talk of Jesus Christ 
and to practise Judaism. For Christianity did not believe in 
Judaism, but Judaism in Christianity, wherein every tongue be- 
lieved and was gathered together unto God. 
|. II. Now these things I say, my dearly beloved, not because 
I have learned that any of you are so minded ; but as being 
less than any of you, I would have you be on your guard 
betimes, that ye fall not into the snares of vain doctrine; but be 
ye fully persuaded concerning the birth and the passion and the 
resurrection, which took place in the time of the governorship 
of Pontius Pilate; for these things were truly and certainly 
done by Jesus Christ our hope; from which hope may it not 
befal any of you to be turned aside. 

12. Let me have joy of you in all things, if I be worthy. 
For even though I am in bonds, yet am I not comparable to one 
of you who are at liberty. I know that ye are not puffed up; 
for ye have Jesus Christ in yourselves. And, when I praise you, 
I know that ye only feel the more shame; as it is written The 
righteous man 1s a self-accuser. 

I3. Do your diligence therefore that ye be confirmed in the 
ordinances of the Lord and of the Apostles, that ye may prosper 
in all things whatsoever ye do in flesh and spirit, by faith and by 


554 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


love, in the Son and Father and in the Spirit, in the begin- 
ning and in the end, with your revered bishop, and with the 
fitly wreathed spiritual circlet of your presbytery, and with 
the deacons who walk after God. Be obedient to the bishop 
and to one another, as Jesus Christ was to the Father [according 
to the flesh], and as the Apostles were to Christ and to the 
Father, that there may be union both of flesh and of spirit. 

14. Knowing that ye are full of God, I have exhorted 
you briefly. Remember me in your prayers, that I may attain 
unto God; and remember also the church which is in Syria, 
whereof I am not worthy to be called a member. For I have 
need of your united prayer and love in God, that it may be 
granted to the church which is in Syria to be refreshed by the 
dew of your fervent supplication. 

15. The Ephesians from Smyrna salute you, from whence 
also I write to you. They are here with me for the glory of 
God, as also are ye; and they have comforted me in all things, 
together with Polycarp bishop of the Smyrnzans. Yea, and 
all the other churches salute you in the honour of Jesus Christ. 
Fare ye well in godly concord, and possess ye a stedfast spirit, 
which is Jesus Christ. 


S 
TO THE -TRAELTANS. 


GNATIUS, who is also Theophorus, unto her that is beloved 
by God the Father of Jesus Christ; to the holy church 
which is in Tralles of Asia, elect and worthy of God, having 
peace in flesh and spirit through the passion of Jesus Christ, 
who is our hope through our resurrection unto Him; which 
church also I salute in the Divine plenitude after the apostolic 

fashion, and I wish her abundant greeting. 
1. I have learned that ye have a mind unblameable and 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 555 


stedfast in patience, not from habit, but by nature, according as 
Polybius your bishop informed me, who by the will of God and 
of Jesus Christ visited me in Smyrna; and so greatly did 
he rejoice with me in my bonds in.Christ Jesus, that in him 
I beheld the whole multitude of you. Having therefore re- 
ceived your godly benevolence at his hands, I gave glory, 
forasmuch as I had found you to be imitators of God, even 
as I had learned. 

2. For when ye are obedient to the bishop as to Jesus 
Christ, it is evident to me that ye are living not after men but 
after Jesus Christ, who died for us, that believing on His death 
ye might escape death. It is therefore necessary, even as your 
wont is, that ye should do nothing without the bishop; but be 
ye obedient also to the presbytery, as to the Apostles of Jesus 
. Christ our hope; for if we live in Him, we shall also be found 
in Him. And those likewise who are deacons of the mysteries 
of Jesus Christ must please all men in all ways. For they are 
not deacons of meats and drinks but servants of the Church 
of God. It is right therefore that they should beware of blame 
as of fire. 

3. Inlike manner let all men respect the deacons as Jesus 
Christ, even as they should respect the bishop as being a type of 
the Father and the presbyters as the council of God and as 
the college of Apostles. Apart from these there is not even 
the name of a church. And I am persuaded that ye are so 
minded as touching these matters: for I received the ensample 
of your love, and I have it with me, in the person of your bishop, 
whose very demeanour is a great lesson, while his gentleness 
is power—a man to whom I think even the godless pay reve- 
rence. Seeing that I love you I thus spare you, though I 
might write more sharply on his behalf: but I did not think 
myself competent for this, that being a convict I should order 
you as though I were an Apostle. 

4. I have many deep thoughts in God: but I take the 
measure of myself, lest I perish in my boasting. For now I 


556 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


ought to be the more afraid and not to give heed to those that 
would puff me up: for they that say these things to me are a 
scourge to me. For though I desire to suffer, yet I know not 
whether I am worthy: for the envy of the devil is unseen in- 
deed by many, but against me it wages the fiercer war. So 
then I crave gentleness, whereby the prince of this world is 
brought to nought. 

5. Am I not able to write to you of heavenly things? 
But I fear lest I should cause you harm being babes. So bear 
with me, lest not being able to take them in, ye should be 
choked. For I myself also, albeit I am in bonds and can 
comprehend heavenly things and the arrays of the angels and 
the musterings of the principalities, things visible and things 
invisible—I myself am not yet by reason of this a disciple. For 
we lack many things, that God may not be lacking to us. 

6. I exhort you therefore—yet not I, but the love of Jesus 
Christ—take ye only Christian food, and abstain from strange 
herbage, which is heresy: for these men do even mingle poison 
with Jesus Christ, imposing upon others by a show of honesty, 
like persons administering a deadly drug with honied wine, so 
that one who knoweth it not, fearing nothing, drinketh in death 
with a baneful delight. 

7. Be ye therefore on your guard against such men. And 
this will surely be, if ye be not puffed up and if ye be insepa- 
rable from [God] Jesus Christ and from the bishop and from 
the ordinances of the Apostles. He that is within the sanctuary 
is clean; but he that is without the sanctuary is not clean, that 
is, he that doeth aught without the bishop and presbytery and 
deacons, this man is not clean in his conscience. 

8. Not indeed that I have known of any such thing among 
you, but I keep watch over you betimes, as my beloved, for 
I foresee the snares of the devil. Do ye therefore arm your- 
selves with gentleness and recover yourselves in faith which is 
the flesh of the Lord, and in love which is the blood of Jesus 
Christ. Let none of you bear a grudge against his neigh- 


TO THE TRALLIANS. 557 


bour. Give no occasion to the Gentiles, lest by reason of a 
few foolish men the godly multitude be blasphemed: for Woe 
unto him through whom My name is vainly blasphemed before 
some. 

9. Be ye deaf therefore, when any man speaketh to you 
apart from Jesus Christ, who was of the race of David, who was 
the Son of Mary, who was truly born and ate and drank, was 
truly persecuted under Pontius Pilate, was truly crucified and 
died in the sight of those in heaven and those on earth and 
those under the earth; who moreover was truly raised from 
the dead, His Father having raised Him, who in the like fashion 
wil so raise us also who believe on Him—His Father, I say, 
will raise us—in Christ Jesus, apart from whom we have not 
true life. 

IO. But if it were as certain persons who are godless, 
that is unbelievers, say, that He suffered only in semblance, 
being themselves mere semblance, why am I in bonds? And 
why also do I desire to fight with wild beasts? So I die in 
vain. Truly then I lie against the Lord. 

11. Shun ye therefore those vile offshoots that gender a 
deadly fruit, whereof if a man taste, forthwith he dieth. For 
these men are not the Father’s planting: for if they had been, 
they would have been seen to be branches of the Cross, and 
their fruit imperishable—the Cross whereby He through His 
passion inviteth us, being His members. Now it cannot be 
that a head should be found without members, seeing that 
God promiseth union, and this union is Himself. 

12. I salute you from Smyrna, together with the churches 
of God that are present with me; men who refreshed me in 
all ways both in flesh and in spirit. My bonds exhort you, 
which for Jesus Christ’s sake I bear about, entreating that I 
may attain unto God ; abide ye in your concord and in prayer 
one with another, For it becometh you severally, and more 
especially the presbyters, to cheer the soul of your bishop unto 
the honour of the Father [and to the honour] of Jesus Christ 


558 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


and of the Apostles. I pray that ye may hearken unto me in 
love, lest I be for a testimony against you by having so written. 
And pray ye also for me who have need of your love in the 
mercy of God, that I may be vouchsafed the lot which I am 
eager to attain, to the end that I be not found reprobate. 

13. The love of the Smyrnzeans and Ephesians saluteth 
you. Remember in your prayers the church which is in Syria ; 
whereof [also] I am not worthy to be called a member, being 
the very last of them. Fare ye well in Jesus Christ, submitting 
yourselves to the bishop as to the commandment, and like- 
wise also to the presbytery; and each of you severally love 
one another with undivided heart. My spirit is offered up 
for you, not only now, but also when I shall attain unto God. 
For I am still in peril; but the Father is faithful in Jesus 
Christ to fulfil my petition and yours. May we be found un- 
blameable in Him. 


a 
TO THE ROMANS. 


who is also Theophorus, unto her that hath 

found mercy in the bountifulness of the Father Most High 
and of Jesus Christ His only Son; to the church that is 
beloved and enlightened through the will of Him who willed all 
things that are, by faith and love towards Jesus Christ our 
God; even unto her that hath the presidency in the country 
of the region of the Romans, being worthy of God, worthy of 
honour, worthy of felicitation, worthy of praise, worthy of 
success, worthy in purity, and having the presidency of love, 
walking in the law of Christ and bearing the Fathers name; 
which church also I salute in the name of Jesus Christ the 
Son of the Father; unto them that in flesh and spirit are united 


TO THE ROMANS. 559 


unto His every commandment, being filled with the grace of 
God without wavering, and filtered clear from every foreign 
stain; abundant greeting in Jesus Christ our God in blame- 
lessness. 

I. Forasmuch as in answer to my prayer to God it hath 
been granted me to see your godly countenances, so that I have 
obtained even more than I asked; for wearing bonds in Christ 
Jesus I hope to salute you, if it be the Divine will that I 
should be counted worthy to reach unto the end; for the begin- 
ning verily is well ordered, if so be I shall attain unto the goal, 
that I may receive mine inheritance without hindrance. For 
I dread your very love, lest it do me an injury; for it is easy 
for you to do what ye will, but for me it is difficult to attain 
unto God, unless ye shall spare me. 

2. For I would not have you to be men-pleasers but to 
please God, as indeed ye do please Him. For neither shall I 
myself ever find an opportunity such as this to attain unto 
God, nor can ye, if ye be silent, win the credit of any nobler 
work. For, if ye be silent and leave me alone, I am a word 
of God; but if ye desire my flesh, then shall I be again a 
mere cry. [Nay] grant me nothing more than that I be poured 
out a libation to God, while there is still an altar ready ; that 
forming yourselves into a chorus in love ye may sing to the 
Father in Jesus Christ, for that God hath vouchsafed that the 
bishop from Syria should be found in the West, having sum- 
moned him from the East. It is good to set from the world 
unto God, that I may rise unto Him. 

3. Ye never grudged any one; ye were the instructors 
of others. And my desire is that those lessons shall hold 
good which as teachers ye enjoin. Only pray that I may have 
power within and without, so that I may not only say it but 
also desire it; that I may not only be called a Christian, but 
also be found one. For if I shall be found so, then can I also 
be called one, and be faithful then, when I am no more visible 
to the world. Nothing visible is good. For our God Jesus 


560 THE EPISTLEVOPtS: IGNATIUS 


Christ, being in the Father, is the more plainly visible. The 
Work is not of persuasiveness, but Christianity is a thing of 
might, whensoever it is hated by the world. 

4. I write to all the churches, and I bid all men know, that 
of my own free will I die for God, unless ye should hinder 
me. I exhort you, be ye not an ‘unseasonable kindness’ to 
me. Let me be given to the wild beasts, for through them 
I can attain unto God. I am God's wheat, and I am 
ground by the teeth of wild beasts that I may be found pure 
bread [of Christ]. Rather entice the wild beasts, that they may 
become my sepulchre and may leave no part of my body 
behind, so that I may not, when I am fallen asleep, be burden- 
some to any one. Then shall I be truly a disciple of Jesus 
Christ, when the world shall not so much as see my body. 
Supplicate the Lord for me, that through these instruments I 
may be found a sacrifice to God. I do not enjoin you, as 
Peter and Paul did. They were Apostles, I am a convict; they 
were free, but I am a slave to this very hour. Yet if I shall 
suffer, then am I a freed-man of Jesus Christ, and I shall rise 
free in Him. Now I am learning in my bonds to put away 
every desire. 

5. From Syria even unto Rome I fight with wild beasts, 
by land and sea, by night and by day, being bound amidst 
ten leopards, even a company of soldiers, who only wax 
worse when they are kindly treated. Howbeit through their 
wrong doings I become more completely a disciple; yet am I 
not hereby justified. May I have joy of the beasts that have 
been prepared for me; and I pray that I may find them 
prompt; nay I will entice them that they may devour me 
promptly, not as they have done to some, refusing to touch 
them through fear. Yea though of themselves they should not 
be willing while I am ready, I myself will force them to it. 
Bear with me. I know what is expedient for me. Now am I 
beginning to be a disciple. May naught of things visible and 
things invisible envy me; that I may attain unto Jesus Christ. 


TO THE ROMANS. 561 


Come fire and cross and grapplings with wild beasts, [cuttings 
and manglings,] wrenching of bones, hacking of limbs, crushings 
of my whole body, come cruel tortures of the devil to assail 
me. Only be it mine to attain unto Jesus Christ. 

6. The farthest bounds of the universe shall profit me no- 
thing, neither the kingdoms of this world. It is good for me 
to die for Jesus Christ rather than to reign over the farthest 
bounds of the earth. Him I seek, who died on our behalf; 
Him I desire, who rose again [for our sake] The pangs of a 
new birth are upon me. Bear with me, brethren. Do not 
hinder me from living; do not desire my death. Bestow not 
on the world one who desireth to be God's, neither allure 
him with material things. Suffer me to receive the pure light. 
When I am come thither, then shall I be a man. Permit me 
to-be an imitator of the passion of my God. If any man hath 
Him within himself, let him understand what I desire, and let 
him have fellow-feeling with me, for he knoweth the things 
which straiten me. 

7. The prince of this world would fain tear me in pieces 
and corrupt my mind to Godward. Let not any of you there- 
fore who are near abet him. Rather stand ye on my side, that is 
on God's side. Speak not of Jesus Christ and withal desire the 
world. Let not envy have a home in you. Even though I 
myself, when I am with you, should beseech you, obey me not; 
but rather give credence to these things which I write to you. 
[For] I write to you in the midst of life, yet lusting after death. 
My lust hath been crucified, and there is no fire of material 
longing in me, but only water living tand speaking in me, 
saying within me ‘Come to the Father.’ I have no delight in 
the food of corruption or in the delights of this life. I desire 
the bread of God, which is the flesh of Christ who was of the 
seed of David; and for a draught I desire His blood, which 
is love incorruptible. 

8. I desire no longer to live after the manner of men; and 
this shall be, if ye desire it. Desire ye, that ye yourselves also 


IGN. II. 36 


562 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


may be desired. In a brief letter I beseech you; believe me. 
And Jesus Christ shall make manifest unto you these things, 
that I speak the truth—Jesus Christ, the unerring mouth in 
whom the Father hath spoken [truly]. Entreat ye for me, 
that I may attain [through the Holy Spirit]. I write not unto 
you after the flesh, but after the mind of God. If I shall suffer, 
it was your desire ; if I shall be rejected, it was your hatred. 

9. Remember in your prayers the church which is in Syria, 
which hath God for its shepherd in my stead. Jesus Christ 
alone shall be its bishop—He and your love. But for myself I 
am ashamed to be called one of them; for neither am I worthy, 
being the very last of them and an untimely birth: but I have 
found mercy that I should be some one, if so be I shall attain 
unto God. My spirit saluteth you, and the love of the churches 
which received me in the name of Jesus Christ, not as a mere 
wayfarer : for even those churches which did not lie on my route 
after the flesh went before me from city to city. 

ro. Now I write these things to you from Smyrna by the 
hand of the Ephesians who are worthy of all felicitation. And 
Crocus also, a name very dear to me, is with me, with many 
others besides. 

As touching those who went before me from Syria to Rome 
unto the glory of God, I believe that ye have received instruc- 
tions; whom also apprise that I am near; for they all are 
worthy of God and of you, and it becometh you to refresh 
them in all things. These things I write to you on the oth 
before the Kalends of September. Fare ye well unto the end 
in the patient waiting for Jesus Christ. 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 563 


d 
TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 


i-is who is also Theophorus, to the church of God 

the Father and of Jesus Christ, which is in Philadelphia 
of Asia, which hath found mercy and is firmly established in 
the concord of God and rejoiceth in the passion of our Lord 
and in His resurrection without wavering, being fully assured in 
all mercy ; which church I salute in the blood of Jesus Christ, 
that is eternal and abiding joy; more especially if they be at 
one with the bishop and the presbyters who are with him, and 
with the deacons that have been appointed according to the 
mind of Jesus Christ, whom after His own will He confirmed 
and established by His Holy Spirit. 

I. This your bishop I have found to hold the ministry 
which pertaineth to the common weal, not of himself or through 
men, nor yet for vain glory, but in the love of God the Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ. And I am amazed at his forbear- 
ance; whose silence is more powerful than others’ speech. For 
he is attuned in harmony with the commandments, as a lyre 
with its strings. Wherefore my soul blesseth his godly mind, 
for I have found that it is virtuous and perfect—even the im- 
perturbable and calm temper which he hath, while living in all 
godly forbearance. 

2. As children therefore [of the light] of the truth, shun 
division and wrong doctrines; and where the shepherd is, there 
follow: ye as sheep. For many specious wolves with baneful 
delights lead captive the runners in God's race; but, where ye 
are at one, they will find no place. 

3. Abstain from noxious herbs, which are not the husbandry 
of Jesus Christ, because they are not the planting of the Father. 
Not that I have found division among you, but filtering. For 

36—2 


564 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


as many as are of God and of Jesus Christ, they are with the 
bishop ; and as many as shall repent and enter into the unity of 
the Church, these also shall be of God, that they may be living 
after Jesus Christ. Be not deceived, my brethren. If any man 
followeth one that maketh a schism, Ze doth not inherit the king- 
dom of God. lf any man walketh in strange doctrine, he hath 
no fellowship with the passion. 

4. Be ye careful therefore to observe one eucharist (for 
there is one flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ and one cup unto 
union in His blood; there is one altar, as there is one bishop, 
together with the presbytery and the deacons my fellow-ser- 
vants), that whatsoever ye do, ye may do it after God. 

s. My brethren, my heart overfloweth altogether in love 
towards you; and rejoicing above measure I watch over your 
safety ; yet not I, but Jesus Christ, wearing whose bonds I am 
the more afraid, because I am not yet perfected. But your 
prayer will make me perfect [unto God], that I may attain unto 
the inheritance wherein I have found mercy, taking refuge in 
the Gospel as the flesh of Jesus and in the Apostles as the 
presbytery of the Church. Yea, and we love the prophets also, 
because they too pointed to the Gospel in their preaching and 
set their hope on Him and awaited Him; in whom also having 
faith they were saved in the unity of Jesus Christ, being worthy 
of all love and admiration as holy men, approved of Jesus 
Christ and numbered together in the Gospel of our common 
hope. 

6. But if any one propound Judaism unto you, hear him 
not: for it is better to hear Christianity from a man who 
is circumcised than Judaism from one uncircumcised. But if 
either the one or the other speak not concerning Jesus Christ, I 
look on them as tombstones and graves of the dead, whereon 
are inscribed only the names of men. Shun ye therefore the 
wicked arts and plottings of the prince of this world, lest haply 
ye be crushed by his devices, and wax weak in your love. But 
assemble yourselves all together with undivided heart. And I 


TO THE PHILADELPHIANS. 565 


give thanks to my God, that I have a good conscience in my 
dealings with you, and no man can boast either in secret or openly, 
that I was burdensome to anyone in small things or in great. 
Yea and for all among whom I spoke, it is my prayer that they 
may not turn it into a testimony against themselves. 

7. For even though certain persons desired to deceive me 
after the flesh, yet the spirit is not deceived, being from God ; 
for it knoweth whence ¿£ cometh and where it goeth, and it search- 
eth out the hidden things. I cried out, when I was among you; 
I spake with a loud voice, with God's own voice, Give ye heed to 
the bishop and the presbytery and deacons. Howbeit there 
were those who suspected me of saying this, because I knew 
beforehand of the division of certain persons. But He in whom 
I am bound is my witness that I learned it not from flesh of 
man; it was the preaching of the Spirit who spake on this 
wise; Do nothing without the bishop; keep your flesh as a 
temple of God; cherish union; shun divisions; be imitators of 
Jesus Christ, as He Himself also was of His Father. 

8. I therefore did my own part, as a man composed unto 
union. But where there is division and anger, there God abideth 
not. Now the Lord forgiveth all men when they repent, if 
repenting they return to the unity of God and to the council of 
the bishop. I have faith in the grace of Jesus Christ, who shall 
strike off every fetter from you; and I entreat you, Do ye no- 
thing in a spirit of factiousness but after the teaching of Christ. 
For I heard certain persons saying, ‘If I find it not in the 
charters, I believe it not in the Gospel. And when I said to 
them ‘It is written,’ they answered me ‘That is the question.’ 
But as for me, my charter is Jesus Christ, the inviolable charter 
is His cross and His death and His resurrection, and faith 
through Him; wherein I desire to be justified through your 

_ prayers. | 

9. The priests likewise were good, but better is the High- 

priest to whom is committed the holy of holies; for to Him 
- alone are committed the hidden things of God; He Himself 


566 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


being the door of the Father, through which Abraham and 

Isaac and Jacob enter in, and the Prophets and the Apostles and 

the whole Church; all these things combine in the unity of God. 

But the Gospel hath a singular preeminence in the advent of the 

Saviour, even our Lord Jesus Christ, and His passion and re- 

surrection. For the beloved Prophets in their preaching pointed ` 
to Him; but the Gospel is the completion of immortality. All 

things together are good, if ye believe through love. 

10. Seeing that in answer to your prayer and to the tender 
sympathy which ye have in Christ Jesus, it hath been reported 
to me that the church which is in Antioch of Syria hath peace, 
it is, becoming for you, as a church of God, to appoint a deacon 
to go thither as God’s ambassador, that he may congratulate them 
when they are assembled together, and may glorify the Name. 
Blessed in Jesus Christ is he that shall be counted worthy of 
such a ministration ; and ye yourselves shall be glorified. Now if 
ye desire it, it is not impossible for you to do this for the name of 
God ; even as the churches which are nearest have sent bishops, 
and others presbyters and deacons. 

II. Butas touching Philo the deacon from Cilicia, a man of 
good report, who now also ministereth to me in the word of 
God, together with Rhaius Agathopus, an elect one who followeth ` 
me from Syria, having bidden farewell to this present life; the 
same who also bear witness to you—and I myself thank God 
on your behalf, because ye received them, as I trust the Lord 
wil receive you. But may those who treated them with dis- 
honour be redeemed through the grace of Jesus Christ. The 
love of the brethren which are in Troas saluteth you; from 
whence also I write to you by the hand of Burrhus, who was 
sent with me by the Ephesians and Smyrnaans as a mark of 
honour. The Lord shall honour them, even Jesus Christ, on 
whom their hope is set in flesh and soul and spirit, by faith, by 


love, by concord. Fare ye well in Christ Jesus our common 
hope. 


TO THE SMYRN/EANS. 567 


6. 
TO THE SMYRNÆANS. 


GNATIUS, who is also Theophorus, to the church of God 
the Father and of Jesus Christ the Beloved, which hath 
been mercifuly endowed with every grace, being filled with 
faith and love and lacking in no grace, most reverend and 
bearing holy treasures; to the church which is in 5myrna 
of Asia, in a blameless spirit and in the word of God abundant 
greeting. 

1. I give glory to Jesus Christ the God who bestowed such 
wisdom upon you; for I have perceived that ye are established 
in faith immovable, being as it were nailed on the cross of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, in flesh and in spirit, and firmly grounded 
in love in the blood of Christ, fully persuaded as touching our 
Lord that He is truly of the race of David according to the 
flesh, but Son of God by the Divine will and power, truly 
born of a virgin and baptised by John that aZ righteousness 
might be fulfilled by Him, truly nailed up in the flesh for our 
sakes under Pontius Pilate and Herod the tetrarch (of which 
fruit are we—that is, of His most blessed passion); that Ze 
might set up an ensign unto all the ages through His resurrec- 
tion, for His saints and faithful people, whether among Jews 
or among Gentiles, in one body of His Church. 

2. For He suffered all these things for our sakes [that we 
might be saved]; and He suffered truly, as also He raised 
Himself truly ; not as certain unbelievers say, that He suffered 
in semblance, being themselves mere semblance. And accord- 
- ing as their opinions are, so shall it happen to them, for they 
are without body and demon-like. 

3. For I know and believe that He was in the flesh even 
after the resurrection; and when He came to Peter and his 


568 THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


company, He said to them, Lay hold and handle me, and see that 
I am not a demon without body. And straightway they touched 
Him, and they believed, being joined unto His flesh and His 
blood. Wherefore also they despised death, nay they were 
found superior to death. And after His resurrection He [both] 
ate with them and drank with them as one in the flesh, though 
spiritually He was united with the Father. ' 

4. But these things I warn you, dearly beloved, knowing 
that ye yourselves are so minded. Howbeit I watch over 
you betimes to protect you from wild beasts in human form— 
men whom not only should ye not receive, but, if it were pos- 
sible, not so much as meet [them]; only pray ye for them, if 
haply they may repent. This indeed is difficult, but Jesus 
Christ, our true life, hath power over it. For if these things 
were done by our Lord in semblance, then am I also a prisoner in 
semblance. And why then have I delivered myself over to death, 
unto fire, unto sword, unto wild beasts? But near to the sword, 
near to God; in company with wild beasts, in company with 
God. Only let it be in the name of Jesus Christ, so that we 
may suffer together with Him. I endure all things, seeing that 
He Himself enableth me, who is perfect Man. 

5. But certain persons ignorantly deny Him, or rather have 
been denied by Him, being advocates of death rather than of the 
truth ; and they have not been persuaded by the prophecies nor 
by the law of Moses, nay nor even to this very hour by the 
Gospel, nor by the sufferings of each of us severally ; for they are 
of the same mind also concerning us. For what profit is it [to 
me], if a man praiseth me, but blasphemeth my Lord, not con- 
fessing that He was a bearer of flesh? Yet he that affirmeth 
not this, doth thereby deny Him altogether, being himself a 
bearer of a corpse. But their names, being unbelievers, I have 
not thought fit to record in writing; nay, far be it from me 
even to remember them, until they repent and return to the 
passion, which is our resurrection. 

6. Let no man be deceived. Even the heavenly beings 


TO THE SMYRNZEANS. 569 


and the glory of the angels and the rulers visible and invisible, 
if they believe not in the blood of Christ [who is God], judg- 
ment awaiteth them also. He that receiveth let him receive. Let 
not office puff up any man; for faith and love are all in all, 
and nothing is preferred before them. But mark ye those who 
hold strange doctrine touching the grace of Jesus Christ which 
came to us, how that they are contrary to the mind of God. 
They have no care for love, none for the widow, none for the 
orphan, none for the afflicted, none for the prisoner, none for 
the hungry or thirsty. They abstain from eucharist (thanks- 
giving) and prayer, because they allow not that the eucharist 
is the flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for 
our sins, and which the Father of His goodness raised up. 

7. They therefore that gainsay the good gift of God perish 
by their questionings. But it were expedient for them to have 
love, that they may also rise again. It is therefore meet that 
ye should abstain from such, and not speak of them either 
privately or in public; but should give heed to the Prophets, 
and especially to the Gospel, wherein the passion is shown unto 
us and the resurrection is accomplished. 

8. [But] shun divisions, as the beginning of evils. Do ye 
all follow your bishop, as Jesus Christ followed the Father, 
and the presbytery as the Apostles; and to the deacons pay 
respect, as to God’s commandment. Let no man do aught of 
things pertaining to the Church apart from the bishop. Let 
that be held a valid eucharist which is under the bishop or 
one to whom he shall have committed it. Wheresoever the 
bishop shall appear, there let the people be; even as where Jesus 
may be, there is the universal Church. It is not lawful apart 
from the bishop either to baptize or to hold a love-feast; but 
whatsoever he shall approve, this is well-pleasing also to God; 
that everything which ye do may be sure and valid. 

9. It is reasonable henceforth that we wake to soberness, 
while we have [still] time to repent and turn to God. It is good 
to recognise God and the bishop. He that honoureth the bishop 


570 | THE EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS 


is honoured of God; he that doeth aught without the knowledge 
of the bishop rendereth service to the devil. May all things 
therefore abound unto you in grace, for ye are worthy. Ye 
refreshed me in all things, and Jesus Christ shall refresh you. 
In my absence and in my presence ye cherished me. May God 
recompense you; for whose sake if ye endure all things, ye 
shall attain unto Him. 

IO. Philo and Rhaius Agathopus, who followed me in the 
cause of God, ye did well to receive as ministers of [Christ] 
God; who also give thanks to the Lord for you, because ye 
refreshed them in every way. Nothing shall be lost to you. 
My spirit is devoted for you, as also are my bonds, which ye 
despised not, neither were ashamed of them. Nor shall He, 
who is perfect faithfulness, be ashamed of you, even Jesus 
Christ. 

II. Your prayer sped forth unto the church which is in 
Antioch of Syria; whence coming a prisoner in most godly 
bonds I salute all men, though I am not worthy to belong to it, 
being the very last of them. By the Divine will was this vouch- 
safed to me, not of my own complicity, but by God’s grace, 
which I pray may be given to me perfectly, that through your 
prayers I may attain unto God. Therefore that your work may 
be perfected both on earth and in heaven, it is meet that your 
church should appoint, for the honour of God, an ambassador of 
God that he may go as far as Syria and congratulate them 
because they are at peace, and have recovered their proper 
stature, and their proper bulk hath been restored to them. 
It seemed to me therefore a fitting thing that ye should send 
one of your own people with a letter, that he might join with 
them in giving glory for the calm which by God’s will had over- 
taken them, and because they were already reaching a haven 
through your prayers. Seeing ye are perfect, let your counsels 
also be perfect; for if ye desire to do well, God is ready to 
grant the means. 


12. The love of the brethren which are in Troas saluteth 


TO THE SMYRNZEANS. ! CUN 


you; from whence also I write to you by the hand of Burrhus, 
whom ye sent with me jointly with the Ephesians your brethren. 
He hath refreshed me in all ways. And I would that all imitated 
him, for he is an ensample of the ministry of God. The Divine 
grace shall requite him in all things. I salute your godly 
bishop and your venerable presbytery [and] my fellow-servants 
the deacons, and all of you severally and in a body, in the name 
of Jesus Christ, and in His flesh and blood, in His passion and 
resurrection, which was both carnal and spiritual, in the unity of 
God and of yourselves. Grace to you, mercy, peace, patience, 
always. 

13. I salute the households of my brethren with their wives 
and children, and the virgins who are called widows. I bid you 
farewell in the power of the Father. Philo, who is with me, 
saluteth you. I salute the household of Gavia, and I pray that 
she may be grounded in faith and love both of flesh and of 
spirit. I salute Alce, a name very dear to me, and Daphnus 
the incomparable, and Eutecnus, and all by name. Fare ye well 
in the grace of God. 


Z 
TO BOLYCARE. 


GNATIUS, who is also Theophorus, unto Polycarp who is 
bishop of the church of the Smyrnzans or rather who hath for 

his bishop God the Father and Jesus Christ, abundant greeting. 
1. Welcoming thy godly mind which is grounded as it were 
on an immovable rock, I give exceeding glory that it hath been 
vouchsafed me to see thy blameless face, whereof I would fain 
have joy in God. I exhort thee in the grace wherewith thou art 
clothed to press forward in thy course and to exhort all men 
that they may be saved. Vindicate thine office in all diligence 
of flesh and of spirit. Have a care for union, than which there 


572 THE EPISTLE OF 8S. IGNATIUS 


is nothing better. Bear all men, as the Lord also beareth thee. 
Suffer all men in love, as also thou doest. Give thyself to 
unceasing prayers. Ask for larger wisdom than thou hast. 
Be watchful, and keep thy spirit from slumbering, Speak to 
each man severally after the manner of God. Bear the maladies 
of all, as a perfect athlete. Where there is more toil, there is 
much gain. 

2. If thou lovest good scholars, this is not thankworthy in 
thee. Rather bring the more pestilent to submission by gentle- 
ness. All wounds are not healed by the same salve. Allay 
sharp pains by fomentations. Be thou prudent as the serpent in 
all things and guileless always as the dove. Therefore art thou 
made of flesh and spirit, that thou mayest humour the things 
which appear before thine eyes; and as for the invisible things, 
pray thou that they may be revealed unto thee; that thou may- 
est be lacking in nothing, but mayest abound in every spiritual 
gift. The season requireth thee, as pilots require winds or asa 
storm-tossed mariner a haven, that it may attain unto God. 
Be sober, as God’s athlete. The prize is incorruption and 
life eternal, concerning which thou also art persuaded. In all 
things I am devoted to thee—I and my bonds which thou didst 
cherish. 

3. Let not those that seem to be plausible and yet teach 
strange doctrine dismay thee. Stand thou firm, as an anvil 
when it is smitten. It is the part of a great athlete to receive 
blows and be victorious. But especially must we for God’s sake 
endure all things, that He also may endure us. Be thou more 
diligent than thou art. Mark the seasons. Await Him that 
is above every season, the Eternal, the Invisible, who became 
visible for our sake, the Impalpable, the Impassible, who suf- 
fered for our sake, who endured in all ways for our sake. 

4. Let not widows be neglected. After the Lord be thou 
their protector. Let nothing be done without thy consent ; 
neither do thou anything without the consent of God, as in- 
deed thou doest not. Be stedfast. Let meetings be held more 


TO S. POLYCARP. | 576 


frequently. Seek out all men by name. Despise not slaves, 
whether men or women. Yet let not these again be puffed up, 
but let them serve the more faithfully to the glory of God, that 
they may obtain a better freedom from God. Let them not 
desire to be set free at the public cost, lest they be found slaves 
of lust. 

5. Flee evil arts, or rather hold thou discourse about these. 
Tell my sisters to love the Lord and to be content with their 
husbands in flesh and in spirit. In like manner also charge my 
brothers in the name of Jesus Christ to love their wives, as the 
Lord loved the Church. If any one is able to abide in chastity 
to the honour of the flesh of the Lord, let him so abide with- 
out boasting. If he boast, he is lost; and if it be known be- 
yond the bishop, he is polluted. It becometh men and women 
too, when they marry, to unite themselves with the consent of 
the bishop, that the marriage may be after the Lord and 
not after concupiscence. Let all things be done to the honour of 
God. 

6. Give ye heed to the bishop, that God also may give heed 
to you. I am devoted to those who are subject to the bishop, the 
presbyters, the deacons. May it be granted me to have my por- 
tion with them in the presence of God. Toil together one with 
another, struggle together, run together, suffer together, lie down 
together, rise up together, as God's stewards and assessors and 
ministers. Please the Captain in whose army ye serve, from 
whom also ye will receive your pay. Let none of you be found 
a deserter. Let your baptism abide with you as your shield ; 
your faith as your helmet; your love as your spear; your pati- 
ence as your body armour. Let your works be your deposits, 
that ye may receive your assets due to you. Be ye there- 
fore long-suffering one with another in gentleness, as God is 
with you. May I have joy of you always. 

7. Seeing that the church which is in Antioch of Syria 
hath peace, as it hath been reported to me, through your 
prayers, I myself also have been the more comforted since 


yd. EPISTLE OF S. IGNATIUS TO S. POLYCARE, 


God hath banished my care; if so be I may through suffer- 
ing attain unto God, that I may be found a disciple through 
your intercession. It becometh thee, most blessed Polycarp, to 
call together a godly council and to elect some one among you 
who is very dear to you and zealous also, who shall be fit to bear 
the name of God's courier—to appoint him, I say, that he may go 
to Syria and glorify your zealous love unto the glory of God. 
A. Christian hath no authority over himself, but giveth his time to 
God. This is God's work, and yours also, when ye shall complete 
it: for I trust in the Divine grace, that ye are ready for an 
act of well-doing which is meet for God. Knowing the fervour 
of your sincerity, I have exhorted you in a short letter. 

8. Since I have not been able to write to all the churches, 
by reason of my sailing suddenly from Troas to Neapolis, as 
the Divine will enjoineth, thou shalt write to the churches in 
front, as one possessing the mind of God, to the intent that they 
also may do this same thing—let those who are able send 
messengers, and the rest letters by the persons who are sent by 
thee, that ye may be glorified by an ever memorable deed— for 
this is worthy of thee. 

I salute all by name, and especially the wife of Epitropus 
with her whole household and her children's. I salute Attalus 
my beloved. I salute him that shall be appointed to go 
to Syria. Grace shall be with him always, and with Polycarp 
who sendeth him. I bid you farewell always in our God Jesus 
Christ, in whom abide ye in the unity and supervision of God. 


I salute Alce, a name very dear to me. Fare ye well in the 
Lord. 


MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


n" 
ANTIOCHENET ACTIS. 


I. N OT long after Trajan had succeeded to the empire of the 
Romans, Ignatius the disciple of the Apostle John, a man 
of apostolic character in all ways, governed the Church of the An- 
tiochenes. He had with difficulty weathered the past storms of the 
many persecutions in the time of Domitian, and, like a good pilot, by 
the helm of prayer and fasting, by the assiduity of his teaching, and by 
his spiritual earnestness, had withstood the surge of the enemy’s power, 
fearful lest he should lose any of the faint-hearted or over-simple. Thus 
while he rejoiced at the tranquillity of the Church, when the persecution 
abated for a while, he was vexed within himself, thinking that he had 
not yet attained true love towards Christ or the complete rank of a dis- 
ciple: for he considered that the confession made by martyrdom would 
attach him more closely to the Lord. Therefore remaining a few years 
longer with the Church, and like a lamp of God illumining the mind of 
every one by his exposition of the scriptures, he attained the fulfilment 
of his prayer. 

2. It so happened that after these things Trajan in the ninth year 
of his reign, being elated with his victory over the Scythians and Dacians 
and many other nations, and considering that the godly society of the 
Christians was still lacking to him to complete the subjection, unless 
they chose to submit to the service of the devils together with all 

. the nations, threatened [to subject them to] persecution and would have 
compelled all those who were leading a pious life either to offer sacrifice 


576 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


or to die. At that time therefore the brave soldier of Christ, being 
afraid for the Church of the Antiochenes, was taken of his own free will 
before Trajan who was staying at that moment in Antioch, making ready 
to march against Armenia and the Parthians. 

And when he stood face to face with Trajan [the king]; Who art 
thou, said Trajan, thou wretch of a devil, that art so ready to transgress our 
orders, whilst thou seducest others also, that they may come to a bad end? 
Ignatius said; Vo man calleth one that beareth God a wretch of a devil; for 
the devils stand aloof from the servants of God. But tf, because [ am 
troublesome to these, thou callest me a wretch toward the devils, I agree with 
thee: for having Christ a heavenly king, I confound the devices of these. 
Trajan said; And who ts he that beareth God? Ignatius answered, He 
that hath Christ in his breast. Trajan said; Dost thou not think then 
that we too have gods in our heart, seeing that we employ them as 
allies against our enemies? Ignatius said; Thou art deceived, when thou 
callest the devils of the nations gods. For there is one God who made 
the heaven and the earth and the sea and all things that are therein, and 
one Christ Jesus His only-begotten Son, whose friendship I would fain 
enjoy. Trajan said ; Speakest thou of him that was crucified under Pontius 
Pilate? Ignatius said; Z speak of Him that nailed on the cross sin and 
ds author, and sentenced every malice of the devils to be trampled under Soot 
of those that carry Him in their heart. Trajan said; Dost thou then 
carry Christ within thyself? Ignatius said ; Yes, for it ¿s written, ‘I will 
dwell zn them and will walk about in them? Trajan gave sentence; Z7 zs 
our order that Ignatius who saith that he beareth about the crucified in 
himself shall be put in chains by the soldiers and taken to mighty Rome, 
there to be made food for wild beasts, as a spectacle and a diversion jor 
the people. The holy martyr, when he heard this sentence, shouted 
aloud with joy; Z thank Thee, Lord and Master, that Thou hast vouchsafed 
to honour me by perfecting my love towards Thee, in that Thou hast bound 
me with chains of tron to Thine Apostle Paul. Having said this and 
having invested himself in his chains with gladness, after praying over 
the Church and commending it with tears to the Lord, like a choice 
ram the leader of a goodly flock, he was hurried away by the brutal 
cruelty of the soldiers to be carried off to Rome as food for bloodthirsty 
brutes. 

3. So then with much eagerness and joy, in longing desire for 
the Lord's passion, he went down from Antioch to Seleucia, and from 
thence he set sail. And having put in at the city of the Smyrneeans after 
much stress of weather, he disembarked with much joy and hastened 
to see the holy Polycarp, bishop of the Smyrnzans, his fellow-student ; 


ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 57 


for in old times they had been disciples of John. And being enter- 
tained by him on landing, and having communicated with him his 
spiritual gifts, and glorying in his bonds, he entreated them to aid him 
in his purpose—asking this in the first place of every church collect- 
ively (for the cities and churches of Asia welcomed the saint through 
their bishops and presbyters and deacons, all men flocking to him, in 
the hope that they might receive a portion of some spiritual gift), but 
especially of the holy Polycarp, that by means of the wild beasts dis- 
appearing the sooner from the world, he might appear in the presence 
of Christ. 

4. And these things he so spake and so testified, carrying his love 
towards Christ to such a pitch, as if he would storm heaven by his good 
confession and by the fervour of those who joined with him in prayer 
over his combat, while at the same time he recompensed those churches 
which came to meet him in the person of their rulers, by sending out 
letters of thanks to them shedding upon them the dew of spiritual grace 
with prayer and exhortation. Therefore when he saw that they all were 
kindly disposed towards him, being afraid lest haply the affection of the 
brotherhood might uproot his zeal for the Lord, when a goodly door of 
martyrdom was thus opened to him, he writes to the Church of the 
Romans in the words which are here subjoined. 


[Here follows the Epistle to the Romans.| 


5. Having therefore by his letter appeased, as he desired, those of 
the brethren in Rome who were averse, this done he set sail from 
Smyrna (for the Christ-bearer was hurried forward by the soldiers to be 
in time for the sports in the great city, that given to wild beasts in the 
sight of the Roman people he might by such a combat obtain the crown 
of righteousness); and thence he put in at Troas. Then departing 
thence he landed at Neapolis; and passing through Philippi he journeyed 
by land across Macedonia and the part of Epirus which lies by Epidam- 
nus. And here on the sea coast he took ship and sailed across the 
Hadriatic sea, and thence entering the Tyrrhene and passing by islands 
and cities, the holy man when he came in view of Puteoli was eager 
himself to disembark, desiring to tread in the footsteps of the Apostle 
[Paul]; but forasmuch as a stiff breeze springing up prevented it, the 
ship being driven by a stern wind, he commended the love of the 
brethren in that place, and so sailed by. Thus in one single day and 
night, meeting with favourable winds, we ourselves were carried forward 
against our will, mourning over the separation which must soon come 
between ourselves and this righteous man; while he had his wish 


IGN. II. Syd 


578 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


fulfilled, for he was eager to depart from the world quickly, that he 
might hasten to join the Lord whom he loved. Wherefore, as he landed 
at the harbour of the Romans just when the unholy sports were drawing 
to a close, the soldiers were vexed at the slow pace, while the bishop 
gladly obeyed them as they hurried him forward. 

6. So we set out thence at break of day, leaving the place called 
Portus; and, as the doings of the holy martyr had already been 
rumoured abroad, we were met by the brethren, who were filled at once 
with fear and with joy—with joy because they were vouchsafed this 
meeting with the God-bearer, with fear because so good a man was on 
his way to execution. And some of them he also charged to hold their 
peace, when in the fervour of their zeal they said that they would stay 
the people from seeking the death of the righteous man. For having 
recognised these at once by the Spirit and having saluted all of them, 
he asked them to show him genuine love, and discoursed at greater 
length than in his epistle, and persuaded them not to grudge one who 
was hastening to meet his Lord; and then, all the brethren falling on 
their knees, he made entreaty to the Son of God for the churches, for 
the staying of the persecution, and for the love of the brethren one to 
another, and was led away promptly to the amphitheatre. Then forth- 
with he was put into the arena in obedience to the previous orders 
of Cæsar, just as the sports were drawing to a close (for the day called 
the Thirteenth in the Roman tongue was, as they thought, a high day, 
on which they eagerly flocked together), whereupon he was thrown by 
these godless men to savage brutes, and so the desire of the holy 
martyr Ignatius was fulfilled forthwith (according to the saying of 
Scripture Zhe desire of the righteous man is acceptable), that he might 
not be burdensome to any of the brethren by the collection of his 
reliques, according as he had already in his epistle expressed his desire 
that his own martyrdom might be. For only the tougher parts of his 
holy reliques were left, and these were carried back to Antioch and 
laid in a sarcophagus, being left to the holy Church a priceless trea- 
sure by the Divine grace manifested in the martyr. 

7. Now these things happened on the 13th before the Kalends of 
January, when Sura, and Senecio for the second time, were consuls 
among the Romans. 

Having with tears beheld these things with our own eyes, and having 
watched all night long in the house, and having often and again en- 
treated the Lord with supplication on our knees to confirm the faith of 
us weak men after what had passed, when we had fallen asleep for a 
while, some of us suddenly beheld the blessed Ignatius standing by and 


ANTIOCHENE ACTS. 579 


embracing us, while by others again he was seen praying over us, and 
by others dripping with sweat, as if he were come from a hard struggle 
and were standing at the Lord’s side with much boldness and unutter- 
able glory. And being filled with joy at this sight, and comparing the 
visions of our dreams, after singing hymns to God the giver of good 
things and lauding the holy man, we have signified unto you both the 
day and the time, that we may gather ourselves together at the season 
of the martyrdom and hold communion with the athlete and valiant 
martyr of Christ, who trampled the devil under foot and accomplished 
the race of his Christian devotion, in Christ Jesus our Lord, through 
whom and with whom is the glory and the power unto the Father with 
the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. . 


p 
ROMAN ACTS. 


I. [` the ninth year of the reign of Trajan Cesar, being the second 

year of the 223rd Olympiad, in the consulship of Atticus Sur- 
banus and Marcellus, Ignatius who became bishop of Antioch the 
second in order after the Apostles (for he succeeded Euodius) was 
escorted under the strictest custody of guards from Syria to the city of 
the Romans on account of his testimony to Christ. Now his keepers 
were bodyguards of Trajan, ten in number, savage wretches with the 
tempers of wild beasts; and they conducted the blessed saint a prisoner 
through Asia and thence to Thrace and Rhegium by land and sea, 
illusing the holy man day and night, although in every city they were 
kindly treated by the brethren. Yet none of these things appeased 
their fury, but they crushed the saint with implacable and pitiless eyes, 
as he himself bears witness, saying in a passage in one of his epistles ; 
From Syria even unto Rome I fight with wild beasts, [conducted | by land 
and sea, bound amidst ten leopards, I mean a band of soldiers, who only 
grow worse, when they are kindly treated. 

2. Having set sail therefore from Rhegium they arrive in Rome; 
and they announced his coming to the emperor. Then the emperor 
commanded him to be brought before him in the presence of the 
Senate, and said to him; Art thou that Ignatius who turned the city 
of the Antiochenes upside down, insomuch that it hath come to my ears 


Symm 


580 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


that thou didst draw away all Syria from the religion of the Greeks to the 
religion of the Christians. Ignatius said; Would, O king, that I were 
able to draw thee also away from thine idolatry, and bring thee to the God 
of the universe, and present thee a friend of Christ, and make thine empire 
more secure to thee. Trajan said; Jf thou desirest to confer a favour on me 
and to be reckoned among my friends, abandon this mind and sacrifice to 
the gods, and thou shalt be high-priest of mighty Zeus and shalt share my 
kingdom with me. Ignatius said; JZ/ is right to confer those favours 
only, O king, which do no harm to the soul, not those whith condemn to 
eternal punishment. But thy promises, which thou didst promise to bestow 
on me, I judge worthy of no account. For neither do I serve gods of 
whom I have no knowledge, nor do T know who this Zeus of thine ts, nor 
do I desire a worldly kingdom. ‘For what shall it profit me, if 4 shall 
gain the whole world and forfeit mine own soul? Trajan said; Thou 
seemest to me to be utterly devoid of sound sense; and therefore thou holdest 
my promises cheap. So then, if thou provokest me to displeasure, Z will 
punish thee with every kind of torture, not only as disobedient but also as 
ungrateful, and as refusing to submit to the decree of the sacred senate and 
sacrifice [to the gods]. Ignatius said; Do as seemeth fit to thee; for I 
offer no sacrifice. For neither fire nor cross nor rage of wild beasts nor 
loss of limbs shall induce me to fall away from the living God: for I love 
not the present world, but Christ who died and rose for me. 

3. The Senate said; We know that the gods are immortal ; but how 
sayest thou, Ignatius, that Christ died? Ignatius said; My Lord, though 
He died, died by reason of a dispensation, but rose again after three days ; 
while your gods died as mortals and were not raised up. For instance 
Zeus is buried in Crete, and Atsculapius struck by a thunder-bolt in 
Cynosura ; Aphrodite is buried in Paphos with Cinyras; Hercules is con- 
sumed by fire. For your gods deserved such punishments, since they were in- 
continent and evildoers and corruptors of men ; whereas our Lord, even though 
He was crucified and died, yet showed His own power by rising from the 
dead and avenging Him on His murderers by your hands. And again; 
your gods were made by Him to pay the penalty as workers of iniquity ; 
whereas our Lord was slain in the flesh by wicked men who could not bear 
His rebukes, after He had shown all beneficence but had met with ingrati- 
tude from unbelievers. Trajan said; Z advise thee to shun death and 
cling to life. Ignatius said; Thou advisest me well, O Ring; for I flee 
rom eternal death and take refuge in eternal life. Trajan said; And how 
many deaths are there? Ignatius said; Two; the one momentary, the 
other eternal. And so likewise there are two lives; the one for a brief 
space, the other eternal, Trajan said; Sacrifice to the gods and shun 


ROMAN ACTS. 581 


punishment ; for thou art not better than the Senate. Ignatius said; To 
what gods wouldest thou have me sacrifice? To him who was shut up in a 
cask thirteen months for adultery? Or to the blacksmith with the crippled 
Jeet? Or to him who failed in his divination and was defeated by a woman ? 
Or to the man-woman who was torn to pieces by Titans? Or to those who 
built the walls of Llium and were defrauded of their wages? Or to those 
goddesses who imitate the doings of men and forget the doings of women? 
J am ashamed to speak of gods who are sorcerers and violaters of boys and 
adulterers, changing themselves, as you say, into an eagle and a bull, and 
into gold, and into a swan and a dragon, not for any good purpose but for 
the subversion of others wedlock—gods whom ye ought to loathe and not to 
worship as ye do. To these deities your wives pray, that they may preserve 
their chastity for you! Trajan said; 7 make myself an accomplice with thee 
in thy blasphemy towards the gods, because I do not torture thee. Ignatius 
said; Z have told thee long ago, that I am ready for every torture and every 
kind of death, since 4 am eager to go to God. 
4. Trajan said; Zf thou wilt not sacrifice, thou shalt repent of it. 
Therefore spare thyself, before thou come to harm. Ignatius said; Unless 
I had spared myself, I should have fulfilled thy commands. ‘Trajan 
said; Torture his back with leaded thongs. Ignatius said; Zhou hast in- 
tensified my longing for God, O king. Trajan said ; Lacerate his sides with 
hooks and rub salt into his wounds. Ignatius said; My whole mind 
yearneth intensely towards God, and I make no account of what I suffer. 
Trajan said ; Sacrifice to the gods. Ignatius said; Zo what gods? Per- 
chance thou biddest me sacrifice to the gods of the Egyptians, to a calf and a 
goat, to an ibis and an ape and a venomous asp, or to a wolf and a dog, 
to a lion and a crocodile, or to the fire of the Persians, or to the water of 
the sea, or to infernal Pluto, or to Hermes the thief. ‘Trajan said; Z said 
unto thee, Sacrifice; for thou wilt get no good by talking thus. Ignatius 
said; Z said unto thee, I do not sacrifice, neither forsake I the one only God, 
who made the heaven and the earth, the sea and all things that are therein, 
who hath power over all flesh ; the God of spirits and King of everything 
sensible and intelligible. Trajan said; Why what hindereth thee from 
worshipping him as God, if he existeth, and these likewise whom we all 
acknowledge in common? Ignatius said; Natural discernment, when it ts 
unclouded, doth not confound falsehood with truth, darkness with light, 
bitter with sweet. For woe threateneth such as make no distinction between 
these. For * What agreement hath Christ with Belial? Or what portion 
hath a believer with an unbeliever? And what concord ts there between a 
temple of God and idols ?' 
s. Trajan said; Open out his hands and fill them with fire. Ignatius 


582 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


said; Neither fire that burneth nor teeth of wild beasts nor wrenching 
of bones nor manglings of my whole body, nay not the tortures of the 

devil, shall separate me from my love towards God. Trajan said; Dip. 
paper in oil and steep it till it is soft; then set fire to it and burn his 

sides. Ignatius said; Zhou seemest to me, O king, not to know that 
there is a God living within me, and He supplieth me with strength and 
hardeneth my soul; for otherwise I should not have been able to bear thy 

tortures. Trajan said; Zhou art made of iron, methinks, and art quite 

callous ; for else thou wouldest have yielded after all this, with the pain 

of thy wounds, and have sacrificed to the gods. Ignatius said ; ZARS 

not because I do not feel the tortures, O king, that I sustain and endure 

them, but because in the hope of good things to come my affection towards 

God doth relieve my pains: for neither burning fire nor drenching water 

shall ever have power to quench my love towards God. Trajan said; 

Bring fire and spread live coals on the ground, and make Ignatius stand 
on them, that so at length he may be induced to submit to me and to sacri- 

fice to the gods. Ignatius said; The burning of this fire of thine leadeth 

me to remembrance of the eternal and unquenchable fire, though this is but 

for a season. Trajan said; Z suppose it is by some sorcery that thou 

despisest the tortures: for otherwise thou wouldest have submitted to us, 

after suffering so much at our hands. Ignatius said; Zell me, how can 

men who abandon demons, as being rebels against God, and abominate idols, 

be sorcerers? Surely ye who worship these are more justly open to such 

reproaches; but for us it ts ordained by law that we suffer not wizards 

nor enchanters nor observers of omens to live; nay we are wont to burn 

even the books of those that practise curious arts, as infamous. Therefore it is 

not I that am a sorcerer, but ye, since ye worship the demons. ‘Trajan said ; 

By the gods, Ignatius, Z am weary of thee by this time, and I am at a loss 

what tortures I shall apply to thee to induce thee to submit to the orders 

which are given thee. Ignatius said; Grow not weary, O king, but either 

put me into the fire, or hack me with the sword, or cast me into the deep, or 
throw me to wild beasts, that thou mayest be convinced that none of these 

things is terrible to us for the love we have to God. 

6. Trajan said; What hope thou hast in prospect, Ignatius, that thou 
art dying in these sufferings which thou endurest, [ cannot say. Ignatius 
said; They that are ignorant of the God who is over all and of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, are ignorant also of the good things that are prepared 
Jor the godly. Wherefore they consider that their existence is confined to 
this world only, even as that of brutes without reason ; and they picture to 
themselves nothing better after their departure hence. But we who have 
knowledge of godliness are aware that after our departure hence we shall — 


ROMAN ACTS. 583 


rise again and have an everlasting life in Christ, a life which shall never 
fail neither give place to another, and from which pain and grief and 
mourning have fled away. Trajan said; Z will destroy your heresy and 
will bring you to your senses and teach you not to fight obstinately against 
the decrees of the Romans. Ignatius said; And who 2s able, O king, to 
destroy God's building? for] if a man shall attempt it, he will gain 
nothing but to wage war against God. For Christianity will not only 
not be destroyed by men, but will increase daily by the power of Christ 
in growth and magnitude. It will advance in the same manner and 
in the same course, flashing out coruscations alike of splendour and of 
awe: for ‘The whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, 
as much water covereth the seas’ But thou doest not well, O king, to 
call Christianity a heresy; for heresy is far apart from Christianity. 
Nay, Christianity is the full knowledge of the true and very God and 
of His only begotten Son and of His dispensation in the flesh and His 
teaching, this infallible religion being accompanied also by the virtues of our 
outward life. But what men among us hast thou known to love Jaction 
and war, and not to pay obedience to rulers whereinsoever obedience ts 
free from peril, living peacefully and harmoniously in friendly inter- 
course, ‘paying to all their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, fear to 
whom fear, customs to whom customs, honour to whom honour, being 
careful to ‘owe no man anything save to love one another’? For we have 
been taught by our Lord not only to ‘love our neighbour’ but also to ‘do 
good to our enemy’ and to ‘love them that hate us’ and to ‘pray for them 
that evil intreat us and persecute us. But say wherein the preaching of 
Christianity hath thwarted thee, since tt began. Hath any strange disaster 
befallen the empire of the Romans? Nay, was not the rule of many 
exchanged for the rule of one? And did not Augustus thy ancestor, in whose 
time our Saviour was born of a virgin, and He who till then was God 
the Word became also man for our sakes, reign nearly a whole age, having 
for fifty-seven whole years and six months besides swayed the empire of the 
Romans and ruled alone, as none other did of those who went before him? 
Was not every tribe made subject to him, while the former separation of 
nations and their mutual hatred ceased from the time when our Saviour 
sojourned upon earth 1 
7. The Senate said; Yes, these things are so as thou hast said, 
 Jgnafius; but this di ts which vexeth us, that he abolished the worship of 
the gods. Ignatius said; O illustrious Senate, just as He subjected the less 
intelligent nations to the rule of the Romans, which our oracles call ‘a vod 
of iron, so also He drove away from mankind the tyrannical spirits of evil, 
by proclaiming one only God, even Him that is over all. And not only this, 


584 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


but He wrought deliverance also from the cruel bondage under their blood- 
thirsty and pitiless rule. Did they not revel in the death of those dearest to 
you? Did they not embrue you with civil wars? Did they not compel you to 
behave unseemly, exposing you naked as a spectacle, and carrying your wives 
naked in procession as tf they were prisoners of war, defiling the earth with 
bloodshed, and darkening the pure air with impurities ? Ask the Scythians 
whether they did not sacrifice human beings to Artemis ; for assuredly, though 
ye may deny for very shame the slaughter of a virgin to Cronos, the Greeks 
glory in such human sacrifices, having derived this wicked practice from 
barbarians. Trajan said; By the gods, Z admire thee, Ignatius, for thy 
much learning, even though I praise thee not for thy religion. Ignatius 
said; And what dost thou condemn in our divine religion? ‘Trajan said; 
That ye worship not our lord the Sun, nor the Heaven, nor the holy 
Moon the common nurse of all, Ignatius said; And who would choose, 
O king, to worship the Sun which hath an outward shape, which falleth 
under the senses, which sheddeth and again replenisheth from fire the 
heat which it hath shed, which undergoeth eclipse, which can never change 
its own order against the mind of Him that ordered it to accomplish its — 
course? And how should the heaven be worshipped, which ts veiled with 
clouds, which the Creator ‘stretched out as a hide’ and ‘fixed as a vault? 
and set firm as a cube? or the moon which waxeth and diminisheth and 
waneth and ts subject to vicissitudes? But to say that because their light 
zs bright men ought therefore to worship them is to say what ts altogether 
untrue: for they were given for illumination to men and not for worship ; 
they were appointed to mellow and warm the fruits, to brighten the day 
and to illumine the night. And the stars of the heaven too were appointed 
Sor signs and for seasons and for notes of time and to cheer and sustain the 
mariners. But none of these ought to be worshipped, neither water which 
Je call Poseidon, nor fire which ye call Hephestos, nor air which ye call 
flere, nor earth which ye call Demeter, nor the Jruits. For all these 
things, though they have been made for our sustenance, are yet perishable 
and lifeless. 

8. Trajan said; Did 7 not then say rightly at the beginning, that thou 
art he who did turn the East upside down, forbidding it to reverence the 
gods? Ignatius said; And doth it vex thee, O king, that we advise 
men not to reverence things which ought not to be worshipped, but the true 
and living God, the maker of heaven and earth, and His only-begotten 
Son? for this is the only true religion, supreme and undisputed, taking 
delight in divine and spiritual doctrines. But the teaching of the Greek 
religion which prevaileth among Jou is an atheist polytheism, easily up- 
set, unstable, veering about, ang standing on no secure foundation : Jor 


ROMAN ACTS. 585 


‘The instruction that ts without reproof goeth astray. For how ts it not full 
of falsehoods of all kinds, when at one time it saith that the common gods 
of the universe are twelve in number, and then again supposeth them to be 
more? Trajan said; 7 can no longer bear thine insolence, for thou revilest 
us shamefully, desiring to defeat us with thy glibness of speech. Therefore 
sacrifice; for thou hast said enough with all the fine words wherewith thou 
hast deluged us. If not, Í will torture thee again and afterwards give thee 
to wild beasts. Ignatius said; How long dost thou threaten and not fulfil 
thy promises? For Iam a Christian and I offer no sacrifice to wicked 
demons, but I worship the true God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who ‘enlightened me with the light of knowledge, and ‘opened mine eyes 
to discern His marvellous things. Him I reverence and honour: for 
He is God and Lord and King and ‘only Potentate.’ 

9. Trajan said; Z put thee to death on a gridiron, unless thou re- 
pentest. Ignatius said; Repentance from evil deeds is a noble thing, O 
hing, but repentance from good deeds is criminal: for we ought to betake 
ourselves to a better course and not to a worse. Nothing is better than 
godliness. Trajan said; Lacerate his back with hooks, saying to him, Obey 
the emperor and sacrifice to the gods according to the decree of the senate. 
Ignatius said; Z fear the decree of God which saith * Thou shalt have none 
other gods but me, and ‘He that sacrificeth to other gods shall be put to 
death. But when senate and king bid me transgress the laws, I do not 
listen to them: for ‘Thou shalt not accept the person of a ruler, so the 
laws distinctly say, and ‘Thou shalt not consort with numbers to do 
evil’ Trajan said; Pour vinegar mixed with salt upon his wounds. 
Ignatius said; AV things that befall me for confessing God must be borne 
that they may be the harbingers of rewards : Jor * The sufferings of the 
present season are not worthy in comparison of the glory that shall be 
revealed? Trajan said; Spare thyself, fellow, henceforth, and submit to the 
orders given thee; for, if not, I will employ worse tortures against thee. 
Ignatius said; ‘Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall 
tribulation or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or peril or 
sword? For I am persuaded that neither life nor death’ shall be able to 
part me from godliness, being confident in the power of Christ. ‘Trajan 
said ; Thinkest thou to gain a victory over me by thine endurance? jor man 
is a creature fond of victory. Ignatius said; Z do not think but believe 
that I have prevailed and shall prevail, that thou mayest learn how wide ts 
the gulf between godliness and ungodliness. Trajan said; Zake him and 
put him in irons and, when ye have made his feet fast in the stocks, throw 
him into the inner prison, and let no person whatsoever see him in the 


596 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATTUS. 


dungeon. And for three days and three nights let him eat no bread and 
drink no water, that after the three days he may be cast to wild beasts and 
so depart from life. The Senate said; We too give our assent to the sen- 
tence against him: for he insulted us all along with the emperor, in not 
consenting to sacrifice to the gods, but he persisted that he was a Christian. 
Ignatius said; ‘Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" 
who of His abundant goodness vouchsafed that I should be a partaker of 
the sufferings of His Christ and a true and faithful witness of His 
Godhead. 

to. On the third day Trajan, having summoned the Senate and 
the prefect, went forth into the amphitheatre, where also was a con- 
course of the Roman people; for they had heard that the bishop from 
Syria was to fight with wild beasts. And he ordered the holy Ignatius 
to be led in. And when he beheld him, he said to him; J wonder 
that thou art alive after so many tortures and so long famine. But now 
at length obey me, that thou mayest escape from the miseries which lie in 
thy path, and thou shalt have us as thy friend. Ignatius said; Thou seemest 
Zo me to have the form of a man but the ways of a fox, which fawneth 
with its tail while it plotteth in its mind; for thou feignest the words of 
one kindly disposed, and yet thy counsels are not sound. So understand hence- 
forth plainly, that I make no account of this mortal and frail life for 
Jesus sake whom 4 desire. I go my way to Him; for He is the bread 
of immortality and the draught of eternal life. Lam wholly His, and I 
yearn for Him in my mind; and I despise thy tortures, and I spit upon 
thy glory. Trajan said; Since he is insolent and contemptuous, bind him 
Jast, and let two lions loose upon him, that they may not leave so much as a 
relique of him behind. But when the wild beasts were let loose, the blessed 
saint beholding them said to the people; Ye Romans, who are spectators 
of this contest, 7 suffer these things, not for any base action or any blameable 
thing, but for godliness. For I am the wheat of God, and I am ground 
by the teeth of wild beasts that I may be found pure bread. But Trajan, 
when he heard these things, was greatly astonished saying; Great ¿s 
the endurance of those who set their hope on Christ; [for] what Greek or 
barbarian ever endured for his own god such sufferings as this man 
endureth for him in whom he believeth? Ignatius said; Jt is no work of 
human power that I bear up against such sufferings, but of zeal and 
Jaith alone, which are drawn into conformity with Christ. And when he 
had said these things, the lions rushed upon him, and attacking him 
from either side crushed him to death only, but did not touch his flesh, 
so that his reliques might be a protection to the great city of the 


ROMAN ACTS. 587 


Romans, in which likewise Peter was crucified and Paul was beheaded 
and Onesimus was made perfect by martyrdom. 

11. But Trajan rose up and was filled with wonder and amazement. 
Meanwhile letters reach him from Plinius Secundus the governor, who 
was troubled at the number of those that underwent martyrdom, seeing 
how they died for the faith. He also informed him at the same time 
that they did nothing impious or contrary to the laws; only they rose 
at daybreak and sang a hymn to Christ as God; [for this they under- 
went punishment;] but adultery and murder and horrible offences akin to 
these they were the first to forbid, and in all things their conduct was in 
accordance [with the laws]. Whereupon we are told that Trajan taking 
into consideration what had happened in the case of the blessed [and 
holy] Ignatius—for he led the van in the army of martyrs—issued a 
decree to the effect that the Christian people should not be sought 
out, but when accidentally found should be punished. And as regards 
the reliques of the blessed Ignatius he gave orders that those who 
wished to take them up and bury them should not be hindered. Then 
the brethren in Rome, to whom also he had written asking them not 
to sue for his deliverance from martyrdom, and thus rob him of his 
cherished hope, took his body and laid it apart in a place where they 
were permitted to assemble themselves together and praise God and 
His Christ for the perfecting of the holy bishop and martyr Ignatius; 
for The memory of the righteous is commended. 

12. And Irenæus also, the bishop of Lyons, is aware of his mar- 
tyrdom, and makes mention of his epistles in these words: Ove of our 
own people, when condemned to wild beasts for his testimony towards God, 
hath said ; T am the wheat of God and I am ground by the teeth of wild 
beasts, that I may be found pure bread. And Polycarp also, who was 
bishop of the brotherhood sojourning in Smyrna, makes mention of these 
things, when writing to the Philippians; 7 exhort you all therefore to be 
obedient and to practise all endurance, such as ye saw with your own eyes 
not only in the blessed saints Ignatius and Rufus and Zosimus, but also in 
many others of your own people, and in Paul himself and those who believed 
together with him, how that all these ran not in vain, but in faith and 
righteousness, and that they are gone to the place assigned to them in 
the presence of the Lord, whose sufferings also they shared. For they 
loved not the present world, but yearned after Christ who ded and rose 
again for us. And again after a short space; Zhe letters of Ignatius 
which were sent to us by him, and all others which we had in our keeping, 
we send to you, as ye enjoined ; the which are subjoined to this letter. Where- 


588 MARTYRDOM OF S. IGNATIUS. 


Jrom ye shall get great profit, for they contain faith and patient endurance 
which looketh to our Lord | Jesus Christ]. 

Such was the martyrdom of Ignatius; and his successor in the 
bishopric of Antioch was Hero. Now the commemoration of the brave 
martyr Ignatius, who was very dear to God, is in the month Panemus, 
on the first day of the month. 


ADDENDA. 


Additional MSS of the Antiochene Acts including the Epistle 
to the Romans. 


THE Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom, which incorporate the Epistle to 
the Romans in its Middle (genuine) form, have been known hitherto only 
from a single MS, Paris. 1451 (see I. p. 75, II. p. 363). The recent researches 
of Prof. Rendel Harris, to whom I am deeply indebted, have revealed two 
other MSS in the libraries of the East. Unfortunately these MSS, like Paris. 
1451, are comparatively late and belong to the same family; but it is a dis- 
tinct gain to have a threefold cord of evidence for the Greek text, which has 
hitherto hung on a single thread. 


(1) The first of these, designated A in the following collation, is 18 S. 
Sab. in the Library of the Patriarch at Jerusalem. An account is given of 
this library by Prof. Rendel Harris in Haverford College Studies, no. I, 
p- 1 sq. It comprises three collections of books now gathered under one 
roof, namely those of (1) the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem ; (2) the Convent 
of Mar Saba near the Dead Sea; (3) the Convent of the Holy Cross about 
two miles from Jerusalem on the Jaffa road. 

The MS in question belongs to the second of these. A photograph was 
procured from which the collation was taken. The Martyrdom of Ignatius 
is followed immediately by the Acts of the Cretan Martyrs, Theodulus, 
Saturninus, etc (Dec. 23). The MS seems to belong to the xth century. 


(2) The second of these MSS, designated B in the collation, is in the 
Library of the Monastery of Sinai (no. 519). It is briefly described in 
Gardthausen's Catalogue of the Sinai MSS thus; 

` Aoyot mavņyvpikoí (m. Sept. Febr.) cod. membr. 38°5 x 38°9 centim., binis 
columnis, scr. saec. x, quamquam lineae summas litteras stringunt. 

Incipit primo folio (manu rec. scr. martyrio Symeonis Stylitae, £évov kai 
mapá8o£ov (Fabric. Bibl. Graec. X. p. 324, Harles). Ultimus titulus; in fol. 
cuÓ (verso) Martyrium Martiniani (m. Febr. d. xiii). Codex in fine mutilus 
est. 

This MS omits large portions of the Epistle to the Romans; but its 
omissions do not correspond either with those of the Curetonian Syriac or 


with those of the Metaphrast. 


590 ADDENDA. 


Vol IL p. 477. MAPTYPION ITNATIOY A] papripioy rod ayiov peyado- 
páprvpos iyvatiou roð Oeopdpov A; paprúpiov Tod dyiov iyvariou rod Oeopópov B. 
2 amooroAov| AB. 

p.478. 1 ev] mv A ; qv B. drootoAtKos| dmooroAukós A. exuBépva| 
exoBepva A ; praef. kai AB. 2 'Avrioxécv| add. éemipehas AB. ds] om. 
AB. xeuuGvas] xeuxóvas. A. pos] porns A. 3 Stwypav] Scoypar A. 
kuBepvijrns] KowBepvirns A. oları] vaxe A. vnoretas| vioreias A. 577 
ovvexeia] praef. kai AB. TO rÓvo TO mvevgarwkQ] A; om. B. 6 tis 
dvrikeuuévgs dvreîyev Suvdpews| Tv dvrikeruévyv dvreîyev (dvrxyev A) AB. 
7 oAwyoróxov] odtyoWixev A. dkepavorép@y amoBaNn] dxaipewrépov aro- 
Bade A. 

p. 479. 8 rovyapodv] rovyàp oiv A. nuppaivero| nuppevero A. eni 
TO] emt ro A. 9 Aedrjcavros] Aojícavros A. Staypod] Svoypod A. 
IO 7jaXaAXev] joyaňev A. tis övros| AB. II epayapevos] A ; vpayrdpe- 
vos B. reAeías] re) tas A. tov] A; add. avro? B. I2 paprvpíov] pap- 
Toiplov A. ywopevnv| AB. I3 mAeov] AB. mrpocotkevo0gav] pos 
oikeiwow AB. 

p.480. I Z mapapévov] črn mapa pévov A. cai] AB. 3 ypapar| 
Ociev ypapav AB. emeruyxavev] A; êrerúyyave yàp B. 5 yap] AB. 
evvar@| AB. éra] B; erm A. 6 tH vikn r5] B; Tüv vikqv ris A. 
7 ^akàv| AB. érépov moAAGv| AB. vouícavros] B; add. avrod A. 
9 ovornpal cvoripa A. ei uj] praef. kai AB. roy Sayover| AB. 


p.481. 10 dorro Aarpeíav] B; ĉiro Aarpíay A. II Swwypov vropeve 
arenoavros| B; Sioypav úrouévyv drodjoayros A. mavras| preef. ó doBos 
AB. I2 rois evocBds Cdvras] AB. I3 PoBnbeis] d$oBew)s A. 
14 yevvaios] yevvates A. oTparurgs] AB. 16 emovüá(ovra] A; 
omovoatortt B. 18 ro) Bacidéws| AB. kakoOatuov] kakoQatgv A; kakó- 
ôaruov (sic) ¿ón B. 

p. 482. I Ouráfes VmepBalvew] SuardéEns úmepßévnv A. peta Tou] pera 
rò AB. 3 dmoka)e; kakodaipova] drrokaM, Kaxwdaipova A. 4 pakpàv] om. 
AB. 5 et 0é| AB. kakóv] A; praef. kai B. 6 árokaAets] arokañĝs A. 
€xov ràs...karaAvo] AB. 8 ris] AB. IO nets] nuts A. doxotpev| 
Saxovpev A. II ois] A; ot B. Xpóne0a] ypopeda A. 13 eoTru] écriv 
A; esr B. 14. rov ovpavoy| AB. 


p. 483. 16 avrod] roð cod AB. pias] Baocideclas AB. ovaipny] ovat- 
pv A. 17 ILAárov] mAdrov A. 18 rjv] add. éujv AB. 20 kakíav] 
many kai kakíav AB. Tov avtov| rGv aUrQv A; Tov aùròv B. 21 opeis| 
pépes B. 22 rov Xpiordv] róv cravpwbévta AB. 23 éevoiknow| evor- 
kiso A; pref. dre B. eumepiratnow|) éumepuraricnw A. 25 Aéyovra] 
Aéyovra A. 26 orparworáàv] B; orpartoróv A. peyáAgv] AB. 27 ye- 
moopevoy] yerrnoduevov A. — eis dup ai eis répyrw] eis répyyw AB. 28 páp- 
tus] AB. 29 éfónoev] éfidgaev A. 

P: 484. I th mpós ce àyámy] B; rips mpos oe ayárns A. 2 dSéopors... 
aOnpots] Sexpois...cvdjpas B. auvdnoas| AB. 4 emevédpevos| AB. 


ADDENDA. 591 


6 émioqpos] émiouos A. 7 Onpiddovs otpariotixis Oewórgros] Onpiodovs 
erparworikfs Snvedritos A. 8 @poBdpos| épofópow A; aipoBdpaus B. 
drayOnoopevos| dmayOnoodpevos A. Bopáv] AB. 9 mpobvpias| mpoOoumias 
A. IO émOupial émi&owiia. A. kareAÓóv] KaredOov A. II Sedev- 
keiav] oedevkiay A. I2 perà moX)v káparov| AB. Zuvpva(ev] cpupvéav 
A. I3 vnds| veós A. IloAékapmov roy Zpvpvatev| moXXo(kapmov Tov 
opupvéoy A. 


p. 485. 15 éyeyórewav] éyeyóvicav A. "Ioávvov] przef. roo dylov drrooróÀou 
AB. 16 karaxyÜeis kal mvevparikGv aúr@ kowovrücas| karaxÓfjs kai mvevpa- 
TikÓv aùr koworicas A. I8 cuvabd<iv] AB. paora) paora A. 
19 rày] B; róv A. émwkórev kal] B; om. A. 20 kai prim.] AB. 
&ukóvov] B; ĉiákovov A. 21 éxkAnotat] aikdnoia A. et mos] AB. 
22 éfawpéros] e£epéros A. 23 IloAvKaproy] modotkaproy A. Onpiov bâr- 
rov adavris| Getpiov 0drrov aaveis A. 24 T mpocóro] B; Tò mpócemov A. 
25 rod Xpiorov] A; rod Oeo B. 

p. 486. 1 xai sec.] AB. Ovepapriparo] AB. 2 émekreivov] émekrzj- 
vov A. mpos Xpiorov] AB. 3 cew] AB. 4 cvwvevxopévov] 
gwevxopévov A. 6 ióravrgaácais] vravticacas A. avrà] AB. 7 èk- 
Teud6évrov| emireévrav AB. 8 mapawécews| mapevécews A. dmogra- 
Cóvrev] AB. 9 xápw] xdpmv A. rovyapov] roi yàp oiv A. evvoikas | 
evvoikas A. IO mep] AB. avróv| B; avrav A. Qofy6Óeis uý more 1j] 
B; $ofe«69s pimore Ñ ei A. II ékkóyyp] exxower A. 12 dveox6etons] 
dveoxOnoes A. avró] A; avro? B. 0vpas] Ooipas A. I3 émigTéAAet 
*Popatev] émurtnAn popéov. 


[Zhe Epistle to the Romans begins.| 


Vol. 11. p. 189. IIPOZ POMAIOYZ] Lyvaríov roô Ocoópov emirrodi) mpós 
popaiovs B. There is no title in A. I ó kai] A; om. o B. nrenpevy | 
ileguévg A. peyaNeórgri]. peyadudryre A. 2 marpós tipicrov] AB. 
3 jyannpévy] B; jyamuém A. 4 tov beAnaavros| AB. 

p. 190. I miorw kai] om. AB. 2 róro xepiov| AB. 

D32102. I dévorpenns| a&udmpemns (sic) A. d£iérawos] diZmevos (sic) A. 
d£ieníirevkros] dË, émírevkros (sic) A. 2 d£(ayvos] á£ióyvos (sic) A. 
xpi róvopos] xpurrovupos A; xpworóvvpos B. 3 marpdvupos| marpóvvpos A. 


p. 193. 4 rjvopévows] rjvonévois A. 6 mavrós] B; mávrov A. 

p.194. I Ico XpurrQ TO OcQ jpav] B; xpwrQ inood T beg pôv A. 
3 Oe] AB. 

p. 195. 4 d£ió6ea] A; dévobéara B. os] AB. mréov 1) nrovpny] mAéov 
nrovpny AB. 8e8epévos] Sedepivos A. 5 yap] om. AB. XpwrQ `o] 
AB. 6 Oédnpa] add. rot &co0 AB. j| Tod] A; om. roô B. eivai] AB. 


p.196. 1! eXoworópyros] evorxovduiTas A. éàv méparos] éávmep xápwros 
AB. 3 yàp] AB. rjv ópóv àyámqv] AB. 4 Opi» yàp] B; óp5v yàp 
A. Oéddere] Oé) eza, A. 


592 ADDENDA. 


p.197. 5 py] om. AB. 7 yap] after ou AB. dpas| AB. dvÓpo- 
tapecknoa| avOpwnapeckica A. @Aa Ces apéoa] AB. 8 dpéokere] 
dpéckera A. obre] o AB. éyd more €o kaipóv] A; more eyo €o Karpov 


B. ro.ovroy] AB. 9 éày] A; à B. 


p. 198. I ewemyoernre] cuomnowre A; ciwomire B. kpeirrow] kpírrov. A. 
€xere] éyerat A. 

p.199. 2 yàp] AB. ovomnonte| B; oromnoure A. eyo] add. yevn- 
copa. (yeviowpar) AB. Aóyos Oeod) Oeod (om. Ayos) AB. 

p. 200. I maw écopat] many éoopa A. owl] rpéxov AB. mÀéov 
8c] mAéov (om. dé) AB. 2 mapdoxnobe] B; mapacxéoOa (sic) A. oTov- 
ôro bvar] AB. éri] ern A. 3 tva...donre] AB. xopós] xepós A. 
4 TÓ marpi] B; +ó marp A. ev 'Incoü Xpiaró] ev xpos inco) AB. 

p. 202. I xarnííecev ó Oeos] ò Óeós karnéionev AB. 2 kaAóv| AB. 
diva] B; Sotva A. ard koopou| A; dmó ro) Koopov B. 3 mpos Ccor| 
AB. dvare(Ào | AB. 

p.203. 4 oúóémore...Bapus tux yévopa (p. 208 1. 3)] om. B. ovOev(] ov- 
déva A; def. B. 


p.204. I évréAAeaÓGe] evré\deo Oar A. pot Svvapev atreiaÓe] pot Soivapuy 
aireigÜe A. 2 iva py sec.] A; def. B. 3 éàv yàp evpeOd] om. A 
by homoeoteleuton; def. B. 4 kal róre motos eivai] kai róre moros eivat A. 
órav] A; def. B. 5 $atvepat] paivoum A. ovdev] ov6€v A. 


p.205. 6 xaAXóv] aidmov: rà yap BXemrópeva mpóoatpa, rà € pn BXerópeva 
aidva A; def. B. Ocós] Kupuos A. 7 mew povíjs| atomis povns A; def. 
B. 8 Grav pooja vd kocpovv] om. A; def. B. 


p.206. I masas] om. A; def. B. évréANopuai] A; def. B. 2 éyà] 
A; def. B: amoÜvjako] anobvicka A. 3 Kodvonre| Kodvoura A. 
evvoua ákatpos yévnabe] eüvowa ükepos yeverOat A. 4 Onpíov eivai] add. Bop- 
pàv A; def. B. 5 évearw] èv éorw (sic) A (èv prefixed in margin); def. B. 

P. 207. 5 émwrvxeiv] émvrvxzv A. Oco] A. 6 ó8óvrev]| dddvrov A. 
adn Popa] adhédopa A. 

p.208. I ro) Xpwrro] A; def. B. 2 yévovrat] yévovra A. karaAíL- 
moow| karaAetroow A. Tov TOU coparós pov] TOD ocóhkarós uov (om. trav) A; 
def. B. kounnbeis Bapds] korunðñs Bapois A. 3 yévona] A; def. B. 
4 Tore k.r...] B resumes. tore] A; add. yàp B. dÀn6ós] AB. "Ingo 
Xpwro)v] Tov xpiorov (om. igoo0) AB. 5 róv Kóptov] ròv xpwróv AB. 

p.209. 6 Oeo] om. AB. vaa] 0otoía A. Svardo cogat] dvatdoowpa 
A. l 8 eyo] AB. 9 eyo 0e] AB. GAN éàv] aX éàv A. 

p. 210. I amedevbepos] AB. Xpwrro?] B; om. A. dvacT!jcopat] dva- 
arícopat A. ev adt@| AB. 2 viv pavOave| AB. pndev] A; pnd & B. 
emOvpeiv] emBoipew A; add. koopuxdy 1] pdravoy B; add. $ uárawov (om. koopu- 
cov) A. 

p. 211. 4 évOeOeuévos] dedepévos AB, 


ADDENDA. | 593 


p.212. I cerparwerikóv] orparuoróy B ; orparioróv (sic) A. 

p. 213. 2 yivovrat] yivevra A. ddixnpacw] ddixivaow A. 

p.214. I pa@ddov] padrov A. 2 dvaipny] ovéuny A. TGv Onpiov] 
A; om. B. 3 a] om. AB. ebxopat] evyoua A. ovvropal| éroua AB. 

P. 215. 5 ékóvra un Oey] dkovra u) OedAnon B; dkovra u) Oise A. Tpos- 
Bidoopa| mpoo Bı dowpe (sic) A. 6 cvyyvdumv...réparev ris yis (p. 
218 1. 2)] om. B. &xere] &xerac A. 7 &pxouat pa6nrjs] dpyopac pabnris 
A. pndév| A. Moca] ooe A. 8 róv dopárev] dopárev (om. 
tov) A; def. B. 

p. 216. npíev re evoráceis] Onpiov kai cvoráceos A; def. B. dyaropat, 
Statpévers] dvaropal Siepéors A. 2 dateay| àoréov A. cvykorai]| evykorrj 
(sic) A; def. B. 3 despo] dduopol A. kakai| A; def. B. KoAaoets 

In iE 2 
kKoÀaous (sic) A. 

p32172 6 pel A; def, B. éàdQeXjae] opednoe: A. mépara| répmva A; 
def. B. 7 ovde ai] ovda è A. kaAóv] uáAXov (sic) A; def. B. 

p. 218. I à] eis A; def. B. '"Incoüv Xpiwróv] xpiorov igcobv A; 
deta B. BaciXevew] Bacirerny A. 2 ys] add. ri yap éeAeira: 
dvÜpemos éàv kepÜeia. Tov kóopov OXov Trjv Oc Nrvxüv avroð Cnuidbet A; def. 
ED. ékeivov (yrà k.r.A.] B resumes. 3 Oko] B; (nro A. ou 
ñas] AB. 6 TokeTés...€mikeirac] om. B. 

p. 219. 4 avyyvare] A. éurodionte] eumodionra A. 5 py Oednonre | 
pu Oedelonre A. pe] AB. Tov roù Oeo? OéXovra] AB. 6 uù xapíaa6e] 
B; m xapionoda A. pndeé Ay Kodakevonre| om. AB. 

p. 220. I kaĝapòv] ka6apóv A. avOperos| add. deov AB. 2 écopat] 
čropa A. emitpéWare| B; emuorpéyara A. papgrzv] puriy A. TOU 
maOovs Tov Oeo pov] AB. 3 <ú TIs...01s ypape viv (p. 223 l. 4)] om. B. 
exer] &xy A 4 cupmabeiro] cupmabnra A. 

p. 221. 7 BovAera] BovAara A. Ccov] A; def. B. Sia 6eipa:] 
rap jpa (sic) A. 8 pndeis] pndis A. Tov mapóvrov vpov| A; def. B. 
Bonbecira] Bon0iro A. 

p.222. I euol yiveobe] éëuo0 yéveoOa A; def. B. AaAeire] ajra A. 
2 émiBuueire] emiOvpitra A. 3 tapar] om. A. mela Ünré uot] mío gré 
pot A. 

p.223. 4 muorevoare| ricOnre A. 5 (av yàp x.7.A.] B resumes. yàp] 
AB. ^ épóv tov] A ; épó rovrov B. 6 mip pirdiror, twp de (Gv kai 
AaAobv] AB. 

p. 224. 2 Méyov] B; Aéyev A. tov marépa| B; marépa (om. róv) A. 
2 ovy Oona] B ; ov (ona, A. 

p.225. 3 nOovais] ndovas A. &prov] dprev A. Oeo] AB. 


p.226. I 6éAo] add. dprov ovpáviov prov (prav A) fms AB. Tov Xpia- 
ToU] inood pioro AB. Add. rod viod ro coo AB. tov sec.| add. yevouévov 
(yevapévov B) ev varépo AB. 


IGN. II. 38 


594 ADDENDA. 


p. 227. 2 Aaveid] add. xai dBpaáp AB. rópa] add. 6co0 AB. 
3 üd apros] add. kai dévvaos Con (oñ A) AB. 

p. 228. I ovk ér...dvaravoa (p. 234 l. 3)] om. B. ovK rk] ovKern A. 
Cav] Cctv A. 2 QeMjogre] OeAnovra A. 3 airoüpai] airovpa (bis) A. 
4 dpiv ravra $arepdaet] vpiv ravra gpavaipacet A. 5 dAnbads Aéyo] adidas 
eyo A. ro] To A. 6 edddnoev adnOds] ddnOas eharynoey A ; def. B. 
airjcac e] airnoacba A. 7 èv nvevpare áyío] om. A; def. B. 

p. 229. 8 xarà yropny] kara yvøpw A. nOednoare] A. 9 arrodo- 
kia 08] arodoxnpacde A. IO pynuwovevere] pynwwvevera A. mpocevxii] 
A; def. B. II srousem] Tom A. 12 'Iycoüs Xpigrós] xpioròs ó 
Qebs (om. inaots) A. émirkonnoe| émiokonicer A. 13 de] A; def. B. 
ala Xvvopat] éexóvopa: A. ovde yàp] A. 14 déuds cip] A. 

p. 230. 2 8e£apévov] Oc&apévov (sic) A. 

p.231. 4 mpoonkoverat] mpoceixovoa A. 5 mou] Tóny A. mporyyor | 
A; def. B. 

Dp. 232. 1.80€] A: Spdipyns| cpvpus A. 2 áÉopakapio rov] dé«opaka- 
piarev A. čorw de kal] A; def. B. 3 kal Kpókos] kpókos (om. kai) A ; 
def. B. por] A; def. B. 

p. 233. 4 róv mpoeMÓóvrev pe] A; def. B. 5 ro) Oeo] Oeod (om, rod) 
A; def. B. 

p. 234. I OyAdacare] diddcare A. eyyus| eyyois A. Tov Oco0] A; 
def. B. dpi eotw] A; def. B. 3 €ypawpa x.r.À.] B resumes. 4 Zer- 


reuBpiev] add. rovrésrw avyovorov (avdovcrouv A) ekat rpirn (xy B) AB. 
"Incod Xpiorod] add. dunv AB. 


End of the Epistle to the Romans. 


Vol. II. p. 487. 15 xaraprícas] karaprjoas A. nBovreTo] 7BovrAéro 
(sic) A. 17 dvaxÓeis] ávax65s A. Suvpyns| pupyns A. karemetyero | 
kareriyero A; karnmeiyero B. 18 otpatiorav| AB. tas] ths A. 
IO móÀeL] pong AB. 20 THs Sikaoovyns dia Tora’Tns aOAnoews| rs dOAnvEws 
AB. 21 Tpwad:| rpaddy A. 22 karaxÓeic] rarax0ñçs A. NedaroÀ u ] 


véav ToAny A. dia $i wrmgotev] dia piinrrov (piturmov A) AB. 23 me] 
B; me(et A. ` 


p.488. 1 ov] om. AB. unos] vos A. 2 'Aüpiarikóv] áüpiavikóv B ; 
adptavixav A. 3 Tvppgvwko?] A; rvppavikot B. mapapetBov] mapapiBov 
(sic) A. ynoous re kai móXews] B ; viocous re kai moAAns A. 6 IIasAov] 
AB. émureaóv| B; émureoóv A. 7 mpipvrs émevyonévgs] mpúvns émvyo- 
pens A. 8T9]TO A. —mapémer] mapémdy A. 9 rovyapo)v] rvyàp oiv 
A. vukri] vvkrz A. IO dmnyopeba] dzruyóneña A ; nrrevyopeba B. 

p.489. 1r ro] rò A. 12 yiverOa] B; yeverOu A. rë] rò A. 
dméBawev] aréßevev A. 13 dvaxoprcat] dvayopioa A. poson] pdre 
A. 14. Aupévas] Aņnpévas A. 15 Ayew] Anyny A. : 


16 orpari@rat] 


ADDENDA. 595 


AB. tis] B; ris A. 7zoxXaXXov] 7jcxaXov A. I7 xaremetyovaw] 
kareriyovow A. 18 €wOev ópugÜévres] Ewbnoavtes A; éwbicavres B. 
19 ĉrerepjpioro] Sieiptora A; dverpucro B. Hôn] ier A. 


D. 490. I ovvavtoper] ovv aire pév A. 2 n&wdvro] B; d£wv rò A. 
3 avrrvxías, PoBovpevors] cvvrixias: PoBovpevor A. 4 rotovros] ó rowodTos AB. 
riri Oc...róv dikacov] om. B. mapiyyyeXXev] mapéyyeiXev A. 5 novxdátew] 
"covxá(ovcww A; def. B. karazavew] karamavgv A. 6 uù émigreiv] 
pl emi(nrny A. oùs evOds yvous| às edOois yvoùs A; ős evdus emuyvors B. 
7 aitnoas re] airícare A. 8 dAg&wiv| ddyOweiv A. 9 Tj emioToAj 
Stare Geis] ri émwarroXet SuadexOys A. metoas pun] micas m A. $60v5ca] 
Qoca, A. IO róv Kdpiov] B ; kvptov A. yovv&uatas] yovvkAgotas. A. 
I2 dtwypod] dioypot A. 


D. 491. 14 evOds] ev6ois A. I6 kararavew] karamavgv A. 17 éüókovv] 
edaxouv A. Aeyouévy] Aeywpern A. '"Pouaik? $evi] popaïke? pove? A. 
I8 evvjecav| cuvincay AB. I9 mapa Toy abéwy| mapa révad A; rapa ràvaià 
(sic) B. mapeBadXero] B; mapeBadero A. 20 mapavrà] map’ avrà B. 
21 émifupía] émifoiiia A. 23 Aew/ávov] Anavou A. 24 émwroN;] 
emiaToAet A. 


P. 492. I rpaxvrepa] B; Bpayirepa A. dyiov adrod| AB. Aeurávov] 
|— Aeujrávov A. mepteheipOn] mapedeipber A. 3 Anva] B; Awg A. àri- 
pntos]| àripros A. 


P. 493. 5 éyévero 00] B; éyévero (om. de) A. 6 "Iavvovapicov] add. rovr- 
éorw (roürearw A) dexeuBpio eixads AB. Supa] A; evpd B. 7 Sevexiovos| 
geðekiov AB, which punctuate thus supa: kal cedexiov rò Oevrepov. 8 daxpvor| 
Oakpoíav A. mavvuyisavres| A; mavvvyevoavtes B. 9 yovvkAaías] 
yovuxAnoias A. denoews| A; denoewr B. 


p. 494. I mAnpohopioa rovs dobeveis| mAnpwpopica roós dobevis A. 
2 e€aidyns| e&ehuns A. 3 mepumtucoopevoyv| B; mepurAakópevov app. 
A. éBAémouev] AB. 4 maw) madnv A; om. B. éepápev] 
AB. rv] róv A. 5 dAdo Oe...0p iSparos| AB. idp@ros| iðpóros A. 
6 mapearóra] mapearóra A. perá...iOóvrec] pera moñs (mocis A) rotvuv 
xapüs raUra idovres (iddvres A) AB. 8 cvuBaAóvres...ràv óveipárov] AB. 
cupBardvres| B; evufBdAXovres A. 9 ror Sotnpal ray Sornpa A. I2 KoL- 
yovopve| kowevopev (sic) A. 13 yervaio pdprupe Xpwrrot] B ; pdprupe 
yevvai@ Tod pioro? A. Karararnoaytt| karamaricavr, A. I4 kai Tov... 
jóv] AB. reAeiooavrt] reAeócavra A. 


A ` 5 >. 5 x >. ^ * AB 
; oùs aidvas Tév aidvev AB. 
p.495. 16 7@ marpi] AB. 17 eis aióvas] eis rovs $ 


38—2 


596 ADDENDA. 


Additional MSS of the Acts of the Metaphrast. 


Though it is no part of my work to deal with the text of the Metaphrast, 
I thought it might be useful to others if I included a collation which Prof. 
Rendel Harris procured of this text from Sz. 508. This MS is described by 
Gardthausen ; 

Adyou mavņyvpikoí (m. Dec.) cod. membr. 33 x 2 5'6 centim., binis columnis 
saec. x scr, quamquam lineae summas litteras stringunt...In initio codex 
mutilus est. Primus titulus diei Danielis prophetae (Aex. i£), ultimus Mela- 
niae Romanae (Aex. Aa). Notae nonnullae additae sunt latine scriptae. 

It is designated S in the following collation. 

Prof. Rendel Harris has also collated (for the Epistle to the Romans 


only) a Jerusalem Ms of the eleventh century, S. Sep. vii f. 236, designated 
H in the collation. 


The collation has been made with Funk’s text in Opera Patrum Aposto- 
licorum (1881) vol. 2, pp. 246 sq. 


I 1. 6 Evó8ov] Evo8ov S. to] S. 2. 8 éri] after róv Xpioròv S. 
2. 12 Oc£erai] déEnra S. 2. 14 caós] coós S. 

111.1676 rhs karà Epúpvav ékkAgoías] r@ karà...Epúpvav ékkXnoías (a gap 
in the MS after kara) S. 3. 22 evyvé] S. (p. 247) S. Fé 85: 
3. 2 Mov kai didackadiay] S. duaxovos jòn] Tóm Suaxovos S. 3. 4 On- 
piows...apadobeis] om. S. dvaAaBó»| om. S. 

III 1. IO etrovy] étro (sic) S. l. II éketves] ékeivos S. 1. 12 ov- 
Tos] obro S. 3. 18 róre] rò de (sic) S. 4, 21 em] & S. 4. 23 kara- 
kpiBévra] S. 

IV 1. 29 ov €i] od (om. ei) S. 1. 30 nc] ¿Ón S. (p. 248) 1. 1 
Toa avacraroy| dvácrarov macav S. 2.46 dé] S. 2. 5 mepupépov] S. 
3. 6 mepiépeis] S. nc] ¿Ón S. 4. 9 hépew] S. 5. 12 eis yàp] S. 
b. 15 é€ort| S. à] S. Toe] S. 5. 17 7cav...uovu. repa] 77cav. kai 
kop vopup.orepa. S. 

V 1. 22 airoi] S. 2. 23 Ocodópos] add. tyvarios S. 2. 24 à] om. S. 
2. 25 ôro] dca S. ávrixapi(ea Oat] ávr.yapta ao at S. 2. 27 a oOporépav] 
S. (p. 249) 3. I gol] S. 3. 4 épavróv] éavróv S. 

VI 1. 6 de] om. S. 1. 7 emt Iovriov oravpwdévre Ildárov] emi Movriov 
TlwAdrov aravpo6évri S. 2. 13 é&grárgao] S. 

VII 1. 22 dyywolas| S. 056ev] S. 1. 23 é$qcav] S. 1. 25 o?ros] 
ovrog S. 2. 27 adpoppns| S. 2. 29 6ipav] S. 3. 33 rpirqv rpépav] 
Tpitn nuépa S. (p. 250) 3. 2 06e] S. 4. 6 émeüe(£aro] S. 5. 14 ó 
mpôros viv kal péywros] ó mparos kal péywros viv S. 5. 16 mvpós] 


ToU mupos S. 5. 17 dváXorai] S. 


ADDENDA. 597 


VIII 1. 20 eis] S. l. 21 7 kai] 7 (om. kat) S. 1. 22 avOnoee| av- 
Onon S. 1. 25 mas a] mós (om. à») S. 1. 26 tmeEaydyou faqs] S. 
2. 29 Kowwcapévov| S. pev] S. DX cr Gf Se pasiv] dno S. 
(p. 251) 2. 3 Onpaw] Onpiois S. 3. 4 9oé£«] úpéće S. 

IX 1.7 rovVrov...ápécavros] S. 2. 9 mpocdyov] S. 2. 11 zAeiov] 
treiov S. 8. 12 pyre] S. 3. 14 endiopeval S. 3. I5 mepi- 
civat] meprOqva S. 

X 1. 20 dzródaocuv éketvgv] S. 1. 25 mapabépnevos rà Gea] S. 4. 28 èu- 
BaáXXerat] Badrcra S. 5. 32 cepvuvomevos emi] S. (p. 252) 6. 4 moño] 
S. 6. 5 rà» móXeov] S. 

XI 1. II ýyovpévovs] S. 2. 18 déAnoeas] S. 2. 20 adrijs| add. 
éketvns S. 

XII 1. 24 kuplov|] povoyevots S; om. H. rod uóvov] H; om. S. ios 
ev OeAnpart] SH. (p. 253) 2. 2 dep] SH. 3. 4 dedenevos] S; add. yàp 
Hs. Xpwró Inco] xpior (om. inood) S; ipso? ypior H. 4. 6 
eix7] S; apx? Hs. 4. IO $eíoga60e] S; u) $eíono0e Hs. 

XIII 1. I2 dpécxere| SH. 1. 13 éyà] S; om. H. 2. 15 mapdoxeode] 
SH. às ért...eromoy éorw| H; om. S. 2. 18 eis] SH. torov] S; 
om. Hs. 

saval 22:0€| 5 ; om. H: 2. 25 dre] S; órav Hs. 

XV 1. 30 yévgaOé por] yévorrðé pov SH. 1. 31 éveovi] S; eorw Hs. 
(p. 254) 2. 2 waddor] add. de SH. yévovra] SH. 2. 3 karaAirooct] SH. 
2. 4 yévopat] S; yévopar H. 2. 6 robrev] S; om. H. 

XVI 1. 12 avrfs| om. SH. 1. 13 8e0euévos] S; om. H. il dh c] SH: 
2. I9 mapafiácouai] SH. 3. 20 dpxopau] SH. 

XVII 2. 30 ddeAdol...uor] om. H by homceoteleuton. pnde] SH. 
ue] SH. 2. 32 muny] H; pupnrns S. (p-325 5) S 2) nel SET: 

XVIII l. 5 yiveoOe] yéverde SH. 1. 6 "IgcoQv Xpicrov| SH. 3.9 0] SH. 
3. II Aadovy év] H; AaXoóv S, followed by an erasure. Aéyov] SH. 
4, 14 ToU yevopévov èv Varépo] H ; roO yevopévov jarépos S. 4. 15 “ABpaap] 


S; 'ABpaáy. H. 

XIX 92. 21 dàg65] S; aààAg6ós Hs. 

XX 1. 24 ayri épo] avr’ euod S. 2. 27 'Igmo0 Xpicrov| H; inoov (om. 
xptorod) S. 

XXI 2. 32 mobnrov] SH. (p. 256) 


XXII 2. 9 év 'Emibápve] éri ðápvo (om. ev) S prima manu. 2. 10 Tvppr- 
vuxov| rvpavwukór S. tàs] S. 3. 12 peraüo)s domacpóv] domaopóv 
perabovs S. 

XXIII 1. 18 ov] S primá manu; erased by a later hand. 1. 19 mvev- 
paros] preef. rod S prima manu, erased by a later hand. 1. 22 árpécrov] 
drpémrov S. 2. 24 kai] przef. of S. 2. 28 yévopar] S. 3. 30 uóvov] 
povoy S. ris eUxfje TO avdpi] S. (p. 257) 3. 3 ro pri.] S. aùròr] 


om, S. 


598 ADDENDA. 


XXIV 1. 5 Teos] S. 1. 7 evveAÓóvres] edOdvres S. 1. 9 eikadal 
eikaðı S. 1. 10 dyovros] S. 2. 12 déopuos éE "Avrioxelas] e£ ’Avrwoxelas 
déopuos (Séopuos added by a later hand). 2, 15 mrepvirrápevat] S. 


XXV 1. 20 kai sec.] om. S. 2. 23 repo òè] érepo: (om. de) S. 
2. 24 rà»] S. 2. 25 rác: muorois| met Tots mioTots S. 


XXVI 1. 27 rotobrot] S. mepupaveis| mepipaveîs S. 2. 28 Aovy8ávov] 
Xoy8ávov S. 3. 31 evayyedtorod re] evayyedioTou (om. re) S. (p. 258) 
4. 5 ovdé] od ovde S. 4. 7 kuptov] kvpío S. 5. 12 paddov puxais] 
Nrvxais padov S. 

XXVII 1. 14 yevvatos] S. 1. 19 éykpdresdy re] èykpárerav (om. re) S. 
2. 22 rowdrov ékÜcivai] ékre vat rotrov S. 2. 24 xabicracba]| S. avav- 
petia bar pév] dvarpeîs bar (om. per) S. 3. 30 kaĝapıórņros] S. 


INDEX. 


Abbreviations used, ro sq 

Absolute use of terms by Ignatius, 37, 
85, 181, 195, 253, 290, 321 

Achilleion, 99 

Acta Fratrum Arvalium, 404, 405 

Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius; docu- 
ments, versions, and MSS, 363 sq; 
Ussher's view, 367; Zahn’s solution, 
367; mutual relations of documents, 
368 sq; historical credibility, 377 sq; 
Greek text and notes of Antiochene, 
477 sq; of Roman, 496 sq; translation 
of Antiochene, 575 sq; of Roman, 579 
sq; see further under Axtiochene, Ar- 
menian, Bollandist, Roman, Syriac 
Acts, Acts of the Metaphrast 

Acts of the Metaphrast, 367; sources of, 
375 sq, 389, 473, 474 ; relation to Ar- 
menian Acts, 376 sq; incorporate the 
Ignatian Epistle to the Romans, 5, 9; 
introduce the story of the Oeodópos, 
376; not in this edition, 376; identi- 
fication of a MS of, 364; collation of 
additional Mss of, 596 sq; see also 
Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius 

Acts of Perpetua and Felicitas, 187,212,214 

Adiabene, Trajan in, 395, 396, 414 sq 

Ado, Martyrology of, 368, 382, 428; Li- 
ber de Festiv. of, 428 

Adonai and Antonini confused, 497 

Adonis, legend of, 505 

Advents, the two, 275 sq 

Zésculapius, death of, 504 

Africanus, Julius, Chronography of, 452 
sq, 455 sq; his date and history, 457 3 
alleged schematism in his lists of 
bishops, 453 sq; as a source of inform- 
ation to Eusebius, 453, 460, 467, 472 

- Agape; references to, 87, 227, 312; his- 
tory of, 312 sq; its relation to the Eu- 
charist, 313 Sq 

Agathopus; see Rhaius Agathopus 

Alce; mentioned in the Ignatian Epistles, 
325, 359 Sq» 871, 874; sister of Nicetes 
the persecutor, 325 

Alexander of Jerusalem; his imprison- 


ment, 458 sq; his letter to the Antio- 
chenes, 458 sq 

Alexandrian Calendar, 381 

Alexandrian grammatical forms, 521 

Alexandrian origin of Roman Acts of 
Martyrdom, 380, 519 

‘ Altar’, use of word in Ignatius; see 
Ouoiaorhpiov 

Ammia, prophetess of Philadelphia, 243 ; 
claimed by the Montanists, 243 

Anacolutha, 28, 29, 110, II}, 155, 159; 
194, 251, 268, 288 

Analogy, transference of ideas by, 41 

Androcles, governor of Ephesus, 535 

Angelology, 164 sq, 303 

Anianus, bishop of Alexandria, 472 

Anointing of our Lord at Bethany, ex- 
plained symbolically, 72 

Anthemus of Tralles, architect of S. 
Sophia, 147 

Antioch in Pisidia, a colony of Magnesia, 
102 

Antioch in Syria; date of the foundation 
of the Church at, 472; mission to the 
Church at, 276 sq, 318, 356, 357 Sq; 
persecution at, 88, 139, 181, 277, 319, 
355 sq; earthquake at, 397, 409, 413, 
417 sq; Malalas’ account of it, 409, 
413, 436, 442 sq; Trajan at, 385, 395, 
409, 413 Sq, 442 Sq; alleged place of 
martyrdom of Ignatius, 437 sq, 447; 
reliques of Ignatius at, 369, 382, 385, 
387 sq, 431 sq, 487; devastated by 
Chosroes, 433; bishops of, see An- 
tiochene bishops 

Antioch, other cities of the name, 177 

Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom of Igna- 
tius; versions and Mss, 363, 380 sq, 
473; narrative in, 368 sq; reason for 
name, 369; relation to Roman Acts, 
371 sq; credibility of, 383 sq; ex- 
ternal testimony to, 386 sq; date and 
origin, 389; circulation of, 389; may 
embody earlier document, 389 sq, 489; 
incorporate the Ignatian Epistle to the 
Romans, 5, 9,486 ; on day of martyr- 


602 


dom of Ignatius, 419, 423 ; on year of 
martyrdom, 448, 492 ; relation to Euse- 
bius' Chronicon, 409, 450 sq ; text and 
notes, 477 Sq; translation, 575 sq ; col- 
lation of additional Mss of, 589 sq; see 
also Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius 

Antiochene bishops; list given in Eu- 
sebius’ Chronicon, 452 sq; Harnack 
on, 452 sq, 468 sq; Hort on, 463 
sq ; its credibility and that of the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 471 

Antiochene reckoning of years, 436 

Antiochenes, Ignatian Epistle to the; 
its relation to Roman Acts of Martyr- 
dom, 380, 519 

Antitheses ; in Ignatius, 48 ; in Tertullian, 
48; in Melito, 48 

Aorist, uses of, 45 

Apellzeus, the month, 436, 443 

Aphrodite, burial of, 504 

Apocalypse i. 10 explained, 129 

Apocryphal additions to Gospel narrative 
in the Ignatian Epistles, 80 sq, 294 sq 

Apocryphal sayings attributed to our 
Lord, 294, 299 

Apollinarianism, interpolations to avoid, 


49 

Apollonius of Tyana, on the Trallians, 
153; 154 

Apollonius, the presbyter, 102, rrosq, 551 

* Apostles’, ‘Gospels’, ‘ Prophets’, mu- 
tual relation of the terms, 260 sq 

Apostolical Constitutions, imitate the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 119 

Apostolici and apostoli, 479 

Apostolici viri, 479 

Apparatus criticus of this edition, 7 

Apphia, her day, 535 

Arabia Petreea, conquered by Palmas, 
394, 406 sq, 410, 480 

Arcadia, human sacrifices in, 523 

Archippus, his day, 535 

Ares, the bindings of, 506 

Arian controversy, go sq 

Aricia, the worship of Diana at, 523 

Armenian Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius, 
5» 9» 367, 371 sq, 4735 component ele- 
ments of, 372 sq; on the day of the 
festival of Ignatius, 234, 375, 4223 see 
also Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius 

Armenian Calendar, 375, 422 sq, 429 

Armenian Chronicon, 449, 451, 455 sq; 
463sq — 

Armenian version of Eusebius’ Chronicon, 
449» 451, 455 Sq 

Armenian version of Ignatian Epistles, 4, 
6, 7, 8, 9 ; when first published, 7; Pe- 
termann's edition of, 7; Aucher's claims 
on behalf of, 367; independent of the 
Metaphrast, 375 ; not necessarily known 
to the compiler ofthe Menza, 383 


INDEX. 


Artemis, 508, 523; processions in Ephe- 
sus in honour of, r7, 54 sq, 56; Leu- 
cophryene, 98, roo sq 

Article omitted, 72, 85 

Asclepiades, bishop of Antioch, 454, 455; 

S 

EUM Roman province of, 151 

Assemani, 423, 431 

Athanasius (S.), passages illustrating the 
use of dyévyntos by, 90 sq 

Atheists; a designation of heathens, 160; 
of Christians, 44, 160; of Docetists, 174 

Athene, 508 

Athlete, typified in the Christian martyr, 
38 sq, 335; 494 

Attalus, king of Pergamos, 144, 237 

Attalus of Smyrna, 330, 359; 574 

Atticus condemns Symeon, son of Clopas, 
498 

P. of relative, 54, 74, 87, 88, 122, 
130, 133, I7I, 227, 250 

Aucher; publishes the Armenian Acts of 
Martyrdom, 367; criticisms on, 367, 
372, 373: 424 x 

Augustus, length of reign of, 520 

Aurelius Victor, 399 

Autographs of the Gospels, 271 


ayaway, orépyew, pirely, 341 

ayardy — dryá&mmv mow, 307 

aydrn and épws, 222 

dydrn combined with isris, 29, 67, 86, 
108, 137, 171, 282, 287, 289, 304, 325 

dydarn '1goo0 Xpisrod, 165, 190; Əeo0, 252 

dydrn Twos (n), 159, 180, 196, 229, 281, 
320 

ayarny mo.etv, 307, 313; see also Agape 

dye, dye, Tápyapı, oproÜüve, 441 

aytopépos, 21, 56, 288 

ayvela, 348 

aryvigew, -feoOat, 51, 181 

Gyvicua, 51, 181 

aduixpiros, -axplrws, 39, 140, 153) 193, 249 

QÕLANEITTOS, 57, 334 

deo, of heathens, 160; of Christians, 
44, 160; of Docetists, 174 

GOeos modvbela, 527 

GOuKTOS, 273 

dOXyrijs, of martyrs, 38 sq, 335, 494 

atdtos, 126 sq 

atua 0coü, 29 

dina kal odp — Qua, 297 

alwoBdpos, 484, 521 

alrnots and Tposevxń, 355 

alxpaXorlgew, 73 

aidy, 80, 520 

axlynros, 253, 289 

GKKETTA, 354 

AKLWY, 342 

dkpófivaros, 264 

arelrrns, 38 


INDEX. 


&Xelóew and compounds, 38 

deus (form), 216 

adnbew (form), 207 

GA few, 134 

"Ax, 325, 360 

addNOrptos, ‘heretical’, 257 

dduopds (v. 1.), 216 

ddwirés, 381, 532 

dauépiorTos kapüla, 181 

äuwpos, dps, 27, 194, 288, 333 

dvarywyevs, 54 

dvafwirupety, 29 

dvatcOnrev, 133 

dvaklpvacOat, 43 

dvakTao Oar éavróv, 170 

dvahauBdavew, 170 

dvavyóew, 314 

dvamáprucTOS, 259 

avamaj/ew, 35 

dvacTavpoUr, 482 

dva xeu, 35 

dvOpóyvvos, 508 

dvekNddnrTos, 81 

dvéxea0at, 334 

aynKkew, 252, 357 

aynp and dvOpwiros, 220 

dv Opwmaperkely, -ápeakos, -apéoKela, 197 

av Opwrduoppos, 298 

ävðpwros and dvyp, 220 

avrl6oros, 87 

avrTipupeta Oar, 59 

dvrlivxov, 51, 87, 316, 341, 35! 

dyuarépytos, 287 

dévayamrnros, 262 

aila-yvos, 192 

dévemlrevkros, IQI 

d£uó0cos, TIO, 152, IQI, 195, 321 

d&touaxdpioTos, 27 

d£iómicTos in bad sense, 167, 254; 341 

atıómňokos, 138 

d&os, in Ignatius, 33; compounds OD T, 
IQI 

dévotoba (kar-), 57, 110 

doparos, 343 

amayecbat, 88 

amaprifew, 259 

dmápripa, -apriopds, 276 

amedevOepos, 210 

ameploracros, 87 

QITETKANKYS, 514 

dmi Tot, of Docetists, 175, 293: 303 

ame in composition, 112 

dmodexvivat, 251 

dmobwrtev, -Nopós, 193, 256 

adrodokipagew, 229 

drrohapBdavew, 196 

årosráčew xápw, 486 

drrooToNKÓs, 478 

dmocToNuOs XAPAKTIHP, 152 

ádmbócToNo.— N. T. Scriptures, 260 

dmorá£ac0a. TQ Bly, 281 


603 


ü&ToTéuvew, 118 

amopacis, 483, 530 

dpa ov and dpa otv, 176 

&prov Kav, 87 

&pros Oco, 45, 87, 226 

dpros kaÜapós, 207 

apxaia and ápxeta, 271 

dpxeta, 270 sq; of Old Testament, 271 

dpxvepevs, of Christ, 274 

&pxovres, of angels, 165, 303 

apxovTiKds, 164 

dpxcv rod al@vos Tovrou (ó), 73, 76, 109, 
163, 265 

*Aoidpxns; see Asiarchs 

dorpov and dornp, 82 

dogpadlfew, 259 

dovyKpitos, 326 

dowparos, 294, 296 

"ArraAos, 359 

avdaipérws, 118 

á$0apcla, 73, 121, 276 

apos virpov, 239 

&xpovos, AX povws, 343 

aynragyros, 353 

-aw and -ew, interchange of, 131 


Babylas, bishop of Antioch, 464, 467 

Baptism administered by the bishop, 312 

Baptism of Christ, motive for, 75, 290 

Baronio, criticism on, 433 

Basil (S.), day of commemoration of, 421 

Bassus, 102, III, 551 

Baur criticised, 52, 213 

Bede, Martyrology of ; see Ps-Bede 

Benediction, forms of, 322 

Bishopric; of Christ, 229; of the Father, 
114, 332) 359 x 

Bishops; Ignatius on the obedience due 
to, 43, 46, 121 sq, 138, 155, 268, 309; 
as the centre of unity, 36, 41 sq, 44, 
121, 169 sq, 258, 268, 310 Sq, 334; 
344; their functions, 312 sq, 349; their 
relation to presbyters, 33, 40 Sq, 112 
Sq, IIO, 121 Sq, 138, 155, 269, 309, 312; 
as strings to a lyre, 40; as the Father to 
the Apostles, 119, 157, 309; as grace to 
law, 112; share the mind of Christ, 40; 
are stewards of Christ, 46; dispensers of 
blessings, 112; embodiments of law, 
181; see Apiscopate, Ministry , 

Bishops of Antioch; see 4zochene bishops 

Bishops of Rome, chronology of, 452 sq 

Bithynia; Pliny governor of, 377, 395; 
407, 536; date of the persecution in, 
395; 407, 530; Eusebius on, 449, 4535 
Jerome on, 449; see Pliny, Trajan 

Bochart criticised, 212 

Bollandist Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius, 
366 sq, 473, 4743 extant only in Latin, 
366; Mss of, 367 ; Petermann’s edition 
criticised, 367; narrative in, 371 sq; 


604 


a combination of the Antiochene and 
Roman Acts, 371, 432, 473; known to 
Ado, Ps-Bede, etc., 382; on day of 
commemoration of Ignatius, 422; errors 
of, 488; see also Acts of Martyrdom of 
Lenatius 

Bonds; Ignatius glories in his, 57, 61, 
108, 164, 195; parallels to this, 62 

Borghesi’s theory of the tribunician years, 
391, 399 sq, 402 Sq 

Bread; varieties of, 207; metaphors from, 
207 

Bunsen; criticisms on, 81, 191, 267; 
emendations by, 162, 180, 293, 341 

Burrhus, deacon of Ephesus, 15, 34, 2433 
the amanuensis of the Epistles to the 
Philadelphians and Smyrneans, 34, 
243, 281, 320; mentioned in the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 34, 35, 320, 544, 566, 
571 


Backalvew, 202 
Backxavla, 222 

Báccos, 111 

Bacráfew, 334 
BéBacos, ‘valid’, 309 
Bios and £wj, 225, 281 
Bracgnula, 58 

Boráv: and Aáxava, 60 
Bord», of heresies, 60, 166, 255 
Bodppos, 34 

Bvew rà öra, 53 
B&pos, 43 


Cacodaemon, 482 

Caesarea, a name of Tralles, 145 

Calendars; Alexandrian, 381 ; Antiochene, 
436; Armenian, 422 sq, 429; Coptic, 
424; Ethiopic, 425 sq; Latin, 429; 
Syriac, 420 sq; Tyrian, 443 

Callatebus, site of, 238 

Calliope, the sacrifice of, 441 

Calpurnius Macer, 34, 232, 536 

Canonical Scriptures ; names for divisions 
of, 290 sq; early existence of collec- 
tion of, 261; documents of, 270 sq 3 
additions to, in Ignatius, 80 sq, 294 
sq; coincidences with and quotations 
from, in Ignatius and Polycarp, see 
Index ii in Vol. 111 

Catholic Church ; see Church, the Catholic 

Cave of Treasures ; wrongly ascribed to 
Ephraem, 81; recensions of, 81; on 
the star of the Epiphany, 8r 

Celibacy in the early Church, 348 sq 

Celsus, 504, 511 

Cerinthus, 264 

Christ, called Gop, 26, 30, 169, 303, 316 

Christianity; spread of, 134 sq; social 
position of, 196; not prejudicial to 


INDEX. 


Roman Empire, 519 sq; its relation to 
marriage, 348, 350; to mythology, 503 
sq, 526; see Church, the primitive 

Christians, efforts on behalf of the con- 
demned, 196 

Christology ; of Ignatius, 48, 86, go sq, 
123, 126 sq, 290, 343; the preexist- 
ence of the Word, 127 sq; the eternal 
generation of the Son, oo sq, 127; in 
antenicene times, 92 sq ; effect of Arian- 
ism on, 94 

Chromatic scale, 41 sq 

Chronicle, Syriac, 447, 448, 476 sq 

Chronicle of John Madabbar, 446 

Chronicle of Julius Africanus, as an au- 
thority for Eusebius, 452 sq, 455 sq 

Chronicon of Eusebius; see JZzwsebzus 
Chronicon 

Chronicon Paschale; on the Second Da- 
cian war, 406, 410; on the year of mar- 
tyrdom of Ignatius, 410, 448; on the 
date of Manes, 439; on Ignatius the 
pupil of S. John, 478 

Chronology ; of Trajan’s reign, 391 sq; 
of Roman bishops, 452 sq; of Antio- 
chene bishops, 452 sq, 471 ; curiosities 
of, 463 sq, 469 sq ` 

Chrysostom (S.) ; his panegyric on Igna- 
tius, 202, 204, 379 sq, 386, 418 sq, 4313 
its relation to the Roman Acts, 379 sq; 
to the Antiochene Acts, 436, 438; to 
the Acts of the Metaphrast, 376; shows 
coincidences with the Ignatian Epistles, 
202, 204, 380; coincidences elsewhere 
in his works, 223; on the day of com- 
memoration of Ignatius, 418 

Church, the Catholic; the name first in 
the Ignatian Epistles, 310; its mean- 
ing there, 311; in Martyrdom of Poly- 
carp, 311 ; in Muratorian Fragment, 
311; in Clement of Alexandria, 311 ; 
definitions of Athanasius, Cyril of Je- 
rusalem and Augustine, 311 sq ; subse- 
quent history of the name, 311; com- 
pared to a ship, 339 

Church, the primitive; funds of, 346; 
its relation to marriage, 348, 350; to 
celibacy, 348 sq ; see Christianity 

Cinyras, legends regarding, 504 sq 

Circumcision, when abandoned by Judais- 
ing Christians, 264 

Classical deities ; ridiculed by early Chris- 
tians, 503 sq; rationalised, 526 

Clement, Epistle of, allusions in Igna- 
tius to the, 203 

Clement of Alexandria; on S. John xii. 3 
sq, 72; on star at the Nativity, 81, 
82; on magic overthrown by Christ, 83 ; 
on the descent into Hades, 132 ; quotes 
Gospel of the Egyptians, 166 ; on the 
symbolism of the Cross, 291; passages 


INDEX. 


emended in, 224; his use of word 
* Catholic’, 311; his Protrepticon, 504 

Clinton, 492 sq 

Colbertine Acts; see Amtiochene Acts of 
Martyrdom 

Commemoration of Ignatius, day of, 418 
sq 

compedagogita, 37 

Complimentary forms of address, 159 

Conjunctive in indirect questions, 59 

Constructions, loose, in the Ignatian 
Epistles, 67, 136; see also Anacolutha 

Consulates in Trajan’s reign, 392 sq, 
498; of Sura and Senecio, 394, 407, 
492 ; of Suburanus and Marcellus, 393; 
405; 497 5q, 

Contractions in proper names, 110 

contubernia, 348 

Coptic Calendars, 424 sq 

Coptic remains of Ignatian Epistles, 4, 9 

Coptic versions of Roman Acts of Mar- 
tyrdom, 364 sq, 383, 474; not Antio- 
chene Acts as Cureton states, 366; ex- 
tant in Memphitic and Sahidic, 364 sq; 
not independent of each other, and the 

' Sahidic prior, 366; Zoega’s mistake as 
to their authorship, 366; their testi- 
mony to origin of these Acts, 381 sq 

Cotelier, criticisms on, 114, 274, 307; 323 

Crocus, I5, 34» 185, 5445 562 

Cronos, human sacrifices to, 522 

Cross of Christ; prominence given by 
Ignatius to the, 74, 78, 177, 249, 272 
sq, 289 sq; regarded as a tree of life, 
291; as a standard, 292; as a trophy, 
292; see also Passion of Christ 

cufa and kindred words, 525 

Cureton; his labours, 363; criticisms on, 
25, 77, 79, 334: 306 

Curetonian Abridgment; 
Epistles, Three Syriac 

Cynosura, 504 

Cyril of Jerusalem, 
Church, 311 sq 

Cyrillus, bishop of Antioch, 454 sq; a 
prisoner in Pannonia, 456; date of his 
death, 456 

Cyrus, 238 


see Zgnatian 


on the Catholic 


ka" ëva, 179 
Kabnrodaba év, 289 
KaborKh éxkrnola (h), 310 sq 
Kabodxds, 310 

kal in apodosis, 293 
kauvós dvOpwrros, 85 
kawérns (os, 84 
Kavpds, 339 
kaxodaluwy, 281 
kakorexvia, 265, 346 
kaXokaya0la, 68 
kay Ü, 217 


605 


kàv, 58 


kará, uses of in Ignatius, 107, 125, 190 


Kata dvOpwrrous (iv, 155, 228 

kata Oeóv, 107 

kar’ dvdpa (ol), 41 

Kara mávra dvaravew, 35, 140, 178, 234, 
315, 321 

Kara cápka, 71, 86 

karà xphow and karà pow, 153 

KatayyéAAew eis, 262 

KaTradeopos, 84 

KaTAKpLTOS, 209, 379 

Karagiomurrever Oat, 167 

karačıoðv, 85, 107, IIO, 180, 202, 278, 
318, 333, 356, 359 

karapnropebew, 523 

karapri(ew, 36, 269, 289 

KATApTLOTHP, 3 

KATÁOTNHQ, 159 

karevoOoÜv, 137 

Karokelv, 46 

kevoOo£(a, -£civ, 135, 252 

Kýpvyua Ilérpov, 295 sq 

KM)pos, of Church, 62; of martyrdom, 180, 
196, 260 ; 

kowóv (Tò), 346 

KoXakeÜew, 219, 33 

korriüv , kóros, of athletes, 336, 351 

Koopelv, 56 

KouT7tov, 525 

kpaBarrorvpla, 528 

Kpadjvar and KparnOjvat confused, 297 

kpavyáqew, 267 

kpavyń, 79 

kpipa (accent), 61 

Kpókos, 34 

kpůġios, II5 

Krios and xpfjats, 153 

krifew and *yevvàv, 9o sq 

KUBos, 524 

Kuvocovpa, 504 

Kvogopely, 75 

KUpLAKy, 129 


xalpew mreloTa, 27 

XAPAKTHP, 117, 152 

xdpus, abs., 321, 357, 359; central point 
of Gospel dispensation, 125 

xdpis, ZNeos, eiphvn, ÚTouovń, form of salu- 
tation, 322 

xeuwv, meanings of, 417 sq 

Xpat, 304 sq, 322, 344 

xOdvios and émux66pvos, 512 

Xopós, 41, 201 

xp&c0aL, 112 

xpijais, plows, krtjcts, 153 

xpuriavi£ew, -v.auós, 134, 264 

xpurruavós, 134 

xps To-, compounds of, 56 

xpworopa0(a, 270 

xpuoróvopos, 193 


606 


xXpraropdpos, -popeîv, 21, 56 
Xpod, 41 

xpvoopopetv, 56 

xpóua, ‘scale’, 41; ‘colour’, 193 
XHpa, XBpos, Xdptov, IQI 

xwpelv, 163, 304 


Dacian Wars of Trajan, 80 sq, 392 sq, 
404 sq,.480 sq 

Dacians, called Getze, 410 

Dacicus, as a title of Trajan, 393, 404 sq 

Daillé, criticism on, 23 

Damas, bishop of Magnesia, 102, 110, 113, 

I 

SR grove of, 277; speaking foun- 
tain at, 224 

Daphne, legend of, 207 

Daphnitic gate at Antioch, 386, 431 sq, 
441; called the Golden Gate, 441; 
translation of Ignatius' bones to ceme- 
tery there, 431 sq 

Daphnus, 326, 571 

Dative of person interested, 151 

De la Berge, criticised, 443 

De Rossi, criticisms on, 408 sq 

Deaconesses, order of, distinct from 
order of widows, 322 sq f 

Deacons; 156 sq, 309; how addressed 
in the Ignatian Epistles, 33, 111, 316; 
their relation to bishops, 157; compared 
to Christ, 120, 157; coupled with 
bishops and presbyters, 111, 120, 138, 
156, 170, 250, 258, 267, 278, 309, 321, 
351; their duties, 156; see Bishops, 
LEpiscopate, Ministry 

Deceiver (the) himself deceived, 76 sq 

Delegates from Asiatic Churches to Syria, 
277: 318 sq, 356 sq 

Demetrianus (Demetrius), bishop of An- 
tioch, 454, 456 sq 

Dependent clauses, arrangement of, 68 

Deponent verbs, passive use of, 309 

Descent into Hades, the early doctrine of 
the, 131 

Didache, 257, 305, 313 

Dierauer, 406, 407, 413, 414 Sq, 443 

Diodorus, on the removal of Magnesia, 99 

Dion Cassius; on the adoption of Trajan, 
399; on his tribunician years, 400 sq; 
on his Dacian wars, 406 sq; on his 
Parthian expedition, 407 sq, 414 sq; on 
his titles, 410, 411, 416sq; Xiphilinus’ 
abbreviation of, 408 

Dionysius of Corinth, on the Roman 
Church, 192 

Dionysus, death of, 507 

Discipleship, by martyrdom, 31, 130, 204 

Divine generation of the Son, 9o Sq, 123, 
127 sq; see Christology, Logos 

Docetic distinction between Aóyos and 
$ov7), 199 


INDEX. 


Docetism ; opposed by Ignatius, 16 sq, 25, 
745 86, 130, 135, 147 etc.; but not in all 
his epistles, 173, 185, 329; how met, 
16, 25, 48, 75, 173, 289, 321; its Ju- 
daic character, 16, 103, 124, 130, 147, 
173, 242 sq, 285; compared with the 
heresy of the Colossian Church, 124; 
play on the name, 175 

Docetists; called deo. and moro, 175, 
293; vexpopdpor, 302; excluded from 
Ignatius’ salutation, 250; admit a spi- 
ritual resurrection, 322 

Dollinger, 489 

Domitian, persecution of, 196, 451, 479 

Domninus, the correspondent of Serapion, 


45 

Donate bishop of Antioch, 454 sq 

Donaldson, criticism on, 347 

Donatives to soldiers, 353 

Door, Christ the, 275 

Dress, fondness of Ephesians for, 57 

Dressel’s edition of Ignatian Epistles, 7, 
271, 292, 364; of the Roman Acts of 
Martyrdom, 474 

Drosine, martyrdom of, 404, 446 


6 in hieroglyphics, 496 

Oarpovixds for datuoviaxds, 294 

OauuóPLov ác óparov, 294 

daiuwv, Christian use of word, 296 

Aapgüs, 110 

Aaveld, èk a mépuaros, 75 

Aádvos, 326 

Ocüeuévos, 305 

OecNalvew, 214 

Oeróctra, 353 

Üépew, 342 

Oecéprop, 352 

és os, the dignity of a, 37, 108, 164, 195 

ões uós, ‘spell’, 83 

d€éxerbat els Svoua, 231 

dud, of representative, 35, 110, 387, 485; 
of amanuensis etc., 233 

dud roüro lva, 72 

Oa Bómros, 51 

didKovos, 316; see Deacons 

Ovapra few, 221 

duardynara TOv drocrod\wy, 169 

duddoKev, athletic term, 203 

Oukatolv, of martyrdom, 273 

dixalws, 7o 

Ov ddlywy, 228 

dwrlfew, -iopds, 193 

Soyuara, 137 

dofdfew, abs., 154 

0x7, 312 

Opootfev, 151 

OvaOepd/revros, 47 

Ovocuverdjrws, 116 

Svowdla, 73 

d&pa, of Eucharistic elements, 307 


INDEX. 


Earthquakes; at Tralles, 145; at Lao- 
dicea, 146; at Philadelphia, 239; at 
Antioch, date of, 397, 409, 413 sq; 
Malalas on this last, 409, 413 sq, 436, 
442 Sq 

Eckhel, 399. 401, 407, 410, 414 

Egnatius, an African martyr, 430; day 
of his commemoration, 430 

Egyptian; months, 381, 423 sq; reckoning 
of time, 412, 498; transliteration of A, 
496; deities ridiculed by Christians, 510 

Elliptical; sentences, 59; use of infini- 
tives, 61 

Ephesians, Ignatian Epistletothe; whence 
written, 5, 15; motive for writing, 16; 
character of, 18; analysis of, 18 sq; 
text and notes, 21 sq; relation to Se 
Paul’s Epistle, 23; promise of a second, 
18, 85; translation of, 544 sq 

Ephesus; places of the name, 27; posi- 
tion of, 15; deputation to Ignatius from, 
2, 15; character of Church of, 105) 323 
image-processions at, 17, 54 sq; festi- 
vals held at, 54 sq; connexion of apo- 
stles with, 62, 65; special importance 
of, 180; its connexion with Magnesia, 
IOI; à part called Smyrna, 288 

Epidamnus, 488, 577 

Epiphi, 381, 423 sq 

Epirus, 487, 577 

Episcopate; Pearson on the extent of, 40; 
Saumaise and others on origin of, 113 
sq; its establishment in Asia Minor, 
169; in Syria, 201; at Rome, 186; its 
position in the Ignatian Epistles, 119; 
in the Apostolical Constitutions, 119; 
interpolations in the Ignatian Epistles 
bearing on the, 274; instances of great 
length in the, 468 sq; of S. Peter, 467; 
see Bishops, Ministry 

Epithronian Orations of Severus of An- 
tioch, 421 

Epitropus, 358, 574 

Erbes, on the sources of Eusebius’ infor- 
mation, 452 

Eternity of the Son asserted by Ignatius, 
120, 128, 343 

Ethiopic Calendars, 423, 425 Sq 

Eucharist; directly referred to in the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 45, 87, 257, 306, 309; 


indirectly, 66, 171, 226; the bond of 


unity, 66, 116, 257; violated by here- 
tics, 257 sq, 306, 309; a pledge of the 
reality of Christ’s death, 307 ; its rela- 
tion to the Agape, 87, 313 Sq; patristic 
use of the word, 257; its validity, 116, 
309 sq; called pvorjpiov, 64, 80, 156; 
see evxaptoTla 

Eucharistic elements called dpa, 307 

Eucharistic metaphors in the Ignatian 
Epistles, 260 


607 


Euhemerus, 502 sq 

Euhodius, bishop of Antioch; his date, 
464 sq, 471 sq, 498, 579 

Euplus, delegate of Ephesian Church, 15, 
35: 321) 544 

Eusebius! Chronicon; on the year of 
the martyrdom of Ignatius, 409, 448 
sq, 452; its relation to the Roman 
and Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom, 
450 sq, 497, 5353 Zohrab’s Armenian 
Version of, 449, 451, 455 sq; Har- 
nack on the list of Antiochene bishops 
in, 452 sq, 468 sq; Hort on, 463 sq; 
sources of the lists of bishops in, 452 
sq, 460, 461 sq, 466 ; relation to Chrono- 
graphy of Julius Africanus, 452 sq, 460; 
relation to Eusebius’ Ecclesiastical His- 
tory, 453 sq, 467 sq; probably two 
editions of this as of other works of his, 
467 ; passage explained in, 475; Syriac 
epitome of, 447; Jerome's recension of, 
449 sq, 463 sq; additions in that re- 
cension, 4773; chronology of bishops in 
this recension and in the Armenian 
Version, 463 sq; on the martyrdom of 
Symeon, son of Clopas, 449, 451 Sq 

Eusebius’ Ecclesiastical History; its re- 
lation to the Roman Acts of Martyr- 
dom, 382; imitated therein, 450, 500, 
516, 529, 535, 538; its relation to the 
Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom, 384, 
386; to the Chronicon, 453 sq, 467 sq; 
its date, 467; on the martyrdom of Poly- 
carp, 945 sq; passages emended in, 73, 
319, 496 

Eutecnus, 326, 571 

Eutychianus, bishop of Rome, 454 sq 

Evagrius; his coincidence with the Antio- 
chene Acts, 386 sq; on the place of 
martyrdom of Ignatius, 438; on the 
translation of the reliques of Ignatius, 
386 sq, 433, 434» 4923 date of, 388 sq; 
passage explained in, 387; sources of 
information, 389, 438 


éavrod — épavroU, 159, 299 
éyyós with dat., 70 

¿Yyketo Oat (constr.), 180 
EdpdtecOan ev, 249, 289, 332 
édpacGae (form), 325 

el uh, ‘but only’, 57 
eldévar, ‘value’, 315 

elvat eis, 24, 195 

eis Tyuunv TWos, 34, 88, 139 
EKOLKELY, 333 

ExSorov 0i00vat, 299 
ékeiüev, 52 

ékkNgola, h kaÜoNuc], 310 
éKANekTÓS, X51 

ékréveta, 139 

Ékrpop.a, 229 Sq 


608 


ékxeta0at, of love, 259 

édecic Oa év, 189, 249, 260, 287 

ers, ù kou], = Christ, 30, 89, 263, 282 

cuBpox?j, 337 

éutAaoTpov, 337 

éumpoobev, 358 

éváperos, 253 

évduvamotv, 300 

évepeldew, 49 

Év0eos, 172 

évvaros and réumrTos confused, 7, 496 

évotlfew, 133 

EvOTNS, 42, 109, 269 

€voücÓat, 25, 121, 193, 298 

évTo\h, active, 181 

évuTrareve, 497 

évwows, 108 sq; of marriage bond, 350 

¿Ë óvóuaros, 86, 345 

é£alperos, éEatpérws, 179, 275, 308, 485 

é£ac0evetv, 265 

é£eumAáptov, 34, 159, 321 

Érapxos, 531 

ém7npela, 109 

eri Tpatavod, 436, 444 Sq 

émvypáóew, 198 

émtelkeut, 59, 252 

éreOuula, 49 

érlppnros, ‘infamous’, 515 

ETLTKOT, 359 

érloxomos; see Lpiscopate, Bishops 

émírevkros, compounds of, 191 sq 

"Emrírporos, or émírpomos, 358 

émiruyxdvew Oeo, 65, 110, 139, 179, 181, 
196, 197, 207, 230, 318, 339, 355 

émovpávvos, 67 

epyov = evaryyéuov, 68 

épl0eua, 270 

Epunvevew, 263 

éppoc0e, 89 

¿pos and dyarn, 222 

¿pos eoravpwrat, 6 éuós, 222 sq 

érepoüi0ackaNetv, 341 

érepodotla, -Eelv, 124, 304 

éÜ pdo eu, 42 

eúayyyéNuoy, = Book of the Gospels, 260 sq, 
271;=doctrine of the Gospels, 308; 
see Gospel, Gospels 

eboyos, 314. 

Evm)ovs, 35 

evoTabety, evoTabera, 344 

evouveldnros, and deriv., 116, 265 

Biürekvos, 326 

evxaptoria, ‘thanksgiving’, 66; ‘the 
eucharist’, 257, 306, 309; history of 
the word, 257 sq; see also Eucharist 

"Eeoos (name), 27, 28 

&podos, 55 

éxew kará, mpós, 172 


nyesha. (passive), 309 
”"Hrepos, 487 


INDEX. 


Fabius (Fabianus), bishop of Antioch, 
455 Sq. 467 : 

Fellow prisoners of Ignatius, 211, 429 

Flesh and blood of Christ; the test of 
His reality, 297 ; allegorically interpret- 
ed, 171, 227, 260 

Fronto, 15, 35, 321, 544 

Funds of early Church, 346 

Funk; his text of the Bollandist Acts, 
367; of the Acts of the Metaphrast, 

76 
kake conjunctive, 155 


Gavia, 325, 359, 571 

Genitive of apposition, 84 

Germanicus, as a title of Trajan, 392 

Gibbon’s panegyric on Philadelphia, 246 

Gladiatorial shows; order of Constantine 
respecting, 439; when abolished, 439 

Gnostic phraseology anticipated in Igna- 
tius, 23, 24, 28, 8o, 126 sq, 153, 193, 
224 Sq, 228, 280 

‘Gospel’ and ‘Gospels’, 260 sq, 271, 308; 
see evayyéXov 

Gospel according to the Hebrews; alleged 
quotation from, 290, 295; account 
in Jerome, 295; in Eusebius, 295; in 
Origen, 295; various recensions of, 
295 Sq 

Gospel according to S. Mark, coincidence 
in language with the alternative ending 
of, 296 

Gospel narrative, additions in the Igna- 
tian Epistles to, 80 sq, 294 sq 

Gospel of the Egyptians quoted, 166 

Gospels; names and designations of the, 
68, 260 sq, 308; when first distinguish- 
ed from ‘Apostles’, 261; autographs 
of the, 271 

Gregory Nazianzen (S.), day of com- 
memoration of, 421 

Gregory, patriarch of Antioch, 388 sq 

Guard of Ignatius, 210 sq 

Guidi, his assistance in this work, 365 


"yauetv and *yaueta0ct, 350 

T'aovía, 325 

yeyevvnuévos, 390 

yéypamrat, formula of quotation, 272 
yevnTós and dyévnros, 48, go sq 
YYevymrós and dyévynros, 48, go sq 
yun Əeo0, 39, 228, 358 

wun rod Iarpós (h) = Christ, 40 
ypdpew 0i, of amanuensis, 233 


Hadrian puts down human sacrifices, 524. 

Harith-bar-Sisin, 76 

Harnack on list of Antiochene bishops, 
452 sq, 468 

Hebrews xiii, 10 explained, 123 


INDEX. 


Hebrews, Gospel according to the; see 
Gospel according to the Hebrews 

Hefele; his edition of the Ignatian E- 
pistles, 6, 73 criticised, 77, 86, 265, 
271, 202, 307 

Hegesias, the orator, 100 

Henzen, 402, 404 

Hephzestos, legend of, 506 

Heracleon the Valentinian; on the will of 
the Evil One, 85; on John i. 1, 14, 199 

Heraclides and Heraclitus, 511 

Heresy; called povxeia, 71; the form at- 
tacked by Ignatius, see Docetésm 

Heretics; and the Eucharist, 257, 306, 
309; claimed the monopoly of truth, 
301; used magical arts, 346 

Hermas; on preaching to the spirits in 
Hades, 132; not alluded to in the Igna- 
tian Epistles, 203 

Hero, bishop of Antioch; successor of 
Ignatius, 370, 449; date of accession, 
454» 455, 461, 464, 465 sq 

Hero, Prayer of; date of, 383; Ussher on, 
383; Coptic Version of, 383; probably 
written in Greek, 383; position in 
Coptic Acts of Martyrdom, 366; per- 
haps by the author of the Roman Acts, 
383 

Herod the tetrarch, 291 

Herodes Atticus, 452 

Herodes the Irenarch, 325 

hetzerize, suppressed by Trajan, 451 

Hilgenfeld criticised, 57, 161, 231, 271, 


39° 

Hippolytus (S.) of Portus, 489; pas- 
sage emended in, 290; on the ship of 
the Church, 340; on John the Baptist 
preaching in Hades, 132 

Hort ; on confusions between numerals in 
documents, 496; on the succession of 
Antiochene bishops, 463 sq 

Human sacrifices; among the Romans, 
522; among the Greeks, 524 

Humanity of Christ, enforced in Ignatian 
Epistles, 16, 25, 48, 75, 173, 289, 300, 
321 

Hyacinthus, legend of, 507 

Hyperbole, common to Ignatius and S. 
Paul, 65, 134 


Ignatian Epistles, Seven genuine; fall 
into two groups, 1 sq ; place of writing, 
I sq; order of Epistles in M$S, 2 sq; 
documents of, 3 sq ; comparative value 

- ofthe documents, 5; two periods in the 
history of the text, 6 sq; apparatus 
criticus, symbols, abbreviations, 7 sq; 
text and notes, r5 sq; translation, 543 
sq; additions to gospel narrative,in, 80 
Sq, 294 Sq; scriptural passages found 
in, see /zdex 2i in Vol. III 


ICN TT: 


609 


Ignatian Epistles, Thirteen forged and 
interpolated (Long Recension) ; date of, 
43 critical value of, 4, 6; their place in 
this edition, g ; scriptural passages found 
in, see Zzdezx ii in Vol. ni 

Ignatian Epistles, Three Syriac (Cure- 
tonian Abridgment); history of, 7; 
advocates of, 7; comparative value of 
MSS of, 78 

Ignatius, bishop of Antioch; possibly 
a slave, 210; early life of, 230, 294; 
the legend of the Oeoóópos, 22, 230, 
294, 376, 431; coincidence of his life 
with that of S. Paul, 64; his alleged 
early connexion with S. John, 477 sq; 
with S. Peter, 478; with Polycarp, 333, 
384, 485; date of his accession, 465, 
471 Sq ; his route to Rome, 2, 211, 231 
Sq, 241 Sq, 251, 267, 357, 484 ; as given 
in the Acts of Martyrdom, 368 sq, 384, 
576 sq, 579; as given by Eusebius, 
384, 386; by Chrysostom, 386; com- 
pared with the route of S. Paul, 64, 
368, 390, 4875q ; fellow prisoners of, 211, 
429; guard with, 211; his meeting with 
Polycarp, 140, 329; his friendship with 
him, 88; his alleged interview with 
Trajan, 368 sq, 425 sq, 435 sq; year of 
his martyrdom discussed, 435 sq; con- 
clusion arrived at, 472; day of com- 
memoration of his martyrdom, 418 sq; 
only recognized late by the Latin 
Church, 430; special lesson for the 
day, 430; place of his martyrdom, 436 
sq, see Martyrdom of Ignatius ; his- 
tory of his reliques, see Religues of 
Lenatius ; his humility, 31, 36, 63, 89, 
135, 161, 209; his attack on Docetism, 
see Docetism ; prominence given by 
him to the Passion, see Cross of 
Christ ; his views on Church order, 
see Bishops, Episcopate, Ministry ; on 
the Eucharist, see Hucharist ; on the 
doctrine of the Logos, 126 sq, 199 sq, 
see Logos; his Christology generally, 
48, 86, 9o sq, 123, 126 sq, 290, 343 ; his 
use of metaphors, see Metaphors ; his 
view of the relation of the Old and New 
Testament, see Patriarchs and Prophets, 
Old Testament; his relation to Gnosti- 
cism, see Gnostic, Valentinian phrase- 
ology 

Ignatius, Acts of Martyrdom of; see Acts 
of Martyrdom of Ignatius 

Ignatius (Egnatius), an African martyr, 
430; day of his commemoration, 430 

Imperative, transition to the, 339 

Incarnation, the doctrine as it appears in 
the Ignatian Epistles, 78, 9o sq, 127; 
called oikovoula, 75 

Inscriptions illustrating Trajan’s reign, 


ote) 


610 


391 sq ; errors in, 393, 398, 40! sq, 403 
sq, 406, 411, 412 

Interpolated epistles; see /enatian Epistles, 
Thirteen forged 

Irenæus (S.); on an apocryphal passage 
in Jeremiah, 131; on the descent into 
Hades, 131 sq; on the death of S. 
John, 439; mentioned in the Roman 
Acts of Martyrdom, 587; use of the 
word evxapiorla by, 258 

Isaiah v. 26 explained, 292; Hi 5 ex- 
plained, 172 ; lviii. 6, frequently quoted, 
269 sq 


larpós, 47 

lepaddpos and iepopópos, 56 
iva, construction of, 161 
lovdatopuos, 125, 264 

-irns, termination, 38 


Jacob of Edessa, extant MS written by, 
420 

Jacobson, 6, 7, 165, 324, 435) 492 

Jerome (S.); on Hosea x. r, 265 ; on Is. v. 
26, 292; on the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews, 295; his inaccuracy, 294, 295 
sq, 377, 378, 386; never saw the Igna- 
tian Epistles, 378; on the route of 
Ignatius, 386; on the reliques of Igna- 
tius, 386; his recension of Eusebius’ 
Chronicon, 449 sq, 463 sq, 477; its 
relation to the Armenian version, 455 
sq; his Martyrology, 428 

Jews at Philadelphia, 240; proselytizing 
tendencies of, 264; uprising in Cyrene 
by, 397; see also Judaism 

Joannes Laurentius, 237, 239 sq 

Joannes Rhetor, 388 sq, 438 sq 

John (S.); Malalas on the death of, 439 ; 
Syriac Chronicle on the death of, 448; 
Syriac Decease of, 34; alleged tutor 
of Ignatius, 450, 477 sq; establishes 
episcopacy in Asia Minor, 169 

John Damascene, explanation of a pas- 
sage in, 201 

John Madabbar; see Madabbar 

John Malalas; see Malalas 

John the Baptist ; his relation to Christ 
as pwvh to Aóyos, 199; according to 
S. Hippolytus preached to souls in 
Hades, 132 

John the Monk, on a passage in the Ig- 
natian Epistles, 199 

Judaic Docetism ; see Docetism 

Judaism and Christianity, 128 sq, 133 
Sq, 240 sq, 262 sq 

Julian, the emperor; a believer in magic, 
83; on the history of Trajan's reign, 
406, 409, 410 

Julius Africanus; see Africanus 


INDEX. 


Jupiter Latiaris, human sacrifices to, 522 


sq 
Justin Martyr, on an apocryphal passage 
in Jeremiah, 131 


Klein, 391 


Labarum, 293 

Laodicea, earthquakes at, 146 

Laomedon, legend of, 508 

Larasius, title of the Trallian Zeus, 146 

Latin Calendars, 429 

Latin version; of the genuine Ignatian 
Epistles, 3, 8; of the Long Recension, 


Lain words; adopted by Ignatius, 34, 
352 sq; by other Greek writers, 353 

Laus Heronis; see Hero, Prayer of 

Lazarus of Beth-Kandasa, 76 

Leclerc, 481, 485 

Lessing, criticism on, 261 

Lethzeus, the river, 98 

Leucophryene; see Artemis 

Leucophrys; geographical relation to 
Magnesia, 98 sq; site of the city 
changed, 99 sq; origin of the name, 


99 S97 

Linus, bishop of Rome, 464 sq 

Lipsius; criticisms on, 77, 79, 80, 81, 113, 
200, 232, 463 sq ; on the sources of Eu- 
sebius’ information, 452, 468 

‘Little Athens’, title of Philadelphia, 240 

Logos; the title in the Ignatian Epistles, 
126 sq; relation to ow in early 
fathers, 199 ; doctrine of Ignatius, 126 
sq, 199 sq; in the Roman Acts of 
Martyrdom, 520; participated in by 
the saints, 200; see also Christology 

Long Recension; see Zezatiam Epistles, 
Thirteen forged and interpolated 

Lord’s Day ; symbolism of the, 129; early 
fathers on the, 129; names for the, 
129 sq 

Lucian; illustrates the history of Ignatius 
generally, 196, 206, 213, 306, 313, 322, 
356; his evidence as to the place of 
martyrdom of Ignatius, 438 

Lusius, military operations of, 395, 397, 
414 Sq 


habpodyxrns (forms), 47 
AalOapyos, 47 

Aare, 116; with acc., 46 
Adxava and Botan, 60 
dele (constr.), 165 
AeAvuévos, 306 
Aeómap8os, 212 sq 
Anvds, 492 

Nnpóómua, 515 

Aóvyov Twos, els, 282 
Aó*yos, ‘reckoning,’ 115 


IN DEX. 


Aéyos, pwvh, Vóoos, 198 

Aóyos and pwvń, theological distinction 
between, 199 

Aóyyos dard erys mpoehOwv,126 sq ; see Logos 

Àóyos Geos, 288 

Xousós (adj.), 336 

Novróv, 61, 314 

Avrpotv, theological use of, 281 


Macarius Magnes, 38, 103, 123, 513 
Macedonian months, 423 
Madabbar, John; his date, 446; his 
Chronicon, 446; Ethiopic Version of, 
446; extracts from, 446 sq; coinci- 
dences with Malalas in, 446 sq 
Meandropolis, 107 
Magi, significance of the visit of the, 84 
Magic; its position in heathen systems, 
83; overthrown by Christ, 83; prac- 
tised by heretics, 346 
Magnesia by the Menander ; situation of, 
97 sq; designations of, 97 sq, 106 sq ; 
site changed, 98 sq ; relation to Leuco- 
phrys, 98 sq; to Ephesus, ror; to 
Tralles, 143 ; history of, roo sq; date 
of conversion of, 102; history of Church 
of, 102 sq 
Magnesia under Sipylus, 98, 105, 106 
Magnesians, Ignatian Epistle to the; 
‘place of writing, 1, 2; subject of, 
103 ; analysis of, 103 sq; title of, 105 
sq; Greek text with notes, 105 sq; 
translation of, 550 sq 
Malalas, John; on the Parthian expedi- 
tion of Trajan, 409, 441 sq ; on the date 
of the earthquake at Antioch, 409, 413 
sq, 436, 442; Von Gutschmid's defence 
of, 442; Wieseler's, 443; on the mar- 
tyrdom of Ignatius, 436 sq; on the 
date of Manes, 439; on the abolition 
of gladiatorial shows, 439; on the death 
of S. John, 439 ; on the letter of Ti- 
berianus, 439; on persecutions under 
Trajan, 440 sq, 446; on Anianus, 472; 
date of, 437; his credibility examined, 
409, 437 Sq, 472; sources of certain 
errors of, 439; 444 Sq 
Manes, date of, 439 
manipulus, 213 
Marcellus of Ancyra ; his doctrine of the 
Logos, 126 sq; its coincidence with 
` language of Ignatius, 80, 126 sq, 298 
Marcellus, M. Asinius, consulship of, 17, 
Marion; on the descent into Hades, 
132 ; his explanation of Luke xxiv. 37, 
297; Tertullian's answer to, 307 
Markland, 266, 271 
Marquardt, 440 s 
Marriage, relation of Christianity to, 348, 


350 


O11 


Martyrdom, the dignity of; Ignatius’ 
estimate of, 186, 197; the topic of his 
Epistle to the Romans, 186; it wins 
God, 30, roo, 165; gains life, 197, 218; 
completes discipleship, 31, 130, 204, 
215; forms the Christian’s heritage, 180, 
196, 260 

Martyrdom of Ignatius; date depends 
on chronology of Trajan’s reign, 391 
sq; days of commemoration of, 418 
sq, 540; superseded by day of comme- 
moration of translation, 433 sq; year 
of martyrdom discussed, 435 sq ; theory 
of Ussher, 435 ; of Pearson, 435 sq; 
of Volkmar, 436 sq; date given in 
Roman and Antiochene Acts, 448, 492, 
496; testimony of Eusebius’ Chroni- 
con discussed, 448 sq; conclusion, 472 ; 
place of martyrdom discussed, 437 sq 

Martyrdom of Ignatius, Acts of, 363 
sq; see under Acts of Martyrdom of 
Ignatius, Antiochene, Armenian, Bol- 
landist, Roman, Syriac Acts, Acts of 
the Metaphrast 

Martyrdoms under Trajan, see Persecu- 
tions 

Martyrologies; of Ado, 368, 382, 428; 
of ps-Bede, 382, 428; of Jerome, 428 ; 
Syriac, 234, 280, 419; Armenian, 234; 
Roman, 433; Egyptian, 365 

Martyrs; Christian devotion to, 213; 
wild beasts afraid of, 214; provoked by, 
215; compared to athletes, 38 sq, 335; 
494 

M xxvii. 52, patristic interpreta- 
tions of, 133 

Maximinus, bishop of Antioch, 454, 459, 
460 

Melito, on Gen. xxii. 13 

Menza; for Jan. 29, 422; for Feb. 15, 
535; for Feb. 23, 485; for Nov. 22, 
538; for Dec. 20, 187, 202, 207, 208, 
383, 387, 422, 489 

Menander, 498 

Menology of Basil Porphyrogenitus, 383 

Metaphorical intermingled with actual, 
81 sq, 202, 209 

Metaphors in Ignatian Epistles; from 
agriculture, etc., 53, 60, 166, 177, 255; 
from anvil, 342 ; from athletics, 38, 180, 
201, 203, 210, 255; 333 SQ» 340 sq, 3503 
from childbirth, 218, 229; from en- 
gineering, 53 sq; from housebreaking, 
71; from medicine, 166, 337; from 
music, 41, 108, 201, 252; from reli- 
gious processions, 17, 54 sq, 201; from 
straining wine, 193, 256 ; military, 292, 
352 sq ; nautical, 320, 339 Sq 

Metaphrast, Acts of the ; see Acts of the 
Metaphrast 

Metaphrast, Symeon the, 376 


612 


Ministry, three orders of the; mentioned 
by Ignatius, III, 120, 138, 156, 170, 
250, 258, 267, 278, 309, 321; 3515 
essential to a Church, 159; interpolated 
allusions to, 274 ; see Bishops, Deacons, 
Lpiscopate 

Moesinger; first publishes the Curetonian 
Abridgment entire, 363; Latin Acts 
of Martyrdom of. Ignatius published 
by, 367 l . 

Mommsen; his chronological labours, 
391, 480, 497 sq, 536 ; his theories on 
the tribunician years, 399, 400 sq ; cri- 
ticisms on, 391, 401 sq, 403 Sq, 405, 406 

Monophysite quotations from Ignatian 
Epistles, 221 

Months; Alexandrian reckoning, 38r; 
Armenian, 375, 424; Egyptian, 381, 
424 sq; Ethiopic, 423; Macedonian, 
381, 423 sq 

Morel’s edition of Long Recension, 720 

munera, 487, 491 


Máyrgs, Mayvijris, Máyvgoca, Mad-yvnows 
(forms), ros 

Maryvyola (name), 106 

pabnTeúew (constr.), 58, 203 

paris, 31 

papyapiraı mvevwariKol, 62 

Mapyapvyn, 517 

Maprupely, -peta0at, 64, 444 

paprvpía, 444 

paprpuov, els, with dat., 179 

uáprvs, 162 

neyaXetórgs, 189 

péycĝðos, ‘moral stature’, 23, 205; Valenti- 
nian term, 24 

MéXos, 178 

pAepuguós, 284 

Meravoely eis, 269, 303 

MX, 53 

Iuris Əeo0, 203, 268, 298 

pynuovetew, 65, 88 

ModuBls, 506 

póvov, ellipse after, 61, 216, 300 

Moppuv, 756 

pune, 518 

póücvua, 124 

ppov, 72 

puorýpia Kpavryis, 77, 79 sq 

MuoT97puor, 64, 80, 130, 156 


Namphanio, 280 

Natalitia, martyrdom the true, 218 

Nature sympathizing with Christ, 84 

Natures, Ignatius on Christ’s two, 48, 86, 
90 Sq, 290; see Christology 

Neapolis, the port of Philippi, 357, 487, 
574» 577 

Neoplatonists, rationalising tendency of 


the, 526 


INDEX. 


Nerva, accession of, 392, 493; adopts 
Trajan, 392, 398 sq; death of, 392, 477 

New Testament; its relation to the Old 
Testament in the Ignatian Epistles, 128, 
131, 260 sq, 275, 301; its canon in time 
of Ignatius, 260 sq; see Canonical 
Scriptures 

Nicephorus Callistus; his relation to 
Evagrius, 387; passage emended in, 
387 

Nicetes, 325 

Nirschl, criticised, 408 sq 

Nolte, 492 

Nouns used absolutely in the Ignatian 
Epistles, 321 


vaodópos, 21, 55 

vaós (metaph.), 7o 

vaós and OvctacTT)ptoV, 43, 123 
NeámoNs, 357 

vekpodópos, 302 

VEWTEPIKY TELS, 112 

výpew, 340 

vomlopma, YIT 


Old Testament; its relation to the New 
in the Ignatian Epistles, 128, 131, 260 
Sq, 275, 301; called rà ápxeta, 271 sq 

Omission of substantive verb, 50, 210 

Onesimus, bishop of Ephesus, 32 ; meets 
Ignatius at Smyrna, r$; quiet cha- 
racter of, 46, 69; play on the name, 35, 
543, 544 : 

Onesimus, convert of S. Paul, 32; mar- 
tyred, 531, 587; his day, 535 

Onesimus, friend of Melito, 32 

Optative of hypothesis, 513 

Optimus, as a title of Trajan, 398, 410 
Sq, 416 

Orac. Sibyll. viii. 65 explained, 496 

Origen; on Aoyos and pwvh, 199; on 
Ign. Rom. 7, 223; on S. John vi. 53, 
260; on the date and place of martyr- 
dom of Ignatius, 438, 472; on the death 
of Zeus, 504 

Ostia, 489 

Oxymoron, 252 


oikovoula and eodoyla, 75, 85 
olkopOdpos, 71 

olyéuent, 168 

opilay mosha, 347 
omonBea Əeo0, 120, 335, 534 
ópotórzs with dat., 33 
óuolws Kal, 77 

dudvoua Əeo0, 119, 140, 249 
0,.0000 0$, QI Sq 

óvalumv, 35, 36 

’Ovnonos, 32 

óvoua, 28 ; (ró), 37, 47, 278 
ömTňov, ‘shield’, 353 


INDEX. 


óparà kal dopara, 165, 215, 303 

dpyavov, 209 

örav with ind., 50 

br, 86 

ovdev pawóuevov kaNóv, 204 

ovx Ort, II5 

dpeNor, 321 

ÓyiGvtov, 352 

òuoßópos, 484 

ws with inf., 195; verb omitted after, 88, 
281, 315 

GQeNeiv with acc., 217 


Palestine divided into provinces, 440 

Palmas reduces Arabia Petrza, 394, 406 
Sq, 410, 480 

Panemus, the month, 370, 381, 423 sq, 
428, 540, 588 

Papias, on the symbolism of the cross, 
291 

Pando 205 

Paronomasia in the Ignatian Epistles, 28, 
35, 43, 1655 175, 301, 314, 332, 355 

Parthemaspates, king of the Parthians, 
441 

Parthia, Trajan's expedition to, 385, 395 
Sq, 407 SQ; 44150, 477 _ 

Parthicus, as a title of Trajan, 395, 396; 
412 Sq, 415, 416, 418 

Patticiple, accusative absolute of, 136 

Paschal Chronicle; see Chronicon Pas- 
chale 

Passion of Christ; prominence in the Ig- 
natian Epistles given to the, 74, 78, 152, 
177, 272 sq, 289 sq; coordinated with 
the Resurrection, 86, 135, 249, 293; 
308, 322 ; prophets and patriarchs wit- 
nesses to the, 262, 275, 301; see also 
Cross of Christ 

Passive use of deponent verbs, 309 

Pastoral Epistles, their relation to the 
Epistle to Polycarp, 329; 351 

Patriarchs and Prophets; Ignatius on 
their relation to the Gospel, 128, 131, 
260 sq, 275, 301; they witness to the 
Passion of Christ, 262, 275, 301 

Paul (S.); his connexion with Ephesus, 
62 sq, 65; with Rome, 209; Ignatius’ 
attraction towards, 64; their routes 
contrasted, 64, 390 

Pearson; on the extent of the episcopate, 
40; on its origin, against Saumaise, 
113; on the word Aeómapóos, 212; on 
a passage in Jerome, 378; on the 
Eastern campaign of Trajan, 407; on 
the year of Ignatius’ martyrdom, 435 
sq; criticisms on, 40, 65, 273, 291, 
307) 338 

Pedo, M. Vergilianus; date of his con- 
sulship, 396; killed in the earthquake 
at Antioch, 396, 413, 418 


@ a 


Pelagia (S.), day of commemoration of, 
418 sq, 422 

Pentecostal loaves, 207 

Peregrinus Proteus, and Ignatius, 196, 
206, 213, 306, 313, 322, 356 

Perpetua, 494 

Persecutions of the Christians under 
Trajan, 449 sq; at Antioch, 277, 384; 
in Bithynia, 395, 449 sq, 532; alleged, 
368, 384, 440, 446 sq 

* Persian Vespers’, 441 

Person of Christ; see Christology, Logos 

Petau criticised, 113 

Peter (S.); episcopate of, 464 sq; date 
of martyrdom of, 465; combined with 
S. Paul in connexion with Rome, 209; 
in the chronology of Eusebius, 466 

Petermann; his edition of the Armenian 
Version, 7, 9; Armenian Acts in, criti- 
cised, 367, 371 sq, 473; translated from 
the Greek, 372 sq; Bollandist Acts in, 
criticised, 367 

Philadelphia; name of, 237, 248 sq; 
other cities of the name, 237, 249; 
probable founder of, 237; situation of, 
237; history of, 238 sq; civil status of, 
239; festivals at, 240; Jews in, 240; 
its connexion with Smyrna, 240 sq; 
evangelisation of, 241; history of the 
Church of, 243 sq; martyrs from, 243; 
taken by Bajazet, 244; by Timour, 
245; wall of, 245; modern name of, 
245; present condition of, 245 sq; 
Gibbon on, 246; Ignatius at, 241, 251, 
267; his treatment there, 241, 265 sq 

Philadelphians, Ignatian Epistle to the; 
place of writing, 242; subject matter, 
241 sq; analysis of, 246 sq; text and 
notes, 248 sq; translation, 563 sq 

Philadelphus, princes bearing the name, 


237 
Philemon, his day, 535 
Philetus, bishop of Antioch, 452, 454, 


457 94 
Philip the Asiarch, a Trallian, 144 
Philip the Evangelist, his traditional con- 

nexion with Tralles, 147 
Philippi, Ignatius at, 487, 577 
Philippus, the physician, a Trallian, 146 
Philo, deacon of Cilicia, 242, 279, 319; 

324, 566, 570, 571; his connexion with 

Rhaius Agathopus, 242, 265, 278, 315; 

389; their journey, 242, 278 sq, 315; 

authorship of the Antiochene Acts 

assigned to them, 389 
Philo Judaeus; metaphor borrowed from, 

58; passage explained in, 7o 
Phlegon of Tralles, 146 
Pliny the Younger; date of his Pane- 

gyric, 392, 411; governor of Bithynia, 

377, 395, 407) 449, 536; date of his 


614 


governorship, 377, 395, 536; his cor- 
respondence with Trajan, 408, 451, 
5363; its assumed connexion with the 
martyrdom of Ignatius, 370, 377, 4513 
its date, 53; its bearing on the agape, 
313, 314; how known to Eusebius, 
531; character of Trajan’s rescript to, 
385; mentioned in the Roman Acts of 
Martyrdom, 587 
Polybius, bishop of Tralles, 147, 153 
Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna; his alleged 
early intercourse with Ignatius, 333, 
368, 383, 384, 485; meets Ignatius at 
Smyrna, 88, 140, 329; his success in 
winning heretics, 347; commemoration 
of martyrdom of, 430; mentioned in 
the Ignatian Epistles, 88, 140, 359, 
550, 554, 574; fellow martyrs of, 
2 
Bolycarps Ignatian Epistle to; place of 
writing of, 267, 329, 357; character of, 
329, 351; analysis, 330; text and notes, 
331 sq; translation, 571 
Pontiolus episcopus, 488 
Pontius Pilate, 135 sq, 174, 290 
Porphyrogenitus, Menology of, 383 
Porphyry, 522, 526 
Portus; date of its foundation, 490; and 
of Claudius’ harbour, 489 
Portus Augusti, 489 
Portus Trajani, 489 
Poseidon, legends regarding, 508 
Prayer of Hero, see Hero, Prayer of 
Prayers; take the place of sacrifices, 44; 
request for, 85, 88, 139, 181, 229, 273 
Preaching of Paul, 290 
Preaching of Peter, 296 
Prepositions, pregnant use of, 30, 63, 68, 
73: 195, 202, 269, 303, 319 
Presbyters; comparisons adduced by 
Ignatius, 119 sq, 138, 155, 158, 269, 
309; their relation to bishops, see 
Bishops, Deacons, Episcopate, Ministry 
Priesthood of Christ, 273 sq 
Prisoners, Christian solicitude for, 305 sq, 
322 
Processions; in honour of the Ephesian 
Artemis, 17 sq, 54 sq; their import- 
ance, 54; words in -$opos relating to, 
54; testimony of Xenophon to, 54, 56; 
of inscriptions, 55; in honour of other 
. deities, 55 
Prophets and patriarchs ; their relation to 
the Gospel, r25, 128, r3r, 26o sq, 275, 
3or; they witness to the Passion of 
Christ, 262, 275, 391 
Proselytism, Jewish practice of, 264 
protector, 498 sq 
Protevangelium, 8o sq, 84; Syriac trans- 
lation of, 81 
Psalm ii. 9 explained, 521 


INDEX. 


ps-Bede, Martyrology of, 382, 428; in- 
debted to the Bollandist Acts, 382 

Ptolemy Philadelphus, probably founder 
of the Lydian Philadelphia, 237 

Puteoli, 488, 535, 577 

Pythagoras, 503 

Pythagoreans, cenotaphs of, 265 

Pythodorus of Tralles, 144 


mráBos (r6), 25, 78; see Passion of Christ 

madatds, -o0v, of Judaic Law, 124, 133 

madaoTpirns, 38 

TANW TPEXWY, 200 

mavomAa, 353 

Tapa TOUTO, 214. 

mapakadely with imper., 166 

mapadoyiferGat, 115 

Tapapovos, 24, 250 

mapamAékew, 166 

TapauTd, 177 

Tapapudas, 177 

Trápeüpot Oeo, 352 

mapeumAékew, 166 

mapbévot al Neyomevar XApat, 323 

Tapodevew, 52, 231 

TrápoOos, $5; 63 

Tapo£vauós, 337 

mapovola, of the two Advents, 275 

mwas anarthrous, 65 

marpós and mvevmaros, confused in Mss, 
53» 324 ^ 

watpwvumos and deriv., 193 

mépas, mépara, 40, 196, 217 

mwepipépev, of bonds, 61 

meplWnua, 50, 74, 181 

Ilepoikòv mip, 511 

T. ays, 255 

mlaris (pass.), 3173 (obj.), 72; combined 
with aydmn, 29, 67, 108, 137, 171, 282, 
287, 289, 304, 325 

morós with inf., 182 

mravav, 266 

wretaTa xalpew, 27 

mhéov, (constr.) 195; and vv, 349 

KAA -eloOat, 126, 128, 135, 250, 
209 

TAHPWMA, 23 Sq, 152 

mvevua, opposed to sáp, 48, 60, 108, 
137, 152, 178, 193, 289, 347 

mvedua and aiia confused, 152 

mvevparixds and capkwós, 48, 60, 322, 
325, 334» 338 

TVEVLATOpopoS, 22 

modevey with acc., 163 

mohvevTAKTOS, 1O7 

ToAuTAHGELA, 32 

IIoríoÀo, 488 

mpáypuara, ‘troubles’, 128 

mpajTÓOeu., 170 

mpémew, 61 

Tpémov éaTl, 36 


INDEX. 615 


mpea Bela Oeo, 277 

mpesBevTns and mpeoßúrns, 319 

mpeafvrépiov, 36, 112, 158 

mpoeNOetv and é£eXA0etv of the mission of 
the Son, 123, 126 sq 

mpoeroumate, 53 

mpokabéferPat, 119, 190, 192 

Tpókevrat, 272 

mpoNauBávew with inf., 39 

mpoéevos with gen., 529 

mpoodos, 55 

mpós with acc., 136 

mpoodoxety and mpocdokay, 131 

Tpocevx'j, 306 

mpooranety, of letter, 37, 107 

mpoaAajuávew, 112 

mpoaTTÜew with gen., 533 

mpóc rov, 118 

mporiktwp, 498 

mpoófjra.— O. T. Scriptures, 261 

mpopudaacev, 170 

TpwropataydpovroNs, 107 

arvkvórepov, 66, 116, 345 

mop QuNdUNOv, 224 


@dsvixos and $uXóvewos, 530 
prroriplar, ‘games’, 486 
piroiros, 224 

-$opos in Ignatius, 21, 54, 288 
ppixros, epithet of uveTńprov, 80 
PpovTLoTns, 344 

puvdaKTNpLov, 534 

duotody, 13 

gtows and its opposites, 153 
pwvh, Novos, Wopos, 198 


Wbpos, puvh, Móyos, 198 


Quadratus and Candidus, consulship of, 
393, 448 1 

Quadratus, martyr of Magnesia, 103 

Quattuor Coronati, 456 : 

Quotation, formule of in Ignatian Epi- 
stles, 272 

Quotations from apocryphal sources in 
Ignatian Epistles, 294 sq 3 f 

Quotations from Canonical Scriptures in 
Ignatian Epistles and in Epistle of 
Polycarp; see Zudex ii in Vol. 11 


Reliques of Ignatius, 208, 431 sq; Antio- 
chene Acts on, 369, 382, 385, 487; 
Roman Acts on, 370, 530; Armenian 
Acts on, 374; Acts of Metaphrast on, 
376; S. Chrysostom on, 386, 431 sq; 
S. Jerome on, 386; Evagrius on, 386 
sq, 492; Nicephorus on, 387; their 
translation from Rome to Antioch, 
387 sq, 431 sq; from the cemetery 
there to the Tycheeum, 387 sq, 432 sq; 


date, 388, 432; their alleged translation 
to Rome, 432 sq 


Renan; on the extravagances of the 


Tiibingen School, 437; criticised, 22, 
205 


Renier, 402, 406 
Resurrection; by Ignatius coordinated 


with the Passion, 249; the work of 
Christ, 293; and of the Father, 174, 
307; Ignatius on the state of the body 
after, 62, 208, 355; Docetics admit a 
spiritual, 322 


Revillout's edition of the Coptic version 


of the Roman Acts of Martyrdom, 
365 sq 


Rhabanus Maurus, on the commemoration 


of Ignatius, 429 


Rhaius Agathopus; the names, 279 sq; 


a deacon, 281, 316; his possible in- 
timacy with Valentinus, 280; his con- 
nexion with Philo, 242, 265, 278, 315, 
389, 566, 570; their journey, 242, 278 
Sq, 315; the authorship of the Antio- 
chene Acts ascribed to them, 389 sq 


Rhegium, 380, 499, 500, 579 
Ritschl criticised, 79 
Roman Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius; 


Mss and versions of, 364 sq, 474; nar- 
rative in, 369 sq; reason for name, 
370; relation to Antiochene Acts, 371; 
credibility of, 377 sq; place of writing 
of, 370, 381 sq, 428, 432; date of, 382 
sq; on date of commemoration of Ig- 
natius, 423 sq; on year of Ignatius’ 
martyrdom, 448 sq; not based upon 
an earlier writing, 377; the writer ac- 
quainted with the ps-Ignatian Epistles, 
380, 382; with the Ignatian Epistles, 
380 sq; indebted to Eusebius’ Chroni- 
con, 450 Sq, 535; to Eusebius generally, 
450, 500, 516, 529, 538; inserted in a 
December martyrology, 364, 423; text 
and notes, 496 sq; anachronisms in, 
499, 518; translation of, 579 sq; see 
also Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius 


Roman Church; its purity in the age of 


Ignatius, 185 sq; its prominence, 190 
sq; influential members of, 186, 196; 
its charity, 192; messengers from Syria 
preceding Ignatius to the, 2, 186, 2333 
its connexion with S. Peter and S. Paul, 
209, 464 sq; episcopacy in the, 186; 
succession and chronology of its bishops, 
452 Sq 


Roman Empire; its relation to Christi- 


anity, 519 sq; typified in Psalm ii. 9, 
521 


Roman See; limits of its jurisdiction, 


190; its relation to the suburbicarian 
sees, 190 sq 


Romans, Ignatian Epistle to the; autho- 


616 


rities for, 5 sq, 9; place of writing, r, 
185; published by Ruinart, 6, 363; its 
distinct history, 5, 187; and character, 
185; its subject matter, 185 sq; its 
wide popularity, 186; a vade mecum 
of martyrs, 186; quotations from, 187; 
the only dated letter, 185, 234, 434, 
562; analysis, 187 sq; text and notes, 
189 sq; translation, 558 sq; in the in- 
terpolated form quoted in the Roman 
Acts of Martyrdom, zoo, 502; incor- 
porated in the Antiochene Acts, 5, 486 

Rossi (F.) edits the Sahidic version of the 
Roman Acts of Martyrdom, 365 

Rothe, 113 

Route of Ignatius; see Zenateus 

Rufus and Zosimus, 211, 429, 587 

Ruinart; publishes the Greek of the 
Epistle to the Romans, 6, 363; and 
the Antiochene Acts of Martyrdom 
which embody it, 363, 473 


Sabbath, abrogation of Jewish, 129 

sacramentum, 314 

Salutaris, Gaius Vibius, ni; 

San Clemente, the reliques of Ignatius 
and the church of, 433 

Satan, ignorant of the Divine counsels, 
76 sq 

Saturn, human sacrifices offered to, 822 

Saturnalia, 490 sq 

Saumaise, on the origin of episcopacy, 
113 

Schism, condemned by Ignatius; see 
Unity 

Scriptures; see 
Gospel, Gospels 

Scythians, 480, 522 

Seleucia, 484, 576 

Senecio (Q. Sosius), consulships of, 394, 
407, 502 sq 

Senses, transference of ideas by analogy 
between the, 41 

Serapion, bishop of Antioch, 454, 489 
Sq, 466 

Severus of Antioch; on Ign. Magn. 8, 
126 sq; his Epithronian Orations, 421, 
438 

Severus, the persecution of, 458, 459 

Shepherd of Hermas and the Ignatian 
Epistles, 203 

Ship of the Church, metaphor of, 339 sq 

Shrines, portable, 55 sq 

Sigillaria, 490 sq 

Silence; of God the Father, 80, 126 sq; 
of Christ, 69; praise of, 69, 2o4, 252 

Simus, roo 

Smyrna; legendary history of, 285; its 
connexion with Philadelphia, 240 sq; 
designation of, 288, 331; visit of Ig- 
natius to, 2, 285; Ignatian Epistles 


Canonical Scriptures, 


INDEX. 


written from, 1, 2; salutations to the 
Church of, 285, 286, 320 sq; the name 
for a part of Ephesus, 288 
Smyrneans, Ignatian Epistle to the; 
place of writing, 1, 285 ; subject matter, 
285 sq; analysis, 286; text and notes, 
287 sq; translation, 567 sq a 
Soldiers; payment of, 352; equipment 
of, 353; donatives to, 353 sq; castrense 
peculium of, 354 
Solomon, a Syriac writer, 478 
Speaking fountains, 224 
Star of the Epiphany; Protevangelium 
on, 8o, 82; Clement of Alexandria on, 
81, 82; ps-Ephraem on, 81; Ephraem 
Syrus on, 82 
Stobbe, on the tribunician years, 399 sq 
Stoics; their idea of 0eoó@ópos, 22; their 
phraseology adopted by Ignatius, 253, 
345; rationalised classical deities, 526 
Suburanus, S. Attius, consulships of, 17, 
369. 393, 405, 497 sq, 579 
Suburbicarian sees and Rome, 190 sq 
sullibertus, 38 
‘Supernatural Religion’, criticisms on, 
268, 437 sq 
Sura, L. Licinius, consulships of, 369, 
384, 393 sq, 405, 406, 492 sq, 578 
urbanus; see Suburanus 
Sylloge Polycarpiana, 3 
Symbols; employed for Mss and versions, 
9; of abbreviation, 1o sq 
Symeon, son of Clopas; date of martyrdom 
of, 449 sq; the evidence of Eusebius 
to, 451, 498; Hegesippus on, 445; a 
Syriac chronicle on, 447 
Symeon the Metaphrast, 376 
Syria, mission to the Churches of, 276 sq, 
318, 356, 357 sq 
Syriac Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius, 5; 
9: 10, 473; see also Acts of Martyrdom 
of Lenatius, Antiochene Acts 
Syriac Calendars, 420 sq 
Syriac Epistles of Curetonian Abridg- 
ment; see /enatian Epistles, Three 
Syriac 
Syriac Martyrology, 234, 280, 419; see 
Martyrologies 
Syriac version of the genuine Ignatian 
Epistles, fragments of a, 3 sq, 6, 8 


2 and Z confused, 111, 331 

gaPBBartfew, 129 

capk.kós and TvevuaTıkós, 48, 60, 322, 
325, 334; 338 

capkopopos, 302 

cáp£, opposed to mveĝpa, 48, 60, 108, 137, 
152, 178, 193, 289, 347 

c&p£ "Inood=Gospel, 260 

càp£ kal aij = opa, 2975 


of Jesus 
Christ, 171, 227 


LI 


INDEX. 


Biyn; see Silence 
aõńpeos (form), 514 
oxoprigew, 216 
okopricpuos doTéwy, 216 
ZovpBavós, 497 
omépua Aaveld, 75 
omovolgecPa, 201 
OTEppoTroetv, 514 
orépavos, 138; and éna, 341 
oriau, of men, 264 
otTpayyanobv, -Này, -Mgew, 163 
OTPUTLWTLKOY Tá'yua, 2135 TIPOS, 500 
ovyyevikds, 30 
cvyyvopovetv, 163 
ovykarari0ec0at, 257 
cvykouxücÜat, 35t 
ovykomlay, 351 
cvyxatpew, 154 
cvyxpücÜat, 112 
copus, 347 
ocumptorns, 63 
owaywyn, 345 
cvvaBpol(eo 0a, 116 
ovvdecuos, 158 
ovyd.dacKkadirns, 37 
ouvdwArigew, 193 
. Cuvõočáćew, 320 
cúvõovňos, of deacons, 33, 111, 259, 316, 
321 
ouveyelper Oat, 351 
guvéðpiov tod émickómov, of presbytery, 
269 
cuvéðpiov TOv ámocTÓNwv, of presbytery, 
IIQ, 158 
cuveiðós — avvelónaus, 318 
cvveupvÜpléew, 252 
c'wyyopos Üavárov, 301 
cvvOepám oV, 33 
gúvoĝðos, 55 
cÓvTojLos, 2145 and eóvrovos, 357 
cuv Tpéxew, 39 
cóccquov, 292 
gúgTagu, 164, 216 
cvoráceu ápxovrual, 164 
oxigew (abs.), 257 
GXoX (eu, 356 
swuareioy and cwudriov, 319 sq 
Zwrds, III 


Table of contents, r sq 
Tacitus, a passage in Ann. iv. 55 ex- 
plained, 145 


Tarlusa, possibly the same as Tralles, 


148 

Teaching of Peter, 295 sq, 299 

Tertullian; on magic, 83; on the descent 
into Hades, 132; on Marcion, 307; 
on widows, 322 sq; passage emended, 
533; borrows from the Ignatian E- 
pistles, 48 

Teshri, 419 sq 


IGN, II. 


OT 


Themistocles, his connexion with Mag- 
nesia, 100 

"Theodorus Studites, 223 

Theodosius, the younger; translates Ig- 
natius’ reliques to Tychzeum, 387 sq, 
432; date of this translation, 388 

Theophilus the Chronographer, 473 

Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, 76, 77, 
454, 460, 468, 473 

Theophorus; see Ocoóópos 

Thimbron ; his campaigns, 99; removes 
site of Magnesia, 99 

Thorax, Mt, 98, 99 

Tiberianus, alleged letter to Trajan of; 
Malalas on the, 439; arguments against 
its genuineness, 439 sq 

Tillemont, on an early expedition of Tra- 
jan to the East, 408 sq 

Timeeus, bishop of Antioch, 454 sq 

Trajan ; chronology of his reign, 391 sq; 
his adoption by Nerva, 392, 398 sq, 
481; his association in the Empire, 
398 sq, 400; accession of, 392, 477; 
tribunician years of, 392 sq, 398 sq; 
Parthian expedition of, 385, 395 sq, 407 
Sq, 435» 441 SQ, 477; 481; only one 
expedition, 407 Sq, 441 Sq; Dacian 
wars of, 392 sq, 404 Sq, 480 sq; at 
Antioch, 385, 395; 409, 413 Sq, 442 
sq; alleged letter of Tiberianus to, 439 
sq ; his correspondence with Pliny, 536; 
character of his rescript to Pliny, 385 ; 
his alleged interview with Ignatius, 367 
sq, 425 Sq, 435 sq; Volkmar on this 
interview, 436 sq; his works at Ostia, 
489 ; his titles, Germanicus, 392; Pater 
Patriae, 392; Dacicus, 393, 404 Sq; 
Optimus, 395, 410 sq, 416; Parthi- 
cus, 395, 390, 412 Sq, 415, 416, 418; 
death of, 398, 4153 persecutions un- 
der, real, 227, 384, 395, 449 sq ; and 
alleged, 368, 384, 440, 446 sq; Ma- 
lalas on, 439 sq; mentioned in the 
Acts of Martyrdom of Ignatius, 368, 
384 sq, 447 sq, 500 Sq, 575 SQ» 579 sq 

Tralles; situation of, 143; wealth of, 
144 ; history of, 144; deities worshipped 
at, 146; games at, 146; famous men of, 
146; historians of, 147; evangelisa- 
tion of, 147 ; history of the Church of, 
148; probably same as 'Tarlusa, 148 

Trallians, Ignatian Epistle to the; place 
of writing of, 1; subject matter of, 1473 
analysis of, 149; title, 150; text and 
notes, 150 sq; translation of, 554 sq 

Tralusa, probably the same as Tralles, 148 

Translation of bones of Ignatius; see Æe- 
liques of Ignatius 

Tree of life explained of the Cross, 291 

Tribunician years of Trajan; table of, 
392 sq; old theory regarding, 398 ; 


40 


618 


theory of Borghesi, 399 sq; theories of 
Mommsen, 391, 399, 400 sq; of Stobbe, 
399 sq; evidence of Aurelius Victor, 
Pliny and Dion Cassius, 398 sq 

Trinity, order of naming in the Ignatian 
Epistles, 137 

Troas; Ignatius at, 1, r5, 34, 242, 277, 
278, 320; letters written from, r, 2, 
34, 285, 320, 357; mentioned Jin Igna- 
tian literature, 281, 357, 487, 566, 
574) 577 s 

Tychaum at Antioch; situation of, 432 ; 
translation of Ignatius’ reliques to, 386 
Sq, 421, 432; called the Church of Ig- 
natius, 421; orations delivered in the, 
421, 434, 438 

Tychicus, perhaps founder of the Church 
of Magnesia, 102 

Tyrannus, bishop of Antioch, 454, 456 


TAYUQ, 213 

TÈIS, 113 

Taos (metaph.), 208, 264 

rées, of athlete, 335; dvOpwmos (6)= 
Christ, 300 

Terelwols, 491 

Tt for Tis, 37 

Tru, 88 

Tts omitted, 72 

Totovros with inf., 197 

rokerós (metaph.), 218; and róxos, 219 

TÓVOS, 479 

Tomobecias dryvyéNov, 164 

témos, pleonastic, 191; and rúmros con- 
fused, 119, 191; ‘office’, 304, 333 

Tomos Udtos, 117 

TÜTOS, IIQ, 121; and róros confused, II9, 
IQI 

TpaddAravés, Tpaddrovos, ToáNNos, 150 

TpadXers (form), 151 

Tpadua, 337 

Tpopy Xpioriav7y, 166 

Tv'yxávew Əeo0, 58, 109, 315 


Oéua and aréQavos, 341 

0€New, 115, 189; 0£Aeo0at, 228 

GéXnua, 85, 195, 290, 318, 357 

Genres, Valentinian term, 228 

Oeoðpóuos, 108, 255, 277, 356 

Geodoyta and oikovoula, 75 

Oeopmakapioros, 108, 292, 356 

Ocompemns, 108, 287, 317, 321, 356 

GeorpecBirns, 108, 318 

Geopopyros, 22 

8coQópos, 21 Sq, 55, 139, 482 

Ocoóópos ; title of Ignatius, 21 sq, 482; 
self-assumed, 22, 108, 482; legend 
founded on the title, 22, 294, 376, 431; 
authorities for the legend, 431 

eed to Christ, 26, 30, 169, 303, 
31 


INDEX. 


0ecpeic Par (middle), 154 

Onptouaxetv, 176, 211 

Ovotacryptov, 43 sq, 258; metaphorically, 
of Christ, 123; of congregation, 44, 
169, 258; of amphitheatre, 201; com- 
pared with B&uos, 43; with vaós, 43, 
123; its application to the Eucharist 
later than Ignatius’ date, 258 


Uhlhorn; on the genuineness of the An- 
tiochene Acts, 383; criticisms on, 77, 
86, 113 

Unity; Ignatius on the necessity for, 40 
sq, 108 sq, 121 sq, 267 sq, 308 sq, 322, 
334; between the three orders of the 
ministry, 118 sq; the bishop the centre 
of, 36, 41 sq, 44, 121, 169 sq, 258, 268, 
310 sq, 346 ; in worship, 43 sq, 66, 86, 
122, 257 Sq, 309; of will between the 
Son and the Father, 121, 298 

Ussher; and the Anglo-Latin Version 
of the Ignatian Epistles, 6, 363 ; pub- 
lishes the Latin version of the Acts of 
Martyrdom, 473, 474 

Usuard, Martyrology of; indebted to the 
Bollandist Acts, 382; on the date of 
the commemoration of Ignatius, 429 


Udwp (Qv àXNóuevov, 224 sq 
UN, 219, 224 
Urarelpew, 38 
Umeparyd Nec Oat, 259 
bmepBaddew (constr.), 82 
brepOo£ágew, 259, 332 
bmepemaívew, 250 
bmépkaipos (form), 343 
Vmeprí(8evat, 133 

bo with acc., 64 

vmod xeuuQvos, 417 sq 
dmodeckvivat, 484 
drwmudfev, 495 


Valentinian phraseology anticipated by 
the Ignatian Epistles, 23, 24, 8o, 193, 
224 sq, 228, 280 

Valentinus ; his possible connexion with 
Rhaius Agathopus, 280 ; his Evange- 
lum Veritatis, 301 

Vatican Acts, see Roman Acts of Martyr- 
dom of Ignatius 

ee of Mary deceived the Deceiver, 
79 sq 

Virgins, order of, 322, 348; its relation to 
widows, and deaconesses, 322 

Volkmar; on the date and place of Igna- 
tius’ martydom, 436 sq; criticism on, 
417 

Von Gutschmid, on the chronology of 
Malalas, 412, 441, 442 sq 

Vows of celibacy, 349 


INDEX. 


Waddington; on the date of a coin, 403; 
on the date of Herodes Atticus, 452; 
inscriptions in, 145, 146, 240 

Wandalbert, on the commemoration of 
Ignatius, 51 sq 

Water sanctified by Christ’s baptism and 
passion, 75 

Waterland, 92 

Widows; care of the early church for, 304 
Sq, 322, 344; duties imposed upon, 
322 ; the order of, 322 sq 

Wieseler; defends the genuineness of the 
Letter of Tiberianus, 439 sq; on the 
date of the earthquake at Antioch, 331, 
443; of Ignatius’ martyrdom, 451 sq, 


471 
Wood’s discoveries at Ephesus, 17, 54, 
55, 50, ror, 110, 146 


Xerxes’ route through Asia Minor, 238 
Xiphilinus, abbreviator of Dion Cassius, 
408, 412 


evis uós, 81 


Zahn; on the history of the word Oco- 
pópos, 22 ; on yeymrós and yevvnTós, 94; 
on the order of widows, 323 ; his edi- 
tion of the Ignatian Epistles, 7; criti- 
cisms on his readings in the Epistles 


619 


of Ignatius, 40, 45, 108, 109, 115, 134, 
137, IQI, 292; on his renderings i in the 
Epistles of Tgnatius, 30, 33, 52, 66, 114, 
121, IQI, 195, 200, 227, 250, 272, 291, 
307, 341; his labours on the Acts of 
Martyrdom, 368, 473 sq; on the ori- 
gin of the Roman Acts, 377 sq ; misled 
as to MSS of the Roman Acts, 364 ; ; on 
the Antiochene Acts, 382; on the day 
of commemoration of Ignatius, 419, 
429, 434; on the date of the martyr- 
dom in the Roman Acts, 496; on the 
story of the connexion between Igna- 
tius and S. John, 477 sq 

Zeus; histomb at Gnossus, 503 sq; his 
amours, 509; Larasius at Tralles, 146 

Zoega, 366 

Zohrab, Armenian Chronicon of, 449, 451, 
455 Sq, 463 sq, 587 

Zonaras, 408, 412 

Zosimus and Rufus, 211, 429, 587 

Zotion, 102, III, 55I 


Z and = confused, 111, 331 

$fjNos, nov, of Satan, 162, 215 

fjv, as subst., 61, 73, 109, 118, 175, 298; 
followed by kara, 256 

Zuúpva, Zuvpvatos (form), 331 

fon and Bios, 225 

Zoriev, III 


CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A., AND SONS, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
