REPORT OF A COMMITTEE OF THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY OF NEW ENGLAND, RELATIVE TO A LARGE MARINE ANIMAL, SUPPOSED TO BE A SERPENT, SEEN NEAR CAPE ANN, MASSACHUSETTS, IN AUGUST 1817
Boston: Cummings and Hilliard, 1817
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1817 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier reportcommittee00linn). The 1817 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete.

========================================================================











































































0 




OF THE 


LINNJEAN SOCIETY OF NEW ENGLAND#. 


BELATIVE 

I ■" ■ ,vi;i 

tTO A 1ARGE MARINE ANIM IE# 




SUPPOSED TO BE 


A SERPENT# 


> 

SEEN NEAR CAPE ANN# MASSACHUSETTS# 

IN > 

August 1817- 


BOSTON : 

PUBLISHED BY CUMMINGS AND HILLIARD? 
JVo. 1# Cornhilh 
**** 


UNIT* PRESS....HILLIARD AND METCALF. 

1817 . 


















DEPOSITED IN THE' - 


ItfSftU! OF COMPARATIVE ZOOLOGY 








In the month of August 18 IT, it was currently report¬ 
ed on various authorities, that an animal of very singular 
appearance had been recently and repeatedly seen in the 
harbour of Gloucester, Cape Ann, about thirty miles 
distant from Boston. It was said to resemble a serpent in 
its general form and motions, to be of immense size, and 
to move with wonderful rapidity ; to appear on the surface 
of the water only in calm and bright weather ; and to seem 
jointed or like a number of buoys or casks following each 
other in a line. 

In consequence of these reports, at a meeting of the 
Linn & an Society of New England, holden at Boston on the 
18th day of August, the Hon. John Davis, Jacob Bige- 
xow, M. D. and Feancis C. Geay, Esq. were appointed a 
Committee to collect evidence with regard to the existence 
and appearance of any such animal. The following re¬ 
port made by that Committee is now published by order of 
the Society. 


t 


t 

























Linntmn Society of JVew England » 

The Committee appointed on the 18th of August last 
to collect evidence with regard to the existence and appear¬ 
ance of a Sea Serpent, said to have been recently seen in 
the harbour of Gloucester, now lay before the Society the 
following facts and documents. 

On the 19th of August your Committee wrote to the 
Hon. Lonsost Nash of Gloucester, requesting him to ex¬ 
amine upon oath some of the inhabitants of that town with, 
regard to the appearance of this animal, to make the exam¬ 
ination as early as possible, to request the persons examin¬ 
ed not to communicate to each other the substance of their 
respective statements, until they were all committed to 
writing ; to have these statements signed and certified in 
due form, and sent to us. Our letter also contained certain 
rules with regard to the mode of conducting this examina¬ 
tion, and questions to be put to the persons examined. 

In answer to it w T e received from Mr. Nash a letter, 
dated 28th August, enclosing eight depositions, duly certi¬ 
fied, which on the 1st September were read before the So¬ 
ciety, as were also three depositions taken in Boston, on the 
80th August and 1st September. You directed us to re¬ 
turn your thanks to Mr. Nash for his readiness in comply¬ 
ing with our request, to continue the investigation of the 
subject committed to us, in such manner as we should deem 
expedient, and to lay before you a formal report of the 
whole evidence that should be procured. In compliance 
with your directions, the chairman of the Committee wrote 
again to Mr. Nash on the 2d September, and received frofn 
him an answer dated 9th September. We also wrote to 
Mr. Samuel Davis of Plymouth on the 1st September, re¬ 
questing him to examine upon oath some respectable man 
of that place, with regard to the appearance of an animal 
said to have been seen there in the year 1815, and to resem¬ 
ble the one lately seen near Gloucester; this letter contained 
the same rules and questions as were sent to Mr. Nash. In 
answer to this application, a letter from that gentleman was 
received on the 4th October, enclosing the deposition of 
2 







('apt E. Finney. Your Committee have also received a 
communication from the Rev. William Jenks of Bath rel¬ 
ative to this subject. All these documents are now laid be¬ 
fore you in the following order. 


1. The rules and questions of your Committee. 

2. The letter from Mr. Nash of 28th August, enclos¬ 
ing the eight following depositions. 

3. The deposition of Amos Story. 

4. That of Solomon Allen. 

5. That of Eppes Ellery. 

6. That of William H. Foster. 


7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 


That of Matthew Goffney. 

That of James Mansfield. 

That of John Johnston. 

That of William B. Pearson. 

ffiftssssss" Toi,pa n **- 1 - ■» 

That of William Somcrby, j 

14. The letter from our Chairman to Mr. Nash. 

15. The answer of Mr. Nash. 

Our letter to Mr. S. Davis of Plymouth. 

His answer, containing 
The deposition of Elkanah Finney. 

19. The letter from the Rev. William Jenks to your 
Committee. 

20. Is an account of a serpent said to have been fre¬ 
quently seen in the North Sea, extracted from the history 
of Norway, written by the Right Rev. Erich Pontoppidan, 
bishop of Bergen, in the year 1751. 


16. 

17. 

18. 












I. 

Boston, Aug. 19, 1817. 

The Committee appointed by the Linnsean Society, at their 
meeting on the 18 th inst. for the purpose of collecting any ev¬ 
idence which may exist respecting a remarkable animal, denomi¬ 
nated a Sea Serpent, reported to have recently been seen in and near 
the harbour of Cape Ann, have concluded on the following 
method of proceeding in the execution of their commission. 

I. The examination to be confined to persons professing ac¬ 
tually to have seen the animal in question. 

II. Such persons to be examined as may be met with by 
either of the Committee, or by Hon. Lonson Nash of Gloucester, 
who is to be requested by a letter addressed to him from the Com¬ 
mittee to undertake this service. 

III. All testimony on the subject to be taken in writing, and 
after being deliberately read to the person testifying, to be signed 
by him, and sworn to before a magistrate. The examinations to 
be separate, and the matter testified by any witness not to be 
communicated until the whole evidence be taken. 

IV. The persons testifying to be requested first to relate their 
recollections on the subject, which being taken down, the follow¬ 
ing questions to be proposed, if not rendered unnecessary by the 
statement given. 

QUESTIONS. 

1. When did you first see this animal ? 

2 . How often and how long at a time ? 

3 . At what times of the day ? 

4. At what distance ? 

5 . How near the shore ? 






8 . 


6. What was its general appearance ? 

7. Was it in motion or at rest ? 

8. How fast did it move, and in what direction ? 

9 . What parts of it were above the water and how high ? 

10. Did it appear jointed or only serpentine ? 

11. If serpentine, were its sinuosities vertical or horizontal ? 

12. How many distinct portions were out of water at one 
time? 

13 What were its colour, length and thickness ? 

14. Did it appear smooth or rough ? 

15 What were the size and shape of its head, and had the 
head ears, horns, or other appendages ? 

16. Describe its eyes and mouth. 

17. Had it gills or breathing holes, and where? 

18. Had it fins or legs, and where ? 

19 Had it a mane or hairs, and where ? 

20. How did its tail terminate ? 

21. Did it utter any sound ? 

22. Did it appear to pursue, avoid or notice any thing ? 

23. Did you see more than one ? 

24. How many persons saw it ? 

25. State any other remarkable fact. 









0 


- II. 

Gloucester, August 28 , 1817 ". 

John Davis, 

Jacob Bigelow, and 

Francis C Gray, 

Gentlemen, 

f I have received your favour of the 19th inst. In that com¬ 

munication you request my assistance, in collecting evidence rel¬ 
ative to a strange marine animal, that has appeared in the har¬ 
bour in this place ; and I have most cheerfully complied with 
your request. I send you, herewith, the testimony that I have 
taken. The subject is calculated to excite much interest, at 
home and abroad. 

The deponents were-interrogated separately, no one knowing 
what the others had testified, and though they differ in some few 
[ particulars, still, for the most part, they agree. 

I am confident, from my own observation, that Mr. Allen is 
mistaken, as to the motion of the animal. His motion is verti¬ 
cal. I saw him, on the 14th instant, for nearly half an hour. 
I should judge he was two hundred and fifty yards from me, 
when the nearest. I saw him twice with a glass for a short time, 
and at other times, with the naked eye. At that distance, I 
could not take in the two extremes of the animal that were visi¬ 
ble, at one view, with a glass. His manner of turning is well de- 
( scribed in Messrs. Pearson’s and Goffney’s depositions. The 

persons who have deposed before me, are men of fair and unblem¬ 
ished characters. The interrogatories that you sent to me were 
all put to the witnesses; but generally, I have omitted inserting 
them in the depositions, when the witnesses declared their inabil- 
ity to answer them. 

I think Mr. Allen is likewise mistaken, as to the distinct por¬ 
tions of the animal that were visible, at one time. I saw, at no time, 
more than eight distinct portions; though more may have been 
visible ; still, I cannot believe that fifty distinct portions were 
seen, at one time. I believe the animal to be straight, and that 
the apparent bunches weie caused by his vertical motion* 







10 


/ 


I have questioned Daniel Goffney, who was in the boat with 
his brother Matthew, when he fired at the animal, and Daniel’s 
answers corroborate Matthew’s testimony. 

Respectfully, gentlemen, 

Your most ob’t, 

LONSON NASH. 

III. 

I, Amos Story of Gloucester, in the County of Essex, mariner, 
depose and say, that on the tenth day of August A. D. 1817, l 

saw a strange marine animal, that I believe to be a serpent, at the 
southward and eastward of Ten Pound Island, in the harbour in 
said Gloucester. It was between the hours of twelve and one o’ 
clock when I first saw him, and he continued in sight for an hour 
and half. I was setting on the shore, and was about twenty rods 
from him when he was the nearest to me. His head appeared 
shaped much like the head of the sea turtle, and he carried his 
head from ten to twelve inches above the surface of the water. 
His head at that distance appeared larger than the head of any 
dog that I ever saw. From the back part of his head to the next 
part of him that was visible, I should judge to be three or four 
feet. He moved very rapidly through the water, I should say a 
mile in two, or at most, in three minutes. I saw no bunches on 
his back. On this day, I did not see more than ten or twelve 
feet of his body. I likewise saw, what I believe to be the same 
animal this day, viz. the twenty third of August, A. D. 18 {7. 
This was in the morning, about seven o’clock. He then lay 
perfectly still, extended on the water, and I should judge that 1 
saw fifty feet of him at least. 

I should judge that I was forty rods from him this day. I 
had a good spy-glass both days when I saw him. I continued 
looking at him about half an hour, and he remained still and in 
the same position, until I was called away. Neither his head 
nor tail weie visible. I lls colour appeared to be a dark brown, 







11 


and when the sun shone upon him, the reflection was very bright. 
I thought his body was about the size of a man’s body. 

AMOS STORY. 

Essex ss. Aug. 23, 1817. Personally appeared Amos Story, 
and made oath that the foregoing deposition by him subscribed 
is true, according to his best knowledge and belief, 
f Cor. Lonson Nash, Jus. Pacis. 


IY. 

I, Solomon Allen 3d, of Gloucester, in the county of Es¬ 
sex, Ship master, depose and say ; that I have seen a strange 
marine animal, that I believe to be a serpent, in the harbour in 
said Gloucester. T should judge him to be between eighty and 
ninety feet in length, and about the size of a half barrel, appar¬ 
ently having joints from his head to his tail. I was about one 
hundred and fifty yards from him, when I judged him to be of 
the size of a half barrel. His head formed something like the 
head of the rattle snake, but nearly as large as the head of a 
horse. When he moved on the surface of the water, his motion 
was slow, at times playing about in circles, and sometimes mov¬ 
ing nearly straight forward. When he disappeared, he sunk ap¬ 
parently directly down, and would next appear at two hundred 
* yards from where he disappeared, in two minutes. His colour 

was a dark brown, and I did not discover any spots upon him. 

Question. When did you first see this animal ? 

Answer. I saw him on the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth 
of August, A. D. 1817. 

Q . How often, and how long at a time ? 

A. I was in a boat on the twelfth inst. and was around him 
several times, within one hundred and fifty yards of him. On 
the thirteenth inst. I saw him nearly all the day, from the shore. 
I was on the beech, nearly on a level with him, and most of the 
time he was from one hundred and fifty to three hundred yards 



IS 







from me. On the fourteenth, I saw him but once, and had not 
so good a view of him. 

Q. What parts of it were above the surface of the water, and 
how high ? 

4 . Its joints or bunches, appeared about eight or ten inches 
above the surface of the water. 

Q, Did it bend its bod/ up and down in moving, or to the 
right and left ? 

A He moved to the right and left. 

Q. How many distinct portions of it were out of water, at 
one time ? 

A I should say fifty distinct portions. 

Q. Did it appear smooth or rough ? 

A. It appeared rough and scaly. 

6' Had it ears, horns, or any other appendages ? 

A. I perceived none. 

Q. How did its tail terminate ? 

A. He seemed to taper towards (what l thought) his tail, 
though I had no distinct view of his tail. 

Q. Did it utter any sound. 

A. Not in my hearing. 

Q. Did it appear to pursue, avoid, or notice any thing ? 

A. It appeared to me to avoid the boat where I was, though 
afterwards, I saw him make towards a boat, in which was Mr. 
Goffney and others. 

Q. Did you see more than one ? 

A. I did not. 

Q. How many persons saw it ? 

A. Twenty or thirty persons were in view of me. 

Q. Did he open his mouth when you saw him, and if so, 
how wide i 

A. Yes, when I looked at him from the shore with a glass, 
at about two hundred yards distance, his mouth appeared to be 
open about ten inches. I had no glass, when I saw him from 
the boat. 


» 









13 


Q. Did he carry his head above the surface of the water ? 

A. Yes, at times, about two feet, then again he would carry 
the top of his head just on the surface of the water. 

( 3 . Did he turn short and quick, and what was the form of 
the curve that he made, when he turned? 

A. He turned short and quick, and the first part of the curve 
that he made in turning resembled the link of a c ain ; but when 
his head came parallel with his tail, his head and tail appeared 
near together. SOLOMON ALLEN, 3d. 

Essex ss. August 21, 1817. Personally appeared Solomon 
Allen the third, and made oath that the foregoing facts, by him 
subscribed, are true, according to his best knowledge and belief. 

Cor. Lonson Nash, Jus. Pacis. 

Y. 

I, Epes Ellery, of Gloucester, in the County of Essex, Ship 
master, depose and say; that on the 14th day of August, 1817, I 
saw a sea animal that I thought to be a serpent, in the harbour 
in said Gloucester. I was on an eminence, near low water mark, 
and about thirty feet above the level of the sea, when I saw him. 
I should judge that he was about one hundred and fifty fathoms 
from me. I saw the upper part of his head, and I should say 
about forty feet of the animal. Pie appeared to me to have 
joints, about the size of a two-gallon keg. I was looking at him 
with a spy-glass, when I saw him open his mouth, and his mouth 
appeared like that of the serpent; the top of his head appeared 
flat. His motion when he turned was quick, but I will not ex¬ 
press an opinion of his velocity. The first part of the curve that 
he made in turning was of the form of a staple, and as he ap¬ 
proached towards his tail, he came near his body with his head, 
and then ran parallel with his tail, and his head and tail then ap¬ 
peared near together. 

Q. -\t what time of the day did you see him ? 

A. It was a little after sun set. 

,3 


1 





14 



) 

\ 


t 


Q. What parts of it were above the surface of the water, and 
how high ? 

A. I did not count the number of bunches, but they appear¬ 
ed about six inches above the surface of the water. 

Q. Were its sinuosities vertical or horizontal ? 

A. Vertical. 

Q. Did it appear to pursue, avoid, or notice any thing ? 

A. It did not appear to avoid any thing. He appeared to 
be amusing himself, though there were several boats not far from 
him. 

Q. Did you see more than one? 

A. I did not. 

< 2 - How many persons saw it ? 

A. There were fifteen or twenty persons, near where I was. 

EPES ELLERY. 

Essex ss, August 25, 1817. Personally appeared Epes Elle- 
17, and made oath to the truth of the foregoing facts by him sub¬ 
scribed. Cor. Lon son Nash, Jus. Pacis. 

VI. 

I, William H. Foster, of Gloucester, in the county of Es¬ 
sex, merchant, depose and say 1 That on the fourteenth day of 
August, A. D. 1817, I first saw an uncommon sea animal, that 
I believe to have been a serpent, in the harbour in said Glouces¬ 
ter. When I first discovered him, his head was above the sur¬ 
face of the water, perhaps ten inches, and he made but little 
progress through the water. He was apparently shaded with 
light colours. He afterwards went in different directions, leav¬ 
ing on the surface of the water, marks like those made by skat¬ 
ing on the ice. Then he would move in a straight line west, and 
would almost in an instant, change his course to east, bringing 
his head, as near as I could judge, to where his tail was; or in 
fact, to the extreme hinder part visible, raising himself as he turn¬ 
ed, six or eight inches out of water, and shewing a body at least 
forty feet in length. On the seventeenth of August instant, I 


\ 





15 


again saw him. He came into the harbour, occasionally exhib¬ 
iting parts of his body, which appeared like rings or bunches. 
As he drew near, and when opposite to me, there rose from his 
head, or the most forward part of him, a prong or spear about 
twelve inches in height, and six inches in circumference at the 
bottom, and running to a small point. 

Q. Might not the prong or spear that you saw, have been the 
tongue of the serpent ? 

A. I thought not; as I saw the prong before I saw the head ; 
but it might have been. 

Q. At what distance was you, when you saw the spear of the 
serpent ? 

A. I should judge forty rods ; I had a spy-glass when I saw 
the prong or spear. 

Q. Did the animal appear round? 

A. He did. 

Q. Did he appear jointed, or only serpentine ? 

A. He appeared jointed. 

Q, Were its sinuosities vertical; or horizontal? 

A Vertical. 

Q. What was its colour ? 

A. It appeared brown. 

Q. Did it appear smooth or rough ? 

A. It appeared smooth. 

Q. What was the size and shape of his head ? 

A. At the distance where I was, his head appeared as large 
as a man’s head; but I cannot describe its shape. 

Q. Did it appear to pursue, avoid, or notice objects ? 

A. I thought it appeared to notice objects. 

Q. How fast did it move ? 

A. At the rate of a mile in a minute, at times, I have no 
doubt. WILLIAM H. FOSTER. 

Essex ss. August 27,1817. Personally appeared William H. 
Foster, and made oath that the foregoing deposition, by him sub¬ 
scribed, is true, according to his best knowledge and belief. 

Before Lonson Nash, Jus. of Peace. 







1 (i 


vir, 

I, M a TT H E w G a F FN E Y, of Gloucester, in the County of Essex, 
Ship carpenter, depose and say : That on the fourteenth day of 
August, A D. 1817, between the hours of four and five o’clock 
in the afternoon, I saw a strange marine animal, resembling a 
serpent, in the harbour in said Gloucester. I was in a boat, and 
was within thirty feet of him. His hea ! appeared full as large 
as a four-gallon keg ; his body as large as a barrel, and his length 
that I saw, I should judge forty feet, at least. The top of his 
head was of a dark colour, and the under part of his head ap¬ 
peared nearly white, as did also several feet of his belly, that I 
saw. I supposed and do believe that the whole of his belly was 
nearly white. I fired at him, when he was the nearest to me. 
I had a good gun, and took good aim. I aimed at his head, and 
tlunk I must have hit him. He turned towards us immediately 
after I had fired, and I thought he was coming at us ; but he 
sunk down and went directly under our boat, and made his ap¬ 
pearance at about one hundred yards from where he sunk. He 
did not turn down like a fish, but app ared to settle directly 
down, like a rock. My gun carries a ball of eighteen to the 
pound; and I suppose there is no person in town, more accus¬ 
tomed to shooting, than I am. I have seen the same animal at 
several other times, but never had so good a view of him, as on 
this day His motion was vertical, like the caterpillar. 

Q. How fast did it move ? 

A I should say he moved at the rate of a mile in two, or at 
most, three minutes. 

Q Did it appear smooth or rough ? 

A. I thought it smooth, though I was endeavouring to take 
aim at him, and will not say positively, that he was smooth, 
though that is still my belief. 

Q- Does he turn quick and short, and if so, what is the form 
of path that he makes, in turning ? 

A. He turns quick and short, and the first part of the curve 
that he makes in turning, is in the form of the staple ; but his 
head seems to approach rapidly towards his body, his head and 







XT 


tail moving in opposite directions, and when his head and tail 
come parallel, they appear almost to touch each other. 

Q Did he appear more shy, after you had fired at him ? 

A. He did not; but continued playing as before. 

Q. Who was in the boat with you, when you fired at the ser¬ 
pent ? 

f A. My brother Daniel, and Augustin M. Webber. 

MATTHEW GAFFNEY. 

Essex ss. August 28, 1817. Then Matthew Gaffney made 
oath that the foregoing, by him subscribed, is true according to 
his best knowledge and belief. 

Before Lonson Nash, Jus. of Peace. 

VIII. 

t 

I, James Mansfield, of Gloucester, in the county of Essex, 
merchant, depose and say : That I saw a strange creature, of 
enormous length, resembling a serpent. I think this was on the 
fifteenth of August, A. D. 1817. I should say he was from for¬ 
ty to sixty feet in length, extended on the surface of the water, 
with his head above the water about a foot. He remained in. 
this position but a short time, and then started off very quick, 
with much greater velocity than I have seen him move with at 
any other time. I saw bunches on his back about a foot in 
f height, when he lay extended on the water. His colour ap¬ 

peared to me black, or very dark. It was a little before six o’ 
clock P. M. when I saw him. I should say, he moved a mile 
in five or six minutes. 

(J. How near the shore was the serpent ? 

A. About one hundred and eighty yards from the shore 
where I stood. 

Q. Were its sinuosities vertical, or horizontal ? 

A. Vertical. 

Q. What were the size and shape of its head } and had it 
ears, horns, or any other appendages ? 







18 


■A. His head appeared to be about the size of the crown of a 
hat, at the distance from whence I saw him. The shape of his 
head I cannot describe, and I saw no ears, horns, or other ap¬ 
pendages. I had no spy-glass, and cannot describe him so mi¬ 
nutely as I otherwise could. I have seen him at other times, 
but my view of him was not so good, as on this day. 

JAMES MANSFIELD. 

Essex ss. August 27, 1817. Then James Mansfield made 
oath to the truth of the foregoing deposition by him subscribed. 

Before Lonson Nash, Jus. Pacis. 


IX. 

I, John Johnston, jun. of Gloucester, in the County of Es¬ 
sex, of the age of seventeen years, depose and say : That on the 
evening of the seventeenth day of August, A. D. 1817, between 
the hours of eight and nine o’clock, while passing from the shore 
in a boat, to a vessel lying in the harbour in said Gloucester, I 
saw a strange marine animal, that I believe to be a serpent, ly¬ 
ing extended on the surface of the water. His length appeared 
to be fifty feet at least, and he appeared straight, exhibiting no 
protuberances. Capt. John Corliss and George Marble were in 
the boat with me. We were within two oars length of him, 
when we first discovered him, and were rowing directly for him. 
We immediately rowed from him, and at first concluded to pass 
by his tail; but fearing we might strike it with the boat, con¬ 
cluded to pass around his head, which we did, by altering our 
course. He remained in the same position, till we lost sight of 
him. We approached so near to him that I believe I could 
have reached him with my oar. There was not sufficient light to 
enable me to describe the animal. 

JOHN JOHNSTON, jun. 

Essex ss. August 25, 1817. Personally appeared John John¬ 
ston, jr. and made oath that the foregoing deposition, by him sub¬ 
scribed, is true according to his best knowledge and belief. 

Before Lonson Nash, Jus. of Peace. 


1 


* 







19 


X. 

I, William B. Pearson of Gloucester, in the County of Es¬ 
sex, merchant, depose and say: That I have, several times, seen a 
strange marine animal, that I believe to be a serpent, of great 
size. T have had a good view of him, only once, and this was on 
the 18th of August, A. D. 1817. I was in a sail boat, and 
when off Webber’s cove (so called) in the harbour of said Glou¬ 
cester, I saw something coming out of the cove ; we hove to, 
not doubting but that it was the same creature that had been 
seen several times in the harbour, and had excited much inter¬ 
est among the inhabitants of Gloucester. James P. Collins was 
the only person with me. The serpent passed out under the 
stem of our boat, towards Ten Pound Island ; then he stood in to¬ 
wards us again, and crossed our bow. We immediately ex¬ 
claimed, ‘here is the snake !’ From what I saw of him, I should 
say that he was nothing short of seventy feet in length. I dis¬ 
tinctly saw bunches on his back, and once he raised his head out 
of water. The top of his head appeared Hat, and was raised sev¬ 
en or eight inches above the surface of the water. He passed by 
the bow of the boat, at about thirty yards distance. His colour 
was a dark brown. I saw him at this time about two minutes. 
His motion was vertical. His velocity at this time was not 
great; though at times, I have seen him move with great veloc¬ 
ity, I should say at the rate of a mile in three minutes, and per¬ 
haps faster. His size I judged to be about the size of a half 
barrel. I saw Mr. Gaffney fire at him, at about the distance of 
thirty yards. I thought he hit him, and afterwards he appeared 
more shy. He turned very short, and appeared as limber and 
active as the eel, when compared to his size. The form of the 
curve when he turned in the water, resembled a staple ; his head 
seemed to approach towards his body for some feet; then his 
head and tail appeared moving rapidly, in opposite directions, 
and when his head and tail were on parallel lines, they appeared 
not more than two or three yards apart. 

Q. At what time of the day was this ? 

J. Between the hours of five and six, in the afternoon. 







so 


Q. How many distinct portions of it were out of water at one 
time } 

■A' Ten or twelve distinct portions. 

Q. Can you describe his eyes and mouth ? 

A. I thought and believe, that I saw his eye at one time, and 
it was dark and sharp. 

Q. How did its tail terminate ? . 

A. I had not a distinct view of his tail; I saw no bunches 
towards, what I thought, the end of his tail, and I believe there 
were none. From where I judged his navel might be, to the end 
of his tail, there were no bunches visible. 

WILLIAM B PEARSON. 

Essex ss. August 27, i8i7. Then William B. Pearson made 
oath to the truth of the above. 

Bo 'ore Lonson Nash, Jus. of Peace. 


XL 

Sewell Toppav, master of the schooner Laura, declares : 

That on Thursday morning the 28th day of August, at about 
9 o’clock A. M. at about two miles, or two and half miles east 
of the eastern point of Cape Ann, being becalmed, I heard one 
of my men call to the man at helm, “ what is this coming tow¬ 
ards usbeing engaged forward, I took no further notice till 
they called out again—I then got on top of the deck load, at f 

which time I saw a singular kind of animal or fish, which I had 
never before seen, passing by our quarter, at distance of about 
forty feet, standing along shore. I saw a part of the animal or 
fish ten or fifteen feet from the head downwards including the head; 
the head appeared to be size of ten-gallon keg, and six inch¬ 
es above the surface of the water. It was of a daik colour. I saw 
no tongue, but heard William Somerby and Robert Bragg, my 
two men, who were with me, call out, “ look at his tongue.” The 
monon of his head was sideways and quite moderate ; the motion 
of the body, up and down, I have seen whales very often; his 










21 


motion was much more rapid than whales, or any other fish I 
have ever seen ; he left a very long wake behind him ; he did 
not appear to alter his course in consequence of being so near 
the vessel. 1 saw him much less time than either of the others, 
and not in so favourable a position to notice his head. 

I have been to sea many years, and never saw any fish that 

had the least resemblance to this animal. Judging from what I 

saw out of water, I should judge the body was about the size of a 

half barrel in circumference. „ . 

SEWELL TOPPAN. 


Suffolk ss. Boston , September i, 1817. Personally appeared 
Capt. Sewell Toppan, and made solemn oath, that the foregoing 
declaration, by him subscribed, is true. 

Before me, Jos. May, Jus. Pacis. 


XII. 

Robert Bragg, of Newburyport, mariner, of the schooner 
Laura of Newburyport, Sewell Toppan master, testifies: That 
on Thursday last, about ten o’clock A. M. coming in said schoon¬ 
er, bound from Newburyport to Boston, off Eastern point, (Cape 
Ann) about a mile and a half from the shore, I being on deck, the 
vessel being becalmed, looking at the windward, I saw something 
break the water, and coming very fast towards us ; I mentioned 
it to the man at helm, William Somerby; the animal came about 
28 or 30 feet from us, between the vessel and the shore, and pass¬ 
ed very swiftly by us; he left a very long wake behind him. 
About six inches in height of his body and head were out of water, 
and as I should judge about 14 or 15 feet in length. He had a 
head like a serpent, rather larger than his body and rather blunt; 
did not see his eyes ; when astern of the vessel about 30 feet, 
he threw out his tongue about two feet in length ; the end of it ap¬ 
peared to me to resemble a fisherman’s harpoon ; he raised his 
tongue several times perpendicularly, or nearly so, and let it fall 
again. He was in sight about ten minutes. I think he moved 
4 












at the rate of 12 or 14 miles an hour; he was of a dark choco¬ 
late colour, and from what appeared out of water I should sup¬ 
pose he was about two and a half feet in circumference ; he made 
no noise ; his back and body appeared smooth ; a small bunch 
on each side of his head, just above his eyes ; he did not appear 
to be at all disturbed by the vessel; his course was in the direc¬ 
tion for the Salt Islands ; his motion was much swifter than any 
W'hale that I have ever seen, and i have seen many—did not ob¬ 
serve any teeth; his motion was very steady, a little up and down. 

To this account I am willing to make oath 

ROBERT BRAGG. 


xin. 

I, William SoMERByofthe schooner Laura, testify and says 
That on Thursday last about 10 o’clock, A. M. as I was coming 
in said schooner from Newburyport, bound to Boston, off Brace’s 
cove, a little eastward of Eastern point, (Cape Ann) about two 
miles from land, the sea calm, I was at helm. Robert Bragg, one 
of the crew, asked me if that was not the snake coming, pointing 
out a break in the water, south of us; a strange animal of the 
serpent form passed very swiftly by us—the nearest distance I 
should judge to be between 30 and 40 feet—the upper part of his 
back and head was above water—the length that appeared was 
about 12 or 15 feet, his head was like a serpent’s, tapering off to 
a point. He threw out his tongue a number of times, extended 
about two feet from his jaws—the end of it resembled a harpoon— 
he threw his tonuue backwards several times over his head, and 
let it fall again—I saw 011c of his eyes as he passed ; it appeared 
very bright, ar:d about the size of the eye of an ox. The col¬ 
our of all that appeared was very dark, almost black. He did 
not appear to take any notice of the vessel, and made no noise. 
There appeared a bunch above the eye—Should judge him to 
be about two and a half feet in circumference. Have often seen 
whales at sea. The motion of this animal was much swifter 
than that of any whale. The motion of the body was rising and 







23 


felling as he advanced, the head moderately vibrating from side 
to side. The colour of his tongue was a light brown. 

To this account I am willing to make oath. 

WILLIAM SOMERBY. 

Commonwealth of Massachusetts, August 30, 1817. Then ap¬ 
peared Robert Bragg and William Somerby, and made oath to 
the truth of the above declarations, by them respectively subscrib¬ 
ed. Before me, Jos. May, Jus. Pacis. 


XIV. 

Boston, September 2 , 1817 ". 

SIR, 

Your letter of the 28th ult. to the Committee of the Linnaean 
Society, and tire accompanying depositions, were duly received, 
and were yesterday communicated to the Society The commit¬ 
tee are greatly obliged to you for your ready compliance with 
their request. In these sentiments the Society unite, and I am 
charged with the agreeable office of communicating to you their 
vote of thanks for your very acceptable labours. What you 
have thus accomplished will go far in giving some precise and 
accurate conceptions on a subject, peculiarly exposed to exagger¬ 
ation and mistake. This evidence, with some additional docu¬ 
ments, will probably be published. The Committee will not 
make their final report on the subject of their commission until 
evidence shall be procured respecting some other rented ap- / on^- 
pearances of like description, particularly one at Plymouth in 
1815. 

We have been informed that the animal at Gloucester was 
once seen, and it was said by a woman, lying dormant very 
near the shore. The Committee wished this intimation to be giv¬ 
en to you, that if it should point to any material circumstances, 
the evidence might be taken. 

The last we hear of the object of our inquiry is of Ins ap¬ 
pearance off Eastern point on the 28th ult. This we gather from 















24 


V 


the testimony of Capt. Toppan, and his crew, of the schooner 
Laura, coming from Newbury port to Boston, 

It appears by your letter, that you had sight of the animal. 
A letter from you, giving a detailed account of your observa¬ 
tions, would be particularly acceptable 

We understand that a gentleman in Gloucester, (Capt Beach,) 
has a drawing, supposed to be a pretty good representation of the 
animal. Some information respecting this drawing would be 
agreeable ; how far it is considered by those who had the best 
view of the animal as a correct representation, and whether the 
person possessing it would be disposed to permit an engraving 
from it to be annexed to the publication of the evidence, and 
on what terms. Yours very respectfully, 

JNO. DAVIS. 


XV. 

Gloucester, September 9, 1817'. 

SIR, 

Your favour of the second inst. has been received. The vote 
of thanks of the Linnasan Society for my services was highly 
gratifying to me, not simply on account of the high consideration 
I entertain for the members of that laudable institution; but 
likewise for the agreeable manner, and respectable channel, 
through which their vote of thanks was communicated to me. 

I have seen and conversed with the woman, who was said to 
have seen the serpent dormant on the rocks, near the water, to 
whom you refer in yours ; but she can give no material evidence. 
She says that she saw something, resembling a large log of wood, 
on the rocks, on the extreme eastern point of Ten Pound island, 
(a small island in our harbour,) resting partly on the rocks, and 
partly in the water. The distance was about half a mile. She 
took a glass, looked at the object, and saw it move. Her 
attention was for a short time arrested, by some domestic avo¬ 
cation, and when she looked for the object again, it had disap. 
peared. 













25 


You request a detailed account of my observations, relative to 
the serpent. I saw him on the fourteenth ultimo, and when 
nearest, I judged him to be about two hundred and fifty yards 
from me. At that distance I judged him (in the largest part) 
about the size of a half barrel, gradually tapering towards the x 
two extremes. Twice I saw him with a glass, only for a short 
time, and at other times, with the naked eye, for nearly half an 
? hour. His colour appeared nearly black—his motion was verti¬ 

cal. When he moved on the surface of the water, the track in 
his rear was visible, for at least half a mile. 

His velocity, when moving on the surface of the water, I 
judged was at the rate of a mile in about four minutes. When 
immersed in the water, his speed was greater, moving, I should 
say, at the rate of a mile in two or at most three minutes. When 
moving under water, you could often trace him by the motion of 
the water, on the surface, and from this circumstance I conclude 
he did not swim deep. He apparently went as straight through 
the water, as you could draw a line. When he changed his 
course, it diminished his velocity but little—the two extremes 
that were visible appeared rapidly moving in opposite directions, 
and when they came parallel, they appeared not more than a 
yard apart. With a glass, 1 could not take in, at one view, the 
two extremes of the animal, that were visible. I have looked at 
a vessel at about the same distance, and could distinctly see forty 
five feet. If he should be taken, I have no doubt that his length 
f will be found seventy feet, at least, and I should not be surprised, 

if he should be found one hundred feet long. When I saw him 
I was standing on an eminence, on the sea shore, elevated about 
thirty feet above the surface of the water, and the sea was smooth. 

If I saw his head, I could not distinguish it from his body ; 
though there were seafaring men near me, who said that they 
could distinctly see his head. I believe they spoke truth ; but 
not having been much accustomed to look through a glass, I was 
not so fortunate. 

I never saw more than seven or eight distinct portions of him 
above the water, at any one time, and he appeared rough} 








26 


though I supposed this appearance was produced by his motion. 
When he disappeared, he apparently sunk directly down like a 
rock. 

Capt. Beach has been in Boston for a week past, and I am 
informed that he is still there. An engraving from his drawing 
of the serpent has been, or is now, making in Boston ; but I have 
npt been able to ascertain how far his drawing is thought a cor¬ 
rect representation. 

Respectfully, Sir, 

your most ob’t, 

„ LONSON NASH. 

ilon. John Davis. 


XYJ. 

Boston, September 1 , 1817 . 

SIR, 

At a meeting of the Linnxan Society, on the 1 8th ultimo, the 
subscribers were appointed a Committee for the purpose of collect¬ 
ing any evidence which may exist respecting a remarkable ani¬ 
mal, denominated a Sea Serpent, reported to have been recently seen 
m and near the harbour of Gloucester. The Committee have 
procured evidence from Gloucester, which they are prepared to 
report to the Society, and this evidence is of such a character, that 
they have thought it expedient to extend their inquiry to other re¬ 
ported appearances of a similar nature on our coasts. An ap¬ 
pearance of this sort is mentioned as having been noticed by some 
persons at Plymouth two or three years since. We would ask 
your assistance in' procuring the evidence on this subject. 

Your connexion with the Society seems to authorize the re¬ 
quest for your assistance in having the evidence on this subject, 
which may exist at Plymouth, properly taken and transmitted ; 
but separately from any such claim, we know your habitual read¬ 
iness to aid in any investigation in natural science. This subject 
is now of general interest among us, and will probably be sp a- 
broad. Any co-operation which you may wish from magis- 














27 


trates and intelligent gentlemen at Plymouth, we doubt not will 
be readily afforded you. We shall suspend our final report to 
the Society, until your communication shall be received. 

Yours respectfully and 

with esteem, 

John Davis, Commit- 

Jacob Bigelow, V 
Francis C. Gray, J 

Mr. Samuel Davis, Plymouth. 


XYII. 

Plymouth, Oct. 2 , 1817 . 

GENTEEMETf, 

Inclosed is the deposition duly authenticated of Capt, E. Fin¬ 
ney of this town, descriptive of an unusual animal, which was 

seen by him in the outer harbour of Plymouth, in June 1815. 

Capt Finney lives a few miles from town, and is much engaged 
in business, which must apologize for the delay that has follow¬ 
ed, since the receipt of your letter of the first of September. 
His deposition is impartial and unbiassed—and agrees uniform y 
with his first declarations in 1815—besides he has not read, 
whatever he may have heard, of the Cape Ann descriptions ; he 
has been from his youth accustomed to a seafaring life—in the 
fishing employ, and in foreign voyages—has frequently seen 

whales, and almost every species of fish. 

The drawing on the other page (made by me) I have shewn 
to Capt. Finney, who says it illustrates his conceptions on the sub¬ 
ject exactly. All your questions were asked him, and when Ins 
replies are negative, such as gills, breathing holes, &c &c it 
must not be inferred that such things were not displayed—but 
only that he did not see them, &c. Certain house carpenters, who 
were at work on a building near the spot, also saw it; as well as 
many others—these persons dwell with emphasis on the long and 
distinct wake made in the water by the passage of the fish.—As 










£8 


to the point of time, it must have been from known data be¬ 
tween the 18th and 25th of June. And I would remark, that 
this is exactly the season when the first setting in of mackerel oc¬ 
curs in our bay. 

Yours respectfully, 

S. DAVIS.' 


Hon. J. Davis, "i 
Dr. J. Bigelow, i 
Mr. F. C. Gray,J 


Committee of the Lin- 
ncean Society. 


XVIII. 

I, Elkanah Finney of Plymouth, in the County of Plym¬ 
outh, Mariner, testify and say : That about the twentieth of June 
A. D. 1815, being at work near my house, which is situated near 
the sea shore in Plymouth, at a place called Warren’s cove, 
where the beach joins the main land ; my son, a boy, came from 
the shore and informed me of an unusual appearance on the sur¬ 
face of the sea in the cove. I paid little attention to his story at 
> f‘ rst ! but as he persisted in saying that he had seen something 
very remarkable, I looked towards the cove, where I saw some¬ 
thing which appeared to the naked eye to be drift sea weed. I 
then viewed it through a perspective glass, and was in a moment 
satisfied that it was some aquatic animal, with the form, motion 
and appearance of which I had hitherto been unacquainted. 
It was about a quarter of a mile from the shore, and was mov¬ 
ing with great rapidity to the northward. It then appeared to 
be about thirty feet in length; the animal went about half a mile 
to the northward ; then turned about, and while turning, display¬ 
ed a greater length than I had before seen ; I supposed at least 
an hundred feet. It then came towards me, in a southerly di¬ 
rection, very rapidly, until he was in a line with me, when he stop¬ 
ped, and lay entirely still on the surface of the water. I then had 
a good view of him through my glass, at the distance of a 
quarter of a mile. His appearance in this situation was like a 
string of buoys. I saw perhaps thirty or forty of these protu- 











29 


berances or bunches, which were about the size of a barrel. The 
head appeared to be about six or eight feet long, and where it 
was connected with the body was a little larger than the body. 
His head tapered off to the size of a horse’s head. I could not 
discern any mouth. But what I supposed to be his under jaw 
had a white stripe extending the whole length of the head, just 
f above the water. While he lay in this situation, he appeared 

to be about a hundred or a hundred and twenty feet long. 
The body appeared to be of a uniform size. I saw no part of 
the animal which I supposed to be a tail. I therefore thought 
he did not discover to me his whole length. His colour was a 
deep brown or black. I could not discover any eyes, manej 
gills, or breathing holes. I did not see any fins or legs. The 
animal did not utter any sound, and it did not appear to notice 
any thing. It remained still and motionless for five minutes or 
*• more. The wind was light with a clear sky, and the water quite 

smooth. He then moved to the southward ; but not with so 
rapid a motion as I had observed before. He was soon out of 
my sight. The next morning I rose very early to discover him. 
There was a fresh breeze from the south, which subsided about 
eight o’clock. It then became quite calm, when I again saw 
the animal about a mile to the northward of my house, down the 
beach. He did not display so great a length as the night be¬ 
fore, perhaps not more than twenty or thirty feet. He often dis¬ 
appeared, and was gone five or ten minutes under water. I 
thought he was diving or fishing for his food. He remained in 
nearly the same situation, and thus employed for two hours. I 
then saw him moving off, in a northeast direction, towards the 
light house. I could not determine whether its motion was up 
and down, or to the right and left. His quickest motion was 
very rapid ,• I should suppose at the rate of fifteen or twenty 
miles an hour. Mackerel, manhaden, herring, and other bait 
fish abound in the cove, where the animal was seen. 

ELK AN AH EINNEt. 

5 










3t> 


Plymouth ss, October 2, 1817. The above named Elkanah 
Finney appeared and made oath to the truth of the foregoing 
statement, by him subscribed, before me, 

Nathaniel M. Davis, Jus. Peace. 


\ 


XIX. 


Bath, September 17 , 181 7 . 

Dear Sir, 

Supposing the interests of natural science may be promoted, 
and some light thrown on a subject, which receives, as it deserves, 
much attention ; and understanding lately from Dr. Vaughan 
of Hallowell, and Mr. Professor Farrar of Cambridge, that 
the Linnxan Society is prosecuting researches respecting it, I 
make no other apology for communicating to you the following 
statements in reference to the Sea Serpent of our coasts. 

They consist of extracts from some MS. Notes on the Dis¬ 
trict of Maine, which I have been in the habit of making ever 
since I have resided in the country, and I shall transcribe liter¬ 
ally, in order to communicate with greater accuracy. 

“ June 28th, 1809. The Rev. Mr. Abraham Cummings,” 
who has been much employed in Missions in the District of 
Maine, and navigated his own boat among the islands, &c. in the 
discharge of his duty, “ informs me,” in conversation, which was 
immediately written from his lips, “ that in Penobscot bay has 
been occasionally seen within these thirty years, a Sea Serpent, sup¬ 
posed to be about sixty feet in length, and of the size of a sloop’s 
mast. Rev. Mr Cummings saw him, in company with his wife 
and daughter, and a young lady of Belfast, Martha Spring ; and 
judged he was about three times the length of his boat, which is 
twenty three feet. When he was seen this time he appeared not 
to notice the boat, though he was distant, as nearly as could be as¬ 
certained, but about fifteen rods. Mr. Cummings observes, that 
the British saw him in their expedition to Bagaduse ; that the in¬ 
habitants of Fox and Long islands have seen such an animal, and 
that a Mr. Crocket saw two of them together about twenty two 










31 


years since. When he was seen by the inhabitants of Fox island, 
two persons were together at both times. People also of Mount 
Desert have seen the monster. One of those which were seen by 
Mr. Crocket was smaller than that seen by Mr. Cummings, and 
their motion in the sea appeared to a perpendicular winding, and 
not horizontal. The British supposed the length of that, which 
they saw, to be three hundred feet, but this Mr. Cummings im¬ 
agines to be an exaggeration. A gentleman of intelligence (Rev. 
Alden Bradford of Wiscasset, now Secretary of the Common¬ 
wealth,) inquired of Mr. Cummings whether the appearance might 
not be pr, duced by a number of porpoises following each other 
in a train; but Mi. Cummings asserts, that the animal held his 
head out of water about five feet till he got out to sea; for 
when seen he was going out of the bay, and Mr. Cummings was 
ascending it. The colour was a bluish green about the head and 
neck but the water rippled so much over his body that it was 
not possible to determine its tint. The shape of the head was 
like that of a common snake, flattened, and about the size of a 
pail. He was seen approaching, passing, and departing. Till 
this, Mr. Cummings was as incredulous in respect to its existence, 
as many of his neighbours. The weather was calm, and it was 
the month of August, in which month, Mr. Cummings remarks, 
that, as far as he has heard, the serpent makes his appearance on 
the coast.” 

I am inclined to suppose that Mr Cummings’ account is that, 
which in one of the public papers was lately alluded to, as hav¬ 
ing been communicated to the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, but mislaid. 

“Aug. 23, 1809. Mr. Charles Shaw, (then of Bath, now 
an attorney in Boston,) informed me, that a Capt. Lillis, with 
whom he had sailed, observed cursorily in conversation, that he 
had seen off the coast a very singular fish ; it appeared, said he, 
more like a snake than a fish, and was about forty feet long. It 
held its head erect, had no mane, and looked like an ordinary 
serpent. He asked Mr Shaw if he had ever seen, or read, or 
heard of such an animal.” 






3 £ 


About two years after hearing this, while on a journey to In¬ 
dian Old town, as one of the Massachusetts Commissioners to in¬ 
duce the Indians to cultivate their lands, I had opportunity to 
make further inquiry, and find in my journal the following entry. 

“Sept, io, 13 u. Have heard to-day further testimony re¬ 
specting the Sea Serpent of the Penobscot. A Mr. Staples of 
Prospect, of whom I inquired as I passed, was told by a Mr, 
Miller, of one of the islands of the bay, that he had seen it; and 
‘ it was as big as a sloop’s boom, and about sixty or seventy feet 
long.’ He told me also that about 1780, as a schooner was ly¬ 
ing at the mouth of the river, or in the bay, one of these enor¬ 
mous creatures leaped over it between the masts—that the men 
ran into the hold for fright, and that the weight of the serpent 
sunk the vessel ‘ one streak,’ or plank. The schooner was of 
about eighteen tons.” 

These extracts I put into your hands, dear sir, without any 
comment. If they shall tend to increase the evidence of facts, 
on which the Linnaean Society is seeking information- you will 
make of them what use is deemed expedient. It is, however, 
proper to suggest, that the Rev. Mr. Cummings can probably 
furnish more testimony on the subject, although I attempted to 
elicit from him what he possessed. He is now, I believe, on mis¬ 
sion, (with a boat obtained in this town,) at the G.and Menan, 

or in its vicinity. 

With great respect, 

Your, and the Society’s obed’t servant, 

WILLIAM JENKS. 

Hon’ble Judge Davis, 

President of the Linncean Society, 


XX. 

The account given by Pontoppidan of the Sea Snake said to 
have been often seen near the coast of Norway, agrees in so ma¬ 
ny particulars with the preceding depositions and statements, that 
your Committee think proper to lay it before you, as affording 
additional evidence of the existence of the animal, described m 











S 3 


them; since they display coincidences with that account appar¬ 
ently too close and numerous to be attributed to mere accident* 
and beyond any reasonable suspicion of design. The work of 
Pontoppidan is hardly known in this country, and the extracts 
from it in the Cyclopedia of Dr. Rees, and in Guthrie’s Geogra¬ 
phy, state but few of the peculiarities, in which this coincidence is 
observed ; and mingle with these few, several traits ascribed by 
Pontoppidan to a different animal, none of which agree with any 
statement in our depositions. 

Extracts from the Natural History of Nona ay, by Tontop- 
pidan, Bishop of Bergen, translated from the Danish. London, 
1755 . Part 2. From p. 196 to p. 207 . 

“ This creature, particularly in the North Sea, continually 
keeps himself at the bottom of the sea, excepting in the months of 
July and August, which is their spawning time; and then they 
come to the surface in calm weather, but plunge into the water 

again, so soon as the wind raises the least wave.”-“ I have 

questioned its existence myself till that suspicion was removed 
by full and sufficient evidence from credible and experienced fish¬ 
ermen and sailors in Norway ; of which there are hundreds, who 
can testify that they have annually seen them. All these persons 
agree very well in the general description. 

« j n a il m y inquiry about these affairs, I have hardly spoke 
with any intelligent person, born in the Manor of Nordland, who 
was not able to give a pertinent answer, and strong assurances of 
the existence of this fish: and some of our north traders, that 
come here every year with their merchandize, think it a very 
strange question, when they are seriously asked whether there be 
any such creature ; they think it as ridiculous as if the question 
was put to them whethei there be such fish as eel or cod.” 

The author then records a letter from the honourable Law¬ 
rence de Ferry, Captain in the Navy ; which is as follows : 

“ Mr. John Reutz. 

“ The latter end of August, in the year 1746, as I was on a 
voyage, in my return from Trondheim, in a very calm and hat 


\ 







34 


day, having a mind to put in at Molde, it happened that when 
we were arrived with my vessel within six English miles of the 
aforesaid Molde, being at a place called Jule-Nsess, as I was read- 
ing in a book, T heard a kind of murmuring voice from amongst 
the men at the oars, who were eight in number, and observed that 
the man at the helm kept off from the land. Upon this I in¬ 
quired what was the matter and was informed that there was a 
Sea Snake before us. I then ordered the man at the helm to 
teep to the land again, and to come up with this creature, of 
which I had heard so many stories. Though the fellows were 
under some apprehensions, they were obliged to obey my orders. 
In the mean time this Sea Snake passed by us, and we were 
obliged to tack the vessel about in order to get nearer to it. As 
the snake swam faster than we could row, I took my gun, that 
was ready charged, and fired at it: on this he immediately 
plunged under the water. We rowed to the place where it sunk 
down, which in the calm might easily be observed, and lay upon 
our oars, thinking it would come up again to the surface ; how¬ 
ever it did not. When the Snake plunged down, the water ap¬ 
peared thick and red; perhaps some of the shot might wound it, 
the distance being very little. The head of this Snake, which it 
held more than two feet above the surface of the water, resem¬ 
bled that of a horse. It was of a greyish colour, and the mouth 
was quite black and very large. It had black eyes and a long 
white mane that hung down from the neck to the surface of the 
water.* Besides the head and neck, we saw seven or eight folds 
or coils of this Snake, which were very thick, and as far as we 
could guess, there was about a fathom distance between each 
fold. I related this affair in a certain company where there was 
a person of distinction present, who desired that I would com¬ 
municate to him an authentic detail of all that happened ; and 
for this reason two of my sailors, who were present at the same 

Hus statement is not absolute proof that the animal here describ¬ 
ed was different from that seen near Gloucester. For when the head 
was elevated above the water, the white colour of the neck, or the 
spray of the sea, might possibly have been mistaken for a mane. 





35 

time and place when I saw this monster, namely Nicholas Ped¬ 
erson Kopper, and Nicholas Nicholson Anglewigen, shall appear 
in court to declare on oath the truth of every particular herein 
set forth ; and I desire the favour of an attested copy of the said 
descriptions. 

“ I remain, Sir, your obliged servant, 

(Signed) L. DE FERRY.” 

Bergen, 21 February , 1751 . 

“ After this the before named witnesses gave their corporal 
oaths, and with their finger held up according to law, witnessed and 
confirmed the aforesaid letter or declaration, and every particu¬ 
lar set forth therein, to be strictly true. A copy of the said at¬ 
testation was made out for the said Procurator Reutz, and grant¬ 
ed by the recorder. That this was transacted in our Court of 
Justice we confirm with our hands and seals.” 

“ Signed by A. C. DASS, Recorder of Bergen , 
and by Ii. C. GARDNER, First Burgher .” 

Pontoppidan then describes a monster with fins, seen by Mr. 
Egede, a Greenland missionary, and declares that it differs much 
from the Sea Snake, of which he has had the most consistent ac¬ 
counts ; he then returns to the Sea Snake and says : 

“ Though one cannot have an opportunity of taking the ex¬ 
act dimensions of this creature, yet all that have seen it are unani¬ 
mous in affirming, as far as they can judge at a distance, it ap¬ 
pears to be the length of a cable, i. e. one hundred fathoms, or 
six hundred English feet; that it lies on the surface of the wa¬ 
ter, when it is very calm, in many folds ; and that there are in 
a line with the head some small parts of the back to be seen above 
the surface of the water when it moves or bends. These at a 
distance appear like so many casks or hogsheads floating in a line 
with a considerable distance between them. Mr. Tuchsen of 
Heroe is the only person of the many correspondents, I have, 
that informs me he has observed the difference between the body 
and the tail of this creature as to thickness. It appears that this 
creature does not, like the eel or land snake, taper gradually to 







.a point, but the body, which looks to be as big as two hogsheads, 
grows remarkably small at once just where the tail begins. The 
head in all the kinds has a high and broad forehead, but in some 
a pointed snout, though in others that is flat, like that of a cow or 
horse, With large nostrils, and several stiff hairs standing out on 
each side like whiskers. They add that the eyes of this creature 
are very large, of a blue colour, and look like a couple of bright 
pewter plates. The whole animal is of a dark brown colour, 
but it is speckled and variegated with light streaks or spots, that 
shine like tortoise shell. It is of a darker hue about the eyes and 
mouth than elsewhere, and appears in that part a .good deal like 
those horses, which we call Moors heads.—Those on our coast 
differ from the Greenland sea snakes, with regard to the skin, 
which is as smooth as glass, and has not the least wrinkle but 
about the neck, where there is a kind of mane, which looks like 
a parcel of sea weeds hanging down to the water. Some say it 
sheds its skin like the land snake. It seems the wind is so des¬ 
tructive to this creature, that, as has been observed before, it is 
never seen on the surface of the water, but in the greatest calm, 
and the least gust of wind drives it immediately to the bottom 
again. These creatures shoot through the water like an arrow 
out of a bow, seeking constantly the coldest places. I have been 
informed by some of our seafaring men that a cable would not 
be long enough to measure the length of some of them, when 
they are observed on the surface of the water in an even line. 
They say those round lumps or folds sometimes lie one after an¬ 
other as far as a man can see.” 

tc jf an y one inquires how many folds may be counted in a 
Sea Snake, the answer is, that the number is not always the same, 
but depends upon the various sizes of them ; Jive and twenty is 
the greatest number I find well attested. Adam Olearius in his 
Gottorf Musseum, p. 17. writes of it thus : “A person of dis¬ 
tinction from Sweden related here at Gottorf, that he had heard 
the Burgomaster of Malmoe, a very worthy man, say, that as 
he was once standing on the top of a high hill towards the North 
Sea, he saw in the water, which was very calm, a Snake, which 





appeared at that distance to be as thick as a pipe of wine, and had 
twenty five folds. Those kind of Snakes only appear at certain 
times and in calm weather.” 


We have seen and heard sundry other statements of various 
authority relating to similar animals, said to have been seen at 
sea by different persons ; but do not insert them in our report, 
because we consider the foregoing testimony sufficient to place 
the existence of the animal beyond a doubt; and because they 
do not appear so minute and so well authenticated as the preced¬ 
ing documents. 


6 






38 


ACCOUNT 

OP THE 

SCOLIOPHIS ATLANTICUS. 

SjwAias, flexuosus, if if, serpens.* 

About four weeks after the foregoing depositions had been 
received, a serpent of remarkable appearance was brought from 
Gloucester to Boston, and exhibited as the progeny of the great 
serpent. It had been killed upon the sea shore by some labour¬ 
ing people of Cape Ann. Capt. Beach jun. the possessor, very 
liberally submitted it to examination, and permitted an opening 
to be made in the side for the inspection of its internal structure. 
The following appearances were the result of this examination. 

External appearance. 

The animal had the general form and external characters of 
a serpent; but was remarkably distinguished from all others of 
that class known to your Committee, by a row of protuberances 
along the back, apparently formed by undulations of the spine. 
From the back of the head to the first of these protuberances, 
was a distance of three inches and three fifths of an inch, during 
which the spine was straight, Between this place and the vent, 
its undulations were nearly regular, twenty four of these protu¬ 
berances, about equally distant from each other, occupying the 
space between the neck and the vent. From the latter to the 
twenty fifth protuberance, the spine formed a straight line, of the 
length of one inch and nine tenths; its undulations there com¬ 
menced again, and were continued quite to the extremity of the 
tail, forming sixteen more distinct protuberances. The size of 
these forty protuberances was proportioned to that of the body 
at the places, where they were respectively situated. The body 

* Sxo/uW/5, apud Hippocratem, Spiim distortio. 








39 


could be bent with facility upward and downward as represented 
in Plate I. a circumstance not common to other serpents.* Those 
parts of the spine, which were straight, admitt d much less mo¬ 
tion in a vertical direction, than those, which were undulatory. 



ft. in. 

The length of the head was 

I- 3 - 
1 1 0 

From the back of the head to the vent 

2 2 * 

From the vent to the end of the tail 

n 

Whole length 

2 tl£ 

The smallest circumference of the neck, 

one inch and a half. 


The circumference of the body over the largest protuberances 2£ 
inches. The circumference of the body between the two largest 
protuberances 2^ inches. The size of the body diminished sud¬ 
denly at the vent, immediately beyond which the circumference 
of the tail was one inch and three fifths. The tail was round, 
* and tapered very much, terminating in a point. 

The head was rather larger than the neck, flattened^ its ante¬ 
rior part pyramidal, rounded at the nose ; the upper lip entire. 
The back part of the head was so much bruised that its original 
form was not easily distinguishable. In the fragments of the up¬ 
per jaw were seen three slender recurved teeth ; in those of one 
side of the under jaw seven similar teeth, and the sockets of three 
others. No venomous fangs were found. The tongue was bifid, 
each fork being nearly half an inch long. The nostrils, situated 
between the second and third plate from the nose, were large, 
and oval. Between the nostril and the eye was a longitudinal 
hollow, bounded beneath by the upper lip, above by a very prom¬ 
inent superciliary ridge, extending beyond the eye. The eye 
was very large, nearly round, its breadth apparently a little di¬ 
minished by the superciliary ridge, jutting over it. The whole 
head was covered with plates, but those on the top of it were so 
much broken, that their number and form could not be perfectly 
ascertained. The under jaw was divided by a longitudinal fut- 

* Ce mode d’articulation, explique Ires bien le mouvement du corps 
des reptiles, qui, en general, s’execute sur les cot£s, et non de haut en 
b'as, comrne le represented les peintres. 

Cuvier Anat. comp. i. 1 76. 







40 


row, having a triangular scutella at its anterior extremity, and 
two rows of scutellae on each side. 

The body was covered with hexagonal flat scales, those on 
the back narrowest; the throat with three or four rows of small 
scales; the belly with a hundred and eighty plates ; the tail with 
ninety three pairs of scutellae. Over the vent was one pair of 
scutellae ; at its sides four pair, the scales opposite to which were 
smaller than those on any other part of the body. 

The colour of the head and of the upper part of the body and 
tail was an uniform deep brown; that of the belly and under 
part of the tail a bluish lead colour, lightest in the middle. 
The whole of the under jaw and throat were white, which colour 
extended in a clouded streak some way down under the neck, a d 
fore part of the belly. 

In the general disposition of its colours, in the number, form, 
and arrangement of the scuta and scutellae, this animal approach¬ 
es most nearly to the Coluber Constrictor; from which however 
it is strikingly distinguished by its undulating back, by its body 
being larger in proportion to its length, and diminishing more 
suddenly at the vent, the tail shorter, the teeth much larger and 
more distant, and the colour brown instead of black 

This animal is probably amphibious, although it has not the 
flat tail of the Pelamides ; nor did the examination of its exterior, 
enable us to discover any thing in its structure, peculiarly adapt¬ 
ing it to a residence in the water, excepting only the remarkable 
facility of bending in a vertical direction. This motion, which 
may be observed in the leech, and various other aquatic animals, 
is quite as important as a horizontal one to an inhabitant of the 
ocean, and comparatively useless in an animal confined to the 
land. 

Internal Structure. 

The structure of the spine in this animal is very singular, and 
different from that of any serpent which we have seen, or known 
to be described. Its course throughout the greater part of the 
body is regularly undulating or flexuous, consisting of successive 
curves upward and downward. The structure of the different 










41 


vertebra: varies to accommodate itself to this configuration, so 
that the spine cannot be extended into a straight line without dis¬ 
location of its parts. In the portion of spinal column which we 
examined, each curve consisted of about nine vertebrae. Each 
vertebra was articulated by a round head on its posterior ex¬ 
tremity to a socket in the anterior extremity of the next.* It 
i had five principal processes, one a spinous process; two anterior, 

and two posterior transverse processes. There were also small¬ 
er processes articulated with the ribs, and a sharp longitudinal 
prominence underneath. The spinous processes varied remarka¬ 
bly in shape and size, according to the part of the spine in which 
they were situated. Those occupying the top of the curve were 
very broad, and those of the bottom of the curve very narrow, 
the latter being not more than half the breadth of die former. 
The top of the spinous processes in the ascending or anterior 
* half of each elevation of the back-bone projected considerably back¬ 

ward. In the descending half, on the contrary, they projected 
forward, so as to appear as if this part of the spine were inverted. 
The space between the spinous processes was very great, amount¬ 
ing to nearly two thirds of their longitudinal diameter; a circum¬ 
stance which contributes very much to the vertical flexibility of 
the spine, being much greater than it is in the Boa constrictor, 
one of the most flexible serpents, as represented by Sir Everard 
Home in his comparative anatomy ; or than it is in the Coluber 
constrictor, which your committee have examined. The two an¬ 
terior transverse processes are long and sharp, and are received 

* This is the reverse of what Cuvier asserts of serpents in general, 
in his learned work on comparative anatomy. He states that the tuber¬ 
cle is on the anterior, and the cavity on the posterior part of the verte¬ 
bra. “ La partie anterieure du corps de la vertebre presente un tuber- 
cule arrondi demi-spherique ; et la partie postei-ieure offre, au contraire, 
une cavity correspondante ; de sorte que chacune des vertebres est ar- 
ticulee en genou avec celle qui la suit, et avec celle qui la precede. ’ 
Lemons d’anatomie comparie I. 176.—We are induced to believe that in 
the above passage the terms anterior and postei-ior must have been mis¬ 
placed. The tubercle, we think, always occupies the posterior part of 
the vertebra. 







under, or pass within the two posteiior transverse processes of the 
preceding vertebra. They differ in direction according to the 
place which they occupy. Those in the highest vertebra pass 
obliquely downwards, and those in the lowest, obliquely up- 
wards ; as may be seen in the vertebra a and b in Fig. 6, Plate II. 
The posterior transverse processes also grow broader and less ob¬ 
lique as the vertebra descend. The whole connexion and propor¬ 
tion of the processes is such, that the greatest downward flexion 
takes place at the top of the curve, and the greatest upward flexion at 
the bottom ; an arrangement admirably adapted to increase the 
power of the muscles which act in the vertical flexion of the spine. 

The ribs are articulated by a double cavity to a small double 
headed process under the anterior transverse process of each ver¬ 
tebra. They differ in length and direction, those at the bottom 
of the curve being shorter and more spreading than those at the 
top, so that' the lower extremities of the whole fall in a right 
line. 


Muscles .—The principal muscles on the outside of the trunk con¬ 
sist of three strong dorsal muscles with oblique fibres continually 
arisingfrom the vertebral processes,or ribs,and inserted byan apon¬ 
eurosis into other bones of a similar kind. Below these is a broad 
thin lateral muscle or congeries of muscles, connected to the ribs 
only. These muscles according to their situation act in perform¬ 
ing the various inflexions of the body. 

On the jnside of the ribs a series of their muscles was ob¬ 
served, arising from the bodies of the vertebra, passing obliquely 
downwards and forward under three ribs and over the fourth, 
and afterwards inserted into ribs beyond. These muscles in con¬ 
junction with others, according to Sir Everard Home and other 
authors, act upon the ribs in serpents to assist their progressive 
motion on land. 










43 


Viscera ,—The only part of the viscera, which the limited openings 
permitted us to examine, were a portion of the lung and oesopha¬ 
gus with the mesentery and blood vessels, also a small part of the 
stomach. The lung was a long cellular and tubular viscus, as 
in other serpents, but with this remarkable peculiarity. It was 
successively dilated and contracted so as to adapt itself to the 
cavities formed by the undulations of the spine. The oesopha¬ 
gus was also unequal, but without relation to the cavities of the 
spine, not being in contact with it. In the stomach was found a 
mass of scales, also the tail and part of the skin of a serpent of' 
a different species, having all the scales carinate. 

In regard to the use or final cause of the curvatures in the 
back-bone, which give so peculiar a character to this animal; it 
*■ is obvious that two important ends are effected by it. These are 

an increase of flexibility and an increase of strength in •vertical mo¬ 
tions, 

1. The flexibility is increased, because in any given length of 
body, there will be more joints in a crooked, than there would be 
in a straight spine, composed of vertebra; of the same di¬ 
mensions. 

2. The strength in vertical motions is increased, since the 
fulcrum formed by the highest articulation is more remote from 

j the power applied by the lateral muscles, and the fulcrum form¬ 

ed by the lowest articulation is also more remote from the pow¬ 
er applied by the dorsal muscles ; than they would be if the spine 
pursued a straight and intermediate course. 

The dorsal muscles, however, being bound down by an apo¬ 
neurosis, so as to pursue nearly the course of the spine, are near¬ 
er their fulcrum and have less of this advantage than the lateral 
muscles, which are farther from their fulcrum ; so that the great¬ 
est power is probably that which is exerted in the forward flex¬ 
ion or extension of the body. This power is the one which would 
be most useful to the animal in swimming at the surface of the 
water with a motion in any degree vertical. 







44 


Your committee considering this serpent* as nondescript, and 
as distinct from other genera of serpents in the flexuous structure 
of its spine, have deemed it necessary to constitute a new genus, 
founded on this peculiarity. They have adopted the descriptive 
name of Scoliophis, and have added the local specific name of 
Atlanticus. Compared with the genera of Linnasus and Lace- 
pede its character will stand thus : 

Scoliophis. —Scuta on the. belly, scutellce on the tail, spine 
flexuous. 

Jltlanticus. Scoliophis. 

The following documents relate to the appearance of this an¬ 
imal while living, and to the circumstances under which it was 
killed. 

The deposition of Gorham Norwood, of Gloucester. 

I live in that part of the town of Gloucester, called Sandy Bay. 

On Saturday, the 27th day of September last, I was at work in a 
field near Loblolly cove, about a mile and a half from Sandy- 
Bay village ; Mr. Colbey and his son were at work near me. 

The boy called out that there was a snake, and that it did not 
move like other snakes, and did not move fast. I went with Mr. 

Colbey immediately to the spot pointed out by the boy ; the snake 
had in the mean time taken shelter under a rock, which the boy 
observed, and pointed out to us. I turned over the rock and 
saw a snake coiled up ; at my approach with a pitchfork, he rais- ' ’ 

ed his head, and began to move. 1 immediately pierced him 
through with the pitchfork, and Mr. Colbey came up and bruised 
the head of the snake with a stone, which he threw at him and by 
which the Snake was killed. Upon examining the Snake, it 
struck us as being different from any we had ever seen, and it 
was concluded to carry it to the village of Sandy Bay. It was 
viewed by many people, it being a training day at that place, and 
all who viewed it, observed that they had never seen such a 

* Tlie specimen of the Scoliophis is now exhibiting 1 by Cap- Beach, 
its possessor. It has been presented by him to the Cinnscan Society, to 
be deposited in their cabinet, at the end of his exhibition. 







43 


Snake before. Snakes of different sorts, are frequently seen and 
killed in and about the roads and rocks of the town, and in this 
part of it. The spot where this Snake was killed, was about ten 
or twelve rods from the sea. fie was between the sea and a pond 
of brackish water, which the sea water enters in heavy storms. 
Many of the persons who saw the Snake, suggested that it might 
be the progeny of the Sea Serpent, which had been so much 
talked of, and which was said to have been seen near the cove, 
where this snake was killed. The Snake was sold to Mr. John 
Gott, of Sandy Bay, who, I understand, afterwards delivered him 
to Capt. Beach, jun. 

GORHAM NORWOOD. 

On this seventh day of October, A D. 1817, the above- 
named Gorham Norwood personally appeared, and made solemn 
©ath to the truth of the affidavit above, by him subscribed. 

Before me, James Savage, Justice of Peace, 


Gloucester, October 8, 1817. 

Dear Snt, 

Your kind favour of the 30th ultimo has been received_ 

I presume the young serpent, that I supposed to be the progeny 
of the remarkable Sea Serpent, that was so often seen in the har¬ 
bour, in this place, has been minutely examined by the mem¬ 
bers of the Linnasan Society. The young serpent ought to un¬ 
dergo the severest scrutiny, and I doubt not, the investigation, 
by your society, will be thorough and satisfactory to the public. 

That I might be enabled to communicate the circumstances 
attending the capture of the young serpent more minutely, on 
Friday last, I went to view the place where he was taken, ac¬ 
companied by Mr. Colbey. He pointed out the spot, where he 
was first seen by his son, and the place where killed. My state¬ 
ment to you, on the 28th ultimo, relative to the distance from the 
sea, where the young serpent was killed, was not correct. I 
was informed, by Capt. Beach, that he was within twelve or four¬ 
teen feet of the sea, when killed ; but I paced the ground, and 






46 


\ 


and found the distance, from high water mark, one hundred and 
fifty paces. He lay extended by some whortleberry bushes, when 
first discovered. The boy called to his father (who was at four or 
five rods distance) to run, for he had never seen so strange a 
snake. Mr. Colbey ran, with a pitchfork in his hand, and with 
his fork, confined the serpent against some loose rocks; when 
the serpent exhibited the most violent temper. Twice he bit 
himself, held on, and shook, (to use Mr. Colbey’s expression.) as 
one dog shakes another, when fighting. His tail seemed like- 
wise a weapon of defence ; for he struck the end of it against the 
fork handle several times. His motion was vertical; his pro¬ 
gress was very slow, not near so fast as a man ordinarily walks. 

His progressive motion was produced, by first contracting, and 

then extending himself. When contracted, Mr. Colbey says, he 
was not more than one foot and half in length, and then the 
protuberances on his back were, at least, three times as large, as 
when extended. The young serpent was killed in a meadow, 
near Loblolly cove. Loblolly cove lies upon the eastern shore 
of Cape Ann, about west from Thatcher’s island. This cove 
makes up about one hundred and fifty yards into the main land, 
in a southwesterly direction. This cove is not much frequented ; 
the nearest dwelling houses are distant from the cove, from one 
fourth, to half a mile. Doctor Kittredge has been out of town ; 
or I should have answered your letter sooner. He was the wri¬ 
ter of the article in the Patriot, to which you refer, in which the 
great aquatic serpent is represented to have been seen, on shore, 
here. He says it was general report, and he supposed there 
was no doubt of the fact. I requested him to get some evidence 
of this fact, if possible ; but he informs me that he has not been 
„ble to • though he will still make further inquiry. I do not be¬ 
lieve thlt he was ever seen cn land here ; though this, and a 
thousand other rumours, have been in circulation, relative to the 
mammoth prodigy. Should it hereafter be ascertained, that 
the great serpent has been seen on land here, I shall take the ear. 

liest opportunity to inform you of a fact, so important. 

Respectfully, dear sir, 

Your most obedient, 


Hon. John Davis, Boston. 


LONSON NASH. 


















47 



A feta remarks on the question, whether the great 
Serpent, seen in the harbour of Gloucester, be 
the Scoliophis Atlanticus, will close our report. 

The appearance at nearly the same time and place of two 
creatures, agreeing with each other in certain important and con¬ 
spicuous particulars, disagreeing in the most remarkable of these 
particulars with other animals of their class ; and between whom 
no difference, but that of size, has been discovered, must natur¬ 
ally lead to a conjecture that they are of the same species. The 
evidences in favour of this supposition are so considerable, that 
your Committee would not be justified in neglecting to direct 
your attention to them. 

The principal circumstances which encourage the idea that 
these animals possess the same structure and configuration are the 
following. 

The appearances noticed in the depositions, relative to the 
great Serpent, except in the few instances of contradiction, all of 
them agree with, and are accounted for, by a structure like that 
of the Scoliophis. The protuberances seen above water mipht 
be produced in two ways. By bunches on the back projecting 
out of the water, while the animal was at rest, as in No. 8 and 
No. 18, or by vertical undulations of the body when in motion, as 
stated in Nos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10. The supposition that both 
these appearances have been presented at different times, is the 
most satisfactory mode of accounting for the variety of testimo¬ 
ny with regard to the number, size, and distance of these protuber¬ 
ances. The other facts stated in relation to the form and gener¬ 
al arrangement of colours in the large Serpent, apply sufficiently 
well to the Scoliophis. The shape of the head and proportion 
of the eye—the protuberance on the side of the head, just above 
the eye—the form of the mouth—the distance from the head to 
the commencement of the protuberances—the brown colour of 
the body, and the whitish colour of the under part of the head 
and neck—the disappearance of bunches from what was suppos- 



/ 



48 


ed to be the navel towards the tail—the tapering of the body to¬ 
ward the tail—its roundness, and great flexibility, are all points of 
the closest resemblance. These coincidences cannot be the ef¬ 
fect of design, since all the depositions from Gloucester, relative 
to the great Serpent, were in the hands of your Committee be¬ 
fore the Scoliophis was discovered. 

Some other circumstances stated by the deponents, though 
not applying to the smaller serpent, are nevertheless easy to be 
accounted for. The prong or spear seen near the head of the an¬ 
imal when in motion, was probably the tongue The shape of 
a harpoon ascribed to that organ was doubtless an optical illu¬ 
sion, occasioned by its rapid vibration j and this, it is well known, 
is not the first instance of such a deception. 

The structure of the Scoliophis is well suited to a residence in 
the water, being capable of various and complicated motions. It 
bends horizontally, as did the great Serpent, in the act of turning , 
it bends vertically, as that animal was supposed to do, in the act 
of swimming ; and it might assume any compound and interme¬ 
diate motion, which should be most effectual in propelling it 
through the water. 

It is worthy of remark, that nearly all the circumstances with 
regard to the appearance of the great Serpent, stated by the depo¬ 
nents, as facts, agree with the structure of the Scoliophis. On 
the other hand, those stated as conjectures, such as these, that the 
whole belly was white, that the animal had a navel, and no bunch¬ 
es beyond that quite to the end of the tail, Scc.nlmost uniformly 
disagree with it. This is what might naturally be expected from 
honest men testifying in regard to an object, with which they 

were but partially acquainted. 

Supposing that the species of the two serpents is the same, it 
is not improbable that one is the progeny of the other. The Col- 
ubri without fangs, the tribe most nearly resembling the Scolio¬ 
phis, are said by naturalists to be generally if not always ovipa¬ 
rous, to deposit their eggs in the sand in the spring or the end of 
summer, and to abandon them. These eggs are hatched by the 











49 


heat of the sun often in less time than a month.* It will be re* 
marked that the large serpents described in our accounts and de¬ 
positions, were seen near the shore, and only in the month of 
August, excepting once at Plymouth in June. 

The principal objections against the specific identity of these 
two animals are derived from the following circumstances. 

1. Their disproportionate size. This however is not appar¬ 
ently greater than is found between the young and the full grown 
individuals of some other animals. The Boa constrictor may be 
mentioned as an instance.f 

2. The one was seen only in the water and the other on land. 
This objection is lessened when we recollect that the eggs of am¬ 
phibious animals are deposited on land. The large serpent may 
have visited the shore in the night or at other times That it 
was an amphibious animal, dependent on respiration, is rendered 
probable by its general structure, and by its frequenting the sur¬ 
face of the water, often with its head elevated above it. The 
small serpent was found near the salt water, in a place, over 
which the sea breaks in stormy weather. Supposing it a young 
animal, it might have remained in the place where it was hatch¬ 
ed, or it might occasionally have resorted to the shore from the 
water. We should not expect it to venture far from the shore, 

* Les couleuvres peuvent pondre des reufs jusqu’ a deux fois chaque 
annee, savoir des les premiers jours du printems et vers la fin de l’ete ; 
et 11 faut souvent moins d’un mois pour que la chaleur du soleil fasse 
£clore leurs ceufs enterres dans le fumier ou dans le sable. 

Daudin hist, des Reptiles, t. 6, p. 232. 

•j- Les reufs du Devin (Boa constrictor) n’ont, en effet, que deux 
trois pouces dans leur plus grand diametre. Totfte la matiere dans 
laquelle le foetus est renferme, n’est done que de quelques pouces cu¬ 
bes ; et cependant, le serpent, lorsqu’il a atteint tout son developpe- 
ment, ne contient-il pas moins de quarante ou cinquante pieds cubes de 
matiere. I.acepede hist . des Serpens, t. 2, p. 185. 

II paroit que e’est a cette espece qu’il faut rapporter les individus de 
quarante ou cinquante pieds de longueur. Id. t. 2, p. 144. 

Daudin cites from Merrem the description of a young Boa constric¬ 
tor, whose whole length was fourteen inches and a half. 

Daudin hist, des Reptiles, t. 5, p. 199. 








50 


until its increased size should afford it some security from be¬ 
coming a prey to larger animals of the ocean. 

The circumstance that no evidences of immaturity were ob¬ 
served in the Scoliophis might be considered as the source of a 
third objection, if it were not well known, that as serpents gen¬ 
erally abandon their eggs, the young are perfect in all their parts, 
and capable of providing for their own subsistence immediately 
on being hatched.* 

On the whole, as these two animals agree in so many con¬ 
spicuous, important and peculiar characters, and as no material 
difference between them has yet been clearly pointed out, except¬ 
ing that of size; the Society will probably feel justified in con¬ 
sidering them individuals of the same species, and entitled to the 
same name, until a more close examination of the great Serpent 
shall have disclosed some difference of structure, important 
enough to constitute a specific distinction. 

JOHN DAVIS, 
JACOB BIGELOW, 
Boston , 11 th Oct. 1817. FRANCIS C. GRAY. 

* Lorsque les petits Serpens sout eclos, ou qu’ils sont sorties tout 
formfis du ventre de leur mere, ils tralnent seuls leur frdle existence; 
ils n’apprennent de leur mere, dont ils sont separes, ni a distinguer 
leur proie, ni a trouver un abri; ils sont reduits it leur seul instinct. 

Lactpede hist. nat. des Serpens, t. 1. p. 37, 
One of the six general characteristics of Serpents, according to Dau- 
din, is the following : “ Des petits, qui au sortir de l’ceuf, sont parfait. 
oment semblables a leurs parens.” 

I 


Daudin hist, des Reptiles, t. 5, p. 10. 



51 


POSTSCRIPT. 

[After the completion of the foregoing report, the following article 
appeared in a Sew York paper.] 

Rye-Neck, Oct. 21, 1817. 

Silvanus Miller, Esq. 

Sir, I observed in the Columbian of the 15th inst. a paragraph stating 
that an animal had been seen in Long Island sound, corresponding with 
the description of the serpent lately seen in Gloucester harbour. That 
communication probably resulted from some observations which I made 
to you, and several other gentlemen, on the subject alluded to. When I 
spoke of that occurrence, I had no idea that it would become the subject 
of newspaper remark ; but since it has been publicly noticed, perhaps 
a more particular detail of the circumstances may not be deemed im¬ 
proper. 

On Sunday, the 5th inst. at 10 o’clock A. M. while standing a few rods 
from my house on Rye-Neck, I observed at a small distance to the south¬ 
ward and eastward ofMr. Ezekiel Halsted’s dwelling on Rye Point, and 
perhaps not more than a half mile from the shore, a long, rough, dark 
looking body, progressing rapidly up sound (towards New York) against 
a brisk breeze, and a strong ebb tide. Viewing it with my glass convinc¬ 
ed me it was a large living animal.—His back, forty to fifty feet of which 
was seen above the surface of the water, appeared to be irregular, une¬ 
ven, and deeply indented. I did not at this time remark that his head 
was more elevated above the water than the ridges or humps on his back. 
Some trees standing near the water, Rye Point soon intercepting my 
view of him, I hastened to a situation from which I obtained another 
sight of him, as he passed that part of the sound opposite Hempstead 
bay. At this time he appeared to be nearly in the middle of the sound— 
his body more depressed below and his head more elevated above the 
water, going with increased velocity in the direction of Sand’s point, 
creating a swell before him not unlike that made by a boat towed rapid¬ 
ly at the stern of a vessel. From the time I first saw him till I lost sight 
of him, perhaps could not have exceeded ten minutes, in which short 
time he had gone probably not less than six or seven miles. 

Understanding that Mr, James Guion, a gentleman of character and 
respectability, had seen what was supposed to be the same animal, I 
yesterday conversed with him on the subject. He states that on Friday 
the 3d inst while on the point of land on the east side of the mouth of 
the Mamaroneck harbour, he saw at a little distance from the rocks, usu¬ 
ally called the Scotch Caps, which lie at the extremity of Rye Point, a 
large animal going with great rapidity up sound. He judged his speed 
to be little or no less than a mile in a minute. He describes the irreg¬ 
ularity and unevenness of his back, about fifty feet of which appeared 
above the surface of the water, much in the way in which I have done. 




I was yesterday informed on creditable authority, that on the day on 
which I saw the above mentioned animal he was seen by some persons 
at or in the vicinity of the light house on Sand’s' Point. 

That it was a sea animal of great bulk, to me is certain.—That it is 
what is usually called a Sea Serpent, and the same which appeared in 
Gloucester harbour, is only probable. 

With much respect. Sir, yours. Sec. 

TIIOS. HERTTELE. 


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES. 

PLATE I. 

The Scoliophis Mlanticus copied from the specimen in possession of 
Gapt. Beach. The dimensions of the animal, the number, size and pro¬ 
portion of the protuberances, are accurately preserved. The body is bent 
vertically to shew its flexibility in that direction. 

a. a. Portions of the head and throat so far destroyed that their 
structure could not be ascertained.. 

PLATE II. 

Fig. 1. Section of the body. 

Fig 2. Dissection of the same on the opposite side. A. A. A. Mus¬ 
cles of the back. B. Lateral muscles. C. Intercostal muscles. 

Fig 3. Inside view of the cavity of the ribs and spine, with the in¬ 
ternal muscles crossing the ribs. 

Fig. 4. Side view of a vertebra. 

Fig. 5. Front view of the same. 

Fig 6. Portion of the spine, shewing the varieties of the vertebra, 
and the direction of the ribs. 

Fig 7. Portions of viscera of the first section. A. The lungs, tlieir 
inequalities corresponding to the cavities in the spine. B. The mesen¬ 
tery, which is attached on each side to the ribs. C. The great vein. 
D. The (Esophagus. 

Fig. 8. Represents an opening in the throat. A. The trachea. B. 
The (Esophagus, with a blowpipe inserted into its cavity. C. Elastic, 
retractile filaments of the tongue. D. D. Extremities of the ribs. 






i 



' 


■
