The Literature of the Ancient Egyptians (Adolf Erman (trans. Aylward M. Blackman), 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1927 Methuen edition (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.532519). Erman's comprehensive anthology — poems, narratives, and manuals — in Blackman's English.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA

ARCHEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA

CENTRAL
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY

ACCESSION  NO  _ _T?

CALL  No.  \a  3 1


D.G.A.  79


THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE
ANCIENT  EGYPTIANS


THE  LITERATURE
OF  THE

ANCIENT  EGYPTIANS

POEMS,  NARRATIVES,  AND  MANUALS  OF
INSTRUCTION,  FROM  THE  THIRD  AND
SECOND  MILLENNIA  B.C.

7

By  v,

ADOLF  ERMAN


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  BY

AYLWARD  M.  BLACKMAN


METHUEN  & CO.  LTD.
36  ESSEX  STREET  W.  C.
LONDON


First  Published  in  192


CENTRAL  ARCH AEO'  'iHuAL
LIBRARY,  NEW  .-it.

Acc.  No...  -

Daui ...?!•/  “T-.'.-L  *? — ..

; 3, II  No, — ...........  •rnm&tmm


PkISTED  IS


great  Britain


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


WHEN  I undertook  to  prepare  the  English  edition  of
Professor  Erman’s  Die  Liter atur  der  Aegypter,  I in-
tended to  carry  out  my  task  in  the  manner  indicated
in  my  review  of  the  book  in  the  Journal  of  Egyptian  Archceology,
vol.  x.  pp.  193  ff.  This  meant  that  a fuller  use  was  to  be  made
of  Dr.  Gardiner’s  Notes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe,  that  full  advantage
was  to  be  taken  of  that  scholar’s  brilliant  translation  of  the
Complaints  of  the  Peasant,  recently  published  in  the  Journal  of
Egyptian  Archceology,  vol.  ix.  pp.  5 ff.,  and  that  various  correc-
tions, many  of  them  noted  in  my  review,  were  to  be  made
in  the  translations  of  other  texts.  Shortly  after  I had  begun
the  work,  I received  a letter  from  Professor  Erman  urgently
requesting  me  not  to  make  any  alterations  in  his  translations,
or,  if  I felt  compelled  to  do  so,  to  content  myself  with  inserting
them  in  footnotes.  In  deference  to  his  wishes  I abandoned
my  original  project,  but  at  the  same  time  decided  that  the
suggestion  with  regard  to  footnotes  was  not  feasible,  for  I
realized  that  if  I adopted  it,  they  would  in  many  instances
occupy  more  than  half  the  page.  This  would  have  been  not
only  most  disfiguring  to  the  book,  but  highly  distracting  to
the  reader.

I felt  it  to  be  imperative,  however,  that  the  English  render-
ings of  the  Egyptian  texts  appearing  in  this  volume  should  not
be  merely  translations  of  translations.  They  have,  accord-
ingly, in  every  instance  been  made  directly  from  the  Egyptian,
though  strictly  in  accordance  with  Professor  Erman’s  inter-
pretation, as  set  forth  in  his  own  German  translations.  Only
on  the  very  rarest  occasions  have  I ventured  to  diverge  from


VI


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


his  interpretation  of  a passage  or  rendering  of  a word,  and
then  solely  on  the  strength  of  statements,  almost  indisputably
correct,  to  be  found  in  Battiscombe  Gunn’s  Studies  in  Egyptian
Syntax,  or  in  philological  articles  by  Dr.  Gardiner  and  other
authorities — all  of  which  have  appeared  since  Professor  Erman’s
book  was  published.

I should  now  like  to  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking
Professor  Erman  for  the  great  pleasure  I have  derived  from
translating  this  delightful  book  of  his.  I hope  he  will  regard
my  undertaking  as  a tribute  from  one  of  the  younger  Egypto-
logists to  the  great  scholar,  who  inaugurated  those  exhaustive
and  systematic  researches,  which,  during  the  last  thirty  years,
have  so  vastly  increased  our  knowiedge  of  Egyptian  grammar
and  syntax,  and  of  Egyptian  philology  as  a whole.

When  this  book  was  already  in  print,  an  interesting  article
by  Battiscombe  Gunn  on  King  Snefru  appeared  in  the  Jotirnal
of  Egyptian  Archceology,  vol.  xii.  pp.  250  f. ; it  ought  certainly
to  be  read  in  connexion  with  the  narratives  and  other  composi-
tions appearing  on  pp.  38  ff.,  67,  and  112  ft.

AYLWARD  M.  BLACKMAN

Oxford,  1927


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE


MY  object  in  writing  this  book  has  been  to  make  acces-
sible to  lovers  of  Antiquity  the  extensive  remains  of
Egyptian  literature  which  have  been  brought  to  light
by  the  labours  of  Egyptologists.  Most  of  this  material  has
hitherto  been  known  to  none  but  a very  limited  circle  of
specialists,  as  it  has  been  published  in  books  and  periodicals
that  are  only  available  to  a few.  Yet  this  literature  deserves
to  be  known,  not  only  because  it  is  the  oldest  secular  literature
that  has  grown  up  in  the  world,  but  because  it  affords  us  an
insight  into  an  active,  intellectual  life,  and  into  a poetry,  which
may  well  hold  place  beside  the  achievements  of  the  Egyptians
in  the  artistic  and  technical  spheres.  In  any  case,  no  one,  if
he  is  not  acquainted  with  their  literature,  ought  to  pass  judg-
ment on  the  Egyptians  and  on  the  period  in  human  development
to  which  they  belong.

I planned  this  book  many  years  ago,  and  did  a great  deal
of  preliminary  work  for  it ; but  it  was  not  until  I began  seriously
to  carry  out  my  project  that  I realized  upon  what  a hazardous
undertaking  I had  embarked.  I have  stated  below  (p.  xlii)
what  the  position  is  with  regard  to  our  translations.  A great
deal  is  still  entirely  unintelligible  to  us ; and  though,  indeed,
we  know  the  approximate  meaning  of  other  passages,  yet  the
exact  significance  of  the  words  still  escapes  us,  or  the  relation-
ship of  the  sentences  remains  doubtful.  In  such  cases  one
would  prefer  to  give  up  all  attempts  at  translating.

Still,  if  we  would  wait  until  all  this  uncertainty  were  re-
moved, we  should  have  to  wait  a long  time — in  the  case  of
many  texts  this  will  never  happen — and  in  the  long  run  it  is


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


viii

really  more  important  that  the  whole  should  be  made  accessible
together,  than  that  every  subsidiary  detail  and  every  individual
sentence  should  be  rendered  with  absolute  accuracy.

At  the  same  time  a translator  should,  of  course,  retail  to
the  reader  nothing  as  certain  that  is  not  so.  I have  tried  to
attain  this  object  by  the  omission  of  what  is  unintelligible,  by
special  type  where  there  is  uncertainty,  and  by  a liberal  use
of  notes  of  interrogation.  On  the  other  hand,  I have  had  to
resist  the  desire  to  give  my  reasons  for  the  choice  of  any  particular
translation  in  cases  of  doubt,  and  to  enter  into  other  scientific
discussions.  For — and  I should  like  expressly  to  emphasize
this — I have  not  written  this  book  for  the  limited  circle  of
Egyptologists,1  but  for  the  many  who  are  interested  in  the
ancient  world,  yet  to  whom  admittance  to  the  field  of  Egyptian
literature  has  hitherto  been  denied.  I must  request  them,
however,  not  to  make  a wrong  use  of  the  book,  nor  to  wish  to
infer  from  it  more  than  it  is  in  a position  to  give.  It  sets  out
to  acquaint  the  reader  with  the  texts  as  a whole,  and  so  I -would
ask  the  student,  who  is  desirous  of  investigating  particular
points,  to  consult  also  the  works  of  those  Egyptologists  to  which
I have  referred  in  dealing  with  each  individual  composition.
I have,  as  a rule,  only  mentioned  tw’o  of  my  predecessors,  the
one  who  first  recognized  the  content  of  the  text,  and  the  one
whose  wTork  thereon  is  at  present  to  be  regarded  as  the  best
and  most  exhaustive.  From  them  can  be  seen  all  that  is  satis-
factory and  unsatisfactory  in  what  has  previously  been  written
about  the  texts  in  question,  and  what  other  translations  have
been  proposed  for  particular  passages.  Many  of  these  texts
have  been  edited  as  much  as  sixty  years  ago,  and  a full  under-
standing of  them  has  only  been  arrived  at  gradually — from
the  first  gropings  and  guesses  to  a grammatical  elucidation,
and  from  that  again  to  an  appreciation  of  the  style.  The

1 Most  of  my  fellow-specialists  may  well  experience  the  same  sensa-
tion as  I did  : they  will  be  astonished  at  the  great  number  of  literary
texts  which  have  already  been  got  together.  Also  an  Egyptian  work
affects  one  quite  differently,  when  read  as  a whole,  than  when,  as  is
customary  with  us,  it  is  laboriously  translated  sentence  for  sentence.


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE


IX


scholars  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  this  problem  are  not
few,  and  if  I mention  here  the  names  of  Chabas,  Devaud,
Gardiner,  Golenischeff,  Goodwin,  Griffith,  Lange,  Maspero,
W.  Max  Muller,  de  Rouge,  and  Vogelsang,  the  list  is  not  by
any  means  complete.  I myself  also  have  participated  in  this
opening  up  of  the  literary  texts,  more  indeed  than  is  to  be
seen  from  my  printed  works.  It  was  my  task  to  prepare  most
of  these  writings  for  the  Lexicon  which  the  German  Universities
have  in  hand,  and  it  was  my  privilege,  moreover,  to  expound
them  for  a period  of  more  than  forty  years  in  my  lectures.
That  in  these  lectures  I was  not  always  the  giver,  but  also
obtained  many  good  ideas  from  my  pupils,  is  to  be  taken  for
granted,  although  I can  no  longer  give  a detailed  acknowledg-
ment of  them.  But  all  these  pupils  have  my  thanks  now  as
I write  this,  and  especially  those  four  of  our  company,  to  whom
this  book  is  dedicated,  and  whom  my  thanks  can  no  longer
reach.

I could  have  greatly  extended  the  scope  of  my  book.  I
could  also  have  included  the  demotic  writings  of  the  Graeco-
Roman  epoch  ; but  they  assuredly  belong  to  another  world,
and  so  I have  preferred  to  call  a halt  at  the  end  of  the  late
New  Kingdom,  where,  moreover,  the  great  break  occurs  in  the
life  of  the  Egyptian  people.  It  will  be  better  to  form  a separate
collection  of  the  demotic  literary  texts.  The  same  holds
good  for  the  medical  and  mathematical  works ; both  indeed
belong,  as  is  now  even  more  evident,  to  the  great  achievements
of  the  Egyptians,  but  they  demand  a special  kind  of  treatment,
and  accordingly  a book  to  themselves.  From  the  endless
multitude  of  religious  texts  I have  taken  only  isolated  examples,
less  on  account  of  their  contents  than  with  a view  to  giving
the  reader  an  idea  of  their  form.1  I have  acted  also  with  similar
restraint  towards  the  innumerable  inscriptions,  even  when
they  are  couched  in  poetic  language  ; for  it  was  my  business

1 The  student  desiring  more  of  them  will  find  good  translations  in
Roeder,  XJrkunden  zur  Religion  des  alien  Agyptens,  Jena,  1915  ; Edv.
Lehmann,  Textbnch  zur  Rehgionsgeschichte,  Leipzig,  1912  (translated  by
Grapow)  ; Scharff,  Agyptische  Sonnenlieder,  Berlin,  1920.


X


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


to  see  that  the  remains  of  the  actual  literature  were  not  hidden
by  what  is  unessential.1

I should  like  to  have  spared  the  reader  the  explanatory
and  introductory  notes,  and  have  permitted  the  Egyptians  to
speak  for  themselves  ; but  the  world  into  which  I am  leading
him  is  so  peculiar,  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  find  his  way
about  in  it  entirely  unaided,  and  still  less  would  he  notice  the
niceties  which  an  Egyptian  author  is  so  fond  of  inserting  into
his  work.  However,  I have  in  these  respects  limited  myself
as  far  as  possible,  and  in  particular  I have  not  gone  more  deeply
into  the  questions  of  the  religion,  history,  and  geography  than
was  necessary  for  the  proper  understanding  of  the  passages
concerned.

A translation  is  always  an  unsatisfactory  thing,  and  no
one  has  ever  yet  succeeded  in  bringing  out  the  external  features
of  the  foreign  original,  and  at  the  same  time  producing  an  intel-
ligible translation  of  its  contents  in  straightforward  language.
I have  endeavoured  not  to  deviate  too  far  from  the  Egyptian
text,  although  I have  often  allowed  myself  to  stress  the  relation-
ship of  the  sentences  with  one  another,  and  have,  where  it  could
safely  be  done,  interpolated  particles  which  denote  this  re-
lationship in  our  languages.  On  the  other  hand,  I would  often
have  liked  to  make  the  arrangement  of  words  and  sentences
conform  more  closely  to  our  own,  but  I could  not  do  this  if
I wished  to  avoid  concealing  the  indications  of  versification
(see  below  p.  xxxi,  note  2).

With  regard  to  titles  and  all  kinds  of  technical  terms,  I
have  often  had  to  content  myself  with  inexact  translations,  and
always  so  in  the  case  of  those  antiquated  names  of  peoples  and
countries,  which  the  Egyptians  preserved  from  the  earliest
period  of  their  history,  and  which  they  themselves  employed
quite  vaguely.  Accordingly,  when  Nubian,  negro,  Asiatic,
Bedouin,  Palestine,  or  Syria  are  encountered  in  my  translation,
it  would  be  well,  before  too  much  is  inferred  therefrom,  to

I I have  therefore  also  in  the  case  of  the  actual  literary  texts  not
accepted  every  unimportant  or  meaningless  fragment.


AUTHOR’S  PREFACE


xi


examine  the  original  so  as  to  see  which  of  these  ominous  words
is  used  there.  A serious  difficulty  is  presented  also  by  the
names  of  persons,  gods,  and  Egyptian  localities,  of  which  we
only  know  the  consonants.  To  make  them  pronounceable  I
have  merely  adopted  the  customary  practice  of  the  present
day.  Where,  however,  there  exists  any  tradition,  or  even
just  a generally  recognized  usage,  in  the  rendering  of  a name,
I have  naturally  availed  myself  of  it.  The  reader  must  not,
therefore,  be  surprised  if  side  by  side  with  monstrous  forms
such  as  Khekheperre-sonbu,  are  to  be  found  Grsecized  forms
such  as  Amenophis,  or  pure  Greek  forms  such  as  Heliopolis,
Arabic  forms  such  as  Siut,  or  modem  European  forms  such  as
Luxor  and  Thebes  ; this  cannot  be  avoided,  and  in  the  end
no  great  harm  is  done.

In  my  translations  I have  indicated  free  renderings  of
passages  and  other  interpolations  by  italics  ; brackets  denote
restorations.  The  gaps  which  I have  been  obliged  to  leave  in
the  translation  I could  naturally  not  reproduce  in  their  full
length,  which  is  often  considerable.  I have  been  content  to
distinguish  between  two  kinds  of  such  omissions  : . . . means

that  a single  word  is  omitted,  while indicates  that  a

sentence,  or  a longer  passage,  is  missing.

Herr  Grapow,  before  the  printing  was  begun,  undertook
the  tedious  task  of  comparing  my  translations  once  more  with
the  originals,  whereby  various  omissions  and  mistakes  have
been  avoided.  I thank  him  here  once  more  for  this  friendly
service.

ADOLF  ERMAN

Pforta,  January  t,  1923

1 An  e is  quite  arbitrarily  inserted  throughout,  and,  moreover,  the
so-called  weak  consonants  alef,  ayin,  w,  and  y are  rendered  by  a,  u,  and  i.
Still,  in  the  use  of  many  oft-recurring  names,  one  allows  oneself  the  privi-
lege of  acting  differently.


CONTENTS


PAGE

Translator’s  Preface  . . . . v

Author’s  Preface  . . . . . vii

Outline  of  Egyptian  History  ....  xix

By  Way  of  Introduction—

1.  The  Development  of  the  Literature  . . . xxiii

2.  The  Learned  Scribes  ....  xxvii

3.  Singers  and  Story-Tellers  . . . xxviii

4.  The  Forms  of  the  Poetry  ....  xxx

5.  Writing  and  Books  ....  . xxxv

6.  Our  Understanding  of  Egyptian  Texts  . . xlii


I.  FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY


1.  From  the  Pyramid  Texts —

(a)  The  deceased’s  journey  to  the  sky  . . 2

(6)-(e)  The  same  .....  2-4

(f)  The  deceased  conquers  the  sky  . . 4

(g)  The  deceased  devours  the  gods  . . 5

(h)  To  a constellation,  which  is  to  announce  the

arrival  of  the  deceased  in  the  sky  . . 7

(1)  The  deceased  comes  as  messenger  to  Osiris  . 8

(k)  The  goddesses  suckle  the  deceased  . . 8

( 7)  The  fate  of  the  enemies  of  the  deceased  . 9

(m)  Joy  over  the  inundation  . . .10

2.  To  the  Crowns —

(а)  To  the  crown  of  Lower  Egypt  . . .10

(б)  To  the  crown  of  Upper  Egypt  . . .11

(c)  The  same  . . . . .11

3.  Morning  Hymns —

(а)  To  the  sun-god  . . . .12

(б)  To  the  royal  serpent  . . . .12

xiii


XIV


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


II.  FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD

PAGE

A.  Narratives —

1.  The  Story  of  Sinuhe  . . . . • 14

2.  The  Story  of  the  Shipwrecked  Sailor  . . 29

3.  The  Story  of  the  Herdsman  . . . -35

4.  King  Kheops  and  the  Magicians  . . .36

5.  The  Deliverance  of  Mankind  . . -47

6.  The  Founding  of  a Temple  . . . -49

7.  The  War  of  King  Kamose  . . . .52

B.  Instructions  in  Wisdom —

1.  The  Instruction  of  Ptahhotep  . . .54

2.  The  Instruction  for  Kagemni  . . .66

3.  The  Instruction  of  Duauf  . . . -67

4.  The  Instruction  of  King  Amenemhet  . . 72

5.  The  Instruction  for  King  Merikere  . . -75

6.  The  Instruction  of  Sehetepibre  . . .84

C.  Meditations  and  Complaints —

1.  The  Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  one  who  is  tired  of

Life  ......  86

2.  The  Admonitions  of  a Prophet  . . -92

3.  The  Complaint  of  Khekheperre-sonbu  . , 108

4.  The  Prophecy  of  Neferrohu  . . . .110

5.  The  Complaints  of  the  Peasant  . . .116


D.  Secular  Poems —

1 . Songs  of  the  workers —

Song  of  the  shepherds
Song  of  the  fishers
Song  of  the  chairmen

2.  Songs  at  Banquets

3.  Hymns  to  King  Sesostris  III

E.  Religious  Poems —

1.  To  Min-Horus

2.  To  the  sun —

(а)  To  the  morning  sun

(б)  To  the  evening  sun

3.  To  Thoth

4.  Hymns  to  Osiris —

(a)  The  long  hymn  .

(b)  Shorter  hymns  .

5 . To  the  Nile  .


131

132
132
132
134


1 37

1 38

139

140

141

145

1 46


CONTENTS  xv

III.  FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM

TAG*

A.  Narratives — -

1 . The  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers  . . .150

2.  The  Enchanted  Prince  ....  161

3.  King  ApSphis  and  Sekenenre  . - .165

4.  The  Capture  of  Joppa  ....  167

5.  Concerning  Astarte  . . . . .169

6.  A Ghost  Story  . . . . .170

7.  Concerning  a King  and  a Goddess  . . . 172

8.  The  Quarrel  of  the  Body  and  the  Head  . . 173

9.  The  Voyage  of  Unamun  . . . .174

B.  The  Schools  and  their  Writings —

1 . Exhortations  and  Warnings  to  Schoolboys —

Life  at  School  . . . . .189

Be  diligent  . . . . . .189

The  same  ......  190

The  same  . . . . - .190

Beer  and  the  maiden  . . . .190

The  schoolboy  is  put  in  fetters  . . . 191

Be  diligent  . . . . . .192

Do  not  be  an  husbandman . . . 193

Do  not  be  a soldier . . . . . 1 93

The  same  . . . . . .194

Do  not  be  a charioteer  . . . . 195

Do  not  be  a soldier,  a priest,  or  a baker  . 196

Be  an  official  .....  197

A fragment . . . . . .198

2.  Actual  I.etters  as  Models  for  Schoolboys —

Pursuit  of  a runaway  slave  . . .198

Order  to  carry  out  a piece  of  work.  . . 199

Business  of  various  sorts  . . . .199

Request  for  assistance  in  a matter  of  taxation  . 200

Enquiries  ......  201

Family  letter  .....  201

Congratulations  .....  202

Reproof  of  a high  official  ....  203

Ennui  in  a lonely  place  ....  203

Longing  for  Memphis  . . 205

3.  Fictitious  Model  Letters —

In  praise  of  the  new  city  called  House-of-Ramesses  206
Letter  of  a governor  to  a vassal  . . . 207

Equipment  for  a royal  journey  . . . 208

Equipment  for  the  king  ....  209

Equipment  of  a war-chariot  . . .211


XVI


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


pao  r.

4.  Greetings  to  Teachers  and  Superiors —

To  the  teacher  . . . . .211

The  same  . . . . . .212

To  an  official  . . . . .212

To  the  teacher  ? . . . . -213

5.  A Literary  Controversy  ....  214

6.  The  Wisdom  of  Anii  .....  234

C.  Love  Songs —

1.  Discourses  of  the  Lovers.  First  Collection  . . 243

2.  Discourses  of  the  Lovers.  Second  Collection  . 244

3.  The  Maiden  in  the  Meadow  ....  246

4.  The  Flowers  in  the  Garden  ....  248

5.  The  Trees  in  the  Garden  ....  249

D.  Various  Songs —

1.  Songs  of  the  Threshers  . . . .251

2.  Songs  at  Banquets  .....  251

3.  The  Good  Fortune  of  the  Dead  . . . 253

E.  Poems  to  the  King—

1.  The  Victories  of  Thutmosis  III  . . . 254

2.  Hymn  to  Ramesses  II  ...  258

3.  The  Battle  of  Kadesh —

Introduction  .....  261

The  king’s  fight  .....  263

The  second  day  of  battle  and  the  overthrow  of  the
enemy  ......  268

4.  Poems  on  the  City  of  Ramesses — -

Longer  poem  .....  270

Shorter  poem  .....  273

;.  Poem  on  the  Victory  of  Merneptah  . . . 274

6.  Shorter  Poems —

(а)  On  the  accession  of  Merneptah . . .278

(б)  On  the  accession  of  Ramesses  IV  . . 279

(c)  Good  wishes  for  the  king  . . . 280

(d)  To  the  king’s  war-chariot  . . . 280

F.  Religious  Poems —

1.  The  Great  Hymn  to  Amun —

Title  ......  283

First  canto  ......  283

Second  canto  .....  284

Third  canto  . . . . .285

Fourth  canto  .....  287


CONTENTS  xvii

PAGE

2.  The  Hymn  to  the  Sun  from  El-Amarnah  . . 288

3.  Prayer  for  the  Kang  in  El-Amarnah  . . . 292

4.  Poems  on  Thebes  and  its  God  . . . 293

5.  From  the  Prayers  of  One  Unjustly  Persecuted —

To  the  sun-god  .....  302

The  same  ......  303

To  Osiris  ......  304

6.  Shorter  Hymns  and  Prayers —

Prayer  to  Thoth  .....  305

The  same  . .....  305

To  an  image  of  Thoth  ....  306

Prayer  to  Re  .....  307

Penitential  hymn  to  Re  ....  307

Praver  to  Amfin  for  the  advancement  of  the
teacher  ......  307

Prayer  to  Amun  as  the  righteous  judge  . . 308

Prayer  to  Amun  in  the  court  of  law  . . 308

Prayer  to  Amun  .....  309

Hymn  to  Amun  after  his  triumph  . . . 309

From  a memorial  tablet  ....  310

Explanatory  Notes  . . . . . . 313


b


OUTLINE  OF  EGYPTIAN  HISTORY


THE  customary  division  into  “ Kingdoms  ” and  “ Dynas-
ties” must,  in  view  of  our  defective  knowledge  of  Egyptian
historv,  be  retained.  The  dates  given  here  are,  from  circa
2000  b.c.  onwards,  approximately  correct.  The  lower  figures  have
been  adopted  for  the  time  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  various  esti-
mates for  which  still  differ  by  centuries.

Old  Kingdom.

Dynasty  3 : 3000-2900  b.c.

A period  still  almost  entirely  unknown  to  us  (pp.

37-  66).

Dynasty  4 : 2900-2750  b.c.

King  Snefru  (pp.  38,  111),  and  the  builders  of  the
great  pyramids — Kheops  (p.  36),  Khephren  (p.  36),
and  Mykerinos.

Dynast}7  5 : 2750-2625  b.c.

Flourishing  period  for  the  art  and  possibly  also  for
the  literature  (p.  54).

Dynasty  6 : From  2625  onwards.

About  2500  a political  collapse  (see  p.  93)  ; Egypt
sinks  into  obscurity.

Period  between  the  Old  and  Middle  Kingdoms.

Egypt  has  broken  up  into  separate  states.  About  2360  b.c.
Akhthoes  (p.  Si)  founds  the  kingdom  of  Herakleopolis  (pp.
xxiv,  75,  116),  and  under  him  the  languishing  civilization  once
more  revives.  The  coexistent  Eleventh  Dynasty  in  Thebes
gains  the  upper  hand  after  prolonged  struggles  (pp.  79,  82).

Middle  Kingdom.

Dynasty  12  : 1995-1790  b.c.,  a period  of  high  attainment
both  in  political  power  and  in  general  culture.

Its  founder,  Amenemhet  I (1995-1965)  puts  an  end
to  the  disorders  (pp.  15,  72  ft.,  hi  ft.).


XX


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


His  son  Sesostris  I (1975-1934  ; see  pp.  15,  49)
and  King  Sesostris  III  (1882-1845  ; see  p.  154),
extend  their  dominion  over  the  neighbouring  countries.
Amenemhet  III  (1844-1797 ; see  p.  84)  turns  the
Fayyum  into  cultivable  land.

Dynasty  13  : from  circa  1790  b.c.  ; downfall  of  the  realm.
Egypt  is  overthrown  by  a barbarous  people  from  Asia,
the  Hyksos,  who  bear  rule  from  their  capital  Avaris
(on  the  north-eastern  frontier  of  the  Delta).  From
among  their  vassals  the  princes  of  Thebes  become
independent  (see  pp.  52,  165),  and  one  of  these,
King  Amosis  ( circa  15S0  b.c.),  succeeds  in  expelling
the  Hyks5s.


New  Kingdom.

Dynasty  iS  : Period  of  the  highest  attainment  in  general
culture  and  in  political  power.  Thebes  becomes  the
capital,  and  its  god  Amun  the  chief  of  the  gods.
Thutmosis  I ( circa  1555-1501)  and  his  son  Thut-
mosis III  ( circa  1478-1447)  create  an  empire  that
extends  from  the  Sudan  to  the  Euphrates  (see
pp.  167,  254).

Amenophis  III  (circa  1415-1380  B.c.)  ; a long,
brilliant  reign,  in  which,  however,  there  are  already
signs  of  a revolution.  This  comes  to  pass  under  his
son  Amenophis  IV  (from  13S0  b.c.),  who  strives  to
bring  about  a religious  reformation  associated  with
pure  sun-worship  (pp.  2S8-292).  On  meeting  with
opposition,  he  deserts  Thebes  and  founds  a new  capital
at  El-Amarnah,  in  Middle  Egypt ; the  art  also  takes
on  a new  character  and  the  old  literary  language  is
replaced  by  the  colloquial  (p.  xxvi).  The  king  hence-
forth calls  himself  Ikhenaton.  The  later  history  of
this  heretical  period  is  quite  obscure  ; all  we  know'
is  that  the  old  faith  finally  triumphed  (pp.  293  ff. , 309).

Dynasty  19  : circa  1350-1200  b.c.

The  centre  of  gravity  of  the  realm  lies  henceforth
in  the  Delta,  though  Thebes  remains  the  sacred  city,
which  is  adorned  with  the  enormous  temples  of  Karnak,
Luxor,  etc.


OUTLINE  OF  EGYPTIAN  HISTORY


xxi


Sethos  I ( circa  1320-1300)  fights  against  the
Bedouins  of  Palestine.  His  son.  Ramesses  II  (circa
1300-1234),  wages  a long  war  with  the  Hittite  empire
in  Asia  Minor  for  the  possession  of  Palestine
(pp.  201-270),  and  founds  the  new  Residence,  House-
of-Ramesses  (pp.  206.  270  ff.).  The  power  of  the  empire
declines.  Under  his  son.  Merneptah,  a war  against
the  Libyans,  and  battles  in  Palestine  against,  among
other  peoples,  the  tribe  of  Israel  (pp.  274-27S).  Then
a period  of  internal  disorders.

Dynasty  20  : Reign  of  Ramesses  III  ( circa  1200-1169  b.c.),
a period  of  revival ; then  under  his  successors,  all  bear-
ing the  name  Ramesses,  the  complete  downfall.

Dynasty  21  ; circa  1090-945  b.c.

The  high-priest  of  Amun,  Hrihor,  becomes  king  in
Thebes,  and  there  are  other  princes  in  other  cities,
e.g.  Smendes,  in  Tanis  (p.  175).

The  End.

Dynasty  22  : One  of  the  Libyan  princes,  who  had  long
been  settled  in  the  country,  Sheshonk,  makes  himself
king  about  945  b.c.  His  family  reigns  in  different
princedoms.

Then  follow  : circa  712  b.c.,  the  conquest  by  the  Ethiopians;
circa  670,  the  conquest  by  the  Assyrians.  Under  the  family  of
Psammetikhos  I (663-525  b.c.;  the  unhappy  country  enjoys  a
period  of  revival,  but  the  Persians  put  an  end  to  this  (525  b.c.).
Egypt  becomes  again  independent  at  intervals,  unril  it  at  last  falls
to  Alexander  (332  b.c.).


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


x.  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  LITERATURE

THE  Egyptian  tvopl..-  tx-c.-v.*  known  to  our  European
world  only  in  their  dot  use  when  tli.-y  hud  expended
their  last  energies  in  unsuccessful  struggles  against
foreign  oppressors.  They  clung  tc-naeicnsly  at  that  time  to  the
beliefs  and  the  outworn  practices  of  the  past,  as  if  by  so  doing
they  could  still  maintain  their  position  among  the  nations  of
the  earth.  The  Greeks  viewed  with  a mixture  of  disdain  and
reverence  this  survival  from  a remote  past,  so  utterly  out  of
keeping  with  their  own  enlightened  world.  Thus  the  Egyptians
have  lived  on  in  the  conception  of  Europeans  as  the  Chinese,
so  to  speak,  of  antiquity,  and,  despite  all  the  discoveries  of  our
time,  they  still  bear  the  reputation  of  having  been  a strange
people,  ossified  and  without  any  proper  development.

And  yet  in  the  earlier  millennia  of  their  history  the  Egymians
were  the  exact  antithesis  to  thU  popular  conception- — a gifted
people,  intellectually  alert,  and  already  awake  when  other
nations  still  slumbered  ; indeed,  their  outlook  on  the  world  was
as  lively  and  adventurous  as  was  that  of  the  Greeks  thousands
of  years  later.  That  is  plainly  to  be  seen  in  their  vast  technical
achievements,  and  still  more  so  in  their  plastic  art,  which
reproduces  life  so  joyously  and  with  so  sure  a touch.

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  so  gifted  a people  took
a pleasure  in  giving  a richer  and  more  artistic  shape  to  their
songs  and  their  tales,  and  that  in  other  respects  also  an  intel-
lectual life  developed  among  them — a world  of  thought  extending
beyond  the  things  of  every  day  and  the  sphere  of  religion.  And
since  the  Egyptians  had  also  invented  a system  of  writing,
there  grew  up  among  them  at  an  early  date  a body  of  writings
of  a varied  kind,  which  they  cultivated  and  esteemed  con-


XX  ill


XXIV


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


sciously,  and  to  which  we  do  not  ascribe  too  much  honour
if  we  speak  of  it  as  their  literature.

But  while  the  works  preserved  from  the  plastic  art  of  the
Egyptians  are  so  many,  that  we  haye  by  now  gained  a conception
of  it  which  could  not  be  greatly  modified,  our  position  with  regard
to  the  literature  is  unfortunately  very  different ; for  of  this  wt
possess  comparatively  little.  And  how  could  it  be  otherwise,
seeing  that  the  preservation  of  a literary  work  depends  upon  an
unlikely  chance  making  it  possible  for  a fragile  sheet  of  papyrus
to  last  for  three  or  four  thousand  years  ! Accordingly,  out  of  a
once  undoubted!}7  large  mass  of  writings,  only  isolated  fragments
have  been  made  known  to  us,  and  every  new  discovery  adds
some  new  feature  to  the  picture  which  we  have  painted  for
ourselves  of  Egyptian  literature.  And  on  the  whole  this  picture
is  now  a fairly  correct  one,  for  it  possesses  an  intrinsic  probability.
Each  of  the  large  chronological  divisions,  into  which  it  falls,  dis-
plays a special  uniform  character,  and  this  character  harmonizes
with  what  we  otherwise  know  about  the  period  in  question.

As  far  back  as  we  can  trace  it,  the  Egyptian  language
displays  signs  of  being  carefully  fostered.  It  is  rich  in  metaphors
and  figures  of  speech,  a “ cultured  language  ” which  “ composes
and  thinks  ” for  the  person  who  writes.  One  at  least  of  the
old  books  of  proverbs  1 may  even  have  been  composed  during
the  Old  Kingdom,  in  the  time  of  the  Fifth  Dynasty  ( circa
2700  B.c.  or  earlier),  which  is  known  to  us  as  an  age  in  which
the  plastic  art  was  at  a particularly  high  level.  But  the  full
development  of  the  literature  appears  only  to  have  been  reached
in  the  dark  period  which  separates  the  Old  from  the  Middle
Kingdom,2  and  in  the  famous  Twelfth  Dynasty  (1995-1790

1 See  what  is  said  with  regard  to  the  Proverbs  of  Ptahhotep  011  p.  54,
below.

2 Three  of  the  most  important  books  of  the  older  literature— the
Instruction  for  King  Menhere,  the  Instruction  of  Ditaitf,  and  the  Com-
plaints of  the  Peasant — will  have  been  w'ritten  under  the  kings  who  then
ruled  from  Herakleopolis  over  Middle  Egypt  and  the  Delta.  We  know
very  little  of  them,  and  therefore  ordinarily  assume  that  they  played  an
unimportant  role  in  the  development  of  the  Egyptian  people.  Yet  it
may  well  be  possible  that  it  was  at  their  court  that  the  literature  blossomed
forth.  This  is  also  suggested  by  Blackman  who  draws  attention  to  the
remarkably  high  level  of  the  art  of  that  period  as  displayed  in  the  tombs
of  Meir  (see  Discovery,  in.  pp.  35  it.  ; Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  xi.
pp.  213  f. ; Luxor  anti  its  Temples , p.  42).


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXV


b.c.).  It  is  the  writings  of  this  age  that  were  read  in  the  schools
five  hundred  years  later,  and  from  their  language  and  style  no
one  dared  venture  to  deviate.  The  feature  which,  from  an
external  standpoint,  gives  its  character  to  this  classical  literature
— it  cannot  be  called  by  any  other  name — is  a delight  in  choice,
not  to  say  far-fetched,  expressions.  “To  speak  well  in  good
sooth  ” is  regarded  as  a high  art,  to  attain  to  which  an  effort
must  be  made.  That  this  was  really  the  tendency  of  this  epoch
is  to  be  seen  also  from  its  inscriptions,  which,  so  far  as  they
originate  from  educated  people,  are  composed  in  the  same
elaborated  style.  However,  it  would  not  be  correct  to  maintain
that  the  real  achievement  of  the  classical  period  is  to  be  seen
in  this  stylistic  art.  Be  it  rather  said  that  its  writers  venture
upon  very  diverse  and  remarkable  topics,  and  do  not  recoil
from  even  the  more  profound  questions.

On  the  other  hand,  the  actual  religion  falls  into  the  back-
ground in  this  body  of  writings,  and  hardly  anything  is  said
in  these  books  about  all  the  divinities,  with  the  worship  of
whom,  according  to  current  conception,  the  Egyptians  were
so  much  occupied.  It  might  be  supposed  that,  for  an  educated
person  of  this  period,  the  old  faith  was  just  an  inheritance
which  he  outwardly  cherished  ; in  his  world  of  thought  he
contented  himself  with  the  indefinite  idea  of  “ God.”

We  have  no  intention  of  blinding  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that
a great  deal  must  be  lost  of  precisely  this  old  literature ; we
cannot  well  suppose  that  there  were  no  love-poems  at  that
time,  or  that  collections  of  proverbs  were  much  more  frequent
than  hymns  to  the  king.  To  this  phenomenon  there  apparently
contributed,  besides  blind  chance,  a special  circumstance,  which
gives  to  what  is  scholastic  in  the  literature  a prominence  beyond
its  due.  Our  papyri  are  derived  mostly  from  tombs,  and  it
would  be  natural  enough  for  a boy  to  have  his  exercise-books
placed  with  him  in  the  grave,  whereas  books  of  another  char-
acter were  retained  for  the  living.

However  that  may  be,  in  the  second  period  of  the  literature
also,  that  of  the  later  New  Kingdom  (since  about  1350  B.c.)
the  schools  are  no  less  to  the  fore.

This  later  literature  grew  up  in  opposition  to  the  old  tradi-
tion. Until  then,  through  all  the  centuries,  the  language  of
the  classical  literature  had  been  retained  as  the  literary  language,
and  at  most  it  had  permitted  itself  to  approach  the  actual


XXVI


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


colloquial  language  in  documents  of  everyday  life  or  in  popular
tales.1  Finally,  however,  the  difference  between  both  languages
became  so  great,  that  the  classical  language  could  scarcely
be  understood  by  ordinary  people.2  In  the  great  revolution
at  the  end  of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  which  we  associate  with
the  name  of  AmenSphis  IV,  these  shackles  also  were  broken.
Men  began  to  write  poetry  in  the  actual  language  of  the  day.
and  in  it  is  composed  the  beautiful  hymn  to  the  sun.  the  mani-
festo of  the  reformed  religion.  But  whereas  the  other  innova-
tions of  the  heretical  regime  disappeared  after  it?  collapse,  this
particular  one  survived,  doubtless  because  the  conditions
hitherto  existing  had  become  impossible.  Under  the  Nineteenth
and  Twentieth  Dynasties  there  burst  forth  into  flower  a vigorous
literature,  written  in  the  new  language,  which  we  call  New
Egyptian,  and  to  which  belong  almost  all  the  writings  contained
in  the  second  half  of  our  book.

In  the  New  Egyptian  epoch  also  the  schools  thrust  them-
selves into  prominence,  but  their  productions  have  now  a more
lively  tone  than  they  had  in  the  old  epoch.  And  this  liveliness
is,  moreover,  characteristic  of  the  literature  of  this  period  ;
men  saw  the  world  as  it  is  and  took  a pleasure  in  it.  On  that
account,  indeed,  so  far  as  our  knowledge  goes,  the  profounder
thoughts  are  wanting  ; though  actually  a new  discovery  may
correct  our  judgment  in  this  respect.

New  Egyptian  literature,  which,  as  we  might  suppose,  had
set  out  to  be  really  popular,  did  not  long  pursue  this  course,
and  soon  the  same  striving  after  refinement  of  expression,  which
characterized  the  older  literature,  is  active  in  it  also.  The
language  of  the  educated  person  was  again  adorned  with  far-
fetched words  and  phrases,  and  he  delights  in  embellishing  it
with  foreign  words.  For  something  like  five  centuries  this  later
literature  appears  to  have  been  cultivated,  and  then  its  language
also  became  a dead  one,  which  the  boys  at  school  had  to  learn  ;
and  with  that  the  literary  life  in  decadent  Egypt  seems  to  have
expired.  It  wras  not  till  several  centuries  later,  perhaps  only

1 See,  e.g.,  below',  the  Story  of  King  Kheops  and  tli ■>  Magicians  ; the
reader  will  notice  the  simplicity  of  its  language  even  in  translation.

a If  the  waiting,  which  omits  all  vow-els,  did  not  gloss  over  a con-
siderable part  of  the  deviations,  the  difference  would  seem  as  great  to  us
as  that  separating  Old  High  German  from  modern  German  or  Italian
from  Latin.


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXVll


in  the  Greek  period,  that  a new  literature  appears,  the  so-called
demotic,  which  does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  book.

I have  spoken  above  of  the  foreign  words,  of  which  the
writings  of  the  later  New  Kingdom  are  full.  They  are  almost
all  borrowed  from  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  and  show,  as  is
known  to  us  from  other  sources,  in  what  close  relationship
Egypt  and  Palestine  then  stood.  We  may  therefore  suppose
that  Canaan  was  also  influenced  by  Egypt  in  the  sphere  of
literature,  just  as  it  was  in  that  of  sculpture.  We  should
certainly  encounter  Egyptian  influence  in  the  literature  of  the
Phoenicians,  were  that  preserved ; but  in  Hebrew  literature
also,  which  belongs  to  so  much  later  a period,  there  are  a number
of  features  that  strikingly  remind  one  of  the  body  of  Egyptian
waitings — namely,  in  the  wisdom-literature  of  the  Hebrews,
in  the  Psalms,1  and  in  the  Song  of  Songs.  It  might  be  supposed
that  similarities  of  this  sort  are  to  be  traced,  at  least  indirectly,
to  Egyptian  prototypes.  That  being  so,  then  even  we  our-
selves must,  without  suspecting  it,  have  all  along  been  under
the  influence  of  the  intellectual  life  of  Egypt.

2.  THE  LEARNED  SCRIBES

I have  spoken  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  of  the  cultured
classes  as  the  upholders  of  the  older  and  later  literature,  and
possibly  this  expression  may  strike  many  as  being  too  modem.
And  yet  it  is  correct.  Through  the  Egyptian  people  from  the
earliest  period  there  ran  a deep  cleavage,  which  separated  him
who  had  enjoyed  a higher  education  from  the  common  mass.
It  came  into  existence  when  the  Egyptians  had  invented  their
writing,  for  he  who  mastered  it,  however  humble  his  position
might  outwardly  be,  at  once  gained  a superiority  over  his
fellows.  Without  the  assistance  of  his  scribes  even  the  ruler
was  now  of  no  account,  and  it  was  not  without  good  reason
that  the  high  officials  of  the  Old  Kingdom  were  so  fond  of
having  themselves  represented  in  writing  posture  ; for  that
was  the  occupation  to  which  they  owed  their  rank  and  their
power.  The  road  to  every  office  lay  open  to  him  who  had
learnt  writing  and  knew  how  to  express  himself  in  well

1 See  the  essay  by  Blackman  in  Simpson,  The  Psalmists,  Oxford,  1926,
pp.  1 77  rf.


xxviii  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

chosen  terms,  and  all  other  professions  were  literally  under
his  control.

There  thus  developed  among  the  scribes  a pride  and  a caste-
consciousness,  that  are  very  evident  in  the  old  literature  which
they  created  (more  so  in  fact  than  accords  with  our  taste),  and
that  also  distinguish  all  their  inscriptions.  Still  we  ought  not
to  condemn  this  mandarinism,  for  it  did  set  up  an  ideal  of
the  official,  which  possesses  some  elements  of  greatness.  The
official  is  to  be  impartial,  one  who  protects  the  insignificant
against  the  powerful ; the  clever  person,  who  knows  a way
out  even  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  difficulties  ; the  humble
one,  who  never  thrusts  himself  forward,  and  yet  whose  opinion
is  heard  in  the  council.  His  every  writing  and  utterance,  too,
must  be  distinct  from  the  vulgar.  In  this  spirit  generation
after  generation  of  scribes  did  their  work,  and  they  brought
up  the  younger  members  of  their  class  on  the  same  principle.
And  in  the  New  Kingdom,  likewise,  the  tendency  of  the
bureaucracy  and  its  schools 1 remained  the  same,  and,  despite  all
external  differences,  the  preceptors’  letters  preach  nothing  but
what  the  old  wisdom-books  had  preached,  except  that  their
teaching  is  clothed  in  a wittier  garb,  and  that  the  arrogance
of  their  outlook  is,  if  possible,  more  strongly  evinced  in  them
than  ever.


3.  SINGERS  AND  STORY-TELLERS

The  educated  “ scribes,”  it  is  true,  created  Egyptian  litera-
ture, but  there  existed  before  them,  and  in  addition  to  them,
persons  who  practised  a less  sophisticated  art — an  art  that
exercised  an  influence,  moreover,  on  the  literature.

Whoever  is  closely  acquainted  wfith  modern  Egypt  will
carry  about  with  him  a recollection  of  the  singing  of  the  fellahhi
and  boatmen,  wrhose  monotonous  songs  resound  continually
over  the  green  fields  and  over  the  yellow  Nile.  I do  not  know
if  the  peculiar  nasal  drawl  of  this  singing,  which  strikes  us  as
so  peculiar,  is  to  be  claimed  as  an  inheritance  from  ancient
times,  but  the  joy  in  singing  certainly  is.  The  peasant  and
craftsman  of  Ancient  Egypt  also  accompanied  their  work  with
their  unpretentious  singing,  which  so  obviously  formed  part

1 Particulars  as  to  the  schools  of  the  Mew  Kingdom  are  to  be  found  in
the  introduction  to  the  section  concerned  with  that  subject.


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXIX


of  the  task  in  hand,  that  the  sculptor,  when  depicting  this,  also
added  the  song  to  the  representation.  Such  songs  from  the
different  periods  I give  below  in  the  appropriate  sections.  What
the  beauties  of  the  harim  sing  in  their  lord's  presence  is  un-
fortunately not  included  in  the  representations  of  them.  We
see  only  that  one  body  of  girls  sings  in  accompaniment  to  the
dance,  which  the  other  executes ; what  they  are  singing  will
scarcely  have  been  so  naive  and  innocent  as  the  songs  of  the
workpeople  ! At  all  times  we  meet  with  blind  men  as  singers,1
and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  these  unfortunates  were  pro-
fessional musicians.  There  were  certainly  also  professional
female  singers,  and  at  the  end  of  the  New  Kingdom,  in  the
Voyage  of  Unamiin,  we  shall  actually  encounter  an  “ Egyptian
female  singer  ” in  Syria,  where  she,  in  her  way,  will  have  spread
Egyptian  civilization.

If  the  male  and  female  singers  have  thus  found  admission
into  the  series  of  tomb-scenes,  we  nevertheless  search  there  in
vain  for  the  other  representative  of  popular  art,  the  story-
teller. That  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  he  plied  his  trade,
not  in  the  house  of  the  noble  lord,  nor  yet  in  his  fields,  but
recited  his  stories  only  to  the  common  people  in  the  street,
and  street-life  is  not  depicted  in  the  tombs.  And  yet  the  story-
teller in  ancient  times  certainly  entertained  his  simple-minded
audience  just  as  he  does  in  Egypt  at  the  present  day  ; for  from
all  periods  of  Egyptian  history  we  possess  popular  narratives,
whose  tone  and  contents  indicate  such  an  origin.  If  the  tales
of  the  modem  story-tellers  are  preferably  made  to  revolve  round
some  historical  personality,  the  Sultan  Bibars,  or  the  Khalif
Harun,  those  older  stories  are  also  connected  with  figures
famous  in  history.  From  the  Christian  period  in  Egypt  we
have  a tale  of  Cambyses,  and  from  the  Greek  period  one  about
Nektanebus  ; Herodotus  has  preserved  to  us  among  others  the
delightful  story  of  Rhampsinitus,  and  in  demotic  papyri  we
read  of  King  Petubastis  and  of  the  high  priest  Khamoes.  Then
from  the  end  of  the  New  Kingdom  we  have  the  stories  of  King
Thutmosis  III,  and  of  the  Hyksos  king  Apophis,  and  from  the
end  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  those  of  Kheops.

The  same  naive,  and  at  times  burlesque,  tone  is  displayed
in  much  of  what  Egypt  has  bequeathed  to  us  as  mythology-
legends  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  of  the  old  sun-god  and  his  drunken
1 See,  e.g.,  Blackman,  Rock  Tombs  of  Meir,  ii.  PI.  hi.  pp.  12  f.


XXX


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


messenger  (p.  47),  and  of  the  goddess  who  would  not  return
to  Egypt  again.1  These  stories  look  as  though  they  had  been
transmitted  by  people  who  took  into  account  the  taste  of  the
masses.  That  they  finally  also  attained  religious  currency  in
this  popular  form  does  not  speak  against  such  an  origin.

4.  THE  FORMS  OF  THE  POETRY

All  that  the  Egyptian  writes  in  elevated  language  falls  into
short  lines  of  approximately  equal  length,  and  although  we
know  nothing  about  their  sound,  we  are  none  the  less  inclined
to  regard  these  lines  2 as  verse,  i.e.  to  ascribe  to  them  some  sort
of  metrical  structure.  This  is  in  many  cases  undoubtedly
correct,  positively  certain  in  those  where  invariably,  as  the
meaning  shows,  a fixed  number  of  lines — generally  there  are
three  or  four — belong  together  :

Thou  embarkest  on  thy  ship  of  cedar-wood,

That  is  manned  from  bow  to  stern,

And  thou  arrivest  at  this  thy  fair  mansion,

Which  thou  hast  builded  for  thyself.

Thy  mouth  is  full  of  vine  and  beer.

Of  bread,  and  meat,  and  cakes  ;

Oxen  are  slain  and  wine-jars  opened,

And  pleasant  singing  is  before  thee.

Thy  chief  anointer  anointeth  with  kemi-unguent,

Thy  water-bailiff  beareth  garlands.

Thine  overseer  of  the  country  folk  presenteth  fowl,

And  thy  fisherman  presenteth  fish.3

These  are  indubitable  verses.

Many  such  poems  show,  in  addition,  the  peculiarity  of  all
their  stanzas  having  the  same  opening  word.  Thus  in  the
Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  one  who  is  tired  of  Life,  the  eight
stanzas  of  the  first  song  all  begin  with  “ Lo  ! my  name  is

1 One  may  also  compare  the  Tale  of  the  T100  Brothers.

1 The  scribes  of  the  New  Kingdom  divide  them  up  mostly  by  means
of  red  dots,  which  they  also  employ,  however,  in  purely  prose  texts  as
stops.

3 See  below,  p.  212.


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXXI


abhorred,”  those  of  the  second  with  “To  whom  do  I speak
to-day  ? ” etc.1

In  the  hymn  on  the  victory  of  Thutmosis  III  the  connection
is,  as  a matter  of  fact,  a double  one,  for  the  third  lines  of  the
stanzas  have  also  the  same  beginnings ; the  first  lines  begin
with  “ I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  . . .,”
the  third  with  “ I show  them  thy  majesty  . . . ” ; the  second
and  fourth  have  optional  beginnings.

But  these  initial  similarities  are  to  be  found  also  in  texts,
the  sections  in  which  are  of  varying  length,  and  display  no
regularity  with  regard  to  the  number  of  lines.  Such  irregular
sections  are  also  to  be  recognized  as  stanzas,  only  of  a freer
structure.  And  there  will  naturally  have  been  such  freer
stanzas  in  poems,  in  which  they  are  not  revealed  by  the  similarity
of  the  opening  words.  It  can  be  seen  that  we  are  here  still  groping
almost  entirely  in  the  dark, 2 and  shall  probably  always  be  doing  so,
since  the  question,  upon  which  everything  depends, — what  metre
did  Egyptian  verses  have  ? — remains  an  unanswered  one  for  us.

As  to  this  question,  we  can  at  most  venture  on  a supposi-
tion. If  we  assumed,  what  on  the  ground  of  grammatical
considerations  is  probable,  that  every  virtual  word  in  the
language — substantive,  adjective,  verb,  etc.— had  only  one
strongly  accented  vowel,  then  every  Egyptian  line  of  verse
would  have  had  two  to  four  accentuations,  with  optional  depres-
sions between ; we  should  thus  have  verses  in  a free  rhythm
and  not  in  a rigid  metre.  The  fact  that  the  Egyptians  of  the
Christian  epoch,  the  Copts,  actually  constructed  their  verses
in  the  same  free  manner  would  well  agree  with  this  supposition  :

Ershan-urome  bok  epshmo
tef-er-urompe  shaf-ktof  epef-ey
a-Ar cheilites  bok  etansef
is-umeshe  enhou  epinau  epef-ho.

Another  man  who  goes  abroad
Tarries  a year  and  returns  to  his  house.

But  Archellite  to  school  he  hath  gone,

And  how  many  the  days  till  I look  on  his  face  !

1 In  New  Egyptian  poetry  the  custom  of  lines  having  the  same  be-
ginning no  longer  exists.

a I have  therefore  in  my  translations  avoided  breaking  up  the  printed
text  into  verse-lines,  apart  from  a few  instances  of  absolute  certainty.


XXX11


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


The  Ancient  Egyptian  quatrains  must  have  sounded  some-
thing like  this  Coptic  one.

Such  free  rhythm  is  also  vouched  for  by  yet  another  circum-
stance : when  a verse,  for  example,  is  repeated,  a longer  expres-
sion can  be  interpolated  in  place  of  a single  name,  and  instead
of  the  “ Osiris  awaketh  in  peace  ” of  the  first  stanza,  there  can
be  sung  in  the  second  “ The  ever  enduring,  the  lord  of  victuals,
that  giveth  sustenance  to  him  whom  he  loveth,  awaketh  in  peace.”

But  in  this  discussion  I have  so  far  not  touched  upon  the
feature  which  lends  all  this  poetry  and  semi-poetry  its  special
character,  the  extraordinary  custom  which  we  are  wont  to
call  “ parallelism  of  the  members.”  It  is  not  enough  to  express
an  idea  once,  it  must  be  done  twice,  so  that  two  short  sentences,
of  the  same  or  similar  purport,  always  follow  one  another.
Thus,  for  example  : “ The  judge  awakeneth,  Thoth  lifteth

himself  up,”  or  : “ Then  spake  these  friends  of  the  king,  and
they  made  answer  before  their  god,”  where  in  both  instances
the  second  sentence  is  quite  superfluous.  Or  again  : “ They
that  enter  into  this  tomb,  they  that  behold  what  is  in  it,”  where
the  repetition  does  introduce  something  new.  It  is  the  delight
in  fine  speeches  that  has  been  responsible  for  this  peculiar  mode
of  expression  ; the  speaker  feels  that  he  could  have  employed,
for  what  he  has  just  said,  yet  a second  no  less  telling  phrase,
and  he  cannot  resist  the  temptation  to  utter  it  once  again  in
this  version.  In  process  of  time  it  became  an  established
fashion,  that  will  have  been  regarded  as  the  natural  ornamenta-
tion of  dignified  speech.  The  Old  Testament  has  accustomed
us  to  this  strange  mode  of  expression — for  it  prevailed  just  as
much  among  the  Hebrews  and  Babylonians — and  so  in  Egyptian
texts  it  does  not  surprise  us  as  much  as  it  should.  But  its
absurdity  is  fully  appreciated  so  soon  as  a piece  of  other
poetry  is  rendered  in  this  style.  The  fifth  book  of  the
Odyssey,  which  begins  :

“ Now  the  Dawn  arose  from  her  couch,  from  the  side
of  the  lordly  Tithonus,  to  bear  light  to  the  immortals  and
to  mortal  men.  And  lo,  the  gods  were  gathering  to  session,
and  among  them  Zeus,  that  thundereth  on  high,  whose
might  is  above  all  ” ;

would  read  somewhat  like  this  in  the  Egyptian  style  :


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


xxxiii

The  Dawn  raised  her  up  from  the  bed  of  Tithonus,

And  the  Red  Glow  of  Morning  arose  from  her  resting-place,
That  she  might  shine  for  the  immortals.

And  bring  light  to  mankind.

Now  the  gods  were  going  to  the  assembly.

And  the  immortals  sat  them  down  to  take  council.

In  their  midst  was  seated  Zeus  the  thunderer,

And  the  king  of  gods  was  enthroned  at  their  head,

He  whose  strength  is  great.

And  his  might  surpasseth  all.

That  all  this  is  narrated  in  a pleasing  manner  may  be  true
enough,  but  such  a method  waters  down  the  narrative  far  too
much.

However,  this  parallelism  was  never  consolidated  into  an
established  form  for  poetry,  but  remained  always  just
a decoration,  which  was  employed,  to  be  sure,  without
stint,  whenever  it  was  desired  to  express  oneself  in  dignified
language.

The  pleasure  taken  in  varying  an  expression  led  also  to
the  habit  of  referring  to  the  person,  extolled  in  a song,  under
repeatedly  new  names  and  designations.  To  this  is  attribut-
able, for  example,  the  Morning  Hymn  translated  below  on  p.  12,
the  single  verse  of  which  is  varied  in  this  manner  ad  infinitum —
monotonous  to  our  ears,  but  only  because  we  cannot  appreciate
the  subtleties  of  all  the  carefully  chosen  appellations.  It  is
also  responsible  for  the  peculiar  style  of  the  hymns  of  praise,
so  characteristic  of  Egypt.  They  begin  with  the  name  of  the
recipient  of  the  eulogy,  preceded,  possibly,  by  an  additional
acclamation,  such  as,  “ Be  thou  praised  ! ” or  “ Adoration  to
thee  ! ” Then  follow,  virtually'  as  attributes  to  this  name,
pure  adjectives,  substantives,  participles,  and  relative  sentences,
which  describe  the  qualities  of  the  object  of  eulogy  or  call  to
mind  his  achievements 1 — endlessly  and  confusedly7,  the  more
so  as  the  poet  attaches  no  value  to  a consecutive  arrangement
of  the  many  things  which  he  calls  to  mind.  Egyptian  poetry7,
therefore,  possesses,  on  the  whole,  no  meaning,  and  he  who
reads  the  lamentations  of  the  prophet  of  the  Admonitions,
depicting  the  misery  of  his  time,  is  surprised  to  find  that  this

1 Examples  of  such  hymns  of  praise  are  to  be  found  below  among  the
religious  poems  of  the  older  period.

C


XXXIV


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


poet  has  made  no  attempt  to  keep  what  is  homogeneous  more
or  less  together.  His  heart  is  full  of  the  country’s  distress,  and
he  now  bursts  forth  with  this  complaint  and  now  with  that.
So  it  can  at  least  be  understood.  However,  on  closer  examina-
tion, a different  impression  is  gained.  The  man  is  improvising,
and  accordingly  any  word,  which  he  has  used  in  the  last  verse,
leads  him  on  purely  extraneous  grounds  to  a new  idea,  which
he  immediately  expresses.  Thus  he  says  once  that  all  are  sated
with  life,  even  little  children.  At  the  mention  of  children  it
occurs  to  him  that  the  children  are  killed  and  thrown  on  to  the
high-desert  ground.  And  the  high-desert  ground  brings  him
again  to  the  mummies,  which  are  there  torn  from  the  tombs  and
cast  on  to  it.

Lastly,  mention  must  be  made  of  two  more  artifices  with
which  the  Egyptians  liked  to  ornament  their  discourses,  though
they  are  not  to  be  numbered  among  the  distinctive  marks  of
poetry — paronomasia  and  alliteration.

Paronomasia  was  always  a favourite  device,  and  there  is,
for  example,  a very  ancient  ritual  for  the  presentation  of
offerings,  in  which  a pun  is  made  on  the  name  of  every  article
of  food.  Punning  is  regularly  employed  also  in  two  poems  of
the  New  Kingdom,  which  are  given  below,1  though  naturally
this  cannot  be  reproduced  in  the  translation.

In  the  times  with  which  we  are  concerned,  cases  of
alliteration  can  only  now  and  then  be  instanced,  e.g.  in  the
two  following  lines  of  verse,  which  refer  to  Amendphis  III :
“ His  club  contends  against  Naharina,  his  bow  bends  down
the  negroes.”  2

But  alliterative  poems  must  have  existed  at  that  date,  for
where  else  can  the  Egyptians  of  the  Greek  period,  who  were
not  given  to  making  new  discoveries,  have  obtained  the  pattern
for  their  alliterative  poetry,  for  which  they  show  such  a marked
predilection  in  their  temple  inscriptions  ? The  priests  of  that
period  take  delight  in  presenting  to  us  one  and  the  same  sentence
with  ever  new  alliterations.  Thus  they  say  of  the  inundation  :
“ The  Nile  neareth  thy  nether  lands,”  “ the  water  welleth  up
over  thy  wold,”  “ the  flood  floweth  to  thy  fields,”  etc.  The
employment  of  similar  artifices  may  also  be  postulated  for  the
Newr  Kingdom.

1 A love  song  and  the  poem  on  the  war-chariot.

2 Mem.  de  la  Mission,  xv.  15.2.


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXXV


5.  WRITING  AND  BOOKS

We  must  at  least  make  some  brief  mention  here  of  that
invention  of  the  Egyptians,  without  which  their  intellectual
life  would  never  have  been  able  to  expand,  namely,  writing.
It  began  as  a system  of  picture-writing,  such  as  other  peoples
also  have  devised — a very  inadequate  expedient,  that  serves
well  enough  to  recall  something  to  one's  own  mind,  but  from
which  another  will  have  difficulty  in  discovering  the  idea  that
it  is  desired  to  express.  Thus,  to  take  a purely  imaginary
example,  if  two  people  agree  that  the  one  is  to  supply  an  ox
in  three  months’  time,  in  return  for  which  the  other  will  pay
five  jars  of  honey,  pictures  of  the  moon,  the  ox,  the  bee,  and
the  jar,  in  addition  to  some  small  strokes  indicating  the  numbers,
suffice  as  tokens  for  them  both,  but  a third  person  would  never
be  able  to  explain  these  signs  with  certainty.  This  preliminary
structure  must  therefore  undergo  considerable  development.
Individual  peoples  have  proceeded  on  very  different  lines,  and
have  thereby  arrived  at  all  sorts  of  writings  of  words  and
syllables.  The  Egyptians  alone  were  destined  to  adopt  a
remarkable  method,  following  which  they  attained  to  the  highest
form  of  writing,  the  alphabet.

The  method  was  fundamentally  very  simple.  It  was  desired
to  write  words  which  it  would  have  been  difficult  or  impossible
to  draw,  and  so  the  idea  was  arrived  at  of  substituting  for  such
a word  another,  that  could  easily  be  drawn  and  that  had  a
similar  sound.  The  reader  then  recognized  from  the  context
what  was  really  meant,  especially  when  the  usage  had  become
stereotyped  and  every  one  was  accustomed  to  think,  in  the
case  of  the  swallow'  ^=5  kt,  of  wr  “great,”  and,  in  the  case  of

the  beetle  khpr,  of  khpr,  “ to  become.”  Since  in  Egyptian,

as  in  the  related  languages,  the  meaning  of  a word  is  attached
to  its  consonants,  whereas  the  vowels  decide  its  grammatical
form,  regard  wTas  only  paid  to  the  fact  that  the  word  which
had  been  substituted  for  another  had  the  same  consonants  as
it,  w'hile  the  vowels  wrere  disregarded.  It  was  as  if — to  take
an  English  example — “ heed  ” w'ere  written  with  the  picture
of  a “ head,”  and  broad  with  that  of  a loaf  of  “ bread.”

Many  signs,  which  were  thus  employed,  were  in  process  of
time  transferred  to  so  many  words,  that  they  wrere  scarcely  any


XXXVI


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


longer  used  for  special  ones  ; and  they  became  purely  phonetic
signs.  Thus  the  swallow  is  used  not  only,  as  in  the  first  instance,
for  i vr  “ great,”  but  also  to  write  the  consonants  tc  and  r in
words  like  Imr,  sur,  ic’rs,  urryt,  etc.  Thereby  the  writing
obtained  phonetic  signs  of  two  consonants.

Other  peoples  have  also  arrived  thus  far  by  a similar  process,
but  the  Egyptians  now  went  one  step  further,  and  employed
especially  short  words,  which  consisted  of  not  more  than  one


consonant,  for  the  writing  of  this  one  consonant.
70  “ mouth  ” was  taken  for  r,  ^ zt  “ snake  ”
termination)  for  z,  i 1 shy  “ lake  ” for  sh.


Thus

-t  is  the  feminine
The  result  was

an  alphabet  of  twenty-four  consonants,  which  later  on,  upon
Canaanite  soil,  became  the  prototype  of  our  own.

With  this  alphabet  were  now  written  single  short  words,

such  as  czz>  7 “ to,”  m “ in,”  jj

grammatical  endings  were  thereby  expressed :

khprf  “ he  becomes.”  What  was  no  less  important,  it  facili-
tated the  reading  of  word-signs.  In  the  case  of  the

draughts-board,  or  ^ , the  hoe,  it  was  in  itself  possible  to  think

of  other  words  for  draughts-board  and  hoe  than  mn  and  nu ;
but  if  their  final  consonants  n and  r were  added  to  them  :


iw  “be,”  or


VWM


, the  reader  saw  at  once  that  mn  and  nir  were  intended.
Several  longer  words  also  were  only  written  with  alpha-
betic signs,  such,  for  example,  as  JJ  {J  -ww*  byn  “ bad  ” and
nht  “ sycomore,”  though  the  system  remained  on  the

whole  a mixed  one,  consisting  of  word-signs  in  their  original
or  transferred  meaning,  and  of  alphabetic  signs  tacked  on  to
them.

In  the  course  of  further  development  yet  a third  element
was  introduced,  the  so-called  determinative.  To  the  single
word  one  more  sign  was  added,  which  guided  the  reader  to  its

meaning  ; nht  “ the  sycomore  ” received,  e.g.,  a tree

nfr  “ good  ” a papyrus  roll  to  indicate  the  abstract  J
and  so  forth.


6'


O'


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xxxvii

The  writing,  which  had  thus  developed,  could  be  read  by
an  Egyptian  with  ease  and  with  certainty ; so  much  can
be  seen  from  the  fact  that  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to
simplify  the  system  and  to  make  way  for  a purely  alpha-
betic writing.  But  it  certainly  had  its  deficiencies,  from
which  we  who  are  not  Egyptians,  and  yet  want  to  under-
stand Egyptian  books,  suffer  severely.  I return  to  that  point
again.

We  are  accustomed,  in  accordance  with  Greek  precedent,
to  call  Egyptian  writing  “ sacred  signs,”  hieroglyphs,  and
to  speak  in  addition  of  a special  “ hieratic  ” script.  Both
names 1 * * have  been  adopted  into  our  language,  and  no
one  will  therefore  be  ready  to  discard  them,  though  they
are  both  somewhat  absurd,  particularly  the  latter.  For  this
“ hieratic,”  in  which  almost  all  that  is  translated  in  this
book  is  written,  is  not  a special  script  at  all  ; it  is  just
the  cursive  form  of  hieroglyphic  writing,  and  to  distinguish
the  one  from  the  other  is  as  if  we  were  to  explain  our
own  handwriting  as  something  different  from  our  printed
type.


Egyptian  literature  found  great  assistance  in  the  excellent
material  with  which  its  scribes  worked.  They  had  not,  like
their  colleagues  in  Babylonia,  to  imprint  their  signs  on  clay,
a proceeding  which  has  produced  the  ugly  shapes  of  cuneiform  ;
they  could  realty  “ write,”  as  our  world  has  leamt  to  do  from
them.  They  had  a black  ink  of  indestructible  permanence,
which  they''  ground  on  a wooden  palette  ; they  had  a reed,
the  tip  of  which  they7  fashioned  into  a brush ; and  they  had
above  all  else  an  admirable  smooth  paper,  which  they  manu-
factured from  the  pith  of  papyrus-stalks.  All  this  was  of
assistance  in  writing,  and  in  a good  manuscript  it  can  still
be  seen  with  what  pleasure  the  writer  has  drawn  his  round,
firm  signs.

Papyrus  made  it  possible  for  books  to  be  made  of  any
length,  by  gumming  separate  sheets  together ; and  there  are
magnificent  manuscripts  measuring  twenty  and  forty  metres.

1 They  date  from  the  latest  phase  of  Egyptian  history,  when  the  old

writing  was  only  the  property  of  the  priests  and  therefore  something

“ sacred.”


xxxviii  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


From  the  “ Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  One  who  is  tired  of

Life.”

'Manuscript  of  the  Middle  Kingdom.)

Hieratic  Writing.


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


XXXIX


>£}


©


ft


r^3

A

£

A


&

Cs

0


Q <2  <5

'i'i!


an

/Vw«*«A

4°


1


S’  A <

nl

53  ^ cj

5 1 ^

y


<#

i ir


■v

O I “


1 V

£

A^AA

0

2

ww\


•h  iz£>  mi  m-kri  min,  my  sty  'n-
tyw,  my  hmst  hy  ht\w
hrw  t’w.  iw  mt  m-hr-t  myn
my  sty  ssnw,  my  hmst  hr  mryt
nt  tht  . iw  mt  m-hri  myn  my

Transliteration


Transcription  into  Hieroglyphs


Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  the  odour  of  myr/rh.

As  when  one  sitteth  under  the  sail/
On  a windy  day.

Death  is  before  me  to-day/

As  the  odour  of  lotus  flowers.

As  when  one  sitteth  on  the  shore/
Of  drunkenness.


Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  . . .


English  Translation


Xl  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

*


From  " King  Kiirors  and  tiik  Magicians  ”
(Manuscript  dating  from  the  beginning  of  the  New  Kingdom)
ITikkatic  Writing


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION  xli


3

5


-i

!/]


z

<


"...  a diversion,  but  I could  find  none.”  And  Zazamonkh  said  unto
him  : ” If  / thy  majesty  would  but  betake  thee  to  the  lake  of  the
Great  House  ! Han  thee  a boat  / with  all  fair  damsels  from  the
inner  apartments  of  thy  palace.  Then  will  the  heart  of  thy
majesty  be  diverted,  / when  thou  shalt  see  how  they  row  to  and
fro.  / Then  as  thou  viewest  the  pleasant  nesting-places  of  thy  lake,
and/viewest  its  fields  and  its  pleasant  banks,  thine  heart  will  . . .


English  Translation


xlii  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Properly  only  one  side  of  a roll  was  written  on,  that  upon  which
the  fibres  run  horizontally  and  where  the  pen  consequently  met
with  least  resistance.  But  not  everybody  could  afford  such
extravagance,  and  we  meet  with  remarkable  instances  of  thrift.
The  man  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the,  to  us,  most  inter-
esting Papyrus  Harris,  No.  500,  supplied  himself  with  paper
by  taking  an  old  volume  and  washing  off  the  ink  ; he  then  wrote
on  its  recto  three  collections  of  love-songs  and  the  old  drinking-
song.  Later  on,  another  person  used  also  the  verso  of  the  papyrus,
to  make  himself  a copy  of  two  stories.  A different  procedure
was  adopted  by  the  writer  of  the  two  Leningrad  papyri,  which
have  preserved  to  us  the  Instruction  for  King  Merikere  and  the
Prophecy  of  Neferrohu.  He  was  a scribe  of  accounts,  and  he
simply  took  documents  of  his  department,  gummed  them
together,  and  copied  out  the  two  works  on  their  empty  reverse
side  as  a goodly  possession  for  himself  and  for  a “ dear  trust v
brother.”

For  him  who  could  not  acquire  paper  there  existed  that
cheap  substitute,  which  we  have  acquired  the  habit  of  calling
by  the  high-sounding  name  of  “ ostracon.”  This  is  either  the
sherd  of  a largish  pot,  or  merely  a smooth  flake  of  limestone
— either  of  which  may  be  found  lying  about  anywhere  in  Egypt.
Since  these  ostraca  were  naturally  used  by  schoolboys  for  their
exercises,  much  of  what  is  translated  in  this  book  is  obtained
from  them.

6.  OUR  UNDERSTANDING  OF  EGYPTIAN  TEXTS

The  student  who  compares  the  older  translations  of  a difficult
text  with  our  modem  version,  may  well  at  times  ask  whether
it  is  really  the  same  passage  that  both  renderings  are  repro-
ducing. To  explain  such  a difference,  it  is  not  enough  to  refer
in  general  terms  to  the  progress  of  our  science  ; rather  there
must  be  some  special  reason  to  account  for  such  different  inter-
pretations. This  reason  is  the  defective  system  of  writing,  to
which  reference  has  already  been  made  above  on  p.  xxxvii.  No
vowels  are  written,  and  consequently  the  most  diverse  gram-
matical forms  look  the  same.  Szm  can  just  as  well  mean  “ to
hear,”  as  “ hears,”  “ is  heard,”  “ may  hear,”  “ hearing,"
“ heard,”  etc.,  and  we  are  thrown  back  on  guessing  from  the
context  what  form  is  meant  in  the  case  in  question.  That  is


BY  WAY  OF  INTRODUCTION


xliii


not  so  difficult  when  we  have  to  do  with  straightforward  texts,
for  there  we  are  helped  by  the  context  and  by  what  are  to  us
well-known  usages.  Far  otherwise  is  it  with  writings  which
contain  unusual  ideas  and  unusual  phrases  ; a conscientious
translator  will  then  only  too  often  have  to  give  in  altogether,
or  anyhow  confess  that  various  other,  and  as  likely,  renderings
could  have  been  adopted.

The  reader  must  not  be  surprised  that  we  have  left  so  much
still  untranslated,  but  rather  that,  in  spite  of  everything,  w'e
now  stand  on  firm  ground  even  when  dealing  with  difficult
texts.

Besides  the  obstacles  presented  by  this  ambiguous  system
of  writing,  yet  another,  laughable  may  be,  but  for  us  only  too
serious,  is  to  be  found  in  the  levity  and  ignorance  of  the  scribes.
That  manuscripts  swarm  with  mistakes  is  unfortunately
no  unusual  thing  elsewhere,  but  in  hardly  any  other  script
are  mistakes  in  writing  so  fatal  as  in  hieroglyphic.  It  is  often
sufficient  for  the  scribe  to  add  a false  determinative  to  a word,
to  change  it  into  something  entirely  different,  and  an  error  of
this  kind,  when  once  it  has  crept  in — and  this,  in  view'  of  the
otherwise  ambiguous  nature  of  the  writing,  may  easily  happen —
leads  to  a false  interpretation  of  the  whole  passage.  Anyhow,
that  is  how  it  affects  us  ; the  Egyptians  themselves  will  have
been  less  disturbed  than  wre  by  such  mistakes,  for  they  knew
approximately  what  ought  to  be  there,  and  will  therefore  have
more  readily  emended  the  text  while  reading.  We  must  suppose
this  to  have  been  so,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  incredible  that
persons,  who  copied  out  a book  for  their  own  use,  could  have
put  up  with  so  inexpressibly  many  mistakes.

And  now  for  the  products  of  the  schoolboys  of  the  New
Kingdom — those  papyri  and  ostraca,  on  which,  certainly  not
ahvays  willingly,  they  had  to  write  out  the  daily  task  which
their  teacher  assigned  them  ! The  mess  they  made  of  the
texts  which  they  copied  absolutely  beggars  belief ! Even  a
straightforward  text  in  the  language  of  the  day  does  not  escape
this  fate,  and  a good  part  of  the  great  poem  on  the  battle  of
Kadesh  would  remain  unintelligible  to  us,  if  we  had  to  depend
only  upon  the  copy  of  Pentawere,  and  had  not  also  the  inscrip-
tions, which  enable  us  to  correct  his  innumerable  mistakes.
But  when  the  schoolboy  had  to  make  a copy  of  a work,  the
understanding  of  which  was  made  difficult  for  him  by  old


xliv  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

linguistic  forms,  it  was  often  changed  under  his  hands  into
what  is  obviously  nonsense,  and  we  must  be  thankful  if  we  can
still  here  and  there  conjecture  what  is  the  subject  under  dis-
cussion. It  is  a pity  that  so  interesting  a work  as  the  Instruction
of  Duauf  should  have  fallen  a victim  to  these  schoolboys  of
the  Nineteenth  Dynasty,  and  it  is  no  consolation  to  us  that,
some  centuries  later,  the  schoolboys  of  the  Twenty-Second
Dynasty  should  on  their  part  have  in  like  manner  misused
the  writings  of  the  Late  Egyptian  literature.  We  owe  our
thanks  to  the  Egyptian  schools  for  having  rescued  for  us  so
much  of  the  literature,  but  the  thanks  of  him  who  undertakes
to  translate  such  scribblings  will  always  be  mixed  with  less
friendly  feelings.


THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE
ANCIENT  EGYPTIANS

I.  EXAMPLES  OF  THE  OLDEST  POETRY

IT  must  be  taken  for  granted  that  songs  and  hymns  and
well-ordered  discourses  were  not  lacking  even  in  that  very
early  period,  when  the  Egyptians  were  gradually  developing
their  civilization ; indeed,  in  the  poetic  forms  and  in  the  language
of  the  historic  age  there  is  much  that  harks  back  to  that  remote
epoch.  Of  this  old  poetry,  however,  but  little  survives,  and
then  not  that  which  reveals  it  in  its  pristine  freshness,  for
we  possess  only  formulae  and  hymns  of  religious  content.  Yet
the  student,  who  knows  how  to  read  them,  can  gain  from  them
some  conception  of  what  the  corresponding  secular  poetry
would  have  been  like — something  very  different  to  what  the
later  classical  literature  of  Egypt  with  its  rhythmical  cadences
would  lead  us  to  expect.  The  vivacity  and  power  of  expression,
the  naivete  of  simile,  the  play  of  thoughts,  and  the  unexpected
change  of  personal  pronouns — all  these  have  something  fresh
and  youthful  about  them  ; and  he  who  can  overlook  the  rawness
and  strangeness  of  the  contents  of  these  old  formulse  will  some-
times 1 detect  a breath  of  v'ild  poetry,  which  is  lacking  in  the
productions  of  a more  refined  period.

i.  FROM  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS

The  so-called  Pyramid  Texts  are  collections  of  very  ancient
formulae,  concerned  with  the  destiny  of  the  blessed  dead — dead
kings  in  particular — and  preserved  to  us  in  five  pyramids  dating
from  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom  ( circa  2600  b.c.  or  earlier).  In

1 Naturally  only  sometimes,  for  most  of  them  are  quite  uninteresting
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  poetry.

I


o


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


the  first  instance,  these  formulae  were  for  the  most  part  quite  short,
but  later  on  several  were  often  combined  and  mixed  up  with  one
another,  even  when  they  were  mutually  incompatible.

The  Pyramid  Texts  are  mainly  concerned  with  the  desire  of  the
august  dead  to  avoid  leading  a gloomy  existence  in  the  under-
world— the  fate  of  ordinary  dead  mortals — and  to  dwell  in  the  skv
like  the  gods.  There  he  might  voyage  with  the  sun-god  in  his  ship,
or  dwell  in  the  Fields  of  the  Blessed,  the  Field  of  Food-Offerings,  or
the  Field  of  Iaru.  He  might  himself  become  a god,  and  the  fancy
of  the  poets  strives  to  depict  the  king  in  this  new  role.  No  longer
is  he  a man  whom  the  gods  graciously  receive  into  heaven,  but  a
conqueror  who  seizes  heaven  from  them.

Intermingled  with  these  conceptions  are  others  that  have  to  do
with  the  god  Osiris,1  the  prototype  of  all  dead  persons.  He  wras
once  murdered,  but  was  recalled  to  life  and  became  the  ruler  of  the
dead.  In  that  capacity  the  Pyramid  Texts  conceive  of  him  as  now
dwelling  in  the  sky.

The  language  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  extremely  archaic,  and
the  understanding  of  it,  therefore,  still  presents  great  difficulties.

(a)  The  deceased’s  journey  to  the  sky  2

He  that  flieth  flieth  ! He  flieth  away  from  you,  ye  men.
He  is  no  longer  on  earth,  he  is  in  the  sky.

Thou  his  city-god,  his  ka  3 is  at  thy  side  (?).

He  rusheth  at  the  sky  as  a heron,  he  hath  kissed  the  skv
as  a hawk,  he  hath  leapt  skyward  as  a grasshopper.4

(b)  The  same  5

How  happy  are  they  that  behold  him,  crowned  with  the
head-dress  of  Re  ! His  apron  is  upon  him  as  that  of  Hathor.6

1 For  particulars  as  to  Osiris  and  his  legend  in  the  religious  hymns  of
the  earlier  period,  see  pp.  140  ff.

1 From  Utterance  467.

3 His  vital  force,  which  dwells  in  him  as  a separate  entity,  and  which
he  is  supposed  to  retain  in  death.  (For  further  views  as  to  the  nature  of
the  “ ka  ” see  Cambridge  Ancient  History,  i.  pp.  374-337  ; Proceedings  of  the
Society  of  Biblical  Archeeology,  xxxvii.  pp.  257-260.)

4 This  naive  simile  is  preserved  in  two  of  the  pyramids,  but  it  offended
the  taste  of  the  learned  editor  who  prepared  the  texts  for  the  pyramid  of
Phiops,  and  he  substituted  “ as  Harakhti,”  i e.  the  sun-god.  This  spoilt
the  sense,  but  for  the  king  of  a civilized  people  was  more  suitable  than  a
comparison  with  a grasshopper.

3 Utterance  335.

8 Meaning  one  such  as  the  goddess  weaves  for  the  sun-god  ?


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY


3


and  his  plumage  is  as  the  plumage  of  a hawk.  He  ascendeth
into  the  sky  among  his  brethren,  the  gods.

(c)  The  same  1

Thou  hast  thine  heart,  Osiris  ; thou  hast  thy  feet,  Osiris ;
thou  hast  thine  arm,  Osiris.  He  hath  his  own  heart ; he  hath
his  own  feet ; he  hath  his  own  arm.2

A ramp  to  the  sky  is  built  for  him,  that  he  may  go  up  to
the  sky  thereon.3

He  goeth  up  upon  the  smoke  of  the  great  exhalation.4

He  flieth  as  a bird,  and  he  settleth  as  a beetle  on  an  empty
seat  that  is  in  the  ship  of  Re  : “ Stand  up,  get  thee  forth,  thou
without  ....  that  he  may  sit  in  thy  seat.”  3

He  roweth  in  the  sky  in  thy  ship,  O Re,  and  he  cometh  to
land  in  thy  ship,  O Re.

When  thou  ascendest  out  of  the  horizon,  he  is  there  with
his  staff  in  his  hand,  the  navigator  of  thy  ship,  0 Re.

Thou  mountest  up  to  the  sky  and  art  far  from  the
earth .

(d)  The  same  6

Wake  up,  judge ! 7 Thoth,  arise ! Awake,  sleepers  !
Bestir  you,  ye  that  are  in  Kenset  ! 8 before  the  great  bittern
that  hath  risen  up  out  of  the  Nile,  and  the  jackal-god  that  hath
come  forth  from  the  tamarisk.9

His  mouth  is  purified,  the  Double  Ennead  of  gods  hath
censed  him ; pure  is  this  tongue  which  is  in  his  mouth.  He
loatheth  dung,  and  he  rejecteth  urine  ; 10  he  loatheth  that  he
loatheth.  He  loatheth  this,  and  he  eateth  not  this .

1 Utterance  267.

* As  nothing  was  missing  from  the  body  of  Osiris,  so  too  with  the
deceased.

3 Where  we  should  erect  wooden  scaffolding,  in  Egypt,  where  wood  is
scarce,  high  sloping  ramps  were  built  of  brick.

4 On  the  smoke  of  incense.

6  He  voyages  as  an  oarsman  in  the  ship  of  the  sun,  and  in  his  favour  Re
ejects  some  other  god  from  his  place.

6 Utterance  210.

7 Name  of  the  moon-god  Thoth,  who  settled  the  dispute  of  the  gods.

8 Northern  Nubia,  but  here  probably  conceived  of  as  in  heaven.

3 The  dead  appears  unexpectedly,  as  a bird  flies  up  and  as  a jackal
steals  forth.

10  The  primitive  Egyptian  had  a horror  of  being  driven  through  want
to  eat  excrement  after  death.


4


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Ye  twain  (?),  that  voyage  over  the  sky,  Re  and  Thoth,1
take  him  unto  you  to  be  with  you,  that  he  may  eat  of  that
whereof  ve  eat  ; that  he  may  drink  of  that  whereof  ye  drink  ;
that  he  may  live  on  that  whereon  ye  live  ; that  he  may  dwell
there  where  ye  dwell  : ' that  he  may  be  strong  in  that  wherein
ve  are  strong  ; that  he  may  voyage  there  where  ye  voyage.

His  booth  is  set  up  in  the  Field  of  laru.  and  his  refresh-
ment is  in  the  Field  of  Food-offerings.  His  victuals  are  with
you,  ve  gods,  and  his  water  is  as  wine,  like  that  of  Re.

He  compasseth  the  skv  like  Re,  he  traverseth  the  sky  like
ThSth.


(e)  The  same2

He  is  Satis,3  that  seizeth  the  Two  Lands,  the  burning  one,
that  taketh  possession  of  her  Two  River-banks.

He  hath  gone  up  into  the  sky  and  hath  found  Re,  w'ho  standeth
up  w'hen  he  draweth  nigh  unto  him.  He  sitteth  down  beside
him,  for  Re  suffereth  him  not  to  seat  himself  on  the  ground,
knowing  that  he  (the  deceased)  is  greater  than  he  (Re).

He  is  more  glorified  than  the  Glorified  Ones,4  more  excellent
than  the  Excellent  Ones,  more  enduring  than  the  Enduring
Ones.  His  hall  (?)  is  a mistress  of  food-offerings.

He  hath  taken  his  stand  with  him 5 in  the  northern  part  of
the  sky,  and  hath  seized  the  Two  Lands  6 like  a king.


(/)  The  deceased  conquers  the  sky  7
“ There  is  strife  in  heaven,  we  see  a newr  thing,”  say  they,
the  primordial  gods.8

The  Ennead  9 of  Horus  is  dazzled  (?),  the  Lords  of  Forms

1 Sun  and  moon.  2 Utterance  439.

3 Goddess  of  the  Cataract-region.  The  dead  as  a new  god  is  mighty

like  her.

1 Who  live  in  the  sky  as  stars.  5 Re.

8 Egypt ; here  probably  to  be  regarded  as  the  entire  world.

r Utterance  257.  3 Who  view  the  conflict.

8 Ennead  (psdt  in  Egyptian)  is  the  designation  of  the  sun-god  and  the

Eight  Gods,  who,  according  to  the  usually  accepted  legend,  are  his  children,
grandchildren,  and  great-grandchildren  : Shu  and  Telnet,  Keb  and  Nut,
and  the  brothers  and  sisters,  Osiris,  Seth,  Isis,  and  Nephthys.  Besides
this  Great  Ennead  there  was  also  a Lesser  Ennead,  with  Horus  at  its  head

see,  e.?.,  immediately  below  and  also  above  in  d,  where  the  “Double
Ennead,”  t.e.  the  two  Enneads  combined,  is  mentioned.)


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY  5

are  in  terror  of  him.  The  entire  Double  Ennead  serveth  him,
and  he  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  the  Lord  of  All.

He  seizeth  the  sky,  he  cleaveth  its  metal.1  He  is  led  along
the  road  to  Khepre,  he  setteth  alive  in  the  west,  the  dwellers  in
the  nether  world 2 follow  him,  and  he  riseth  renewed  in  the  east.

He  that  adjudged  the  quarrel 3 cometh  to  him,  making
obeisance.  The  gods  are  afraid  of  him,  for  he  is  older  than  the
Great  One.  He  it  is  that  hath  power  over  his  seat.  He  layeth
hold  on  Command,4  Eternity  is  brought  to  him.  Discernment 5
is  placed  for  him  at  his  feet.

Cry  aloud  to  him  in  joy,  he  hath  captured  the  horizon.

(g)  The  deceased  devours  the  gods  6

The  skj?  is  overclouded,  the  stars  rain  down  (?)  ; the  Bows

are  moved,  the  bones  of  the  earth-god  tremble  7 ,

when  they  see  how  he  appeareth  and  is  animated,8  as  a god
that  liveth  on  his  fathers,  that  feedeth  on  his  mothers.

He  is  the  Lord  of  . . .,  whose  name  his  mother  knoweth  not.9

His  glory  is  in  the  sky,  his  power  in  the  horizon,  like  Atum
his  father  that  begat  him — he  begat  him,  but  he  (the  dead
king)  is  stronger  than  he.

His  kas  are  about  him,  his  qualities  are  under  his  feet ; his
gods  are  upon  him,  his  serpents  are  on  his  brow,  his  guiding-
snake  10  is  on  his  forehead, , his  powers  protect  him.

1 Of  which  the  sky  is  formed.  What  follows  describes  how  he  accom-
plishes the  daily  course  of  the  sun-god.

2 The  underworld  or  nether  sky.

3 Tboth,  the  counsellor  of  the  sun-god  ; see  p.  3,  note  7.

4 Egyptian  Hui  : the  personification  of  “ that  aspect  of  the  royal
power  which  is  manifested  in  the  words  that  fall  from  the  lips  of  a king”
(see  A.  H.  Gardiner,  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archeology,
xxxviii.  p.  49).

5 The  wisdom  which  is  required  for  ruling.  See  also  A.  H.  Gardiner,
op.  cit.  xxxviii.  pp.  43-54,  63-95.

* Utterance  273-274.  Translated  by  J.  H.  Breasted,  Development
of  Religion  and  Thought  in  Ancient  Egypt,  pp.  127-129  ; R.  O.  Faulkner,
Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  x.  pp.  97-103.

T The  whole  world  is  in  confusion  from  fear  ; the  Bows  are  a part  of
the  sky.

8 Or  perhaps  " appeareth  in  manifest  form  ” ; see  A.  H Gardiner,
op.  cit.  xxxvii.  p.  253.

* Because  he  is  a divinity  of  higher  standing  than  she

10  The  so-called  ura-us-snake,  the  king’s  diadem  which  was  supposed  to
burn  up  his  foes


6


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


He  is  the  Bull  of  the  Sky,  with  his  heart  bent  on  thrust-
ing (?),  that  liveth  on  the  being  of  every  god,  that  eateth  their
. . . limbs,  when  (?)  they  have  filled  their  bellies  with  magic
on  the  island  of  Nesisi 1 .

He  appeareth  as  this  Great  One,  the  lord  of  (divine)
ministers  (?).  He  sitteth  down  with  his  back  to  Keb,2  and  he
it  is  that  executeth  judgment  together  with  him  whose  name
is  hidden,  on  this  day  of  slaying  the  Eldest.3

He  is  the  lord  of  food-offerings,  that  knotteth  the  cord,4
that  prepareth  his  own  meal.

He  it  is  that  eateth  men,  that  liveth  on  gods,  that  possesseth
carriers,  and  despatcheth  messages.5

The  Grasper-of-Horns,  that  is  in  . . .,  he  seizeth  them  for
him.6  The  serpent  Splendid-Head  (?),  he  watcheth  them  for
him  and  driveth  them  to  him  (?).  Heri-terut,  he  bindeth  them
for  him.  The  Runner-with-all-Knives  (?),  he  strangleth  them
for  him  ; he  draweth  out  for  him  their  entrails,  he  the  messenger,
whom  he  sendeth  to  . . . He-of-the-Winepress,  he  cutteth
them  up  for  him,  cooking  for  him  a portion  of  them  in  his
evening  cooking-pots.

He  it  is  that  eateth  their  magic  and  swalloweth  their  lordli-
ness. Their  great  ones  are  for  his  morning  meal,  their  middle-
sized  ones  for  his  evening  meal,  and  their  little  ones  for  his  night
meal.  Their  old  men  and  their  old  women  are  assigned  for
his  fumigation.7  The  Great  Ones  who  are  in  the  north  of  the
sky,  they  place  for  him  the  fire  to  the  kettles,  that  which  is
under  them  being  the  thighs  of  their  eldest  ones.8  The  sky-
dwellers  serve  him,  and  the  cooking-pots  are  wiped  out  (?)  for
him  with  the  legs  of  their  women.

He  hath  encircled  the  two  entire  skies,  he  hath  traversed
the  Two  River-banks.  He  is  the  Great  Mighty  One  that  hath

1 It  is  a -well-known  belief  of  cannibals  that  with  the  flesh  of  their
enemies  they  also  assimilate  their  strength.  The  island  of  Nesisi,  or
Xeserser,  is  often  mentioned  in  the  myths.

1 The  earth-god.  3 Those  whom  the  court  has  condemned  ?

1 Probably  that  of  the  lasso,  with  which  he  caught  his  victims.

5 He  has  his  servants,  who  are  enumerated  under  their  strange  names
in  the  following  passage.  They  will  probably  have  been  constellations.

6 The  victims  were  captured  with  the  lasso  like  oxen.  The  following
description  corresponds  exactly  to  the  scenes  of  slaughtering  in  the  ancient
tomb-chapels.

7 1 .e.  they  were  burnt  as  incense.

s I.e.  they  were  used  as  fuel.


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY


7


power  over  the  mighty  ones . Him  that  he  en-

countereth  on  his  way,  he  eateth  him  up  quite  raw  (?).

His  place  is  at  the  head  of  the  nobles  that  are  in  the  horizon.
He  is  a god  older  than  the  Eldest.  Thousands  serve  him,
hundreds  make  offering  to  him.  A deed  of  appointment  as
Great  Mighty  One  is  given  him  by  Orion,  the  father  of  the  gods.1
He  is  crowned  anew  in  the  sky,  and  weareth  the  crown  as  lord
of  the  horizon.

He  hath  broken  up  the  backbones  and  the  spinal  marrow,
he  hath  taken  away  the  hearts  of  the  gods.  He  hath  eaten  the
Red  Crown,  he  hath  swallowed  the  Green  One.  He  feedeth
on  the  lungs  of  the  Wise  Ones ; he  is  satisfied  with  living  on
hearts  and  their  magic  ; he  rejoiceth  (?)  when  he  devoureth
the  . . . which  are  in  the  Red  Crown.2  He  flourisheth,  and
their  magic  is  in  his  belly,  his  dignities  are  not  taken  from  him.
He  hath  swallowed  the  understanding  of  every  god.

His  duration  is  eternity  and  his  boundary  everlastingness,
in  this  his  dignity  of  “If  he  will,  he  doeth  it ; if  he  will  not,
he  doeth  it  not,” — one  that  is  within  the  boundary  of  the
horizon  for  ever  and  ever.

Lo,  their  soul  is  in  his  belly,  their  lordliness  is  with  him.
His  superfluity  of  food  is  more  than  that  of  the  gods,  and  what
is  burnt  for  him  is  their  bones.  Their  souls  are  with  him,  and
their  shadows  are  with  their  companions.3

He  is  this  that  ascendeth,  ascendeth,  is  hidden,  hidden

. The  place  of  his  choosing  4 is  among  the  living  in  this

land  for  ever  and  ever.

(h)  To  A CONSTELLATION,  WHICH  IS  TO  ANNOUNCE  THE
ARRIVAL  OF  THE  DECEASED  IN  THE  SKY  3

If  thou  desirest  to  live,  O Horus,  that  is  upon  his  . . .

of  Truth,6  then  do  thou  shut  the  doors  of  the  sky ,

when  thou  takest  his  ka  to  this  sky,7  unto  the  august  ones  of
the  god,8  unto  the  beloved  of  the  god,  who  lean  upon  their

1 It  is  characteristic  how  the  bureaucracy  obtrudes  itself,  even  in  the
nndst  of  this  extreme  savagery.  Even  a cannibal  god  needs  a deed  of
appointment !

s The  crowns  possess  supernatural  powers.  3 Meaning  ?

1 The  tomb,  in  which  he  appears  to  dwell.

5 Utterance  440.  6 A constellation.

: No  one  will  be  able  to  rob  him  ol  tins  power,  whereby  he  lives.

6 Divinities  or  the  blessed  dead.


8


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


sceptres,  who  keep  watch  over  Upper  Egypt,  who  are  clothed
in  red  linen,  who  live  on  figs,  who  drink  wine,  who  are  anointed
with  fine  oil.

Let  him  speak  of  (?)  him  to  the  great  god,  let  him  lead  him
up  to  the  great  god.1 *


(i)  The  deceased  comes  as  messenger  to  Osiris  -

An  appeal  is  addressed  to  a ferryman  in  the  sky  to  transport
the  deceased  to  where  Osiris  dwells.

0 ferryman  of  the  Field  of  Food-offerings,  bring  me
this  ! 3 It  is  he,  hasten ! It  is  he,  come  ! He,  the  son  of  the
morning  bark,  to  whom  she  (the  morning-bark  of  the  sun-god
personified)  gave  birth  over  against  the  earth — his  unblemished
birth  (?),  whereby  the  Two  Lands  live.

He  is  the  harbinger  4 5 of  the  year,  0 Osiris.  See,  he  cometh
with  a message  from  thy  father  Keb  : “A  fortunate  year’s
yield,  how  fortunate  is  the  year’s  yield ! The  year’s  yield  is
good,  how  good  is  the  year’s  yield  ! ”

He  hath  gone  down  with  the  double  Ennead  into  the  Cool
Water,3  he  that  is  the  builder  for  the  double  Ennead,  the
founder  of  the  Field  of  Food-Offerings.6  He  found  the  gods
waiting,  wrapped  (?)  in  their  garments,  their  white  sandals  on
their  feet.  Then  threw  they  their  white  sandals  to  the  ground,
then  cast  they  off  their  garments  : 7 “ Our  heart  was  not  at
ease  until  thou  earnest,”  said  they .

(. k ) The  goddesses  suckle  the  deceased  8

He  that  ascendeth  ascendeth  ! He  ascendeth.

The  mistress  of  Buto  rejoiceth,  and  the  heart  of  her  that

1 The  constellation  is  to  announce  him  to  the  sun-god.

: Utterance  518.

3 See  K.  Sethe.  Ztitsih.  Jar  ugypt.  Spracltr,  liv.  p.  2.

4 Presumably  the  one  who  renders  a report  to  his  master  on  the  result
of  the  harvest  ; as  such  he  brings  to  Osiris  a cheering  message  from  the
earth-god  Keb.

5 Name  of  the  heavenly  river.

6 A god  must  have  created  this  resort  of  the  gods  and  the  blessed,  and
w-ith  him  the  deceased  is  compared.

; Tokens  of  joy,  or  of  homage  ?

“ Utterance  50s  ; probably  recited  at  the  making  of  a milk- libation.


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY  9

dwelleth  in  El-Kib  1 is  dilated  (?),  on  that  day  when  he  ascendeth
at  the  place  of  Re.2

He  hath  trampled  for  himself  these  thy  rays  into  a ramp
beneath  his  feet,3  that  he  may  go  up  thereon  unto  his  mother,
the  living  snake  that  is  upon  Re.4  She  hath  compassion  on
him,  she  giveth  him  her  breast,  that  he  may  suck  it : “ My
son,  0 king,  take  to  thee  this  my  breast  and  suck  it,  O king.
How  is  it  that  thou  hast  not  come  on  every  one  of  thy  days  ?

At  the  end  of  this  long  Utterance  we  read  :

It  is  Keb  5 that  taketh  hold  of  his  hand  and  leadeth  him
through  the  portals  of  the  sky.  The  god  is  on  his  throne,  well
is  it  that  the  god  is  on  his  throne.

Satis  6 hath  washed  him  with  her  four  pitchers  in  Elephantine.

“ Ho ! Whither  art  thou  come,  my  son,  O king  ? ” He  is  come
unto  the  Ennead  that  is  in  the  sky,  that  he  may  eat  of  its  bread.

“Ho!  Whither  art  thou  come,  my  son,  0 king?”  He  is
come  unto  the  Ennead  that  is  on  earth,  that  he  may  eat  of
its  bread .

“ Ho  ! Whither  art  thou  come,  my  son,  0 king  ? ” He  is
come  to  these  his  two  mothers,  the  two  vultures,7  they  of  the
long  hair  and  the  pendulous  (?)  breasts,  that  are  upon  the  hill
of  Sehseh.  They  draw  their  breasts  to  his  mouth,  and  never
more  do  they  wean  him.

(1)  The  fate  of  the  enemies  of  the  deceased

From  a long  Utterance ; 8 it  is  concerned  with  enemies  who
would  rob  him  of  his  food  and  breath.

1 The  goddesses  of  the  old  capitals  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.

- The  place  where  the  sun  has  risen.  (But  Professor  Sethe  would  read
here  not  m st  R “at  the  place  of  Re,”  but  m sty  R " as  the  representative
ol  Re.”  [Translator].)

3 As  a ramp  was  trampled  out  of  Nile  mud,  so  the  deceased  trampled
one  out  of  the  sunbeams.

1 The  fire-spitting  serpent  which  encircles  the  sun  and  lights  his  foes.
Here  she  also  has  to  suckle  the  deceased.

5 The  earth-god.

6 The  Cataract-goddess  of  Elephantine  (Aswan),  where  the  water  of  the
Nile,  according  to  the  ancient  belief,  gushes  forth  from  the  underworld.

7 The  same  goddesses  as  those  discussed  above  m note  i.  Since  the
1 pper  Egyptian  goddess  has  the  form  of  a vulture,  both  are  here,  as
often,  conceived  of  as  vultures  That  they  are  here  simultaneously  con-
ceived of  as  women  is  poetic  licence.

“ Utterance  a 54.


10


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


He  is  stronger  than  they,  when  he  appeareth  upon  his  river-
bank.  Their  hearts  fall  to  (?)  his  fingers.1 2  They  of  the  sky
have  their  entrails,  they  of  the  earth  * their  red  blood.

Poverty  hath  their  inheritances,  the  past  their  dwellings,  a
high  Nile  their  gates.3

(But)  he  is  glad  of  heart,  glad  of  heart,  he,  the  Sole  One,
the  Bull  of  the  Sky.  He  hath  put  them  to  flight  that  did  this
unto  him,  he  hath  destroyed  their  survivors.


( m ) Joy  over  the  inundation  4

From  a somewhat  long  Utterance  of  doubtful  purport.

They  tremble,  that  behold  the  Nile  in  full  flood.  The  fields
laugh  and  the  river-banks  are  overflowed.  The  god’s  offerings
descend,5  the  visage  of  men  is  bright,  and  the  heart  of  the  gods
rejoiceth.


2.  TO  THE  CROWNS

The  different  crowns  of  the  king,  and  the  serpent  which  he
wore  as  a diadem,  were  regarded  as  goddesses,  who  fought  for  him.
They  were  therefore  from  the  earliest  times  regularly  called  upon
to  succour  the  monarch.

(a)  To  THE  CROWN  OF  LOWER  EGYPT  6

0 Net-crown,  O In-crown,  O Great  Crown,  O Sorceress,  O

Serpent ! Let  the  slaughter  that  he  maketh  be  as  the  slaughter
that  thou  makest  ! Let  the  fear  of  him  be  as  the  fear  of
thee  !

Let  the  love  of  him  be  as  the  love  of  thee  !

Let  his  sceptre  be  at  the  head  of  the  living,  let  his  staff  be
at  the  head  of  the  Glorified ! 7 Let  his  knife  be  firm  against
his  foes !

1 He  tears  them  out  ?

2 Birds  and  beasts  of  prey.

3 A high  Nile  washes  them  away.

4 From  Utterance  581.

* Even  the  gods  will  now  receive  more  food.

5 From  the  Pyramid  Texts,  Utterance  221.

7 Since  the  king  was  regarded  as  the  ruler  of  the  dwellers  in  the  sky,

the  blessed  dead  are  introduced  here  as  his  subjects.  In  the  original  form
of  the  address  “ men  " or  the  like  would  have  occurred  lieu..


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY


11


(b)  To  THE  CROWN  OF  UPPER  EGYPT  1

Praise  to  thee,  thou  Eye  of  Horus,2  white,  great,  over  whose
beauty  the  Ennead  of  gods  rejoices,  when  it  (the  eye  of  Horus)
riseth  in  the  eastern  horizon.

They  that  are  in  what  Shu  3 upholdeth  adore  thee,  and
they  that  descend  in  the  western  horizon,  when  thou  art  revealed
to  them  that  are  in  the  nether  world.

Grant  that  (king  N.)  conquer  the  Two  Lands  through  thee,
and  have  power  over  them.

Grant  that  the  (foreign  countries)  4 come  to  him  mak-
ing obeisance,  even  to  (king  X.).  Thou  art  the  mistress  of
brightness.

(c)  The  same  5

Praise  to  thee,  O Eye  of  Horus,  that  didst  cut  off  the  heads
of  the  followers  of  Seth.6

She  trod  them  down  (?),  she  spat  at  the  (foes) 7 with  that
which  came  forth  from  her- — in  her  name  of  “ Mistress  of  the
Atef-crown.” 8

Her  might  is  greater  than  that  of  her  foes— -in  her  name  of
“ Mistress  of  Alight/'  8

The  fear  of  her  is  instilled  into  them  that  defame  her — in
her  name  of  “ Mistress  of  Fear.”  8

0 (king  X.),  thou  hast  set  her  on  thine  head,  that  through
her  thou  mayest  be  great,  that  through  her  thou  mayest  be
lofty,  that  through  her  thy  might  may  be  great  among  (men)/

Thou  abidest  on  the  head  of  (king  X.),  and  shinest  forth
on  his  brow — in  this  thy  name  of  “Sorceress.”

(Men)  9 fear  thee,  the  foreign  peoples  fall  down  before  thee
upon  their  faces,  and  the  Nine  Bows  10  bow  their  heads  to  thee
because  of  thy  slaughtering,  O Sorceress.

1 From  a collection  of  ancient  hymns  of  this  kind.  The  manuscript
was  written  for  the  temple  of  Sobk  in  the  Fayyum,  in  the  Hyksos  period
or  thereabout.  Since  the  gods  were  regarded  as  kings,  they  also  had  their
crowns.  See  Erman,  Hymnen  an  das  Diadem,  p.  23  (Abh.  Berl.  Akad.,
1911).

2 The  crown  is  identified  with  the  eye  of  Horus,  i.e.  originally  the  sun.

3 The  sky,  which  Shu,  the  god  of  the  atmosphere,  supports.

1 The  IIS.  reads  “ the  gods.”

6 Erman,  op.  cit.  p.  47.  6 When  he  fought  against  S5th.

7 The  MS.  reads  “ the  gods.”  8 Paronomasia.

8 MS.  ” The  gods  ”

10  Ancient  designation  of  the  nine  neighbouring  peoples  of  Egypt


12


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Thou  holdest  in  bondage  for  (king  N.)  the  hearts  of  all
foreign  countries,  the  southern  and  northern,  the  western  and
eastern,  all  together.

Thou  beneficent  one,  that  protecteth  her  father,1  protect
thou  (king  N.)  from  his  foes,  thou  Upper  Egyptian  Sorceress  !


3.  MORNING  HYMNS  2

The  gods  in  the  temples  were  greeted  in  the  morning  with  a
hymn,  consisting  mainly  of  the  constantly  repeated  summons
“ Awake  in  peace,”  followed  each  time  by  a different  name  of  the
divinity.  Accordingly,  it  was  assumed  that  the  gods  were  also  thus
awakened  in  heaven,  and,  moreover,  by  goddesses,  a circumstance
which  enables  us  to  conjecture  what  this  hymn  originally  was  :
the  song  with  which  the  women  in  earliest  Egypt  awrakened  their
sovereign  in  the  morning.

One  may  suppose  that  such  words  as  “ Thou  king,  thou  lord
of  Egypt,  thou  lord  of  the  palace,”  took  the  place  of  the  divine
names  in  the  original  version  of  the  hymn,  and  that  in  this  form
it  will  have  been  chanted  by  the  women  in  front  of  the  dwelling
of  the  primitive  king,  monotonously  and  endlessly,  as  long  as
suitable  names  occurred  to  the  singer.

(a)  To  THE  SUX-GOD  3

Awake  in  peace,  thou  Cleansed  One,4  in  peace  !

Awake  in  peace,  thou  Eastern  Horus,  in  peace  !

Awake  in  peace,  thou  Eastern  Soul,  in  peace  !

Awake  in  peace,  Harakhti,  in  peace  !

Thou  sleepest  in  the  bark  of  the  evening.

Thou  awakest  in  the  bark  of  the  morning.

For  thou  art  he  that  overlooketh  the  gods,  there  is  no  god
that  overlooketh  thee  !

(b)  TO  THE  ROYAL  SERPENT  5

Awake  in  peace  ! Great  Queen,  awake  in  peace  ; thine
awakening  is  peaceful.

Awake  in  peace  ! Snake  that  is  on  the  brow  of  (king  N.),
awake  in  peace  ; thine  awakening  is  peaceful.

1 The  sun-god.  - Cf.  Erman,  op.  cit.  pp.  15  ff.

3 Pyramid  Texts , Utterance  575,

4 The  sun  washes  himself  on  rising  out  of  the  darkness.

6 Hymnen  an  das  Diadem,  p.  34.


FROM  THE  OLDEST  POETRY


13


Awake  in  peace  ! Upper  Egyptian  snake,  awake  in  peace,
thine  awakening  is  peaceful.

Awake  in  peace  ! Lower  Egyptian  snake,  awake  in  peace  ;
thine  awakening  is  peaceful.

Awake  in  peace ! Renenutet,  awake  in  peace ; thine
awakening  is  peaceful.

Awake  in  peace  ! Uto  with  splendid  . . awake  in  peace  ;
thine  awakening  is  peaceful.

Awake  in  peace  ! Thou  with  head  erect,  with  wide  neck,1
awake  in  peace  ; thine  awakening  is  peaceful.

etc.  etc.

1 The  angered  snake  which  raises  itself  erect  and  putts  out  its  throat ;
the  royal  serpent  is  always  thus  depicted.


II.  FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


A.  NARRATIVES

MATERIAL  of  a very  varied  sort  has  been  brought
together  in  this  section.  The  stories  of  King  Klieops
and  the  Magician,  and  that  of  the  Deliverance  of
Mankind,  are  of  an  entirely  unsophisticated  character  ; the
Tale  of  the  Shipwrecked  Sailor,  as  indeed  its  high-flown  language
shows,  lays  claim  to  being  a more  serious  work,  and  in  the
Story  of  Sinuhe  there  is  absolutely  nothing  that  is  unsophisti-
cated. The  last  named  is,  in  fact,  the  finished  product  of  a
poet  who  was  less  concerned  with  the  contents  than  with  the
form  of  his  work.  The  Founding  of  a T emple  illustrates  the  style
of  an  official  account  of  a solemnity.

i.  THE  STORY  OF  SINUHE  1

If  among  the  accidentally  preserved  fragments  of  Egyptian
literature  we  encounter  the  same  work  over  and  over  again,  if  we
know  of  three  manuscripts  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,2  and  a papyrus,
and  at  least  ten  ostraca,  of  the  New  Kingdom,3  then  we  can  be  sure
that  we  have  before  us  a masterpiece  of  Egyptian  poetry,  the
admiration  for  which  not  even  the  passage  of  five  hundred  years
could  dim.4

1 Brought  to  notice  by  Chabas  in  1863.  Most  recent  edition,  that  of
A.  H.  Gardiner,  Xotes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe,  Paris,  1916.

* Thus  dating  from  the  age  in  which  the  work  was  composed  and  in
which  the  events  described  took  place.  The  two  most  important  MSS.
are  in  the  Berlin  Museum.

3 They  contain,  for  the  most  part,  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  the  work  ;
four  are  in  Berlin.

4 Quotations  from  it  are  to  be  found  in  inscriptions  of  the  New  King-
dom. The  dwellers  in  the  incense-country  say  to  the  sailors  of  Queen
Hatshepsut  as  they  draw  near  : “ Wherefore,  pray,  are  ye  come  hither  ? ”
employing  the  very  words  with  which  the  barbarous  prince  greets  Sinuhe.
In  the  biography  of  the  general  Amenemheb  the  death  of  Thutmosis  III  is
described  in  the  same  words  as  that  of  Amenemhet,  and  into  a list  of

‘4


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


15


Wherein  lay  the  attraction  of  this  book  for  the  Egyptian  reader  ?
Certainly  only  to  a lesser  degree  in  its  matter,  which  could  actually
be  related  in  ,t  few  sentences.  It  is  full  of  unusual  expressions,
which  strike  us  as  highly  artificial,  but  which  will  have  greatly  taken
the  fancy  of  the  Egyptians.1  Another  attraction  we,  too,  are  still
able  to  appreciate — -the  art  displayed  in  telling  the  story.  It  does
not  occur  to  this  poet  to  relate  to  us  in  detail  the  life  of  his  hero,
although  he  could  have  furnished  his  readers  with  all  sorts  of  in-
teresting facts  about  foreign  countries  ; he  only  picks  out  single
episodes,  which  he  depicts  minutely,  and  then  cleverly  and  not
ungracefully  strings  together.  The  humour  also  which  he  displays
in  treating  of  the  contrast  between  the  elegant  courtier  and  his  new
friends  with  their  dirt  and  their  bellowing,  still  has  the  same  effect
upon  us  as  it  will  once  have  had  upon  Egyptian  readers.

Sinuhe  lived  during  the  Middle  Kingdom  under  the  famous
king  Amenemhet  I (1905-1065  b.c.)  and  under  his  son  Sesostris  I.

The  prince  and  count,  administrator  of  the  domains  of  the
sovereign  in  the  lands  of  the  Asiatics,  the  true  acquaintance
of  the  king,  whom  he  loveth,  the  henchman  Sinuhe.  He  saith  :
I was  a henchman  who  followed  his  lord,  and  a servant  of  the
king’s  harim  waiting  on  the  princess,  the  greatly  praised,  the
Royal  Consort  of  Sesostris,  the  Royal  Daughter  of  Amenemhet
in  the  Pyramid-town  of  Ka-nefru,  even  Nefru  the  revered.

In  the  year  30,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  third  month  of
Inundation,  the  god  entered  his  horizon.2  King  Amenemhet
flew  away  to  heaven  and  was  united  with  the  sun,  and  the  god’s
body  was  merged  with  his  creator.3  The  Residence  was  hushed,
hearts  were  filled  with  mourning,  the  Two  Great  Portals  4 were
shut,  the  courtiers  sat  head  on  knees,  and  the  people  grieved.

Palestinian  localities,  dating  from  the  reign  of  Thutmosis  III,  are  in-
corporated the  countries  of  Yaa  and  Kedemi,  about  which  we  otherwise
possess  no  information.

1 So,  e.g.,  “to  give  a road  to  the  feet”  for  ‘‘to  go”;  “to  take  the
crouching  posture  ” for  “ to  bow  oneself  down  ” ; “ to  unite  with  the
place  ” for  “ to  arrive  ” at  it,  etc.  In  translating  I had  to  eliminate
this  for  the  most  part,  if  I wished  to  be  intelligible.

2 What  I have,  according  to  usage,  translated  “ horizon  ” is  in  the  first
instance  the  dwelling  of  the  sun-god  in  the  sky,  and  is  then  used  of  the
places  where  the  sun  rises  and  sets.  Since  the  king  is  the  earthly  counter-
part of  the  sun-god,  his  palace  and  his  tomb  are  also  designated  his
“ horizon.”  Here  the  tomb  is  meant.

3 He  journeys  to  the  sky  and  becomes  again  a part  of  the  sun,  from
which  he  had  issued.

4 At  the  entrance  to  the  palace.


16  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Now  his  majesty  had  sent  forth  an  army  to  the  land  of  the
Temehu,1  and  his  eldest  son  was  captain  thereof,  the  good
god  Sesostris ; and  even  now  he  was  returning,  having  carried
away  captives  of  the  Tehenu  2 and  all  manner  of  cattle  without
count.

And  the  Chamberlains  of  the  Royal  Palace  sent  to  the
western  border  (of  the  Delta)  to  inform  the  king’s  son  of  the
event  that  had  befallen  at  the  Court.  And  the  messengers
met  him  on  the  road  and  reached  him  at  eventide.  Not  a
moment  did  he  tarry  ; the  hawk  3 flew  away  with  his  henchmen,
and  did  not  make  it  known  unto  his  army.  Howbeit,  a message
had  been  sent  4 unto  the  king’s  children  that  were  with  him
in  this  army,  and  one  of  them  had  been  summoned.  And  lo,  I
stood  and  heard  his  voice  as  he  spake,5  being  a little  way  off  (?).

Then  was  mine  heart  distraught,  mine  arms  sank,  and
trembling  fell  on  all  my  limbs.6  I betook  me  thence  leaping,
to  seek  me  a hiding-place  ; I placed  me  between  two  bushes
so  as  to  sunder  the  road  from  its  traveller.7

I set  out  southward,  yet  did  I not  purpose  to  reach  the
Residence,  for  I thought  that  strife  would  arise,  and  I was  not
minded  to  live  after  him.  I crossed  the  waters  of  Maaty,8
hard  by  the  Sycamore,8  and  came  to  the  island  of  Snefru,8  and
tarried  there  in  a plot  of  ground  (?).  I was  afoot  early,  and
when  it  was  day  I met  a man  who  stood  in  my  path  ; he  shrank
from  me  and  was  afraid.  The  time  of  the  evening  meal  came,
and  I drew  nigh  to  Ox-town.9  I crossed  over  in  a barge  10

1 A Libyan  people  on  the  west  of  the  Delta,  who  regularly  raided  it.

2 Another  Libyan  people.  3 The  new  king  Sesostris  I.

4 I.c.  by  another  faction  ; there  was  a plot  to  set  up  a rival  king.
Sinuhe  purposely  passes  lightly  over  this  affair.

6 Probably  the  prince  who  had  been  “ summoned.”

6 What  so  terrifies  Sinuhe  is  probably  the  prospect  of  domestic  war ;
yet  he  must  have  special  grounds  for  fear  besides,  which  he  later  invariablv
hides  under  excuses.

7 I.e.  in  order  to  separate  myself  from  the  road,  to  be  well  away  from
the  beaten  track  ?

s Unknown  locality.

9 Unknown  : from  what  follows  it  must  be  looked  for  in  the  region
of  Cairo.  Sinuhe  has  fled  along  the  western  edge  of  the  Delta  to  this
place,  where  the  Nile  does  not  yet  branch  apart  and  so  is  most  easily
crossed.

10  What  is  meant  is  a broad  vessel  such  as  was  used  for  the  transport
of  stone  ; he  finds  it  lying  alongside  of  the  bank  and  the  wind  drives  him
over  the  stream.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


17


without  a rudder,  with  the  aid  of  the  breath  of  the  west  wind,
and  passed  on  east  of  the  quarry,  in  the  region  (?)  of  the  Mistress
of  the  Red  Mountain.1  I gave  a road  to  my  feet  northwards,
and  attained  the  Wall  of  the  Prince,2  which  was  made  to  repel
the  Asiatics.  I bowed  me  down  in  a thicket  for  fear  lest  the
watcher  for  the  day  on  the  wall  should  espy  me.

At  eventide  I passed  on,  and  when  day  dawned  I reached
Peten  and  halted  on  the  island  of  Kemwer.3  There  it  o’ertook
me  that  I fell  down  for  thirst,  I was  parched,  my  throat  burned,
and  I said  : “ This  is  the  taste  of  death.”  Then  lifted  I up
mine  heart  and  gathered  up  my  body,  for  I heard  the  sound
of  the  lowing  of  cattle  and  descried  Bedouins.  The  sheikh
among  them,  who  had  been  in  Egypt,  recognized  me.4  He
gave  me  water  and  cooked  milk  for  me,  and  I went  with  him
to  his  tribe,  and  they  entreated  me  kindly.

Land  gave  me  to  land.5  I set  forth  from  Byblos  and  drew
near  to  Kedemi  and  spent  half  a year  there.  Nenshi  the  son
of  Amu,  the  prince  of  Upper  Retenu,6  took  me  and  said  unto
me  : “ Thou  fares!  well  with  me,  for  thou  hearest  the  speech
of  Egypt.”  This  said  he,  for  he  had  become  aware  of  my
qualities,  and  had  heard  of  my  wisdom  ; Egyptians  that  dwelt
with  him  had  testified  to  him  concerning  me.

He  said  unto  me  : “ Why  art  thou  come  hither  ? Hath
aught  befallen  at  the  Residence  ? ” And  I said  unto  him  :
“ King  Sehetepibre  7 hath  gone  to  the  horizon,  and  none  knoweth
what  hath  happened  in  the  matter.”  And  I said  again,  dis-
sembling : “ I came  from  the  expedition  to  the  land  of  the  Temehu,

1 A mountain  east  of  Cairo,  in  ■which  is  to  be  found  that  reddish  brown
sandstone  which  the  Egyptians  were  so  fond  of  using  for  their  statues.
It  is  called  “ the  Red  Mountain  ” even  at  the  present  day,  and  the  quarries
are  still  worked.  The  “ Mistress  of  the  Red  Mountain  ” is  the  goddess
worshipped  there.

- An  oft-mentioned  fortification  intended  to  keep  off  the  Bedouins  ;
see  below,  p.  115.  note  S.

3 Name  of  the  lakes  on  the  Isthmus  of  Suez.

4 Sinuhe  was  thus  a personage  whom  every  one  in  Egypt  knew.

5 The  poet  does  not  trouble  the  reader  with  all  the  lands  through
which  Sinuhe  -wandered  and  which  he  naturally  did  not  know  himself.
He  only  introduces  Byblos,  the  universally  known  port  at  the  foot  of
Lebanon,  whence  the  Egyptians  imported  their  wood,  and  Kedemi,  which
probably  lay  in  the  east.

5 Upper  Retenu  later  stands  for  what  we  designate  Palestine.

7 The  official  name  of  the  old  king.

2


18


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


and  report  was  made  unto  me,  and  mine  heart  trembled  and
mine  heart  was  no  longer  in  my  body.  It  carried  me  away
upon  the  pathways  of  the  wastes.  Yet  none  had  gossiped
about  me,  none  had  spat  in  my  face  ; I had  heard  no  reviling
word,  and  mv  name  had  not  been  heard  in  the  mouth  of  the
herald.1  I know  not  what  brought  me  to  this  land  : it  was
like  the  dispensation  of  God.  ’ ' 2 Then  said  he  unto  me  : ' ' How
will  yon  land  fare  without  him,  that  beneficent  god,  the  fear  of
whom  was  throughout  the  lands  like  that  of  Sekhmet  3 in  a
year  of  plague  ? ” But  I said  unto  him  answering  him  : “ Nay,
but  his  son  hath  entered  into  the  palace  and  hath  taken  the
inheritance  of  his  father,  he,  the  god  without  peer,  whom  none
surpasseth,  a lord  of  prudence,  excellent  in  counsel,  efficacious
in  giving  orders.  Going  out  4 and  coming  in  are  at  his  command.
He  it  was  that  subdued  the  foreign  lands,  while  his  father  sat
within  in  his  palace,  that  he  might  report  to  him  that  what  had
been  commanded  him  had  been  done  (?).

‘ ‘ He  is  the  strong  one  that  achieveth  with  his  mighty  arm,
the  champion  without  peer.

He  is  seen  charging  down  on  the  foe  {?),  attacking  the
warriors  (:).

It  is  he  that  curbeth  the  horn  5 and  maketh  weak  the  hands,
and  his  foes  cannot  marshal  their  ranks.

It  is  he  that  venteth  his  wrath  and  smasheth  the  foreheads,
and  none  can  stand  in  his  neighbourhood.

It  is  he  that  is  wide  of  stride  when  he  shooteth  the  fugitive,
and  there  is  no  end  (to  flight)  for  him  that  turneth  on  him  his
back.

Steadfast  of  heart  is  he  at  the  moment  of  a repulse  ; he  is
the  repeller  and  turneth  not  his  back.

Stout  of  heart  is  he  when  he  seeth  a multitude  ; he  allowetli
his  heart  no  rest  (?).

Bold  is  he,  when  he  falleth  upon  the  Easterners  ; his  delight
it  is  to  take  captive  the  enemy  (?).

He  seizeth  his  buckler,  he  trampleth  under  foot ; he  re-
peateth  not  (his  blow)  in  order  to  kill.

1 He  thus  stresses  the  fact  that  there  was  no  charge  against  him ;
how  far  this  account  was  “ dissembling  ” escapes  us.

2 A supernatural  intervention.  3 The  dreadful  lion-headed  goddess.

4 From  Egypt  to  the  war.  " I.v  of  the  enemy.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


19


There  is  none  that  hath  turned  his  shaft,  there  is  none  that
hath  bent  his  bow.

The  People-of-the-Bow  flee  before  him,  as  before  the  might
of  the  Great  Goddess.1

He  fighteth  without  end,  he  . . . eth  not,  and  there  is  no
remnant.

He  is  a master  of  grace,  rich  in  sweetness,  and  through  love
hath  he  conquered.

His  city  loveth  him  more  than  itself,  and  they  ( i.c . the
citizens)  rejoice  over  him  more  than  over  their  god.

Men  and  women  pass  by  2 and  exult  over  him.

He  is  a king,  and  he  conquered  while  yet  in  the  womb  ; 3
on  that 4 was  he  set  ever  since  he  was  born.

He  it  is  that  multiplieth  them  that  were  born  with  him  ; s
he  is  unique,  god-given.

How  this  land  which  he  ruleth  rejoiceth  ! It  is  he  that
extendeth  the  borders.

He  will  conquer  the  southern  lands,  but  (as  yet)  he  payeth
no  heed  to  the  northern  lands.

(Still)  he  was  created  to  smite  the  Bedouins,  to  crush  the
sand-farers.

Send  to  him,  let  him  know  thy  name,  utter  no  curse  against
his  majesty.  He  faileth  not  to  do  good  to  a land  that  will  be
loyal  to  him.”

Then  said  he  unto  me  : “ Verily  Egypt  is  happy,  for  it
knoweth  that  he  6 flourisheth.  But  see,  thou  art  here  and  shalt
abide  with  me,  and  I will  entreat  thee  kindly.”

And  he  placed  me  at  the  head  of  his  children,  and  mated  me
with  his  eldest  daughter.  He  caused  me  to  choose  for  myself
of  his  country,  of  the  best  of  what  belonged  to  him  on  his  border
to  another  country.  It  was  a goodly  land  called  Yaa.  There
were  figs  in  it  and  vines,  and  it  had  more  wine  than  water.
Plentiful  was  its  honey,  abundant  its  oil,  and  all  fruits  were  on
its  trees.  There  was  barley  in  it  and  wheat,  and  countless
cattle  of  all  kinds.  Great  too  was  that  which  accrued  to  me

1 The  serpent  on  the  brow  of  the  sun-god,  that  burns  up  his  toes.

- Paying  him  homage  in  front  of  the  palace  ?

J Lit.  " while  yet  in  the  egg.”  1 Conquest.

6 The  people  increase  under  him.

s The  new  king ; the  barbarian  does  not  attempt  to  emulate  Sinuhe's
song  of  praise  and  admonition,  and  replies  m arid  prose.


20


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


by  reason  of  the  love  bestowed  upon  me 1 (?).  He  made  me  ruler
of  a tribe  of  the  best  of  his  country.  Bread  was  made  for  me
for  my  daily  fare,  wine  for  my  daily  drink,  cooked  meat  and
roast  fowl,  over  and  above  the  wild  game  of  the  desert  ; for
that  men  hunted  for  me  and  laid  it  before  me.  besides  the  spoils
of  my  hounds.  And  many  . . . were  made  for  me,  and  milk
prepared  in  every  way.

I spent  many  years,  and  my  children  grew  up  to  be  mighty
men,  each  one  having  his  tribe  in  subjection.  The  envoy  who
went  north  or  south  to  the  Residence  2 tarried  with  me.  I
made  all  men  to  tarry.  I gave  water  to  the  thirsty,  set  upon
the  road  him  that  had  strayed,  and  rescued  him  that  had  been
plundered.  When  the  Bedouins  began  to  wax  bold  and  to
withstand  the  chieftains  of  the  lands,  I counselled  (?)  their
movements.3  This  prince  of  Retenu  caused  me  to  pass  many
years  as  the  captain  of  his  host,  and  every  country  against
which  I marched,  when  I had  made  my  attack,  it  was  driven
from  its  pastures  and  its  wells.  I plundered  its  cattle  and
carried  off  its  people  and  took  away  their  food.  I slew  people
in  it  by  my  strong  arm,  my  bow,  my  marchings,  and  my  excellent
counsels.  That  found  favour  with  him  and  he  loved  me  : he
marked  how  brave  I was,  and  placed  me  at  the  head  of  hi-
children,  for  he  saw  how  my  hands  prevailed.

There  came  a mighty  man  of  Retenu,  that  he  might  challenge
me  in  my  camp.  He  was  a champion  without  peer,  and  had
subdued  the  whole  of  Retenu.  He  vowed  that  he  would  fight
with  me,  he  planned  to  rob  me,  he  plotted  to  take  my  cattle
as  a spoil,  by  the  counsel  of  his  tribe.  That  prince  communed
with  me  and  I said  : “ I know  him  not ; forsooth,  I am  no  con-
federate of  his,  that  I should  stride  about  his  encampment.
Or  have  I ever  opened  his  door  (?)  or  overthrown  his  fence  ?
Nay,  it  is  envy  (?),  because  he  seeth  me  doing  thy  behest.4
Assuredly  I am  like  a bull  of  the  cattle  in  the  midst  of  a strange
herd,  and  the  steer  of  the  kine  attacketh  him,  the  long-horned
bull  chargeth  (?)  him.  I am  even  so  a foreigner  whom  none
loveth,  any  more  than  a Bedouin  mould  be  loved  in  the  Delta.  But
if  that  man  is  a bull  and  loveth  combat,  I also  am  a fighting  bull

1 The  gifts  which  he  received  as  chieftain  of  the  tribe.

1 Of  the  Egyptian  king.

3 Meaning  probably  that  he  led  the  military  expeditions  of  the  prince.

Meaning  probable  . it  is  cnl\  envy  and  jealousy  of  me,  the  foreigner


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  21

and  am  not  afraid  to  try  conclusions  with  him.  If  his  heart  be
set  on  fighting,  let  him  speak  his  will.  Doth  God  not  know
what  is  ordained  for  him ? ” 1

At  night-time  I strung  my  bow  and  shot  my  arrows.2  I
drew  out  (?)  my  dagger  and  burnished  my  weapons.  At  dawn
when  Retenu  came,  it  had  stirred  up  (?)  its  tribes,  it  had
assembled  the  countries  of  a half  of  it,  and  it  had  planned  this
combat.  Every  heart  burned  for  me  ; the  men’s  wives  jabbered,
and  ever}’  heart  was  sore  for  me.  They  said  : “ Is  there  another
mighty  man  who  can  fight  against  him  3 ? "

Then  his  shield,  his  axe,  and  his  armful  of  javelins.  . . .
But  after  I had  drawn  out  his  weapons,  I caused  his  arrows  to
pass  by  me,  uselessly  sped.4  As  one  approached  the  other,  he
charged  me,  and  I shot  him,  mine  arrow  sticking  in  his  neck.J
He  cried  out  and  fell  on  his  nose.  I laid  him  low  with  his  own
axe,  and  raised  my  shout  of  victory  on  his  back.  Every  Asiatic
bellowed.6  I offered  praise  to  Month,7  and  his  following
mourned  for  him.  This  prince  Xenshi,  the  son  of  Amu,  took
me  to  his  embrace.

Then  carried  I oft  his  goods  and  spoiled  his  cattle.  That
which  he  had  devised  to  do  to  me  I did  to  him.  I seized  what
was  in  his  tent  and  plundered  his  encampment.  I became
great  thereby,  wide  in  my  riches,  abundant  in  mine  herds.

And  (this)  hath  God  8 done,  in  order  to  be  gracious  to  one
that  had  trespassed  (?)  against  him,  that  had  fled  away  unto
another  land.  To-day  his  heart  is  again  glad.

Once  a fugitive  fled  in  his  season — -
now  the  report  of  me  is  in  the  Residence.

Once  a laggard  lagged  because  of  hunger —
now  give  I bread  to  my  neighbour.

Once  a man  left  his  country  because  of  nakedness —
now  am  I shining  white  in  raiment  and  linen.

1 Meaning  probably  : the  issue  is  ordained  by  fate.

2 To  test  the  bow  ?

3 Sinuhe's  opponent.

4 The  whole  passage  is  probably  corrupt  and  the  translation  dubious.

5 Accordingly  the  opponent  must  have  fled.

6 The  word  which  is  used  of  the  bellowing  of  cattle.

7 The  war-god.

8 The  king  is  probably  meant,  to  whose  divine  might  Sinuhe  ascribes
even  his  present  success  m the  attray.


22


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Once  a man  sped  for  lack  of  one  to  send—

now  have  I slaves  in  plenty.

Fair  is  my  house,  wide  my  dwelling-place,

and  I am  remembered  in  the  palace.

0 God,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  didst  ordain  this  flight,
be  merciful  and  bring  me  again  to  the  Residence.  Peradventure
thou  wilt  suffer  me  to  see  the  place  wherein  mine  heart  dwelleth.
What  is  a greater  matter  than  that  my  corpse  should  be  buried
in  the  land  wherein  I was  born  ,J  Come  to  mine  aid  ! May
good  befall,  may  God  show  me  mercy -.in  order  to  make-

good the  end  of  him  whom  he  hath  afflicted  (?),  his  heart  being
compassionate  on  him  whom  he  hath  compelled  to  live  abroad.
Is  he  in  truth  appeased  to-day  ? Then  may  he  hearken  to  the
prayer  of  one  that  is  afar  off, .

0 may  the  king  of  Egypt  show  me  mercy,  that  I may  live
by  his  mercy.  May  I ask  the  Lady  of  the  Land  that  is  in  his
palace  what  her  will  is.  May  I hear  the  behests  of  her  children.

0 may  my  body  grow  young  again,  for  now  hath  old  age
befallen,  and  weakness  hath  overtaken  me.  Mine  eyes  are
heavy,  mine  arms  are  weak,  and  my  legs  have  ceased  to  follow.
Mine  heart  is  weary-,  and  death  draweth  nigh  unto  me.  May
they  bring  me  to  the  cities  of  Eternity.1  May  I serve  the
Sovereign  Lady  ; 0 may-  she  speak  well  to  me  of  her  children  ;
may  she  spend  eternity  over  (?)  me.2

Now  it  had  been  told  unto  the  majesty  of  King  Kheperkere  3
concerning  this  state  in  which  I was.4  Thereupon  his  majesty-
sent  to  me  with  presents  of  the  roy-al  bounty-,  to  gladden  the
heart  of  the  servant  there,5  as  it  had  been  the  prince  of  any
foreign  country.  And  the  royal  children  in  his  palace  caused
me  to  hear  their  behests.6

1 I.e.  the  tombs  in  Egypt.

2 His  old  mistress.  Queen  Nefru,  is  to  take  him  again  into  her  service
and  assign  him  a grave  beside  her  own.

3 The  official  name  of  Sesostris  I.

4 Who  undertook  this  negotiation  is  left  purposely  obscure.  The
reader  will  naturally  think  of  the  envoys  who,  as  above  related,  passed
by  Sinuhe  on  their  missions,  and  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  entertaining.

s Usual  polite  expression  for  " I.

* I .e  they  wrote  to  me  a!-o


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


23


COPY  OF  THE  DECREE  WHICH  WAS  BROUGHT  TO  THE

SERVANT  THERE  CONCERNING  HIS  RETURN  TO  EGYPT

Horus,  Life-of-Births,  Two  Crown-Goddesses,  Life-of-Births,
King  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  Kheperkere,  Son  of  Re,
Sesostris,  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever.1

A royal  decree  unto  the  henchman  Sinuhe.  Behold,  this
decree  of  the  King  is  brought  to  thee  to  instruct  thee  as  here
followeth  : Thou  hast  traversed  the  foreign  lands  and  art  come
forth  from  Kederni  to  Retenu,  and  land  gave  thee  to  land,  by
the  counsel  of  thine  own  heart.  What  hast  thou  done  that
aught  should  be  done  against  thee  ? Thou  didst  not  curse,
that  thy  speech  should  be  reproved,  and  thou  didst  not  so  speak
in  the  council  of  the  magistrates,  that  thine  utterances  should
be  thwarted.  (Only)  this  thought,  it  carried  away  thine

heart . But  this  thine  heaven,2  that  is  in  the  palace.

yet  abideth  and  prospereth  to-day  ; she  hath  hey  part  in  the
kingdom  of  the  land,  and  her  children  are  in  the  council-chamber.
Thou  wilt  long  subsist  on  the  good  things  which  they  give  thee,3
thou  wilt  live  on  their  bounty.  Come  back  to  Egypt,  that  thou
mayest  see  the  Residence  wherein  thou  didst  growy  up,  that
thou  mayest  kiss  the  earth  at  the  Two  Great  Portals,  and  mingle
wdth  the  Chamberlains.

Even  to-day  thou  hast  begun  to  be  old,  thou  hast  lost  thy
manhood,  and  hast  bethought  thee  of  the  day  of  burial,  the
passing  to  honour.4  An  (?)  evening  is  devoted  (?)  to  thee  with
cedar-oil  and  with  bandages  from  the  hand  of  Tait.3  A funeral
procession  is  made  for  thee  on  the  day  of  burial ; the  mummy-
shell  is  of  gold,  with  head  of  lapis  lazuli ; the  heaven  6 is  above
thee,  and  thou  art  placed  upon  a sledge.7  Oxen  drag  thee,
and  singers  go  before  thee,  and  the  dance  of  the  Muu  is  per-

1 The  official  titulary  of  the  king : the  beginning  of  the  decree  is
couched  quite  in  official  form.

- The  queen.

3 The  victuals  which  they  will  send  thee  when  thou  livest  once  more  at
Court.

4 I.e.  his  coming  among  the  honoured  dead.  In  the  subsequent  pas-
sages embalming  and  burial  are  described.

3 The  goddess  of  weaving.

6 The  lid  of  the  sarcophagus  ? The  lid  of  the  coffin  was  conceived  of
as  symbolizing  the  sky-goddess  Nut.

7 The  Egyptians  of  the  earlier  period  employed  sledges  for  the  trans-
port of  all  loads  and  therefore  also  of  corpses.


24


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


formed  for  thee  at  the  door  of  thy  tomb.  The  Requirements
of  the  Offering-Table  are  recited  for  thee,  and  victims  are  slain
at  thine  offering-stones.  Thy  pillars  1 are  wrought  of  white
stone  in  the  midst  of  (the  tombs  of)  the  royal  children  Thus
shalt  thou  not  die  abroad,  nor  shall  the  Asiatics  bury  thee.

Thou  shalt  not  be  placed  in  a sheep-skin, . Wherefore

bethink  thee  (?)  of  thy  corpse  and  return.

This  decree  reached  me  as  I stood  in  the  midst  of  my  tribe.
It  was  read  to  me,  and  I threw  myself  on  my  belly  ; I touched
the  dust  and  strewed  it  on  my  hair.  I strode  about  my  encamp-
ment rejoicing  and  saying  : “ How  should  such  things  be  done
to  a servant,  whom  his  heart  led  astray  to  barbarous  lands  :
Yea,  good  indeed  is  the  Benevolent  One  that  delivereth  me
from  death.  Thy  ka  2 will  suffer  me  to  bring  my  life  to  an  end
in  the  Residence.

COPY  OF  THE  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  THIS  DECREE

The  servant  of  the  palace  Sinuhe  saith  : In  very  beautiful
peace  ! 3 Ascertained  is  this  flight,  which  the  servant  there
made  unwillingly,  by  thy  ka,  thou  Good  God,  Lord  of  the  Two
Lands,4  beloved  of  Re,  praised  of  Month,  lord  of  Thebes.  Amun.
lord  of  Kamak,  Sobk,  Re,  Horus,  Hathor.  Atum  with  his
Ennead  of  gods,  Sopdu-Neferbau-Semseru  the  Eastern  Horus, 'J
the  Mistress  of  Buto  that  resteth  on  thy  head,6  the  Conclave
on  the  Waters,  Min-Horus  that  is  in  the  foreign  countries.
Wereret  mistress  of  Punt,7  Nut,  Harueris-Re,  the  gods  of  Egypt
and  of  the  islands  of  the  sea,8 — may  they  all  give  life  and  happi-
ness to  thy  nose,  may  they  endue  thee  with  their  gifts,  may
they  give  thee  eternity  without  limit,  everlastingness  without
end !

Men  tell  of  the  fear  of  thee  in  the  plains  and  hill-countries  ;
w'hat  the  sun  encircleth  hast  thou  subdued.  This  prayer  of

1 The  pillars  of  thy  tomb.

2 The  often-mentioned  ‘ ka  " is  the  force  in  a man  that  keeps  him  alive
and  at  the  same  time  also  the  sustenance  which  produces  it.  Furthermore
the  ka  is  the  actual  personality  which  feels  and  perceives,  and  finallv
“ thy  ka,"  as  here,  is  nothing  more  than  a choice  expression  for  " thou."

Mayest  thou  read  this  writing

4 The  usual  expression  for  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt

5 The  god  through  whose  district  Sinuhe  fled

s The  royal  serpent,  the  diadem.

7 The  incense-producing  countries.  ’ I he  Greek  islands


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


the  servant  there  to  his  lord  that  rescueth  from  the  West,1 2 —
the  lord  of  Perception,  that  perceiveth  men,  he  perceived  it  in
the  majesty  of  the  Palace.1  The  servant  there  feared  to  say
it,  (for)  it  is  a grave  matter  to  repeat  it,  but  the  great  god,  who
is  like  unto  Re,  giveth  discretion  even  unto  him  that  serveth

him 3 . Thy  majesty  is  the  victorious  Horus  and

thine  arms  are  strong  against  all  lands.

Now  let  thy  majesty  command  that  Meki  be  brought  from
Kedemi,  Khentiuiaush  from  Khentkeshu,  and  Menus  from  the
lands  of  the  Fenekhu.  They  are  princes  and  . . . witnesses,
that  have  grown  up  in  love  of  thee — without  my  making  mention
of  Retenu,  for  that  is  thine,  as  it  were  thy  dogs.4

This  flight,  which  the  servant  there  made,  I planned  it  not,
it  was  not  in  mine  heart,  and  I had  not  conceived  it.  I know
not  what  sundered  me  from  my  place.  It  was  after  the  manner
of  a dream,  as  if  a man  of  the  Delta  should  see  himself  suddenly
in  Elephantine,  or  a man  of  the  marshes  in  Nubia.  I had
nought  to  fear,  none  had  persecuted  me,  I had  heard  no  reviling
speech,  my  name  had  not  been  heard  in  the  mouth  of  the  herald.
Only  this  befell,  that  my  body  quivered  (?),  my  feet  quaked  (?),
mine  heart  led  me  on,  and  the  god  that  ordained  the  flight
drew  me  away.  And  yet  I w as  not  presumptuous  aforetime  (?) ,5
and  a man  that  knoweth  his  land  is  afraid,  for  Re  hath  put
the  fear  of  thee  throughout  the  land,  the  dread  of  thee  in  every
foreign  country.  Whether  I am  in  the  Residence  or  in  this
place,  it  is  (ever)  thou  that  obscurest  this  horizon,6  and  the  sun
ariseth  at  thy  pleasure  ; the  water  in  the  river  is  drunk  when
thou  wiliest,  and  the  air  in  heaven  is  breathed  when  thou  biddest.

The  servant  there  will  hand  over  my  viziership,  which  the
servant  there  hath  exercised  in  this  place.7

Thereupon  men  came  to  the  servant  there — thy  majesty
wilt  do  as  he  pleaseth ; 8 men  live  on  the  breath  which  thou

1 The  realm  of  the  dead.

2 Thou  hast  surmised  my  wish  without  my  expressing  it.

3 Thou  givest  me  courage  and  wisdom  to  speak  to  thee.

4 He  wishes  to  show  the  king  that  he  lives  in  a well-disposed  country
the  princes  mentioned,  who  will  be  known  at  the  Court,  can  testifv  for
him,  and  over  the  loyalty  of  his  own  land  he  need  not  waste  words.

5 1 did  not  run  away  through  brazen  insolence.

6 1.e.  probably  : thou  canst  plunge  us  into  night.

7 He  regards  himself  as  being  the  king’s  viceroy.

8 He  thereby  expresses  his  acquiescence  to  the  king's  command.


26


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


givest.  May  Re,  Horus,  and  Hathor  love  this  thine  august
nose  1 which  Month,  lord  of  Thebes,  willtth  shall  live  for  ever.

I was  suffered  to  spend  a day  in  Yaa,  and  handed  over  my
substance  to  my  children,  so  that  my  eldest  son  had  charge  of
my  tribe  and  all  mv  substance  was  in  his  hand,  my  serfs,  all
mv  cattle,  mv  fruits,  and  every  pleasant  tree  of  mine.

Then  the  servant  there  came  southwards  and  I halted  at
Paths-of-Horas.2  The  commander  there,  who  was  in  charge  of
the  patrol,  sent  a message  to  the  Residence  to  bear  tidings.
And  his  majesty  despatched  a trusty  overseer  of  the  peasants
of  the  royal  domain,  having  with  him  ships  laden  with  presents
of  the  royal  bounty  for  the  Bedouins  that  had  followed  me
and  had  conducted  me  to  Paths-of-Horus.  And  I named  each
one  of  them  with  his  name.3

Every  cook  was  at  his  task,  and  I set  out  and  sailed ; and
men  kneaded  and  brewed  beside  me,  until  I reached  the  town
of  Conqueress-of-the-Two-Lands.4  And  at  daybreak,  very
early,  they  came  to  summon  me  ; ten  men  came  and  ten  men
went  and  conducted  me  to  the  palace.

I touched  the  ground  between  the  sphinxes  5 with  my  fore-
head, and  the  royal  children  stood  in  the  gateway  and  re-
ceived (?)  me,  and  the  Chamberlains,  that  conduct  to  the  hall,
set  me  on  the  way  to  the  Privy  Chamber.  I found  his  majesty
on  his  great  throne  in  the  golden  gateway.  When  I had
stretched  myself  on  my  belly,  my  wits  forsook  me  in  his  presence,
albeit  this  god  addressed  me  kindly.  I was  as  a man  that  is
carried  off  in  the  dusk,  my  soul  fled,  my  body  quaked  (?),  mine
heart  was  no  longer  in  my  body,  and  I wist  not  whether  I were
alive  or  dead.

Then  said  his  majesty  to  one  of  these  Chamberlains  : “ Raise
him  up,  let  him  speak  to  me.”  And  his  majesty  said  : “ See,
thou  art  returned,  after  thou  hast  trodden  the  foreign  lands
. Eld  assaileth  thee  and  thou  hast  reached  old  age.

1 The  nose  is  the  seat  of  life.

2 On  the  borders  of  Egypt  on  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile,  from  whence
the  Egyptian  armies  were  accustomed  to  start  on  their  campaigns.

3 He  paid  the  barbarians  the  compliment  of  introducing  them  to  the
Egyptian  officials.

4 Name  of  the  capital  at  that  time,  situated  on  the  site  of  the  modern
Lisht,  some  way  south  of  the  later  Memphis.

5 Or  " statues.”


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  27

It  is  no  small  matter  (?)  that  thy  body  be  laid  in  the  ground,
and  that  the  barbarians  bury  thee  not.  But  be  not  silent,  be
not  silent ; speak,  thy  name  is  pronounced  1

I answered  thereto  with  the  answer  of  one  that  is  afraid  :
“ What  saith  my  lord  unto  me  ? Would  that  I might  answer
it,  but  I cannot.  It  is  as  it  were  the  hand  of  God,  it  is  a dread  ;
it  is  in  my  body,  as  it  were  that  which  (once)  caused  that
destined  flight.  Behold.  I am  in  thy  presence.  Thine  is  life,
and  thy  majesty  will  do  as  it  pleaseth  thee.”

Then  the  royal  children  were  caused  to  be  ushered  in.  Said
his  majesty  to  the  Oueen  : “ See,  this  is  Sinuhe,  who  hath
come  back  as  an  Asiatic,  a creature  (?)  of  the  Bedouins.”  She
uttered  an  exceeding  loud  cry,  and  the  royal  children  shrieked
out  altogether.  They  said  unto  his  majesty  : “It  is  not  he
in  sooth,  O king,  my  lord.”  His  majesty  said  : " It  is  he  in
sooth.”  2 Now  they  had  brought  with  them  their  necklaces,
their  rattles,  and  their  sistra.  And  they  held  them  out  to  his
majesty  : 3 ” Thy  hands  be  on  the  Beauteous  One,  0 long-
living  King,  on  the  ornament  of  the  Lady  of  Heaven.  May
the  Golden  One  4 give  life  to  thy  nose,  and  the  Mistress  of  the
Stars  4 join  herself  to  thee.  May  the  LTpper  Egyptian  crown
go  down  stream,  and  the  Lower  Egyptian  crown  go  up  stream,5
and  be  joined  both  together  in  the  mouth  of  thy  majesty.6
May  the  serpent 7 be  set  on  thy  brow.  Thou  hast  delivered
the  poor  from  evil.  May  Re  be  gracious  unto  thee,  O Lord  of  the
Two  Lands  ! Hail  to  thee  as  to  the  Mistress  of  All.  Loose
thine  horn  8 and  pull  out  thine  arrow  ; give  breath  to  him  that

1 Thou  art  now  received  in  audience

- They  do  not  recognize  the  elegant  courtier  in  the  wild  Bedouin.

3 The  rattles  and  sistra  with  which  the  women  make  music,  and  their
large  necklaces,  are  the  attributes  of  their  goddess  Hathor.  When  they
hold  them  out  to  anyone  during  the  dance,  they  thereby  present  him  with
the  blessing  of  the  goddess  (see  also  Blackman,  Rock  Tombs  of  Meir,  i.  pp.
24  f.).  What  follows  is  the  song  with  which  they  accompany  their  action.

1 Name  of  Hathor.

5 The  crown  of  either  of  the  two  ancient  kingdoms  is  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  other.

6 Meaning  : both  divisions  of  Egypt  are  subject  to  thee,  and  thou
issuest  commands  to  them.

'•  The  king’s  diadem  which  he  wears,  like  his  prototype,  the  sun-god
(see  p.  g,  note  4).

8 The  king  is  conceived  of  as  a bull,  and  he  is  to  set  free  him  who  has
been  pierced  with  his  horn.


28


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


is  stifled,  and  bestow  on  us  as  our  goodly  festival-gift  (?)  this
sheikh,  the  son  of  the  Goddess  of  the  North,1  the  barbarian
bom  in  Egypt.  He  fled  through  fear  of  thee  ; he  left  the  land
through  dread  of  thee.  But  a face  that  hath  seen  thy  majesty
shall  no  more  blench  (?),  and  an  eye  that  hath  regarded  thee
shall  not  fear.”  2

Then  said  his  majesty  : “He  shall  not  fear,  he  shall  not
dread.  He  shall  be  a Chamberlain  among  the  magistrates,  and
be  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  courtiers.  Get  you  gone  to  the
Chamber  of  Adoration  (?)  in  order  to  make  3 . . . ”

So  when  I was  gone  forth  from  the  Privy  Chamber,  the
royal  children  giving  me  their  hands,  we  then  went  to  the  Two
Great  Portals.4  And  I was  placed  in  the  house  of  a king’s  son.
in  which  there  was  noble  equipment,  and  a bath  was  therein

and . Precious  things  of  the  Treasury  were  in  it,

garments  of  royal  linen,  myrrh,  and  fine  oil  of  the  king.
Counsellors  whom  he  loveth  were  in  every7  chamber,  and  every
serving  man  was  at  his  task.  Years  were  made  to  pass  away
from  my  body,  I was  shaved  (?),  and  my  hair  was  combed  (?).
A load  (of  dirt)  was  given  over  to  the  desert,  and  the  (filthy)
clothes  to  the  Sand-farers.  And  I was  arrayed  in  finest  linen
and  anointed  with  the  best  oil.  I slept  on  a bed,  and  gave  up
the  sand  to  them  that  be  in  it,  and  the  oil  of  wood  to  him  that
smeareth  himself  therewith.

And  I was  given  the  house  of  a . . .,  such  as  appertaineth  (?)
to  a Chamberlain.  Many  artificers  built  it,  and  all  its  wood-
work was  new  appointed.

And  meals  were  brought  me  from  the  palace,  three  times
and  four  times  a day,  over  and  above  that  which  the  royal
children  gave,  without  cessation  at  any  time.

And  there  w7as  constructed  for  me  a pyramid  out  of  stone
within  the  precinct  of  the  pyramids.5  The  chief  architect  began
the  building  of  it  (?),  the  painter  designed  in  it,  the  master-

1 Paronomasia;  Sinuhe  means  “ Son  of  the  (sacred)  sycomore,”  now
as  a barbarian  he  must  be  called  after  the  Goddess  of  the  Xorth,  Si-mehvt.

2 Meaning  : he  is  only  anxious  because  he  does  not  vet  know  thy
goodness  as  we  do.

3 What  is  probably  meant  is  that  they  should  assist  Sinuhe  in  his
highly  necessary  toilet  (see  also  Blackman*.  Journ  of  Egypt.  Archeology,
v.  pp.  148  ff.}.

1 Thus  out  of  the  palace.

5 The  members  of  his  court  are  buried  around  the  king’s  grave.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


29


sculptor  carved  in  it,  the  master-builders  of  the  necropolis
busied  themselves  with  it.1  All  the  glistening  gear  that  is
placed  in  a tomb-shaft,2  its  (the  tomb’s)  needs  were  supplied
therefrom.  And  funerary  priests  were  given  me,  and  there
was  made  for  me  a sepulchral  garden,  in  which  were  fields,  over
against  the  abode  (?),  even  as  is  done  for  a chief  Chamberlain.
And  my  statue  3 * was  overlaid  with  gold  and  its  apron  was  of
fine  gold.  It  was  his  majesty  who  caused  it  to  be  made.  There
is  no  humble  man  for  whom  the  like  had  been  done.

And  so  live  I,  rewarded  by  the  king,  until  the  day  of  my
death  cometh.

2.  THE  STORY  OF  THE  SHIPWRECKED  SAILOR1

This  is  actually  a tale  of  the  simplest  character,  but  in  the  form
preserved  to  us,  it  has  been  adapted  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  educated
reader,  as  its  carefully  chosen  phraseology  plainly  shows.  Hence,
too,  the  remarkable  dressing-up  which  it  has  undergone  : an  Egyp-
tian of  high  rank  5 has  been  sent  South  by  the  king,  but  on  this
voyage  has  met  with  little  success.  He  is  now  in  grave  anxiety  as
to  the  reception  awaiting  him.  But  one  of  his  comrades  speaks  to
him  and  exhorts  him  to  face  his  sovereign  with  more  confidence.
He  will  then  fare  just  as  well  in  the  king’s  presence  as  he  himself
did  on  a similar  occasion.  He  now'  gives  an  account  of  this  voyage
of  his,  namelv,  our  tale. — Into  this  tale  a second  has  been  incorpo-
rated, but  in  the  Leningrad  manuscript  it  is  abbreviated  to  a few
sentences.

A noteworthy  feature  of  this  book  is  the  fact  that  it  leaves  the
reader  to  form  his  own  ideas  as  to  the  characters  and  their  circum-
stances. It  might,  therefore,  be  supposed  that  we  have  here  only
an  extract  from  a longer  chain  of  stories,  and  that  other  travelling


1 What  is  meant  is  that  the  best  craftsmen  who  work  on  the  royal
pryamid  are  also  employed  on  that  of  Sinuhe.

2 The  numerous  offerings  which  a well-equipped  tomb  of  this  period
must  contain.

3 Which  was  erected  in  the  tomb.

1 In  a Middle  Kingdom  papr-rus  .acquired  by  Golenischeff,  and  now
n Leningrad.  See  my  article  (transcription,  commentary,  and  translation)
in  Zeitschr.  fiir  dgypt.  Sprache,  xliii.  pp.  I ft.  ; Gol£xischeff,  Le  conte  dtt
naitfiage  (Cairo,  1912).  See  also  DhvAUD,  Le  conte  dn  naufragf  in  Receuil
de  travaux,  xxxviii.  pp.  iSS  ft.  ; A.  H.  Gardiner,  Notes  on  the  Tale  of  the
Shipwrecked  Sailor,  in  Zeitschr.  fur  dgypt.  Sprache,  xlv.  pp.  60  ff.

5 Probablv  a prince  of  Elephantine,  whose  duties  included  expeditions
such  as  this.


30


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


companions  had  previously  recounted  to  the  prince  other  nurutm  es,
in  order  to  console  hint  in  his  affliction.

A worthy  henchman  said : Be  of  good  cheer,  Prince,  behold,
we  have  reached  the  Residence.1  The  mallet  hath  been  taken,
the  mooring-post  driven  in.  and  the  bow-rope  run  along  the
ground.  There  is  praising  and  thanksgiving  to  God,  and  every
one  embraceth  his  fellow.  Our  crew  hath  come  home  safe  and
sound,  and  our  soldiers  have  suffered  no  loss.  We  have  readied
the  end  of  Wawat  and  have  passed  by  Senmet.  See,  we  have
returned  in  peace  and  have  reached  our  own  land.  Hearken
to  me,  Prince  ; I am  one  that  is  free  from  exaggeration.  Wash
thyself  and  pour  water  on  thy  fingers.  Answer  when  thou  art
greeted,  speak  to  the  king  having  thy  wits  about  thee,  and
answer  without  faltering.  It  is  a man’s  mouth  that  savetli
him,  and  his  speech  maketh  men  forbearing  towards  him.
Thou  wilt  do  as  thou  willst ; to  speak  2 to  thee  is  irksome  (to
thee).

Yet  I will  relate  to  thee  something  like  thereunto,  that  was
experienced  by  me  myself,  when  I had  set  out  for  the  mines
of  the  Sovereign 3 and  gone  down  to  the  sea  in  a ship  of  an  hundred
and  twenty  cubits  in  length  and  forty  cubits  in  breadth ; 4 and
therein  were  an  hundred  and  twenty  sailors  of  the  pick  of  Egypt.
They  scanned  the  sky,  they  scanned  the  earth,  and  their  hearts
were  more  . . . than  those  of  lions.  They  foretold  a storm  or
ever  it  came,  and  a tempest  when  as  yet  it  was  not.

A storm  burst  while  we  were  yet  at  sea,  before  we  had
reached  land.  We  flew  before  the  wind5  and  it  made  a
and  a wave  eight  cubits  high  was  within  it.  It  was  a piece  of
wood  that  ...  it  to  me.

1 the  henchman  wakes  up  his  lord  in  the  morning  on  board  --hip  and
announces  that  they  are  once  more  in  Egypt ; they  have  passed  the  fron-
tier-island of  Senmet  (the  modern  liigeh  near  Piute),  and  the  ship  is
already  alongside  of  the  quay  Accordingly  " the  Residence  ” must  here
mean  Elephantine,  thus  possibly  the  residence  of  the  prince  himself
But  he  has  still  to  continue  his  voyage  northward  to  the  king,  in  order  to
make  report  to  him

2 Thus  attempts  to  encourage  him  have  already  been  vainly  made  on
previous  days

3 He  sails  from  a harbour  on  the  Red  Sea  for  the  mines  of  the  Sinaitic
peninsula

‘ I e oo  by  so  metres  ; thus  a very  large  ship.

5 I he  whole  account  of  the  storm  is  unintelligible  to  us  , it  occurs
again  below  in  identically  the  same  words.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  31

11  ien  the  ship  perished,  and  of  them  that  were  in  it  not
one  survived.  And  I was  cast  on  to  an  island  by  a wave  of
the  sea,  and  I spent  three  days  alone  with  mine  heart  (only)  as
my  companion.  I slept  under  the  shelter  of  a tree  (?)  and
embraced  the  shade.1  Then  I stretched  forth  my  feet  in  order
to  find  out  what  I could  put  into  my  mouth.  I found  figs  and
vines  there,  and  all  manner  of  line  leeks,  kau-fruit  together
with  nekut-fruit  and  cucumbers  . . . There  were  fish  there
and  fowl,  and  there  was  nothing  that  was  not  in  it.2  Then  I
satisfied  myself  and  still  left  over,  for  it  was  too  much  for  my
hands.  When  I had  made  me  a fire-drill,3  I kindled  a fire  and
made  a burnt-offering  for  the  gods.

Then  I heard  the  sound  of  thunder  and  thought  it  was  a wave
of  the  sea  ; the  trees  brake,  and  the  earth  quaked.  I uncovered
my  face  4 * and  found  that  it  was  a serpent  that  drew  nigh.  He
was  thirty  cubits  long,  and  his  beard — it  was  longer  than  two
cubits ; his  body  was  overlaid  with  gold,  his  eyebrows  were  of
real  lapis  lazuli,3  and  he  coiled  himself  forward.

He  opened  his  mouth  at  me,  while  I was  on  my  belly  in  front
of  him,  and  he  said  unto  me  : “ Who  hath  brought  thee  (hither),
who  hath  brought  thee  (hither),  little  one  ? Who  hath  brought
thee  (hither)  ? If  thou  delayest  in  telling  me  who  hath  brought
thee  to  this  island,  I will  let  thee  know  thyself  to  be  but  ashes,
becoming  as  that  which  is  not  seen.”  6 7 (I  answered  :)  “ Thou
speakest  unto  me,  and  yet  I hear  it  not.  I am  in  thy  presence,
but  my  wits  have  gone.”

Then  he  took  me  in  his  mouth  and  brought  me  to  his  lair,
and  set  me  down  without  touching  me,  and  I was  whole  and
there  was  nothing  torn  from  me."  He  opened  his  mouth  at  me,
while  I was  on  my  belly  in  front  of  him.  And  he  said  unto  me  :
" Who  hath  brought  thee  (hither),  who  hath  brought  thee
(hither),  little  one  ? Who  hath  brought  thee  to  this  island  of

1 / e.  probably  only  : 1 sought  it.  - The  island

3 An  Egyptian  tire-drill  consists  of  only  two  pieces  r,i  wood,  and  so  is
easy  to  construct.

4 in  his  terror  he  had  held  his  hands  in  front  of  his  face.

3 The  narrator  conceives  of  the  monster  as  the  tigure  ot  an  Egyptian

divinity,  made  of  gilded  bronze  with  coloured  inlay.  By  the  beard  is

meant  the  plaited  beard  of  a god.

6 The  serpent  can  spit  lire  like  its  divine  companion,  the  snake  of  the
sun-god.

7 So  carefulh  did  lie  haiidie  lnm.


32


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


the  sea,  which  is  encompassed  on  both  sides  by  the  waters  ? ”
And  I made  answer  to  him,  my  arms  being  bent 1 in  his  presence,
and  said  unto  him  : "I  am  one  who  went  down  to  the  mines
on  an  errand  of  the  Sovereign,  with  a ship  of  an  hundred  and
twenty  cubits  in  length  and  forty  cubits  in  breadth,  and  therein
were  an  hundred  and  twenty  sailors  of  the  pick  of  Egypt.  They
scanned  the  sky,  they  scanned  the  earth,  and  their  hearts  were
more  . . . than  those  of  lions.  They  foretold  the  storm  or
ever  it  came,  and  the  tempest  when  as  yet  it  was  not.  Each
one  of  them  was  ...  of  heart  and  stronger  of  arm  than  his
fellow,  and  there  was  no  fool  among  them.  A storm  burst
while  we  were  yet  at  sea,  before  we  had  reached  land.  We
flew  before  the  wind  and  it  made  a . . . , and  a wave  eight
cubits  high  was  within  it.  It  was  a piece  of  wood  that  . . .
it  to  me.  Then  the  ship  perished,  and  of  them  that  were  in
it  not  one  survived  save  me,  and  behold,  here  I am  beside  thee.
And  I was  brought  to  this  island  by  a wave  of  the  sea.”

Then  he  said  unto  me  : “ Fear  not,  fear  not,  little  one  ; let
not  thy  countenance  . . .,  now  that  thou  art  come  to  me.  Lo,
God  hath  preserved  thee  alive  to  bring  thee  to  this  Island  of
the  Ka  2,  in  which  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  in  it,  and  it  is
full  of  all  good  things.  Lo,  thou  shalt  spend  month  after  month
in  this  island  until  thou  completest  four  months.  Then  a ship
will  come  from  the  Residence  3 with  sailors  in  it  whom  thou
knowest,  and  thou  shalt  go  with  them  to  the  Residence  and
die  in  thine  own  town.

" How  glad  is  he  that  relateth  what  he  hath  experienced  when
the  calamity  hath  passed  ! So  I will  relate  to  thee  something
like  this  which  came  to  pass  in  this  island.4  I was  in  it  with
my  brethren,  and  children  were  in  their  midst,  and  we  numbered
in  all  seventy-five  serpents,  my  children  and  my  brethren,
without  my  mentioning  to  thee  the  daughter  of  a humble
woman  that  was  brought  to  me  by.  . . .s  Then  a star  fell.

1 The  humble  posture.

' With  regard  to  the  " ka,  ’ see  above  p 24,  note  2 Here  “ island  of
the  Ka  " probably  only  means  an  island  in  which  there  is  food  to  live  on.

8 This  is  naturally  not  to  be  taken  literally,  for  one  cannot  get  by  ship
to  the  Red  Sea  from  any  Egyptian  town  !

* For  the  curtailment  of  the  following  narrative,  see  above  ; the  simi-
larity to  the  experience  of  the  shipwrecked  sailor  lies  of  course  m the  fact
that  the  serpent,  too,  had  lost  all  his  companions.

3 A human  child  cast  on  to  the  island.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  33

and  these  went  up  (?)  in  fire  because  of  it.  Now  it  happened
when  I was  not  with  the  burned  ones  (?),  and  while  I was  not
in  their  midst.  And  I (almost)  died  on  their  account  when  I
found  them  as  one  heap  of  corpses.

“ If  thou  art  valiant,  curb  thine  heart.1  Then  thou  wilt
embrace  thy  children  and  kiss  thy  wife  and  see  thine  house —
that  is  the  best  thing  of  all.  Thou  wilt  arrive  at  the  Residence,
and  dwell  there  in  the  midst  of  thy  brethren.”

Then  I extended  myself  on  my  belly  and  touched  the  ground
in  (his)  presence.  And  I said  unto  him : “I  will  discourse
on  thy  nature  to  the  Sovereign  and  acquaint  him  with  thy
greatness.  I will  cause  ibi,  hekenu,  iudeneb,  and  khesait  2 to
be  brought  to  thee,  and  incense  of  the  temples,  wherewith  every
god  is  made  content.  I will  relate  what  befell  me,  and  of  what
I have  seen.  . . . Thou  shalt  be  thanked  in  the  city  in  the
presence  of  the  officers  of  the  entire  land.3  I will  slay  for  thee
oxen  for  burnt-offering,  and  geese  will  I sacrifice  for  thee.  I
will  send  thee  ships  laden  with  all  the  precious  things  of  Egypt,
as  should  be  done  for  a god,  that  loveth  men,  in  a land  far  off
which  men  know  not.”  4

Thereupon  he  laughed  at  me  and  at  what  I had  said,  as
being  but  foolishness  in  his  heart.5  And  he  said  unto  me  :
“ Thou  hast  not  myrrh  6 in  plenty,  being  (but)  a possessor  of
frankincense.  But  I am  the  prince  of  Punt,  and  myrrh,  that
is  my  very  own.  As  for  that  hekenu  whereof  thou  didst  say
that  it  is  to  be  brought  (to  me),  why  that  is  the  chief  product
of  this  island.  But  it  shall  happen,  when  thou  art  parted  from

1 As  I did  then.

* Pure  perfumes,  which  were  accounted  as  most  precious  substances
by  the  Egyptians.

3 Thus  a public  recognition  by  the  king  of  the  services  rendered  by  the
serpent.

4 To  what  the  king  is  to  send  he  himself  will  add  something : ships
full  of  good  things,  and  burnt  ofierings,  which  latter  indeed  a far-ofi  god
is  able  to  receive,  for  the  wind  wafts  them  to  him.

6 The  serpent  laughs  at  the  simplicity  of  the  man,  who  holds  out  before
him  valuables,  on  which  he  himself  sets  no  store  or  actually  possesses  in
better  quality.

8 “ Antiu,”  which  we  are  accustomed  to  translate  “ myrrh,"  is  re-
garded as  the  chiefest  of  all  perfumes.  It  was  imported  from  Punt,
the  land  named  immediately  below.  Punt  being  probably  a general
designation  for  the  incense-producing  countries  in  the  south  of  the
Red  Sea.

3


34


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


this  place,  that  never  shalt  thou  behold  this  island  more,  for
it  will  become  water.”  1

And  then  that  ship  came,  even  as  he  had  foretold.  And  I
went  and  climbed  a tall  tree,  and  I descried  them  that  were  in
it.  And  I went  to  report  it,  but  found  that  he  already  knew
it.  And  he  said  unto  me  : “ Safely,  safely  home,  little  one,
and  see  thy  children,  and  give  (me)  a good  name  in  thy  city.
Lo,  that  is  all  I require  of  thee.”

Then  I placed  me  on  my  belly,  and  my  arms  were  bent  in
his  presence.  And  he  gave  me  a freight  of  myrrh,  hekenu,
iudeneb,  khesait,  tishepes,  shaas,  eye-cosmetic,  giraffes’  tails,
a great  mass  (?)  of  incense,  elephant-tusks,  greyhounds,  monkeys,
apes,  and  all  goodly  treasures.2  And  I stowed  them  on  this
ship.

Now  when  I had  placed  me  on  my  belly  to  thank  him,  he
said  unto  me  : “ Lo,  thou  shalt  reach  the  Residence  in  two
months,  shalt  hold  thy  children  in  thine  embrace,  grow  young
again  at  the  Residence,  and  be  buried.”  3

And  I went  down  to  the  shore  where  this  ship  lay.  And
I hailed  the  contingent  that  was  in  this  ship,  and  gave  praise
upon  the  shore  to  the  lord  of  this  island,  and  they  that  were
on  board  did  likewise.

Then  we  voyaged  northwards  to  the  Residence  of  the
Sovereign,  and  we  reached  the  Residence  in  two  months,
according  to  all  that  he  had  said.  And  I entered  in  before
the  Sovereign  and  presented  unto  him  all  this  treasure  which
I had  brought  from  this  island.  And  he  thanked  me  in
the  sight  of  the  officers  of  the  entire  land,  and  I was
appointed  to  be  a henchman  and  was  presented  with  people
of  his  (?).

Look  at  me  after  I reached  land,  after  I saw  what  I had
experienced.4  Hearken  unto  my  speech.  Lo,  it  is  good  for
men  to  hearken  !

And  he  said  unto  me  : “ Act  not  the  superior  person,5  my

1 Thou  needest  not  therefore  trouble  thyself  to  send  me  anything.

3 All  these  are  things  that  the  Egyptians  actually  imported  from  the
incense-producing  countries.

3 1.e.  duly  buried,  as  is  necessary,  if  a person  desires  to  be  happy
in  death.

4 Meaning  probably  : See  to  what  I have  attained,  in  spite  of  my
unlucky  voyage.

4 Do  not  try  to  be  too  sapient  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  35

friend ! Who  giveth  water  at  dawn  to  a bird  that  he  will  kill
early  in  the  morning  ? ” 1

3.  THE  STORY  OF  THE  HERDSMAN  2

That  this  fragment  has  been  preserved  to  us  is  due  solely  to  the
fact  that  a scribe  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,  who  wished  to  clean  a
papyrus  in  order  to  re-use  it,  did  not  complete  his  task,  and  left
intact  twenty-five  lines  from  the  middle  of  the  book — unfortu-
nately, too  few  for  us  to  be  able  to  conjecture  their  purport.  Per-
haps a goddess  waylays  one  of  the  herdsmen,  who  live  with  their
cattle  in  the  swamps  of  the  Delta.

. . . Behold  ye,  when  I went  down  to  the  swamp  which
bordereth  on  this  low  ground,  I saw’  a woman  therein,  and  she
looked  not  like  mortal  men.  My  hair  stood  on  end  when  I saw
her  tresses,  because  her  colour  3 was  so  bright.  Never  will  I
do  what  she  said  ; awe  of  her  is  in  my  body.

I say  unto  you  : Ye  bulls,  let  us  go  home  (?).  Let  the  calves
cross  over  and  the  goats  rest  in  the  place  of  . . .,  with  the
herdsmen  behind  them,  and  our  boat  for  the  voyage  home  (?),
astern  of  which  are  set  the  bulls  and  cows,  and  the  wisest  of  the
herdsmen  recite  a waterspell 4 and  speak  thus:  “My  kas  6
rejoice.”  Ye  herdsmen  and  ye  men,  there  is  none  that  shall
drive  me  forth  from  this  field,  (even  ?)  in  the  year  of  a high
Nile,  that  issueth  commands  to  the  ridges  of  the  land,  and  the
pool  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  river.6

Betake  thee  unto  thine  house.7  The  cattle  that  had  re-
mained in  their  place  have  come.  The  fear  of  thee  hath  vanished,
the  awe  of  thee  is  passed  av’ay,  until  (?)  the  terror  of  the  Mighty

1 The  meaning  being : The  king  will  show  me  no  favour  now,  for  he  even
has  designs  on  my  life.

! See  Gardiner,  Hierat.  Papyrus  aus  den  konigl.  Museen  zu  Berlin,
ii.  p.  15.

3 The  colour  of  the  woman,  not  of  her  tresses.

4 To  keep  the  crocodiles  from  the  herds.  What  is  meant  is  known  to
us  from  the  representations  of  the  Old  Kingdom.  The  herdsmen,  who
bring  the  cattle  home  and  have  to  cross  a stretch  of  water,  go  ahead  in  a
skiff,  the  bulls  and  cows  follow  swimming,  while  the  calves  are  kept  up
by  the  halter.  At  the  same  time,  the  herdsmen  make  a particular  gesture
with  the  fingers,  which  is  supposed  to  keep  off  the  crocodiles.

5 See  p.  24,  note  2 ; divine  beings  possess  several  kas.

0 The  water  now  masters  even  the  higher  parts  of  the  country,  and  lake
and  river  form  a single  mass  of  water.

7 This  is  probably  the  answer  of  the  other  herdsmen.


86


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


One,  the  fear  of  the  Lady  of  the  Two  Lands.1  hath  (also)
vanished.

When  the  earth  grew  bright,  at  early  dawn,  it  was  done  even
as  he  said.  This  goddess  met  with  him  as  he  wended  his  way
to  the  pool,  and  she  had  stripped  off  her  clothes  and  disarrayed
her  hair.  . . .


4.  KING  KHEOPS  AND  THE  MAGICIANS  2 *

This  tale,  in  contrast  with  the  narratives  that  have  so  far  been
presented  to  the  reader,  does  not  belong  to  the  higher  literature.
It  is  of  a popular  character,  as  is  shown  both  by  the  simplicity  of  its
style  and  of  its  matter,  which,  at  times,  is  burlesque,  and  by  the
fact  that  it  is  written  in  the  vernacular  ; it  might  well  be  ascribed  to
a public  story-teller.

In  spite  of  the  loss  of  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  book,  the
plot  is  easily  reconstructed.  King  Kheops,  the  builder  of  the  Great
Pyramid  (about  2900  b.c.  at  the  latest),  makes  his  sons  tell  him
tales  of  the  wonders  which  had  been  wrought  by  magicians  in  the
past.  Finally,  one  of  his  sons  informs  him  of  his  acquaintanceship
with  a still  living  magician,  who  then  works  his  miracles  in  the
king’s  presence.  But  unfortunately  this  sage  also  knows  the  future,
and  so  the  Pharaoh  is  informed  by  him,  though  unwillingly,  of  the
disaster  threatening  his  line  : at  this  very  time  three  children  will
come  into  the  world  who  will  drive  it  from  the  throne.  The
children  are  then  actually  born  and — here  the  papyrus  breaks
off  — grow  up  notwithstanding  all  Kheops’  machinations  ; it
is  the  pious  kings  of  the  Fifth  Dynasty  whose  origin  is  here
recounted.

The  first  of  these  tales  deals  with  events  in  the  reign  of
King  Zoser,  but  only  the  conclusion  is  preserved,  in  which  King
Kheops,  in  recognition  of  their  deeds,  commands  victuals  to  be
presented  to  that  king  and  his  magician,  a “ chief  kherheb,”  3 i.e.
to  be  placed  in  their  tombs.

Then  Prince  Khephren 4 stood  up  to  speak  and  said : “ I
relate  to  thy  majesty  a wonder  that  came  to  pass  in  the  time

1 In  view  of  these  designations  a great  goddess  must  be  meant.

2 The  so-called  Papyrus  Westcar  in  Berlin.  See  my  edition  : Mitteil-
ungen  a.  d.  Oriental.  Sammlungen  der  Konigl.  Museen,  vols.  v.  and  vi.  The
papyrus  was  perhaps  written  in  the  Hyksos  period.

2 The  kherheb  is  the  learned  priest  who  knows  the  sacred  books,  and  is
accordingly  the  magician  par  excellence.

* The  well-known  builder  of  the  second  pyramid  of  Gizah.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


37


of  thy  father  King  Nebka,1  when  he  went  to  the  temple  of  Ptah
of  Memphis.  Now  when  his  majesty  went  to  Memphis,  he  also
visited  (?)  the  chief  kherheb  Ubaoner .

Ubaoner  had  a wife  who  was  in  love  with  a townsman,  and
who  kept  in  touch  with  him  through  the  medium  of  a handmaid ;
she  had  also  sent  him  a box  full  of  clothes  as  a present,  and  he
came  with  the  handmaid.

And  after  many  days  had  passed  2 — now  there  was  a pleasure-
house  in  the  lake  3 4 * of  Ubaoner — the  townsman  said  to  the  wife
of  Ubaoner : “ Why,  there  is  a pleasure-house  in  the  lake  of
Ubaoner.  Behold,  we  will  tarry  therein.”  And  the  wife  of
Ubaoner  sent  to  the  house-steward  that  had  charge  of  the  lake,
saying  : “ Let  the  pleasure-house  which  is  in  the  lake  be  fur-
nished.” 4 Then  went  she  thither  and  passed  the  day  there
drinking  with  the  townsman,  until  the  sun  set.  Now  when  it
was  evening,  he  came  and  went  down  into  the  lake,  and  the
handmaid  waited  on  him  as  bath  attendant.  And  the  house-
steward  observed  it.  Now  when  the  earth  became  light  and  the
next  day  was  come,3  the  house-steward  went  and  reported  this

matter  to  his  master . And  Ubaoner  said  : “ Fetch

me  my  ...  of  ebony  and  gold,”  and  with  this  gear  he  made
a waxen  crocodile  that  was  seven  spans  long.  And  he  recited
a spell  over  it  and  said  : “ Whoso  cometh  to  bathe  in  my  lake,
him  do  thou  seize.”  And  he  gave  it  to  the  house-steward,  and
said  unto  him  : “ When  the  townsman  goeth  down  into  the  lake
according  to  his  daily  wont,  then  do  thou  throw  the  crocodile
into  the  water  behind  him.”  So  the  house-steward  went  his
way  and  took  the  waxen  crocodile  with  him.

And  the  wife  of  Ubaoner  sent  unto  the  house-steward  that
was  in  charge  of  the  lake,  saying  : “ Let  the  pleasure-house
which  is  in  the  lake  be  furnished.  Lo,  I come  to  dwell  therein.”
And  the  pleasure-house  was  furnished  with  every  good  thing.
Then  they  6 went  and  spent  a mirthful  day  with  the  townsman.

1 Xebka  and  the  previously  mentioned  Zoser  are  kings  of  the  Third
Dynasty,  who  reigned  not  long  before  Kheops.

2 A stereotyped  formula  in  Egyptian  tales,  and  not  to  be  taken
literally.

3 What  is  meant  is  a large  garden  with  a pond  in  it  and  a pavilion,  in
accordance  with  Egyptian  custom  (cf.  A.  M.  Blackman,  Luxor  and  its
Temples,  pp.  io  f.).

4 With  provisions,  etc.  6 Also  a stereotyped  expression.

* The  wife  and  her  maid.


38


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Now  when  it  was  evening,  the  townsman  came  according
to  his  daily  wont.  And  the  house-steward  threw  the  waxen
crocodile  behind  him  into  the  water,  and  it  became  a crocodile

of  seven  cubits,  and  it  laid  hold  on  the  townsman .

But  Ubaoner  tarried  for  seven  days  with  the  majesty  of  King
Nebka,  and  meantime  the  townsman  was  in  the  water  without
breathing.  Now  when  the  seven  days  were  passed,  King  Nebka
came  . . . and  the  chief  kherheb  Ubaoner  presented  himself
before  him.  And  Ubaoner  said  : “ . . . May  thy  majesty  come
and  view  the  wonder  that  hath  come  to  pass  in  the  time  of  thy
majesty.”  The  king  went  with  him,  and  Ubaoner  called  the
crocodile  and  said  : “ Bring  thou  hither  the  townsman.”  Then

the  crocodile  came  forth  and  brought  him . And  the  majesty

of  King  Nebka  said  : “ Your  pardon,  but  this  crocodile  is
frightful  (?).”  Thereupon  Ubaoner  stooped  down  and  took  it,
and  it  became  a waxen  crocodile  in  his  hand.

Then  the  chief  kherheb  Ubaoner  related  unto  the  majesty
of  King  Nebka  this  thing  that  the  townsman  had  done  in  his
house  with  his  wife.  And  his  majesty  said  unto  the  crocodile  :
“ Take  that  is  thine.”  Then  the  crocodile  went  down  into  the
depths  (?)  of  the  lake,  and  none  knew  the  place  whither  he  went
with  him.

And  the  majesty  of  King  Nebka  caused  the  wife  of  Ubaoner
to  be  taken  to  the  field  to  the  north  of  the  Residence,  and  he
set  fire  to  her,  and  (her  ashes)  were  thrown  into  the  river.

Lo,  this  is  a wonder  that  came  to  pass  in  the  time  of  thy
father  Nebka,  one  of  the  deeds  of  the  chief  kherheb  Ubaoner.

And  the  majesty  of  King  Kheops  said  : “ Let  there  be
offered  to  King  Nebka  a thousand  loaves  of  bread,  a hundred
jars  of  beer,  one  ox,  and  two  measures  of  incense,  and  let  there
be  given  to  the  chief  kherheb  Ubaoner  one  cake,  one  jug  of  beer,
a large  piece  of  flesh,  and  one  measure  of  incense,  for  I have
seen  an  example  of  his  learning.”  And  it  was  done,  according
to  all  that  his  majesty  commanded.

Then  Prince  Baufre  stood  up  to  speak,  and  said  : “ I relate
to  thy  majesty  a wonder  that  came  to  pass  in  the  time  of  thy
father  Snefru,1  one  of  the  deeds  of  the  chief  kherheb  Zazamonkh,
One  day  King  Snefru  was  sad.  So  he  assembled  the  officers  of
the  palace  in  order  to  seek  for  him  a diversion,  but  he  found
1 The  immediate  predecessor  of  Kheops.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


39


none.  Then  said  he : ' Go,  bring  me  the  chief  kherheb,  the  scribe
of  the  book,  Zazamonkh.’  And  he  was  brought  unto  him  straight-
way. And  his  majesty  said  unto  him  : ‘ I had  assembled  the
officers  of  the  palace  together  in  order  to  seek  for  me  a diversion,
but  I could  find  none.’  And  Zazamonkh  said  unto  him : ‘ If  thy
majesty  would  but  betake  thee  to  the  lake  of  the  Great  House  ! 1
Man  thee  a boat  with  all  fair  damsels  from  the  inner  apartments
of  thy  palace.  Then  will  the  heart  of  thy  majesty  be  diverted,
when  thou  shalt  see  how  they  row  to  and  fro.  Then,  as  thou
viewest  the  pleasant  nesting-places  of  thy  lake,  and  viewest  its
fields  and  its  pleasant  banks,  thine  heart  will  be  diverted  there-
by.’ His  majesty  said  unto  him  : ‘ I will  do  this;  get  thee  back  to
thine  house  (?),  but  I will  go  boating.  Have  brought  to  me
twenty  paddles  of  ebony  inwrought  with  gold,  the  handles
thereof  being  of  sekeb-wood  inwrought  with  fine  gold.  Have
brought  to  me  twenty  women,  of  those  with  the  fairest  limbs,
and  with  (beauteous)  breasts  and  braided  tresses,  such  as  have
not  yet  given  birth,  and  moreover  have  brought  to  me  twenty
nets,  and  give  these  nets  to  these  women  instead  of  their  clothes.’
And  it  was  done  according  to  all  that  his  majesty  commanded.
And  they  rowed  to  and  fro,  and  the  heart  of  his  majesty  was
glad,  when  he  beheld  how  they  rowed.

“ Then  a leader  2 became  entangled  (?)  with  her  braided  tress,
and  a fish-pendant  3 of  new  malachite  fell  into  the  water.  And
she  became  silent 4 and  ceased  rowing,  and  her  side  became
silent  and  ceased  rowing.  Then  said  his  majesty  : ‘ Is  it

that  ye  will  not  row  then  ? ’ And  they  said  : ' Our  leader  is
silent  and  roweth  not.’  And  his  majesty  said  unto  her :
‘ Wherefore  rawest  thou  not  ? ” She  said  : ' It  is  the  fish-
pendant  of  new  malachite  that  hath  fallen  into  the  water.’  He
had  another  brought  to  her  (?)  and  said  : ‘ I give  thee  this  instead.’
And  she  said  : ‘ I want  my  pot  down  to  its  bottom.’  5 6

1 1.e.  the  Palace.

s The  girls  probably  sit  in  two  lines,  either  of  which  has  a leader  who
sets  the  stroke.

3 Women  when  boating  seem  sometimes  to  have  worn  a hair-orna-
ment in  the  shape  of  a fish  ; see  Blackman,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,
xi.  pp.  212  f.  She  probably  hit  herself  on  the  hair  with  her  paddle.

4 The  girls  sing  at  their  rowing  to  keep  time,  as  is  done  on  Nile  boats

to-day.

6 Doubtless  a proverb : I want  my  right  in  full,  my  own  thing.  [Better :
“ I would  rather  mine  own  than  its  likeness  ” (Translator)].


40


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


“ Then  said  his  majesty  : ‘ Go  to,  and  bring  me  the  chief
kherheb  Zazamonkh.’  And  he  was  brought  straightway.  And
his  majesty  said : ‘ Zazamonkh,  my  brother,  I have  done  as
thou  saidst,  and  the  heart  of  my  majesty  was  diverted  when  I
beheld  how  they  rowed.  But  a fish-pendant  of  new  malachite
belonging  to  a leader  fell  into  the  water,  and  she  was  silent  and
rowed  not,  and  so  she  spoilt  her  side.  And  I said  unto  her  :
‘ Wherefore  rowest  thou  not  ? ’ And  she  said  unto  me  : ‘ It
is  a fish-pendant  of  new  malachite  that  hath  fallen  into  the
water.’  And  I said  unto  her : ‘ Row,  and  lo,  I will  replace
it.’  And  she  said  unto  me  : ‘I  want  my  pot  down  to  its
bottom.’  ” 1

“ Then  the  chief  kherheb  Zazamonkh  said  his  say  of  magic,
and  he  placed  the  one  side  of  the  water  of  the  lake  upon  the
other,2  and  found  the  fish-pendant  lying  on  a potsherd.3  And
he  brought  it  and  gave  it  to  its  mistress.  - — Now  as  for  the  water,
it  was  twelve  cubits  deep  in  the  middle,  and  it  reached  twenty-
four  cubits  after  it  was  turned  back.  Then  he  said  his  say  of
magic,  and  he  brought  the  waters  of  the  lake  back  to  their  place.

“ And  his  majesty  spent  the  whole  day  in  merriment  with  the
entire  palace,  and  he  rewarded  the  chief  kherheb  Zazamonkh
with  all  good  things.

“ Lo,  it  is  a wonder  that  came  to  pass  in  the  time  of  thy  father
King  Snefru,  one  of  the  deeds  of  the  chief  kherheb,  the  scribe
of  the  book,  Zazamonkh.”

And  the  majesty  of  King  Kheops  said  : “ Let  there  be  offered
to  the  majesty  of  King  Snefru  a thousand  loaves  of  bread,  a
hundred  jars  of  beer,  one  ox,  and  two  measures  of  incense,  and
let  there  be  given  to  the  chief  kherheb,  the  scribe  of  the  book,
Zazamonkh,  one  cake,  one  jug  of  beer,  and  one  measure  of
incense,  for  I have  seen  an  example  of  his  learning.”  And  it
was  done  according  to  all  that  his  majesty  commanded.

Then  Prince  Hardedef  stood  up  to  speak  and  said  : “ Hitherto
hast  thou  heard  only  examples  of  what  they  knew  that  have  gone
before  (us),  and  one  knoweth  not  the  truth  from  falsehood.
But  even  in  thine  own  time  there  is  a magician.”  Then  said  his
majesty  : “ Who  is  that,  Har[dedef,  my  son  ? " And  Prince

1 See  above  p.  39,  note  5.

s He  folds  up  the  waters  of  the  lake  like  a cloth.

3 It  had  not,  therefore,  sunk  in  the  mud.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  41

Har]dedef  said  : 1 “ There  is  a townsman,  Dedi  by  name,  and
he  dwelleth  in  Ded-snefru.2  He  is  a townsman  of  no  years,
and  he  eateth  five  hundred  loaves  of  bread,  a haunch  of  beef
in  the  way  of  meat,  and  drinketh  one  hundred  jugs  of  beer,
unto  this  very  day.3  He  knoweth  how  to  put  on  again  a head
that  hath  been  cut  off,  and  he  knoweth  how  to  make  a lion
follow  after  him,  with  its  leash  4 trailing  on  the  ground.  He
knoweth  the  number  (?)  of  the  locks  5 (?)  of  the  sanctuary  of
Th5th.”  — Now  the  majesty  of  King  Kheops  was  always  seeking
for  himself  the  locks  (?)  of  the  sanctuary  of  ThSth,  to  make  for
himself  the  like  thereof  for  his  Horizon.6

Then  said  his  majesty  : “ Thou  thyself,  Hardedef,  my  son,
shalt  bring  him  to  me.”  And  ships  were  made  ready  for  Prince
Hardedef,  and  he  voyaged  upstream  to  Ded-snefru.  Now
when  the  ships  were  moored  to  the  bank,  he  went  journeying
by  land,  and  sat  in  a carrying-chair  of  ebony,  the  poles  of  which
were  of  sesenem-wood  and  overlaid  with  gold.

And  when  he  was  come  to  Dedi,  the  chair  was  set  down.
And  he  stood  up  to  salute  him,  and  found  him  lying  on  a mat
on  the  threshold  of  his  house,  and  a servant  held  his  head  and
was  stroking  it  for  him,  and  another  was  rubbing  his  feet.

And  Prince  Hardedef  said : “ Thy  condition  is  like  life
before  growing  old  and  before  (?)  old  age,  the  place  of  decease,
the  place  of  enwrapping,  the  place  of  burial ; (thou  art  still)
one  that  sleepeth  on  into  the  daylight,  free  from  sickness,  and
without  becoming  old  in  abhorrence.7  Greetings,  revered  one  !
I am  come  hither  to  summon  thee  with  a message  from  my
father  Kheops,  that  thou  mayest  eat  the  dainties  that  the  king
giveth,  the  victuals  of  them  that  are  in  his  service,  that  he  may

1 For  this  reading  see  Sethe,  Aegyptische  Lesestiicke,  p.  sS.

2 A town  near  the  modern  Medum,  north  of  the  entrance  to  the
Fayyum.

3 So  hale  and  hearty  is  he  yet  ; i io  years  is  the  conventional  number
for  extreme  age.

4 The  rope  by  which  he  could  lead  the  lion ; but  the  lion  follows  him
even  so.

5 But  see  Gardiner,  “ The  Secret  Chambers  in  the  Sanctuary  of
Thoth,”  in  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  xi.  pp.  2 ff.

6 The  Horizon  is  the  pyramid  of  the  king,  who  is  supposed  to  set
therein  like  the  sun.  The  king  wished  to  have  for  it  the  safest  locks,  even
those  which  the  god  of  wisdom  had  himself  invented  in  past  time.

7 In  these  greetings  of  the  prince  and  the  sage  the  narrator  aims  at  a
loftier  style,  and  accordingly  becomes  hard  to  understand.


42


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


bring  thee  at  a good  time  of  life  to  thy  fathers,  who  are  in  the
realms  of  the  dead.”  Said  this  Dedi : “ In  peace,  in  peace,
Hardedef,  thou  king’s  son  whom  his  father  loveth  ! May  thy
father  Kheops  reward  thee  ! May  he  advance  thy  station
among  the  elders  ! May  thy  ka  contend  with  thine  adversary  !
May  thy  soul  know  the  . . . way  to  the  portal  of  Him-that-
hideth-Weakness  ! 1 Greetings,  king’s  son  ! ”

And  Prince  Hardedef  held  out  his  hands  to  him  and  helped
him  up ; and  then  he  went  with  him  to  the  riverside,  giving
him  his  hand  the  while.  And  Dedi  said  : “ Let  a ship  be  given
me,  that  it  may  bring  me  the  children 2 together  with  my
books.”  And  two  vessels  with  their  crews  were  put  at  his  service ;
but  Dedi  voyaged  downstream  in  the  ship  in  which  was  Prince
Hardedef.

Now  when  he  reached  the  Residence,  Prince  Hardedef
entered  in  to  make  report  to  the  majesty  of  King  Kheops.
And  Prince  Hardedef  said  : “ O king,  my  lord,  I have  brought
Dedi.”  Said  his  majesty  : “ Go,  bring  him  to  me.”  Then  his
majesty  proceeded  to  the  pillared  hall  of  the  palace,  and  Dedi
was  brought  in  unto  him.  And  his  majesty  said  : “ How  is  it,
Dedi,  that  I have  never  seen  thee  before  ? ” And  Dedi  said  :
“It  is  he  who  is  summoned  that  cometh.  The  Sovereign  sum-
moned me,  and  lo,  I am  come.”  3 And  his  majesty  said  : “Is
it  true,  what  is  said,  that  thou  canst  put  on  again  a head  that
hath  been  cut  off  ? ’’  And  Dedi  said : “ Yea,  that  I can,  O
king,  my  lord.”  And  his  majesty  said  : “ Have  brought  unto
me  a prisoner  that  is  in  the  prison,  that  his  punishment  may  be
inflicted.”  And  Dedi  said  : “ But  not  on  a man,4  O king,  my
lord ! Lo,  is  not  such  a thing  rather  commanded  to  be  done
to  the  august 5 cattle  ? ”

And  a goose  was  brought  unto  him,  and  its  head  was  cut
off ; and  the  goose  was  placed  on  the  western  side  of  the  hall,
and  its  head  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  hall.  And  Dedi  said
his  say  of  magic,  and  thereupon  the  goose  stood  up  and  waddled,
and  its  head  likewise.  Now  when  one  part  had  reached  the
other,  the  goose  stood  up  and  cackled.  And  he  had  a duck

1 A door-keeper  in  the  underworld.  2 His  pupils  ?

3 Sense  : It  is  thy  fault  if  thou  hast  not  seen  me  till  now  ; thou  hast

never  even  inquired  about  me.

4 The  sage  is  depicted  as  humane.

5 “ August  ” because  they  are  the  property  of  the  king.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


43


brought  unto  him,  and  there  was  done  unto  it  the  like.  And
his  majesty  had  an  ox  brought  to  him,  and  its  head  was  made
to  tumble  to  the  ground.  And  Dedi  said  his  say  of  magic,
and  the  ox  stood  up  behind  him,  while  its  leash  fell  to  the
ground.1

And  King  Kheops  said : “It  hath  been  said  that  thou  knowest
the  number  (?)  of  the  locks  (?) 2 of  the  sanctuary  of  Thoth.”
And  Dedi  said : “ So  it  please  thee  (?),  I know  not  the  number
thereof,  O king,  my  lord,  but  I know  the  place  where  they
are.”  And  his  majesty  said  : “ Where  is  that  ? ” And  Dedi
said : " There  is  a chest  of  flint  in  the  chamber  named  ‘ The
Inventory  ' in  Heliopolis.  (Lo,  they  are)  in  the  chest.”  3 And
Dedi  said  : “ O king,  my  lord,  lo,  it  is  not  I that  bring  it  thee.”
And  his  majesty  said : “ Who  then  will  bring  it  me  ? ” And
Dedi  said : “ It  is  the  eldest  of  the  three  children  who  are  in
the  belly  of  Red-dedet  that  will  bring  it  thee.”  And  his  majesty
said : “ But  I desire  that  (?)  thou  say  who  she  is,  this  Red-
dedet.”  And  Dedi  said  : “ It  is  the  wife  of  a priest  of  Re  of
Sakhebu,4  that  hath  conceived  three  children  of  Re,  lord  of
Sakhebu.  He  hath  told  her  that  they  will  exercise  this  excellent
office  8 in  this  entire  land,  and  that  the  eldest  of  them  will  be
high  priest  in  Heliopolis.”  Then  his  majesty's  heart  grew  sad
thereat.  And  Dedi  said  : “ Pray,  what  is  this  mood,  O king,
my  lord  ? Is  it  because  of  the  three  children  ? Then  I say
unto  thee  : thy  son,  his  son,  and  then  one  of  them.”  6 And  his
majesty  said  : “ When  will  she  give  birth,  pray,  (this)  Red-
dedet  ? ” (And  Dedi  said)  : “ She  will  give  birth  on  the
fifteenth  day  of  the  first  winter  month.”  And  his  majesty  said  :
“ She  . . . the  region  (?)  of  the  Canal  of  the  Two  Fishes ; I
myself  would  set  foot  (?)  there  ; I will  see  the  temple  of  Re,
lord  of  Sakhebu.”  And  Dedi  said  : “ Then  will  I cause  the

1 The  above-mentioned  wonder  with  the  lion  seems  to  have  been
omitted  here  in  the  MS.  ; to  it  belongs  the  statement  about  the  leash.

3  See  above,  p.  41,  note  5.

3 An  utterance  of  the  king's  has  dropped  out  here.

4 A little-known  town  in  the  district  of  Memphis  and  Heliopolis.

5 The  kingship.  The  sun-god,  from  whom  the  kings  are  descended,
has  begotten  for  himself  a new  line  and  rejected  that  of  Kheops.

6 The  prophecy  asserts  : first  thy  son  Khephren  will  reign,  then  his
son  Mykerinos,  and  then  the  new  family  is  to  take  the  helm.  Actually
two  other  kings  reigned  in  the  interval ; but  of  the  Fourth  Dynasty
kings  only  the  builders  of  the  three  great  pyramids  lived  in  the  memories
of  the  people.


44  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

water  to  stand  four  cubits  deep  over  the  region  (?)  of  the  Canal
of  the  Two  Fishes.”  1

Then  his  majesty  betook  himself  to  his  palace.  And  his
majesty  said  : “ Let  the  ...  be  instructed  (to  consign)  Dedi
to  the  house  of  Prince  Hardedef,  that  he  may  dwell  with  him.
Fix  his  allowance  at  a thousand  loaves  of  bread,  an  hundred  jars
of  beer,  one  ox,  and  an  hundred  bunches  of  leeks.”  And  it  was
done  according  to  all  that  his  majesty  commanded.

Now  on  one  of  these  days  it  came  to  pass  that  Red-dedet
suffered  the  pangs  of  childbirth.  Then  said  the  majesty  of  Re
of  Sakhebu  to  Isis,  Nephthys,  Mesekhent,  Heket,  and  Khnum  : 2
" Up,  go  ye  and  deliver  Red-dedet  of  the  three  children  that
are  in  her  womb,  that  will  exercise  this  excellent  office  in  this
entire  land.  They  will  build  your  temples,  they  will  furnish
your  altars  with  victuals,  they  will  replenish  your  libation-
tables,  and  they  will  make  great  your  offerings.”  3 Then  these
deities  went,  when  they  had  taken  on  the  forms  of  dancing-girls,
and  Khnum  was  with  them  and  bore  their  carrying-chair  (?).4

And  they  came  to  the  house  of  Rewoser  6 and  found  him
standing  with  loin-cloth  hanging  down.6  Then  they  presented
to  him  their  necklaces  and  rattles.7  And  he  said  unto  them  :
“ My  mistresses,8  behold  there  is  a lady  here  who  is  in  travail.”
And  they  said : “ Let  us  see  her ; lo,  we  understand  mid-
wifery.” And  he  said  unto  them : “ Come.”  Then  they

entered  in  before  Red-dedet,  and  shut  (the  door  of)  the  room

1 Dedi  probably  wishes  to  make  the  journey  easier  for  the  king.  At
the  season  mentioned  the  region  in  question  was  dry,  but  Dedi  will  by
magic  place  it  under  water  for  him,  so  that  the  king  can  voyage  in  com-
fort to  Sakhebu.

* Mesekhent  is  the  goddess  of  birth,  Heket  an  ancient  primordial
goddess  ; Khnum  is  the  fashioner  of  all  mankind.

3 The  kings  of  the  Fifth  Dynasty  were  thus  pious  kings,  according  to
the  popular  view,  in  contrast  with  those  of  the  Fourth.  Whether  they
really  were  descended  from  a priest  of  the  sun-god  we  do  not  know,  but
it  is  certainly  true  that  they  displayed  special  veneration  for  this  divinity,
for  each  one  of  them  built  at  his  residence  a new  temple  for  him,  after  the
pattern  of  the  temple  of  Heliopolis.

4 They  come  as  travelling  women  with  a male  attendant.

6 The  husband  of  Red-dedet.

* His  clothing  W'as  in  disorder — because  of  his  anxiety  ?

7 1.e.  they  made  music  and  danced  before  him  ; cf.  above,  p.  27,

note  3.

8 He  speaks  to  them  politely,  in  order  that  they  might  go  away.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  45

upon  them  and  her.  And  Isis  placed  herself  in  front  of  her,
and  Nephthys  behind  her,  and  Heket  hastened  the  birth.  And
Isis  said  : “Be  not  lusty  in  her  womb  as  truly  as  thou  art  named
User-ref.” 1 This  child  slipped  forth  on  to  her  hands,  a child
of  one  cubit  with  strong  bones  ; the  royal  titulary  of  his  limbs
was  of  gold,  and  his  head-cloth  of  true  lapis  lazuli.2  They
washed  him,  cut  his  navel-string,  and  laid  him  on  a sheet
upon  (?)  a brick.  And  Mesekhent  drew  near  unto  him  and  she
said : “A  king  that  will  exercise  the  kingship  in  the  entire
land.”  And  Khnum  gave  health  to  his  body.

The  birth  of  the  two  other  children  is  then  related,  both  times
in  the  same  words  and  in  the  same  detail.  But  the  adjurations  are
of  course  different : “ Draw  not  near  in  her  womb,  as  truly  as
thou  art  named  Sah-re,”  3 and  “ Be  not  dark  in  her  womb,  as
truly  as  thou  art  named  Keku.”

And  these  divinities  went  forth,  after  that  they  had  delivered
Red-dedet  of  the  three  children.  And  they  said : “ Let  thy
heart  be  glad,  Rewoser  ! Behold,  three  children  are  bom  unto
thee.”  And  he  said  unto  them  : “ My  mistresses,  what  can  I
do  for  you  ? I pray  you  give  this  one  measure  of  barley  to  your
chairman,  and  take  it  away  for  yourselves  as  payment  into
(your)  vessels  (?).”  4 So  Khnum  loaded  himself  with  the  barley.

Now  when  they  had  gone  their  way  to  the  place  whence
they  had  come,  Isis  said  unto  these  deities  : “ What  meaneth
it,  that  we  have  come  to  her  and  yet  have  worked  no  wonder  for
these  children,  that  we  may  make  report  to  their  father  who  sent
us  forth  ? ” So  they  fashioned  three  royal  crowns,  and  they
placed  them  in  the  barley.  And  they  caused  storm  and  rain
to  come  in  the  sky,  and  they  went  back  to  the  house.5  And

1 The  adjurations,  which  Isis  utters,  declare  the  names  of  the  children
to  be  User-ref,  Sah-re,  and  Keku.  The  three  first  kings  of  the  Fifth
Dynasty  are  meant : Userkaf,  Sahure,  and  Kakai.  The  adjurations
contain  puns  on  the  names.

1 The  children  come  into  the  world  attired  in  the  royal  blue  and  yellow
head-cloth,  while  the  titulary,  which  the  kings  assumed  on  attaining  the
throne,  is  to  be  read  on  their  limbs  inlaid  in  gold.  The  story-teller  con-
ceives of  the  children  as  inlaid  bronze  figures,  just  as  pointed  out  on
p.  31,  note  5.

3 See  Blackman,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archaology,  x.  p.  196.

4 He  means  probably  the  barrel-like  pottery  receptacles  in  which
grain  and  the  like  are  stored.

6 They  bring  on  the  storm  in  order  to  have  a pretext  for  bringing  back
the  barley.


46


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


they  said  : “ We  pray  you,  let  us  lay  the  barley  here  in  a locked-

up  chamber  until  we  come  again And  they  laid  the

barley  in  a locked-up  chamber.

And  Red-dedet  purified  herself  with  a fourteen  days’  purifica-
tion.1 And  she  said  unto  her  handmaid  : “ Hath  the  house
been  made  ready  ? ” And  she  said  : “ It  hath  been  made
ready  with  every  good  thing,  save  for  pots,  which  cannot  be
brought.”  And  Red-dedet  said : “ Wherefore,  pray,  cannot
pots  be  brought  ? ” And  the  handmaid  said  : “ No  good
can  be  done  here  2 apart  from  the  barley  for  the  dancing-
girls,  and  that  is  in  a chamber  bearing  their  seal.”  And
Red-dedet  said  : “ Go  down  and  fetch  some  of  it,  and  Rewoser
will  recompense  them  therefore  after  he  retumeth.”

So  the  handmaid  went  and  opened  the  chamber.  And  she
heard  in  the  chamber  the  sound  of  singing,  music,  dancing,  rejoic-
ing (?),  and  all  that  is  done  in  a king’s  honour.  Then  she  went
and  told  Red-dedet  all  that  she  had  heard.  And  she  (Red-
dedet)  went  round  the  chamber,  but  could  not  find  the  place
wherein  it  was  being  done.  Then  she  laid  her  temple  to  the
corn-bin,  and  she  found  that  it  was  in  this.  And  she  put  it  in
a chest,  put  this  in  another  locker,  corded  it  with  hide,  put  it
in  a closet  which  contained  her  pots,  and  shut  (the  door)  upon  it.

And  Rewoser  came  in  from  the  field,  and  Red-dedet  related
unto  him  this  matter.  And  he  rejoiced  greatly,  and  they  sat
them  down  and  made  merry.

Now  after  certain  days  had  passed  by,  Red-dedet  was  enraged
with  her  handmaid  about  a matter,  and  had  her  punished  with
a beating.  And  the  handmaid  said  unto  the  people  that  were
in  the  house  : “ Shalt  thou  do  the  . . . ? She  has  born  three
kings.  I will  go  and  tell  it  unto  the  majesty  of  King  Kheops."
So  she  went  and  found  her  eldest  brother  by  her  mother 3
binding  yam  of  flax  on  the  threshing-floor.  And  he  said  unto
her  : “ Whither  art  thou  bound,  little  maiden  ? ” Then  she
related  unto  him  this  matter.  And  her  brother  said  unto  her  :

1 A woman,  therefore,  was  accounted  unclean  for  a period  of  time
after  child-birth.

* See  Gardiner,  Recueil  de  Travaux,  xl.  pp.  79  ff.

3 The  added  designation  is  illustrative  of  the  relationships  of  such
slaves  ; they  belong  to  their  mother,  the  father  counts  for  nothing.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


47


“ And  so  thou  art  come  even  unto  me  (?),  and  I am  to  take  part
in  the  betrayal  (?)  ! ” 1 * And  he  took  a ...  of  flax  to  her,
and  dealt  her  a grievous  blow.  Then  the  handmaid  went  to
fetch  her  a handful  of  water,  and  a crocodile  seized  her.”

Then  her  brother  went  to  tell  it  to  Red-dedet,  and  he  found
Red-dedet  sitting  with  her  head  upon  her  knee  and  her  heart
exceeding  heavy.  And  he  said  unto  her  : “ Wherefore  art
thou  so  troubled  ? ” And  she  said  : “ It  is  this  girl,  that  hath
grown  up  in  the  house.  Lo,  she  is  even  now  gone  forth,  saying  :
‘ I will  go  to  reveal  it ! ’ ” And  he  hung  down  (?)  his  head

and  said  : “ My  mistress,  she  came  and  said  unto  me

beside  me,  and  I dealt  her  a grievous  blow.  And  she  went  to
draw  her  some  water  and  a crocodile  seized  her.”

(Here  the  manuscript  breaks  off.)


5.  THE  DELIVERANCE  OF  MANKIND

The  following  myth,  which  is  a good  example  of  a popular  tale,
has  survived  owing  to  the  author  of  a charm  against  snakes  having
used  it  as  an  introduction  to  the  same.  It  thus  had  the  honour  of
being  included  among  the  texts  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  two  royal
tombs  of  the  New  Kingdom,  and  so  has  been  preserved  for  us.*

(Re),  the  god  that  fashioned  himself,  when  he  was

king  over  men  and  gods  together.  Mankind  devised  an  (evil)
thing.  Now  his  majesty  3 had  become  old,  and  his  bones  were
silver,  his  flesh  gold,  his  hair  real  lapis  lazuli.4

And  his  majesty  discerned  the  things  which  were  (devised)
against  him  by  mankind.  And  his  majesty  said  unto  them
that  were  in  his  following  : “ Pray,  summon  to  me  mine  eye,5
and  Shu,  Tefnet,  Keb,  and  Nut,  together  with  the  fathers  and
mothers  that  were  with  me  when  I was  yet  in  Nun,6  likewise

1 Sense  in  any  case  : I do  not  want  to  have  anything  to  do  with  your
denunciation.

* First  brought  to  notice  by  Naville  in  1875  ; frequently  discussed
and  translated,  most  recently  by  Roeder,  Urkunden  zur  Religion  des
alien  Agyptens,  p.  142.

3 1.e.  Re,  the  sun-god.

* Apparently  regarded  as  the  signs  of  old  age.

6 This  is  originally  the  sun  himself,  as  eye  of  the  sky-god.  It  was
then  also  identified  with  the  oft-mentioned  snake  of  the  sun-god,  and  it
is  here,  in  addition,  identical  with  the  goddess  Hathor.

* The  ocean  in  which  the  sun  originated.


48


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


also  my  god  Nun  himself.  He  shall  bring  his  courtiers  with
him.  Thou  shalt  bring  them  stealthily  (?),  in  order  that  man-
kind may  not  see,  and  that  their  hearts  may  not  be  affrighted.
Thou  shalt  come  with  them  to  the  great  hall,  that  they  may
tell  (us)  their  counsels .”

So  these  gods  were  brought  in,  and  these  gods  came  nigh
unto  him,  and  they  touched  the  ground  with  their  foreheads
in  the  presence  of  his  majesty,  that  he  might  say  his  say  in  the
presence  of  the  Father  of  the  Eldest  Ones,  him  that  had  fashioned
mankind,  the  king  of  men.  They  said  before  his  majesty  :
“ Speak  to  us  that  we  may  hear  it.”  And  Re  said  unto  Nun  :
“ Thou  eldest  god,  in  whom  I came  into  being,  and  ye,  ye  ancestor
gods,  behold,  mankind  that  came  into  being  from  mine  eye  1 —
they  have  devised  a thing  against  me.  Tell  me  what  ye  would
do  concerning  it.  Behold,  I still  ponder,  and  am  slaying  them
not,  until  I have  heard  what  ye  may  say  about  it.”  And  the
majesty  of  Nun  said  : “ My  son  Re,  thou  god  that  is  mightier
than  he  that  created  him,  and  older  than  they  that  fashioned
him,  (only)  sit  thee  down  on  thy  throne  ; the  fear  of  thee  is
great,  if  thine  eye  is  (but)  turned  toward  them  that  blaspheme
thee.”  And  the  majesty  of  Re  said  : “ Behold,  they  are  fled
unto  the  desert,  their  hearts  being  afraid  because  of  what  they
have  said.”  And  they  said  before  his  majesty  : “ Send  forth

thine  eye,  that  it  may  slay  them  for  thee . Let  it  go

down  as  Hathor.”

Then  went  this  goddess  and  slew  mankind  in  the  desert.
The  majesty  of  this  god  said  : “ Welcome,  Hathor  ! Thou  hast
done  that  for  which  I sent  thee  forth.  . . And  this  goddess
said : “ By  thy  life,  I have  prevailed  over  men,  and  that  is
pleasant  in  mine  heart.”  Said  the  majesty  of  Re  : "I  will
prevail  over  them  in  (Herakleopolis  and  ?)  diminish  them.”

So  arose  the  name  Sekhmet 2 meal  of  the  night,  in  order

to  wade  in  their  blood,  beginning  from  Herakleopolis.3

And  Re  said  unto  (his  followers)  : “ Pray  call  to  me  swift-
running messengers,  that  they  may  run  for  me  as  the  shadow
of  a body.”  These  messengers  were  brought  straightway.

1 According  to  another  legend,  which  is  based  on  a pun,  the  sun -god
wept,  and  from  these  tears  mankind  originated.

* “ She  that  prevaileth,”  the  name  of  the  goddess  of  war,  who  is  here
equated  with  Hathor.

* In  this  garbled  speech  Re  expresses  his  determination,  which  he
then  carries  out,  to  rescue  what  is  left  of  mankind.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  49

The  majesty  of  this  god  said : “ Get  you  to  Elephantine  and
bring  me  much  dedi.”  1 And  this  dedi  was  brought  to  him,
and  the  majesty  of  this  great  god  gave  it  unto  Him-with-the-
Side-lock  of  Heliopolis,2  and  he  ground  this  dedi.  Now  the
maidservants  bruised  (?)  barley  for  beer,  and  this  dedi  was
added  to  this  mash  and  it  was  as  human  blood.  And  seven
thousand  jars  of  beer  w’ere  made  ready.

The  majesty  of  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  Re,
came  together  with  these  gods  to  see  this  beer.  Now  it  was  the
morning  whereon  the  goddess  purposed  to  slay  mankind,  when
they  should  go  up.  Said  the  majesty  of  this  god  : “ How
goodly  they  are,3  I will  protect  mankind  thereby.”  And  Re
said  : “ Carry  them  to  the  place  where  she  said  that  she  would
slay  mankind  there.”

The  majesty  of  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  set  to
work  early,  under  cover  of  the  night,  to  have  this  . . . drink
poured  out.  Then  were  the  fields  full  of  liquor  4 to  the  height
of  four  palms  through  the  might  of  the  majesty  of  this  god.

And  this  goddess  came  in  the  morning  and  found  how  this
was  flooded.  Her  face  looked  beautiful  therein.  Then  drank
she  it,  and  it  pleased  her ; she  became  drunken  and  knew  not
mankind.

6.  THE  FOUNDING  OF  A TEMPLE  ■

That  Sesostris  I (1965-1934  b.c.)  undertook  building  operations
in  the  temple  of  Heliopolis  we  can  see  from  his  fine  obelisk,  the
only  noteworthy  relic  of  the  famous  temple  that  has  survived  the
passing  of  the  centuries.  This  building  of  Sesostris  must  have  been
a large  one,  for  the  king  erected  a special  monument  in  order  to
record  to  posterity  his  resolve  to  undertake  the  work,  and  its
inauguration.  The  actual  stone  has  not  come  down  to  us,  but  we
probably  possess  a copy  of  it,  made  by  some  one  in  the  time  of  the
Eighteenth  Dynasty.  The  copy  was  made,  no  doubt,  because  the
text  was  regarded  as  an  example  of  good  literary  style.  Anyhow,
it  was  then  further  made  use  of  in  the  schools,  for,  in  the  manuscript


1 Some  substance  that  stains  red  ; possibly  haematite,  which  is  actu-
ally to  be  found  at  Elephantine.

* See  Sethe,  Zeitschr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  lvii.  pp.  18,  24  [Translator],

3 The  jars  containing  the  beer.  4 The  beer  is  meant.

5 Preserved  in  the  so-called  Berlin  heather  Roll,  a sheet  of  vellum
dating  from  the  time  of  Amenophis  II.  Brought  to  notice  in  1875  by
Ludw.  Stern  ; see  Breasted,  Ancient  Records  of  Egypt,  i.  pp.  240  ff.

4


50  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

with  which  we  are  concerned,  it  is  divided  up  into  verses  and  sections,
and  the  orthography  has  been  changed  into  that  of  the  New  King-
dom— not  without  serious  perversion  of  the  text.

In  the  year  3,  on  the  . . . day  of  the  third  month  of  Inunda-
tion, under  the  majesty  of  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,
Kheperkere,  the  son  of  Re,  Sesostris,  who  liveth  for  ever  and
ever.

The  king  appeared  in  the  double  crown,  and  it  came  to  pass
that  One 1 sat  down  in  the  . . . hall,  and  that  One  asked
counsel  of  his  followers,  the  chamberlains  of  the  palace  and  the
magistrates,  in  the  place  of  seclusion.2  One  commanded,  while
they  hearkened.  One  asked  counsel,  and  caused  them  to  reveal
their  opinion  : “ Behold,  my  majesty  intendeth  a work,  and
bethinketh  him  of  some  good  thing  for  the  time  to  come,  that
I may  erect  a monument  and  set  up  an  abiding  memorial  tablet 3
for  Harakhti.  He  hath  formed  me  in  order  to  do  for  him  what
should  be  done  for  him,  and  to  execute  that  which  he  com-
manded to  be  done.  He  hath  made  me  the  herdsman  of  this
land,  for  he  knew  that  I would  maintain  it  in  order  for  him.
He  hath  bestowed  upon  me  that  which  he  protecteth,  and  that
which  the  eye  4 that  is  in  him  doth  illumine.  All  is  done  in
accordance  with  his  desire .

“ I am  a king  whom  he  (caused  ?)  to  be,  a sovereign .

I conquered  already  as  a babe,5  and  was  great  while  yet  in  the

egg . He  hath  made  me  spacious,  to  be  lord  of  the

Two  Halves,  as  a child,  ere  the  swaddling-clothes  were  loosed
for  me.  He  hath  appointed  me  to  be  lord  of  the  people,  created
me  (.  . .)  in  the  sight  of  mankind,  and  completed  me  for  dweller
in  the  palace  6 when  unborn,  ere  I came  forth  from  between  the
thighs.  He  hath  given  me  (the  land)  in  its  length  and  breadth,
and  I am  brought  up  to  be  an  ‘ if  he  is,  he  conquereth.’ 7 He
hath  given  me  the  land,  and  I am  its  lord.  My  might  hath
reached  the  height  of  heaven.

1 “ One  ” here,  and  subsequently,  denotes  the  king.

* The  innermost  part  of  the  palace.  Probably  so  named  because
Horus  had  grown  up  in  " seclusion.”

3 I.e.  that  on  which  the  inscription  was  cut  ?

4 The  sun  ; cj.  p.  47,  note  5.  5 Literally  : young  bird.

* “ Horus,  the  dweller  in  the  palace,”  as  a designation  of  the  king.

T Similar  bold  constructions  are  fancied  elsewhere,  e.g.  an  “ if  I come,
it  is  brought  to  me  ” for  something  belonging  to  me,  a “ go  out  that  he
may  come  in,”  for  an  overcrowded  place.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


51


“ It  is  excellent  (?)  to  work  for  him  that  hath  made  me,  and
to  content  the  god  with  what  he  hath  given.  I am  like  his  son
and  protector  ; 1 he  hath  commanded  me  to  conquer  what  he
hath  conquered.  I am  the  guardian  of  the  temple  (?),  Horus

. I establish  the  food-offerings  of  the  gods,  and  do  a

work  for  my  father  Atum  in  the  great  hall.  (I)  cause  him  to
have  2 it  as  broad  as  he  hath  caused  me  to  conquer.  I victual
his  altar  on  earth.  I build  mine  house  in  (his)  vicinity.3  Thus
my  beauty  will  be  remembered  in  his  house  ; my  name  will  be
the  benben-stone,  and  my  memorial  the  lake.  It  is  to  gain
eternity,  if  one  doeth  for  him  that  which  is  good,  and  no  king

dieth  that  is  mentioned  because  of  his  4 possessions .

A name  that  standeth  thereupon  is  . . . mentioned  and
perisheth  not  in  eternity.  What  I do  is  what  will  be,  and  what
I seek  is  what  is  excellent .”

And  the  chamberlains  of  the  king  spake  and  answered  before
their  god  : 5 “ Commanding  Utterance  (?)  is  in  thy  mouth,  and
Discernment  is  behind  thee.  O sovereign,  thy  designs  come  to
pass.  O king,  who  hast  appeared  as  uniter  of  the  Two  Lands,
in  order  to  ...  in  thy  temple  ! It  is  excellent  to  look  upon

the  morrow . (But)  mankind  together  (would)  complete

nothing  without  thee,  for  thy  majesty  is  the  eye  of  all  men.
Thou  art  great  when  (thou)  settest  up  thy  monument  in  Helio-
polis, the  dwelling  of  the  gods,  before  thy  father,  the  lord  of
the  great  hall,  Atum,  the  Bull  of  the  Ennead.  Erect  thine  house
and  make  for  it  gifts  for  the  stone  of  oblation,  that  it  may  serve
the  statue,  its  favourite for  all  eternity.”

The  king  himself  said  to  the  chancellor  and  first  chamberlain,
the  superintendent  of  the  two  (gold-)houses  and  silver-houses,
him  that  is  over  the  mysteries  of  the  two  serpent-diadems :
“ It  will  be  thy  counsel  that  causeth  the  work  to  be  accom-
plished . . .,  the  coming  to  pass  of  that  which  my  majesty
desired.  Thou  wilt  be  the  director  thereof,  one  that  will  do

according  to  that  which  is  in  my  heart vigilant,  that

it  may  come  to  pass  without  languor,  and  all  work  that  apper-

1 Horus — who,  to  be  sure,  actually  bears  this  designation  as  the
protector  of  Osiris.

2 By  my  work  on  his  temple.

3 The  king  thus  built  a second  new  temple  beside  the  older  one ;
new  was  then  also  assigned  the  accessories  of  the  old,  a sacred
stone  and  a lake.


52


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


taineth  thereto . They  that  work  are  commanded

to  work  according  to  that  which  thou  wilt  ordain  (concerning
it).”

The  king  appeared  in  the  diadem  and  the  two  feathers,  and
all  the  people  accompanied  him.  The  chief  kherheb  and  scribe
of  the  god’s  book  1 extended  the  line  and  carried  out  the  founda-
tion ceremonies.

Then  his  majesty  caused  the  royal  scribe  of  the  records  to
go  before  the  people,  who  stood  united  together,  out  of  Upper
and  Lower  Egypt.  . . .

7.  THE  WAR  OF.  KING  KAMOSE  2

This  beginning  of  a narrative  is  to  be  found  on  a schoolboy’s
writing-board.]  As  far  as  can  be  decided  on  palaeographical  grounds,
it  dates  from  the  time  in  which  the  events  recorded  took  place,
namely,  the  seventeenth  century  b.c.

It  deals  with  a war  which  Kamose,  the  king  of  Thebes,  waged
against  the  Asiatic  people  known  as  the  HyksSs,  who  had  con-
quered a large  part  of  Egypt,  and  whose  capital,  the  city  of  Avaris,
lay  in  the  north-eastern  Delta.  The  late  tale  of  King  Apophis
and  Sekenenre,  which  I give  below,  is  concerned  with  an  incident
of  the  same  date.  But  what  occurs  on  our  writing-board  is  not
a tale,  but  an  historical  narrative,  which  the  teacher  may  well  have
copied  from  an  inscription  of  Kamose.

The  document  begins  with  the  date  of  the  third  year  of  the  king.
It  then  continues  :

The  strong  king  in  Thebes,  Kamose,  who  is  granted  life  for
ever,  is  an  excellent  king  ; Re  himself  hath  made  him  king  and
hath  granted  to  him  victory  in  very  sooth.

His  majesty  spake  thus  in  his  palace  to  the  council  of  the
great  men  that  was  with  him  : ‘‘I  should  like  to  know  to  what
purpose  serveth  my  strength.  One  prince  sitteth  in  Avaris  and
another  in  Nubia,3  and  there  sit  I together  with  an  Asiatic  and
a negro  ! Each  possesseth  his  slice  of  Egypt  and  divideth  the
land  with  me as  far  as  Memphis.  . . . Behold,  he

1 It  was  the  duty  of  this  adept  in  the  sacred  writings  to  direct  the
ceremonies  of  laying  the  foundations  of  a temple.  This  consisted  mainly
in  marking  out  on  the  ground  the  outline  of  the  building  by  means  of
sticks  and  cords.

s See  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  iii.  pp.  95  ft. ; v.  p.  45  ff.
The  language  already  displays  vulgar  characteristics.

* A Nubian  state  had  therefore  grown  up  at  that  time.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  53

hath  Shmun,1  and  no  man  standeth  still  (?),  being  ruined  by
the  imposts  of  the  Bedouins.  I will  grapple  with  him,2  and  rip
open  his  belly.  My  desire  is  to  deliver  Egypt  and  to  smite  the
Asiatics.”

The  great  men  of  his  council  spake  thus  : “ Behold,  even
if  the  Asiatics  are  come  as  far  as  Cusse,  and  have  pulled  out
their  tongues  all  together  (?),3  yet  are  we  in  quietness  with  our
Egypt.  Elephantine  4 is  strong,  and  the  middle  part  (of  the
land)  belongeth  to  us  as  far  as  Cusae.  The  finest  of  their  fields
are  ploughed  for  us,  our  oxen  are  in  the  Delta,5  wheat  is  sent

for  our  swine,6  our  oxen  are  not  taken  away, he  hath

the  land  of  the  Asiatics  and  we  have  Egypt.  (But)  if  any  man
cometh  and  attacketh  ns  (?),  we  will  act  against  him.”

They  were  displeasing  in  the  heart  of  his  majesty : “ Your

counsel  is  wrong  and  I will  fight  with  the  Asiatics

weepeth,  the  whole  land . Men  shall  say  of  me  in

Thebes  : Kamose,  the  protector  of  Egypt.”

Then  sailed  1 7 down  stream  to  drive  back  the  Asiatics,
according  to  the  command  of  Amun,  that  hath  the  right  counsels.
My  valiant  army  marched  on  before  me  like  a fiery  blast ; the
auxiliary  troop  of  the  Matoi 8 was  our  . . .,  in  order  to  seek
out  the  Bedouins  and  to  blot  out  (?)  their  places.  East  and
West  brought  fat  and  wine  (?),9  and  the  host  wTas  furnished  with
victuals  in  every  place.

I sent  on  the  strong  troop  of  the  Matoi  ahead  (?),  and  I

remained  as  guard in  order  to  coop  up  (?)  Teti,  the

son  of  Pepi,10  in  the  town  of  Nefruisi.  I suffered  him  not  to
escape,  and  held  off  the  Asiatics, .

I passed  the  night  in  my  ship  with  gladsome  heart.  When

1 Shmun — Hermopolis — lies  in  Middle  Egypt.  Perhaps  this  passage
is  to  be  taken  as  stating  that  the  Hyksos  realm  actually  reaches  only  up
to  Memphis,  but  that  it  has  unlawfully  extended  itself  as  far  as  Middle
Egypt,  where  it  hinders  trade  with  its  tariffs.

2 The  enemy  is  not  named  as  being  obvious.

3 Meaning  that  they  put  out  their  tongues  derisively  ?

4 The  frontier  fortress  against  Nubia.

5 The  Upper  Egyptians  have  thus,  in  spite  of  the  Hyksos  domina-
tion, retained  their  property  and  their  rights  of  pasturage.

6 Wheat  was  the  species  of  grain  produced  in  the  Delta.

' From  here  onwards  the  king  recounts  his  deeds.

8 A people  in  Northern  Nubia  who  served  as  mercenaries  in  Egypt.

9 The  ships  received  presents  from  both  banks  of  the  Nile.

10  He  will  be  a vassal  of  the  Hyksos.


54


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


day  dawned,  I was  on  him,  as  it  were  an  hawk.  When  it  was
the  time  of  perfuming  the  mouth,1  I drove  him  back  and  de-
stroyed his  wall  and  slew  his  people.  I caused  his  wife  to  come
down  2 to  the  quay,  and  my  soldiers  were  like  lions  with  their
prey,  with  slaves,  herds,  fat,  and  honey,  dividing  up  their
possessions  with  joyful  hearts .

All  we  can  learn  from  the  few  following  sentences  is  that  a
place,  Per-shak,  was  in  a panic  when  Kamose  came  unto  it  and
their  horses  fled  inside.

B.  INSTRUCTIONS  IN  WISDOM

The  writings  which  compose  this  section  bear  the  name
“ sboyet,”  “ instruction,”  and  are  conceived  of  as  the  addresses  3 *
of  a sage,  in  which  he  instructs  liis  son.  In  some  instances  we
have  to  do  with  a discourse  on  worldly  prudence  and  wisdom,
and  such  books  will  have  been  intended  merely  for  schools  ;
unquestionably  so  the  Instruction  of  Duauf,  which  is  simply
a commendation  of  the  schools.  But  the  customary  designa-
tion “ sboyet  ” also  covers  writings  of  different  content ; what
King  Amenemhet  committed  to  his  son  far  exceeds  the  bounds
of  school  philosophy,  and  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  do  with
school  in  a great  man  warning  his  children  to  be  loyal  to  the
king.

i.  THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  PTAHHOTEP  1

This  book  professes  to  have  been  composed  by  a vizier  of  King
Issi  (about  2675  b.c.  ; according  toother  calculation  about  2870  b.c.),
and,  as  a matter  of  fact,  that  king  did  have  a vizier  of  this  name,
whose  tomb  is  still  known  to  us.5  Though  it  may  rightly  be
doubted  whether  the  book  can  really  claim  this  man  as  its  author,
it  is  certainly  very'  ancient,  and  by  the  time  of  the  Middle  Kingdom
had  already  been  re-edited,  obviously  with  a view  to  making  it

1 Perhaps  breakfast,  otherwise  called  “ mouth- washing,”

2 As  a captive.

3 The  “ instruction  in  the  form  of  a letter.”  which  prevailed  in  the
schools  during  the  New  Kingdom,  does  not  appear  at  an  earlier  date.

1 Preserved  complete  only  in  the  Papyrus  Pnsse  in  Paris,  which  was
written  during  the  Middle  Kingdom.  The  most  recent  edition,  in  which
use  is  made  of  all  the  manuscripts,  is  that  of  Devaud,  Les  Maximes  de
Ptahhotep  (Fribourg,  1916).  Translations,  among  others,  by  Griffith  in
The  World's  Best  Literature,  and  by  Lange  (not  printed).

5 At  Sakkarah  (Mariette,  Mastabas,  D 62 ).


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


55


more  intelligible.  In  this  form  it  was  still  used  as  a school-book
as  late  as  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty.

It  has  a twofold  object.  It  is  intended  to  instruct  the  schoolboy
in  wise  conduct  and  in  good  manners,  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  sets
out  to  be  his  model  for  the  appropriate  expression  of  ideas  ; he  is
to  be  an  “artist  ” in  speech,  and  is  to  express  himself  in  such  choice
language  as  befits  an  official.

In  my  translation  I have  preferred  sometimes  the  older,  and
sometimes  the  newer,  version,  according  as  one  was  more  easy  to
understand  than  the  other.  I have  only  too  often  had  to  forgo
translating  altogether.


[Title. — Older  version.]

The  instruction  of  the  superintendent  of  the  capital,  the
vizier,  Ptahhotep,  under  the  majesty  of  King  Issi,  who  liveth
for  ever  and  ever.

[Introduction. — Later  version.]

So  spake  he  unto  the  majesty  of  King  Issi : Old  age  hath
come  and  dotage  hath  descended.  The  limbs  are  painful  and
the  state  of  being  old  appeareth  as  something  new.  Strength
hath  perished  for  weariness.  The  mouth  is  silent  and  speaketh

not.  The  eyes  are  shrunken  and  the  ears  deaf . The

heart  is  forgetful  and  remembereth  not  yesterday.  The  bone,  it
suffereth  in  old  age,  and  the  nose  is  stopped  up  and  breatheth
not.1  To  stand  up  and  to  sit  down  are  alike  ill.  Good  is
become  evil.  Every  taste  hath  perished.  What  old  age  doeth
to  a man  is  that  it  fareth  ill  with  him  in  all  things.

Let  therefore  the  servant  there  2 be  bidden  to  make  him  a
staff  of  old  age  ; let  my  son  be  set  in  my  place,  that  I may
instruct  him  in  the  discourse  of  them  that  hearken,3  and  in  the
thoughts  of  them  that  have  gone  before,  them  that  have  served
the  ancestors  in  times  past.4  May  they  do  the  like  for  thee,
that  strife  may  be  banished  from  among  the  people,  and  the
Two  River-banks  may  serve  thee.

Said  his  majesty  : “ Instruct  thou  him  in  discourse  first
. May  he  set  an  example  to  the  children  of  the

1 The  nose  was  accounted  the  actual  seat  of  life  (see  p.  26,  note  1).

2 Humble  way  of  saying  “ me  ” ; see  also  p.  22,  note  5.

3 This  must  have  a special  meaning  here.

4 The  viziers  of  previous  kings.  May  my  pupil  be  as  useful  to  you
as  they  were  to  their  kings.


56


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


great ; may  obedience  enter  into  him,  and  every  right  concep-
tion of  him  that  speaketh  unto  him.  There  is  no  child  that
(of  itself)  hath  understanding.”

[Second  title. — Earlier  version.]

The  beautifully  expressed  utterances,  spoken  by  the  prince
and  count,  the  father  of  the  god  and  beloved  of  the  god,1  the
bodily  son  of  the  king,  the  superintendent  of  the  capital  and
vizier,  Ptahhotep,  while  instructing  the  ignorant  in  knowledge
and  in  the  rules  of  elegant  discourse,  the  weal  of  him  that
will  hearken  thereto  and  the  woe  of  him  that  shall  transgress
them.

i.  [Thou  canst  learn  something  from  every  one. —
Later  version.]

Be  not  arrogant  because  of  thy  knowledge,  and  have  no
confidence  in  that  thou  art  a learned  man.  Take  counsel  with
the  ignorant  as  with  the  wise,  for  the  limits  of  art  cannot  be
reached,  and  no  artist  fully  possesseth  his  skill.  A good  dis-
course is  more  hidden  than  the  precious  green  stone,  and  yet
is  it  found  with  slave-girls  over  the  mill-stones.2

2-4.  [Concerning  behaviour  towards  an  orator  (?).]

If  thou  findest  an  orator  (?)  at  his  time,  with  sound  sense
and  better  than  thou,  bend  thine  arm  and  bow  thy  back.  But
if  he  speaketh  ill,  then  fail  not  to  withstand  him,  in  order  that
men  may  call  out  to  him  : “ Thou  ignorant  one.”

But  if  it  is  an  equal  of  thine,  show  thyself  by  silence  to  be
better  than  he,  when  he  speaketh  ill.  Then  will  he  be  praised
by  the  listeners,  but  thy  name  will  be  accounted  good  among  the
great.3

If  he  is  a humble  person,  who  is  not  thine  equal,  be  not
wrathful  against  him,  for  thou  knowest  that  he  is  miserable.

. Disregard  him,  and  so  he  punisheth  himself.  It  is

bad  if  one  injureth  one  that  is  despicable . Thou  smitest

him  with  the  punishment  of  the  great.4

1 Priestly  title.  1 The  poorest  of  the  poor.

* But  see  Gardixer,  Notes  on  the  Story  of  Sinuhe,  p.  31.

4 Does  this  mean  : as  great  people  punish,  by  keeping  silence  and

ignoring  him  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


57


5.  [Thou  wilt  get  on  best  in  life  with  the  aid  of  right
and  truth. — Later  version.]

If  thou  art  a leader  and  givest  command  to  the  multitude,
strive  after  every  excellence,  until  there  be  no  fault  in  thy
nature.  Truth  is  good  and  its  worth  is  lasting,  and  it  hath  not
been  disturbed  since  the  day  of  its  creator,1  whereas  he  that
transgresseth  its  ordinances  is  punished.  It  lieth  as  a (right)
path  in  front  of  him  that  knoweth  nothing.  Wrong-doing  (?)
hath  never  yet  brought  its  venture  to  port.  Evil  indeed  winneth
wealth,  but  the  strength  of  truth  is  that  it  endureth,  and  the
(upright)  man  saith  : “ It  is  the  property  of  my  father.”  2

6.  Possibly  : Thou  canst  obtain  nothing  in  life  by
bluster  ; what  hath  come  to  pass  is  the  command  of  God.

7.  [Concerning  behaviour  as  a guest. — Later  version.]

If  thou  art  one  that  sitteth  where  standeth  the  table  3 of  one
who  is  greater  than  thou,  take,  when  he  giveth,  that  which  is
set  before  thee.  Look  not  at  that  which  lieth  before  him,  but
look  at  that  which  lieth  before  thee.4  Shoot  not  many  glances
at  him,  for  it  is  an  abhorrence  to  the  ka  5 if  one  offendeth  it.

Cast  down  thy  countenance  until  he  greeteth  thee,  and
speak  only  when  he  hath  greeted  thee.  Laugh  when  he  laugheth.
That  will  be  well  pleasing  in  his  heart,  and  what  thou  doest
will  be  acceptable  ; one  knoweth  not  what  is  in  the  heart.6

A great  man,  when  he  sitteth  behind  the  food,  his  resolves
depend  upon  the  command  of  his  ka.  A great  man  giveth  to

1 Re,  who  brought  truth  into  the  world.

3 That  my  father  brought  me  up  in  the  ways  of  truth  is  the  best  thing
he  has  bequeathed  me.

3 The  Egyptians  at  meals  sat  each  at  a low  table  by  himself.  We
are  to  suppose  that  the  exalted  host  had  his  table  in  the  middle,  and  the
guests  theirs  round  about  him.

4 The  host  has  a quantity  of  victuals  before  him  ; do  not  look  greedily

at  them.  fSee  also  Gunn,  Syntax,  pp.  13,  74  (Translator)].

6 Upon  this  vital  force  in  a man  also  depended,  according  to  the  view
here  held,  his  disposition  and  therewith  his  whole  conduct.  In  social
intercourse,  therefore,  particular  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  what  is
unpleasant  to  another’s  ka — what,  as  we  would  say  to-day — gets  on  his
nerves.

6 Prudence  in  the  presence  of  a great  man  is  always  in  place,  for  one
doesn’t  know  his  moods,


58


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


the  man  that  is  within  reach  of  him,  but  the  ka  stretcheth  out
the  hands  for  him  (further).1  Bread  is  eaten  by  the  decree  of
God  2 .

8.  [Be  faithful  ix  the  delivering  of  messages. — Later

VERSION.]

If  thou  art  one  of  the  trusted  ones,  whom  one  great  man
sendeth  to  another,  act  rightly  in  the  matter  when  he  sendeth
thee.  Thou  shalt  deliver  the  message  as  he  saith  it.  Be  not
secretive  concerning  what  may  be  said  to  thee,  and  beware  of
any  forgetfulness.  Hold  fast  to  the  truth  and  overstep  it  not,
even  if  thou  (therewith)  recountest  nothing  that  is  gratifying.
Beware  (also)  of  worsening  words,  such  as  might  make  one  great
man  contemptible  (?)  to  the  other  through  the  manner  of
speech  of  all  men.  “ A great  man,  an  insignificant  one  ” — that
is  what  the  ka  abhorreth.3

9.  If  thou  ploughest  and  there  is  growth  in  the  field  and
God  giveth  it  thee  liberally,  satisfy  not  thy  mouth  beside  thy
kindred  . . . (all  the  rest  unintelligible).

10.  [Do  NOT  SLIGHT  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  RISEN  IN  THE  WORLD.

— Later  version.]

If  thou  art  an  humble  person  and  art  in  the  train  of  a man
of  repute,  one  that  standeth  well  with  the  god,4  know  thou
nothing  of  his  former  insignificance.  Raise  not  up  thine  heart
against  him  on  account  of  what  thou  knowest  about  him  afore-
time. Reverence  him  in  accordance  with  what  hath  happened

unto  him,  for  wealth  cometh  not  of  itself . It  is  God

that  createth  repute .

11.  [Permit  thyself  time  for  recreation. — Older
version.]

Follow  thine  heart 3 so  long  as  thou  livest,  and  do  not  more
than  is  said.  Diminish  not  the  time  in  which  thou  followcst

1 Usually  the  great  man  at  a meal  only  gives  especially  tasty  morsels
to  those  who  sit  beside  him  ; but  if  he  is  in  good  humour  he  will  stretch
out  his  hand  even  as  far  as  you.

2 Probably  the  ka  ; mention  is  also  made  elsewhere  of  the  god  who
is  in  man.

3 Do  not  replace  the  choice  language  of  your  employer  by  ordinary
expressions  ; it  sounds  discordant  when  a great  man  speaks  like  a
nobody.

4 1.e.  the  king.


5 Variant  : thy  ka.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  59

the  heart,  for  it  is  an  abhorrence  to  the  ka  if  its  time  is  dimin-
ished. In  particular  a warning  scents  to  be  uttered  against  too
much  care  for  thine  house.

12.  [Conduct  towards  thy  sox. — Later  version.]

If  thou  art  held  in  esteem,  and  hast  an  household,  and  beget-
test  a son  that  pleaseth  God — if  he  doeth  right,  and  inclineth
to  thy  nature,  and  hearkeneth  to  thine  instruction,  and  his
designs  do  good  in  thine  house,  and  he  hath  regard  for  thy
substance  as  it  befitteth,  search  out  for  him  everything  that
is  good.

He  is  thy  son,  whom  thy  ka  hath  begotten  for  thee  ; separate
not  thine  heart  from  him.

But  if  he  doeth  wrong  and  trespasseth  against  thy  designs,
and  acteth  not  after  thine  instructions,  and  his  designs  are
worthless  in  thine  house,  and  he  defieth  all  that  thou  saycst

then  drive  him  away,  for  he  is  not  thy  son,  he  is  not

born  to  thee .

13.  [On  behaviour  in  the  vestibule  of  the  great.]

If  thou  standest  or  sittest  in  the  vestibule,  wait  quietly  until
thy  turn  cometh.  Give  heed  to  the  servant  that  announceth ;
he  that  is  called  hath  a broad  place.1  The  vestibule  hath  its
rule,  and  every  arrangement  therein  is  in  accordance  with  the
measuring-cord.  It  is  God  who  assigneth  the  foremost  place —
but  one  attaineth  nothing  (?)  with  the  elbow.

14.  Be  discreet  in  thine  intercourse  with  people.

15.  Proclaim  thy  business  without  concealment.  Give  out

thy  thoughts  in  the  council  of  thy  lord . One  ought  to

say  plainly  what  one  knoweth  and  what  one  knoweth  not.  The
last  line  runs  : he  is  silent  and  saith  : “ I have  spoken.”

16.  The  leader,  i.e.  the  high  official,  ought  to  have  in  mind
the  days  that  are  yet  to  come,  or,  as  the  later  version  more  clearly
puts  it : beware  of  the  days  that  are  yet  to  come,  thus  probably
the  ever-threatening  displeasure  of  the  king.

17.  [Behaviour  towards  petitioners. — Later  version.]

If  thou  art  one  to  wrhom  petition  is  made,  be  kindly  when

thou  hearkenest  to  the  speech  of  a petitioner.  Deal  not  roughly
1 l.e.  he  need  not  push  himself  forward  in  unseemly  fashion.


60  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

with  him,  until  he  hath  swept  out  his  body,1  and  until  he  hath
said  that  on  account  of  which  he  is  come.  A petitioner  liketh
it  well  if  one  noddeth  to  his  addresses,  until  he  hath  made  an

end  of  that  about  which  he  came . A favourable

audience  gladdeneth  the  heart.

But  whoso  acteth  the  churl  towards  petitioners,  then  men
say  : “ Why  is  it,  pray,  that  he  so  doeth  ? ”

18.  [Warning  against  women.]

If  thou  wouldst  prolong  friendship  in  an  house  to  which  thou
hast  admittance,  as  master,  or  as  brother,  or  as  friend,  into
whatsoever  place  thou  enterest,  beware  of  approaching  the
women.  The  place  where  they  are  is  not  good.

On  that  account  a thousand  go  to  perdition  : Men  are  made
fools  by  their  gleaming  limbs,  and  lo  ! they  are  (already)  become
herset-stones.2  A trifle,  a little,  the  likeness  of  a dream,  and
death  cometh  as  the  end .

19.  [Warning  against  covetousness.]

If  thou  desirest  thy  conduct  to  be  good,  to  set  thyself  free
from  all  that  is  evil,  then  beware  of  covetousness,  which  is  a
malady,  diseaseful,  incurable.  Intimacy  with  it  is  impossible  ;
it  maketh  the  sweet  friend  bitter,  it  alienateth  the  trusted  one
from  the  master,  it  maketh  bad  both  father  and  mother,  to-
together  with  the  brothers  of  the  mother,  and  it  divorceth  a
man’s  wife.  It  is  a bundle  (?)  of  every  kind  of  evil,  and  a bag
of  everything  that  is  blameworthy.  Long  lived  is  the  man
whose  rifle  of  conduct  is  right,  and  who  goeth  in  accordance
with  his  (right)  course  ; he  winneth  wealth  thereby,  but  the
covetous  hath  no  tomb.3

20.  [The  same. — Older  version.]

Be  not  covetous  regarding  division,  and  be  not  exacting,
except  with  regard  to  what  is  due  to  thee.  Be  not  covetous
towards  thy  kindred  ; the  request  of  the  meek  availeth  more

1 A similar  comparison  of  the  unburdening  of  the  heart  with  the
emptying  of  the  belly  is  also  employed  in  the  Complaints  of  the  Peasant.

2 The  shining  limbs  attract  you,  but  after  brief  enjoyment  they
appear  as  discoloured  to  you  as  the  herset-stone,  which  is  accounted
elsewhere  as  the  sign  of  affliction.

2 The  sign  of  the  extremest  poverty.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  61

than  strength . Just  the  little  of  which  he  hath  been

defrauded,  createth  enmity  (even)  in  one  of  a cool  disposition.

21.  [The  advantage  of  marriage.— Older  version.]

If  thou  art  a man  of  note,1  found  for  thyself  an  household,
and  love  thy  wife  at  home,  as  it  beseemeth.  Fill  her  belly,
clothe  her  back  ; unguent  is  the  remedy  for  her  limbs.  Gladden
her  heart,  so  long  as  she  liveth  ; she  is  a goodly  field  for  her
lord.

To  this,  apparently,  another  warning  is  appended  : hold  her
back  from  getting  the  mastery  and  the  like .2

22.  [Be  liberal  towards  thine  intimates. — Later
version.]

Satisfy  thine  intimates  with  that  which  hath  accrued  to
thee,  as  one  favoured  of  God.  To  do  this  is  prudent,  for  there
is  none  that  knoweth  his  condition,  if  he  thinketh  of  the  morrow.
If,  therefore,  a misfortune  befalleth  the  favoured  ones,  it  is  the
intimates  that  still  say  “ Welcome ! ” to  him.  . . . Thus
retain  for  thyself  their  attachment  against  the  time  of  displeasure
that  threateneth.

23.  Repeat  not  frivolous  speeches,  the  utterance  for  instance
of  one  that  is  heated.

24.  [Be  cautious  in  speech.]

If  thou  art  a man  of  note,  that  sitteth  in  the  council  of  his
lord,  fix  (?)  thine  heart  upon  what  is  good.  Be  silent — this
is  better  than  teftef-flowers.  Speak  (only)  if  thou  knowest
that  thou  canst  unravel  (the  difficulty).  It  is  an  artist  that
speaketh  in  council,  and  to  speak  is  harder  than  any  other
work .

25.  Only  the  beginning  is  intelligible : If  thou  art  strong

and  inspirest  respect,  through  knowledge  or  through  pleasant-
ness of  speech .

26.  Approach  not  a great  one  in  his  hour,3  and  anger  not

the  heart  of  him  that  is  laden ; this  is  a dangerous

1 1.e.  hast  attained  eminence  in  thy  profession.

2 In  this  passage  the  older  version  employs  a term  for  “ wife  ” that  is
more  than  blunt,  and  this  the  later  modestly  replaces  with  “ woman.”

3 I.e.  probably,  when  he  is  at  his  work.


62  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

thing,  which  detacheth  the  ka  from  him  that  loveth  him,  him
that  supplieth  food  together  with  the  god  1 .

27.  Instruct  a great  one  in  that  which  is  profitable  to  him  ;

that  will  also  be  of  advantage  to  thee,  for  thy  sustenance  dependeth
upon  his  ka,  and  thy  back  will  be  clothed  thereby.

28.  If  thou  art  the  son  of  a man  of  the  bureaucracy,  an

envoy,  that  is  to  make  the  multitude  content , be  not

partial .

29.  Do  not  harbour  a grudge  ?

30.  [Trust  not  fortune. — Older  version.]

If  thou  be  grown  great,  after  that  thou  wast  of  small  account,
and  have  gotten  thee  substance,  after  that  thou  wast  aforetime
needy  in  the  city  which  thou  knowest,2  forget  (?)  not  how  it
fared  with  thee  in  time  past.  Trust  (?)  not  in  thy  riches,  that
have  accrued  to  thee  as  a gift  of  God.  Thou  art  not  better  {?)
than  another  that  is  thine  equal,  to  whom  the  same  hath
happened.3

31.  [Respect  for  superiors. — Older  version.]

Bend  thy  back  to  him  that  is  over  thee,  thy  superior  of  the
king’s  administration.  So  will  thine  house  endure  with  its
substance,  and  thy  pay  be  duly  awarded.  To  resist  him  that
is  set  in  authority  is  evil.  One  liveth  so  long  as  he  is  in-
dulgent. —

32.  Do  not  have  intercourse  with  a woman  with  (?)  a child
(1 one  that  is  pregnant  ?).

33.  [Prudence  in  engaging  in  friendships.]

If  thou  lookest  for  a state  of  friendship,  ask  no  question,

but  draw  near  him  and  be  with  him  alone . Prove  (?)

his  heart  by  a conversation.  If  he  betrayeth  aught  that  he
hath  seen,  or  doeth  aught  with  which  thou  art  vexed,  then  take
heed,  even  in  thine  answers .

1 1.e.  the  king;  upon  him  and  upon  the  partiality  of  your  superior
your  fate  depends.

2 In  thine  home,  not  yet,  as  now,  at  court.

* Impoverishment  ; he  avoids  naming  the  misfortune.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


63


34.  Have  a cheerful  countenance  when  thou  celebratest  a
feast  and  distributest  bread  thereat.

35.  Perhaps  : Riches  are  inconstant,  but  a good  disposition
is  a lasting  possession.

36.  Quite  unintelligible.

37.  [Let  not  thy  concubine  starve  (?)]

If  thou  takest  to  wife  one  that  is  well-nurtured,  one  that

is  cheerful,  one  that  the  people  of  her  city  know, put

her  not  away,  but  give  her  to  eat.1

[Now  comes  a long  epilogue,  in  which  the  usefulness  of  this
instruction  is  extolled : it  should  be  handed  on  from  generation
to  generation,  because  of  its  excellent  contents  and  its  beautiful
form :]

If  thou  hearest  this  that  I have  spoken  unto  thee,  thy  whole
state  will  be  as  good  as  that  of  them  who  have  gone  before.
What  remaineth  over  of  their  truth  is  noble,  and  the  remembrance
of  them  perisheth  not  in  the  mouth  of  men,  because  their  maxims
are  so  goodly.  Every  word  (of  theirs)  will  be  used  (?)  always  as
a thing  imperishable  in  this  land,  and  will  beautify  the  utterances
with  (?)  which  the  princes  speak.2

It  is  that  which  teacheth  a man  to  speak  to  posterity  that
it  may  hear  it,  and  to  be  an  artist,  one  that  hath  heard  what
is  good,  and  that  now  on  his  part  speaketh  to  posterity  that  it
may  hear  it.

If  a good  nature  is  formed  in  him  that  is  the  one  set  in
authority,3  he  will  be  excellent  for  ever  and  all  his  wisdom  will
endure  eternally ; the  wise  man’s  soul  is  glad  when  he  causeth
his  beauty  ...  to  endure  on  earth.

Then  men  see  how  admirable  he  is  : his  heart  is  evenly
balanced  (?)  to  his  tongue,  and  his  lips  are  exact  when  he  speaketh ;
his  eyes  see,  and  his  ears  together  hear  what  is  profitable  for
his  son,  that  doeth  right  and  is  free  from  lying.

1 The  other  version  is  more  explicit : make  her  fat  by  eating.

2 Discourse  is  adorned  with  quotations  from  these  proverbs.

3 Or  does  it  mean  : if  it  is  recognized  by  a person  set  in  authority  ?
What  follows  possibly  asserts  that  he  will  take  care  that  the  wise  teaching
is  perpetuated  on  earth.


64


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[The  next  section,  which  was  certainly  a masterpiece  in  respect
of  style,  plays  with  the  word  “ to  hear."  The  translation  is
particularly  difficult.  He  who  “ has  heard  ” is  he  who  has  adopted
his  father’s  wisdom.']

To  hear  is  excellent  for  a son  that  hath  heard ; the  hearer
entereth 1 as  one  that  hath  heard,  and  he  that  hath  heard
becometh  a hearer  2 that  heareth  well  and  speaketh  well.  Every
one  that  hath  heard  is  something  excellent,  and  it  is  excellent
for  one  that  hath  heard  to  hear.  To  hear  is  better  than  all  that
is,  and  fair  favour  accrueth  thereby.  How  good  is  it  for  a son
to  receive  it,  when  his  father  speaketh  ; thereby  old  age  be-
cometh his  portion.

He  whom  God  loveth,  heareth,  but  he  whom  God  hateth,
heareth  not.  It  is  the  heart  that  maketh  its  owner  into  one
that  heareth  or  one  that  heareth  not.  His  heart  is  a man’s
fortune .3

How  good  is  it  when  a son  hearkeneth  to  his  father,  and
how  happy  is  he  to  whom  this  is  said.4  A son,  that  is  good  as
a lord  of  hearing,  that  hath  heard,  and  to  whom  it  is  said  . . .
that  is  honoured  of  his  father,  the  memory  of  him  remaineth
in  the  mouth  of  the  living,  them  that  are  now  upon  earth  and
them  that  shall  be.

If  a son  accepteth  it,  when  his  father  saith  it,  not  one  of  his

plans  miscarrieth. He  will  be  esteemed  among  the

magistrates , whereas  evil  cometh  on  him  that  heareth

not.  A wise  man  riseth  early  in  order  to  establish  himself,5
but  the  ignorant  doeth  not  so.

As  for  the  fool  that  heareth  not,  he  can  do  nothing  at  all.
He  regardeth  knowledge  as  ignorance,  and  good  as  bad.  He
will  do  everything  that  is  blameworthy,  so  that  complaint  is
laid  against  him  every  day.  He  liveth  on  that  wherefrom
others  die,  and  it  is  his  food  to  speak  ill.  This  his  nature  is
known  to  the  magistrates;  daily  doth  death  threaten  him(?),
and  men  shun  him  because  of  the  multitude  of  misfortunes  that
are  daily  upon  him.

A son  that  hath  heard  is  a worshipper  of  Horus.6  He
prospereth  after  he  hath  heard.  When  he  hath  grown  old  and

1 Into  the  palace  ? 2 Is  this  an  official  post  ?

J A man’s  fate  does  not  rest  with  him  ; it  depends  on  his  talents.

4 The  father  ? 5 In  his  good  profession  ?

* One  of  the  legendary  primaeval  kings.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


65


hath  attained  honour,  he  talketh  in  like  manner  to  his  children
and  reneweth  the  instruction  of  his  father.  And  every  one  that  is
so  instructed  should  talk  to  his  children,  and  they  again  to  theirs.  . . .
May  the  people  who  shall  see  (them)  say  : “ He  is  as  that  one
was,”  and  also  the  people  who  shall  hear  (of  them)  shall  say  :
“ He  is  as  that  one  was  ” .

Take  no  word  away,  and  add  nothing  thereto,  and  put  not
one  thing  in  the  place  of  another.1

Thy  lord  also  shall  say  : “ This  is  the  son  of  that  one,”  and
they  that  hear  it  (shall  say)  : “ Praised  be  he  to  whom  he  was

bom  ” . May  the  magistrates  that  will  hear  it  say  :

“ How  goodly  are  the  utterances  of  his  mouth.”

So  act  that  thy  lord  may  say  concerning  thee  : “ How
goodly  was  the  instruction  of  his  father.  He  issued  from  him,
from  his  body,  and  he  hath  told  (it)  unto  him,  and  it 2 is  all  in
(his)  body,  and  what  he  hath  done  is  yet  greater  than  what  was
told  to  him.  Behold,  this  is  a good  son,  one  that  God  giveth,
one  that  did  more  than  what  was  told  him  by  his  lord.  He
doeth  right  and  his  heart  doeth  after  its  (right)  course.”

Mayest  (?)  thou  reach  me 3 being  sound  in  body,  and  so  that
the  king  is  satisfied  with  all  that  hath  been  done,  and  mayest
thou  pass  many  years  in  life.  It  is  not  little  that  I have  wrought
upon  earth.  I have  spent  an  hundred  and  ten  years  4 in  life,
which  the  king  hath  given  me,  and  with  rewards  beyond  those
of  them  that  have  gone  before,  because  I did  right  for  the  king
up  to  the  place  of  honour.3

In  what  esteem  our  hook  was  held  can  he  seen , moreover,  from
the  fact  that  single  phrases  were  quoted  from  it  in  inscriptions.
Thus  a certain  Amenemhet ,6  who  lived  during  the  Eighteenth
Dynasty,  says,  speaking  of  himself  and  his  superior  : I shot  not
many  glances  at  him.  I cast  down  my  countenance  when  he
spake  with  me  ; this  he  has  extracted  from  precept  7.  And  upon
the  monument,  which  glorifies  King  Sesdstris  Ill’s  conquest  of

1 Alter  nothing  in  this  book  ; a warning  that  has  certainly  not  pro-
tected the  book  from  being  completely  recast.

2 The  instruction.  3 Be  as  successful  as  I.

* The  proverbial  long  life.  The  king  bestows  long  life,  inasmuch  as  he
gives  a man  sustenance  for  a corresponding  length  of  time.

5 Old  age.  * Zeitschr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  xlvii,  pp,  87  fl.

5


66


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Nubia,1  we  read : he  is  not  thy  son,  he  is  not  born  to  thee,
which  is  derived  from  our  precept  12.

2.  THE  INSTRUCTION  FOR  KAGEMNI 8

This  must  have  been  a similar  work  to  the  Instruction  of  Ptah-
hotep.  In  the  lost  beginning  it  was  probably  related  that  the  old
king  Huni  (dating  from  the  end  of  the  Third  Dynasty)  commanded
his  vizier  to  put  his  life’s  experiences  in  writing  for  the  benefit  of
his  children,  among  whom  was  included  the  future  vizier  Kagemni.
There  actually  was  a vizier  of  this  name,  though  several  hundred
years  later,  and  the  author  of  this  work  will  have  had  some  dim
recollection  of  his  name.

1.  "OX  DISCRETION  IN  SPEECH.]

the  humble  remaineth  whole,  and  he  that  dealeth

uprightly  is  praised  ; the  tent  is  opened  for  the  humble,  and
he  that  is  cautious  in  speech  (?)  hath  a broad  place,  but  the  knife
is  sharp  against  him  that  strayeth  from  the  path .

2.  [On  behaviour  at  a meal.]

If  thou  sittest  with  many  persons,  hold  the  food  in  abhor-
rence, even  if  thou  desirest  it ; 3 it  taketh  only  a brief  moment

to  master  oneself,  and  it  is  disgraceful  to  be  greedy.

A cup  of  water  quencheth  the  thirst,  and  if  the  mouth  be  full
of  . . it  strengtheneth  the  heart.  A good  thing  taketh  the
place  of  that  which  is  good,4  just  a little  taketh  the  place  of
much.  He  is  a miserable  man  that  is  greedy  for  his  body .

3.  [The  same  subject.]

If  thou  sittest  with  a greedy  person,  eat  thou  only  when
his  meal  is  over,  and  if  thou  sittest  with  a drunkard,  take  thou
only  when  his  desire  is  satisfied.  Rage  not  against  the  meat
in  the  presence  of  a . . . ; take  when  he  giveth  thee,  and  refuse
it  not.  Think,  that  softeneth  him.

4.  [Strive  to  obtain  a good  profession  ? ]

1 In  the  Berlin  Museum.

2 Preserved  in  the  Paris  papyrus  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,  which  also
contains  the  Instruction  of  Ptahhotep  ; translated,  as  is  that,  by  Griffith  and
Lange.

3 Assume  this  manner  out  of  humility.

* A simple  but  good  dish  sufficeth  thee  instead  of  the  better  one.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


67


5.  [Be  not  boastful.]

Be  not  boastful  of  thy  strength  in  the  midst  of  those  of
thine  own  age.  Be  on  thy  guard  against  any  withstanding
thee  (?).  One  knoweth  not  what  may  chance,  what  God  doeth
when  He  punisheth.

6.  [Concluding  narrative.]

The  vizier  had  his  children  called  after  he  had  completed
(his  treatise  on)  the  ways  of  mankind  and  on  their  character
as  encountered  by  him.  And  he  said  unto  them  : “ All  that  is

in  this  book,  hear  it  as  if  (?)  I spake  it .”  Then  they

placed  themselves  upon  their  bellies.  They  read  it  as  it  stood
in  writing,  and  it  was  better  in  their  heart  than  everything
that  was  in  this  entire  land  ; they  stood  and  they  sat  in  accord-
ance therewith.1 2

The  majesty  of  King  Huni  came  to  port,3  and  the  majesty
of  King  Snefru  was  raised  up  as  beneficent  king  in  this  whole
land.  Then  was  Kagemni  appointed  superintendent  of  the
capital  and  vizier.

3.  THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  DUAUF  3

This  Instruction  was  a favourite  work  in  the  schools  of  the  late
New  Kingdom,  and  it  is,  moreover,  preserved  only  in  schoolboys’
exercises  of  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty  (about  1300  B.c.)  — com-
pletely in  two  papyri,  and  in  parts  on  several  ostraca.  The  way
in  which  the  boys  have  mangled  the  text  baffles  description.
There  are  not  manv  passages  in  it  with  regard  to  which  one  does
not  despairingly  ask  what  can  have  been  written  there  originally  ;
for  what  the  boys  have  written  are  only  too  often  meaningless
words — they  simply  did  not  understand  what  they  had  to  copy
out.  Of  many  paragraphs,  therefore,  I can  only  translate  a small
portion.

It  is  not  surprising  that  this  work  was  such  a favourite  school
textbook,  for  it  is  written  to  extol  schools  and  a school-education,
exactly  as  are  the  fictitious  letters  to  and  from  schoolmasters  in
the  New  Kingdom.  It  can  be  seen  from  the  personal  names  con-


1 They  regulated  their  behaviour  in  accordance  with  it.

2 Usual  euphemism  for  “ to  die."

3 Preserved  in  Pap.  Sallier,  ii  and  Pap.  Auastasi,  vii.  in  the  British
Museum.  Brought  to  light  by  Goodwin  in  1858  ; edited  by  Maspero,
Genre  eptstolatre,  pp  48  tf.  A recent  edition  is  wanting.


68


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


tained  in  this  Instruction,  that  it  is  to  be  dated  to  the  time  between
the  Old  and  Middle  Kingdoms.

Instruction,  which  a . . . man,1  named  Duauf,  the  son  of
Khety,  composed  for  his  son,  named  Pepi,  when  he  voyaged  up
to  the  Residence,  in  order  to  put  him  in  the  School  of  Books,
among  the  children  of  the  magistrates .

He  said  unto  him  : I have  seen  him  that  is  beaten,  him  that
is  beaten  : thou  art  to  set  thine  heart  on  books.  I have  beheld
him  that  is  set  free  from  forced  labour  : behold,  nothing  sur-
passed books.2

Read  at  the  end  of  the  Remit ; 3 thou  findest  this  sentence
therein  : “ The  scribe,  his  is  every  place  at  the  Residence  and
he  is  not  poor  in  it.4  But  he  that  acteth  according  to  the  under-
standing of  another,5  he  hath  no  success.”  The  other  professions
also  are  as  this  sentence  purported.

Would  that  I might  make  thee  love  books  more  than  thy
mother,  would  that  I might  bring  their  beauty  before  thy  face.

It  is  greater  than  any  calling. If  he  6 hath  begun  to

succeed,  and  is  yet  a child,  men  greet  him.7  He  is  sent  to  carry
out  behests,  and  he  cometh  not  home  that  he  may  don  the  apron.8

Never  have  I seen  a sculptor  on  an  errand,  nor  a goldsmith
as  he  was  being  sent  forth.  But  I have  seen  the  smith  at  his
task  at  the  mouth  of  his  furnace.  His  fingers  were  like  stuff
from  crocodiles,9  he  stank  more  than  the  offal  (?)  of  fishes.

Every  artisan  that  wieldeth  the  chisel  (?),  he  is  wearier
than  he  that  delveth ; his  field  is  the  wood  and  his  hoe  is  the
metal.10  In  the  night,  when  he  is  set  free,  he  worketh  beyond
what  his  arms  can  do  ; in  the  night  he  burned  a light.11

The  stone-mason  seeketh  for  work  (?)  in  all  manner  of  hard
stone.  When  he  hath  finished  it,  his  arms  are  destroyed  and

1 Apparently  a person  of  low  standing.

2 The  uneducated  is  faced  with  a life  of  flogging,  the  educated  need
not  do  any  rough  work.

3 Is  this  the  name  of  some  old  book  ?

4 Meaning  probably : Every  office  which  a scribe  fills  is  in  con-
nection with  the  court,  and  so  the  scribe  has  a share  before  others  in  all
the  favours  which  are  distributed  there.

4 Thus  is  himself  not  a learned  official.  8 The  schoolboy.

7 So  soon  do  men  begin  to  treat  him  with  deference.

8 The  ‘‘apron”  here  and  further  on  will  denote  the  clothing  of  the
artisan.

• As  crinkled  and  hard  as  their  skin.  18  I.e,  the  chisel.

11  Even  at  night  there  is  no  respite  for  him.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


69


he  is  weary.  When  such  an  one  sitteth  down  at  dusk,  his
thighs  and  his  back  are  broken.

The  barber  shaveth  late  into  the  evening , he

betaketh  him  from  street  to  street,  in  order  to  seek  (?)  whom  he
may  shave.  He  straineth  his  arms  in  order  to  fill  his  belly,  even
as  a bee  that  feedeth  at  its  work.1

The  . . . sails  down  to  the  Delta  in  order  to  get  the  purchase-
money,2  and  he  worketh  beyond  that  his  arms  can  do.  The
gnats  3 slay  him .

The  small  bricklayer  4 with  the  Nile  mud  (?),  he  spendeth
his  life  among  the  cattle  (?)  ; he  is  somehow  concerned  with  vines

and  swine,5  his  clothes  are  stiff, he  worketh  (?)  with  his

feet,  he  poundeth .

Let  me  tell  thee  further  of  the  builder  of  walls,  that  is  oft-
times  sick  (?),  his  raiment  is  likewise  vile ; what  he  eateth  is  the
bread  of  his  fingers  and  he  washeth  himself  once  only.  — He
fares  so  ill  that  the  sage  has  to  devote  a second  paragraph  to  him,
of  which  only  a little  is  intelligible  to  us  :

He  is  more  miserable  than  one  can  rightly  tell  (?).  He  is
like  a block  of  stone  (?)  in  a room,  which  measureth  ten  cubits  by

six  cubits. The  bread,  he  giveth  it  unto  his  house  ;

his  children  are  beaten,  beaten.

The  gardener  bringeth  loads,6  and  his  arm  and  neck  ache
beneath  them.  At  morn  he  watereth  the  leek,  and  at  even  the
vines . It  also  goeth  more  ill  with  him  than  any  calling.

The  field-worker,  his  reckoning  endureth  for  ever ; 7 he

hath  a louder  voice  than  the  abu-bird . He,  too,  is

wearier  than  can  be  told  (?),  and  he  farcth  as  well  as  one  fareth

among  lions  ; he  is  oft-times  sick  (?), and  when  he

cometh  unto  his  house  at  eventide,  the  going  hath  cut  him  to
pieces  (?).8

1 As  indefatigable  as  it  collects  honey.  - 1 iius  d trailer  ?

3 The  pest  of  the  Delta.

1 This  seems  to  be  the  bricklayer  who  makes  brick  out  of  Nile  mud

and  builds  with  them.

5 In  the  Egyptian  there  is  a play  on  the  words  “ vines  ” and  “ swine,”
and  it  is  probably  on  that  account  that  they  are  brought  together  here.

6 The  produce  of  the  garden

7 Probably^  the  settling  up  of  accounts  with  the  owner,  so  often  de-
picted in  the  old  tombs  ; the  standing  jokes  m the  scenes  being  that  the
peasants  talk  a great  deal  and  get  a hiding.

s The  long  roads  have  worn  him  out  ?


70


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


The  weaver  (?)  in  the  workshop,  he  fareth  more  ill  than  any
women.1  His  thighs  are  upon  his  belly,2  and  he  breatheth  no
air.  On  a day,  when  no  weaving  is  done,  he  must-  pluck  (?)  lotus
flowers  in  the  pond.  He  giveth  bread  to  the  doorkeeper,3  that
he  may  suffer  him  to  come  into  the  daylight.

The  fletcher,  he  fareth  ill  exceedingly,  when  he  goeth  up
into  the  desert.4  Much  giveth  he  for  his  ass,  much  giveth  he
for  what  is  in  the  field.5  When  he  setteth  out  on  the  road  (?)

and  corneth  unto  his  house  at  eventime,  the  going

hath  cut  him  to  pieces  (?).

The  . . . goeth  up  into  the  desert,  and  (first)  maketh  over
his  goods  to  his  children,  for  fear  of  the  lions  and  the  Asiatics

and  corneth  unto  his  house  at  eventide,  the  going  hath

cut  him  to  pieces  (?) .

The  . . .,  his  fingers  stink,  and  the  odour  thereof  is  abhor-
rent (?) . He  spendeth  the  day  cutting  reed,  and

clothes  are  his  abhorrence.6 *

The  cobbler,  he  fareth  ill  exceedingly  ; he  beggeth  ever.
He  fareth  as  well  as  one  fareth  among  . . . What  he  biteth
is  leather.’

The  fuller  washeth  upon  the  river  bank,  a near  neighbour

of  the  crocodile . This  is  no  peaceful  calling  in  thine

eyes,  that  would  be  more  tranquil  than  all  callings .

The  fowler,  he  fareth  ill  exceedingly,  when  he  looketh  at
the  birds  in  the  sky.  When  the  passers-by  8 are  joined  to  the
heaven,  he  saith  : “ Would  that  I had  a net  here.”  But  God
giveth  him  no  success  (?).

Let  me  tell  thee  further,  how  it  fareth  with  the  fisherman  ;
it  goeth  more  ill  with  him  than  any  other  calling.  Is  not  his
work  upon  the  river,  where  he  is  mixed  with  the  crocodiles  ?
. One  saith  not  : “ There  is  a crocodile  there  ” ; fear


1 Who  also  must  always  sit  in  the  house.

- He  squats  on  the  ground  on  his  haunches  3 He  bribes  him.

1 Where  he  fashions  the  arrow-heads  out  of  the  quantities  of  flints

that  are  to  be  found  there.

5 1 he  donkey's  fodder.  b Because  he  is  standing  in  the  water.

7 He  uses  his  teeth  at  his  work  in  order  to  pull  tight  the  sandal-straps,
as  he  is  actually  shown  doing  in  a scene  on  a tomb  wall  (Rosellini,  Mon.

Civili  , Ixiv.  i).  The  jest  obviously  is  that  this  is  the  only  thing  that
comes  between  his  teeth.

" The  migratory  birds,  which  formed  a substantial  item  in  the  food-
supply  of  the  Egyptians


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


71


hath  blinded  him . Behold,  there  is  no  calling  that  is

without  a director  except  (that  of)  the  scribe,  and  he  is  the
director.1

If  he  knoweth  the  books,  then  true  of  him  is  : “ They  are

good  for  thee  ” . What  I now  do  on  the  voyage  up  to

the  Residence,  lo,  I do  it  out  of  love  for  thee.  A day  at  school
is  profitable  to  thee,  and  its  work  cndureth  even  like  the
mountains .

Most  of  what  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  sections  is  unin-
telligible. .Is  the  introduction  to  them  shows  : Let  me  say  to
thee  further  yet  other  words  in  order  to  instruct  thee,  they  deal
with  a new  theme  ; indeed,  they  may  be  a later  addition.  The
one  section  teaches  good  behaviour  in  the  presence  of  the  great  : If
thou  enterest,  while  the  master  of  the  house  is  in  his  house,  and
he  hath  to  do  with  another  first,  while  thou  sittest  with  thine  hand
to  thy  mouth,  ask  not  for  anything.  Further  : Speak  no  hidden

words  and  speak  no  insolent  words . Then  : If  thou

comest  from  school  and  midday  is  announced  to  thee,  and  thou

goest  shouting  joyously  in  the  streets,  then . If  a

great  man  sendeth  thee  with  a message,2  repeat  it  as  he  saith  it ;
take  nothing  therefrom  and  add  nothing  thereto .

Be  content  with  thy  diet : If  three  loaves  satisfy  thee,  and
thou  drinkest  two  pots  of  beer,  and  the  belly  is  not  yet  contented,
fight  against  it  (?).

Behold,  it  is  good  if  thou  sendest  away  the  multitude  and

hearkenest  (alone)  to  the  words  of  the  great. Make  a

friend  of  a man  of  thy  generation.

Behold,  Renenet  3 is  upon  the  way  of  God  ; Renenet,  the
scribe  hath  her  upon  his  arm  on  the  day  of  his  birth.4  He
arriveth  at  the  vestibule  (?)  of  the  officials,  when  he  is  grown  up  (?) .
Behold,  no  scribe  lacketh  sustenance,  the  thingsof  the  king’s  house.

Mesekhent 5 hath  vouchsafed  success  to  the  scribe ; at  the

1 This  thought  is  the  culmination  of  all  that  the  sage  has  hitherto  been
saying.

- In  the  school  or  on  the  way  home  ?

3 The  goddess  of  the  harvest  ; the  following  sentences  assert  somehow
or  other  that  a scribe  never  suffers  want.

4 This  will  have  some  connection  with  the  custom,  which  we  know
from  statues,  of  having  the  name  of  one’s  master  either  branded  or
tattoed  on  the  upper  part  of  the  arm.  So  the  scribe  is  the  property  of  the
goddess,  who  gives  plentiful  sustenance.

5 The  goddess  of  birth,  see  p.  44,  note  2.


72  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

head  of  the  officials  is  he  set,  and  his  father  and  his  mother

thank  God  for  it . Behold,  this  it  is  that  I set  before

thee  and  thy  children's  children.

4.  THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  KING  AMENEMHET  1

This  book  also  seems  to  have  been  held  in  high  esteem  during
the  New  Kingdom,  for  it  is  preserved  in  four  different  papyri,  and
extracts  from  it  are  found  on  at  least  nine  ostraca.  Unfortunately
there  is  no  older  manuscript,  and,  with  one  exception,  they  are
all  writing-exercises  of  schoolboys  of  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty
[circa  1300  B.c./,  and  teem  with  mistakes.

The  great  king  Amenemhet  I (1955-1965  b.c.),  in  the  twentieth
year  of  his  reign,  as  we  know  from  other  sources,  made  his  son
Sesostris  I co-regent,  and  withdrew  from  the  outward  activities  of
political  life.

Our  document  represents  the  aged  king  as  recounting  to  his
son  on  this  occasion,  by  way  of  admonishment,  the  events  which
induced  him  to  take  this  step  ; he  had  reaped  ingratitude,  and  an
attempt  had  been  made  on  his  life.

Instruction,  which  the  majesty  of  King  Sehetepibre,2  the
son  of  Re,  Amenemhet,  made,  speaking  in  a message  of  truth
to  his  son,  the  Lord  of  All.

He  saith  : “ Thou  that  hast  appeared  as  God,3  hearken  to
what  I shall  say  to  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  king  over  the
land,  and  ruler  over  the  river  banks,  that  thou  mayest  do  good
in  excess  of  (what  is  looked  for).  Be  on  thy  guard  against  sub-
ordinates ; approach  them  not,  and  be  not  alone.

Trust  not  a brother,  know  not  a friend,  and  make  not  for  thyself
intimates, — that  profiteth  nothing.

If  thou  slecpest,  do  thou  thyself  guard  thine  heart,  for  in
the  day  of  adversity  a man  hath  no  adherents.  I gave  to  the
poor  and  nourished  the  orphan,  I caused  him  that  was  nothing
to  reach  the  goal,  even  as  him  that  was  of  account.

It  was  he  who  ate  my  food  that  disdained  me  (?)  ; it  vs  as
he  to  whom  I gave  my  hand  that  aroused  fear  therewith.4
They  that  clothed  them  in  my  fine  linen  looked  at  me  as  at  a

1 Sec  the  article  by  Griffith  in  Zeitschv.  fur  dgypt.  Sprache , xxxiv.
PP  35  h : Maspero,  Les  ensignements  d'Amenemhdit  Itr.  Cairo,  1914.

He  who  pacifies  the  heart  of  Re/’  the  official  name  of  King
Amenemhet  I.

3 I.e.  that  hast  become  king.

J \\  ith  the  kindness  which  1 showed  him  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


73


shadow,  and  they  that  anointed  them  with  my  myrrh,  poured
water  . . .

Mine  images  are  among  the  living,  and  my  shares  (in  the
offerings)  among  men  ; 1 (and  yet  ?)  they  contrived  a con-
spiracy (?)  against  me,  without  it  being  heard,  and  a great  contest,
without  it  being  seen.2  Men  fought  on  the  place  of  combat 3
and  forgat  yesterday.4 — Good  fortune  attendeth  not  one  that
knoweth  not  when  he  ought  (?)  to  know.5

It  was  after  supper,  when  night  had  come  ; I had  taken  an
hour  of  repose,  and  laid  me  down  upon  my  bed.  I was  weary,
and  my  heart  began  to  follow  after  slumber.  Then  it  was  as
if  weapons  were  brandished,  and  as  if  one  inquired  (?)  concerning
me,  and  I became  like  a snake  of  the  desert.6

I roused  me,  to  fight  alone  (?),  and  I marked  that  it  was
an  hand-to-hand  affray  of  the  bodyguard.  When  I had  quickly
taken  weapons  into  mine  hand,  I drave  back  the  rogues.  . . .
But  there  is  no  strength  by  night,  and  one  cannot  (?)  fight  alone,
and  success  will  not  come  without  thee  that  protectest  me.7

Behold,  the  abominable  thing  came  to  pass  when  I was
without  thee,  when  the  Court  had  not  yet  heard  that  I am
resigning  (the  sovereign  power)  to  thee,8  when  I did  not  yet
dwell  with  thee.  May  I act  according  to  thy  counsels,9  for  I fear
them10  no  (more),  . . . and  I am  powerless  against  the  indolence
of  servants.

Had  the  women  set  the  battle  in  array  ? Had  the  conflict
been  fostered  (?)  within  the  house  ? Were  the  towns-

men made  foolish  on  account  of  their 11  deeds.  Ill  fortune  hath
not  come  behind  me  since  my  birth,  and  nought  hath  happened
that  might  equal  my  prowess  as  a doer  of  valiant  deeds.12

1 So  honoured  am  I in  the  land

- Xo  one  betrayed  to  me  the  plot.

3 Literally  the  place  where  the  bulls  fight.  1 My  good  deeds.

5 Does  he  mean  himself,  who  was  unsuspicious  ? The  interpretation
of  the  whole  paragraph  is  by  no  means  certain.  (See  also  Gunn,  Syntax,
p.  12H  [Translator]).

6 I e.  I started  up  like  a sand- viper

7 He  fears  further  assaults  if  his  son  is  not  associated  with  him  on  the
throne.

8 That  sounds  as  though  the  attempt  had  been  made  by  some  one  who
wished  to  see  the  son  on  the  throne  at  once.

9 I.e.  your  plan  to  take  a part  in  governing.

10  The  courtiers.  11  the  conspirators  ?

12  For  this  successful  administration  l have  had  but  ill  thanks.


74


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


I trod  Elephantine,1  I marched  into  the  Delta  ; I stood
upon  the  boundaries  of  the  land  and  beheld  its  circuit.  I
carried  forward  the  boundaries  of  my  power  by  my  might  and
by  my  prowess.

I was  one  that  produced  barley  and  loved  the  corn-god  ;
the  Nile  greeted  me  on  every  . . .2  None  hungered  in  my
years,  none  thirsted  in  them.  Men  dwelt  (in  peace)  through
that  which  I wrought  and  talked  of  me  (?)  ; all  that  I com-
manded was  as  it  should  be.

I tamed  (?)  lions  and  captured  crocodiles.3  I . . . ed  the
Wawa,4  and  captured  the  Matoi ; 4 I caused  the  Bedouins  to
go  as  dogs.5  I built  an  house  adorned  with  gold  ; its  ceilings
are  of  lapis  lazuli 6 . . .,  its  floor  is  . . .,  the  doors  are  of  copper
and  the  bolts  of  bronze,  they  are  made  for  endless  time,  and
eternity  is  afraid  of  them.7

The  schoolboy,  on  whose  scribblings  we  are  at  this  juncture
almost  entirely  dependent,  has  so  utterly  garbled  the  conclusion,
that  we  can  only  make  out  disconnected  scraps  : There  is  much
talk  in  the  streets.  I know  : “ Yea  ” and  make  search  because

of  its  beauty,  for  he  knoweth  it  not 8 King  Sesostris.

Thy  feet  go.  Thou  art  mine  own  heart,  mine  eyes  gaze  upon
(thee).  The  children  have  an  hour  of  happiness  beside  the
people,  when  they  give  thee  praise.

Behold,  I have  wrought  at  the  beginning,  and  thou  (?)
commandest  at  the  end  - - j-s  - the  white  crown  of  the
divine  seed.9

There  is  exultation  in  the  boat  of  Re. lu  Monuments

are  set  up  and  thy  tomb  (D)  is  made  splendid .

1 The  southern  frontier  town

- I he  inundation  reached  even  the  nvi-t  inaccessible  places

3 Probably  figurative  for  foreign  peoples

1 Nubian  people.

5 So  docile  were  they.

6 I e.  the  ceilings  of  the  rooms  are  painted  to  represent  the  sky.

7 Because  it  sees  that  it  will  never  be  able  to  destroy  them.

8 The  whole  of  this  meaningless  sentence,  as  can  be  seen  only,  it  is
true,  in  the  original,  is  derived  from  the  verse  of  the  Admonitions  (p.  ioo),
" Nay,  but  the  children  of  the  magistrates  are  thrown  on  to  the  streets.
He  that  hath  knowledge  saith  • ' Yea  ’ The  fool  saith  • ‘ Nay.’  He
that  hath  no  knocvledge,  to  him  seemeth  it  good.”

9 The  king.  10  See  Guxs,  Syntax,  p.  148.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


75


5.  THE  INSTRUCTION  FOR  KING  MERIKERE  1

Although  this  work  is  only  known  to  us  from  an  Eighteenth
Dynasty  copy,  we  need  not  hesitate  to  assign  it  to  an  earlier  date.
As  to  Merikere,  we  only  know  that  he  lived  in  the  confused  period
between  the  Old  and  Middle  Kingdoms — in  the  second  half  of  the
third  millenium  b.c. — and  was  one  of  the  kings  of  Herakleopolis.
The  kings  of  the  Eleventh  Dvnasty  ruled  at  Thebes  contemporan-
eously with  these  monarchs,  and,  as  our  book  asserts  (an  assertion
now  confirmed  by  inscriptions  from  Thebes),  they  fought  with  one
another  for  the  possession  of  the  city  of  Thinis.  The  name  of  the
father  of  Merikere,  who  here  presents  his  son  with  his  life’s  ex-
periences, is  unknown  to  us.

It  is  worth  noting  that  we  meet  with  religious  conceptions  in
this  composition  that  are  practically  non-existent  in  the  other
works  of  the  same  class.

Only  scanty  fragments  survive  of  the  beginning  of  the  book.
It  can  be  seen  that  the  father  who  addresses  Merikere  is  himself  a
king.  Further  on,  also,  long  lacunae  make  interpretation  difficult.

[How  TO  ACT  TOWARDS  REBELS.]

With  regard  to  one  whose  dependants  are  many,  and  who  is
pleasant  in  the  eyes  of  his  serfs,  one  that  talketh  much,  the  king’s

advice  is  : suppress  him,  slay  him,  wipe  out  his  name,

root  out  the  memory  of  him  and  his  dependants  that  love  him.

A cause  of  unrest  for  the  citizens  is  a quarrelsome  man,  one
that  createth  two  factions  among  the  youth.  If  thou  findest
that  the  citizens  cleave  to  him  . . .,  cite  2 him  before  the
courtiers,  suppress  him  ; he  too  is  an  enemy.

This  was  followed  by  two  similar  sections , the  one  about  a beggar
that  stirs  up  the  army,  and  then  came  the  assurance  that  if  the  son
dealt  justly  it  would  be  well  with  him  : the  citizens  rejoice  and  thou

art  justified  before  the  god.3 A good  disposition  is  a man’s

heaven  (?),  but  the  cursing  of  a passionate  (?)  man  is  baneful.

[The  value  of  speaking  well  and  of  wisdom.]

Be  a craftsman  in  speech,  so  that  thou  mayest  prevail,  for
the  power  of  (a  man)  is  the  tongue,  and  speech  is  mightier  than

1 In  a Leningrad  papyrus  of  the  time  of  Thutmosis  III  (1478-1447  B c ),
and  in  fragments  of  a papyrus  of  the  same  period  in  Moscow.  Dis-
covered by  Golenischefi  in  1876,  and  published  by  him  in  1913.  See  the
translation  by'  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  i.  pp.  20  if.

* Thus  in  legal  form  ?

3 Osiris,  before  whom  the  trial  took  place  m the  other  \corld.


76  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

any  fighting. He  that  is  clever,  him  the  learned  attack

not,  if  he  is  learned,  and  no  (harm)  happeneth  where  he  is.
Truth  cometh  to  him  fully  kneaded,1  after  the  manner  of  that
which  the  forefathers  spake.

Copy  thy  fathers,  them  that  have  gone  before  thee .

Behold,  their  words  endure  in  writing.  Open  (the  book)  and
read,  and  copy  the  knowledge,2  so  that  the  craftsman  too  may
become  a wise  man  (?).

[Be  benevolent,  but  with  prudence.]

Be  not  evil,  it  is  good  to  be  kindly.  Cause  thy  monument 3

to  endure  through  the  love  of  thee. Then  men  thank

God  on  thine  account,  men  praise  thy  goodness  and  pray  for  thine
health.

Honour  the  great  and  prosper  thy  people ; good

is  it  to  work  for  the  future.  But  keep  thine  eyes  open,  one  that
is  trusting  will  become  one  that  is  afflicted .

lAbout  high  officials.]

Make  thy  counsellors  great,4  that  they  may  execute  thy
laws,  for  he  that  is  rich  in  his  house  dealeth  not  partially,  he
is  a possessor  of  substance  that  wanteth  nought.

(But)  the  poor  man  speaketh  not  according  to  what  is  right
for  him,  and  he  that  saith  “ Would  that  I had,"  is  not  fair.  He
favoureth  him  that  hath  a payment  for  him.  Great  is  a great
one  whose  counsellors  are  great.  Strong  is  a king  that  possesseth

a court.5 Speak  thou  the  truth  in  thine  house,  that

the  nobles  who  hold  sway  in  the  land  mat’  fear  thee.  It  goeth
well  with  a lord  that  is  upright  of  heart.  It  is  the  inside  of  an
house  that  inspireth  the  outside  with  fear.6

1 The  comparison  is  derived  from  the  processes  of  brewing ; liglitlv
baked  barley  loaves  were  kneaded  in  water,  uhich  then  fermented  and
produced  the  beer.  This  task  of  kneading  has  already  been  done  for  you,
for  truth  already'  worked  up  into  shape  is  before  y'ou  in  the  ancient  writings.

2 The  knowledge  of  the  forefathers,  i.e.  follow  their  teaching.

3 The  remembrance  of  thee.

1 I.e.  rich  enough  for  it  not  to  be  necessary  for  them  to  suiter  them-
selves to  be  bribed.

5 That  is  to  say,  a dependable  one.

6 Your  good  example  in  the  palace  influences  your  officials  all  over
the  country.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


77


'MOW  THE  KING  HIMSELF  SHOULD  BEHAVE.]

Do  right  so  long  as  thou  abidest  on  the  earth.  Calm  the
weeper,  oppress  no  widow,  expel  no  man  from  the  possessions
of  his  father,  and  injure  not  the  magistrates  in  respect  of  their
posts.1  Take  heed  lest  thou  punish  wrongfully.  Slaughter
not,  that  doth  not  profit  thee ; punish  with  beatings  and
with  imprisonment  (?).  Therewith  shall  this  land  be  well

established  (indeed). God  knoweth  the  froward,  God

requiteth  his  sins  in  blood.2 Slay  not  a man  whose

good  qualities  thou  knowest,  with  whom  thou  didst  once  chant
the  writings.3

Read  in  the  Sipu-book  (?)  : “.  . . (who  is  with  God?)
goeth  boldly  forward  in  inaccessible  places.  The  soul  cometh
to  the  place  that  it  knoweth  ; it  strayeth  not  from  its  paths  of
yesterday.  No  magic  keepeth  it  away,4  but  it  cometh  to  them
that  give  it  water.”  5

[Warning  against  the  posthumous  judgment.]

The  judges  who  judge  the  oppressed,  thou  knowest  that
they  are  not  lenient  on  that  day  of  judging  the  miserable,6  in
the  hour  of  carrying  out  the  decision.7  Ill  fareth  it  when  the
accuser  is  the  Wise  One  ! 8 — Put  not  thy  trust  in  length  of
years  ; they  regard  a lifetime  as  an  hour.9  A man  remaineth

1 Do  not  deprive  them  of  their  positions  except  for  most  cogent

reasons ; it  is  an  Egyptian  king’s  duty  to  secure  to  the  sons  the  positions
held  by  their  fathers.

3  Thus  you  can  leave  vengeance  to  him  ?

3 I.e.  with  whom  you  learnt  to  read  ? In  Oriental  schools  this  is
done  in  a sing-song  voice.

4 Meaning  probably  : the  soul  of  the  slain  can  always  haunt  you,  it
finds  its  way  back  again  to  the  road  that  it  travelled  yesterday,  That  the
souls  of  the  dead  brought  sickness  and  misery  upon  the  living  out  of
revenge  was  a widespread  belief.

5 Its  relations  ?

6 Those  who  have  been  murdered  by  thee  will  accuse  thee  in  the  post-
humous trial  in  the  underworld.

7 I.e.  execution.

3 Probably  Thoth,  the  god  of  wisdom,  who  directs  the  posthumous
trial.

* Think  not  that  the  judgment  is  still  a long  way  off,  and  that  by  then
all  will  have  been  forgotten.  The  judges  of  the  dead  keep  all  things  in
remembrance.


78


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


over  after  death  and  his  deeds  are  placed  beside  him  1 in  heaps.
But  it  is  for  eternity  that  one  is  there,'2  and  he  is  a fool  that
maketh  light  of  (?)  them.3  But  he  that  cometh  unto  them
without  wrong-doing,  he  shall  continue  yonder  like  a god,  stepping
boldly  forward  like  the  Lords  of  Eternity.1

[OX  THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  YOUNG.]

Raise  up  thy  young  troops,  that  the  Residence  may  love
thee,  and  get  thee  a large  following.  . . . Behold,  thy  com-
monalty is  full  of  those  newly  grown  up,  of  such  as  are  twenty
years  old.  The  young  generation  is  happy  in  following  its

heart. Magnify  thy  great  ones,  advance  thy  . . .,  and

increase  the  young  generation  of  thy  followers,  that  it  may  be
furnished  with  lists,5  endowed  with  fields,  and  rewarded  with
cattle.

[Be  just,  energetic,  and  pious  ?]  6

Exalt  not  the  son  of  one  of  high  degree  more  than  him  that
is  of  lowly  birth,  but  take  to  thyself  a man  because  of  his  actions.

Practise  every  craft, protect  thy  boundary  and

command  thy  fortresses  (?),  that  the  troops  may  be  of  service
to  their  master.  Make  . . . monuments  for  the  god  ; they
cause  the  name  of  their  builder  to  live  again.  A man  should
do  that  which  profiteth  his  soul : in  that  he  performeth  the
monthly  service  of  priest,7  putteth  on  white  sandals,  frequenteth
the  temple,  uncovereth  the  mysteries,  entereth  the  sanctuary,
and  eateth  bread  in  the  temple.8

[Be  pious.]

Cause  the  drink-table  8 to  be  replenished,  and  present  many
loaves.  Increase  the  permanent  offering, — that  is  profitable  to

1 In  judgment,  to  be  scrutinized.  2 In  the  other  world.

2 The  judges  of  the  dead.  1 Name  of  the  blessed  dead.

5 Lists  of  the  revenues  belonging  to  them.

6 In  this  section  the  beginning  actually  belongs  to  what  precedes,  and
the  end  to  what  follows.  This  occurs  elsewhere  in  this  treatise  and  in
other  Egyptian  compositions,  and  is  certainly  an  intentional  artifice.  I
could  not  always  adhere  to  this  arrangement.

7 Or  : the  monthly  bath  ? A bath  was  demanded  of  him  who  entered
a god’s  presence.

9 I.e.  shares  in  the  offering.  All  this  active  participation  in  public
worship  is  thus  accounted  as  merit  that  will  one  day  be  imputed  to  the
departed  soul.

* Upon  which  water  and  the  like  were  offered  in  the  temple.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  79

him  that  doeth  it.  Cause  thy  monuments  to  flourish,  so  long
as  thou  hast  the  strength  : a single  day  giveth  to  eternity,  and
an  hour  doeth  good  to  futurity.  God  knoweth  him  that  worketh
for  Him.1

The  end  : Conduct  thy  statues  to  a distant  land ,

speaks  also  of  the  enemy  and  Egypt,  and  then  probably  leads  on  to
what  follows.

The  second  part  of  the  treatise,  which  begins  here,  refers  to
various  political  affairs  and  to  the  father’s  deeds,  and  is  for  the
most  part  unintelligible  to  us,  who  are  unacquainted  with  them.
This  king’s  dominion,  as  we  also  know  from  other  sources,  did  not
comprise  the  whole  of  Egypt,  and  there  is  a Southern  Land  as  well.

The  young  generation  shall  oppress  the  young  generation,
as  the  forefathers  have  foretold  concerning  it.  Egypt  fights  in
the  necropolis  with  violating  of  tombs  2 . . . Even  so  did  I,
and  even  so  did  it  occur.

Be  not  on  ill  terms  with  the  Southern  Land,  for  thou  knowest
what  the  Residence  hath  foretold  concerning  it,  and  that
happeneth  even  as  this  did  happen.  With  regard  to  the  city  of
Thinis,  which  apparently  formed  the  southern  boundary  of  the
realm,  it  is  then  said  : I captured  it  like  a cloud-burst.  King
Mer  ...  re  did  not  do  it.  But  now  be  lenient  concerning  it,
for  : it  is  good  to  wrork  for  the  future.

Stand  well  with  the  Southern  Land.  Then  the  bearers  of
bags  come  to  thee  with  gifts.  I did  the  same  as  the  forefathers  :
“ Though  it  hath  no  corn  that  it  may  give  it,  yet  let  it  be  pleasing
to  thee,  seeing  that  they  are  but  weak  unto  thee.  Satisfy
thee  with  thy  bread  and  with  thy  beer.”  3 The  red  granite,
too,  comes  to  thee  without  hindrance.4  Harm  not  the  monu-
ment of  another,  but  quarry  thyself  stone  in  Turah.5  Build

1 God  wall  some  day  reward  you  for  all  you  have  done  during  your
lifetime  to  promote  His  worship

2 To  what  extent  this  was  carried  on,  tombs  of  all  periods  still  show.
It  was  the  worst  injury  that  could  be  inflicted  on  enemies.  For  the
passage  cf.  below,  p.  82,  note  3.

3 Meaning  probably  : Forego  the  corn,  which  they  should  give  as
tribute,  rather  than  rouse  them  again  to  fight.

4 The  granite  quarries  of  Hamamat  and  of  Elephantine  lay  within  the
Southern  Land.  He  who  had  no  hold  over  them  was  driven  to  plundering
older  buildings  for  his  own  requirements.  Hence  the  following  reflection.

6 The  quarries  south-east  of  Cairo,  from  which  the  fine  white  lime-
stone was  obtained.


80  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

not  thy  tomb  out  of  what  hath  been  pulled  down .

Behold,  thou  king,  thou  lord  of  joy,  , . . thou  sleepest  in  thy
might.1  Follow  thine  heart  in  that  which  I have  done,  and
so  thou  hast  no  foe  u-ithin  thy  borders.

What  follon's  is  concerned  with  conditions  in  the  Delta,  the
western  side  of  which  was  perpetually  harassed  by  the  Libyans.
The  only  intelligible  portion  runs  :

There  rose  up  one,  a ruler  in  the  city,2  and  his  heart  was

oppressed  by  reason  of  the  Delta, . I pacified  the  entire

West  as  far  as  the  margins  (?)  of  the  lake.3  Also  on  the  east
side  of  the  Delta  matters  were  in  evil  case,  it  is  made  into  districts
and  cities,  and  the  authority  of  one  is  in  the  hand  of  ten.  But
now  (?)  they  give  a whole  list  of  all  manner  of  taxes,  the  priest
is  invested  with  fields,  and  tribute  is  paid  thee  as  if  they  were
a single  gang.  It  will  not  come  to  pass  that  there  are  evil  foes
thereamong.  Thou  sufferest  not  from  the  Nile,  that  it  cometh
not,  and  thou  hast  the  products  of  the  Delta.4

The  eastern  boundary  of  the  kingdom  is  now  secured  against
the  Asiatic  Bedouins  : Behold,  I drave  in  the  mooring-post,5  . . .
in  the  East.  The  boundary  from  (?)  Hebenu  unto  the  Path-of-
Horus 6 is  settled  with  cities  and  filled  with  people  of  the
best  of  the  entire  land,  in  order  to  repel  the  arms  (of  the
Asiatics).

I would  fain  see  a brave  man,7  that  equalleth  (me)  therein,
and  that  doeth  more  than  I have  done.

This  is  said,  moreover,  with  regard  (?)  to  the  barbarian  :
The  wretched  Asiatic,  evil  is  the  land  wherein  he  is,  with  bad
water,  inaccessible  by  reason  of  the  many  trees,  and  the  roads
thereof  are  evil  by  reason  of  the  mountains.8  Never  dwelleth
he  in  a single  place  and  his  feet  winder  (?).  Since  the  time

1 Unconcerned.  To  what  the  whole  of  this  passage  refers  eludes  us,
as  the  beginning  of  the  treatise  is  missing.

2 Probably  the  old  king  himself,  who  might  have  come  into  power
as  defender  of  the  country  against  the  Libyans.

3 The  lagoons  on  the  coast  of  the  Delta  ?

1 The  inundation  chances  to  be  a good  one  and  consequently  the
tax  returns  are  large.

3 Elsewhere  an  expression  meaning  “ to  land.”

6 Hebenu  lies  in  Middle  Egypt.  For  the  Path-of-Horus,  see  p.  26,
note  2.

r He  trusts  in  his  son,  who  will  maintain  these  establishments.

* This  wooded  and  mountainous  country  with  nomadic  inhabitants
must  be  Palestine


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  81

of  Horus  1 he  fighteth  and  conquereth  not,  but  likewise  is  he
not  conquered,  and  he  never  announceth  the  dav  in  fighting,
like  the  . . . supporter  of  a confederacy.'2

Further  on,  mention  is  made  of  foreigners  : I caused  the  Delta
to  smite  them,  I made  captive  their  people,  I plundered  their

cattle, trouble  not  thyself  concerning  him,  the  Asiatic

; he  plundereth  a lonely  settlement  (?),  but  he  capturetli

not  a populous  (?)  city.

Of  the  cities  which  he  has  peopled,  he  makes  special  mention
of  Kemui,  the  later  Athribis : Behold,  that  is  the  navel  of  the
barbarians.3  Its  walls  are  made  ready  for  battle  (?),  its  soldiers
are  many,  subjects  are  in  it,  who  know  how  to  take  the  . . .
And  such  too  is  the  case  with  the  district  of  Ded-esut,  which  teas
probably  situated  near  Memphis  : it  counts  ten  thousand  men
as  citizens,  who  are  clean 4 and  without  imposts.  The  great
men  thereof  go  since  the  time  (of  Horus  ?)  to  the  Residence.
Established  are  its  boundaries  . . . There  are  many  northerners

who  water  it , they  have  made  a dyke  as  far  as  Herak-

leopolis .

If  thy  boundary  towards  the  Southern  Land  is  in  revolt,  the
foreigners  {of  the  Xorth  ?)  will  also  begin  fighting  {?).  Build
(therefore)  towns  in  the  Delta.  A man's  name  will  not  be  small
through  what  he  hath  done,  and  an  inhabited  city  is  not  harmed.
Build  towns.  . . . The  enemy  is  glad  to  see  that  one  is
afflicted  (?),  out  of  evil  nature  (3).  King  Akhthoes  5 laid  it  down
m his  instruction  : “ Whoso  is  quiet  toward  one  that  is  insolent.

he  injureth . God  attacketh  him  that  is  hostile  towards

the  temple.”

From  this  point  onwards  the  treatise  reverts  to  more  general

topics.  Of  the  first  all  that  is  intelligible  is  : reverence

God,  and  say  not  : “ He  hath  a weak  mind  {?).”  Let  not  thine
arms  be  limp.  Further,  with  regard  to  the  monuments  which
another  king  has  erected  : He  will  not  injure  them,  through  desire

1 Horus  was  the  last  of  the  gods  to  rule  the  world.

2 A robber-chief.  J What  does  this  mean  ?

1 Does  this  mean  free  from  taxes  as  colonists  ?

5 Akhthoes  is  the  founder  of  the  royal  line  of  Ilcrakleopolis.  to  which
also  the  kings  of  our  treatise  belonged.  Greek  tradition  related  of  him
that  " he  was  more  terrible  than  any  before  him,  and  that  he  did  evil  to
all  in  Egypt.”  According  to  tins  passage  he  also  composed  a book  of
wise  sayings.

6


82


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


that  what  he  himself  hath  done  may  be  maintained  by  another
that  cometh  after  him.  There  is  none  that  hath  no  enemy.

The  kixg  ought  to  know  everything  ?]

Full  of  knowledge  is  he,  the  (ruler  ?)  of  the  Two  River-
banks,  and  no  king  is  foolish  while  he  hath  courtiers.1  He  is
wise  already,  when  he  cometh  forth  from  the  womb .

(Piety  towards  one's  predecessors.]

The  kingship  is  a goodly  calling.  Although  it  hath  no  son
and  no  brother,  who  may  cause  the  remembrance  thereof  to
endure,  yet  one  restoreth  (the  monument)  of  the  other.  Each
one  doeth  it  for  one  that  went  before,  because  he  desireth  that
what  he  himself  hath  done  may  be  maintained  by  another  that
cometh  after  him.2

Behold,  a calamity  happened  in  my  time  : the  regions  of
Thinis  were  violated.  It  happened  in  sooth  through  that  which
I did,  and  I (only)  knew  it  after  it  was  done.3  That  was  evil

. Take  heed  concerning  it.  A blow  is  rewarded  with

the  like  thereof 4 .

[God  and  mankind.]

A generation  passeth  among  men,  and  God,  who  discemeth
characters,  hath  hidden  himself.

Reverence  thou  God  upon  his  road,5  even  him  that  is
fashioned  of  precious  stones  and  formed  of  copper,  even  as  water
that  is  replaced  by  water.6  There  is  no  river  that  suffereth
itself  to  be  concealed  ; it  destroyeth  the  dam  (?)  with  which  it
was  hidden."

1 He  probably  means  to  say  that  the  knowledge  of  those  about  him  is
at  the  king’s  disposal.

- A private  person  without  successors  is  soon  forgotten,  but  kings  fare
better,  for  in  their  case  it  is  the  duty  of  successors  not  to  allow  the
memory  of  their  predecessors  to  perish.

J His  soldiers  destroyed  the  monuments  of  the  sacred  city,  without
his  having  a hand  in  it.  This  is  the  “ violating  of  tombs  ” -which  he
mentions  above  on  p.  79.

1 The  meaning  being  that  God  punishes  such  impiety  ? “ God  ” is

also  referred  to  above,  after  the  first  mention  of  these  acts  of  destruction.

6 In  a procession  ?

6 .Meaning  possibly  that  sim  e God  keeps  Himselt  hidden.  His  image
must  be  reverenced.  It  is,  of  course,  only  a substitute,  but  a sufficient
one.

7 So  also  God  is  only  seemingly  hidden.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  83

The  soul  goeth  to  the  place  which  it  knoweth,  and  strayeth
not  from  its  paths  of  yesterday.  (Wherefore)  make  fair  thine
house  of  the  West,  and  stately  thy  place  in  the  necropolis,  even
as  one  that  is  just,  as  one  that  hath  done  right.  That  it  is,
whereon  their  heart  reposeth.1

More  acceptable  (to  God)  is  the  virtue  of  one  that  is  just
of  heart  than  the  ox  of  him  that  doeth  iniquity.  Do  something  2
for  God,  that  He  may  do  the  like  for  thee  with  an  offering  that
replenisheth  the  offering-table,  and  with  an  inscription,  one  that
perpetuateth  (?)  thy  name.  God  is  cognizant  of  him  that  doeth
something  for  Him.

Well  tended  are  men,  the  cattle  of  God.  He  made  heaven
and  earth  according  to  their  desire.  He  allayed  the  thirst  {:)
for  water.  He  made  the  air  that  their  nostrils  may  live.  They
are  His  images,  that  have  proceeded  from  His  limbs.  He
ariseth  in  heaven  according  to  their  desire.  He  made  for  them
plants  and  cattle,  fowls  and  fishes,  in  order  to  nourish  them.
But  He  also  punisheth  : He  slew  His  enemies,  and  punished
His  children,  because  of  that  which  they  devised  when  they  were
hostile.3

He  maketh  the  light  according  to  their  desire  ; but  He  also
suffereth  them  to  sleep and  when  they  weep,  He  heareth.

He  made  for  them  rulers  from  the  womb,4  a supporter  to
support  the  back  of  the  weak.

He  made  for  them  magic  as  weapons,  to  ward  off  events  (?),
and  dreams  in  the  night  as  in  the  day.5

He  hath  slain  the  froward  of  heart  among  them,  even  as  a
man  smiteth  his  son  and  his  brother.  God  knoweth  every  name.6

At  the  end  comes  a general  exhortation,  of  which  blit  little
is  intelligible  :

Mayest  thou  reach  me  without  having  an  accuser.7  Slay

1 Souls  require  a good  tomb,  in  which  they  may  find  food  and  lodging,
when  they  come  on  earth  to  enjoy  the  light.

2 1 c.  make  offering,  then  God  will  have  a well-tended  tomb  allotted
to  thee.

3 Allusion  to  the  legend  of  the  revolt  of  mankind  against  the  ageing
sun-god  (see  pp.  47  11.).

' I.e.  legitimate  kings.

5 Are  dreams  meant  which  foretell  the  future  ?

* He  knows  every  one,  and  therefore  also  knows  whom  He  has  to  punish.

7 In  the  other  world  ?


81


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


not  one  that  standeth  nigh  unto  thee,1  after  thou  hast  praised

him,  and  God  knoweth  hint . Cause  thyself  to  be

beloved  by  all  the  world — . Behold,  1 have  spoken  unto

thee  the  best  of  mine  inmost  thoughts  ; thou  wilt  act  according
to  what  hath  been  established  before  thee  (?).

6.  THE  INSTRUCTION  OF  SEHETLPIBRL

This  poem  to  King  Amenemhet  III  (1844-1797  b.c.';  is  included
in  this  section,  because  its  author  claims  to  have  composed  it  for
the  instruction  of  his  children.  He  was  a high  official  m the  treasure,
and  must  also  have  been  brought  into  personal  contact  with  the
king,  for  he  speaks  of  himself  as  " one  whom  his  lord  exalted  in  front
of  millions,  a real  confidant  of  his  lord,  to  whom  hidden  things  were
spoken.”  He,  moreover,  proclaims  this  close  connection  with  lus
lord  by  placing — against  all  precedent — the  following  verses  on  his
tomb-stone,2  which  he  scholastically  designates  his  “ Instruction.”

Instruction  which  he  composed  for  his  children.

I tell  of  a great  matter  and  cause  you  to  hear  (it).  I impart
to  you  a thought  for  eternity,  and  a maxim  for  right  living  (?)  3
and  for  the  spending  of  a lifetime  in  bliss.

Revere  King  Nemaatre,  who  ever  liveth,  in  your  bodies,
and  consort  with  his  majesty  in  your  hearts.

He  is  Understanding,  which  is  in  the  hearts,  and  his  eyes
search  out  every  body.  He  is  Re,  by  whose  rays  men  sec.

He  illumineth  the  Two  Lands  more  than  the  sun.  He
maketh  the  Two  Lands  more  verdant  than  doth  a high  Nile.
He  hath  filled  the  Two  Lands  with  strength  and  life.

The  nostrils  become  cool  when  he  inclineth  to  terror.4  When
he  is  gracious,  then  (?)  men  breathe  the  air.

He  giveth  vital  force  to  them  that  serve  him,  he  supplieth
food  to  them  that  tread  his  path.  The  king  is  Vital  Force  and
his  mouth  5 Abundance.

1 I c probably  : Do  not  make  awav  with  \our  kinsmen  on  coming  to
the  throne — as  so  often  is  done  in  the  East

- Cairo  2053s  i he  ijuite  obvious  stanzas  should  be  noted

3 V special  device  has  been  employed  here  bv  the  poet.  Not  only  do
the  three  words  " for  right  living  ” form  a pun  on  the  immediately  follow-
ing name  of  his  king,  but  he  has  contrived  so  to  arrange  the  signs  that
they  look  like  this  name

1 Meaning  3

a Which  utters  hi-  commands  The  passage  merely  states  that  the
king  sees  that  his  faithful  subjects  are  provided  for.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


83


He  it  is  that  nurtureth  him  that  will  be.  He  is  Khnum  for
all  bodies,  the  Begetter  that  begetteth  the  people.1

He  is  Bastet,2  that  protecteth  the  Two  Lands  ; he  that
revereth  him  shall  escape  his  arm.  (But)  he  is  Sekhmet  2
against  him  that  transgresseth  his  command  ; he  that  ...  to
him  will  have  . . .

Fight  for  his  name  and  defend  (?)  his  life,  that  ye  may  be
free  from  affliction  (?).3

He  that  is  a friend  of  the  king, — he  will  be  an  honoured
one.4  But  there  is  no  tomb  for  him  that  is  a foe  of  his  majesty,
and  his  corpse  is  thrown  into  the  water.

Do  this,  that  your  bodies  may  be  sound,  yea,  it  is  profitable
for  you  for  ever.


C.  MEDITATIONS  AND  COMPLAINTS

The  first  treatises  in  this  section  are  perhaps  the  most  inter-
esting to  be  found  in  the  whole  of  Egyptian  literature.  They
deplore  the  misery  which  the  world  brings  upon  the  individual,
and  depict  the  frightful  distress  of  a nation  that  has  suffered
from  a complete  collapse  : it  is  best  for  mankind  not  to  be
born.  Such  a mood  can  come  upon  a nation  only  as  the  result
of  dire  misfortune,  and  we  shall  not  be  mistaken,  therefore,  in
regarding  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom  and  the  period  before
the  Twelfth  Dynasty  as  times  of  great  catastrophes,  times  at
the  thought  of  which  a generation,  that  had  survived  them,
still  shuddered.

Quite  different  in  tone  to  these  writings  are  the  Complaints
of  the  Peasant.  Here  again  the  subject,  it  is  true,  is  the  wicked-
ness of  those  who  oppress  the  poor,  but  over  the  bad  officials
stands  a good  minister  and  a good  king.  Moreover,  the  author
is  not  quite  in  earnest  about  all  this  ; his  interest  lies  in  the
ever  new  and  eloquent  words  in  which  his  hero  contrives  to
frame  his  complaints.  The  book  is  an  exercise  in  rhetoric  and
a school  product.

1 As  Khnum  creates  children,  so  he  creates  dignitaries.

2 The  kindly  cat-headed,  and  the  terrible  lion-headed,  goddess  re-
spectively.

3 Possibly  “disloyalty”  [Translator],

4 A dead  person  who  has  been  properly  buried.


86


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


i.  THE  DISPUTE  WITH  HIS  SOUL  OF  ONE  WHO  IS
TIRED  OF  LIFE  1

This  strange  work  is  based  upon  the  conception  that  the  soul
is  an  independent  being  apart  from  the  man  ; it  can  leave  him  at
death,  but  it  can  also  stand  by  him  faithfully.

In  the  lost  beginning  of  the  book  it  must  have  been  related
how  a man  was  impoverished,  deserted,  and  calumniated,  and
how  in  his  distress  he  wished  to  bring  his  life  to  an  end,  and  that
by  burning.  His  soul  itself  had  urged  him  to  take  that  step,  but  it
declined  to  remain  by  him  when  death  was  actually  at  hand ; for,
in  the  case  of  so  poor  a person  it  feared  that  it  would  fare  badly.
No  tomb  would  protect  him,  and  no  survivor  would  bring  him
victuals,  and  thus  it  was  threatened  with  hunger,  cold,  and  heat.
So  the  unfortunate  man  endeavours  to  persuade  his  soul  not  to
desert  him  in  death.  Where  the  treatise  at  present  begins,  both
are  arguing  before  certain  judges,  whose  tongue  is  not  biased  ; the
soul  has  turned  to  them,  instead  of  answenng  its  master.

Then  opened  I my  mouth  unto  my  soul,  that  I might  answer
what  it  had  said  : This  is  too  much  for  me  at  present,  that  my

soul  speaketh  not  with  me . My  soul  goeth  forth  ;

it  shall  stand  there  for  me It  fleeth  on  the  day  of

misfortune.

Behold,  my  soul  thwarteth  me,  and  I hearken  not  unto  it,
and  drag  me  to  death  ere  I be  come  to  it,2  and  cast  me  upon  the

fire  in  order  to  burn  me . May  it  draw  nigh  to  me  on

the  day  of  misfortune  and  stand  upon  yon  side,  as  a mourner

doth  3 . My  soul,  it  is  foolish,  to  hold  back  (?)  one

that  is  sorrowful  on  account  of  life  ; lead  (?)  me  to  death,  ere
I be  come  to  it,  and  make  the  West  4 pleasant  for  me.  Is  that
then  something  grievous  ? Tread  thou  upon  wrong-

doing.5 The  unhappy  one  will  endure  : 6 Thoth  will  judge  me,
he  that  contenteth  the  gods  ; Ivhons  will  defend  me,  he,  the

1 A Berlin  papyrus  oi  the  middle  Kingdom,  the  purport  of  which  was
recognized  by  Maspero  in  1&74  ; edited  bv  me  in  Abh.  der  Berliner
Akadenue  in  1S90.

- 1 e.  before  the  time  appointed  for  me.

3 The  meaning  probably  is  since  I have  no  survivor  to  trouble  about
me,  let  it  at  least  remain  beside  my  corpse.  The  same  wish  more  exactly
expressed  below.

1 The  usual  name  of  the  abode  of  the  dead  and  the  necropolis.

5 Give  up  the-  purpose  of  wishing  to  forsake  me.

* The  following  passage  declares  that  he  relies  on  the  good  and
righteous  gods,  who  will  espouse  his  cause.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


87


scribe  of  Right ; Re  will  hearken  unto  my  words,  he  that

guideth  (?)  the  sun’s  ship  ; Isdes  will  maintain  my  cause .

My  distress  is  heavy  upon  me  and  he  beareth  it  for  me  . . .
The  gods  avert  the  secret  of  my  body.1

This  is  what  my  soul  said  unto  me  in  answer  : Thou  art  not

a man  (of  high  degree) (and  yet)  thou  carest  for  good

things  like  one  that  possesseth  treasures.'2

I said : I go  not  away  so  long  as  that  one  3 remaineth  on

the  earth I will  carry  thee  away.  Thy  lot  (?)  is  to

die,  while  thy  name  liveth  on,  and  yonder  4 is  the  place  where

one  alighteth . If  my  soul  will  hearken  unto  me

and  its  heart  agreeth  (?)  with  me,  it  will  be  happy.  I

wall  cause  it  to  reach  the  West,  like  the  soul  of  one  that  is  buried
in  his  pyramid,  and  at  whose  burial  there  stood  a survivor.

The  expedient,  whereby  Ihe  luckless  one  proposes  to  attain
this,  is  unfortunately  unintelligible  to  us;  one  can  only  see  that
he  will  do  something  which  will  safeguard  his  soul  against  the
distresses  feared.  He  assures  it  that  it  will  despise  another  soul
as  a weary  one,  and  it  shall  not  freeze  ; it  will  despise  another
soul  that  is  too  hot,  for  he  will  drink  water  at  the  place  of
drawing,5  and  it  will  also  look  down  on  another  soul  that  hungereth.
In  this  wise  it  is  to  lead  him  to  death — otherwise  hast  thou  no
possibility  of  alighting  in  the  West.  Be  so  kind,  my  soul  and
my  brother,  and  become  mine  heir  (?),6  who  shall  make  offering
and  stand  upon  my  tomb  on  the  day  of  burial,  that  he  may
prepare  (?)  the  funeral  bed.

Then  my  soul  opened  its  mouth  to  me,  to  answer  what  I had
said  : If  thou  callest  burial  7 to  mind,  it  is  sadness,  it  is  the

1 My  unspoken  troubles  ? The  body  is  to  the  Egyptian  the  seat  of
thought.

3 Meaning  probably  : the  gods  will  not  trouble  themselves  about  a
miserable  person  like  you.

3 The  soul.  4 The  other  world.

5 I.e.  “ the  part  of  the  river  where  water  is  drawn,”  where  it  was  the
wish  of  all  the  dead  to  drink.

6 I.e.  the  survivor,  who  recited  the  prescribed  formulas  over  the  corpse
and  performed  the  rites  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the  dead.  Since  the
luckless  one  has  no  one  to  render  him  this  service,  the  soul  is  to  take  on
the  duty.

7 To  be  able  to  appreciate  all  the  malice  of  the  following  sentences,  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  to  the  genuine  Egyptian  of  that  day  there


88


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


bringing  of  tears,  it  G making  a man  sorrowful,  it  is  haling  a
man  from  his  house  and  casting  him  upon  the  hill.1  Never
wilt  thou  go  forth  again  to  behold  the  sun.2  They  that  builded
in  granite  and  fashioned  a hall  (;)  in  the  pyramid,  that  achieved
what  is  goodly  in  this  goodly  work — when  the  builders  are
become  gods,3  then  their  offering-tables  are  empty  (and  they
are)  even  as  the  weary  ones  which  die  upon  the  dyke  without
a survivor  ; the  flood  hath  taken  its  end  (of  them)  and  likewise
the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  the  fish  of  the  river-bank  hold  converse
with  them.4

Hearken  thou  unto  me,  lo,  it  is  good  for  a man  when  he
hearkeneth.  Follow  the  glad  day  and  forget  care.5

Thus  the  advice  of  the  soul  now  is  that  he  had  better  give  life
a further  trial,  and  then,  probably  in  support  of  the  theory  that
this  is  still  to  be  endured  by  even  the  most  unfortunate,  he  recounts
lo  him  two  tales,  of  which  we  frankly  understand  but  little  :

A man  of  humble  birth  tilleth  his  field  and  loadeth  his
harvest  on  to  a ship,  that  he  may  tow  (it)  . . .,  when  his  festival
approacheth.  He  scetli  that  the  night  of  the  flood  (?)  cometh
on,  keepeth  watch  in  the  ship  until  dusk,  and  goeth  forth  with
his  wife  and  his  children  ; they  perish  upon  the  lake,  en-
dangered (?)  in  the  night  amid  the  crocodiles.  Then  he  sitteth
him  down  and  when  he  hath  a share  in  the  voice  (i.e.  can
speak  again  P),  he  saith  : I am  not  weeping  for  that  maid,  who
cannot  come  forth  from  the  West  to  another  woman  upon
earth 11 ; I am  troubled  for  her  children  that  are  broken  in  the
egg,  that  behold  the  face  of  the  crocodile  before  they  are  yet
alive.

We  understand  still  less  of  the  seccmd  tale 1 of  the  man  of  humble
birth,  who  begs  his  supper  of  his  wife.

was  no  higher  duty  than  the  care  of  the  dead  and  of  their  tombs.  This
is  represented  here  with  bitter  scorn  as  useless  folly — arrant  heresy,
which,  however,  displays  itself  also  in  the  Song  at  a Banquet  (p.  133).

1 The  tombs  are  situated  on  the  high  ground  at  the  desert  edge.

- It  is  the  constant  prayer  of  the  dead,  that  they  might  leave  their
tombs  by  day  and  behold  the  sun.

3 I.e.  directly  the  kings  are  dead.

4 Meaning  : they  dragged  themselves  down  to  the  water's  edge  and
there  they  died  ; they  lie  half  on  the  land  and  half  in  the  water,  their
corpses  shrivel  up  and  rot  simultaneously,  and  the  fishes  nibble  at  them.

' that  is  the  usual  cry  at  banquets.  6 See  Gunn,  Syntax,  p.  143.

7 Perhaps  it  is  only  the  conclusion  of  the  first.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


89


Then  opened  I my  mouth  to  my  soul,  that  I might  answer
what  it  had  said  : 1

[First  poem.)

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  the  odour  of  carrion 2
On  days  in  summer,  when  the  sky  is  hot,

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  catching  fish

On  the  day  of  the  catch,  when  the  sky  is  hot.

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  the  odour  of  birds.

More  than  the  hill  of  willows  with  the  geese.

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  the  odour  of  fishermen,

More  than  the  shores  of  the  swamps,  when  they  have  fished.

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  the  odour  of  crocodiles,

More  than  sitting  on  . . .,  where  are  the  crocodiles.

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  that  of  a wife

When  lies  are  told  against  her  to  the  husband.

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  that  of  a stalwart  child

Against  whom  it  is  said,  he  . . . to  him  that  hateth  him,3

Lo,  my  name  is  abhorred,

Lo,  more  than  that  of  a . . . city,

(Than)  that  of  a rebel,  whose  back  is  seen.4

1 For  the  peculiar  construction  of  this  poem,  cf.  the  remarks  on
pp.  xxx.  f.

2 In  Egyptian  a name  is  said  to  “ stink,”  meaning  to  “ be  execrated  ” ;
the  following  verses  express  this  by  means  of  comparisons,  which  come
readily  to  an  Egyptian,  especially  those  associated  with  fishing  and
fowling  in  the  swamps.

3 No  doubt  a stepchild  is  meant.  1 Who  has  fled.


90


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[Second  poem.]

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Brothers  are  evil,

Friends  of  to-day,  they  are  not  lovable.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Men  are  covetous.

Every  one  seizeth  his  neighbour’s  goods.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Gentleness  hath  perished.

Insolence  hath  come  to  all  men.1

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

He  that  hath  a contented  countenance  is  bad.

Good  is  disregarded  in  every  place.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

He  that  maketh  wrathful  a (good)  man  by  his  evil  deeds.
The  same  moveth  all  men  2 to  laughter,  when  his  iniquity  is
grievous.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Men  rob.

Every  man  seizeth  his  neighbour’s  (goods).

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

The  sick  man  is  the  trusty  friend.

The  brother  that  is  with  him,  hath  become  the  enemy 3

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

None  remembereth  the  past,

None  at  this  moment  doeth  good  to  him  that  hath  done  it.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Brothers  are  evil,

A man  is  treated  as  an  enemy  (?)  in  spite  of  (?)  a right  disposition.

1 This  verse  occurs  again  in  the  Admonitions  ; see  below,  p 99,
note  1.

2 The  masses  make  mock  of  the  righteous  for  becoming  enraged
against  the  evil-doer.

3 The  meaning  may  be : since  his  own  relatives  have  deserted  the
poor  man,  he  now  has  no  friend  save  him  who  is  in  a worse  plight.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


91


To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Faces  are  invisible,

Every  man  hath  his  face  downcast  against  his  brethren.1

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

Hearts  are  covetous.

The  man  on  whom  men  rely,  hath  no  heart.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

There  are  none  that  are  righteous,

The  earth  is  given  over  to  the  workers  of  iniquity.

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

A trusty  friend  is  lacking,

A man  is  treated  as  one  that  is  unknown,  albeit  (?)  he  have
made  (himself)  known.2

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

There  is  none  that  is  peaceable  ;

That  one  who  went  (?)  with  him,  he  is  not  existent  (?).

To  whom  do  I speak  to-day  ?

I am  laden  with  misery,

And  lack  a trusty  friend.

To  whom  do  I speak  to  day  ?

The  sin  that  smiteth  the  land,

It  hath  no  end.

[Third  poeii.]

Death  is  before  me  to-day

As  when  a sick  man  becometh  whole.

As  when  one  walketh  abroad  after  sickness.

Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  the  odour  of  myrrh,

As  when  one  sitteth  under  the  sail  on  a windy  day.3

Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  the  odour  of  lotus  flowers,

As  tvhen  one  sitteth  on  the  shore  of  drunkenness.1

1 Xo  one  now  looks  openly  at  the  other.

2 But  see  Gunn,  Rec.  de  Trav.,  xxxix.  p.  105  [Translator],

3 Meaning  probably  that  one  is  released  from  rowing.

4 The  poet  means  a feast  on  the  cool  river-bank.


02


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  a well-trodden  (?)  path.

As  when  a man  returneth  from  the  war  unto  his  house.

Death  is  before  me  to-day
As  a clearing  of  the  sky.

As  a man  ...  to  that  which  he  knew  not.

Death  is  before  me  to-day

As  when  a man  longeth  to  see  his  house  again,

After  he  hath  spent  many  years  in  captivity.

(Fourth  poem.]

Why  he  that  is  yonder 1 will  be
One  that  ...  as  a living  god,

And  will  inflict  punishment  for  sin  on  him  that  doeth  it.

Why  he  that  is  yonder  will  be
One  that  standeth  in  the  sun’s  ship.

And  will  therein  assign  the  choicest  things  unto  the  temples.

Why  he  that  is  yonder  will  be
A man  of  knowledge,  and  he  is  not  hindered,2
And  he  petitioneth  Re  when  he  speaketh.

This  is  what  my  soul  said  unto  me  : Cast  aside  (?)  lamenta-
tion, my  comrade,  my  brother . I will  abide  here,  if

thou  rejectest  the  West.  But  when  thou  reachest  the  West,
and  thy  body  is  united  with  the  earth,  then  I will  alight  after
that  thou  restest.  Let  us  have  an  abode  together.

2.  THE  ADMONITIONS  OF  A PROPHET  3

We  have  only  the  one  very  infenor  manuscript,  in  which  both
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  book  are  missing  ; thus  the  narrative
of  events  which  called  forth  the  prophet's  utterances  is  lost  to  us.

1 “ He  that  is  yonder  ” is  a regular  euphemism  for  the  dead.  The
three  concluding  verses  are  in  praise  of  the  lot  of  the  blessed  dead,  who,
as  the  sun-god’s  companions,  promote  what  is  good.

2 The  man  who  is  tired  of  life  doubtless  alludes  here  to  his  own  fate.

3 In  a papyrus  at  Leyden,  and  brought  to  notice  by  H.  O.  Lange  in
1003.  See  Gardiner,  The  Admonitions  of  an  Egyptian  Sage,  Leipzig,

IQOQ


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  93

Various  restorations  have  been  proposed  on  the  basis  ot  indications
in  the  text,  and  that  here  offered  is  also  not  to  be  regarded  as  certain
in  all  respects.

Under  a ruler  of  ancient  times  a terrible  calamity  overtakes  the
country  ; the  people  rebel  against  the  officials  and  those  in  high
places  ; the  foreign  mercenary  troops  are  in  revolt,  and  possibly
also  the  Asiatics  threaten  the  Eastern  frontier.  Thus  ordered
government  breaks  up  completely  in  Egvp'  ; but  the  aged  king
lives  on  peacefully  m his  palace,  for  he  is  being  regaled  with  lies.
Then  a sage,  Ipuwer  bv  name,  appears  on  the  scene  at  court  1 and
tells  the  whole  truth.  He  depicts  the  misery  already  prevailing,
and  foresees  what  is  still  to  come  ; he  urges  his  hearers  to  fight
against  the  enemies  of  the  realm,  and  reminds  them  that  the
worship  of  the  gods  must  be  restored.  And  then  he  addresses  the
king  himself,  that  he,  too.  “ may  taste  of  this  misery.”

The  time  in  which  this  break-up  of  ordered  government  in
Egypt  is  to  be  imagined  as  taking  place,  must  be  the  end  of  the  Old
Kingdom.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  Sixth  Dynasty  (circa  2500  b.c.),
Egypt  is  suddenly  blotted  out  from  our  sight  in  obscurity,  as  if
some  great  catastrophe  had  overwhelmed  it  ; furthermore,  the
few  remains  known  to  us  from  the  centuries  immediately  following
show  that  civilization,  formerly  at  so  high  a level,  has  declined —
exactly  as  one  would  expect  from  the  descriptions  in  our  book.
And  that  the  ruler,  whom  the  sage  addresses,  is  apparently-  an  aged
man,  is  also  perfectly  in  agreement  with  facts,  for  the  monarch,
with  whom  the  Old  Kingdom  disappears  from  our  ken,  is  none
other  than  the  second  Phiops.  who  came  to  the  throne  at  the  age  of
six,  and  who,  according  to  Egyptian  tradition,  reigned  for  ninety-
three  y-ears.2

The  approximate  date  of  the  Admonitions  can  be  determined
from  two  passages  therein,  recurring  also  m other  old  poems.
One,  in  the  Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  One  who  is  tired  of  Life,  is  far
more  in  place  there  than  here ; with  the  other,  the  reverse  is  the  case,
for  on  external  grounds  it  certainly  belongs  to  our  book,  whereas,
in  the  Instruction  of  Amenemkit,  it  is  interpolated  in  a corrupt  form.
The  Admonitions  is  thus  later  than  the  Dispute  of  One  who  is  tired
of  Life,  and  older  than  the  Instruction  of  A me nemhet.

The  book  consists  of  prose  sections,  and  ot  six  poems,  these

1 In  view  of  the  frequent  references  to  storehouses  and  treasuries,  it  is
natural  to  suppose  that  the  sage  was  one  of  the  treasury-  officials.  Also
from  the  third  poem  and  its  appendix  it  may  be  inferred  that  he  came
from  the  Delta  to  report  011  the  lack  of  treasure  ; possibly  he  had  to  do
this  himself,  because  his  messengers  refused  to  go.  The  catastrophe,
however,  is  not  confined  only  to  the  Delta,  but  extends,  as  is  expressly-
stated  on  p.  95.  to  Upper  Egy-pt.

2 See,  too,  A.  M Blackman,  Luxor  anil  its  Temples,  pp.  35  If.


94


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


forming  its  actual  kernel ; for  their  formation  see  above,  pp.  xxx.
and  xxxiii.  f.

Where  the  hook  now  begins,  the  sage  is  already  depicting  the
country’s  misfortune  : The  door-keepers  say  : “ Let  us  go  and
plunder.”  The  washerman  refuseth  to  carry  his  load.  The
bird-catchers  have  made  themselves  ready  for  battle,  and  others
from  the  Delta  carry  shields.  Even  the  most  peaceful  callings,
such  as  the  confectioners  and  the  brewers  are  in  revolt,  and  a man

looketh  upon  his  son  as  an  enemy. The  virtuous  man

goeth  in  mourning  because  of  what  hath  happened  in  the  land
strangers  are  become  Egyptians  1 everywhere.

[First  poem.]

It  is  concerned  mainly  with  the  general  distress — robbery,
murder,  destruction,  and  famine.  The  officials  are  expelled,  the
administration  destroyed,  trade  with  abroad  is  at  an  end.
Foreigners  flourish  in  the  country,  and  the  rabble  occupy  the
positions  of  the  upper  classes.

Every  verse  begins  with  two  words,  best  rendered  in  English
by  “nay,  but ” or  “forsooth,”  which  represent  the  assertion  as
something  that  cannot  be  gainsaid.

Xay,  but  the  face  is  pale ; the  forefathers  have

foretold .2

Then  after  a lacuna  of  some  length  :

Xay,  but ( and  the  land  is)  full  of  confederates.  A

man  goeth  to  plough  with  his  shield.

Xay,  but  the  meek  saith  : [destroyed).

Nay,  but  the  face  is  pale,  the  bowman  is  ready.  The  wrong-
doer is  everywhere.  There  is  no  man  of  yesterday.3

Xay,  but  plunderers  are  everywhere .

Xay,  but  Nile  is  in  flood,  yet  none  plougheth  for  him.  Every
man  saith  : “ We  know  not  what  hath  happened  throughout
the  land.”  4

1 Literally  “ men,"'  i e.  “ real  men  " ; this  designation  of  Egyptians  is
found  elsewhere  All  that  is  meant  is  that  the  numerous  foreigners  who
then,  as  now,  will  have  lived  in  Egypt,  venture,  m the  universal  upheaval,
to  pose  as  Egyptians.

2 It  is  apparently  stated  previously  in  a much  damaged  passage,  that
this  had  already  been  determmed  in  the  time  oi  Horus,  i.e.  m primaeval  time.

3 Who  was  highly  esteemed  yesterday.

1 Mo  one  has  enough  confidence,  in  these  times  of  uncertainty,  to  till
the  fields.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  95

Nay,  but  women  are  barren,  and  there  is  no  conception.
Khnum  fashioneth  men  no  more  because  of  the  condition  of  the
land.1

Nay,  but  poor  men  now  possess  fine  things.  He  who  once
made  for  himself  no  sandals  now  possesseth  riches.

Nay,  but  men’s  slaves,  their  hearts  are  sad.2  The  great  no
longer  take  part  in  the  rejoicings  of  their  people  (?).

Nay,  but  the  heart  is  violent.  Plague  stalketh  through  the

land  and  blood  is  everywhere. The  mummy-cloth

speaketh  (although)  not  drawn  nigh  unto.

Nay,  but  many  dead  men  are  buried  in  the  river.  The
stream  is  a sepulchre,  and  the  Pure  Place  3 is  become  a stream.

Nay,  but  the  high-born  are  full  of  lamentations,  and  the
poor  are  full  of  joy.  Every  town  saith  : “ Let  us  drive  out  the
powerful  from  our  midst.”

Nay,  but  men  look  like  gem-birds.4  Squalor  is  throughout
the  land.  There  is  none  whose  clothes  are  white  in  these  times.

Nay,  but  the  land  turneth  round  as  doth  a potter’s  wheel.
The  robber  possesseth  riches.  The  ...  is  (become  ?)  a
plunderer.

{A  mutilated  verse.)

Nay,  but  the  river  is  blood.  Doth  a man  drink  thereof,
he  rejecteth  it  as  human,  (for)  one  thirsteth  for  water.

Nay,  but  gates,  columns,  and  walls  are  consumed  with  fire  ;
(and  yet)  the  chamber  (?)  of  the  king’s  palace  (still)  endureth
and  standeth  fast.

Nay,  but  the  southern  ship  5 is  adrift  (?).  The  towns  are
destroyed,  and  Upper  Egypt  is  become  an  empty  (waste  ?).

Nay,  but  the  crocodiles  (are  glutted  with)  what  they  have

carried  off.  Men  go  to  them  of  their  own  accord .

People  say  : “ Tread  not  here,  but  they  do  tread  there  as  though
there  were  fish,  so  stupid  is  the  timid  man  through  terror.

Nay,  but  men  are  few.  He  that  layeth  his  brother  in  the
ground  is  everywhere  (to  be  seen) 6 .

1 See  above,  p 44,  note  2.  He  gives  up  the  now  useless  task.

2 The  slaves  of  the  new  rich  ?

3 The  place  of  embalmment.  The  corpses  are  too  numerous  to  be
buried.  They  are  thrown  into  the  water  like  dead  cattle.

1 A kind  of  heron,  which  may  have  had  a dirty  appearance.

5 Probably  figuratively  for  Upper  Egypt.

* Grave-diggers  are  to  be  seen  everywhere.


96


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Nay,  but  the  son  of  the  high-born  man  is  no  longer  to  be
recognized  (?).  The  child  of  his  lady  is  become  the  son  of  his
handmaid.1

Nay,  but  the  Red  Land  2 is  spread  abroad  throughout  the
country.  The  homes  are  destroyed.  The  stranger  people
from  without  are  come  into  Egypt.3

The  next  verse  ends  with,  there  are  no  men  anywhere.4

Nay,  but  gold  and  lapis  lazuli,  silver  and  turquoise,  car-
nelian  and  bronze,  marble  and  ....  are  hung  about  the  necks
of  slave-girls.  But  noble  ladies  (?)  walk  through  the  land,  and
mistresses  of  houses  say  : " Would  that  we  had  something  we
might  eat.’’  5

Nay,  but ladies,  their  limbs  are  in  sad  plight

because  of  their  rags.  Their  hearts  shudder  (?)  when  (they  ? are)
greeted.15

Nay,  but  boxes  of  ebony  are  broken  up.  Precious  sesnern-
wood  is  cut  in  pieces  for  beds  (?) .

Nay,  but  they  that  build  . . . are  become  lield-labourers,
and  they  that  were  in  the  god’s  bark  are  yoked  together.7  Men
do  not  sail  to  Byblos  to-day. 8 What  can  we  do  to  get  cedars
for  our  mummies  ? Priests  are  buried  with  their  produce,  and
princes  are  embalmed  with  their  resin,  as  far  as  the  land  of
Keftiu,9  and  now  they  come  no  more.  Gold  is  diminished,  the

. . . which  is  used  for  all  handicrafts  is  at  an  end .

How  great  it  seems  to  one  (after  all),  when  the  people  of  the
Oases  come  bringing  their  products  in  the  way  of  plants  and  birds.10

1 There  is  no  longer  any  distinction  between  the  child  of  the  head-wife
and  that  of  the  domestic  slave-girl

i Foreign  countries  in  contrast  to  the  'Black  Land,"  i.e.  Egvpt.
The  expressions  are  taken  from  the  yellow  and  black  soils  file  meaning
is  : everywhere  one  encounters  foreigners

3 1 he  expressions  do  not  sound  like  a hostile  invasion.

1 See  p.  94,  note  i . Only  foreigners  are  to  be  seen

5 1 hey  are  begging

6 So  doubt  meaning  : they  are  ashamed  to  be  recognized  in  their
misery.

: Architects  and  commanders  ni  the  royal  ships  (that  is  what  is  meant
by  the  god’s  ships)  work  as  common  labourers

8 The  port  Inr  the  Lebanon,  whence  weie  brought  the  cedar- wood  and
cedar-resin.

9 Apparently  Crete,  which  was  under  Egyptian  influence  at  an  earlv
date.

10  This  trivial  trading,  now  that  all  more  extended  commerce  is  at  an
end,  is  something  quite  gratifying


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  97

Nay,  but  Elephantine  and  Thinis  (?),  and  the  ...  of  Upper
Egypt  (?),  they  pay  taxes  no  more  by  reason  of  the  unrest.
There  is  a lack  of  fruits,  charcoal,  and  all  manner  of  joinery,  the

products  of  the  craftsmen . To  what  purpose  is  a

treasury  without  its  revenues  ? But  glad  is  the  heart  of  the

king  when  the  truth  cometh  to  him  ! 1 What  can  we

do  about  it  ? All  goeth  to  ruin  !

Nay,  but  laughter  hath  perished  and  is  no  longer  made.
It  is  grief  that  walketh  through  the  land,  mingled  with
lamentations.

(.4  damaged  verse,  treating  of  Egyptians  and  foreigners.)

Nay,  but  the  hair  of  all  people  is  ( untended  ?).  The  son  of
a man  of  rank  is  no  more  distinguished  from  him  that  hath  no
such  (father).2

(.4  damaged  verse.)

Nay,  but  great  and  small  say : “ I wish  I were  dead ! ” Little
children  say  : “ He  ought  never  to  have  caused  me  to  live.”

Nay,  but  the  children  of  princes,  men  dash  them  against  walls.
The  children  of  the  neck,3  they  are  laid  upon  the  high  ground.4

Nay,  but  they  that  were  in  the  Pure  Place,  they  are  cast
forth  upon  the  high  ground.  The  secret  of  the  embalmers,  it
lieth  open.5 *

Nay,  but  that  hath  perished  which  was  still  seen  yesterday.
The  land  is  left  over  to  its  weariness,  as  when  one  hath  pulled
up  the  flax.8

Nay,  but  the  entire  Delta  is  no  (longer)  hidden.  The  con-
fidence of  the  North  Land  is  (now)  a trodden  road.7  What  is

1 By  this  is  probably  meant  the  truth  which  the  king  is  not  told.

2 The  hair  of  children  of  high  rank  was  probably  dressed  in  a special
way  ; they  wore  perhaps  the  side-lock,  which  later  on  was  ordinarily  worn
by  princes  only.

3 Children  in  arms  ? Below,  where  the  verse  is  repeated,  this  ex-
pression is  replaced  by  “ the  children  of  the  request,”  i.e.  those  which
have  been  asked  for  in  prayer.

4 Want  drives  people  to  expose  them.

s The  mummies  of  persons  of  rank  are  tom  from  the  tombs.

* In  the  flax-field  no  stubble  is  ever  left.

7 The  natural  protection  of  the  Delta  afforded  by  its  swamps  and  lakes

is  no  longer  of  any  avail,  the  foreigners  enter  it  in  bands  and  practise  its
crafts  themselves.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Delta  in  the  later
periods  of  Antiquity  and  during  the  Middle  Ages  was  the  centre  of  in-
dustry and  export.  Such  may  well  have  been  the  case  also  at  this  earlier
date.


7


98


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


one  to  do  ? Men  say  : “ Cursed  (?)  be  the  inaccessible

place  ! Behold,  it  belongeth  now  (?)  as  much  to  them  that
know  it  not,  as  to  them  that  know  it,  and  strangers  are  versed
in  the  crafts  of  the  Delta.

Nay,  but  the  citizens  have  been  placed  over  the  mill-stones.
They  that  were  clad  in  fine  linen  are  beaten  with  . . . They
that  saw  not  the  day  are  gone  forth 1 . . . They  that  were  on
the  beds  of  their  husbands,  let  them  sleep  on  the  cushions  2 of

the  . . . Ladies  are  like  slave-girls.  The  musicians

in  the  chambers  within  the  houses,  their  song  to  the  goddess  of
music  (?)  is  a dirge,  and  they  that  tell  . . .,  sit  over  the  mill-
stones.3

Nay,  but  all  female  slaves  have  power  over  their  mouths.4
When  their  mistresses  speak,  it  is  irksome  to  the  servants.

Nay,  but . People  will  say,  when  they  hear  it :

“ The  . . . cakes  for  the  children  are  diminished,  and  there  is
no  food  for  . . How  tasteth  that  to-day  ?

Nay,  but  the  magistrates  are  hungry  and  suffer  need

Nay,  but  the  hot-headed  man  saith  : “ ...  If  I knew  where
God  is,  then  would  I make  offering  to  Him.”  5

(Two  damaged  verses  : Truth  hath  become  lies  (?)  in  the  land,
and  : The  harvester  (?)  is  robbed  of  all  his  possessions.)

Nay,  but  all  cattle,  their  hearts  weep.  The  herds  lament
because  of  the  state  of  the  land.

Nay,  but  the  children  of  princes,  men  dash  them  against
walls.  The  children  that  have  been  earnestly  desired,  they  are
laid  upon  the  high  ground.  Khnum  complaineth  because  of
his  weariness.6

(A  quite  unintelligible  verse.)

Nay,  but throughout  the  land,  insolence  hath  come

1 As  in  the  following  sentence,  the  writer  probably  means  ladies  of
high  rank,  who  ordinarily  lived  in  the  house  ; they  must  now  toil  outside
in  the  heat.

2 In  this  and  a later  passage,  by  cushions  are  meant  apparently  some
inferior  kind  of  resting-place

’The  female  singers  (and  story-tellers  ?)  are  meant,  who  at  other
times  entertained  the  ladies  of  the  harim.

11  Say  what  they  like  ; as  we  should  say,  “ are  free  with  their  tongues.”

6 What  is  meant  by  this  ?

• The  trouble  he  takes  in  fashioning  children  seems  to  him  to  be
wasted.  The  author  has  already  employed  the  same  verse  similarly
above.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


99


to  all  men.1  A man  slayeth  his  brother  by  the  same
mother .

Nay,  but  the  roads  are  . . . and  the  streets  are  watched.2
Men  sit  in  the  bushes  until  the  benighted  (traveller)  cometh,
in  order  to  take  from  him  his  load.  What  is  upon  him  is  stolen.
He  getteth  blows  of  the  stick  to  smell  and  is  slain  wrongfully.

Nay,  but  that  hath  perished  which  was  still  seen  yesterday.
The  land  is  left  over  to  its  weariness,  as  when  one  hath  pulled

up  the  flax.3 Would  that  there  might  be  an  end  of

men,  no  conception,  no  birth  ! Oh  that  the  earth  would  cease
from  noise  and  strife  be  no  more  !

Nay,  but  men  feed  on  herbs  and  drink  water.  No  fruit  nor
herbs  are  longer  found  for  the  birds,  and  the  offal  (?)  is  robbed
from  the  mouth  of  the  swine,  without  it  being  said  (as  afore-
time) : “ This  is  better  for  thee  than  for  me,”  for  men  are  so
hungry.4

Nay,  but  com  hath  perished  everywhere.  People  are
stripped  of  clothing,  perfume,  and  oil.  Every  one  saith :
“ There  is  no  more.”  The  storehouse  is  bare,  and  he  that  kept

it  lieth  stretched  out  on  the  ground. Would  that  I

had  lifted  up  my  voice  at  that  moment,  that  it  might  have  saved
me  from  the  pain  in  which  I am  ! 5 *

Nay,  but  the  splendid  judgment-hall,  its  writings  are  taken
away  ; the  secret  place  is  laid  bare.  . . .

Nay,  but  magic  spells  are  divulged  and  are  now  ineffectual  (?),
for  the  people  have  them  in  mind.8

Nay,  but  the  public  offices  are  opened,  and  their  lists  are
taken  away.  Serfs  become  lords  of  serfs.7

Nay,  but  the  (officials  ?)  are  slain  and  their  lists  taken  away.
Woe  is  me  because  of  the  misery  in  such  a time  !

Nay,  but  the  scribes  of  the  sack,  their  writings  are  destroyed.

1This  sentence  is  borrowed  from  the  Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  One  who
is  tired  of  Life  (see  p.  90).

2 1.e,  by  robbers  ? 3 The  same  verse  already  above.

4 Men  are  now  themselves  eating  that  on  which  they  used  to  feed  the

poultry  and  the  pigs.

s Is  the  prophet  reproaching  himself  here  for  not  having  come  forward
at  the  right  moment  ?

* Owing  to  their  having  become  known,  they  are  profaned.  It  should
be  observed  that  magical  spells  are  here  reckoned  as  a valuable  possession
of  the  Government.

7 Now  the  lists  are  gone,  no  one  knows  who  was  not  free.


100


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


That  whereon  Egypt  liveth  is  a “ When  I come,  it’s  brought
me.”  1

Nay,  but  the  laws  of  the  judgment-hall  are  placed  in  the
vestibule.  Yea,  men  walk  upon  them  in  the  streets,  and  the
poor  tear  them  up  in  the  alleys.

Nay,  but  the  poor  man  hath  attained  to  the  condition  (?)
of  the  Nine  Gods.  That  procedure  of  the  House  of  the  Thirty
is  divulged.2

Nay,  but  the  great  judgment-hall  is  a “ go  out,  that  he  may
come  in.”  3 The  poor  go  and  come  in  the  Great  Houses.4

Nay,  but  the  children  of  the  magistrates  are  thrown  on  to
the  streets.  He  that  hath  knowledge  saith  : “ Yea.”  The
fool  saith : “ Nay.”  He  that  hath  no  knowledge,  to  him
seemeth  it  good.5 * *

Nay,  but  they  that  were  in  the  Pure  Place,  they  are  cast
forth  upon  the  high  ground.  The  secret  of  the  embalmers,  it
lieth  open.8

[Second  poem.]

The  disasters  described  in  this  poem  far  surpass  those  hitherto
complained  of.  Even  the  kingship  is  now  destroyed,  and  the
masses  are  completely  triumphant.  It  is  pointed  out  over  and
over  again  how  rich  they  have  become,  whereas  the  upper  classes
are  sunk  in  misery.

As  the  first  poem,  with  each  verse  introduced  by  “ Nay,  but,”
depicted  well-known  and  accomplished  facts  ; the  second,  with  its
recurring  introductory  “ Behold,”  vividly  brings  before  us  events
that  are  just  taking  place  or  about  to  take  place.

Behold,  the  fire  will  mount  up  on  high.  Its  burning  goeth
forth  against  the  enemies  of  the  land.

Behold,  a thing  hath  been  done,  that  happened  not  afore-

1 The  corn-supply  of  the  State,  from  which  all  were  fed,  is  now  at  any
one’s  mercy,  for  the  documents  regulating  its  distribution  are  lost.

2 The  thirty  highest  officials  no  longer  make  any  impression  upon  the
people,  who  have  become  like  gods.

3 I.e.  is  full  to  overflowing.

4 The  Six  Great  Houses  are  the  ancient  High  Courts,  into  which  the

rabble  now  forces  its  way  without  any  feeling  of  awe.

s A soliloquy  of  the  prophet,  a corrupt  version  of  which  is  interpolated

in  the  Instruction  of  Amenemhet  (see  p.  74,  note  8).  Is  the  complacent,
unsuspecting  person  the  king  ?

8 this  verse  has  already  been  employed  above.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  101

time  ; it  is  come  to  this  that  the  king  hath  been  taken  away  by
poor  men.1

Behold,  he  that  was  buried  as  a hawk  3 lieth  on  a bier.
What  the  pyramid  hid  3 will  become  empty.

Behold,  it  is  come  to  this,  that  the  land  is  despoiled  of  the
kingship  by  a few  senseless  people.

Behold,  it  is  come  to  this,  that  men  display  enmity  against
the  Urseus,4  the  (defender  ?)  of  Re,  which  caused  the  Two  Lands
to  be  in  peace.

Behold,  the  secret  of  the  land,  whose  limits  were  unknown,5
is  divulged.  The  Residence  is  overturned  in  an  hour.

(An  unintelligible  verse  about  Egypt.)

Behold,  the  kerehet-snake  6 is  taken  from  its  hole.  The
secret  of  the  kings  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  is  divulged.

Behold,  the  Residence  is  afraid  through  want.  The  . . .
will  stir  up  unrest,  and  there  is  no  resistance.

Behold,  the  land  . . . full  of  confederates.  The  strong
man,  the  miserable  one  robbeth  him  of  his  goods.7

Behold,  the  kerehet-snake  . . . the  weary  ones.8  He  that
could  make  himself  no  sarcophagus  now  possesseth  a tomb.9

Behold,  the  lords  of  the  Pure  Place  10  are  thrown  out  upon
the  high  ground.  He  that  could  not  make  himself  a coffin  is
now  in.  . . .

Behold,  this  hath  happened  among  (?)  men  : he  that  could
not  build  himself  a chamber  now  possesseth  a walled  enclosure.

Behold,  the  officers  of  the  land  are  driven  out  through  the
land. are  driven  out  from  the  houses  of  the  kingdom.

Behold,  ladies  he  on  cushions,11  and  magistrates  in  the  store-
house. He  that  could  not  sleep  upon  (?)  walls  now  possesseth
a bed.

I From  what  follows,  the  plundering  of  the  royal  sepulchre  is  meant.

3  The  king.

3 The  sarcophagus.

4 The  serpent-diadem  of  the  king  and  of  the  sun-god.

5 Secret  affairs  of  which  no  one  except  the  king  had  full  knowledge.

6 A snake  which  lives  in  consecrated  places — in  this  case  the  palace —
as  the  guardian-spirit.

7 The  hitherto  powerful  person  is  plundered  by  the  rabble  joined  to-
gether in  bands.  The  following  verses  develop  this  theme.

8 The  dead.

9 Which  he  has  stolen  for  himself.

10  See  p.  95,  note  3 ; the  dead  are  meant.

II  See  p.  98,  note  2 ; the  magistrates  seek  shelter  in  the  storehouse.


102  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Behold,  the  rich  man  sleepeth  thirsty.  He  that  once  begged
him  for  his  dregs  (?)  now  possesseth  strong  beer  (P).1

Behold,  they  that  possessed  clothes  are  now  in  rags.  He
that  wove  not  for  himself  now  possesseth  fine  linen.

Behold,  he  that  never  built  for  himself  a boat  now  possesseth
ships.  He  that  possessed  the  same  looketh  at  them,  but  they
are  no  longer  his.

Behold,  he  that  had  no  shade  now  hath  shade.  They  that
had  shade  are  in  the  full  blast  of  the  storm.2

Behold,  he  that  had  no  knowledge  of  harp-playing  now
possesseth  an  harp.  He  to  whom  never  man  sang,  now  praiseth
the  goddess  of  music.

Behold,  they  that  possessed  drink-tables  of  copper, — not
one  vessel  is  bedecked  (?)  3 for  one  of  them.

Behold,  he  that  slept  unwed  through  want  now  findeth
ladies  (?) .

Behold,  he  that  had  nothing  now  possesseth  wealth.  The
great  man  4 praiseth  him.

Behold,  the  poor  of  the  land  have  become  rich  ; he  that
possessed  something  is  now  one  that  hath  nothing.

Behold,  they  that  . . . now  have  a staff  of  servants.  He
that  was  a messenger  now  sendeth  another.

Behold,  he  that  had  no  bread  now  possesseth  a barn  ; (but)
that  wherewith  his  storehouse  is  provided  is  the  property  of
another.

Behold,  the  bald  head  that  used  no  oil  now  possesseth  jars
of  pleasant  myrrh .

Behold,  she  that  had  no  box  now  possesseth  a coffer.
She  that  looked  at  her  face  in  the  water  now  possesseth  a
mirror.

(A  verse  left  incomplete .)

Behold,  a man  is  happy  when  he  eateth  his  food  : “ Spend
thy  possessions  in  joy  and  without  holding  thee  back  ! It  is
good  for  a man  to  eat  his  food,  which  God  assigneth  to  him
whom  he  praiseth  5 .”

1 Literally  “ beer  that  bowls  one  over.”

2 They  are  shelterless,  exposed  to  the  sun  and  to  the  tempest.

3 The  verse  is  probably  corrupt.  Possibly  there  is  here  a reference  to
the  custom  of  wreathing  the  wine-jars  with  garlands.

* Or,  " the  high  official  ; he  must  pay  court  to  the  upstart.

5 Apparently  a quotation  from  some  old  book.  But  what  is  it  doing
here  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  103

Behold,  he  that  knew  nought  of  his  god  now  maketh  offering
to  him  with  the  incense  of  another .

Behold,  noble  ladies,  great  ladies,  who  possessed  goodly
things,  their  children  are  given  to  the  beds.1

Behold,  he  that  had  a lady  to  wife,  her  father  protecteth
him .

Behold,  the  children  of  officials  are  in  rags . Their

cattle  belong  to  plunderers.

Behold,  the  butchers  make  onslaught  upon  2 the  cattle .

Behold,  he  that  never  slaughtered  for  himself  now  slaughter-
ed oxen .

Behold,  the  butchers  make  onslaught  upon  the  geese,  which
are  given  to  the  gods  instead  of  oxen.3

Behold,  slave-girls  . . . make  offering  . . .,  ladies .

Behold,  ladies  run . Their  (children  ?)  are  laid  low

in  fear  of  death.

Behold,  the  chiefs  of  the  land  run,  without  their  having  any
employ,  through  want  . . .

Behold,  they  that  possessed  beds  now  lie  upon  the  ground.
He  that  slept  with  dirt  (?)  upon  him  now  stuffeth  for  himself  a
cushion.

Behold,  ladies,  they  are  becoming  hungry  ; but  the  butchers
are  sated  with  that  which  they  have  done.4

Behold,  no  office  is  any  longer  in  its  right  place  ; they  are
as  a frightened  herd  without  herdsmen.

Behold,  the  cattle  rove  about  and  there  is  none  that  careth
for  them.  Each  man  fetcheth  for  himself  therefrom  and
brandeth  it  with  his  name.

Behold,  a man  is  slain  beside  his  brother.  He  leaveth  him
in  the  lurch  in  order  to  rescue  himself.

Behold,  he  that  had  no  yoke  of  oxen  now  possesseth  droves.
He  that  could  not  procure  himself  oxen  for  ploughing  now
possesseth  herds.

Behold,  he  that  had  no  grain  now  possesseth  barns.  He
that  fetched  for  himself  corn-doles  now  himself  causeth  them
to  be  dispensed.

1 Does  this  mean  they  are  prostituted  ? 2 Slay  them  indiscriminately.

3 The  meaning  probably  is  that  the  new  rich  give  geese  as  offerings  and
prefer  to  eat  the  oxen  themselves.

1 They  themselves  eat  the  meat.  (But  see  Blackman,  Journ.  of

Egypt.  Archeology,  xi.  pp.  213  ff.  [Translator]).


104  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Behold,  he  that  had  no  bondsmen  now  possesseth  serfs.
He  that  was  a (notable  ?)  now  himself  executeth  behests.

Behold,  the  mighty  ones  of  the  land,  none  reporteth  to  them
the  condition  of  the  common  people.  All  goeth  to  ruin  !

Behold,  no  craftsman  worketh  ; the  enemy  despoileth  the
land  of  its  crafts.

( A mutilated  verse  about  the  harvest,  which  he  that  gather eth
hath  not  tilled .)

[Third  and  fourth  poem.]

Some  missing  and  mutilated  verses,  each  of  which  began  with
the  word  “ Destroyed.”  In  the  last  but  one  can  be  made  out :
The  poor  man  awakeneth,  when  day  dawneth  upon  him,  and  is
without  dread,  and  they  are  tents  which  they  have  made  like
the  barbarians.  The  last  is  as  follows  :

Destroyed  is  the  carrying  out  of  that  for  which  servants
were  sent  on  the  behests  of  their  lords  ; they  are  without  dread.
Behold,  they  are  five  men.1  They  say,  they  say  : “ Go  ye  upon
the  road  which  ye  know,  we  have  arrived  (home  ?).2

An  isolated  section  follows  :

The  Delta  weepeth,  the  storehouse  of  the  king  is  for  every
one  an  “If  I come,  then  it  is  brought  unto  me.”  The  entire
palace  is  without  its  dues,  and  (yet)  there  belong  to  it  barley
and  wheat,  fowl  and  fish.  To  it  belpng  white  cloth  and  fine
linen,  copper  and  oil.  To  it  belong  mat  and  carpet,  . . . and
palanquin  and  all  goodly  dues . If  it  is  not  yet  pro-
claimed (?)  in  the  palace,  then .

In  the  fourth  poem,  of  which  only  scraps  are  preserved,  the
six  verses  begin  with  the  words : Destroy  the  enemies  of  the
noble  Residence  ; it  thus  doubtless  contains  the  summons  to  resist
them.  The  Residence  is  here  assigned  such  epithets  as  with
excellent  officials,  with  many  laws,  and  with  many  offices,  and
in  the  first  verse  the  words  the  superintendent  of  the  capital  goeth
forth  without  constables  are  still  legible.

1 There  were  labour-gangs  of  five  persons,  and  perhaps  that  is  what  is
meant  here.  They  no  longer  suffer  themselves  to  be  sent  on  errands,
but  expect  the  masters  to  go  themselves.  Mention  was  made  of  a
" messenger  ” in  the  preceding  passage.

a For  the  meaning  which  can  be  assigned  to  this  and  the  following
passage,  see  above,  p.  93,  note  1.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


105


[Fifth  poem.]

Eight  or  more  verses  beginning  with  “ Remember  ” ; they  deal
with  the  worship  of  the  gods,  how  this  was  formerly  conducted,
and  how  it  is  to  be  conducted  in  the  future.

All  that  can  be  said  about  the  first  verse  is  that  it  makes  mention
of  some  one  in  pain  and  of  his  god.

Remember how  fumigation  is  made  with  incense,

and  water  offered  from  an  ewer  in  the  early  morning.

Remember  how  fat  geese  are  brought,  and  geese  and  duck
and  the  divine  offering  offered  to  the  gods.

Remember  how  natron  is  chewed,1  and  white  bread  prepared
on  the  day  when  the  head  is  moistened.2

Remember  how  flagstaff's  are  erected,3  and  offering-slabs
carved,  how  the  priest  purifieth  the  temples,  and  the  house  of
God  is  whitened  like  milk,  how  the  horizon  4 is  perfumed,  and
the  offering-bread  perpetuated.

Remember  how  the  regulations  are  observed,  and  the  days
of  the  month  adjusted.  Bad  priests  are  to  be  removed  (?) .

Remember  how  oxen  are  slaughtered .

In  the  destroyed  concluding  verses  we  read  among  other  things
that  geese  are  laid  upon  the  fire,  of  course  as  a sacrifice.

A long  section  followed,  in  which  the  sage  first  addresses  himself
yet  further  to  several  persons  ; of  what  is  preserved  the  following

is  intelligible : Behold,  wherefore  seeketh  he ? A

timid  man  is  not  distinguished  from  one  that  is  violent ; he
will  bring  coolness  upon  the  heat.  It  is  said  : he  is  the  herds-
man of  all  men.  No  evil  is  in  his  heart.  His  herd  is  diminished,

and  yet  (?)  he  hath  spent  the  dayin  order  to  tend  them  5 .

Ah,  but  had  he  perceived  their  nature  in  the  first  generation  ; 6

1 The  priest  purified  his  mouth  with  natron-water.  2 Meaning  ?

3 At  the  gateways  of  the  temples.  The  whole  verse  speaks  of  the

restoration  of  ruined  temples.

4 The  temple.

6 This  must  primarily  refer  to  the  king,  to  whom  the  sage  once  more
addresses  himself ; he  is  a herdsman,  from  whom  the  herd  has  run  away
during  the  night.

6 Probably  an  allusion  to  the  legend  which  related  how  Re,  when  he
ruled  over  the  world  in  primaeval  times,  did  not,  in  his  clemency,  so
completely  extirpate  mankind  as  they  deserved  in  view  of  their  impieties
(see  pp.  47  ft.  and  the  allusion  on  p.  S3,  cote  3).  It  might  also  bear  the


106


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


then  would  he  have  smitten  down  evil ; he  would  have  stretched
forth  the  arm  against  it,  and  destroyed  the  seed  thereof  and
their  inheritance.  Then  the  sage  laments,  perhaps,  over  the  fact
that  men  always  desire  to  give  birth,  and  seed  issueth  from  the
women,  while  oppression  is  on  every  side.  There  is  no  pilot
in  their  time.  Where  is  he  to-day  ? Doth  he  sleep  then  ?
Behold,  his  might  is  not  seen.1  When  we  were  thrown  into  (?)

mourning  I found  thee  not ; I was  not  called . After

a series  of  long  lacunce  the  text  again  becomes  intelligible :

Command,  Perception,  and  Truth  are  with  thee,2  but  it  is
confusion  that  thou  puttest  throughout  the  land,  together  with
the  noise  of  them  that  contend.  Behold,  one  thrusteth  at  the

other . If  three  men  journey  upon  a road,  they  are

found  to  be  two  men  ; it  is  the  greater  number  that  slayeth  the
lesser.  Is  there  an  herdsman  that  loveth  death  ? 3

But  thou  wilt  command  that  a reply  be  made .

Lies  are  told  thee  ; the  land  is  brushwood,4  mankind  is  de-
stroyed all  these  years  are  confusion.  A man  is  slain

(even)  upon  his  roof,  when  he  is  on  the  watch  in  his  boundary-
house.3  If  he  be  strong  and  saveth  himself,  then  remaineth  he
alive.  The  text  then  goes  on  to  speak  of  some  one  that  walketh
upon  the  road.  What  is  upon  him  is  stolen.  He  getteth  blows
of  the  stick  to  smell  and  is  slain  wrongfully.6

Would  that  thou  mightest  taste  some  of  these  miseries
(thyself)  ! Then  thou  wouldest  say .

[Sixth  poem.]

A description  of  the  happy  time  that  the  future  has  in  store.

It  is  good,  however,  when  ships  sail  upstream .

{A  verse  destroyed.)

It  is  good,  however,  when  the  net  is  drawn  in  and  the  birds
are  made  fast 7 . . .

meaning  : Would  that  Re  had  realized  at  the  time  that  men  were  in-
corrigible, and  extirpated  them.

1 The  sleeping  pilot  is  certainly  the  king.

2 You  possess  the  qualities  necessary  to  a king,  but  make  no  use  of  them.

3 Among  his  herd.

4 Literally  : It  is  kaka  ” ; kaka  is  elsewhere  a plant  that  easily

catches  lire.

6 What  is  intended  by  this  ?

* This  verse  occurs  above  in  the  first  poem  (p.  99).

7 The  catching  of  birds  with  the  clap-net  is  meant.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  107

(.4  verse  dealing  probably  with  roads.)

It  is  good,  however,  when  the  hands  of  men  build  pyramids
and  dig  ponds,  and  make  for  the  gods  plantations  with  trees.

It  is  good,  however,  when  the  folk  are  drunken,  and  when
they  drink  . . d glad  of  heart.

It  is  good,  however,  when  rejoicing  is  in  (men’s)  mouths,
and  the  magnates  of  districts  stand  and  look  on  at  the  jubila-
tion in  their  houses  (?),  clad  in  fine  raiment .

It  is  good,  however,  when  beds  are  stuffed  and  the  head-
rests 2 of  the  great  are  protected  (?)  with  amulets,  and  every
man’s  wish  is  satisfied  with  a bed  in  the  shade,  behind  a closed
door,  ( and  he  need  not  ?)  sleep  in  the  bushes.

It  is  good,  however,  when  fine  linen  is  spread  out  on  the
day  of .

After  a series  of  lacunce  we  meet  with  a section  that  must  have
contained  a reply  of  the  king,  to  which  the  sage  makes  further
answer.  In  what  is  preserved  of  this  section  mention  is  apparently
made  of  the  “recruits,"  the  young  manhood,  having  revolted  and  of
having,  like  foreigners,  attacked  Egypt.  The  peoples  of  the  South,
however,  wish  to  succour  Egypt,  which  is  brother  and  sister  to  them :

None  are  found  to  stand  and  protect  it .

If  any  man  fight  for  his  sister,  he  protecteth  himself.3

The  negroes  say  : “ We  will  be  your  protection.  Let  fighting
be  multiplied  to  repel  the  People  of  the  Bow.  Do  they  consist
of  Temehu,  then  we  do  it  again.”

The  Mato'i,  who  are  friendly  towards  Egypt,  (say  ?)  : “ How
could  there  be  a man  that  would  slay  his  brother  ? ”

The  recruits  whom  we  enrolled  (?)  for  us,  are  become  a People
of  the  Bow,  that  would  fain  destroy  that  from  which  it  took
its  being,  and  showeth  the  Bedouins  the  condition  of  the  land.
But  all  foreign  countries  are  afraid  of  them.

Then  after  long  lacunce  : Said  the  recruits . All  the

rest  is  destroyed.

This  is  what  Ipuwer  said  when  he  answered  the  majesty  of
the  Lord  of  All : to  be  ignorant  of  it  4 is  something

1 Some  special  kind  of  drink.

3 The  wooden  rest  on  which  the  head  was  laid  during  sleep.  People
liked  to  have  them  ornamented  with  figures  of  demons,  who  were  supposed
to  protect  sleepers.

3 Is  this  Egypt’s  call  for  help  to  the  Southern  peoples  ?

4 Meaning  possibly  the  future  ?


108  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

that  is  pleasant  in  the  heart.  Thou  hast  done  what  is  good  in
their  hearts,  thou  hast  kept  alive  the  people  among  (?)  them,1
but  (?)  they  (still)  cover  their  faces  for  fear  of  the  morrow.

There  was  once  a man  that  was  old  and  stood  in  the  presence
of  death,  and  his  son  was  still  a child  and  without  understanding

and  opened  not  yet  his  mouth  to  speak  unto  you.  Ye

took  him  away  through  a deathly  doom .2

Isolated  words  still  surviving  show  that  the  subject  under  dis-
cussion 'was  still  the  plight  of  the  land,  weeping,  the  forcing  a way
into  the  tomb-chapels,  and  the  burning  of  statues.

3.  THE  COMPLAINT  OF  KHEKHEPERRE-SONBU  3

As  is  evident  from  his  name,  Kheklieperre-sonbu  (“  Khekheperre
is  in  health  ”),  the  author  lived  under  King  Sesostris  II,  i.e.  about
1900  b.c.  As  the  text  is  written  on  the  writing-board  of  a school-
boy of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  it  was  evidently  regarded  at  that
time  also  as  a classical  work.

The  introduction  alone  is  preserved,  and  in  it  the  author  ex-
presses a desire  to  discover  new  and  unheard-of  utterances,  with
which  to  adorn  his  complaint.  The  book  is  in  the  form  of  the
colloquy  of  a man  with  his  own  heart  as  his  only  true  friend.  It  is
thus  reminiscent  of  the  Dispute  with  his  Soul  of  One  who  is  tired  of
Life  (above,  pp.  86  ff.),  in  whose  case  also  his  soul  is  the  only  com-
panion left  to  him.  We  know  nothing,  apart  from  this  work,
about  the  calamity  which  the  writer  deplores,  though,  to  be  sure,
in  view  of  our  inadequate  knowledge  of  Egyptian  history,  we
cannot  exactly  be  surprised  at  this.

That  the  book  is  later  than  the  other  writings  of  this  description,
is  distinctly  to  be  concluded  from  the  fact  that  the  man’s  complaint
is  somewhat  vague  and  generalizing.  It  might  almost  be  supposed
that  to  lament  over  the  misery  of  the  world  had  already  become  a
literary  convention.  With  this  would  agree  the  author’s  wish  to
surpass  his  predecessors  in  his  phraseology.

[Title.]

The  collection  of  words  and  gathering  4 of  sayings,  the  quest
of  utterances  with  meditation  of  the  heart,  composed  by  the

1 I.e.  the  Egyptians  ? See  p.  94,  note  1.

- What  does  this  story  mean  ? Does  he  tell  it  by  way  of  illustration,  or
is  it  the  prelude  to  the  whole  disaster  ? ( of . above  p.  93}.

3 On  a writing-board  of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty  in  London.  See
Gardiner,  The  Admonitions  of  an  Egyptian  Sage,  pp.  95  ff.

4 He  thinks  of  himself  as  plucking  flowers.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  109

priest  of  Heliopolis,  the  . . Khekheperre-sonbu,  also  named
Ankhu.

He  saith  : Would  that  I had  words  that  are  unknown,  utter-
ances and  sayings  in  new  language,  that  hath  not  yet  passed
away,  and  without  that  which  hath  been  said  repeatedly — not
an  utterance  that  hath  grown  stale,  what  the  ancestors  have
already  said.

I wring  out  my  body 1 because  of  that  which  is  therein,  as
one  that  separateth  himself  from  (?)  every  one  that  hath  spoken

(aforetime),  seeing  that . And  now  the  author  indulges  in

tricks  of  construction  with  the  words  “ say  ” and  “ speak,”  of  which
only  parts  are  intelligible : What  is  said  is  said  ; a man  cannot
pride  himself  upon  the  speech  of  men  of  former  times  ; in  this
instance  there  speaketh  not  one  that  hath  spoken,  there  speaketh
one  that  will  speak.  He  that  doeth  otherwise,  that  is  lies,  and
there  is  none  that  will  make  mention  of  his  name  to  others.2

This  have  I said  in  view  of  that  which  (?)  I have  seen  : from
the  first  generation  unto  that  which  cometh  after — they  are
like  that  which  is  past.3

Would  that  I knew  that  which  others  knew  not  yet,  some-
what of  that  which  is  not  (only)  repetition,  in  order  that  I might
say  it,  and  that  my  heart  might  make  answer  to  me,  in  order
that  I might  make  clear  (?)  to  it  (i.e.  to  the  heart)  my  suffering,
and  thrust  aside  to  it  the  load  that  is  upon  my  back.

I am  meditating  upon  what  hath  happened,  on  the  things
that  have  come  to  pass  throughout  the  land.  Changes  take
place  ; it  is  not  like  last  year,  and  one  year  is  more  burdensome
than  the  other.  The  land  is  in  confusion,  become  waste  (?)

. Right  is  cast  out,  and  iniquity  (sitteth)  in  the  council-

chamber.  The  plans  of  the  gods  are  destroyed  and  their
ordinances  transgressed.  The  land  is  in  misery,  mourning  is  in
every  place,  towns  and  villages  lament.  All  people  alike  are
transgressors,  the  back  is  turned  upon  respect .

He  would  fain  complain  of  this  misery,  for  it  is  painful  to
hide  it  in  the  body.  He  cannot  complain  of  it  to  another,  for
another  heart  would  be  bowed  down  therewith.  Still,  an  heart
that  is  valiant  in  evil  case,  this  is  a comrade  to  its  lord.  Would

1 The  body  is  accounted  the  seat  of  the  thoughts.

1 See  Gunn,  p.  162,  note  1.

3 No  one  is  original  ; the  “ first  generation  " is  of  course  merely  a
manner  of  speech.


110


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


that  I had  an  heart  that  knoweth  how  to  endure  ! Then  would
I rest  upon  it,  that  I might  load  it  with  words  of  misery,  that
I might  drive  to  it  my  pain.

He  saith  to  his  heart  : Come,  my  heart,  that  I may  speak
to  thee,  that  thou  mayest  answer  for  me  my  words,  that  thou
mayest  expound  to  me  the  things  that  are  throughout  the  land,
that  are  bright  and  he  outstretched.1

I meditate  upon  what  hath  happened.  Affliction  is  come

to-day and  all  men  are  silent  concerning  it.  The

whole  land  is  in  a great  condition.2  There  is  none  free  from
transgression,  and  all  men  alike  are  doing  it.  Hearts  are  sorrow-
ful. Every  day  men  rise  up  early  thereto  ; yesterday

in  that  respect  is  like  to-day. .

There  is  none  so  understanding,  that  he  comprehendeth ;
none  so  indignant,  that  he  speaketh  out.  Men  rise  up  early
every  day  to  suffering.

Long  and  heavy  is  my  suffering  ; the  wretched  hath  no
strength  to  (protect  himself)  from  him  that  is  stronger  than  he.

It  is  pain  to  keep  silent  with  respect  to  what  is  heard,  and

it  is  misery  to  answer  one  that  is  ignorant 3 . The  heart

accepteth  not  the  truth . I speak  to  thee,  mine  heart,

to  the  intent  that  thou  mayest  answer  me ; an  heart  that  is
approached  doth  not  keep  silence.  Behold,  the  affairs  of  the
servant4  are  like  those  of  the  master,  and  manifold  is  that
which  weigheth  upon  thee.

4.  THE  PROPHECY  OF  NEFERROHU 5 6 *

This  work  is  known  to  us  from  a papyrus  of  the  time  of  Thut-
mosis  III,  and  from  two  writing-boards  8 and  three  ostraca  of  the
New  Kingdom.  It  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  literature  cherished

1 What  is  in  view  of  all,  yet  is  comprehended  of  none.

! “ Condition  ’’  for  " bad  condition.’’

3 The  meaning  of  the  passage  probably  is  : It  is  not  right,  my  heart,

that  you  answer  me  nothing,  and  wherefore  should  I speak  to  you,  if
you  wish  to  know  nothing  about  it  ?

* The  servant  is  the  heart,  which  also  suffers,  if  the  man,  its  master,
suffers.

6 Discovered  and  published  by  Golenischeff ; translated  by  Gardiner,

Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  i.  pp.  ioo  ff.

• One  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  5647)  contains,  to  be  sure,  only  a few  words,
lor  the  schoolboy  has  wiped  the  surface  almost  clean.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  111

in  the  later  schools.  The  approximate  date  of  its  composition  is
revealed  by  its  ending  : the  sage,  who  describes  to  the  old  king
Snefru  1 the  distress  of  the  south-eastern  Delta,  foresees  that  a
defender  will  rise  up  for  it  in  the  person  of  King  Amenemhet  I
(1995-1965  b.c.).2  To  the  poet  this  king  is  not  a far-away  figure,
one  out  of  the  long  series  of  Pharaohs,  but  stands  close  to  him  ;
for  he  mentions  him  familiarly  by  his  nickname,  as  though  he  were
his  contemporary.  One  might,  therefore,  suppose  that  these
prophecies  were  written  under  this  king  himself,  whom  they  set
out  to  glorify,  or  at  least  under  one  of  his  immediate  successors.
The  horrors  also,  which  the  sage  foresees  at  the  time  of  Snefru,  and
which  Amenemhet  is  to  bring  to  an  end,  must  correspond  with
events  of  the  poet’s  own  period.

The  book  begins  with  a scene,  which  is  employed  as  an  intro-
duction in  all  periods  of  Egyptian  history,  even  in  official  inscrip-
tions : the  king  sits  with  his  court  and  deliberates  upon  a matter,
or  has  some  story  told  him.3  That,  as  a result  of  his  inquisitive
searchings  into  the  future,  he  also  succeeds  in  hearing  something
that  he  had  rather  not  know,  is  to  be  found  elsewhere.1

Now  it  came  to  pass  when  the  majesty  of  King  Snefru,  the
blessed,  was  beneficent  king  in  this  whole  land — on  one  of  these
days  it  came  to  pass  that  the  officers  of  the  Residence  entered
into  the  palace  to  offer  greeting  5 to  the  king,  and  they  came
forth  again  that  they  might  offer  (further)  greeting,  as  was  their
daily  observance.  Then  said  his  majesty  to  the  chancellor  who
was  at  his  side  : “Go  and  bring  to  me  the  officers  of  the  Resid-
ence who  have  gone  forth  hence  to-day  in  order  to  offer  greeting.”
They  were  led  in  unto  him  forthwith  and  lay  on  their  bellies
in  the  presence  of  his  majesty  a second  time.

And  his  majesty  said  unto  them  : “ My  friends,  I have
caused  you  to  be  summoned,  in  order  that  ye  may  seek  out  for
me  a son  of  yours  that  hath  understanding,  or  a brother  of
yours  that  excelleth,  or  a friend  of  yours  that  hath  performed
some  noble  act,  one  that  will  speak  to  me  some  beauteous  words,
choice  speeches,  in  hearing  which  my  majesty  may  find  diver-
sion.” Then  they  laid  themselves  on  their  bellies  in  the  presence
of  his  majesty  yet  again.

They  said  before  his  majesty  : “ There  is  a great  kherheb

1 See  above,  p.  38,  note  x.  3 See  above,  pp.  15  ff.  and  72  ff.

3 Cf.  e.g.,  pp.  64  ff.,  and  50  ff.  1 Above,  p.  43.

6 By  “ offer  greeting  " are  meant  the  daily  reports  of  the  high  officials,
rendered  firstly  to  the  king,  then  to  the  vizier  and  other  departmental
chiefs.


112


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


of  Bast,1  0 king  our  lord,  named  Neferrohu  ; he  is  a commoner
with  valiant  arm,  and  a scribe  with  cunning  fingers  ; he  is  a
lordly  person,  who  is  richer  than  any  of  his  equals.  Oh  that
he  might  see  thy  majesty  ! ”

Said  his  majesty  : “Go  and  bring  him  to  me.”  And  he  was
led  in  unto  him  forthwith,2  and  he  laid  himself  on  his  belly  in
the  presence  of  his  majesty.  Said  his  majesty  : “ Come  now,
Neferrohu,  my  friend,  and  speak  to  me  some  beauteous  words,
choice  speeches,  in  hearing  which  my  majesty  may  find  diver-
sion.” And  the  kherheb  Neferrohu  said  : “ Shall  it  be  of
that  which  hath  happened,  or  of  that  which  will  happen,  O king
my  lord  ? ” Said  his  majesty  : “ Nay,  of  that  which  will

happen.  If  ought  hath  happened  to-day,  pass  it  by  (?).”  3

Then  he  stretched  out  his  hand  to  the  box  of  writing  materials,
and  took  him  a scroll  and  pen-and-ink  case,  and  then  he  put
it  in  writing.

What  was  spoken  by  the  kherheb  Neferrohu,  the  wise  man
of  the  East,  that  belongeth  to  Bast  . . .,  the  child  of  the  Helio-
politan  nome,4  while  he  brooded  over  what  will  come  to  pass  in
the  land,  and  thought  of  the  condition  of  the  East,  when  the
Asiatics  come  in  their  might  (?),  when  they  afflict  the  hearts  of
the  harvesters,  and  take  away  their  span  when  ploughing.

He  said  : “ Up  (?),  mine  heart,  that  thou  mayest  bewail
this  land  whence  thou  art  sprung  5 .

Rest  not  ! Behold,  it  lieth  before  thy  face.  Rise  up

against  that  which  is  in  thy  presence. That  which  was

made  is  as  if  it  were  never  made,  and  Re  might  begin  to  found
(anew).6  The  whole  land  hath  perished,  there  is  nought  left,
and  the  black  of  the  nail  surviveth  not  of  what  should  be  there  !

This  land  is  ruined ; none  concemeth  himself  about  it  any
more,  none  speaketh,  and  no  eye  weepeth.7

1 Cf.  above,  p.  36,  note  3.  Bast  is  the  jovial  cat-headed  goddess  of
Bubastis  in  the  Delta.

2 This  is  a regular  formula  in  narratives  of  this  sort  and  is  not  to  be
taken  literally  here,  for  Bubastis  is  at  least  ninety  kilometres  distant
from  the  residence  of  Snefru.

3 The  meaning  probably  is  : let  the  past  alone.

4 He  was  bom  in  Heliopolis  and  has  settled  in  Bubastis.

• Here,  as  throughout  the  book,  what  is  said  refers  strictly  to  the
district  in  which  Neferrohu  was  bom,  and  not,  as  in  similar  writings,  to
Egypt  as  a whole.

4 He  can  begin  creation  over  again  7 That  is  no  longer  worth  while,


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


113


How  fareth  this  land  ? The  sun  is  veiled  and  will  not  shine
that  men  may  see.  None  will  live  when  the  storm  veileth  (it)  ;
all  men  are  dulled  (?)  through  the  want  of  it.1

I will  speak  of  what  is  before  me,  and  foretell  nought  that
is  not  also  come.

The  river  of  Egypt  is  empty,  men  cross  over  the  water  on
foot.  Men  shall  search  for  water  upon  which  the  ships  may
sail ; its  road  is  become  a bank  and  the  bank  is  become  water

.2  The  south  wind  will  drive  away  the  north  wind,3

and  the  sky  hath  still  only  the  one  wind.  The  birds  no  longer
hatch  their  eggs  in  the  swamps  of  the  Delta,  but  the  bird  hath
made  her  a nest  nigh  unto  men  and  letteth  them  approach  her  in
her  necessity. 4 Moreover,  those  good  things  are  ruined,  the  fish-
ponds (?),  where  were  the  slittings,5  which  shone  with  fish  and
wild  fowl.  All  good  things  are  passed  away,  and  the  land  is
laid  low  through  misery,  by  reason  of  yon  food  of  the  Bedouins
who  traverse  the  land.6

Foes  are  in  the  East,  Asiatics  are  come  down  into  Egypt ;

no  helper  heareth.  By  night  one  will  suddenly  be  fallen

upon  (?)  ; men  shall  force  their  way  into  houses  (?)  ; sleep  shall
be  banished  (?)  from  mine  eyes,  and  I lie  there  and  say  : “I
am  awake.”  7

The  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  8 shall  drink  from  the  rivers
of  Egypt,  in  order  that  they  may  cool  themselves  upon  their
banks,  for  that  there  is  none  to  scare  them  away  (?).

This  land  is  taken  away  and  added  to,9  and  none  knoweth
what  the  issue  will  be  ; that  is  hidden  and  one  cannot  say,  see,
or  hear  it  . . .

I show  thee  the  land  in  lamentation  and  distress  ; that
which  never  happened  (before)  hath  happened.  Men  shall  take

1 By  this  obscuring  of  the  sun,  of  which  he  also  speaks  below,  p.  1 14,
not  a single  eclipse  will  be  intended,  but  dust-  and  sand-storms,  suiting,
as  they  do,  the  following  descriptions  of  the  drought.

2 By  the  road  is  meant  the  course  of  the  river;  but  what  does  the  rest
signify  ?

3 Which  brings  coolness  and  humidity.

4 The  birds  migrate  from  the  dried-up  swamps  to  inhabited  regions,
where  water  still  exists.

5 The  slitting  open  and  preparing  of  fish.

* The  new  misfortune,  to  which  he  now  directs  his  attentions.  It  is  a
food  which  the  country  has  to  taste  to  the  full.

5 He  uneasily  waits  for  the  attack.

8 The  Bedouins  ? * An  expression  for  disorder.

8


114  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

up  weapons  of  war,  that  the  land  may  live  on  uproar.1  Men
shall  fashion  arrows  of  copper,  that  they  may  beg  for  bread
with  blood.  Men  laugh  with  a laughter  of  disease.  Men  will
not  weep  because  of  death,  men  will  not  sleep  hungry  because
of  death ; 2 a man’s  heart  followeth  after  his  own  self.3

and  one  slayeth  another.  I show  thee  the  son  as

foeman,  and  the  brother  as  adversary,  and  a man  murdereth
his  father.

Every  mouth  is  full  of  “ Love  me  ! ” 4 All  good  things  have

departed,  The  land  is  destroyed ; that  which  was

made  is  as  though  it  had  not  been  made.  Men  take  the  goods
of  a man  (of  high  estate)  from  him  and  give  them  to  one  from
without.  I show  thee  the  possessor  in  deprivation,  and  him
that  is  (from)  without  contented.

Moreover,  hatred  reigns  among  the  townsmen ; the  mouth
that  speaketh  is  brought  to  silence,  and  a speech  is  answered,

while  the  hand  reaches  out  with  the  stick . A thing

spoken  is  as  fire  for  the  heart,  and  what  a mouth  uttereth  is  not
endured.

The  land  is  minished  and  its  governors  are  multiplied.5
(The  field  ?)  is  bare,  and  its  imposts  are  great ; little  is  the  com
and  great  the  corn-measure,6  and  it  is  measured  to  overflowing.

The  sun  separateth  himself  from  men  ; 7 he  ariseth  when
it  is  the  hour.  None  will  know  that  it  is  midday,  and  his
shadow  will  not  be  distinguished.8  No  face  will  be  bright
that  beholdeth  thee,9  and  the  eyes  will  not  be  moistened  with
water.10  He  is  in  the  sky  like  the  moon,  and  yet  he  deviateth
not  from  his  accustomed  time,  and  his  rays  are  in  (men’s)  faces
after  his  former  wise.

1 In  the  prevailing  distress  all  live  on  robbery.

2 Did  people  ordinarily  fast  on  the  occasion  of  a death  !

3 The  passage  probably  means  that  people  are  so  stupehed  that  they
view  the  death  of  others  with  calmness.  They  are  fully  preoccupied  with
their  own  troubles.

4 Can  that  have  been  the  cry  of  the  beggar  ?

6 In  the  confusion  petty  princes  arise,  who  oppress  the  people  with
taxes,  although  the  cultivated  fields  grow  ever  leso.

s The  corn-measure  of  the  tax-collector.

7 Here  he  reverts  again  to  the  calamities  of  the  drought  and  the  sand-
storms.

8 By  which  the  hours  were  defined  on  the  dial.

9 In  a lively  turn  of  speech  he  now  addresses  the  sun  himself.

10  One  can  gaze  at  the  pallid  sun  without  the  eyes  watering.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


115


I show  thee  the  land  in  lamentation  and  distress.1  The

man  with  a weak  arm  hath  an  arm . I show  thee  how

the  undermost  is  turned  to  uppermost . Men  live  in

the  necropolis.  The  poor  man  will  acquire  riches ,

paupers  eat  the  offering-bread  2 . The  nome  of  Helio-

polis will  no  longer  be  a land  (?),  it,  the  birthplace  of  every
god.3

A king  shall  come  from  the  south,  called  Ameni,4  the  son
of  a woman  of  Nubia,  and  born  in  Upper  Egypt  (?).  He  shall
receive  the  white  crown,  and  wear  the  red  crown  ; he  shall  unite
the  Two  Powerful  Ones 5 and  shall  delight  the  Two  Lords  6
with  what  they  love .

Be  glad,  ye  people  of  his  time  ! The  son  of  a man  (of  high
degree)  will  make  himself  a name  for  all  eternity.  They  that
would  work  mischief  and  devise  hostility,  they  have  subdued
their  mouthings  7 for  fear  of  him.  The  Asiatics  shall  fall  before
his  carnage,  and  the  Libyans  shall  fall  before  his  flame.  The
foes  succumb  to  his  onset,  and  the  rebels  to  his  might.  The
royal  serpent  that  is  on  his  forehead,  it  pacifieth  for  him  the
rebels.

There  shall  be  built  the  “ Wall  of  the  Prince,”  8 and  the
Asiatics  shall  not  (again)  be  suffered  to  go  down  into  Egypt.
They  beg  (again)  for  water,  after  their  accustomed  wise,  that
they  may  be  able  to  give  their  cattle  to  drink.

And  Right  shall  come  again  into  its  place,  and  Iniquity,
that  is  cast  forth.  He  will  rejoice  who  shall  behold  this,  and
who  shall  then  serve  the  king.

A man  of  learning  shall  pour  out 9 water  for  me,  when  he
seeth  that  what  I have  spoken  is  fulfilled.

1 The  way  in  which  the  description  ends  is  reminiscent  of  the  Ad-
monitions (see  pp.  94  ff.).

2 Which  appertains  to  persons  of  distinction.

3 The  whole  prophecy  thus  applies  to  this  sacred  land.

* The  usual  shortened  form  of  the  name  Amenemhet.

5 The  two  diadems.

6 Horus  and  Seth,  as  tutelary  divinities  of  the  two  divisions  of  Egypt.

7 1.e.  They  do  not  venture  to  speak  any  more.

8 The  fortification  in  the  east  of  the  Delta,  which  was  meant  to  bar
the  way  against  the  irruptions  of  the  Bedouins  (cf.  above,  p.  i j,  note  a).

a In  my  tomb  in  honour  of  the  dead  colleague.  With  an  offering  of
this  sort  the  departed  were  made  happy.


116


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


5.  THE  COMPLAINTS  OF  THE  PEASANT  1

The  fact  that  we  know  of  four  manuscripts  of  the  Complaints
of  the  Peasant  belonging  to  the  Middle  Kingdom,  shows  that  they
were  highly  esteemed  at  that  time.  None  dating  from  the  New
Kingdom  are  so  far  authenticated,2  and  so  we  may  suppose  that
the  work  had  by  then  fallen  out  of  favour.  The  reason  for  this  is
fairly  obvious  — these  complaints  are  monotonous  and  the  con-
tents lacking  in  interest.  Indeed,  the  book  is  primarily  an  example
of  that  rhetoric  which  is  entirely  given  up  to  elegant  expression.
The  main  point  of  it  is  that  a person  “ who  is  eloquent  in  very
sooth  ” delivers,  on  account  of  a matter  that  has  occurred,  nine
speeches  of  most  beautiful  words.  That  in  these  speeches  right  is
praised,  and  the  baseness  of  officials  condemned,  is  almost  for-
gotten by  us  in  face  of  the  flood  of  far-fetched  expressions.  Mono-
tonous, obscure,  and  far-fetched  as  these  nine  speeches  may  appear
to  us  to-day,  they  really  may  not  have  sounded  so  to  an  Egyptian.
He  was  sensible  of  much  in  them  that  was  elegant  and  witty,  which
quite  escapes  us  who  only  understand  the  book  very  incompletely.

The  event  described  occurred  in  the  reign  of  Nebkaure,  one  of
the  kings  of  Herakleopolis,  who  bore  the  name  of  Akhthoes  (to-
ward the  end  of  the  third  millennium  B.c.  ; see  p.  xxiv.,  note  2).
The  man  whom,  according  to  custom,  I designate  “ the  peasant  ”
is  really  not  one,  but  is  a “ dweller  in  the  field,”  an  inhabitant  of
the  salt-field.  The  salt-field  is  the  Wadi  Natrun,  the  small  oasis
west  of  the  Delta,  the  ” Desert  of  Natron  ” of  the  Christian  period.
He  lives  in  this  wilderness  and  brings  its  products  to  Egypt,  in  order
to  exchange  them  for  corn.  That  a man  of  such  humble  rank  should
have  the  gift  of  eloquence  accords,  however,  with  what  the  learned
Ptahhotep  teaches,  namely,  that  fine  expressions  may  be  learnt
even  from  slave-girls  (see  above,  p.  56).

There  was  once  a man  whose  name  was  Khunanup,  a peasant
from  the  salt-field  ; and  he  had  a wife  whose  name  was  Marye.

And  this  peasant  said  unto  this  his  wife : “ Behold,  I am  going
down  into  Egypt  to  bring  food  thence  for  my  children.  Go  to,
measure  out  for  me  the  corn  which  we  have  left  in  the  barn  . . .”
She  measured  it  out  for  him,  and  there  were  eight  bushels.

And  this  peasant  said  unto  his  wife  : “ Thou  hast  two
bushels  as  food  for  thee  and  thy  children  ; but  from  the  six

1 Contained  in  four  papyri  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  (three  of  which  are
in  Berlin).  Brought  to  notice  by  Chabas  in  1S63.  See  F.  Vogelsang,
Kot.v.nenUtr  r.u  (Ur.  Klagcti  de-.  Bauern,  Leipzig,  1913.  For  the  most
recent  translation  see  Gardiner,  Journ.  uf  Egypt,  Archaeology,  ix.  pp.  5 ff.

2 But  see  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archceology , ix.  p.  25  [Translator].


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  117

bushels  which  remain  over  thou  slialt  make  for  me  bread  and
beer  for  every  day,  that  I may  (live)  thereon.”

So  this  peasant  went  down  into  Egypt,  after  that  he  had
laden  his  asses  with  iaa-plants,  redemet-plants,  natron,  salt,
sticks  of  the  land  of  . . .,  rods  of  the  Land  of  the  Cow,  leopard

skins,  wolf  furs, 1 and  all  kinds  of  other  goodly  products

of  the  salt -field.

And  this  peasant  went  southwards  to  Herakleopolis,2  and
came  to  the  district  of  Per-fioti,  to  the  north  of  Medenit.  And
there  he  fell  in  with  a man  standing  on  the  river-bank,  named
Dehutinekht,  the  son  of  a man  whose  name  was  Iseri,  belonging
to  the  vassals  3 of  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru.

And  this  Dehutinekht  said,  when  he  saw  the  asses  of  this
peasant,  which  were  desirable  in  his  heart  : “ Would  that  I had
some  potent  idol,  that  I might  steal  the  belongings  of  this
peasant  withal ! ” 4

Row  the  house  of  this  Dehutinekht  lay  on  the  ...  of  a
path,3  that  was  narrow  and  not  broad,  equal  only  to  the  breadth
of  a loin-cloth ; and  the  one  side  of  it  was  under  water,  and
the  other  side  of  it  under  corn.

And  this  Dehutinekht  said  unto  his  servant : “ Go,  fetch
me  a sheet  from  our  house.”  And  it  was  brought  to  him
straightway.  Then  he  stretched  the  sheet  over  the  ...  of
the  path,  and  its  one  hem  rested  on  the  water  and  the  other  on
the  barley.

Then  came  this  peasant  along  the  public  road.  And  this
Dehutinekht  said  : “ Have  a care,  peasant ; wouldst  tread  on
my  clothes  ? ” And  this  peasant  said  : “ I will  do  thy  pleasure,
my  course  is  a good  one.”  So  he  went  farther  up.  And  this
Dehutinekht  said  : “ Shalt  thou  have  my  barley  for  a path  ? ”
This  peasant  said  : “ My  course  is  a good  one.  The  bank  is
high,  and  the  only  way  is  under  barley,  and  still  thou  cumberest
our  path  with  thy  clothes.  Wilt  thou  not  let  us  go  by  ? ”

1 Here  follow  about  twenty  names  of  plants,  stones,  and  birds,  about
which  we  know  nothing.

2 The  capital  at  that  period.

3 That  is  one  who  was  attached  to  Rensi’s  estates.  One  must  suppose
that  he  was  an  official  connected  with  the  estates-management.

4 Probably  an  oath  and  curse.

• The  meaning  is  that  a narrow  path  led  between  a somewhat  higher
lying  field  and  a canal.  One  had  only  to  spread  out  the  washing  upon  it
to  dry  for  it  to  be  entirely  blocked.


118


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


When  he  had  so  far  spoken,  one  of  the  asses  filled  its  mouth
with  a wisp  of  barley.

And  this  Dehutinekht  said  : “ Behold,  I will  take  away
thine  ass,  peasant,  for  it  is  eating  my  barley.  Behold,  it  shall
tread  (?)  and  thresh  (?)  it.”  1

And  this  peasant  said : “ My  course  is  a good  one.  Since
the  one  side  was  blocked,  I have  brought  mine  ass  upon  the
other,2  and  now  thou  takest  it  away  for  the  filling  of  its  mouth
with  a wisp  of  barley.  But  I know  the  lord  of  this  domain.  It
belongeth  to  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru.  He  it
is  that  restraineth  every  robber  throughout  the  entire  land,
and  shall  I be  robbed  in  his  domain  ? ”

And  this  Dehutinekht  said : “ Is  not  this  the  proverb  that
men  say  : ‘ The  poor  man’s  name  is  (only)  pronounced  for  his
master’s  sake  ? ’ 3 It  is  I that  speak  to  thee,  but  it  is  the  high
steward  whom  thou  callest  to  mind.”  Then  he  took  up  a rod
of  green  tamarisk  against  him  and  belaboured  all  his  limbs
therewith,  took  his  asses,  and  drove  (them)  into  his  domain.

Then  this  peasant  wept  very  bitterly  for  the  pain  of  that
which  was  done  unto  him.  But  Dehutinekht  said  : ” Cry  not
so  loud,  peasant,  behold  thou  art  bound  for  the  city  of  the  Lord
of  Silence.”  4 And  this  peasant  said  : “ Thou  beatest  me  and
stealest  my  goods,  and  now  thou  takest  away  also  the  complaint
from  my  mouth  ! O Lord  of  Silence,  give  me  back  my  chattels  !
So  may  I not  cry  out .”

And  this  peasant  tarried  ten  days  making  petition  to  this
Dehutinekht,  but  he  heeded  it  not.

So  this  peasant  departed  to  Herakleopolis  to  make  petition
to  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  and  found  him  as
he  was  coming  forth  from  the  door  of  his  house  to  go  down  into
his  barge  belonging  to  the  judgment-hall.  And  this  peasant
said  : ‘‘  Would  that  it  might  be  permitted  me  to  apprise  thee
of  this  matter.  Perchance  thy  trusted  servant  might  be  sent

1 Asses  were  generally  employed  for  treading  out  the  com.

- A more  exact  term  for  this  side  is  employed  (but  see  Gardiner,
Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archczology,  ix.  p.  S).

3 This  is  apparently  a proverb,  which  asserts  that  the  man  of  humble
standing  is  disregarded.  What  he  means  to  say  is  : Mind  how  you  treat
me.  What  concern  has  my  master  with  you  ?

4 " Lord  of  Silence  " is  an  attribute  of  Osiris,  in  whose  holy  places
noise  was  forbidden.  These  two  are  in  proximity  to  such  a place — the
cemetery  of  Herakleopolis.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


119


to  me,  so  that  through  him  I might  inform  thee  concerning  it.”  1
Then  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  sent  on  his
trusted  servant  ahead  of  him,  and  through  him  this  peasant
gave  information  concerning  this  matter  in  its  every  aspect.

Then  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  brought  an
accusation  against  this  Dehutinekht  before  the  magistrates  which
were  with  him.  And  they  said  unto  him  : “ This  is  assuredly
a peasant  of  his,  who  hath  gone  to  some  one  else  instead  of  to
him.2  Behold  thus  do  they  unto  their  peasants  who  go  to  others
instead  of  to  them.  Behold,  thus  do  they.  Is  it  a case  for  one’s
punishing  this  Dehutinekht  on  account  of  a trifle  of  natron  and
a trifle  of  salt  ? 3 Let  him  be  bidden  to  replace  it,  and  he  will
replace  it.”  But  the  high  steward  Rensi  held  his  peace,  and
answered  not  these  magistrates,  nor  did  he  answer  this  peasant.

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  the  high  steward
Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  and  said  :

“ O high  steward,  my  lord ! Greatest  of  the  great,  leader
of  that  which  is  not  and  of  that  which  is.4  If  thou  goest  down
to  the  lake  of  truth,5  sail  over  it  with  a fair  wind  ! The  . . .
of  thy  sail  shall  not  be  stripped  off,  thy  boat  shall  not  lag,
misfortune  shall  not  befall  thy  mast,  thy  pegs  (?)  shall  not  be

cut  through, , the  current  shall  not  carry  thee  off,  thou

shalt  not  taste  the  evils  of  the  river,  thou  shalt  not  see  a fright-
ened face.6  The  timid  (?)  fish  shall  come  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt
capture  fat  fowl  ! Forasmuch  as  thou  art  the  father  of  the
orphan,  the  husband  of  the  widow,  the  brother  of  her  that  is
put  away,  the  apron  of  him  that  is  motherless.7

1 The  peasant  does  not  venture  to  detain  the  great  lord  with  his
complaint.

2 The  magistrates  do  not  even  inquire  into  the  matter,  but  know
already  that  what  they  have  to  do  with  is  an  ordinary  case  of  some  one
taking  the  law  into  his  own  hands ; not  that  they  intend  to  sanction  this,
but  at  the  same  time  they  do  not  intend  to  inflict  punishment.

3 The  asses  and  all  the  rest  of  the  merchandise  the  magistrates  leave
out  of  count.  It  should  be  noted  what  pleasure  is  taken  in  depicting  these
magistrates  as  unscrupulous  and  biased.

* A favourite  expression  for  “ all.”

5 Is  this  an  actual  lake  ? Or  is  it  only  a figurative  designation  ? In
what  follows  the  idea  is  worked  out  of  Rensi  wishing  to  go  boating  in
order  to  catch  fish  and  birds,  the  favourite  pursuit  of  Egyptian  notables.

6 I.e.  probably  among  his  companions.

7 You  are  the  garment  for  the  poor  child,  who  has  no  mother  to  make
a garment  for  him.


120  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

“ Let  me  make  for  thee  a name  in  this  land,  that  is  worth
more  than  every  good  ordinance.1  Thou  leader,  in  whom  is
no  guile,  thou  great  one  in  whom  is  no  baseness  ! Thou  that
destroyest  wrong  and  fosterest  right  ! Put  evil  aside.  I speak
and  do  thou  hear ! Do  justice,  thou  praised  one,  praised  by
them  that  are  praised  ; dispel  the  wrong  that  hath  been  done
me.  See  how  burdened  I am  with  misery.  See  how  weak  I
am.  Take  count  of  me,  behold,  I am  found  lacking.”  2

Now  this  peasant  made  this  speech  in  the  time  of  King
Nebkaure,  the  blessed.

And  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  went  before
his  majesty  and  said  : " My  lord,  I have  found  one  of  these
peasants,  that  is  eloquent  in  very  sooth,3  one  that  hath  been
robbed  of  his  goods  by  a man  who  is  subject  to  (?)  me.  And
behold,  he  is  come  to  make  petition  to  me  concerning  it.”

Then  said  his  majesty  : “ If  thou  lovest  to  see  me  in  health,4 5
cause  him  to  tarry  here  without  answering  aught  that  he  may
say,  to  the  intent  that  he  may  yet  go  on  speaking.  Then  let
his  speech  be  brought  to  us  in  writing  that  we  may  hear  it.
But  provide  for  his  wife  and  for  his  children ; behold,  one  of
the  peasants  may  go  and  relieve  the  penury  in  his  house.
Provide  also  for  this  peasant  himself.  Thou  shalt  cause  food
to  be  given  him,  without  letting  him  know  that  it  is  thou  that
hast  given  it  him.”  s

So  they  gave  him  four  loaves  of  bread  and  two  jugs  of  beer
every  day.  These  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,
used  to  give — he  used  to  give  them  to  a companion  of  his,  and
he  gave  them  to  him.  Then  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son
of  Meru,  sent  to  the  mayor  of  the  salt-field  and  remitted  to  the
wife  of  this  peasant  daily  provision,  to  the  amount  of  three
bushels.6

1 If  you  help  me,  men  will  put  more  trust  in  you  than  in  the  laws.

2 In  the  bureaucratic  Egyptian  manner  he  likens  his  plight  to  a de-
ficiency in  computation.

3 The  king  and  his  minister  are  both  connoisseurs  and  lovers  of  elegant
discourse.

4 Probably  a familiar  w ay  of  introducing  a request.

5 These  arrangements  for  the  sustenance  of  the  people  are  character-
istic of  the  humane  nature  of  the  educated  Egyptian.

8 The  three  bushels  are  probably  assigned  as  total,  not  as  daily
amount.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


121


Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  a second
time  and  said  :

“ O high  steward,  my  lord ! Greatest  of  the  great,  richest

of  the  rich. . Thou  tiller  of  heaven,  thou  beam  of  the

earth,  thou  plumb-line  that  carrieth  the  weight.  Tiller,  tumble
not ; beam,  tilt  not ; plumb-line,  swing  not  awry  ! 1

“ The  great  lord  helpeth  himself  to  that  which  hath  no
possessor,  and  robbeth  the  solitary  one  (?).  And  yet  thou  hast
what  thou  needest  in  thine  house,  the  one  jug  of  beer  and  the
three  loaves.  What  dost  thou  draw  out  then  for  the  satisfying
of  thy  poor  ? 2

‘ ‘ Wilt  thou  not  be  a man  of  eternity  ? Is  it  not  wrong,  for-
sooth,3 4 a balance  that  tilteth,  a plummet  that  deflecteth,  a
guardian  of  the  laws  who  is  become  one  that  vacillateth  (?)  ?

“ Behold,  justice  fareth  ill  (?)  with  thee  and  is  thrust  from
its  place.  The  magistrates  do  evil,  the  well-ordered  speech  is

partial.  They  that  give  hearing,  steal. . He  that

should  give  air  to  breathe,  taketh  away  breath  (?) ;

the  arbitrator  is  a spoiler ; ; he  that  should  combat

wrong,  himself  doeth  evil.”

Here  the  high  steward  interrupts  these  accusations  of  the
peasant  with  the  reminder  that  his  henchman  might  carry  him
off.  But  the  peasant  does  not  permit  himself  to  he  bewildered,  and
proceeds : “ He  that  measureth  the  corn  heaps,  converteth  to
his  own  use  ; he  that  filleth  up  for  another,  apportioneth  too
little  to  his  intimates  ; he  that  should  lead  according  to  law,
commandeth  to  rob.  Who  then  shall  redress  evil,  when  he  who
should  dispel  wrong  swingeth  backwards  and  forwards  ? ”

He  then  calls  to  mind  a saying : “ Do  to  the  doer  so  that
he  may  do,”  4 and  adds  thereto : “ that  is  thanking  him  for

1 That  the  sky,  which  turns  with  such  regularity  like  a good  ship,  has  a
tiller,  is  an  idea  that  appears  elsewhere  in  Egypt,  and  that  the  earth  is
securely  put  together  is  also  a natural  enough  conception.  What  would
become  of  the  world  if  reliance  could  no  longer  be  placed  on  these  main-
stays of  its  order,  or  on  the  plummet  of  the  mason  ? And  so  you,  who  are
like  these,  may  not  vacillate  and  give  way.

2 I.e.  what  do  you  use  for  that  purpose  out  of  your  possessions  ?
From  here  onwards  he  attacks  the  prince  as  though  he  were  a robber  and
a miser  as  well.

3 Ironical.

4 I.e.  “ Do  the  other  good,  that  he  may  do  it  to  you.”  All  else  here
is  quite  obscure.


122


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


what,  he  doeth,  that  is  parrying  a thing  before  it  is  shot,  that
is  giving  an  order  to  one  that  hath  a trade.”

He  wishes  the  prince  ill : “ Ah,  if  only  a moment  might
destroy  and  (cause)  upheaval  in  thy  . . diminishment  among
thy  birds,  and  destruction  among  thy  water  fowl ! But  he
that  can  see  is  turned  blind,  he  that  can  hear  deaf,  and  he  that
should  be  the  guide  is  become  the  one  that  leadeth  astray

“ Behold,  thou  art  strong  and  powerful,  thou  art  active  of
arm,  and  thine  heart  is  rapacious.  Mercy  hath  passed  thee
by.  How  sorroweth  the  poor  man  that  is  destroyed  by  thee  !

“ Thou  art  like  unto  a messenger  of  the  crocodile  ;

the  Lady  of  Pestilence.1  If  it  is  not  for  thee,  it  is  not  for  her  ;
if  it  is  not  against  her,  it  is  not  against  thee.  If  thou  wilt  not
do  it,  the  merciful  man  will  not  do  it.”

He  further  reproaches  him  with  openly  laying  violent  hands
on  the  poor  and  committing  “ theft  on  him  that  hath  nothing.

That  is  an  ill  deed  in  one  that  (himself)  lacketh  nothing

. But  thou  art  sated  with  thy  bread  and  drunken  with

thy  beer.  Thou  art  rich  in  all  things.

“ If  the  face  of  the  steersman  is  turned  to  the  front,  the  ship
drifteth  whither  it  will.  If  the  king  sitteth  within  doors  and
the  tiller  is  in  thy  hand,  evil  is  dealt  out  in  thy  company.  Long
and  tedious  to  this  company  seemeth  the  petitioner  who  is  ruined :
‘ Who  is  he  that  is  there  ? ’ men  say.2

“ Be  thou  a place  of  refuge,  let  thy  quay  be  sound.3 .

Let  thy  tongue  be  directed  aright ; go  not  astray. .

Speak  no  falsehood  ! Take  heed  to  the  magistrates .

They  that  give  hearing,  it  is  provender  for  them  to  speak  lies  ;
that  is  a light  matter  in  their  hearts.

“ Thou  that  knowest  about  all  men,  knowest  thou  then
nought  of  my  circumstances  ? Thou  that  dispellest  every  need
of  the  water,  behold  I have  course  without  a ship.4  Thou  that

1 Apparently  two  divinities  who  bring  ruin  are  meant ; whom  you
resemble  in  what  you  do.  The  obscure  sentences  which  follow  further
amplify  this  comparison  with  the  goddess  of  pestilence.  [See  Gunn,  Syntax,
! '•  148  ]

2 So  say  the  magistrates,  before  whom  the  petitioner  makes  his  claim.

3 That  ships  may  lie  off  it  in  safety.

4 That  in  the  course  of  travelling  one  should  be  impeded  by  canals,  etc.,
is  characteristic  of  Egypt  ; to  assist  the  traveller  in  such  circumstances
counted  as  a moral  duty


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  123

bringest  every  drowning  man  to  land  and  rescuest  the  ship-
wrecked, rescue  thou  me

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  for  the
third  time  and  said  :

“ 0 high  steward,  my  lord,  thou  art  Re,1  the  lord  of  heaven,
in  company  with  thy  courtiers.  The  needs  of  all  mankind  (are
supplied  by  thee,  for)  thou  art  like  the  flood.2  Thou  art  the
Nile,  which  maketh  green  the  meadows  and  maketh  habitable
the  waste  places.

“ Ward  off  the  robber  ! Protect  the  poor  man  ! Become  not
a torrent  against  the  petitioner ! Take  heed  to  the  approach
of  eternity.3  Will  so  to  be,  even  as  it  is  said  : ‘ To  do  right
is  breath  for  the  nose.’  4 Mete  out  punishment  to  him  that
should  be  punished.

“ None  shall  equal  thee  in  rectitude.  Doth  the  hand-balance
deflect  ? Doth  the  stand-balance  weigh  falsely  ? Doth  Thoth  5
slow  leniency  ? (If  so)  then  do  thou  work  mischief.  Make  thy-
self the  companion  of  those  three,  and  if  the  three  show  leniency,
then  do  thou  show  leniency.

“ Answer  not  good  with  evil,6  put  not  one  thing  in  place  of
another.”

What  follows  may  mean  something  like  : let  the  weeds  of  my
speech  grow,  and  do  not  water  it  with  evil,  otherwise  it  only  grows
the  more.  Then  he  warns  him  against  wrongly  handling  the  tiller
and  sail : “ The  exact  adjustment  of  the  land  is  the  doing  of
right.

“ Speak  not  falsehood — thou  art  great.  Be  not  light —
thou  art  heavy.  Speak  not  falsehood — thou  art  the  balance.
Be  not  in  error  (?) — thou  art  rectitude.”

Seven  comparisons  of  the  unjust  prince  follow,  all  of  which
begin  with  “ Behold  thou  art,”  and  are  only  partly  intelligible  :

“ Behold,  thou  art  on  one  level  with  the  balance  ; if  it  tilt,
then  do  thou  also  tilt.  Fall  not,  thou  art  to  handle  the  tiller.

1 You  are  like  the  sun-god,  who,  together  with  the  gods  who  voyage
with  him  in  his  ship,  rules  the  world.

2 You  provide  men’s  sustenance  like  the  inundation.

3 Eternity  is  the  life  after  death,  in  which  their  punishment  overtakes
the  wicked.

4 Apparently  a proverb.

6 The  god  of  wisdom  and  judge  of  the  gods.

8 He  probably  notices  that  he  has  provoked  Rensi  and  is  afraid  of  him.


124


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


. Rob  not,  thou  art  to  act  against  the  robber,  for  that

great  one  is  not  great  that  is  rapacious.  Thy  tongue  is  the
plummet  (of  the  balance),  tliine  heart  is  the  weight,  thy  two
lips  its  arms.1  If  thou  veil  thy  face  against  the  impious,  who
will  ward  off  crime  ?

“ Behold,  thou  art  a poor  man  for  the  washerman,  a rapa-
cious one,  that  damageth  friendship  2 .

“ Behold,  thou  art  a ferryman,  who  (only)  conveyeth  across
him  that  hath  a fare  ; a straight-dealer  whose  straight-dealing
is  done  away  with.

“ Behold,  thou  art  an  head  of  the  granary .

“ Behold,  thou  art  a bird  of  prey  (?)  to  men,  living  upon  the
meanest  of  the  birds.

“ Behold,  thou  art  a cook,  whose  joy  is  slaughtering ;

“ Behold,  thou  art  an  herdsman .

“ Thou  that  canst  hearken,  thou  hearkenest  not ; wherefore

doest  thou  not  hearken  ? . He  that  concealeth  the

truth  is  found  out  (at  the  last),  and  the  back  of  falsehood  is
laid  on  the  ground.

“ Prepare  not  to-morrow,  ere  it  be  come  ; none  knoweth
the  evil  that  will  3 come  in  it.”

Now  this  peasant  spake  these  words  to  the  high  steward
Rensi,  the  son  of  Meru,  at  the  entrance  of  the  gate-house.4

Then  he  caused  two  apparitors  to  attend  to  him  with  whips,
and  they  belaboured  all  his  limbs  therewith.

And  this  peasant  said  : “ The  son  of  Meru  goeth  on  erring  ;
blind  to  what  he  seeth,  and  deaf  to  what  he  heareth,  and  regard-
less (?)  of  that  which  is  related  to  him.

“ Behold,  thou  art  a town  without  its  mayor,  like  a company
without  its  chief,  like  a ship  in  which  is  no  commander,  a con-
federacy without  its  captain.

1 The  arms  of  the  balance.

- Better  : “ Behold  thou  art  a wretch  of  a washerman,  one  rapacious
in  damaging  a comrade,  one  that  forsaketh  (?)  his  partner  (?)  for  the  sake
of  his  client ; he  who  hath  come  and  brought  (something)  for  him  is  his
brother  ” [Translator],

3 Meaning  probably  only  : Some  day  it  may  even  go  ill  with  you,  all
powerful  though  you  be.

1 the  gate-house  is  a seat  of  the  administration  ; accordingly  the
prince  has  servants  at  hand  there,  who  thrash  the  peasant  for  his  im-
pudent utterances.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  125

“ Behold,  thou  art  a constable  (?)  and  a thief,  a mayor  that
taketh  presents,  a chief  of  a district  that  should  repress  plunder-
ing, and  yet  art  become  a pattern  for  him  that  doeth  it  (?).”

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  a fourth
time,  and  found  him  coming  forth  from  the  door  of  the  temple
of  Harsaphes,1  and  said  :

“ Thou  praised  one,  may  Harsaphes,  from  whose  temple
thou  art  come,  praise  thee.  Good  is  diminished,  and  there  is
none  that  can  boast  (?)  that  he  hath  laid  out  the  back  of  false-
hood upon  the  ground.”

He  then  appears  to  speak  of  one’s  using  a ferry  in  order  to
cross  the  river,  but  does  not  say  what  he  means  by  this  simile .2

“ Why,  who  (still)  sleepeth  until  daylight  ? Destroyed
are  walking  by  night,  and  travelling  by  day,  and  suffering  a
man  to  attend  to  his  own  right  cause.3

“ Behold,  one  is  never  finished  saying  to  thee  : 4 ' Mercy
hath  passed  thee  by.’  How  sorroweth  the  poor  man  that  is
destroyed  by  thee  !

“ Behold,  thou  art  a sportsman  that  followeth  his  desire,
one  bent  on  doing  what  he  will,  harpooning  hippopotami  and
shooting  wild  bulls,  striking  fish  and  catching  birds.5  (But)
none  that  hath  a hasty  mouth  is  free  from  , . . ; none  that  is
light-minded  hath  weighty  designs.  Be  patient  and  learn  the

truth . Something  (?)  is  brought  (to  thee)  that  maketh

the  eyes  to  see,  and  the  heart  is  gladdened  ; 6 so  be  not  boastful,

because  thou  art  powerful,  lest  mischief  befall  thee.

It  is  he  that  eateth  that  tasteth,  and  he  that  is  addressed
answereth  ; 7 it  is  he  that  sleepeth  that  seeth  the  dream .

“ Fool,  behold,  one  is  come  to  thee.  Dunce,  behold  thou

1 The  god  of  Herakleopolis.

2 Possibly  : even  so  justice  is  needed  to  preserve  the  country.

3 That  one  should  sleep  till  late,  and  go  out  unmolested  by  night,  is
spoken  of  elsewhere  as  a sign  of  public  security.  An  end  has  been  made
of  that ; even  by  day  men  are  robbed,  and  they  can  no  longer  maintain
their  rights.  Cf.  p.  127,  note  1.

1 He  has  addressed  the  following  sentence  to  him  once  already  in  the
second  complaint.

5 Is  he  appealing  to  the  cheery  nature  of  the  sportsman  ?

6 To  " gladden  the  heart  ” is  the  regular  and  also  official  expression  for
“ inform.”  Does  the  peasant  allude  to  a petition  which  he  has  handed
in  through  the  medium  of  the  trusted  servant  ?

7 Accordingly,  give  me  a final  answer.


126


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


art  addressed.  Thou  that  hast  baled  out 1 the  piss,  behold
thou  art  entered.

“ Steersman,  let  not  thy  ship  run  aground.  Thou  that
shouldest  keep  alive,  suffer  not  to  die.  Destroyer,2  suffer  not
to  be  destroyed.  Shade,  become  not  sun.  Shelter,  let  not
the  crocodile  seize.

“ It  is  now  the  fourth  time  that  I make  petition  to  thee.
Am  I to  spend  (yet  more)  time  at  it  ? ”

In  the  fifth  petition  the  peasant  first  produces  all  manner  of
anglers,  fishers,  fish-spearers,  every  one  of  whom  catches  a fish —
one,  it  might  be  conjectured,  they  did  not  wish  to  catch — and  then
adds : “ Behold,  thou  art  in  like  case,”  i.e.  one,  probably,  who
does  not  ply  his  trade  aright.

“ Rob  not  an  humble  man  of  his  possessions,  a feeble  man
whom  thou  knowest  (to  be  such).  The  poor  man’s  possessions
are  breath  to  him,  and  he  that  taketh  them  from  him  stoppeth
up  his  nose.

“Thou  wast  appointed  to  hear  pleas,  to  judge  between
suitors,  to  repress  the  robber.  But  lo,  it  is  the  upholder  of  the
thief  that  thou  wouldst  be.3

“ Men  put  their  trust  in  thee,  and  thou  art  become  a trans-
gressor. Thou  wast  set  for  a dam  unto  the  poor  man,  to  prevent
his  being  drowned — and  behold,  thou  art  his  lake,  thou  flowing
one  ! ”

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  a sixth
time,  and  said  :

“ 0 high  steward,  my  lord ! , foster  truth,  foster

good,  and  destroy  (evil),  even  as  satiety  cometh,  that  it  may
end  hunger,  and  clothing,  that  it  may  end  nakedness  ; even  as
the  sky  becometh  calm  after  a high  storm,  vrhen  it  warmeth
all  that  are  cold ; even  as  a Are  that  cooketh  what  is  raw,  and
as  water  that  quencheth  thirst.

“ Look  in  front  of  thee.  The  arbitrator  is  a spoiler.4  The
peace-maker  is  a maker  of  sorrow .

1 I.e.  evacuated.  The  same  tasteful  simile  occurs  again  in  greater
detail  in  the  seventh  complaint  ! I have  no  idea  what  it  means  here.

2 One  expects  rather  some  such  expression  as  “ sustainer.”

s See  Gunn,  Syntax,  p.  xiv  [Translator],

1 He  has  already  said  this  in  the  second  complaint,  and  he  has  simi-
larly employed  there  the  following  metaphor  of  false  measurement  of  the
com.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


127


“ Cheating  maketh  justice  too  small,  one  must  give  good
measure  ; truth  neither  falleth  short  nor  exceedeth.  The  next
paragraph  perhaps  means  to  assert  that  a petitioner  ought  not  to
be  rebuffed,  otherwise  one  knoweth  not  what  is  in  the  heart  ;
and  then  follow  two  utterly  unintelligible  metaphors,  the  one  of
urine  or  semen , the  other  of  the  loading  of  a ship.

“ Thou  art  instructed,  thou  art  made  perfect  . . . but  not

for  plundering.  (Yet)  thou  dost  the  same  as  all  men,

a cheat  for  the  whole  land  : The  cultivator  of  evil  waters  his
plot  with  wrong-doing,  that  he  may  plant  his  plot  with  lies,  and
pour  out  trouble  for  the  estate.”

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  a seventh
time,  and  said  :

“ O high  steward,  my  lord  ! Thou  art  the  tiller  of  the  entire
land.  The  land  saileth  according  to  thy  command.  Thou  art
the  peer  of  Thoth,  who  judgeth  without  partiality.

" My  lord,  permit  that  a man  be  called  to  what  is  rightfully
his.1  Be  not  vexed,  it  is  nothing  to  thee,  if  (?)  the  man  of
cheerful  (?)  countenance  becometh  ill-humoured.  Rail  not
because  of  that  which  hath  not  yet  come,  and  rejoice  not
because  of  that  which  hath  not  yet  happened.”  2

What  follows  perhaps  speaks  of  a good  judge,  who  re-examines
a case  that  has  been  settled,  and  then  of  one  “ that  subverteth
the  law  and  infringeth  upon  right  reckoning.  No  poor  man
liveth  whom  he  plundereth,  and  truth  addresseth  him  not.

“ But  my  belly  is  full  and  mine  heart  is  laden.  There  issueth
forth  from  my  belly  . . .,  there  is  a breach  in  the  dam  and  its

water  floweth  ; (thus)  is  my  mouth  opened  for  speech .

(Now)  have  I baled  out  my  piss  and  ventilated  what  was  in  my
belly.3  I have  washed  my  clothes  ; my  discourse  is  achieved,
and  my  misery  is  concluded  in  thy  presence.  What  is  now  thy
decision  (?)  ? 4

“ Thy  sluggishness  will  lead  thee  astray,  thy  rapacity  will
make  thee  a fool,  thy  gluttony  (?)  will  create  thee  enemies.

“ But  wilt  thou  ever  find  another  peasant  like  me  ? A

1 That  his  suit  be  conducted  according  to  rule.

- Probably  only  meaning  : do  not  come  to  a decision  prematurely,
before  you  have  exact  information  about  a matter.

3 As  the  body  rids  itself  of  vrhat  is  a burden  to  it — as  when  there  is
a breach  in  a dam — so  my  distress  pours  forth  in  words.

4 The  washing  is  ready  and  now  it  is  your  turn.


128  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

sluggard — will  a petitioner  remain  standing  at  the  door  of  his
house  ? 1 He  keepeth  no  (longer)  silence  whom  thou  hast
caused  to  speak ; he  sleepeth  no  (longer)  whom  thou  hast

awakened ; ; the  mouth  (remaineth)  not  closed  that

thou  hast  opened  ; he  is  no  (longer)  ignorant,  whom  thou  hast
caused  to  know  ; he  is  no  (longer)  a fool  whom  thou  hast  in-
structed. They  2 are  such  as  repel  evil ; they  are  magistrates
who  possess  good ; they  are  craftsmen  who  create  that  which
is  ; they  are  such  as  affix  the  severed  head.3

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  an  eighth
time,  and  said  :

“ O high  steward,  my  lord  ! Men  suffer  a fall  because  of
greed,  the  rapacious  faileth  in  his  affair,  his  affair  eludeth  him.
Thou  art  rapacious,  that  is  nothing  for  thee  ; thou  robbest,
that  profiteth  thee  not,  thee,  that  (else)  wouldst  suffer  a man
to  attend  to  his  own  right  cause.4

“ What  thou  needest  is  in  thine  house,  thy  belly  is  full.
The  corn  measure  runneth  over  ; that  which  leapeth  out  (?) 5
of  it  perisheth,  and  its  superfluity  is  on  the  ground.6  They
seize,  plunder,  and  take  away,  do  the  magistrates,  yet  they  were
appointed  to  repel  evil.  A refuge  for  the  insolent  are  the
magistrates,  yet  they  were  appointed  to  repel  falsehood.

“ The  fear  of  thee  hath  not  suffered  me  to  make  petition
to  thee,  and  so  thou  knowest  not  mine  heart 7 .

“ Thou  hast  thy  plot  of  ground  in  the  field,  thy  bread  in
the  domain,  thy  victuals  in  the  storehouse.  The  magistrates
give  to  thee,8  and  thou  takest  (yet  more) — art  thou  not  a robber  ?
And  doth  not  one  bring  to  thee,  when  the  troops  are  with  thee
at  the  division  of  the  ground-plots  ? 9

1 Meaning  ? 2 Probably  those  who  thus  tell  you  the  truth.

3 They  make  even  the  impossible  possible  ; the  magician  in  the  story
had  also  to  exhibit  this  art  (see  above,  p.  42).

1 The  same  in  the  fourth  appeal  (p.  125).  The  peasant  warns  Rensi
in  this  section  against  injustice,  which  only  brings  a man  harm  ; because,
as  he  emphasizes  further  on,  it  is  at  variance  with  the  will  of  the  gods.

« During  the  measuring.  In  your  house  no  one  bothers  about  such  a
trifle.

* You  are  so  rich,  and  yet  you  still  permit  robbery  to  go  on.

7 From  fear  of  you  I have  never  yet  been  able  to  tell  you  what  I really
want  (?)

8 From  tlieir  plunder.

* When  you  divide  the  fields  anew  after  the  inundation  (>)


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


129


" Do  according  unto  truth  for  the  Lord  of  Truth,1  whose
truth  is  the  truth  (indeed).  Thou  reed-pen,  thou  book,  thou
palette  of  Thoth,  when  thou  keepest  aloof  from  working  mischief.2
Good  is  it,  when  thou  art  good,  yea  good  is  it,  when  thou  art
good.

“ ‘ But  truth  endure th  unto  everlasting,  and  it  descendeth
with  him  that  doeth  it  into  the  nether  world.3  When  he  is
buried  and  the  earth  is  joined  with  him,  his  name  is  not  obliter-
ated upon  earth,  but  he  is  remembered  for  goodness.’  That
is  what  is  laid  down  in  the  word  of  God.4  Is  it  a hand-balance  ?
Then  it  tilteth  not.  Is  it  a stand-balance  ? Then  it  weigheth
not  falsely.5

“ Whether  I shall  come  or  another  shall  come,  greet  him,
but  answer  him  not  with  the  greeting  of  one  that  is  silent,  and
attack  not  him  that  attacketh  not.6

“ Thou  art  not  become  a sufferer  (?),  thou  art  not  become
sick,  thou  hast  not  run  away,  and  thou  hast  not  perished,  and
yet  hast  thou  given  me  no  payment 7 for  this  goodly  speech
that  cometh  forth  from  the  mouth  of  Re  himself  : ‘ Speak  truth,
do  according  unto  truth,  for  that  it  is  great  and  mighty,  and
endureth.  Its  . . . will  find  thee  and  bring  thee  to  venerable
estate.'  8

“ If  the  balance  doth  tilt,  or  its  scales  which  weigh  the
things,  there  is  then  no  right  result.  A mean  act  attaineth
not  to  the  city,9  whereas  a . . . will  come  to  land.”

Then  this  peasant  came  to  make  petition  to  him  a ninth
time  and  said  :

“ O high  steward,  my  lord ! The  tongue  of  men  is  their

1 Usually  a name  of  Ptah  of  Memphis,  but  here  Osiris  will  be
meant.

1 In  accordance  with  your  office,  you  are  the  instrument  of  the  god  of
wisdom,  the  judge  of  the  gods — only  you  must  behave  accordingly.

* It  helps  him  in  the  posthumous  judgment

* The  sacred  writings  which  are  derived  from  Thoth.  What  proceeds
will  therefore  be  a quotation  from  these.

* The  word  of  God  is  probably  meant  ; this  has  been  put  to  the  proof.

* In  the  future  be  friendly  to  petitioners  and  do  not  leave  them,  as
you  have  left  me,  without  an  answer,  and  do  not  fly  at  them.

7 You  have  heard  all  my  speeches,  and  yet  I remain  without  answer.

* This  is  also  probably  a quotation  from  the  sacred  writings.

* Like  a bad  ship  that  does  not  reach  the  town  ; similarly  in  the
ninth  appeal.

9


130  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

stand-balance.  The  hand-balance  searcheth  out  the  defici-
encies,1 and  punisheth  him  that  should  be  punished.  Be  like  it
in  rectitude .

“ If  falsehood  walk  abroad,  it  straveth  ; it  crosseth  not
over  in  the  ferry-boat  and  . . . not.  As  for  him  that  is  rich
therein,  he  hath  no  children,  and  hath  no  heir  upon  earth.  He
that  voyageth  with  it  cometh  not  to  land,  his  vessel  mooreth
not  off  its  city.

“ Be  not  heavy,  if  (?)  thou  art  not  light.  Lag  not,  if  (?)
thou  art  not  quick.  Be  not  partial ; hearken  not  unto  the
heart.

“ Veil  not  thy  face  against  one  whom  thou  knowest.  Be
not  blind  to  one  whom  thou  seest.  Rebuff  not  him  that  peti-
tioneth  thee.

“ So  be  not  sluggish,  and  publish  thy  speech  and  do  (what  is
right)  to  him  that  hath  done  (it)  to  thee.  Hearken  not  unto
all  men,2  but  call  a man  to  what  is  rightfully  his.3  There  is  no
yesterday  4 for  the  sluggard  ; for  him  that  is  deaf  to  truth  there
is  no  friend ; for  him  that  is  rapacious  there  is  no  day  of
cheer. .

“ Behold,  I make  petition  to  thee,  and  thou  hast  not  heard
it.  Now  will  I go  aw’ay  and  will  make  petition  on  thy  behalf
to  Anubis.”  5

Then  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of  Mem,  caused  two
apparitors  to  go  and  bring  him  back  (?).  And  this  peasant  was
afraid,  and  thought  that  it  was  being  done  to  punish  him  for
this  speech  which  he  had  spoken.

And  this  peasant  said : “As  the  thirsty  man  draw'eth  near
to  water,  as  the  mouth  of  the  suckling  reacheth  after  milk,  so
I long  to  see  how  death  cometh  (?).”

The  high  steward  Rensi.  the  son  of  Meru,  said  : “ Fear  not,
peasant . Behold,  thou  shalt  dwell  with  me . ' ’ Then  this  peasant
sw'ore,  saying  : “I  will  for  ever  eat  of  thy  bread  and  drink  of
thy  beer.”  And  the  high  steward  said  : “ Well,  come  this  way,
that  thou  mayest  hear  thy  petitions.”  And  he  caused  them

1 It  indicates  what  should  be  left  over  and  yet  is  not  there  ; that  is
what  you  also  should  be

1 He  means  the  magistrates.

* Cf.  p.  127,  note  1.

4 Possibly  • no  pleasant  recollection  5

5 I e.  I will  betake  me  to  the  god  of  the  dead  ; meaning,  he  would  die
and  seek  for  justice  at  his  hands  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


131


to  be  read  out  from  a new  1 papyrus  roll,  every  petition  accord-
ing to  [its]  content.  And  the  high  steward  Rensi,  the  son  of
Meru,  caused  it  to  be  sent  in  to  the  majesty  of  King  Nebkaure,
the  justified.  And  it  pleased  the  king  more  than  anything  that
was  in  the  entire  land.

And  his  majesty  said  : “ Give  judgment  thyself,2  O son  of
Meru.”  Then  the  high  steward,  the  son  of  Meru,  sent  two
apparitors  to  fetch  him.  And  he  was  brought.  An  inventory
was  made .

From  the  fragments  of  the  concluding  portion  of  the  tale  one
conjectures  that  the  household  of  the  peasant  amounted  to  six  heads,
and  that  he  was  provided  with  wheat,  asses  . . . swine  . . .
And  in  addition  all  the  possessions  of  Dehutinekht  were  given
to  this  peasant.


D.  SECULAR  POEMS

i.  SONGS  OF  THE  WORKERS

Several  of  the  little  songs,  with  which  the  Egyptian  accom-
panied his  tasks  (see  above,  pp.  xxviii.  f .),  arepreserved  in  the  tombs
as  inscriptions  appended  to  representations  of  the  task  m question.

Song  of  the  shepherds  3

When  the  inundation  is  at  an  end,  the  shepherds  drive  rams
over  the  still  sodden  ground,  in  order  that  their  sharp  hoofs  may
“plough”  the  field.  While  thus  engaged  they  sang  in  the  Old
Kingdom  :

The  shepherd  is  in  the  water  among  the  fish,

He  speaketh  with  the  shad,  and  greeteth  the  . . . fish.

West ! Whence  is  the  shepherd  ? A shepherd  of  the  West.

The  shepherd  makes  fun  of  himself ; what  the  West  means
here  is  doubtful.

1 Not  on  one  that  has  already  been  used  once,  and  that  has  had  the
writing  expunged.  The  passage  shows  clearly  that  at  that  time  papyrus
was  still  an  article  of  some  value.

2 The  king  replies  as  though  he  has  read  through  the  speeches  of
the  peasant  as  official  documents,  about  which  he  has  to  come  to  a
decision.

* In  two  tombs  of  the  Old  Kingdom  ; in  a third  was  a variant  version.
See  Erman,  Reden,  Rufe  und  Lieder  (in  Abh.  d.  Bert.  Akad.,  1918),  p.  19.


132


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Song  of  the  fishers  1

While  the  net  is  being  drawn  in  this  song  is  sung  :

It  comes  and  brings  us  a fine  catch  !

Song  of  the  chairmen  2

The  men  carrying  their  master  in  the  palanquin  sing  :

Better  is  it  (for  us)  when  full,  than  when  it  is  empty  !
or  :

Happy  are  they  that  bear  the  chair  !

Better  is  it  (for  us)  when  full,  than  when  it  is  empty  !

Or  again,  probably  in  allusion  to  some  reward  which  is  to  be
assigned  to  their  master  I pi  :

Come  down  to  them  that  are  rewarded,  hail !

Come  down  to  them  that  are  rewarded,  health  !

. Reward  (?)  of  Ipi,  be  it  as  great  as  I desire  !

Better  is  it  (for  us)  when  full,  than  when  it  is  empty  !

a.  SONGS  AT  BANQUETS

When  the  deceased’s  survivors  celebrated  a festival  in  his
tomb,  a meal  was  provided,  at  which  he  was  conceived  of  as  being
present,  a meal  which  was  lacking  in  none  of  the  requirements
appertaining  to  such  an  occasion — wine,  music,  and  song,  flowers
and  perfumes.

A tombstone  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  has  preserved  the  begin-
ning of  one  of  the  songs  with  which  the  guests  were  entertained  at
these  banquets.  A corpulent  harpist  is  depicted  on  it  singing  :

O grave,  thou  art  built  for  festivity,

Thou  art  founded  for  what  is  fair.3 4

But  we  possess  complete  a remarkable  song,  which  was  sung  on
the  same  occasions,  and  which  describes  the  transitoriness  of  all
earthly  things,  in  order  to  warn  the  listeners  to  make  the  most  of
life.  The  New  Kingdom,  which  has  preserved  it  for  us,*  knew  of

1 In  two  tombs  of  the  Old  Kingdom  ; see  op.  cit.  p.  34  ; cf.  also

Blackman,  Rock  Tombs  of  Meir,  iv.  PI.  vm.

3 See  op.  cit.  p.  52.

3 Steindorff,  Zeitsckr.  fur  dgypt.  Sptache,  xxxii.  p,  124  ; the  meaning
is  of  course  : thou  art  no  place  for  woe.

4 Preserved  in  Pap.  Hams,  No.  500,  and  partly  also  on  a tombstone
of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty.  See  W.  Max  Muller,  Die  Liebespoesie  der
alien  Agypier  (Leipzig,  1899),  pp.  31  fi.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  138

it  as  coming  from  the  House  of  King  Ante/,1  i.e.  from  his
tomb,  where  it  was  also  written  i n f r o n t o f t h e Harpist.
An  amplified  version  of  it  is  to  be  found  among  the  songs  of  the
New  Kingdom.

Well  is  it  with  this  good  prince,  the  goodly  destiny  hath
suffered  hurt.2

Bodies  pass  away  and  others  remain  3 since  the  time  of  them
that  were  before.

The  gods  4 that  were  aforetime  rest  in  their  pyramids,  and
likewise  the  noble  and  the  glorified,  buried  in  their  pyramids.

They  that  build  houses,  their  habitations  are  no  more.
What  hath  been  done  with  them  ?

I have  heard  the  discourses  of  Imhotep  and  Hardedef,5
with  whose  words  men  speak  everywhere  6 — what  are  their
habitations  (now)  ? Their  walls  are  destroyed,  their  habita-
tions are  no  more,  as  if  they  had  never  been.

None  cometh  from  thence  that  he  may  tell  us  how  they  fare,
that  he  may  tell  us  what  they  need,  that  he  may  set  our  heart
at  rest  (?),  until  we  also  go  to  the  place  whither  they  are  gone.

Be  glad,  that  thou  mayest  cause  thine  heart  to  forget  that
men  will  (one  day)  beatify  7 thee.  Follow  thy  desire,  so  long  as
thou  livest.  Put  myrrh  on  thine  head,  clothe  thee  in  fine  linen,
and  anoint  thee  with  the  genuine  marvels  of  the  things  of  the
god.

Increase  yet  more  the  delights  that  thou  hast,  and  let  not
thine  heart  grow  faint.  Follow  thy  desire,  and  do  good  to
thyself  (?).  Do  what  thou  requirest  (?)  upon  earth,  and  vex
not  thine  heart,— until  that  day  of  lamentation  8 cometh  to
thee.  Yet  He  with  the  Quiet  Heart  8 heareth  not  their  lamenta-
tion, and  cries  deliver  no  man  from  the  underworld.

1 This  must  be  one  of  the  Antefs  from  the  end  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,
as  the  language  already  tends  to  be  popular.

2 The  later  version  has  : “ The  goodly  destiny  (i.e.  death)  hath  come  to
pass,”  and  that  is  what  must  be  meant  here.

3 According  to  the  later  version  the  meaning  is  : Come  in  their  place.

4 The  ancient  kings.

5 The  famous  old  sages.  Imhotep  was  considered  to  be  a son  of  Ptah  ;
Hardedef  is  a son  of  King  Kheops  (see  above,  pp.  40  If.).

8 Whose  wise  sayings  every  one  has  on  his  lips.

7 The  beatification  is  a ceremony  at  the  funeral.

* The  lament  for  the  dead.

8 The  god  of  the  dead,  Osiris.


134  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Below  there  is  written  as  “ refrain  ” (or  whatever  the  word-
may  signify)  :

Spend  the  day  happily  and  weary  not  thereof ! Lo,  none
can  (?)  take  his  goods  with  him.  Lo,  none  that  hath  departed
can  come  again.

3.  HYMNS  TO  KING  SESOSTRIS  III 1

The  first  four  of  these  fine  songs  were  probably  composed  for
the  entry  of  the  king  into  “ his  city,”  and  they  greet  him  in  the
name  of  its  inhabitants.  From  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  song
we  can  see  that  the  city  is  one  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  that  the  king
has  come  there  in  order  to  be  crowned  ruler  of  the  Upper  Country.

The  fifth  and  sixth  songs  were  apparently  not  written  for  any
special  purpose.

Homs,  Neter-kheperu ; lord  of  diadems,  Neter-mesut,
Horns  that  hath  overcome  Seth,  Kheper,  king  of  Upper  and
Lower  Egypt,  Khakaure,  son  of  Re,  Sesostris  2 — he  carried  off
the  Two  Lands  in  triumph.

[First  hymn.]

Praise  to  thee,  Khakaure  ! Our  Horus,  Neter-kheperu  !

That  protecteth  the  land  and  extendeth  his  boundaries,

That  vanquisheth  the  foreign  countries  with  his  crown.3
That  encloseth  the  Two  Lands  in  his  arms,

And  (strangleth  ?)  the  foreign  lands  with  his  grip;

That  slayeth  the  People  of  the  Bow,  without  stroke  of  the  club,4
Shooting  of  the  arrow,  or  drawing  of  the  string.

His  might  hath  smitten  the  Troglodytes  5 in  their  land,

And  the  fear  of  him  hath  slain  the  Nine  Bows.

His  slaughtering  hath  made  thousands  to  die

Of  the  People  of  the  Bow  . . .,  that  attacked  his  borders.

He  that  shooteth  the  arrow  as  doth  Sekhmet,6

1 In  a papyrus  of  the  Twelfth  Dynasty  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  town  of
Kahun  ; see  Griffith,  Hieratic  Papyri  from  Kahun  and  Gurob  (London,
1S9S),  pp  1 ff.  The  king  reigned  from  1882-1845  b c

2 The  titulary  of  the  king,  which  stands  here  as  a heading  to  the
collection  of  hymns

3 The  crown  with  the  royal  serpent  on  it  was  accounted  a goddess  who
protected  the  king.

4 They  die  merely  from  terror  of  him.

6 The  inhabitants  of  the  desert  between  the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea,  the
modem  Ababdeh  and  Bisharfn.

3 The  lion-headed  goddess  of  war.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  135

When  he  overthroweth  thousands  of  them  that  knew  not  his
might.

It  is  the  tongue  of  his  majesty  that  confineth  1 Nubia,

And  it  is  his  utterances  that  make  the  Bedouins  to  flee.

Sole  youthful  one  that  fighteth  for  his  boundaries.

And  suffereth  not  his  people  to  wax  faint ; 2
That  suffereth  men  to  sleep  unto  daylight,

And  his  recruits  to  slumber,  for  his  heart  is  their  defender.

His  decrees  have  made  his  boundaries.

And  his  word  hath  joined  in  one  the  Two  River-banks.

[Second  hymn.]

How  the  gods  rejoice  : thou  hast  made  their  offerings  to
flourish.

How  thy  . . . rejoice  : thou  hast  made  their  boundaries.

How  thy  (fathers)  which  were  aforetime  rejoice  : thou  hast
increased  their  portions.3

How  the  Egyptians  rejoice  in  thy  might : thou  hast  pro-
tected . . .

How  the  people  rejoice  in  thy  designs  : thy  might  hath  captured
the  . . .

How  the  Two  River-banks  rejoice  in  thy  strength  : thou  hast
enlarged  that  which  they  need.

How  thy  recruits  rejoice  in  ...  : thou  hast  caused  them  to
grow.

How  thine  honoured  ones  rejoice  : thou  hast  renewed  their
youth.

How  the  Two  Lands  rejoice  in  thy  strength  : thou  hast  pro-
tected their  walls.

Thereafter  comes  the  rubric : Its  ...  is  : " Horns,  that
extendeth  his  boundaries,  mayest  thou  repeat  eternity,”  doubt-
less a direction  for  the  singer.  It  might  be  a refrain  or  a specifica-
tion of  the  time.

[Third  hymn.]

How  great  4 is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  alone  is  a million,
little  are  other  men.

1 When  he  does  not  fight  himself  his  wise  orders  suffice.

* Through  fighting  ? For  that  is  his  particular  care.

3 Probably  the  shares  which  the  deceased  kings  obtained  for  their
tombs  at  the  distribution  of  the  food-offerings.

1 I.e.  how  rich  in  blessing.


186


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  a dyke,  that
keepeth  back  the  river  in  its  water-floods.

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  a cool  lodge
that  letteth  a man  sleep  unto  daylight.

(Two  unintelligible  verses  : the  second  likens  the  king  to  a
place  of  refuge.)

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  a bulwark  that
delivereth  the  fearful  from  his  enemy.

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  the  shade  of
the  season  of  Overflowing  for  cooling  in  summer.1

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  a corner  warm
and  dry  in  time  of  winter.

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  a mountain,
that  keepeth  back  the  storm-blast,  at  the  time  when  the  sky  is
in  riot.

How  great  is  the  lord  for  his  city  : he  is  like  Sekhmet  unto
foes  that  overstep  his  boundaries.

[Fourth  hymn.]

He  hath  come  unto  us  that  he  may  carry  away  Upper  Egypt  ;

the  double  diadem  2 hath  rested  on  his  head.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  united  the  Two  Lands  ; he
hath  mingled  the  reed  (?)  3 with  the  bee.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  brought  the  Black  Land  4
under  his  sway ; he  hath  apportioned  to  himself  the  Red
Land.4

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  taken  the  Two  Lands  under
his  protection  ; he  hath  given  peace  to  the  Two  River-
banks.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  made  Egypt  to  live  ; he  hath
banished  its  suffering.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  made  the  people  to  live ; he
hath  caused  the  throat  of  the  subjects  to  breathe.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  trodden  down  the  foreign

1 He  is  as  welcome  as  that  double  coolmg  would  be  in  the  heat.

1 That  form  of  the  diadem,  in  which  the  crown  of  Upper  Egypt  is
inserted  into  that  of  Lower  Egypt.

* The  emblem  of  Upper  Egypt,  with  which  also  its  king  is  written,
whereas  the  king  of  Lower  Egypt  is  denoted  in  the  writing  by  the  bee.

4 Egyptian  and  non-Egyptian  territory.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


187


countries  ; he  hath  smitten  the  Troglodytes,1  that  knew
not  the  dread  of  him.

He  hath  come  unto  us  and  hath  (done  battle  for)  his  boundaries  ;
he  hath  delivered  them  that  were  robbed  . . .

(A  destroyed  verse.)

He  hath  come  unto  us,  that  we  may  (nurture  up  ?)  our  children
and  bury  our  aged  ones  . . .

[Fifth  hymn.]

It  is  concerned  with  the  gods  ; one  can  still  recognize  : ye  love

Khakaure,  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever he  apportioned

your  victuals our  herdsman,  that  can  give  breath

ye  requite  it  him  in  life  and  happiness,  numberless  times.

[Sixth  hymn.]

Praise  of  Khakaure,  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever

when  I sail  in  the  ship adorned  with  gold .

E,  RELIGIOUS  POEMS

The  Egyptians  regarded  the  religious  writings  of  then-
ancestors  as  sacred  ; hence  any  such  compositions  of  their  own
closely  imitated  these  in  both  form  and  language.  It  is  there-
fore very  difficult  for  us  to  be  certain  about  the  age  of  a religious
text,  of  which  we  do  not  possess  an  early  version.  Accordingly
it  is  in  itself  possible  that  one  or  other  of  the  hymns  here  given
should  have  been  assigned  a place  among  the  remains  of  the
earliest  poetry  above.  On  the  other  hand,  the  great  Hymn  to
Amun,  which  I have  assigned  below  to  the  New  Kingdom,  may
actually  date  from  as  early  a period  as  the  Middle  Kingdom.
However,  I think  that  on  the  whole  I am  right  in  my  divisions.

i.  TO  MIN-HORUS  2

I adore  Min  and  praise  Horus,  that  lifteth  up  his  arm.3

Praise  to  thee,  Min,  at  his  appearing  ! 4 Thou  with  lofty

1 A people  in  the  desert  between  Upper  Egypt  and  the  Red  Sea,  who
plundered  travellers.  The  king  had  just  fought  against  them,  as  is
evident  from  the  following  verse.

a From  a tombstone  of  the  Middle  Kingdom  (Louvre,  C 30).  The  ithy-
phallic  god  Min  was  regarded  since  the  Middle  Kingdom  as  Horus,  son  of
Osiris.

* Min  is  represented  with  his  right  arm  uplifted.

4 The  “ Appearing  of  Min  " is  a known  festival.


138  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

plumes  ; 1 son  of  Osiris,  born  of  divine  Isis.  Great  in  the  Senut-
temple,  mighty  in  Ipu,  thou  of  Koptos  ! Horus,  that  lifteth
up  his  arm,  lord  of  reverence,  that  hath  reduced  the  might  2 to
silence.  King  of  all  gods  ! Rich  in  perfume,  when  he  cometh
down  from  the  Matoi-land  ; revered  in  Xubia  ! 3 4 .

2.  TO  THE  SUN

In  the  tombs  of  the  New  Kingdom  it  is  the  custom  to  furnish
the  deceased  with  two  songs — either  in  the  form  of  an  inscription,
or  else  written  out  in  a so-called  Book  of  the  Dead — in  which  he
praises  the  mormng  and  the  evening  sun  ; for  to  be  able  to  look
upon  these  was  the  earnest  wish  of  all  dead  persons.  It  is  prob-
ably not  to  be  doubted  that  these  songs,  which  exist  in  various
versions,1  are  intrinsically  ancient,  although  no  example  dating
from  the  Middle  Kingdom  has  hitherto  been  found.

(a)  TO  THE  MORNING  SUN.5 *

Adoration  of  Re,  when  he  ariseth  in  the  eastern  horizon  of
heaven.

Praise  to  thee,  that  ariseth  in  Xun  8 and  lighteneth  the  Two
Lands,  when  he  cometh  forth.

Thee  the  whole  Ennead  praiseth thou  goodly,

beloved  youth — when  he  ariseth,  men  live.

Mankind  rejoiceth  at  him  ; the  Souls  7 of  Heliopolis  shout
joyfully  to  him  ; the  Souls  of  Buto  and  Hierakonpolis  8 extol
him.  The  apes  9 adore  him  ; “ Praise  to  thee,”  say  all  wild
beasts  with  one  consent.

Thy  serpent  overthroweth  thy  foes.10  Thou  exultest  in  thy
ship,  thy  crew  is  content,  and  the  morning 11  bark  receiveth  thee.

1 Min  wears  two  feathers  as  a head-dress.

2 That  of  Seth,  the  foe  of  Horus

3 Min,  whose  sanctuary  lay  m the  part  of  Egypt  whence  the  roads
lead  to  eastern  desert  territories,  was  accounted  the  patron  of  these.
Thus  it  is  he  who  brings  perfumes.

4 For  translations  of  such  songs,  see  SchaRff, ,A gyf'ti  ~.ene  Sonne  nlteder ,
Berlin,  1922

5 Book  of  the  Dead,  ch.  xv  AIL  « The  celestial  ocean.

7 The  gods  of  the  ancient  cities  are  designated  “ Souls.'1

8 The  ancient  capitals  of  Lower  and  Tipper  Egypt.

8 The  apes,  who  greet  the  sun  at  his  rising.

10  The  clouds  which  threaten  the  sun,  generally  conceived  of  as  the

snake  Apophis.

11  The  ship  which  the  sun  uses  by  day  : at  night,  in  the  underworld,
he  has  another  ; both  are  manned  by  go  is.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


139


Thou  rejoicest,  O lord  of  gods,  over  them  whom  thou  hast
created,  and  they  praise  thee.  Nut  is  blue  alongside  of  thee,1
and  Nun  . . . for  thee  with  his  ravs.

Give  me  light,  that  I may  see  thy  beauty.

( b ) To  THE  EVENING  SUN.2

Adoration  of  Re-Harakhti.  when  he  setteth  in  the  western
horizon  of  heaven.

Praise  to  thee,  O Re,  when  thou  settest,  Atum,  Harakhti !
Divine  divinity,  that  came  into  being  of  himself,  primaeval  god,
that  existed  at  the  beginning.

Jubilation  to  thee  that  hast  fashioned  the  gods ; he  that
hath  raised  up  the  sky  to  be  the  pathway  (?)  for  his  eyes,3  that
hath  fashioned  the  earth  to  the  extent  (?)  of  his  radiance,  so
that  every  man  may  discern  the  other.

The  evening  bark  is  in  gladness,  and  the  morning  bark
exulteth  and  crieth  aloud  for  joy,  when  they  voyage  for  thee
in  peace  over  Nun.  They  crew  is  happy,  thy  serpent  hath  over-
thrown thine  enemies,  and  thou  hast  put  an  end  to  the  going
of  Apophis.

Thou  art  fair,  0 Re,  every  day ; thy  mother  Nut  embraceth
thee.4

Thou  settest  beauteous  with  gladsome  heart  in  the  horizon
of  Manun.3  The  noble  dwellers  in  the  West  exult.  Thou
givest  light  there  for  the  great  god  Osiris,  the  ruler  of  eternity.

The  lords  of  the  caverns  6 in  their  dens,  they  uplift  their
hands  and  praise  thee.  They  address  to  thee  all  their  prayers,
when  thou  shinest  for  them.

The  lords  of  the  underworld,7  they  are  happy  when  thou
bestowest  light  on  the  West.  Their  eyes  open  when  they  behold
thee.  How  their  hearts  rejoice  when  they  behold  thee  !

Thou  hearest  the  petitions  of  them  that  are  in  the  coffin.
Thou  dispellest  their  pain  and  drivest  away  their  evils.  Thou
givest  breath  to  their  nostrils,  and  they  take  hold  of  the  rope
at  the  forepart  of  thy  ship  8 in  the  horizon  of  Manun.

1 The  sky-goddess  is  here  conceived  of  as  a blue  ocean  over  which  the
sun  voyages.

2 Book  of  the  Dead,  ch.  xv.  B II.  3 The  sun  and  moon.

4 The  sky-goddess  enfolds  the  sun  in  her  arms  at  his  rising  and  setting  ?

5 A legendary  mountain  in  the  West,  in  which  the  sun  goes  down.

3 The  dead.  7 The  dead.

8 In  the  underworld,  where  there  is  no  wind,  the  boat  of  the  sun  is
towed  along,  and  this  task  is  undertaken  by  the  grateful  dead.


140  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Thou  art  fair,  O Re,  every  day ; thy  mother  Nut  embraceth
thee.

3.  TO  THOTH

In  the  form  of  a schoolboy’s  exercise  written  on  a writing-board
of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,1  but  probably  of  earlier  date.

Daily  adoration  of  ThSth.

0 ye  gods  that  are  in  heaven,  0 ye  gods  that  are  (on  earth)  !
(Ye  southerners,  northerners,  westerners  ?),  easterners,  come
and  behold  Th5th,  how  he  shineth  forth  in  his  crown,  which
the  two  lords 2 in  Hermopolis  have  set  in  place  for  him,  in  order
that  he  may  execute  the  governance  of  mankind.  Exult  in  the
hall  of  Keb  over  what  he  hath  done.  Adore  him,  extol  him,
give  him  praise.  He  is  the  lord  of  kindliness,  the  leader  of  the
entire  multitude.

Then  follow  a promise  3 that  for  all  gods  and  goddesses  who
will  thus  praise  him  Thoth  will  furnish  their  chapels  and  their
altars  (?)  in  their  temples,  and  a prayer  of  the  writer  that  Thoth
may  give  him  an  house  and  possessions  and  sustenance ; he  is
to  cause  that  he  be  loved  and  praised  . . . and  pleasant  and
protected  with  all  people,  and  that  his  enemies  be  overthrown.

4.  HYMNS  TO  OSIRIS

Osiris,  the  most  popular  of  all  gods,  -was  originally  a god  of  vege-
tation, which  dies  away,  it  is  true,  but  is  revived  again  bv  the
inundation.  But  he  came  to  be  generally  regarded  as  an  almost
entirely  human  figure,  and  he  usually  appears  as  such  in  the  hymns
also.

He  was  the  son  of  the  earth-god  Keb  and  the  skv-goddess  Nut,
and  succeeded  his  father  as  king  of  Egypt.  His  reign  was  prosper-
ous, and  he  was  also  victorious  in  war.  But  his  brother,  the  god
Seth,  murdered  him  and  threw  his  corpse  into  the  water.

Isis,  his  sister  and  spouse,  sought  for  it  for  a long  time,  and
when  she  had  at  last  found  it  and  had  brought  it  to  land,  she
fanned  breath  into  it,  and  so  restored  Osiris  to  a sort  of  life.  She
became  pregnant  by  him  and  bore  a son.  floras,  whom  she  brought
up  in  a hidden  place,  that  he  might  escape  the  persecutions  of  Seth.
When  he  was  grown  up,  she  led  him  before  the  tribunal  of  the  gods,

1 Brit.  Mus.,  5650  ; of  1 urajeff,  Zeitichr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  xxxiii,
p.  120.

* Horus  and  Seth

3 These  practical  applications  may  be  later.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  141

where  he  defended  himself  against  Seth,  who  contested  the  legiti-
macy of  his  birth.  The  gods  decided  in  his  favour  and  assigned  to
him  the  kingdom  of  his  father.  Since  then,  Osiris  reigned  as  king
of  the  dead  in  their  realm,  which  was  thought  to  be  in  the  under-
world or  even  in  the  sky.  He  has  many  sanctuaries  on  earth,  the
chiefest  being  Busins  in  the  Delta,  and  Abydos.

(a)  The  long  hymn.1

Praise  to  thee,  Osiris  ! Thou  lord  of  eternity,  king  of  gods  !
Thou  with  many  names  and  lordly  of  being  ! With  mysterious
ceremonies  in  the  temples.2

He  it  is  that  hath  the  noble  ka  in  Busiris  and  the  abundant
sustenance  (?)  in  Letopolis  ; to  whom  men  shout  for  joy  in  the
nome  of  Busiris,  and  that  hath  many  victuals  in  Heliopolis.3

He  whom  men  call  to  mind  in  . . .,  the  mysterious  soul  of
the  lord  of  Kerert ; that  is  lordly  in  Memphis,  the  soul  of  Re
and  his  own  body.4

He  that  went  to  rest  in  Herakleopolis,  and  to  whom  men
raised  goodly  shouts  of  joy  in  the  Naret-tree,  which  came  into
being  in  order  to  raise  up  his  soul.5

Lord  of  the  Great  Hall  in  Hermopolis,  and  very  terrible  in
Shashotep  ; lord  of  eternity  in  Abydos,  that  hath  his  seat  in
To-zoser.6

He  whose  name  endureth  in  the  mouth  of  men,  that  was  in
Primaeval  Time  for  the  Two  Lands  together  ; 7 sustenance  and
food  at  the  head  of  the  Ennead ; 8 the  most  excellent  glorified
one  among  the  glorified.9

Nun  10  hath  offered  to  him  his  water,  and  the  north  wind

1 On  a tombstone  of  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty  in  Paris.  See  Chabas,
Revue  archeologique,  xiv.  p.  307  The  hymn  in  its  second  part  furnishes
us  with  a short  account  of  the  Osiris  legend,  which,  however,  it  com-
presses into  the  form  of  the  ordinary  hymns  of  praise.

1 Refers  probably  to  the  mysteries,  1 e.  the  dramatic  performances  of
incidents  in  the  Osiris  myth.

3 In  every  place  his  festivals  are  celebrated  and  offerings  are  made  to
him.

4 Theological  constructions,  whose  object  it  is  to  connect  Osiris  with
other  divinities.

* This  verse  and  the  following  deal  with  events  in  the  myth  of  which
we  know  nothing.

3 The  necropolis  of  Abydos.  7 Who  ruled  over  them  ?

8 The  gods  are  indebted  to  him  for  their  sustenance  ?

9 He  is  the  ruler  of  the  dead.

10  The  celestial  ocean,  to  which  Osiris  is  indebted  for  the  water  which
he  gives  the  earth  in  the  inundation.


142


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


journeys  southward  to  him  ; the  sky  createth  air  for  his  nose,
for  the  contentment  of  his  heart.  The  plants  grow  according
to  his  desire,  and  the  field  createth  for  him  its  1 food.

The  firmament  and  its  stars  hearken  unto  him,  and  the
great  portals  open  to  him ; to  whom  men  shout  for  joy  in  the
southern  sky,  whom  men  adore  in  the  northern  sky.2  The  im-
perishable stars 3 are  under  his  authority,  and  the  never-
wearying  ones  are  his  place  of  abode.

Offering  is  made  to  him  by  the  command  of  Keb,4  and  the
Nine  Gods  adore  him  ; they  that  are  in  the  underworld  kiss  the
ground,  and  they  that  are  in  the  necropolis  make  an  obeisance.
The  . . . shout  for  joy  when  they  behold  him,  they  that  are
there  5 * are  in  fear  of  him.  The  Two  Lands  together  give  him
praise  at  the  approach  of  his  majesty.

The  lordly  noble  at  the  head  of  the  nobles,  with  enduring
office  and  established  rule.  The  goodly  Mighty  One  for  the
Nine  Gods,  he  with  the  kindly  face,  on  whom  men  love  to  look.

He  that  put  the  fear  of  him  in  all  lands,  to  the  intent  that
they  might  make  mention  of  his  name  6 in  respect  of  all  that
they  offered  (?)  unto  him  ; he  that  is  remembered  in  heaven
and  on  earth.  To  whom  many  shouts  of  joy  are  raised  at  the
Wag-festival,7  over  whom  the  Two  Lands  rejoice  together.
The  most  chiefest  of  his  brethren,  the  eldest  of  the  Nine  Gods.8

He  that  established  right  throughout  the  Two  River-banks,
and  placed  the  son  upon  his  father’s  seat ; 9 praised  of  his  father
Keb,  beloved  of  his  mother  Nut.

Great  of  strength  when  he  overthrew  the  adversary,  powerful
of  arm  when  he  slew  his  foe.  He  that  put  the  fear  of  him  in
the  enemies,  and  reached  (?)  the  boundaries  of  them  that  plotted
mischief.  Firm  of  heart  when  he  trod  down  (?)  the  foemen.

The  heir  of  Keb  in  the  kingship  of  the  Two  Lands.  He  10

1 The  field’s.

* An  allusion  to  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  Osiris.

5 The  circumpolar  stars,  which  are  accounted  the  most  eminent,  because
they  never  set.

1 Keb,  as  earth-god,  furnishes  the  victuals.

5 Usual  designation  of  the  dead.

a Probably  refers  to  the  deeds  which  the  myth  ascribes  to  him.
Similarly  all  that  follows.

7 Apparently  a harvest-festival.

8 That  he  certainly  was  not ; it  is  only  poetical  exaggeration.

* As  a good  king  does.  10


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  143

saw  how  excellent  he  was,  and  he  entrusted  it  to  him  to  lead
the  Two  Lands  to  good  fortune.

He  placed  this  land  in  his  hand,  its  water  and  its  air,  its
herbs  and  all  its  cattle.  All  that  flieth  and  all  that  fluttereth,
its  worms  and  its  wild  beasts,  were  made  over  to  the  son  of
Nut,  and  the  Two  Lands  were  contented  therewith.

He  that  appeared  upon  the  throne  of  his  father,  like  Re
when  he  ariseth  in  the  horizon,  that  he  might  give  light  to  him

that  was  in  darkness.  He  illumined and  flooded 1

the  Two  Lands,  like  the  sun  at  dawn  of  day.

His  crown  cleft  the  sky  and  consorted  with  the  stars  ; 2
he,  the  leader  of  every  god,  admirable  in  command,  whom  the
Great  Ennead  of  gods  praised,  and  the  Lesser  Ennead  3 loved.

His  sister  protected  him,4  she  that  held  the  foes  aloof  and
warded  off  the  deeds  of  the  miscreant  by  the  beneficent  things
of  her  mouth,5  she  with  the  excellent  tongue,  whose  words  come
not  to  nought,  and  admirable  in  command.

Beneficent  Isis,  that  protected  her  brother,  that  sought  for
him  without  wearying,  that  traversed  this  land  mourning,  and
took  no  rest  until  she  found  him.

She  that  afforded  him  shade  with  her  feathers,  and  with  her
wings  created  air.  She  that  cried  aloud  for  joy  and  brought
her  brother  to  land.

She  that  revived  the  faintness  of  the  Weary"  One,  that  took
in  his  seed  and  provided  an  heir,  that  suckled  the  child  in
solitude,  the  place  where  he  was  being  unknown,  that  brought
him,  when  his  arm  was  strong,  into  the  hall  of  Keb.

The  Ennead  cried  out  full  of  joy  :

“ Welcome,  Horus,  son  of  Osiris  !

Stalwart  hearted,  justified  ! 6
Son  of  Isis,  heir  of  Osiris  ! ”

1 With  light.

2 It  was  so  tall.  The  height  of  the  crown  is  a thing  that  earthly  kings
boast  about  ; this  will  go  back  to  the  earliest  times,  when  the  ruler  actually
wore  his  crown  in  order  to  be  visible  above  all  people.  In  historic  times
also  the  crowns  were  still  as  much  as  fifty  centimetres  high.

3 The  ordinary  Ennead  comprised  the  gods  up  to  the  generation  of
Osiris  ; for  the  remaining  gods  a second  “ Lesser  " Ennead  was  invented.

3 Isis  protected  Osiris  ; the  murder  of  the  god  is  passed  over  as  some-
thing too  terrible  to  be  spoken  of.

3 Her  magical  spells.

3 Horus  is  actually  not  yet  justified,  for  the  trial  has  not  yet  taken
place.


144


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


The  Tribunal  of  Truth  assembled  for  him,  the  Ennead  and
the  Lord  of  All  himself,  the  lords  of  truth  that  were  united
therein,  that  turned  their  backs  on  iniquity.

They  sat  them  down  in  the  hall  of  Keb  with  the  intent  to  assign
the  office  to  its  lord,  the  kingdom  to  whom  it  should  be  given.

It  was  found  that  the  word  of  Horus  was  true,  and  the  office
of  his  father  was  given  unto  him.  He  came  forth  crowned  by
the  command  of  Keb,  he  received  the  lordship  of  the  Two  River-
banks,  and  the  crown  rested  securely  on  his  head.

The  earth  was  accounted  unto  him  for  his  possession  (?),
and  heaven  and  earth  were  under  his  authority.  Men,  folk,
people,  mankind 1 were  made  over  to  him,  Egypt  and  the
Northerners,2  and  what  the  sun  encircleth,  were  under  his
governance,  the  north  wind,  the  river,  the  flood,  the  fruit-tree,
and  all  plants.

The  corn-god  gave  all  his  herbage  and  (?)  sustenance  to  the
glorified  one  ; 3 he  brought  (?)  satiety  and  placed  it  in  all  lands.

All  people  were  happy,  cheerful  of  mind,  and  with  glad
hearts ; all  men  cried  out  for  joy,  and  all  people  adored  his
goodness  : “ How  deeply  we  love  him  ! His  goodness  traverseth
the  hearts,  and  great  in  all  is  the  love  of  him.4

"They  have  given  his  enemies  to  the  son  of  Isis .

Evil  hath  been  inflicted  on  the  miscreant  (?) .

“ The  son  of  Isis  hath  protected  his  father,  and  his  name  hath
been  made  noble  and  excellent.  Might  hath  taken  its  seat,
and  Prosperity  endureth  by  its  ordinances.  The  roads  he  out-
spread, and  the  ways  are  open.5

" How  contented  are  the  Two  Lands  ! Wickedness  hath
vanished,  and  evil  hath  fled.  The  land  is  happy  under  its  lord.
Right  is  established  for  its  lord,  and  the  back  is  turned  on
iniquity.

“ Be  glad  of  heart,  Wennofre ! 6 The  son  of  Isis  hath  assumed

1 In  the  original  are  ancient  stereotyped  expressions  for  men,  the  exact
meanings  of  which  are  unknown  to  us.

2 The  Hautiu-nebt,  properly  the  designation  for  the  peoples  of  the
Mediterranean.

3 Probably  Osiris  is  meant.

4 All  that  follows  is  still  to  be  regarded  as  the  utterance  of  men  who
are  rejoicing  over  the  accession  of  Horus.

* Security  reigns  throughout  the  land.  All  these  are  expressions  em-
ployed in  connection  with  earthly  kings.

* Marne  for  Osiris.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  145

the  diadem.  The  office  of  his  father  hath  been  assigned  unto
him  in  the  hall  of  Keb.  Re,  he  speaketh,  Th5th,  he  write th,1
and  the  tribunal  assenteth  thereto.  Thy  father  Keb  hath  given
command  2 for  thee  (?)  and  it  is  done  according  to  that  which
he  spake.”

( b ) Shorter  hymns  3

Praise  to  thee,  Osiris,  son  of  Nut  ! Lord  of  the  horns  ; with
tall  atef-crown  ! 4 To  whom  the  crown  was  given  (in)  joy  in
the  presence  of  the  Ennead  of  gods.

He,  the  reverence  for  whom  Atum  hath  fashioned  in  the
hearts  of  men  and  of  gods,  of  the  glorified  and  of  the  dead.

He  to  whom  the  lordship  was  given  in  Heliopolis  ; of  great
estate  in  Busiris  ; fearful  in  the  Two  Places,  terrible  in  Rosetau,
revered  in  Ehnas,  mighty  in  Tenent.

The  greatly  loved  upon  earth,  of  goodly  memory  in  the  goa  s
palace,  that  appeared  in  greatness  at  Abydos.

He  to  whom  justification  was  ascribed  before  the  entire
Ennead,  for  whom  a slaughtering  was  made  in  the  great  hall  at
Herwer.

He  of  whom  the  great  mighty  ones  were  in  terror,  and  before
whom  the  great  ones  rose  up  from  their  mats.

Shu  hath  inspired  fear  of  him,  and  Tefnet  hath  created
reverence  for  him.

The  two  sanctuaries  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  came  making
obeisance  to  him,  because  the  fear  of  him  is  so  great  and  the
reverence  for  him  so  immense.

This  one,5  Osiris,  king  of  gods,  the  great  Mighty  One  of
heaven,  and  the  king  of  them  that  are  there.6  Thousands
praise  him  in  Babylon,7  and  men  are  in  jubilation  over  him  in
Heliopolis.  Lord  of  the  portions  of  meat  in  the  Upper  Houses,
to  whom  sacrifice  is  made  in  Memphis.

1 As  scribe  of  the  gods.

1 Meaning  ?

s Often  found  on  tombstones  of  the  Middle  Kingdom,  e.g.  Louvre,  C 30,
Leiden,  v.  65.

4 The  god  wears  a crown  ornamented  with  horns.

• Upon  the  tombstone,  Louvre,  C 30,  but  as  a separate  hymn.

* In  the  realm  of  the  dead

’ An  Egyptian  city,  the  modem  Old  Cairo.


10


146


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


5.  TO  THE  NILE1

The  Nile  was,  it  is  true,  regarded  as  a god.  but  unlike  the  other
great  divinities  he  had  no  regular  organized  cult.  Thus,  this  hymn,
which  is  designated  Adoration  o f t h e .V  i l e,  is  different
in  character  from  the  old  hymns  to  divinities  ; it  thanks  the  god  for
all  the  blessings  which  he  bestows  on  men.  It  must  have  been
composed  for  an  inundation  festival.  This,  according  to  the
hymn,  took  place  in  Thebes,  at  a time  when  it  was  the  city  of  “ a
sovereign,’’  thus  possibly  in  the  later  Hyksos  period.

Praise  to  thee,  O Nile,  that  issueth  from  the  earth,  and
cometh  to  nourish  Egypt.  Of  hidden  nature,  a darkness  in  the
daytime .

That  watereth  the  meadows,  he  that  Re  hath  created  to
nourish  all  cattle.  That  giveth  drink  to  the  desert  places,  which
are  far  from  water  ; it  is  his  dew  that  falleth  from  heaven.2

Beloved  of  Keb,3  director  of  the  corn-god ; that  maketh
to  flourish  every  workshop  of  Ptah.4

Lord  of  fish,  that  maketh  the  water-fowl  to  go  upstream,5

That  maketh  barley  and  createth  wheat,  so  that  he  may
cause  the  temples  to  keep  festivals.

If  he  be  sluggish,6  the  nostrils  are  stopped  up,7  and  all  men
are  impoverished  ; the  victuals  of  the  gods  are  diminished,  and
millions  of  men  perish.

If  he  he  niggardly  (?)  the  whole  land  is  in  terror  and  great

and  small  lament. Khnum  hath  fashioned  him.  When

he  riseth,  the  land  is  in  exultation  and  every-  body  is  in  joy.
All  jaws  begin  to  laugh  and  every  tooth  is  revealed.8

1 Preserved  in  two  school  manuscripts  of  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty,
and  fragmentarily  in  a papyrus  at  Turin  and  on  ostraca.  One  of  these
last-named  has  made  the  first  verses  intelligible,  for  the  rest  of  the  hymn
has  been  completely  corrupted  by  the  schoolboys.  See  IIaspero,  Hymne
au  Nil,  Cairo,  1912.

* The  rain  which  waters  the  desert  is  thus  accounted  a product  of  the
Nile.

* The  earth-god.

4 Ptah,  the  craftsman,  who  fashions  everything,  could  effect  nothing
without  the  Nile.

5 To  Upper  Egypt.

* On  the  occasion  of  a deficient  inundation.

' lien  no  longer  breathe  and  live.


With  laughing.


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD


147


He  that  bringeth  victuals  and  is  rich  in  food,  that  createth

all  that  is  good.  The  revered,  sweet-smelling . That

createth  herbage  for  the  cattle,  and  giveth  sacrifice  to  every

god,1  be  he  in  the  underworld,  in  heaven,  or  upon  earth .

That  filleth  the  storehouses,  and  maketh  wide  the  granaries,
that  giveth  things  to  the  poor.

He  that  maketh  trees  to  grow  according  to  every  wish,  and
men  have  no  lack  thereof ; the  ship  is  built  by  his  power,  for
there  is  no  joinery  with  stones.2  What  follows  possibly  compares
him  to  an  invisible  king,  who  imposes  no  taxes  ; where  he  is,  no
one  knows.

All  that  is  intelligible  is  : thy  young  folk  and  thy  children
shout  for  joy  over  thee,  and  men  hail  thee  as  king.  Unchanging
of  laws,3  when  he  cometh  forth  in  the  presence  of  Upper  and
Lower  Egypt.  Men  drink  the  water .

He  that  was  in  sorrow  is  become  glad,  and  every  heart  is
joyful.  Sobk,  the  child  of  Neith,4  laugheth,  and  the  divine
Ennead,  that  is  in  thee,5  is  glorious.

Thou  that  vomitest  forth,  giving  the  fields  to  drink  and
making  strong  the  people.  He  that  maketh  the  one  rich  and
loveth  the  other.  He  maketh  no  distinctions,  and  boundaries  are
not  made  for  him.

Thou  light,  that  cometh  from  the  darkness  ! Thou  fat  for
his  cattle  ! He  is  a strong  one,  that  createth  . . . ( all  the
rest  unintelligible).

The  beginning  is  entirely  obscure ; then,  perhaps,  the  poem
goes  on  to  speak  of  all  going  to  work  in  the  field  : One  beholdeth
the  wealthy  as  him  that  is  full  of  care  (?),  one  beholdeth  each

one  with  his  implements ; None,  that  (otherwise)

goeth  clad,  is  clad,6  and  the  children  of  notables  are  unadorned


1 By  the  fact  that  the  cattle  flourish.

’Timber  is  a rarity  in  Egypt,  stone  a common  thing.

* Always  at  the  same  time.

4 Sobk  has  the  form  of  a crocodile  and  will  originally  have  been  a
water-god,  who  rejoices  in  the  inundation.

5 Meaning  ? • For  hard  work,  clothes  are  taken  off.


148


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


He  that  established  right,  whom  men  love. .It

would  be  but  lies  to  compare  (?)  thee  with  the  sea,  that  bringeth
no  corn. no  bird  descended  in  the  desert.

Farther  on,  mention  is  made  of  gold  and  of  ingots  of  silver,
which  avail  nothing ; men  eat  not  real  lapis  lazuli  ; barley  is
better.

Men  begin  to  play  to  thee  on  the  harp,  and  men  sing  to  thee
with  the  hand.1  Thy  young  folk  and  thy  children  shout  for
joy  over  thee,  and  deputations  2 to  thee  are  appointed.

He  that  cometh  with  splendid  things  and  adorneth  the
earth  ! That  causeth  the  ship  to  prosper  before  (?)  men  ; that
quickeneth  the  hearts  in  them  that  are  with  child  ; that  would
fain  have  there  be  a multitude  of  all  kinds  of  cattle.

When  thou  art  risen  in  the  city  of  the  sovereign,3  then  men
are  satisfied  with  a goodly  list.4  “ I would  like  lotus  flowers,”
saith  the  little  one,  “ and  all  manner  of  things,”  saith  the  . . .
commander,  “ and  all  manner  of  herbs,”  say  the  children.
Eating  bringeth  forgetfulness  of  him.5  Good  things  are  scattered
over  the  dwelling .

When  the  Nile  floodeth,  offering  is  made  to  thee,  cattle  are
slaughtered  for  thee,  a great  oblation  is  made  for  thee.  Birds
are  fattened  for  thee,  antelopes  are  hunted  for  thee  in  the  desert.
Good  is  recompensed  unto  thee.

Offering  is  also  made  to  every  other  god,  even  as  is  done
for  the  Nile,  with  incense,  oxen,  cattle,  and  birds  (upon  ?)  the
flame.  The  Nile  hath  made  him  his  cave  in  Thebes,  and  his
name  shall  be  known  no  more  in  the  underworld  6 .

All  ye  men,  extol  the  Nine  Gods,  and  stand  in  awe  of  the
might  which  his  son,  the  Lord  of  All,7  hath  displayed,  even  he

1 It  is  an  old  custom  to  beat  time  with  the  hand  while  singing.

2 To  greet  thee

3 When  the  inundation  has  reached  the  royal  residence

4 1.e.  a multitude  of  good  things.

6 The  Nile.

* He  will  henceforth  abide  in  Thebes,  where  he  is  so  well  feted.  His
original  home  knows  him  no  more.

7 Whose  son  ? Is  the  king  the  subject  of  discussion,  or  the  Nile  ?


FROM  THE  OLDER  PERIOD  149

that  maketh  green  the  Two  River-banks.  Thou  art  verdant,
O Nile,  thou  art  verdant.1  He  that  maketh  man  to  live  on
his  cattle,  and  his  cattle  on  the  meadow  ! Thou  art  verdant,
thou  art  verdant  ; O Nile,  thou  art  verdant.

1 1.e.  thou  dost  flourish  ; however,  the  formula  should  perhaps  be
understood  quite  differently.


III.  FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM

(So  far  as  not  stated  to  the  contrary,  in  New  Egyptian  throughout )

A.  NARRATIVES

i.  THE  TALE  OF  THE  TWO  BROTHERS  1

IN  form  and  contents  this  is  more  naive  and  more  racy  of  the
soil  than  any  Egyptian  taie  that  we  possess,  and  we  may  con-
gratulate ourselves  that  the  young  scribe  Ennana,2  who  was
a pupil  of  the  scribe  of  the  treasury  Kagabu,  copied  out  so  entirely
an  unliterary  piece  of  writing.

This  delightful  story  is  certainly  based  on  a myth,  as  is  shown
by  the  names  of  the  two  brothers.  The  one  is  called  Anubis,  like
the  ancient  jackal-god  of  the  dead  ; and  if  the  other,  Bata,  does  not
possess  so  distinguished  a namesake,  he  is  also,  however,  a divine
being,  for  in  the  Upper  Egyptian  town  of  Saka,  in  the  period  of  the
New  Kingdom,  a god  called  Bata  3 was  worshipped  side  by  side
with  the  chief  local  divinity  Anubis.

It  will  accordingly  be  a myth  belonging  to  this  town  that  the
story-teller  has  here  transferred  to  the  sphere  of  human  activities,
a transference,  thanks  to  which  it  has  acquired  a charm  that  it
could  scarcely  have  possessed  as  a mere  legend  about  the  gods.

The  world,  however,  m which  the  events  related  take  place  is,
naturally,  not  the  actual  world,  but  the  supernatural  world  of  faerie,
in  which  the  cedar  has  large  blossoms,  oxen  speak,  and  all  kinds
of  marvellous  and  impossible  things  occur.  Two  incidents  in  the
story,  which  are  puzzling  at  first,  have  been  unexpectedly  explained
by  comparison  with  other  folk-tales.

It  is  related  that  there  were  once  two  brothers  by  one
mother  and  one  father  ; and  the  name  of  the  elder  was  Anubis,

1  Preserved  in  the  so-called  Papyrus  d'Orbiney  in  the  British  Museum.
Already  brought  to  notice  by  de  Rouge  in  1852,  and  since  then  frequently
translated.  See,  e g , Griffith  in  The  World's  Best  Literature,  p.  5253  •
Maspero,  Contes  populairesi,  pp.  1 if.

2  He  lived  under  Memeptab  and  Sethos  II,  towards  the  end  of  the
Nineteenth  Dynasty  ( circa  1200  b.c.).

3  In  view  of  the  writing  of  the  name,  it  must  be  of  quite  late  origin.
See  my  note  below  in  the  poem  on  the  king’s  war-chariot,  p.  281.

150


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  151

and  the  name  of  the  younger  Bata.  Now  Anubis,  he  had  an
house  and  he  had  a wife,  while  his  younger  brother  dwelt  with
him  as  a son.  It  was  he  who  made  clothes  for  him,  tended  his
cattle  in  the  field,  ploughed  and  reaped  for  him,  and  did  for
him  all  the  tasks  that  are  in  the  field.  Yea,  his  younger  brother
was  a good  husbandman,  who  had  not  his  equal  in  the  whole
land,  and  the  strength  (?)  of  a god  was  in  him.

Now  many  days  after  this  1 his  younger  brother  tended  his
cattle,  as  he  did  every  day,  and  he  came  home  to  his  house  every
evening  laden  with  all  manner  of  herbs  of  the  field,  and  with
milk,  and  with  . . . wood  2 of  the  field,  and  set  it  down  before
his  elder  brother,  while  he  sat  with  his  wife  ; and  then  he  drank
and  ate,  and  (laid  him  down  to  sleep)  in  his  stall,  and  (kept
watch  over)  his  kine.

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,3  he  (made
ready)  cooked  (victuals)  and  set  them  before  his  elder  brother,
and  he  gave  him  bread  for  the  field,  and  he  drave  out  his  cattle
in  order  to  pasture  them  in  the  field.  He  walked  behind  his
cattle,  and  they  said  unto  him  : “ The  herbage  is  good  in  such
and  such  a place,”  and  he  heard  all  that  they  said  and  took
them  to  the  place  where  was  the  good  herbage  which  they
desired.  Thus  the  cattle  which  he  tended  flourished  exceedingly
and  calved  very,  very  often.

Now  at  the  season  of  ploughing  his  elder  brother  said  unto
him  : “ Make  ready  an  yoke  (of  oxen)  for  ploughing,  for  the
land  hath  come  forth  and  it  is  now  good  for  ploughing.4  Also
come  to  the  field  with  seed,  for  we  will  plough  with  a will  in
the  early  mom.”  So  spake  he  unto  him,  and  his  younger
brother  did  all  the  things  that  his  elder  brother  said  unto  him,
“ Do  them.”

Now  when  day  dawned  and  another  day  had  come,  they
went  afield  with  their  . . . and  ploughed  with  a will,  and  were
exceeding  glad  of  heart  because  of  their  work  at  their  beginning
of  work.5

And  many  days  after  this  they  wrere  in  the  field  and  were

1 One  of  those  formulse  of  unsophisticated  narrative  that  have  quite
lost  their  real  meaning.

1 Is  dry  wood  for  fuel  meant  ?

* Formula,  as  note  i above.

* The  inundation  has  so  far  subsided.

* The  commencement  of  the  year’s  agriculture,


152


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


short  of  seed.  And  he  sent  his  younger  brother,  saying  : "Go
and  fetch  us  seed  from  the  village.”  And  his  younger  brother
found  the  wife  of  his  elder  brother  as  she  sat  having  her  hair
done.  And  he  said  unto  her  : “ Up,  and  give  me  seed,  that  I
may  go  to  the  field,  for  mine  elder  brother  waiteth  for  me.
Tarry  not.”

And  she  said  unto  him  : “ Go,  open  the  bin  (thyself),  and
take  away  for  thee  what  thou  wiliest  ; make  me  not  to  leave
unfinished  the  dressing  of  my  hair.”

And  the  lad  went  into  his  stall  and  took  a great  vessel,  with
the  intent  to  take  away  much  seed.  And  he  loaded  himself
with  barley  and  wheat  and  went  out  with  it.  And  she  said
unto  him : “ How  much  is  it  that  thou  hast  upon  thy  shoulder  ? ”
And  he  said  unto  her  : “ Three  sacks  of  wheat  and  two  sacks
of  barley,  five  in  all,  have  I upon  my  shoulder.”  So  spake  he
unto  her.  And  she  . . . and  said  : “ Then  thou  hast  great
strength.  Yea,  I see  daily  how  strong  thou  art.”  And  her
desire  was  to  know  him  as  one  knoweth  a youth.

And  she  arose  and  took  hold  of  him  and  said  : “ Come,  we
will  take  our  pleasure  and  sleep.  It  will  also  be  for  thine
advantage,  for  I will  make  thee  goodly  garments.”

And  the  lad  became  enraged  like  a leopard  ...  at  this  wicked
thing  which  she  said  unto  him,  and  she  was  sore  afraid.  And
he  spake  unto  her,  saying  : “ Lo,  thou  art  unto  me  as  a mother,
and  thine  husband  is  unto  me  as  a father,  for  as  the  elder  hath
he  brought  me  up.  What  is  this  great  abomination  that  thou
hast  spoken  ? Say  it  not  again  unto  me.  But  I will  tell  it  to
no  man,  and  will  not  suffer  it  to  come  forth  from  my  mouth  to
any  man.”  And  he  took  up  his  burden  and  went  into  the  field.
And  he  came  to  his  elder  brother,  and  they  worked  at  their  work
with  a will.

Then  at  eventide  his  elder  brother  went  home  to  his  house,
but  his  younger  brother  tended  his  cattle,  and  loaded  himself
with  all  manner  of  things  of  the  field,  and  he  drave  his  cattle
before  him,  in  order  to  let  them  sleep  in  their  stall  in  the  village.

Now  the  wife  of  his  elder  brother  was  afraid  because  of  that
which  she  had  said.  So  she  took  fat  and  . . A and  made  as
though  she  had  been  cruelly  beaten,  desiring  to  say  to  her

1 Apparently  another  word  for  “ fat,”  but  how  the  woman  could  attain
her  end  by  that  means  is  not  clear.  Does  she  thus  cause  the  subsequently
mentioned  vomiting  ?


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


153


husband : “ It  was  thy  younger  brother  that  did  beat  me.”  And
her  husband  came  home  at  even,  as  was  his  daily  wont.  He  came
to  his  house  and  found  his  wife  lying  down  and  made  cruelly
sick.  She  poured  no  water  upon  his  hands  according  to  his
wont ; she  had  kindled  no  light  against  his  return,  and  his
house  was  in  darkness  ; and  there  she  lay  and  vomited.  And
her  husband  said  unto  her : “ Who  hath  spoken  with  thee  ? ”
And  she  said  unto  him  : “No  one  hath  spoken  with  me  save
thy  younger  brother.  When  he  came  to  fetch  the  seed  and
found  me  sitting  all  alone,  he  said  unto  me  : ‘ Come,  we  will
take  our  pleasure  and  sleep.  Put  on  thy  ringlets.’  1 So  spake
he  unto  me,  but  I heeded  him  not.  ‘ Lo,  am  I not  thy  mother,
and  thine  elder  brother  is  unto  thee  as  a father,’  so  spake  I unto
him.  Then  he  was  afraid,  and  he  beat  me  so  that  I might  not
report  it  unto  thee.  If,  therefore,  thou  sufferest  him  to  live,
I will  take  mine  own  life  ; for  behold,  when  he  cometh  home  at
even  and  I tell  this  evil  tale,  he  will  have  made  it  (look)  white.”

Then  his  elder  brother  became  (enraged)  as  a leopard,  and
made  his  lance  sharp  and  took  it  in  his  hand.

And  his  elder  brother  took  up  his  stand  behind  the  door  of
his  stall,  in  order  to  slay  his  younger  brother,  when  he  came
home  at  even  to  drive  his  cattle  into  the  stall.

And  when  the  sun  set,  he  loaded  himself  with  all  herbs  of
the  field,  according  to  his  daily  wont.  He  came,  and  the  first
cow  entered  the  stall.  And  she  said  unto  her  herdsman : “ Have
a care  ! Thine  elder  brother  standeth  before  thee  with  his  lance,
in  order  to  slay  thee.  Flee  from  before  him.”  And  he  under-
stood what  his  first  cowr  said.  The  next  entered,  and  she  said
likewise.  And  he  looked  under  the  door  of  his  stall  and  saw
the  feet  of  his  elder  brother,  as  he  stood  behind  the  door  with
his  lance  in  his  hand.  So  he  laid  his  load  down  on  the  ground
and  started  to  run  away  quickly,  and  his  elder  brother  pursued
after  him  with  his  lance.

And  his  younger  brother  called  to  Re-Harakhti,  saying  :
“ My  good  lord,  thou  art  he  that  judgest  between  the  wrong-
doer and  the  righteous  ! " And  Re  heard  all  his  petitions,  and
Re  caused  a great  stretch  of  water,  that  was  full  of  crocodiles,
to  spring  up  between  him  and  his  elder  brother,  and  one  of  them

1 Literally,  “ Clothe  thee  with  thy  ringlets,”  probably  meaning  that
she  is  to  put  on  the  great  wig  which  Egyptian  women  wore  over  their
own  hair  for  show.


154


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


came  to  be  upon  the  one  side  and  the  other  upon  the  other.
And  his  elder  brother  smote  twice  upon  his  hand,1  because  he
had  not  slain  him.

And  his  younger  brother  called  to  him  from  the  (other)  side,
saying  : “ Abide  here  until  day-break.  When  the  sun  ariseth,  I
will  be  judged  with  thee  in  his  presence,  and  he  will  give  the
wrong-doer  to  the  righteous.2  For  I will  never  more  be  with
thee,  nor  be  in  a place  where  thou  art.  I will  go  to  the  Valley
of  the  Cedar.”  3 Now,  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had
come,  Re-Harakhti  arose,  and  the  one  beheld  the  other.  And
the  lad  communed  with  his  elder  brother,  sating  : “ What
meaneth  thy  pursuing  after  me  in  order  to  slay  me  by  guile,
without  first  hearing  what  I had  to  say  ? For  I am  indeed  thy
younger  brother,  and  thou  art  unto  me  as  a father  and  thy  wife
is  unto  me  as  a mother.  Is  it  not  so  ? Now  when  I was  sent
to  fetch  us  seed,  thy  wife  said  unto  me  : ' Come,  let  us  take  our
pleasure  and  sleep.’  But  behold,  that  hath  been  perverted
for  thee  into  some  different  thing.”  And  he  acquainted  him
with  all  that  had  befallen  him  with  his  wife.

And  he  swore  by  Re-Harakhti,  saying  : “ Alas,  that  thou
desiredst  to  slay  me  by  guile,  and  didst  (take)  thy  lance  on  the
word  of  a dirty  (?)  strumpet  ! ” 4 And  he  took  a reed  knife  5 and
cut  off  his  privy  member  and  cast  it  unto  the  w'ater,  and  the  shad
swallowed  it.6  And  he  wras  faint  and  became  wretched.  And
his  elder  brother  was  exceeding  sorrowTul,  and  stood  and  wrept
loudly  (?)  over  him,  yet  could  he  not  cross  over  to  where  his
younger  brother  was  because  of  the  crocodiles.

Then  his  younger  brother  cried  unto  him,  saying  : “ If  thou
hast  thought  of  an  evil  thing,  wilt  thou  not  think  of  a good  thing,
or  of  something  that  I (also)  might  do  for  thee  ? 7 Go  now  to
thine  house,  and  (thyself)  tend  thy  cattle,  for  I will  no  more
abide  in  the  place  where  thou  art.  I shall  go  away  to  the

1 In  vexation.  3 Meaning  : let  the  righteous  triumph.

3 This  name  may  well  have  been  derived  from  accounts  of  the  Lebanon,

whence  the  Egyptians  from  early  times  obtained  their  timber.

1 The  expression  is  still  coarser.

5 Probably  not  a knife  for  cutting  reeds,  but  a sharp  reed-stalk  growing
by  the  water.

8 Why  he  mutilated  himself  is  obscure  ; the  swallowing  of  the  member
by  the  fish  is  an  incident  in  the  Osiris  legend.

; He  means  the  immediately  following  request — to  betake  himself  to
him  in  time  of  need.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


155


Valley  of  the  Cedar.  Now  as  for  what  thou  shalt  do  for  me,  it
is  that  thou  art  to  come  to  tend  me,  if  thou  leamest  that  ought
hath  befallen  me.  Now  it  will  come  to  pass  that  I shall  take
mine  heart  and  place  it  on  the  top  of  the  flower  of  the  cedar.1  If
the  cedar  be  hewn  down  and  fall  to  the  ground,  and  thou
comest  to  seek  it — if  thou  spendest  seven  years  seeking  for  it,
grow  not  weary  thereof.  And  when  thou  findest  it  and  placest
it  in  a pot  of  cold  water,  I shall  live  again  2 and  make  answer  to
the  trespass  committed  against  me.  Hereby  thou  wilt  learn
that  mischief  hath  befallen  me,  in  that  one  handeth  thee  a bowl
of  beer  and  it  fermenteth.  Then  tarry  not,  for  this  concerneth
thee  (?)."

And  he  went  away  to  the  Valley  of  the  Cedar,  and  his  elder
brother  went  unto  his  house,  his  hand  laid  on  his  head,3  and  he
was  smeared  with  mud.3  And  he  came  unto  his  house,  and  he
slew  his  wife,  cast  her  to  the  dogs,  and  sat  mourning  for  his
younger  brother.

And  many  days  after  this  his  younger  brother  was  in  the
Valley  of  the  Cedar,  and  there  was  none  with  him.  And  he
spent  the  day  hunting  the  game  of  the  desert,  and  at  even  he
came  to  sleep  under  the  cedar,  on  the  top  of  the  flower  whereof
lay  his  heart.

And  many  days  after  this  he  built  him  a castle  in  the  Valley
of  the  Cedar,  and  it  was  full  of  all  good  things,  because  he  wished
to  set  up  house  for  himself.

And  (one  day)  he  went  forth  from  his  castle,  and  he  met  the
Nine  Gods,  as  they  went  and  surveyed  their  W’hole  land.  And
the  Nine  Gods  spake  with  one  (mouth  ?)  and  said  unto  him  :
“ Ho,  Bata,  thou  bull  of  the  Nine  Gods  ! * Art  thou  here  alone,
and  hast  left  thy  city  before  the  wife  of  Anubis  thine  elder
brother  ? Behold,  his  wife  is  slain,  for  thou  hast  made  clear  to
him  all  the  trespass  committed  against  thee.”  And  they  had
great  compassion  on  him.  And  Re-Harakhti  said  unto  Khnum : 5

1 The  heart  is  thus  made  safe  against  enemies  and  thereby  secured  to
the  person  to  whom  it  belongs.  The  same  feature  also  appears  in  the
stories  of  other  peoples,  particularly  clearly  in  a Norwegian  tale  (see  Max
Burchardt,  Zeitschr.  lur  dgypt.  Sprache,  1.  p.  iS.)

2 In  a Hottentot  story  the  heart  of  a dead  girl  is  placed  in  milk  and
sucks  it  up,  and  the  girl  then  comes  to  life  again  (see  loc.  cit.).

3 Token  of  grief.

4 This  is  elsewhere  a designation  for  gods,  particularly  for  the  moon.

* Who  creates  men  severally  ; see  p.  44,  note  2.  ; p.  95,  note  x.


156


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


“ Do  thou  fashion  a wife  for  Bata,  that  he  may  not  dwell  alone.”
And  Khnum  made  him  a companion  that  had  fairer  limbs  than
any  woman  in  the  whole  land,  and  every  god  was  in  her.1

And  the  seven  Hathors  2 came  to  see  her  and  said  with  one
mouth  : “ She  will  die  a violent  death.”

And  he  was  greatlv  enamoured  of  her,  and  she  dwelt
in  his  house.  And  he  spent  the  day  hunting  the  game  of  the
desert,  and  brought  it  and  laid  it  before  her.  And  he  said  unto
her  : “ Go  not  out,  lest  the  sea  carry  thee  away ; for  I cannot
rescue  thee  from  it,  because  I am  a woman  even  as  thou.  Mine
heart  lieth  on  the  top  of  the  flower  of  the  cedar,  and  if  another
find  it,  I am  in  his  power  (?).”  And  he  opened  to  her  his  heart
in  its  fullness.

And  many  days  after  this  Bata  went  to  hunt,  according  to
his  daily  wont.  Then  went  the  maiden  forth  to  walk  about
under  the  cedar  which  was  beside  her  house.  And  the  sea  saw
her  and  swept  up  behind  her,  and  she  started  to  run  from  before
it,  and  went  into  the  house.  But  the  sea  called  to  the  cedar,
saying  : “ Catch  hold  of  her  for  me.”  And  the  cedar  took  away
a lock  of  her  hair  ; and  the  sea  brought  it  to  Egypt,  and  laid  it
in  the  place  in  which  were  the  fullers  of  Pharaoh.3

And  the  smell  of  the  lock  of  hair  got  into  the  garments  of
Pharaoh,  and  One 4 contended  with  the  fullers  of  Pharaoh,
saying  : “ The  smell  of  unguent  is  in  the  garments  of  Pharaoh.”  5
And  One  contended  with  them  daily,  and  they  wist  not  what
they  should  do.  And  the  chief  fuller  of  Pharaoh  went  to  the
river-bank  and  was  sore  vexed  because  of  these  daily  conten-
tions. And  he  stood  still  upon  the  sand,6  and  took  his  stand
over  against  the  lock  of  hair  that  was  in  the  water.  And  he
caused  some  one  to  go  down  (into  the  water),  and  it  was  brought

1 1 e.  something  of  the  divine  essence.

3  The  ancient  sky-goddess  Hathor,  who  at  an  early  date  had  become
the  goddess  of  women  and  love,  has  assumed  in  these  stories  the  role  of
fairies.  Similarly  in  the  following  tale.

3 Of  course  on  the  Mile  near  the  Residence  ; that  the  lock  has  floated
up  the  river  from  the  sea  is  no  matter  for  wonder  in  this  world  of  marvels  !

4 The  writing  shows  that  “ one,”  as  often,  denotes  the  king.

5 The  Egyptian  method  of  anointing  resulted  in  the  unguent  trickling
down  from  the  head  on  to  the  clothes.  It  was  therefore  a sign  of  bad
washing  if  the  clean  linen  still  smelt  of  unguent.

* Literally,  " the  desert  " ; what  is  meant  is  the  sand-bank  deposited
by  the  current  on  the  river’s  edge.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  157

unto  him  ; and  there  was  found  an  exceeding  sweet  smell.
And  he  took  it  to  Pharaoh.

Then  were  fetched  the  scribes  and  wise  men  of  Pharaoh,1
and  they  said  unto  Pharaoh  : “ This  lock  of  hair  belongeth  to
a daughter  of  Re-Harakhti,  and  the  essence  of  every  god  is  in
her.  Yea,  it  is  a present  for  thee  from  another  land.  Send
messengers  unto  every  land  to  seek  for  her.  But  as  for  the
messenger  that  is  bound  for  the  Valley  of  the  Cedar,  with  him
send  thou  many  men  in  order  to  fetch  her  hither.”  2 And  his
majesty  said  : “ What  ye  have  said  is  very  good.”  And  (the
men)  were  sent.

And  many  days  after  this,  the  men  that  had  gone  abroad
came  back  to  render  report  to  his  majesty,  albeit  they  that  had
gone  to  the  Valley  of  the  Cedar  came  not  back,  for  Bata  had
slain  them,  leaving  only  one  of  them  to  render  report  to  his
majesty.

And  his  majesty  sent  again  many  soldiers,  and  chariotry
likewise,  to  fetch  her  back,  and  with  them  was  a woman,  into
whose  hand  was  given  all  manner  of  goodly  adornment  for  a
woman.  And  the  woman  came  with  her  to  Egypt,  and  there
was  rejoicing  over  her  in  the  whole  land.

And  his  majesty  loved  her  exceedingly,  and  appointed  her
Great  Princess.3  And  One  held  converse  with  her,  that  she
might  tell  how  the  matter  stood  with  her  husband.  And  she
said  unto  his  majesty  : “ Have  the  cedar  cut  down  and  de-
stroyed.” So  soldiers  were  sent  with  their  weapons  to  cut
down  the  cedar  ; and  they  came  to  the  cedar  and  cut  off  the
flower  upon  which  was  the  heart  of  Bata,  and  on  the  instant
he  fell  down  dead.

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,  and  the
cedar  was  cut  down,  Anubis,  the  elder  brother  of  Bata,  went  into
his  house  and  sat  down  and  washed  his  hands.4  And  there  was
given  unto  him  a bowl  of  beer,  and  it  had  fermented,  and  there
was  given  him  another  of  wine,  and  it  had  gone  bad.

1 These  are  naturally  not  actual  official  terms,  but  popular  expressions
for  the  “ wise  men.”

2 That  she  should  be  sought  for  in  all  lands,  when  it  is  already  known
where  she  is  to  be  found,  is  altogether  too  naive  even  for  a fairy-tale.

3 Literally  : “ the  august,  the  great  lady  ” ; here  a rank  in  the  royal
harim.  Later  on  she  is  actually  spoken  of  as  the  consort  of  the  king.
“ One  " is  again  Pharaoh.

* Before  partaking  of  a meal.


158


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Then  took  he  his  staff  and  his  sandals,  his  garments  likewise
and  his  weapons,  and  he  started  off  to  go  unto  the  Valley  of
the  Cedar.  He  entered  the  castle  of  his  younger  brother,  and
he  found  his  younger  brother  lying  on  his  bed,  and  he  was  dead.
And  he  wept  when  he  beheld  his  younger  brother  lying  thus
dead,  and  he  went  to  seek  for  the  heart  of  his  younger  brother
under  the  cedar,  whereunder  his  younger  brother  was  wont  to
sleep  at  even.  He  spent  three  years  seeking  it,  and  found  it
not.  But  when  he  had  begun  the  fourth  year,  his  heart  longed
to  come  back  to  Egypt,  and  he  said  : “I  will  depart  on  the
morrow.”  So  said  he  in  his  heart.

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,  he  began
to  walk  under  the  cedar,  and  he  spent  the  whole  day  seeking
it.  And  he  ceased  at  even,  and  looked  once  more  (only)  to  seek
it,  and  he  found  a fruit.  And  he  went  home  with  it,  and  lo,
this  was  the  heart  of  his  younger  brother.  And  he  brought  a
cup  of  cold  water  and  dropped  it  into  it,  and  sat  down  as  was
his  daily  wont.

And  when  it  was  night  and  his  heart  had  sucked  up  the
water,  Bata  shuddered  in  all  his  limbs  and  began  to  look  at
his  elder  brother,  while  his  heart  was  still  in  the  cup.  Then
Anubis,  his  elder  brother,  took  the  cup  of  cold  water,  in  which
was  the  heart  of  his  younger  brother,  and  gave  it  him  to  drink.
And  when  his  heart  stood  in  its  place,  he  became  as  he  had  been.
And  they  embraced  one  another,  and  the  one  communed  with
the  other.

And  Bata  said  unto  his  elder  brother  : “ Behold,  I shall
become  a great  bull,  that  is  of  every  goodly  colour,1  whose
nature  none  knoweth,  and  thou  shalt  set  thee  on  my  back.
When  the  sun  ariseth  we  shall  be  in  the  place  where  my  wife  is,
that  I may  return  answer  to  her.  And  thou  shalt  take  me  to
where  the  king  is,  for  there  shalt  be  done  for  thee  all  manner
of  good  things.  Thou  shalt  be  rewarded  with  silver  and  gold
for  taking  me  to  Pharaoh,  because  I shall  become  a great  wonder,
and  men  will  rejoice  over  me  in  the  whole  land.  And  thou  shalt
then  depart  to  thine  own  village.”

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,  Bata
took  upon  him  the  form  whereof  he  had  spoken  to  his  elder
brother.  And  Anubis,  his  elder  brother,  sat  him  upon  his  back.

1 The  markings  are  meant,  by  which  sacred  oxen,  like  the  Apis,  were
recognized  ; this  win  be  one  of  a kind  unheard  of.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


159


At  dawn  he  came  to  where  the  king  was.  And  his  majesty  was
informed  about  him,  and  he  examined  him  himself,  and  rejoiced
over  him  exceedingly.  And  he  presented  unto  him  two  great
offerings,  saying  : “A  great  marvel  is  this  that  hath  come  to
pass.”  And  they  rejoiced  over  him  in  the  whole  land.

And  they  made  up  his  weight  in  silver  and  gold  for  his  elder
brother,  and  he  settled  down  in  his  village.  And  One  1 gave
him  much  people  and  much  gear,  and  Pharaoh  loved  him  exceed-
ingly, more  than  all  people  that  were  in  the  whole  land.

And  many  days  after  this,  he  2 entered  the  kitchen,3  and
stood  in  the  place  where  the  princess  was.  And  he  began  to
commune  with  her,  saying  : “ Behold,  I am  yet  alive.”  She
said  unto  him  : “ Who  art  thou,  pray  ? ” He  said  unto  her  :
“ I am  Bata.  (Surely)  thou  knowest  when  thou  didst  cause
Pharaoh  to  destroy  the  cedar  at  thy  (?)  bidding,  that  I might  no
longer  live  ? But  behold,  I am  now  alive  and  am  a bull.”
Then  was  the  princess  sore  afraid  because  of  the  tale  which  her
husband  had  told  her.

And  he  went  forth  from  the  kitchen.  And  his  majesty  sat
and  made  merry  with  her  ; and  she  poured  out  for  his  majesty,
and  One  4 was  very  gracious  towards  her.  Then  said  she  unto
his  majesty  : “ Swear  to  me  by  God,  saying  : ‘ Whatsoever
thou  shalt  say,  I will  hearken  unto  it  for  thee.’  ” And  he
hearkened  unto  all  that  she  said.  “ Let  me  eat  of  the  liver  of
this  bull,  for  he  will  not  do  anything,”  5 she  said  unto  him.
And  One  4 was  distressed  exceedingly,  because  of  what  she  had
said,  and  Pharaoh’s  heart  was  very  sore  for  him.

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,  a great
sacrificial  festival  was  proclaimed,  as  a sacrifice  of  the  bull.6
And  the  chief  butcher  of  his  majesty  was  sent  to  slaughter  the
bull.  And  thereafter  he  was  slaughtered.  And  when  he  now
lay  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  men,  he  shook  (?)  his  neck  and
caused  two  drops  of  blood  to  fall  beside  the  two  door-posts  (?)
of  his  majesty,  and  the  one  fell  upon  the  one  side  of  the  great
portal  of  Pharaoh,  and  the  other  upon  the  other.  And  they
grew  into  two  great  persea  trees,  each  of  which  was  excellent.
And  one  went  to  say  unto  his  majesty  : “ Two  great  persea

1 The  king.  * The  bull.

* A general  expression  for  the  domestic  offices.

* The  king.  6 He  is  good  for  nothing.

* The  sacred  animal  is  anyhow  to  meet  his  end  at  a festival.


160


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


trees  are  grown  up  as  a great  wonder  for  his  majesty  in  the  night,
beside  the  great  portal  of  his  majesty.”  And  they  rejoiced
over  them  in  the  whole  land,  and  One  1 made  offering  unto  them.

And  many  days  after  this  his  majesty  appeared  in  the
window  of  lapis  lazuli,2  and  he  had  a garland  of  all  manner  of
flow’ers  about  his  neck,  and  he  w'as  upon  a chariot  of  gold  and
drove  forth  from  the  palace  to  see  the  persea  trees.  And  the
princess  rode  forth  on  horseback  3 behind  Pharaoh.

And  his  majesty  sat  down  under  one  of  the  persea  trees.
Then  (Bata)  spake  with  his  wife  : “ Ah,  thou  false  one  ! I am
Bata.  I yet  live  in  spite  (?)  of  thee.  (Surely)  thou  knowest
how  thou  didst  cause  Pharaoh  to  cut  down  (the  cedar)  at  thy  (?)
bidding  ! And  I became  a bull,  and  thou  hadst  me  slaughtered.”

And  many  days  after  this  the  princess  arose  and  poured  out
for  his  majesty,  and  One  4 was  very  gracious  towards  her.  And
she  said  unto  his  majesty  : “ Swear  to  me  by  God,  saying  :

‘ Whatsoever  the  princess  saith  to  me,  I will  hearken  unto  it.'
Thus  shalt  thou  speak.”  And  he  hearkened  unto  all  that  she
said.  And  she  said  : “ Have  the  twro  persea  trees  cut  down,
and  make  them  into  goodly  furniture.”  And  One  hearkened
unto  all  that  she  said.

And  many  days  after  this  his  majesty  sent  cunning  crafts-
men, and  the  persea  trees  (of  Pharaoh)  were  cut  down.  And
Pharaoh  stood  to  behold  (together  with)  the  consort  of  the  king,
the  princess.  And  a splinter  flew"  off  and  entered  the  mouth
of  the  princess,  and  she  swallowed  it,  and  in  the  same  moment
she  conceived.  And  there  was  made  of  them  all  that  she
desired.®

And  many  days  after  this  she  bore  a son.  And  one  went
and  told  his  majesty  : “ A son  is  born  to  thee."  And  he  was
brought  in,  and  there  were  given  unto  him  a nurse  and  attend-
ants. And  there  w'as  rejoicing  in  the  whole  land,  and  One  sat
down  and  made  merry.  And  he  was  brought  up  (?),  and  straight-
way his  majesty  loved  him  exceedingly,  and  he  was  appointed
King’s  Son  of  Ethiopia.6

1 The  king.

•The  state  window  of  the  palace,  m which  the  king  showed  himself
on  ceremonial  occasions.  After  this  a sentence  is  probably  missing

1 This  probably  only  means  that  she  rode  in  a chariot.

4 The  king.

• Namely,  the  articles  of  furniture  from  the  trees.

• The  title  of  the  viceroy  of  Nubia  in  the  New  Kingdom


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


161


And  many  days  after  this  his  majesty  made  him  crown
prince  for  the  whole  land.

And  many  days  after  this,  when  he  had  passed  many  years
as  crown  prince  in  the  whole  land,  his  majesty  flew  into  heaven.1
And  One  2 said  : “ Let  my  great  royal  counsellors  be  brought
unto  me,  that  I may  acquaint  them  of  all  things  that  have  be-
fallen me.”  And  his  wife  was  brought  unto  him,  and  he  entered
into  judgment  with  her  before  them,  and  they  were  in  agree-
ment with  him  concerning  it.3  And  his  elder  brother  was
brought  unto  him,  and  he  appointed  him  crown  prince  in  his
whole  land.  And  he  was  thirty  years  king  of  Egypt ; and  he
departed  this  life,  and  his  elder  brother  stood  in  his  place  on  the
day  of  his  death.


2.  THE  ENCHANTED  PRINCE4

I have  not  changed  the  title  under  which  this  tale  was  first  intro-
duced into  Germany  by  Georg  Ebers.  It  is,  of  course,  quite  un-
suitable, for  mention  is  never  made  of  any  enchantment.  The
tale  would  more  rightly  be  entitled  The  Foredoomed  Prince,  as,
although  the  end  is  missing,  it  is  obvious  that,  in  spue  of  all
precautions,  the  prince  was  overtaken  by  his  fate.

The  story  has  something  of  what  might  be  called  a romantic
air  about  it,  and  if  the  crocodile  were  eliminated  and  the  names
changed,  it  might  quite  as  well  belong  to  our  world  of  fairy  tales  as
to  that  of  Ancient  Egypt.

There  was  once  a king  to  whom  no  son  was  born.  So  he
prayed  the  gods  whom  he  served  for  a son,  and  they  decreed
that  one  should  be  born  to  him.  That  night  he  slept  with
his  wife,  and  she  conceived.  And  when  she  had  fulfilled  the
months  of  childbirth,  a son  was  bom.

Then  the  Hathors  5 came  to  decree  him  his  destiny,  and  they

1 Died.  * The  new  king.

* The  sentence  and  punishment  are  not  recounted,  being  taken  for

granted  and  also  regarded  as  an  unpleasant  topic.

4 Pap.  Hams,  500,  verso,  4-8  (see  Budge,  Facsimiles  of  Egyptian
Hieratic  Papyri  m the  British  Museum,  second  series.  Pis.  xlviii.-lii.),
written  in  the  reign  of  Ramesses  II.  Brought  to  notice  bj^Goodwin  ; often
translated,  e.g.  by  Griffith  in  The  World’s  Best  Literature,  pp.  5250  ff.  ;
Maspero.  Contes  populaires,  pp.  196  ff.  ; Peet,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archer'
alogy,  xi.  pp.  227  ff.

5 See  above,  p.  156,  note  2.

II


162  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

said  : “He  shall  die  either  by  the  crocodile,  or  by  the  snake,
or  by  the  dog.”

The  people  who  were  about  the  child  heard  1 that,  and  re-
peated it  to  his  majesty.  And  his  majesty  became  very,  very
sad  of  heart.

And  his  majesty  had  built  for  him  an  house  of  stone  in  the
desert,  that  was  equipped  with  people  and  all  good  things  of  the
palace,  and  the  child  went  not  out  of  it.

Now  when  the  child  grew  up,  he  went  up  on  to  his  roof,  and
descried  a greyhound  that  was  following  a man  who  was  walking
upon  the  road.  And  he  said  unto  his  servant  that  was  beside
him  : “ What  is  this  that  goeth  behind  the  man  that  cometh
along  the  road  ? ” And  he  said  unto  him  : “ It  is  a grey-
hound.” And  the  lad  said  unto  him  : “ Let  one  like  it  be
brought  to  me  also.”  Then  went  the  servant  and  told  it
to  his  majesty.  And  his  majesty  said  : “ Let  a little  one  that
jumpeth  about 2 be  taken  to  him,  that  his  heart  be  not  grieved.”  3
So  the  greyhound  was  taken  to  him.

Now  when  the  days  had  gone  by  after  this,  the  child  was  full
grown  in  all  his  body.  And  he  sent  unto  his  father,  saying  :
“ To  what  purpose  is  it  that  I sit  here  ? Lo,  I am  doomed  to
the  three  destinies.  It  should  therefore  be  granted  me  to  do
according  to  my  desire  ; God  will  do  that  which  is  in  his  heart.”
Then  there  was  given  unto  him  a chariot  fully  equipped  with
all  manner  of  weapons,  and  (there  was  given  unto  him)  his
(servant)  as  henchman.  And  he  was  conveyed  over  to  the
eastern  side,  and  it  was  said  unto  him  : “ Go  as  thou  -wiliest,”
and  his  greyhound  was  with  him.

And  he  journeyed  northwards,  according  to  his  pleasure,
through  the  wilderness,  and  lived  on  the  choicest  of  all  the  wild
beasts  of  the  desert.  And  so  came  he  to  the  prince  of  Naharina.

Now  the  prince  of  Naharina  had  no  child  save  a daughter.
And  he  had  built  an  house  for  her,  the  window  whereof  was
seventy  cubits  distant  from  the  ground.  And  he  caused  all  the
children  of  all  the  princes  of  the  land  of  Kharu  4 to  be  brought,
and  he  said  unto  them  : “ Whosoever  shall  reach  the  window
of  my  daughter,  he  shall  have  her  to  wife.”

1 The  goddesses  were  thus  invisible.

s The  king  thinks  a “ little  ” dog  could  do  no  harm.

* Or  possibly,  “ for  his  heart  is  sore."

4 Palestine,  whereas  Naharina  lies  on  the  upper  Euphrates,


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


168


Now  when  many  days  had  gone  by  after  this,  and  they  were
occupied  as  they  were  daily  wont,  the  lad  passed  by  them.
Then  took  they  the  lad  to  their  house,  and  they  bathed  him,
gave  his  span  provender,  did  every  (good)  thing  for  the  lad,
anointed  him,  wrapped  up  his  feet,1  and  gave  bread  unto  his
henchman.  And  they  said  unto  him,  by  way  of  discourse  : 2
“ Whence  comest  thou,  fair  youth  ? ” He  said  unto  them  : “I
am  a son  of  an  officer  of  the  land  of  Egypt.3  My  mother  died,
and  my  father  took  to  him  another  wife,  a stepmother  (?).
She  began  to  hate  me,  and  so  I came  fleeing  from  before  her.”
And  they  embraced  him  and  kissed  him  very  many  times.4

Now  when  many  days  had  gone  by  after  this,  he  said  unto
the  youths  : “ What  is  it  (that  ye)  do  ? ” They  answered  him  :
“ Whosoever  shall  reach  the  window  of  the  daughter  of  the
prince  of  Naharina,  to  him  will  he  give  her  to  wife.”  And  he
said  unto  them  : “ Would  that  I could  also.  If  I might  enchant  (?)
my  feet,  I would  also  go  to  climb  up  with  you.”  So  they  went
to  climb,  as  was  their  daily  wont,  and  the  lad  stood  afar  off  and
watched,  and  the  glance  of  the  daughter  of  the  prince  of  Naharina
(lighted)  upon  him.

Now  when  (many  days)  had  gone  by  after  this,  the  lad  came
also  to  climb  with  the  lads  of  the  princes.  He  climbed,  and  he
reached  the  window  of  the  daughter  of  the  prince  of  Naharina.
And  she  kissed  him  and  embraced  him  very  many  times.

Then  went  they  to  rejoice  the  heart  of  her  father  with  these
tidings,  and  said  unto  him  : “A  man  hath  reached  the  window
of  thy  daughter.”  And  the  prince  asked  him,  saying  : “ Whose
son  among  the  princes  is  it  ? ” And  they  said  unto  him  : “ It
is  the  son  of  an  officer,  that  hath  come  fleeing  from  the  land  of
Egypt  from  before  his  stepmother  (?).”  Then  the  prince  of
Naharina  waxed  exceeding  wroth,  and  said  : “ Shall  I give  my
daughter  to  the  Egyptian  runaway  ? Let  him  take  himself
off  again.”

And  they  came  and  said  unto  him  : “ Get  thee  back  to  the
place  whence  thou  art  come.”  But  the  daughter  took  hold  of
him  and  swore  by  God  : “ By  Re-Harakhti ! If  he  is  taken

1 What  does  this  mean  ?

* The  chivalrous  children  of  the  princes  are  well  brought  up  and  do
not  pump  him  !

3 Why  he  makes  this  false  assertion  is  not  revealed  by  what  follows,

1 Literally : on  all  his  body.


164


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


from  me,  I will  not  eat,  I will  not  drink,  I will  die  straightway.”
And  the  messenger  went  and  related  to  her  father  all  that  she
had  said.

Then  the  prince  sent  men  to  slay  him  there  and  then.
And  the  daughter  said  unto  them  : “ By  Re  ! If  he  is  slain —
when  the  sun  sets,  I too  am  dead.  I live  not  an  hour  longer
than  he.”  So  they  went  and  told  it  to  her  father.

The  prince  had  the  lad  and  his  daughter  summoned .

He  embraced  him  and  kissed  him  very  many  times.  And  he  said
unto  him  : “ Tell  me  of  thy  condition,  for  behold,  thou  art  as
a son  unto  me.”  And  he  said  unto  him  : “I  am  the  son  of  an
officer  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  My  mother  died,  and  my  father
took  to  him  another  wife.  And  she  began  to  hate  me,  and  I
came  fleeing  from  before  her.”

Then  he  gave  him  his  daughter  to  wife,  and  he  gave  him
an  house  and  lands,  and  cattle  likewise,  and  every  good  thing.

And  when  (many  days)  had  gone  by  after  this,  the  youth
said  unto  his  wife  : "I  am  doomed  to  three  destinies — the
crocodile,  the  make,  and  the  dog.”  And  she  said  unto  him  :
“ Have  the  greyhound  that  followeth  thee  slain.”  He  said
unto  her  : “ (By  Re  !)  I will  not  have  my  greyhound  slain,  which
I brought  up  when  it  was  yet  little.”  So  she  began  to  guard
her  husband  carefully,  and  suffered  him  not  to  go  out  alone.

But  the  youth  . . . the  land  of  Egypt  to  wander  about.1

And  the  crocodile  of  the  lake it  came  against  him  in  the

town  in  which  the  youth  wras . Now  there  was  a

mighty  man  2 in  it,  and  the  mighty  man  suffered  not  the  croco-
dile to  come  forth . When  the  crocodile  slept  (?),  the

mighty  man  came  forth  to  stroll  about.  And  when  the  sun
arose,  they  stood  ....  the  tw'o  of  them,  every  day  for  the  space
of  two  months.

Now  when  (many)  days  had  gone  by  after  this,  the  youth
sat  him  down  and  made  merry  in  his  house.  And  when  the
night  came,  the  youth  slept  upon  his  bed,  and  sleep  prevailed
over  all  his  limbs.  Then  his  wife  filled  a bowl  (with)  . . . and
another  bowl  with  beer.  And  a (snake  came  out  of  its)  hole
to  bite  the  youth,  but  his  wife  sat  beside  him  and  slept  not.
The  maidservants  (.p)  gave  the  snake  the  beer,  and  it  drank  and

1 This  probably  implies  that  he  journeys  to  Egypt.

1 Or  rather  " water-spirit  ” ; see  Peet,  op.  cit.  p.  228,  note  2 [Trans-
lator],


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


165


became  drunken,  and  went  to  sleep  and  lay  on  its  back  (?).  And
his  wife  hewed  it  in  pieces  with  her  axe.  And  they  awoke  her

husband and  she  said  unto  him : “ Behold,  thy  god

hath  given  one  of  thy  destinies  into  thine  hand.  He  will  also
give  thee  the  others.”  Then  she  made  an  oblation  to  Re,  and
worshipped  him,  and  daily  extolled  his  power.

Now  when  (many  days  had  gone  by  after  this),  the  youth
went  forth  to  stroll  about  upon  the  ...  in  his  domain  (?)  ;

and  his  dog  followed  him.  Then  his  dog  seized  upon

ran  in  front  of  him.  And  he  came  to  the  lake  and

went  down after  his  dog.1  Then  the  crocodile  carried  (?

him  off  and  took  him  to  the  place  wherein  was  the  mighty  man

. And  the  crocodile  said  unto  the  youth  : “I  am  thy

destiny,  that  (?)  followeth  thee. But  behold,  I will  let

thee  go  . . .”  The  crocodile  then  speaks  of  the  slaying  of  the
mighty  man,  etc.,  and  finally  gives  him  a sign  : “ but  when  thou
seest  . . all  unfortunately  destroyed.

Now  when  it  was  dawn  and  another  day  had  come,  there
came — we  cannot  guess  who.  But  the  end  of  the  story  certainly  was
that  the  good  dog  unwittingly  brought  his  master's  life  to  an  end.

3.  KING  APOPHIS  AND  SEKENENRE  2

Sekenenre  was  a prince  of  Thebes  under  the  suzerainty  of  the
Hyksos,  whose  yoke  he  finally  succeeded  in  throwing  off.  The  tale
is  probably  a narrative  of  the  events  leading  up  to  this  struggle
with  his  overlord,  the  Hyksos  king  Apophis.  Unfortunately,  only
the  beginning  of  the  tale  is  preserved,  and  even  that  is  full  of  long
lacunas  ; it  has,  moreover,  been  sadly  corrupted  by  the  ignorant
schoolboy  who  had  to  copy  it  out.

The  papyrus  was  written  under  KmgMerneptah  ( circa  1230  b.c.),
and  the  composition  itself  is  not  necessarily  much  older.

Now  it  came  to  pass  that  the  land  of  Egypt  was  in
distress  (?),  and  there  was  no  sovereign  (as)  king .

And  King  Sekenenre,  he  was  (at  that  time  only)  ruler  of
the  Southern  City  3 Apophis  was  in  Avaris,4  and  the

1 The  dog  probably  seized  something  in  play,  the  youth  wanted  to
take  it  from  him  and  so  ca  me  to  the  lake.

2 Pap.  Saltier,  i.  1-3,  in  the  British  Museum.  Its  purport  recognized
by  de  Rouge  as  long  ago  as  1854,  and  since  then  frequently  dealt  with
See  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology , v.  pp.  36  ff.

3 Thebes.

‘The  capital  of  the  Hyksos,  on  the  north-east  frontier  of  Egypt.


166


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


whole  land  paid  him  tribute  with  its  dues.  (The  South  paid
tribute  to  him  ?),  and  likewise  the  North,  with  all  the  goodly
products  of  the  Delta.

And  King  Apophis  took  to  him  Sutekh 1 for  lord,  and  served
not  any  god  that  was  in  the  whole  land  save  only  Sutekh.  He
built  (him)  a temple  in  good  everlasting  work.  He  had  offerings
made  daily  to  Sutekh,  and  the  councillors  of  the  king  stood  there
with  flowers,  even  as  is  done  for  the  temple  of  Re-Harakhti.

From  all  that  follows  it  is  to  be  conjectured  that  King  Apophis
felt  himself  somehow  or  other  aggrieved  by  his  vassal,  and  sought
for  an  accusation  against  him.  He  called  the  scribes  and  wise
men,2  and  they  advised  him  to  complain  of  the  “ hippopotamus
canal”  which  robbed  him  of  sleep.  At  the  same  time  the  wise
men  remark  that  Sekenenre  undoubtedly  has  Amiin  with  him  as
protector,  he  relieth  not  on  any  god  that  is  in  the  whole  land,
save  Amunre,  king  of  gods.

Now  many  days  after  this  King  ApSphis  sent  unto  the
prince  of  the  Southern  City  concerning  the  . . . accusation
which  his  scribes  and  wise  men  had  said  unto  him.  And  the
messenger,  whom  King  Apophis  had  sent,  reached  the  prince
of  the  Southern  City ; and  he  was  taken  into  the  presence  of
the  prince  of  the  Southern  City.  And  One  3 said  to  the  mes-
senger of  King  Apophis  : “ Wherefore  art  thou  sent  to  the
Southern  City ; and  wherefore  didst  thou  venture  upon  the
joymey  ? " And  the  messenger  said  unto  him  : “ It  is  King
Apophis  that  sendeth  me  to  thee,  saying  : ' Cause  to  be  aband-
oned (?)  the  hippopotamus  canal,  that  lieth  in  the  Well-spring
of  the  City,4  for  it  suffereth  not  sleep  to  come  to  me  either  by
day  or  by  night ; its  noise  is  in  mine  (?)  ear.'  ” 5

And  the  prince  of  the  Southern  City  lamented  and  wept  a
long  time,  and  it  befell  him  that  he  could  not  answer  the  mes-
senger of  King  Apophis.  Finally  he  promised  : “ All  that  thou

1 This  is  not  a foreign  god,  but  a form  of  Seth  worshipped  in  the
Delta.

2 See  p.  157,  note  1.  3 The  king.

4 The  name  of  a district  ?

6 This  need  only  mean  that  Apophis  believes  he  has  a right  to  this
canal  : he  hears  how  the  canal  cries  out  for  its  rightful  owner.  On  the
other  hand,  this  statement  may  possibly  be  just  some  element  from  a
folk-tale,  and  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  hippopotami  in  the

canal  are  not  supposed  to  bellow  so  loudly  that  the  king  hears,  or  alleges
he  hears,  the  noise  in  far-off  Avaris.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


167


sayest  to  me  (?)  I will  do.”  Then  the  messenger  of  King  Apophis
betook  him  to  journey  to  the  place  where  his  lord  was.

And  the  prince  of  the  Southern  City  had  his  great  councillors
summoned,  and  likewise  the  officers  and  leaders  of  the  host
that  he  had,  and  repeated  to  them  every  accusation  concerning
which  King  ApSphis  had  sent  unto  him.  And  they  were  silent
with  one  accord  for  a long  time,  and  knew  not  what  to  answer
him,  whether  good  or  bad.

And  King  Apophis  sent  unto .


4.  THE  CAPTURE  OF  JOPPA  1

The  tale  is  concerned  with  an  otherwise  unknown  incident  in  the
wars  of  Thutmosis  III  (1478-1447  b.c.).  On  the  other  hand,  we  are
probably  acquainted  with  the  hero  of  the  tale,  General  Thutii.
Among  the  contemporaries  of  Thutmosis  III,  whose  tombs  are
preserved  to  us  at  Thebes,  there  is  also  a Thutt,  who  must  have  been
one  of  this  sovereign's  most  important  generals  and  diplomatists.
He  speaks  of  himself  as  “ Confidant  of  the  King  in  all  Foreign
Countries  and  in  the  Isles  in  the  midst  of  the  Sea  ” ; he  w'as
“Superintendent  of  the  Northern  Countries”;  he  was  also
“ General  ” and  “ accompanied  the  King  in  all  Foreign  Lands.”
His  dagger  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Museum  at  Darmstadt,  and  a
gold  dish,  which  the  king  presented  to  him,  is  in  the  Louvre.  He
was  apparently  a great  personality,  whose  name  was  familiar  even
to  subsequent  generations.

Joppa  is  the  well-known  port  in  southern  Palestine,  on  the
road  to  the  north.

Only  the  end  of  the  tale  is  preserved,  but  the  situation  is  quite
clear.  The  king  himself  is  still  in  Egypt,  the  general  is  besieging
Joppa,  and,  since  he  cannot  take  the  town  by  assault,  he  has  recourse
to  a stratagem.  He  entices  its  prince  out  of  the  city  to  a conference,
entertains  him,  and  tells  him  in  confidence  that  he  will  come  over  to
his  side  ; he  will  also  hand  over  to  him  his  wife  and  children.

the  troops  of  Pharaoh .

Now  after  an  hour,  when  they  were  drunken,  Thutii  said
unto  (the  prince  of  Joppa)  ; “ I will  come  to  thee  with  my  wife
and  child  (into)  thine  own  city.  Let  the  grooms  [?)  bring  hither
the  horses  and  give  them  provender.  Or  an  Aper  2 may  also

1 Pap.  Harris,  500,  verso,  1-3  (see  above,  p.  161,  note  4).  Brought
to  notice  by  Goodwin  in  1S74.  See  JIaspero,  Contes  populaires1,  pp.  iijff. ;
Peet,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archcsology,  xi.  pp.  226  i.

2 Aper  is  apparently  the  name  for  a body  of  foreign  troops  in  Egyptian
service.


168


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


.”  Then  they  laid  hold  on  the  horses  and  gave  them

provender.1

Then  the  prince  of  Joppa  desired  also  to  see  the  club  of  King
Thutmosis,2  and  one  came  and  told  it  to  Thutii.  And  the  prince
of  Joppa  came  and  said  to  Thutii  : “ My  desire  is  to  see  the
great  club  of  King  Thutmosis,  which  is  called  ‘ The  Beauteous
. . By  King  Thutmosis,  thou  hast  it  with  thee  to-day  ! Be
so  good  (P),  and  bring  it  me  1 ” And  he  did  so,  and  brought  the

club  of  King  ThutmSsis . And  he  stood  before  him

and  said  : “ Look  at  me,  O Prince  of  Joppa,  this  is  the  club  of
King  ThutmSsis,  the  fierce-eyed  lion,  the  son  of  Sekhmet.3
His  father  Amun  hath  given  him  his  strength  in  order  to  slay  the
enemy.”  And  he  smote  the  prince  of  Joppa  on  the  temple,
and  he  fell  down  senseless  before  him.  Then  he  bound  him  with
leather  thongs  (?)  and  put  copper  chains  with  four  rings  (?)  on  his
feet.

And  he  caused  to  be  brought  five  hundred  sacks  (?),  which
he  had  had  made,  and  caused  two  hundred  soldiers  4 to  enter
into  them,  and  their  arms  were  filled  with  fetters  and  hand-
cuffs ( ?),  and  they  were  sealed  up.  And  they  were  assigned
their  . . . and  their  carrying-poles  . . . And  brave  soldiers
all  were  made  to  carry  them— five  hundred  in  number — and
it  w'as  said  unto  them  : “ When  ye  be  come  into  the  city,  let
out  your  comrades,  and  lay  hold  on  all  the  people  that  are  in
the  city  and  put  the  fetters  on  them.”

And  one  wrent  out 5 and  said  unto  the  charioteer  of  the  prince
of  Joppa  : “ Thy  lord  bids  tell  thee  (?)  : Go  and  say  to  thy
mistress  : 6 Be  glad  of  heart,  for  that  Sutekh  hath  given  unto
us  Thutii  together  with  his  wife  and  children.  Lo,  here  is  their
tribute” — meaning  thereby  (?)  the  two  hundred  7 sacks  full  of
people  with  handcuffs  (?)  and  fetters.  And  he  went  in  front  of

1 Have  his  horses  no  fodder,  and  does  he  thus  allow  them  to  be  fed
by  the  enemy  ? Or  is  it  just  a stratagem  to  bring  his  people  in  this  wise
into  the  city  along  with  the  horses  ?

2 There  must  be  some  peculiarity  about  this  club.  Perhaps  it  is  the
distinguishing  mark  of  the  leader  of  the  army,  which  Thutii  may  carry
as  representative  of  the  king.

3 The  war-goddess.

4 Why  there  are  in  the  one  case  five  hundred  and  in  the  other  two
hundred  is  not  clear.

3 From  the  camp  of  the  Egyptians,  before  which  waited  the  chariot
of  the  prince.

3 The  wife  of  the  prince.


7 See  note  4 above.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


169


them  in  order  to  gladden  the  heart  of  his  mistress,  saying  :
“ We  have  Thutii  ” ; and  they  opened  the  closed  gates  of  the
city  before  the  soldiers.  So  they  entered  into  the  city,  and  they
let  out  their  comrades.

And  they  laid  hold  on  the  (people  of)  the  city,  both  small
and  great,  and  put  on  them  the  fetters  and  handcuffs  (?).  The
strong  arm  of  Pharaoh  captured  the  city.

And  in  the  night  Thutii  sent  to  Egypt  unto  King  Thutmosis
his  lord,  saying  : “Be  glad  ! Amun,  thy  good  father,  hath
given  unto  thee  the  prince  of  Joppa  and  all  his  people  and  his
city  likewise.  Now  send  men  to  take  them  away  as  captives,
that  thou  mayest  fill  the  house  of  thy  father  Amun,  king  of
gods,  with  male  and  female  slaves,  that  are  fallen  down  for
ever  and  ever  under  thy  feet.”

5.  CONCERNING  ASTARTE  1

The  Phoenician  goddess  Astarte  was  a familiar  figure  to  the
Egyptians  of  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty  ; under  Ramesses  II  she
possessed  a special  temple  in  his  residence,  and  such  will  have  been
the  case  in  other  cities  also.  This  intrusion  of  a foreign  goddess
may  have  given  rise  to  a tale,  of  which,  unhappily,  only  small
fragments  are  preserved.  It  seems  to  have  related  how  Astarte
was  brought  to  Egypt  from  abroad.2

From  the  first  fragment  it  is  seen  that  a god  claims  tribute  as
sovereign,  and  there  appear  to  have  been  proceedings  with  respect
to  this  in  a court  of  law.  Renenutet  3 addresses  Astarte  (?)  :
“ Behold,  if  thou  bringest  him  tribute,  he  will  be  gracious  unto
thee  (?),  but  if  thou  doest  it  not,  he  will  carry  us  away  captive.
Therefore  give  him  (?)  his  tribute  in  silver,  gold,  lapis  lazuli,  and
. . . wood.”  And  she  said  unto  the  Ennead  of  gods  : “ . . .
the  tribute  of  the  sea  ; may  he  hearken  unto  us

In  another  fragment,  where  the  subject  is  still  the  tribute  of  the

sea,  one  can  make  out : Then  Renenutet  took  a and

said  : * “ Hear  what  I say.  Go  not  forth  to  another.  Up,  go  to

1 First  remarked  upon  by  Birch,  Zeitschr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  1871,
p.  119.  Published  by  Newberry,  The  Amherst  Papyri,  Pis.  xix.-xxi.

2 If  this  explanation  is  correct,  the  story  will  have  been  modelled  upon
the  legend  of  the  lion-goddess  who  fled  to  Nubia  and  was  brought  back
by  Thoth.

* The  haxvest-goddess.  4 Perhaps  to  a bird.


170


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Astarte  in  her  house,  and  thou  shalt  speak  under  (her  ?)  bed
(-chamber  ?),  and  thou  shalt  say  unto  her  : ‘ If  thou  awakest  (?)

; but  if  thou  slumberest,  I will  make . Mayest

thou  come  to  them ”

Behold,  Astarte  dwelleth  in  a region  of  the  sea

the  daughter  of  Ptah,  the  raging,  terrible  goddess.

Are  the  sandals,  which  thou  hast  on  thy  feet,  . . . ? Are  thy  (?)
clothes,  which  thou  w'earest,  torn  with  the  going  and  coming
which  (thou)  hast  made  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ? He  said .

What  shall  I do  against  them  ? Astarte  heard

the  ...  of  the  sea,  she  set  out  and  entered  into  the  presence
of  the  Ennead  of  gods,  where  they  were.  . . . The  great  ones
beheld  her,  and  they  stood  up  before  her.  The  lesser  ones  saw
her,  and  they  laid  them  on  their  bellies.  And  there  was  given
unto  her  her  throne,  and  she  sat  her  down.  And  there  was
brought  unto  her .

the  messenger  of  Ptah  went,  saying  : “ Pay  homage

to  Ptah  and  to  Nut.”  And  Nut  ...  the  ..  . which  was
about  her  neck,  and  placed  (it)  on  the  balance .

We  must  all  agree  with  the  discoverer  of  these  fragments  in
saying  that  only  enough  is  preserved  to  make  us  deplore  the  loss  of
the  whole.


6.  A GHOST  STORY

Three  fragments  of  a story  are  preserved  to  us  in  very  faulty
copies  on  four  ostraca 1 — not  enough  for  us  to  be  quite  certain  that
we  fully  understand  the  purport  of  it.

The  matter  treated  of  is  the  appearance  of  a person,  who  had
died  long  since,  to  a high  priest  of  Amun,  and  his  commanding
him  with  threats  to  restore  his  ruined  and  forgotten  tomb.  After
persistent  search,  the  tomb  is  found.

King  Rehotep,  under  whom  the  dead  man  lived,  belongs  to
the  obscure  period  at  the  end  of  the  Aliddle  Kingdom  ; we  must
place  the  high  priest,  however,  in  view  of  his  name,  in  the  Nine-
teenth or  Twentieth  Dynasty.

The  high  priest,  who  certainly  seems  to  be  spoken  of  as  a youth,
probably  speaks  first,  and  complains  as  follows  : I see  not  the

1 Rec.  de  Trav.,  iii  p.  3;  ibid.  xvi.  p.  31  ; Bergmavn,  Hierat.  dem
Texte,  \ienna,  1886,  PL  iv.  A translation  with  arbitrary  restorations  in
Maspero,  Contes  populaires1,  iv.  p.  293.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  171

light  of  the  sun,  and  breathe  not  the  ...  of  the  air  ; darkness
is  upon  me  daily  and  they  come  not d

The  ghost  said  unto  him  : “ When  I lived  on  earth,  I was
Chief  Treasurer  of  King  Rehotep,  and  I was  Representative  of
the  Army,2  I was  at  the  head  of  men  and  nigh  unto  (?)  the
gods.3

" In  the  year  14,  in  the  second  (?)  month  of  Summer,  I went
to  my  rest  under  King  Mentuhotep  (?).  He  presented  unto  me
four  funerary  vases  4 and  my  sarcophagus  of  alabaster,  and  had
a pyramid  built  for  me,  as  appertaineth  to  a man  of  my  station.

He  caused  me  to  go  to  my  rest . Behold,  the  ground

below  (?)  hath  become  old  (?)  and  falleth  out  (?)  3 .

“ But  as  for  what  thou  hast  said  (?)  unto  me  : ' I will  have
the  burial  place  made  anew,’  I have  already  heard  (?)  that  four

times,  but  what  are  they  doing  to  it  (?) This  is  not

achieved  with  all  the  words .”  6

The  high  priest  of  Amunre,  king  of  gods,  Khonsemheb,  said
unto  him  : “ Mayest  thou  pronounce  to  me  a good  command,
that  appointeth  : ‘ He  is  to  make  (this)  for  me  or  is  to  have  it
made  for  me  (?).  Five  male  and  five  female  slaves,  in  all  ten
are  to  be  given  me,  in  order  to  pour  out  water  for  me,  and  a
sack  of  wheat  is  to  be  assigned  me  daily  in  order  to  offer  it  unto
me,  and  the  overseer  of  ...  is  to  pour  out  water  for  me.’  ” 7

The  ghost  was  wroth  (?)  and  said  unto  him:  “To  what
purpose  is  that  which  thou  doest  ? 8 Is  not  the  wood  ex-
posed (?)  to  the  sun the  stone  that  hath  become  old

holdeth  no  longer  (?)  ; it  tumble th

After  mention  of  the  sending  of  people  to  the  tomb,  we  read  :
Then  said  the  ghost  to  him  : “ He  is  also  to  perpetuate  the  name
of  the  father  of  my  father,  and  the  name  of  my  mother."  And
the  high  priest  said  : “ I will  have  him  do  (it)  for  thee.  I will

1 This  is  probably  the  disease  which  the  ghost  has  sent  him.

2 A well-known  title  for  one  of  the  highest  officers.

* So  distinguished  ?

4 The  so-called  canopic  jars,  in  which  the  intestines  were  placed.

5 The  tomb  is  sinking  ?

* If  the  passage  is  so  to  be  understood,  the  ghost  will  have  already
appeared  three  times  to  the  high  priest  and  been  put  off  with  fair  promises.

7 He  must  have  a perfectly  plain  contract  with  which  he  can  easily
comply.

3 The  ghost  insists  upon  the  restoration  of  his  ruined  tomb.


172


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


have  him  make  a burying  for  thee and  I will  have

him  do  it  for  thee  as  is  done  for  a man  of  thy  station.”

He  probably  further  promises  him  that  he  shall  not  freeze  in
•winter,  and  then  after  an  unintelligible  passage  : The  (high

priest)  Khonsemheb  sat  him  down  and  wept and  ate

not  and  drank  not perhaps,  because  he  did  not  know

where  to  find  the  tomb  he  had  to  restore.

Since  the  deceased  would  have  been  an  official  of  Rehotcp,  it  is
assumed  that  he  would  have  been  buried  near  him.

And  there  were  despatched  the  . . . of  Amunre,  king  of  gods,

three  men . He  crossed  over  (the  Nile),  and  he  climbed

up  to  a tomb  beside  the  noble  house  of  King  Rehotep .

This  was  the  grave  that  was  being  looked  for.  They  went
down  to  the  river-bank  and  crossed  over  to  the  high  priest  of
Amunre,  king  of  gods,  Khonsemheb,  and  they  found  him  as  he
was  officiating  in  the  temple.

He  receives  them  with  a speech  that  perhaps  expresses  some
doubt  as  to  whether  the  good  place  has  already  been  found.

Then  said  the  three  men  with  one  mouth  : ' ‘ \Ve  have  found
the  good  place.”  And  they  sat  down  before  him  and  made
merry,  and  his  heart  also  rejoiced  when  they  said  unto  him  :
“ the  sun  hath  risen  out  of  the  horizon.”

And  he  called  the  Representative  of  the  House  of  Amun,
Mentuka,  (and  entrusted  him)  with  his  work.

In  the  evening  he  came  back  to  sleep  in  the  city,  and
he .


7.  CONCERNING  A KING  AND  A GODDESS

Miserable  fragments  of  a papyrus  in  Berlin  and  in  Vienna  tell
of  a king,  a goddess,  and  an  official  named  Harmin.  I give  here,
as  a mere  curiosity,  the  bits  that  permit  of  translation ; the  imagina-
tion of  the  reader  must  fill  in  the  rest.1

I might  add  that  the  official  in  Memphis,  bearing  the  rare  name
of  Harmin,  with  whom  the  king  spends  ten  days,  and  in  whose  house
the  beautiful  girl  appears,  involuntarily  recalls  an  actual  person,
the  eminent  “ Superintendent  of  the  Royal  Women’s  Apartment
of  the  Hanm  of  Memphis,  Harmin.  This  personage  was  rewarded
with  the  gold  by  his  king,  Sethos  I,  when  he  had  attained  ‘‘a  long
life  and  a goodly  old  age,  without  becoming  childish  and  without
1 The  sequence  of  the  fragments  is  not  certain.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  173

having  committed  a fault  in  the  royal  house.”  1 All  museums
have  been  enriched  from  his  tomb  at  Sakkarah.2  A folk-tale  may
have  attached  itself  to  this  man  no  less  than  to  the  officer  Thutii
(see  p.  167).

All  kinds  of  shifts  were  brought  to  the  king.  And  at  eventide
she  came  (?)  at  the  head  of  the  people,  who  were  laden  with  the
gifts. her  house,  and  she  said  unto  his  majesty .

brought  him  the  cup.  He on  the  roof,  he

called captain  of  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  army.

with  an  officer  that  had  been  beaten

bringeth  me  baskets  with  silver  and  gold.  He  did .

Now  many  days  after  this, . She  (?)  saw  it.  And

she  took  to  him these  three  years  in  it ; they  lie  before

(the  king  ?) .

(I  will  do  what  ?)  mine  heart  saith fifty

jars  of  honey, wheat . And  his  majesty

caused (he  caused)  the  load  to  be  brought  before  him

come  (?)  to  Memphis,  then  there  shall  be  (?)  made  for

thee . And  many  days  after  this,  his  majesty  (came)

to  Memphis  unto  the  Superintendent  of  the  (Women's  ?)

Apartment,  Harmin.  And  they  spent  ten  days  and .

And  many  days  after  this, and  she  changed  herself

into  a fair  damsel .

And  many  days  after  this, be  not  afraid ! Come  up,

thou . And  many  days  after  this,  his  majesty  mounted

(his  chariot  ?)  and  they  came  to  the  North  country

the  people  said  to  the  Pharaoh  : “ What  (wouldst  thou  ?)  do  ? ”

(none  returneth  ?)  again,  the  goddess  (slayeth  ?)  the

people . And  many  days  after  this .

8.  THE  QUARREL  OF  THE  BODY  AND  THE  HEAD  3

On  a writing-board,  which  may  date  from  the  Twenty-Second
Dynastv,  a schoolbov  has  written,  with  many  mistakes,  the  begin-
ning of  a tale,  in  which  the  parts  of  the  body  squabble  about  their

1 Louvre,  C 213.

2 His  tombstones  are  in  Berlin.

3 Brought  to  notice  by  Maspero ; see  his  Etudes  egyptiennes,  i.  pp.  260  fi.
A satisfactory  publication  is  wanting,  and  the  translation  is  on  that
account  very  difficult.


174


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


precedence.  That  this  poem  recalls  the  fable  of  the  quarrel  of  the
belly  and  the  limbs,  has  been  observed  by  its  first  editor,  though  it
is  impossible  to  ascertain  how  far  this  similarity  went.

The  belly  disputed  with  the  head,  in  order  to  solve  . . .
(with  ?)  loud  talking  (?)  before  the  Thirty.  These  were  to  bring
to  light  the  outrage,  over  which  the  eye  of  the  head  wept,  and  the
truth  was  to  be  established  before  (?)  the  god,  who  abhorreth
iniquity.

When  the  belly  had  uttered  his  accusation,  the  head  cried
out  exceedingly  with  his  mouth  : “I,  I am  this  beam  (?)  of  the
whole  house,  that  supporteth  (?)  the  beams  (?),  and  yoketh
the  beams  (?)  together,  and  every  member  that  (is  supported  ?)
on  me  is  happy.  My  heart  is  happy,  my  limbs  flourish  (?),  my
neck  sitteth  firm  under  the  head,  mine  eyes  look  into  the  dis-
tance, my  nose  breatheth  and  draweth  in  air,  mine  ear  standeth
open  and  heareth,  my  mouth  is  opened  and  knoweth  how  to
make  answer,  his  arms1  flourish  (?)  and  work.

The  topic  then  seems  to  be  a man  who  is  proud  and  regardeth
notables  as  being  of  low  estate ; who  is  meant  by  this  is  un-
certain. Then  it  proceeds  : “I  am  your  mistress,  I am  the  head,
whom  her  brethren  would  accuse  (?).”

This  is  what  the  mouth  said  unto  him  : “Is  not  this  wrong  ?
Let  the  head  speak  unto  me.  I am  he  that  keepeth  alive


9.  THE  VOYAGE  OF  UNAMUN  2

The  directness  of  this  narrative  testifies  to  its  being  the  account
of  a traveller’s  actual  experiences,  although  he  will  certainly  have
devoted  more  space  to  them  here,  and  given  them  a more  telling
form,  than  in  the  original  report,  in  which  he  must  have  offered
excuses  for  his  misadventures  to  those  who  had  sent  him  on  this
errand.

The  famous  old  state-barge  Userhet,  which  Amun  of  Thebes
made  use  of  at  his  festivals,  had  in  course  of  time  constantly  to  be
restored,  or  else  replaced  by  an  entirely  new  construction.  For
such  a purpose,  cedar-wood,  which  had  to  be  obtained  from  Lebanon,
was  required.  This  presented  no  difficulty  so  long  as  Egypt  was  a
great  power,  for  the  prince  of  Byblos  was  only  too  ready  to  render

1 Which  are  subject  to  the  mouth  ?

2 A papyrus  in  Moscow.  Discovered  by  Golenischefi  and  published
and  translated  by  him  in  1899.  See  also  my  revised  translation  ip
Zeitschr.  fur  dgypt.  Sprache,  xxxviii.  pp.  1 g.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  175

such  service  to  the  god,  though,  of  course,  for  payment.  But  about
iioo  b.c.  the  days  of  Egypt’s  greatness  were  over.  At  Thebes  the
last  of  the  many  Ramessids  still  nominally  reigned,  though  actually
Egypt  was  subject  to  various  petty  rulers.

At  Thebes,  Hrihor,  the  high  priest  of  Amun,  held  sway,  and
Tanis,  the  important  city  of  the  north-eastern  Delta,  belonged  to  a
certain  Smendes  and  a woman  Tentamun.1  When  the  sacred  barge
of  Amun  once  more  needed  completely  renovating,  Thebes  was  in
dire  straits.  There  was  insufficient  money  and  insufficient  in-
fluence to  procure  the  wood  needed  for  the  rebuilding.  However,
the  money  was  raised  by  subscriptions  from  the  different  rulers  of
Egypt,  though  a state  embassy  was  not  feasible  as  in  better  days.

In  this  necessity  the  idea  was  adopted  of  sending  Amun  him-
self to  Byblos,  and  there  was  chosen  for  that  purpose  an  image  of
the  god,  which,  as  it  was  called  “ Amun  of  the  Road,”  had  probably
been  sent  away  from  Thebes  on  other  occasions  also.  With  this
image  was  dispatched  a temple  official,  “ the  Eldest  of  the  Hall,
Unamun,”  but  even  he  was  left  to  depend  upon  charity  for  his
journey.  He  was  sent  with  letters  of  introduction  to  Smendes  and
Tentamun,  who  were  then  to  further  him  on  his  way  to  Byblos.

This  document  presents  us  with  a vivid  picture  of  the  voyage,
and  of  trading  operations  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  ; it  enables
us  to  see,  as  it  actually  was,  that  world,  the  reflection  of  which  still
delights  us  in  the  Odyssey.  Its  author  writes  the  simplest  prose,
without  any  learned  and  archaistic  embellishments  ; but  so  much
the  more  does  he  appeal  to  us,  and  not  least  by  his  delicate  humour,
which  often  unaffectedly  breaks  out  in  the  course  of  the  narrative.

Year  5,  day  16  of  the  third  month  of  Summer.  On  this  day
Unamun,  Eldest  of  the  Hall  of  the  Administration  of  Amun
of  Kamak,  departed  in  order  to  fetch  the  timber  for  the  great
august  ship  of  Amunre,  king  of  gods,  which  is  on  (the  river)  and
is  called  Userhet-Amun.

On  the  day  whereon  I came  to  Tanis,  the  abode  of  Smendes
and  Tentamun,  I gave  unto  them  the  writings  of  Amunre,  king
of  gods.  They  had  them  read  in  their  presence  and  said  : “ Yea,

I will  do  even  as  Amunre,  king  of  gods,  our  lord,  saith.”

I remained  until  the  fourth  month  of  Summer  in  Tanis.
Smendes  and  Tentamun  then  sent  me  with  the  ship-captain,
Mengebet,2  and  on  the  first  day  of  the  fourth  month  of  Summer
I went  down  to  the  great  Syrian  sea.

1 Both  Hrihor  and  Smendes  proclaimed  themselves  kings  later,  but
neither  yet  held  that  position  at  the  time  this  document  was  composed.

2 As  is  shown  later  on,  this  is  a Syrian,  i.e,  Phoenician,  captain.


176  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

And  I came  to  Dor,  a city  of  the  Zakar,1  and  its  prince  Beder
caused  to  brought  to  me  fifty  (?)  loaves,  one  measure  of  wane,  and
a leg  of  beef.2

A man  of  my  ship  ran  away  and  stole  in

Gold  : . . . (vessels),  . amounting  to  5 deben.

Silver  : 4 vessels,  . amounting  to  20  deben.

Silver  : in  a bag,  . amounting  to  11  deben.

(Total  of  what  he  stole  :)  Gold,  5 deben  ; silver,  31  deben.3

On  the  same  (?)  morning  I arose  and  went  to  where  the
prince  was,  and  said  unto  him  : “I  have  been  robbed  in  thine
harbour.  Now  thou  art  the  prince  of  this  land,  and  thou  art
its  judge,4  so  look  for  my  money.  Of  a truth  the  money  be-
longeth  to  Amunre,  king  of  gods,  the  lord  of  the  countries  ; it
belongeth  to  Smendes  ; it  belongeth  to  Hrihor,  my  lord,  and  the
other  great  men  of  Egypt.5  To  thee  it  belongeth,  and  it  be-
longeth to  Weret,  and  belongeth  to  Mekemer,  and  belongeth  to
Zakarbaal,  the  prince  of  By  bios.”  6

And  he  said  unto  me  : “ Art  thou  aggrieved  (?),  or  art  thou
friendly  ? ” 7 For  behold,  I understand  nought  of  this  matter
that  thou  hast  told  me.  Had  it  been  a thief  belonging  to  mine
own  country  that  went  aboard  thy  ship  and  stole  thy  money,
then  would  I have  repaid  it  thee  out  of  my  treasury,  until  thy
thief  aforesaid  had  been  apprehended.  But  the  thief  that  hath
robbed  thee,  he  is  thine,  he  belongeth  to  thy  ship.  So  tarry
a few  days  here  with  me,  that  I may  seek  for  him.”

So  I spent  nine  days  moored  in  his  harbour.  Then  I went
unto  him  and  said  : “ Behold,  thou  hast  not  found  my  money,
(so  I will  now  depart)  with  the  captain  and  with  them  that  go
away  . . .”

1 The  Zakar  are  a people  that  eight  years  earlier  had,  together  with
the  Philistines,  conquered  the  coast  of  Palestine.

2 As  a present  for  a guest.

3 A deben  = 9i  grammes;  we  are  thus  concerned  with  about  455
grammes  of  gold  and  almost  3 kilograms  of  silver — a considerable  sum,
which  was  mainly  to  serve  to  pay  for  the  timber.  In  the  bag  were  pieces
of  silver,  which  were  used  as  money,  in  addition  to  the  vessels.

4 Literally  : its  “ inquisitor,"  i.e.  its  police.

5 Who  have  collected  it.

• These  are  the  Phoenician  princes,  whose  harbours  he  has  to  visit,
and  who  would  also  come  in  for  some  of  the  money  when  he  recovered  it.

7 Meaning  probably  : you  may  take  offence  at  my  answer,  but  this
affair  is  no  concern  of  mine  at  all,  for  the  thief  is  not  my  subject.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


177


In  the  long  lacuna,  which  the  papyrus  here  shows,  something
like  the  following  must  have  been  narrated.  Unamun  had  a
heated  argument  with  the  prince  of  Dor  : He  said  unto  me  : “ Be
silent  ! ” and  some  one  gives  him  bad  advice,  namely,  to  do  as
others  would  do,  and  get  back  his  money  again  himself : they  go  to
look  for  their  thief. — Thence  he  conies  to  Tyre:  I came  at  dawn
of  day  from  Tyre,  and  proceeded  further  on  his  voyage  to  Zakar-
baal,  the  prince  of  Byblos.  -4s  ill  luck  would  have  it,  somewhere
on  this  journey  he  encountered  certain  Zakar-people,  and  thought
himself  justified  in  compensating  himself  out  of  their  property
for  the  theft  of  which  he  had  been  the  victim  in  their  city.  He  took
from  them  a bag  (?)  ; I found  thirty  deben  of  silver  therein  and
took  it.  They  complain,  but  he  replies  : “ ( Certainly  it  is)  your
money,  but  it  remaineth  with  me,  until  my  money  shall  have
been  found.  He  had  thus  made  enemies  of  the  Zakar-people.
They  departed  and  he  came  to  the  harbour  of  Byblos.  There
he  sought  for  himself  some  place  of  safety  : (I  hid  therein)  Amun
of  the  Road  and  placed  his  possessions  in  it.1  But  the  prince
of  Byblos  was  apparently  not  pleased  at  this  visit  of  a man  who
was  on  bad  terms  with  the  Zakar  : The  prince  of  Byblos  sent
unto  me  and  said  : “ Get  thee  out  of  my  harbour.”

Of  Unamun’ s answer  to  this  demand  only  the  last  words  are
preserved  : “If  men  sail,  let  them  take  me  away  to  Egypt.”
Apparently  Unamun  was  himself  ready  enough  to  give  up  the
unsuccessful  journey,  but  had  no  chance  of  a safe  voyage  home,
if  the  prince  of  Byblos  would  not  secure  him  a passage  on  a ship
sailing  to  Egypt.  The  texi  continues : I passed  nineteen  days
in  his  harbour,  and  every  day  he  continued  sending  to  me,
saying  : “ Get  thee  out  of  my  harbour.”

Now  when  he  was  making  offering  to  his  gods,  the  god  seized
one  of  his  noble  youths  2 and  made  him  frenzied,  and  he  said  :
“ Bring  the  god  hither ! Bring  the  messenger,  that  hath  him.
It  is  Amun  that  sent  him,  it  is  he  that  caused  him  to  come.”  3
Thus  the  frenzied  one  continued  in  frenz}7  throughout  this
night,  when  I had  just  found  a ship  bound  for  Egypt,  and  I
1 That  will  be  the  money  of  the  Zakar  and  Unamuu’s  own  baggage.

1 T.e.  a page  or  the  like.

3 The  news  that  a god’s  image  had  arrived  was  thus  talked  about  in
the  king's  entourage,  and  works  upon  the  boy,  already  excited  by  the
sacrificial  festivities.  His  ecstatic  ejaculations  might  be  divine  mani-
festations, and  so  the  prince  does  not  in  any  case  wish  to  expel  Unamun,
without  having  spoken  to  him.

12


178  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

was  stowing  all  that  I had  aboard  her,  and  was  watching  for
the  darkness,  thinking  that  when  it  descends  I will  also  embark
the  god,  so  that  no  other  eye  may  see  him.1

And  the  harbour-master  came  to  me,  saying  : “ Remain

until  morning  at  the  disposition  of  the  prince.”  I said  unto
him  : “ Art  thou  not  he  that  continued  coming  to  me  every
day,  saying  : ‘ Get  thee  out  of  my  harbour,’  and  never  didst
thou  say  : ‘ Remain  ’ ? And  now  the  prince  will  let  the  ship,
which  I have  found,  depart,  and  thou  wilt  come  again  saying  :

' Get  thee  gone  ! ’ ”

So  he  went  and  told  it  to  the  prince,  and  the  prince  sent
unto  the  ship’s  captain,  saying  : “ Remain  until  morning  at  the
disposition  of  the  prince.”

And  when  the  morning  was  come  he  sent  and  had  me  brought
up,  while  the  god  rested  in  the  ...  in  which  he  was,2  on  the
shore  of  the  sea.  I found  him  sitting  in  his  upper  chamber,
with  his  back  leaning  against  a window,  while  the  waves  of
the  great  Syrian  sea  beat  upon  his  neck.3

I said  unto  him  : “ The  kindness  (?)  of  Amun  ! ” He  said
unto  me  : “ How  long  is  it  until  to-day  since  thou  earnest  from
the  abode  of  Amun  ? ” 4 I said  unto  him  : “Five  full  months
until  now."  He  said  unto  me  : “ Dost  thou  indeed  speak  the
truth  ? Where  then  is  the  writing  of  Amun,  which  thou
(shouldest)  have  ? Where  is  the  letter  of  the  High  Priest  of
Amun,  which  thou  (shouldest)  have  ? ” And  I said  unto  him  :
“ I gave  them  to  Smendes  and  Tentamun.”  And  he  was  very
wroth,  and  said  unto  me  : “ Behold,  writing  and  letter  hast
thou  none.  Where  is  then  (at  least)  the  ship  of  cedar-wood
that  Smendes  hath  given  thee  ? And  where  is  her  Syrian
crew  ? He  surely  did  not  hand  thee  over  to  this  ship’s  captain,
to  be  slain  and  to  be  cast  into  the  sea  ! 5 From  whom  had

1 The  god’s  image  is  something  that  profane  eyes  might  not  ordinarily
look  upon.

2 He  again  emphasizes  the  fact  that,  according  to  custom,  he  has  made
the  god  secure.

* This  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  taken  literally.  He  means  that  through
the  window  he  saw  the  surf  fly  in  spray  behind  the  king

1 All  the  following  questions  clearly  show  that  the  prince  is  inclined  to
regard  Unamun  as  an  impostor.

s Still  to-day  the  favourite  method  in  the  East  of  getting  rid  of  un-
desirable persons.  The  prince's  suspicions  are  aroused,  because  Smendes
has  let  Unamun  sail  with  a foreign  captain.  He  thinks  that  might  well


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  179

they  sought  the  god  then  ? And  thee,  pray,  from  whom  had
they  sought  thee,  pray  ? " So  spake  he  unto  me.  And  I said
unto  him  : “ But  it  is  an  Egyptian  ship,  and  it  is  also  an
Egyptian  crew,  that  sailcth  for  Smendes.  He  hath  no  Syrian
crew.”  1 And  he  said  unto  me  : “ But  there  are  twenty  ships
here  in  my  harbour  that  are  in  kheber  2 with  Smendes,  and  as
for  this  Sidon,  past  which  thou  didst  also  (?)  sail,  there  are
other  fifty  (?)  ships  there,  which  are  in  kheber  2 with  Birkat-el,3
and  they  sail  (?)  to  his  house.”

I was  silent  in  this  great  moment.  And  he  answered  and
said  unto  me  : “ Upon  what  kind  of  behest  art  thou  come
hither  ? ” I said  unto  him  : “I  am  come  after  the  timber
for  the  great  august  vessel  of  Amunre,  king  of  gods.  Thy
father  used  to  do  it,  thy  grandfather  used  to  do  it,  and  thou
wilt  do  it  also.”  So  spake  I unto  him.  And  he  said  unto
me  : “ They  did  it  in  sooth,  and  if  thou  wilt  give  me  something
for  doing  it,  I will  do  it.  Of  a truth  my  people  did  execute
this  behest,  but  the  Pharaoh  had  six  ships  sent  hither,  laden
with  the  wares  of  Egypt,  and  they  unloaded  them  into  their
storehouses.  So  do  thou  bring  somewhat  for  me  also.”  And
he  had  fetched  the  daily  registers  of  his  fathers,  and  he  had
them  read  aloud  in  my  presence,  and  it  was  found  that  it  was
a thousand  deben  of  every  kind  of  silver 4 that  was  entered
in  his  book.

And  he  said  unto  me  : “If  the  ruler  of  Egypt  were  the  lord
of  my  possessions,  and  I were  also  his  servant,  he  would  not
have  sent  silver  and  gold,  when  he  said  : ‘ Execute  the  behest
of  Amun.’  Nor  was  it  a king’s  gift  5 that  they  assigned  to  my
father.  And  I too,  I am  not  thy  servant,  nor  yet  am  I the

happen,  since  nobody  could  have  called  him  to  account  if  he  had  made
away  with  Unamun.

1 This,  and  what  follows,  seems  to  be  an  empty  argument  : the  sailors
are  Phoenicians,  but  since  the  ship  has  an  Egyptian  owner,  they  can  be
regarded  as  Egyptians.

8 The  Phoenician  word  for  “ association,”  “ partnership.”  Phoenician
was  just  at  that  time  the  commercial  language  of  this  part  of  the  world.

* The  name  must  so  be  read,  i e.  “ Blessing  of  God.”  According
to  the  context  he  will  have  been  a Phoenician  merchant  resident  in
Tanis.  Similarly,  Smendes  himself  will  actually  have  been  an  Egyptian
merchant.

4 He  means  vessels,  ingots,  pieces  of  silver,  etc.

6 No  gift,  such  as  is  usual  among  friendly  rulers.  He  wishes  to  stress
the  fact  that  the  money  was  simply  the  purchase  price  of  the  timber.


180


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


servant  of  him  that  sent  thee.1  If  I cry  out  to  the  Lebanon,
the  heaven  openeth,  and  the  trees  are  here  lying  on  the  shore
of  the  sea.2  Give  me  the  sails  that  thou  hast  brought  3 with
thee,  to  take  thy  ships  that  carry  thy  timber  back  to  (Egypt) .
Give  me  also  the  ropes,  that  thou  hast  brought  with  thee,  in  order
to  bind  fast  (?) 1 the  . . . trees  which  I (am  to)  fell,  in  order
to  make  them  . . . for  thee  . . . For  without  all  this  thou
cansi  not  sail  away  (?)  with  the  timber,  and  if  I make  them  for
thee  (into  ?)  the  sails  of  thy  ships,  the  ends  (?)  5 will  be  too  heavy
and  (the  ship)  will  break  in  pieces,  and  thou  wilt  perish  in  the
middle  of  the  sea.  (For)  behold,  Amun  thundereth  in  the  sky
and  causeth  Sutekh  6 to  (rave  ?)  in  his  season.  For  Amun  7
hath  equipped  all  lands  ; he  hath  equipped  them,  and  the
land  of  Egypt,  whence  thou  comest,  he  did  first  equip.  For
cunning  work  8 came  forth  from  it  to  reach  mine  abode,  and
teaching  9 came  forth  from  it  to  reach  mine  abode — what  are
these  childish  journeyings  that  they  have  caused  thee  to
make  ! ”

And  I said  unto  him  : “ Fie  ! They  be  no  childish  journey-
ings in  any  wise  that  I make.  There  is  not  a ship  upon  the
water  that  belongeth  not  to  Amun.  His  is  the  sea  and  his  is
Lebanon,  whereof  thou  sayest  : ‘ It  belongeth  unto  me.’  (Nay
rather)  is  it  a plantation  for  the  bark  Userhet-Amun,  the  lord
of  all  ships.  Of  a truth  thus  spake  Amunre,  king  of  gods,
saying  unto  Hrihor,  my  lord:  ‘ Send  me  forth,' 10  and  made  me
travel  with  this  great  god.  But  behold,  thou  hast  caused  this

1 He  thus  contemptuously  designates  the  high  priest.

* The  trees  fall  as  though  from  heaven,  for  the  mountain  range,  on
which  they  grow,  soars  up  into  it.

* Ironical ; he  points  out  to  him  that  he  has  not  taken  even  the  most
necessary  precautions  for  so  difficult  an  undertaking.

* A cargo  of  logs  on  the  deck  of  a ship  is  always  dangerous,  if  it  is  not
made  thoroughly  fast.  For  what  purpose  he  was  supposed  to  bring  special
sails  remains  doubtful.

9 Later  on  he  gives  the  name  of  “ ends  ” to  the  stem-  and  stem-post
of  a ship  ; he  may  thus  mean  the  great  beams  which  were  to  furnish  these
parts  of  the  boat  of  Amun.  The  details  of  this  passage  are  obscure

9 Seth-Sutekh  was  thus  regarded  as  god  of  the  tempest.

7 He  here  speaks  to  the  Egyptian  of  his  Amun  as  supreme  god,  and
that  leads  him  on  in  the  following  sentence  to  the  fact  that  his  own  people
also  had  respect  for  this  god  and  for  Egypt.

* The  arts  and  crafts.  * Wisdom  and  learning.

10  Amun  had  thus  himself  ordained  the  journey  of  his  image  by  means
of  an  oracle.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  181

great  god  to  spend  twenty-nine  days,  after  that  he  had  landed
in  thy  harbour,  and  thou  knewest  well  that  he  was  here  ! He
is  still  the  same  as  ever  he  was,  and  thou  standest  and  wouldest
bargain  about  Lebanon  with  Amun  its  lord.

“ As  for  thy  saying  : ‘ The  former  kings  sent  silver  and
gold  ’—if  they  had  offered  life  and  health,  they  would  not
have  sent  these  things.  Rather  they  sent  thy  fathers  these
things  instead  of  life  and  health.1

“ Now  as  for  Amunre,  king  of  gods,  he  is  the  lord  of  life
and  health,  and  he  was  the  lord  of  your  fathers,  who  passed
their  term  of  life  making  offering  to  Amun.  And  thou  too,
thou  art  a servant  of  Amun.  If  now  thou  sayest  : ‘ Yea,  I
will  do  it,’  and  fulfillest  his  behest,  thou  wilt  live  and  prosper
and  be  in  health,  and  thou  wilt  be  a benefactor  to  thy  whole  land
and  to  thy  people.  But  covet  not  for  thyself  anything  that
belongeth  to  Amunre,  king  of  gods  ; verily  a lion  loveth  his
own  !

“ Let  my  2 scribe  be  brought  unto  me,  that  I may  send  him
to  Smendes  and  Tentamun,  the  officers  of  the  land,  whom  Amun
hath  given  to  the  northern  portion  of  his  land,  and  they  wall
send  all  that  is  needed.  I will  write  to  them,  saying  : ‘ Send
it,  until  I be  come  to  the  south  and  send  thee  all  that  I owe
thee.’  ” 3 So  spake  I unto  him.

And  he  gave  my  letter  into  the  hand  of  his  messenger,  and
loaded  the  keel  (?)  and  the  bow-  and  stern-post,  together  with
four  other  hewn  logs — seven  in  all — and  had  them  brought
to  Egypt.

And  his  messenger  went  to  Egypt  and  came  back  to  me  to
Syria  in  the  first  month  of  Winter.  And  Smendes  and  Tent-
amun sent  me  :

Gold  : 4 ewers  and  i kakment-vessel.

Silver  : 5 ewers.

Garments  of  royal  linen  : 10  pieces.

Good  Tipper  Egyptian  linen  : xo  khered.

1 “ Life  and  health  ” is  the  blessing  which  the  gods  bestow,  which  I
bring  you  through  the  medium  of  the  god's  image.  That  is  surely  more
than  the  money  which  you  received  in  times  past.

8 Emend  “ thy  ” ?

3 Smendes  is  to  advance  the  money,  which  Unamun  will  cause  to  be
refunded  to  him  after  his  return  home.  In  view  of  this  projected  loan
the  prince  shows  himself  complaisant,  and  sends  a portion  of  the  timber.


182


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Fine  papyrus  : 500.

Ox-hides  : 500.

Ropes  : 500.

Lentils  : 20  sacks.

Fish  : 30  baskets.

They  also  had  brought  to  me  : 1

Garments  of  good  Upper  Egyptian  linen  : 5 (?)  pieces.

Good  Upper  Egyptian  linen  : 5 khered.

Lentils  : 1 sack.

Fish  : 5 baskets.

And  the  prince  rejoiced,  and  appointed  three  hundred  men
and  three  hundred  oxen,  and  set  overseers  at  their  head,  in
order  that  they  might  fell  the  trees.  And  they  felled  them,
and  they  remained  lying  over  the  winter.  But  in  the  third
month  of  summer  they  were  dragged  to  the  shore  of  the  sea.

And  the  prince  came  forth  and  took  up  his  stand  upon  them,
and  sent  for  me,  saying  : “ Come.”  Now  when  I was  brought
nigh  unto  him,  the  shadow  of  his  fan  (?)  fell  upon  me.  And
Penamun,2  a butler  belonging  unto  him,  placed  himself  between
me  (and  him),  saying  : “ The  shadow  of  Pharaoh,  thy  lord,

hath  fallen  on  thee.”  And  he  was  wroth  with  him,  saying  :
“ Let  him  alone.”  And  I was  brought  nigh  unto  him,  and
he  answered  and  said  unto  me  : “ Behold,  the  behest  that
my  fathers  fulfilled  in  times  past,  I have  also  fulfilled  it,  albeit
thou  on  thy  part  hast  not  done  for  me  what  thy  fathers  did
for  me.  Behold,  the  last  of  thy  timber  hath  now  arrived  and
there  it  is  stacked.  Now  do  according  to  my  wish  and  come
to  stow  it,  for  in  truth  it  is  given  unto  thee.  But  come  not
to  regard  the  terror  of  the  sea.3  If  thou  regardest  the  terror
of  the  sea,  regard  that  of  me  also.  Verily,  I have  not  done  to
thee  what  they  did  to  the  messengers  of  Kharmvese,4  when
they  passed  seventeen  years  in  this  land.  They  died  where

1 Tentamun  sends  him  this  personally.

1 An  Egyptian  : we  are  unable  to  determine  where  lay  the  malice  of
his  jest.  (But  see  Bauer,  Orientalistische  LiteYotiirzeitimg,  1925,  571.
[Translator]).

* Meaning  : now  make  haste  to  get  away,  and  do  not  make  the  bad
season  of  the  year  a pretext  for  remaining  on  here.

4 Possibly  Ramesses  IX  ? We  are  not  in  a position  to  guess  what
actually  had  occurred,  but  m any  case  a threat  lurks  in  the  allusion  to
this  event.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


183


they  were."  And  he  said  unto  his  butler  : “ Take  him  and
show  him  their  grave  wherein  they  rest.”

And  I said  unto  him  : “ Show  it  me  not  ! As  for  Kham-
wese,  they  were  men  whom  he  sent  unto  thee  as  messengers,
and  he  himself  was  a man.  I have  none  of  his  messengers,
and  yet  thou  sayest  : “ Go  and  look  on  thy  comrades.”  1

Dost  thou  not  rather  rejoice  and  have  a tablet  made  for  thee
and  say  upon  it  : ‘ Amunre,  king  of  gods,  sent  unto  me  his
messenger,  Amun  of  the  Road,  together  with  Unamun,  his
human  messenger,  after  the  timber  for  the  great  august  bark
of  Amunre,  king  of  gods.  I felled  it,  I stowed  it,  and  I de-
spatched it  with  my  ships  and  my  crews.  I sent  them  to
Egypt  in  order  to  beseech  for  me  ten  thousand  years  of  life
from  Amun  over  and  above  that  ordained  for  me  (by  destiny),
and  so  shall  (?)  it  come  to  pass.'  When,  therefore,  in  the  time
to  come  another  messenger  shall  come  from  the  land  of  Egypt,
one  that  knoweth  writing,  and  readeth  thy  name  on  the  tablet,
thou  wilt  receive  water  in  the  West  like  the  gods  that  are
here."  2

And  he  said  unto  me  : “ It  is  a great  testimony  that  thou
hast  recounted  unto  me.”

I said  unto  him  : “ As  for  the  many  things  that  thou  hast
said  unto  me,  if  I reach  the  abode  of  the  High  Priest  of  Amun,
and  he  seeth  thy  behest,3  then  shall  thy  behest  bring  thee  in
somewhat."  1

And  I went  to  the  shore  of  the  sea  to  where  the  timber  was
stacked,  and  I descried  eleven  ships  drawing  nigh  on  the  sea.
They  belongeth  to  the  Zakar  ( and  came  with  the  order)  : “ Take
him  prisoner,  suffer  not  a ship  of  his  to  get  to  the  land  of
Egypt.”  Thereupon  I sat  down  and  wept.

And  the  letter- writer  of  the  prince  came  out  to  me  and
said  unto  me  : “ What  aileth  thee  ? ” And  I said  unto  him  :
“ Surely  thou  seest  the  birds  that  for  the  second  time  5 go  down
into  Egypt.  Look  at  them ! They  go  to  the  cool  pool,  but  how

1 Meaning  : my  mission,  however,  is  of  a divine  character.

1 The  dead  kings.  For  the  offering  of  water,  see  p.  115,  note  9.

* The  timber  which  you  are  delivering.

4 Meaning  : then  we  shall  pay  also  for  the  second  consignment  of
timber.

5 Since  his  departure  from  Thebes  a full  year  has  now  gone  by,  and  so
with  some  exaggeration  he  can  well  say  that  he  sees  the  birds  of  passage
for  the  second  time.


184


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


long  am  I to  be  left  here  ? Surely  thou  seest  them  that  come
back  to  take  me  prisoner.”

And  he  went  and  told  it  to  the  prince,  and  the  prince  began
to  weep  because  of  the  tidings  told  him,  that  were  so  grievous.
And  he  sent  out  his  letter-writer  unto  me,  and  he  brought  me
two  measures  of  wine  and  a ram.  Moreover,  he  had  brought
unto  me  Tentnut,  an  Egyptian  singer  that  was  with  him,  saying
unto  her  : “ Sing  unto  him  ; let  not  his  heart  harbour  cares  ! ”
And  he  sent  unto  me,  saying  : “ Eat  and  drink  ! Let  not  thine
heart  harbour  cares ! Thou  wilt  hear  all  that  I shall  say
to-morrow.”  And  when  the  morrow  came  he  had  his  . . .
called,  and  he  stood  in  their  midst  and  said  unto  the  Zakar  :
“ What  meaneth  this  coming  of  yours  ? ” And  they  said  unto
him  : “ We  are  come  after  the  shivered  1 ships  which  thou
sendest  unto  Egypt  with  our  . . . comrades.”  And  he  said
unto  them  : “I  cannot  take  the  messenger  of  Amun  prisoner
in  my  land.  Let  me  send  him  away,  and  then  do  ye  pursue
him  in  order  to  take  him  prisoner.”  2

He  put  me  on  board  and  sent  me  away  ...  to  the  harbour
of  the  sea.  And  the  wind  drave  me  to  the  land  of  Arsa.3  And
they  of  the  city  came  forth  against  me  to  slay  me,  and  between
them  I was  hustled  to  the  place  of  abode  of  Heteb,  the  queen
of  the  city.  And  I found  her  as  she  was  coming  from  her  one
house  and  was  entering  into  her  other.4

And  I saluted  her,  and  said  unto  the  people  that  stood
beside  her  : “ Surely  there  is  one  among  you  that  under-
standeth  Egyptian.”  And  one  of  them  said  : “ I understand
it.”  And  I said  unto  him  : “ Say  unto  my  mistress  : ‘ As
far  as  Thebes,  even  unto  the  abode  of  Amun,  I have  heard  it
said  that  wrong  is  done  in  every  city,  but  right  is  done  in  the
land  of  Arsa.5  And  now  here  also  wrong  is  done  every  day.’  ”
And  she  said  unto  me  : “ But  what  meaneth  it,  that  thou
sayest  this  ? ” And  I said  unto  her : “ If  the  sea  raged  and
the  wind  drave  me  to  the  land  wherein  thou  dwellest,  thou
wilt  not  suffer  them  to  arrest  me  in  order  to  slay  me,  seeing
that  I am  a messenger  of  Amun.  Look  well  to  it,  I am  one

1 Meaning  : which  should  be  shivered.

2 The  expedient  is  truly  Oriental.

3 Here  begins  a new  series  of  adventures  ; the  story  of  how  he  got
safely  away  from  the  Zakar  is  left  untold — Arsa  is  probably  Cyprus.

4 Thus  in  the  street.

* This  sounds  like  a quotation  from  a poem  or  like  a proverb.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


185


for  whom  search  will  be  made  unceasingly.1  And  as  for  this
crew  of  the  prince  of  Bvblos  that  they  seek  to  slay,  if  their
lord  findeth  ten  crews  of  thine  he  too  will  slay  them.”

So  she  had  the  people  summoned  and  they  were  brought
forward.  And  she  said  unto  me  : “ Lie  down  and  sleep ”

Here  the  papyrus  breaks  off,  and  so  we  do  not  know  how
Unamiin  escaped  from  these  new  dangers.  Did  he  succeed  in
bringing  the  timber  to  Egypt?  I Las  it  paid  for?  And  did
Amun  of  the  Road,  who  had  been  so  utterly  useless  on  the  journey,
march  safely  back  again  into  Karnak  ?


B.  THE  SCHOOLS  AND  THEIR  WRITINGS

We  have  frequently  throughout  this  book  pointed  out  that
we  in  great  measure  owe  our  knowledge  of  the  old  and  later
literature  to  the  papyri,  writing-boards,  and  ostraca,  upon
which  the  schoolboys  of  the  New  Kingdom  copied  out  extracts
from  standard  or  didactic  compositions.  Our  sincere  thanks
are  therefore  due  to  the  compulsory  energy  of  these  lads.  But
the  body  of  writings,  which  the  schools  of  the  New  Kingdom
produced  themselves,  and  which  I have  gathered  together  in
this  section,  supplies  us  with  much  that  is  interesting,  and  the
reader  might  well  like  to  know  something  about  the  system  of
education  winch  has  bequeathed  us  all  this.

It  consisted  apparently  of  twro  stages.  In  the  lower,  which
corresponds  more  or  less  to  what  we  call  “ school,"  the  boys
learnt  writing  and  the  ancient  literature.  For  their  writing
exercises  they  used  potsherds  and  limestone  flakes,  which  cost
nothing,  rather  than  expensive  rolls  of  papyrus.

About  one  such  school  at  least  we  possess  a certain  amount
of  information.  It  wras  attached  to  the  temple  w’hich  Ramesses
II  built  for  Amun  on  the  west  bank  of  Thebes,  the  so-called
Ramesseum,  and  it  w^as  included  in  the  great  groups  of  offices
surrounding  the  temple  on  three  sides.  A strikingly  large
number  of  such  ostraca  have  been  found  there,  particularly  on
a small  rubbish  mound  ; apparently  the  temple-school  stood
there,  and  what  the  lads  had  finished  writing  out,  they  threw
away  on  the  spot.  If  we  examine  the  material  which  the  boys
in  this  school  had  placed  before  them,  we  find  that,  besides

1 1 am  held  in  such  esteem  that  you  cannot  make  me  disappear
unnoticed.


186


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


certain  later  compositions,1  it  consists  of  three  books,  which
turn  up  repeatedly  : the  Instruction  of  King  Amenemhet  (p.  72),
the  Instruction  of  Duauf  (p.  67),  and  the  Hymn  to  the  Nile
(p.  46),  and  it  is  interesting  that  the  same  three  compositions
occur  all  together  in  two  school-papyri,2  whose  provenance  is
apparently  Memphis — they  thus  formed  the  usual  main  subject
of  the  school-curriculum.  In  these  papyri  they  are  complete,
on  the  ostraca  we  invariably  find  only  short  selections  from
them  and  from  other  writings,  and  for  the  most  part  always
the  same  selections  ; perhaps  they  were  the  “ choice  ” passages,
which  every  educated  person  had  to  know.

When  the  schoolboy  had  finished  with  this  elementary
course  of  instruction,  and  was  entered  as  “ scribe  ” in  some
administration,  he  received  there  also  yet  further  instruction,
and  that  at  the  hands  of  an  older  official,  possibly  his  im-
mediate superior.  While  undergoing  this  higher  education,
the  pupil  had  still  to  write  out  model  compositions,  though  not,
as  heretofore,  a few  fines  a day  only,  but  larger  portions,  in  one
case  three  pages  a day.  What  the  pupil  thus  wrote  out  his
teacher  corrected  in  the  margin  of  the  papyrus,  unfortunately
but  seldom  paying  attention  to  the  nonsense  which  the  pupil
had  written,  but  so  much  the  more  to  the  shape  of  his  char-
acters ; we  might  really  think  that  we  are  merely  concerned
with  an  exercise  in  calligraphy ! Of  course  it  was  not  that
alone,  and  the  contents  of  most  3 of  these  “ school  manuscripts  ”
clearly  show  what  objects  were  actually  had  in  view  : education
on  the  one  side,  and  training  in  commercial  style  and  in  ortho-
graphy on  the  other.  The  orthography  was  no  fight  matter,
for  scarcely  any  system  of  writing  provides  so  many  possibilities
for  mistakes  as  the  hieroglyphic.  How  the  writing  of  the  indi-
vidual word  was  imparted  to  the  schoolboys,  can  still  be  seen
in  a book,4  which  must  have  been  much  used  in  the  schools,

1 The  warning  against  becoming  a soldier,  given  below  on  p.  195,  is
also  included  in  these.

1 Pap.  Saltier,  ii. , and  Pap.  Anastasi,  vii.

5 Not  all,  for  several  teachers  had  wider  interests  and  let  their  pupils
write  out  things  that  cannot  have  been  of  much  use  educationally,  though
for  us  they  are  certainly  all  the  more  interesting.

4 Preserved  in  Pap.  Hood  (Maspero,  6tud.es  egyptiennes,  ii.  1 ff.),
and  more  completely  in  a papyrus  in  Moscow.  It  must  have  been  also
used  in  the  above-mentioned  school  attached  to  the  Ramesseum,  and
its  title  at  least  occurs  on  the  verso  of  a papyrus  in  Cairo.  See  also
Glanville,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archeology,  xii.  pp.  171  Q.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  187

and  which  “ the  scribe  of  the  God’s  Book  in  the  House  of  Life,1
Amenemope,  son  of  Amenemope,  devised.”  It  bears  the  long-
winded  title  : “ The  teaching  that  maketh  clever  and  in-

structeth  the  ignorant,  the  knowledge  of  all  that  existeth,  what
Ptah  hath  created  and  Thoth  hath  written  (?),  the  heaven  with
its  stars,  the  earth  and  what  therein  is,  what  the  mountains
disgorge,  and  what  floweth  forth  from  the  ocean,  concerning
all  things  that  the  sun  enlighteneth  and  all  that  groweth  on  the
earth.”  This  sounds  grandiose  enough,  yet  the  work  is  nothing
more  than  a large  collection  of  substantives  and  names  of
frequent  and  rare  occurrence,  placed  in  tolerably  systematic
order.  First  comes  the  heaven  and  what  is  in  it  : “ Heaven,
sun,  moon,  star,  Orion,  Great  Bear,  Ape,  Giant,  Sow,2  clouds,
tempest,  dawn,  darkness,  sun,  shadow,  . . .,  sun’s  rays.”  Then
follow  expressions  for  water  and  fields,  and  then  in  six  groups  the
words  which  denote  individuals.  First,  “ God,  goddess,  blessed
dead  (male  and  female),  king,  queen,”  etc.  ; next  come  the
highest  officials,  the  high  priests  and  learned  men,  then  the  great
mass  of  lower  officials  and  artisans,  and  lastly  the  expressions
for  mankind  and  for  troops,  and  the  names  of  foreign  peoples
and  localities.  The  pupil  then  gets  to  know  ninety-six  Egyptian
cities,  forty-two  expressions  for  buildings  and  their  parts,
designations  for  lands  and  fields,  and  then  all  that  one  may  eat
and  drink,  including  forty-eight  different  baked  meats,  twenty-
four  drinks,  and  thirty-three  sorts  of  flesh.  In  the  concluding
portion  which  is  destroyed,  the  different  birds  and  the  numerous
words  for  cattle  were  listed,  and  of  course  much  else  besides.
All  this  AmenemSpe  carefully  compiled,  in  order  to  show  the
world  all  that  exists,  thanks  to  Ptah  and  Thdth,  though,  to  be
sure,  only  with  the  very  simple  object  of  imparting  to  his  pupils
the  correct  writing  of  the  individual  words.

A serious  obstacle,  even  for  advanced  students,  must  have
been  presented  by  the  many  foreign  words  and  barbarous  names,
in  which  New  Egyptian  abounded,  and  therefore  particular
attention  was  paid  to  the  learning  of  them.  A schoolboy  of
the  Eighteenth  Dynasty  had  to  busy  himself  on  his  writing-
board  3 with  the  “ drawing  up  of  Keftiu-names  ” ; and  the
model  letters  on  pp.  205  ff„  were  set  before  the  schoolboy  so  that,

1 Ancient  designation  of  the  schools.

5 Constellations.

5 See  W.  Max  Muller.  Mitt,  der  V orderdsiat.  Ges.,  v.  pp.  7 ft  .


188


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


through  the  foreign  words  which  they  contained,  he  might
acquire  this  difficult  art.

Special  importance  was  also  attached  to  the  learning  of  the
correct  style  for  letter-writing.  Accordingly  the  schoolboy
had  to  copy  out  model  letters  of  all  kinds,  actual  and  fictitious,
and  even  the  admonitions  and  warnings,  which  appertained  to
this  instruction,  he  wrote  out  in  the  form  of  letters.  What  the
schoolboy  thus  compiled  on  his  papyrus,  obtained  the  title  of
“ epistolary  teaching,”  and  he  often  inserts  in  the  individual
letters  his  own  name  and  that  of  his  teacher,  as  if  they  were
actually  corresponding  with  one  another.  The  schoolboy
accordingly  mites  to  himself  that  he  is  lazy  and  dissolute  and
deserves  a hundred  blows.

We  find  that  officials  of  the  most  varied  kind  were  thus
occupied  with  the  education  of  schoolboys,— -a  “ scribe  of  the
treasury  of  Pharaoh,”  a “ chief  registrar  of  the  treasury,”  a
“ scribe  of  the  workshop  of  Pharaoh,”  and  the  like  ; and  he
who  reads  the  Literary  Controversy  below,  will  see  that  even
an  official  in  the  royal  stable  can  be  a famous  teacher.  So
when  the  tomb  of  Harnesses  IX  was  being  hewn  out  of  the  rock
in  the  desert  valley  of  Biban  el-Muluk.  an  official,  who  was
employed  on  this  work,  could  not  give  up  teaching  even  in  this
solitude.  On  the  large  limestone  flakes,  which  the  work  provided,
his  assistant  had  to  WTite  out  all  kinds  of  things  for  practice  :
a model  letter,  an  old  poem  to  Ramesses  II,  and  the  beauti-
ful Prayers  of  one  unjustly  persecuted1  (see  pp.  302  ff.).  And
the  teacher  himself  has  made  a certain  number  of  corrections.

1.  EXHORTATIONS  AND  WARNINGS  TO
SCHOOLBOYS  2

These  short  compositions  have  rightly  aroused  great  interest,  as
describing  contemporary,  social  conditions.  The  reader  must  not
lose  sight  of  their  object  ; the  pictures  which  they  paint  of  the
happy  lot  of  the  scribe  and  the  misery  of  the  other  professions,  are
of  course  thoroughly  biased  and  exaggerated.

The  epistolary  formulae,  which  in  many  manuscripts  precede
the  various  compositions,  have  been  omitted.  The  reader  can  gain

1 Zeitschr.  fur  dgypt.  Sprache,  xxxviii  p.  19  ff.

1 Preserved  separately  in  the  different  schoolboy  manuscripts  of  the
Nineteenth  Dynasty.  See  Maspero,  Du  genre  epzstolaire,  Paris,  1872
(out  of  date);  also  Erman,  Die  dgypt.  Schiilerhandsschnften  (in  Abh  d
Berl.  Ahad.,  1925).


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  189

a sufficient  knowledge  of  them  from  the  genuine  letters  in  the  next
section.

[Life  at  school.]  1

I place  thee  at  school  along  with  the  children  of  notables,  to
educate  thee  and  to  have  thee  trained  for  this  aggrandizing  calling.

Behold,  I relate  to  thee  how  it  fareth  with  the  scribe  when
he  ...  “ Wake  up,  at  thy  place,  the  books  lie  (already)  before
thy  comrades.  Place  thine  hand  on  thy  clothes  and  look  to
thy  sandals  (?).”  When  thou  gettest  thy  daily  (task  ?)...,
be  not  idle .2

and  read  diligently  from  the  book.  When  thou

reckonest  in  silence,3  let  no  word  be  heard .

Write  with  thine  hand  and  read  with  thy  mouth.  Ask
counsel  of  (them  that  are  clever  ?).  Be  not  slack,  and  spend
not  a day  in  idleness,  or  woe  betide  thy  limbs  ! Enter  into  the
methods  of  thy  teacher  and  hear  his  instructions  . . . Behold,
I am  with  thee  every  (day  ?).  Beware  of  saying  . . . !

[Be  diligent.]4

0 scribe,  be  not  idle,  be  not  idle,  or  thou  wilt  be  soundly
chastised.  Set  not  thine  heart  on  pleasures,  or  thou  wilt  be
ruined.  Write  with  thine  hand,  read  with  thy  mouth,  and
ask  counsel  of  them  that  have  more  knowledge  than  thou.

Procure  for  thyself  this  calling  of  a magistrate,  that  thou
mayest  attain  it  when  thou  art  become  old.  Fortunate  is  a
scribe  that  is  skilled  in  his  calling,  a master  of  education.  Per-
severe every  day  ; thus  shall  thou  obtain  the  mastery  over  it
(writing  or  the  knowledge  of  writing).  Spend  no  day  in  idleness
or  thou  wilt  be  beaten.  The  ear  of  the  boy  is  on  his  back,  and
he  hearkeneth  when  he  is  beaten.

Set  thine  heart  upon  hearing  my  w’ords ; they  will  be  pro-
fitable unto  thee.

The  Kaeri 5 is  taught  to  dance,  horses  are  broken  in,  a
kite  (?)  is  put  in  a nest  (?),  a hawk’s  wings  are  bound.6

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  22.  6 fi.

2 Possibly  arithmetical  exercises  are  the  subject  of  the  omitted  passage.

3 I.e.  in  your  head.

4 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.  3.  9 ff.  ; ibid.  v.  8.  1 fi.  Translated  by  Griffith.

6 An  Ethiopian  animal,  which  is  spoken  of  elsewhere  as  an  example
of  what  can  be  done  in  the  way  of  training.

6 Meaning  : if  one  can  tame  all  these,  one  will  probably  be  able  to  do
the  same  with  you.


190  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Persevere  in  asking  counsel,  neglect  it  not ; and  in  writing,
sicken  not  of  it.

Set  thine  heart  upon  hearing  my  words,  thou  wilt  find  them
profitable.

[Be  diligent.]  1

Be  not  a foolish  man,  that  hath  no  instruction.

By  night  one  teacheth  thee,  and  by  day  one  instructeth
thee,  but  thou  hearkenest  not  unto  instruction,  and  thou  doest
after  thine  own  devices.

The  Kaeri 2 listeneth  to  words,  when  it  is  brought  from
Ethiopia.  Lions  are  taught,  horses  are  broken  in — but  thou,
the  like  of  thee  is  not  known  in  the  whole  land.  Prithee,  know
that.

Be  diligent.]  3

Mine  heart  is  sick  of  giving  (thee  further)  teaching .

I may  give  thee  an  hundred  blows,  and  yet  thou  castest
them  all  off.  Thou  art  as  a beaten  ass  unto  me,  that  is  stub-
born (?)...  Thou  art  as  a jabbering  negro  unto  me,  that  is
brought  with  the  tribute.4

The  kite  (?)  is  put  in  a nest  (?),  the  wings  of  the  kite  are
bound  5 — I will  also  make  thee  play  the  man,  thou  bad  boy.
Prithee,  know  that.

[Beer  and  the  maiden.]  6

I am  told,  thou  forsakest  writing,  thou  givest  thyself  up  (?)
to  pleasures  ; thou  goest  from  street  to  street,  where  (?)  it
smelleth  of  beer,  to  destruction  (?).  Beer,  it  scareth  men
(from  thee),  it  sendeth  thy  soul  to  perdition  (?).

Thou  art 7 like  a broken  steering-oar  in  a ship,  that  is  obedient
on  neither  side.  Thou  art  like  a shrine  without  its  god,  and  like
a house  without  bread.

Thou  art  encountered  climbing  a wall  and  breaking  the

1 Pap.  Bologna,  1094,  3.  5 fi.  * See  p.  189,  note  g.

* Pap.  Sallier,  i.  7.  gfl.

* The  newly  imported  slave,  who  has  no  knowledge  of  Egyptian.

* The  same  passage  above,  p.  189

* Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  n.  8 fi.  ; Pap.  Sallier,  i.  9.  9 fi.  ; was  contained

also  in  Pap.  Anastasi,  v.

7 In  your  drunkenness.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


191


. . . ; men  run  away  from  before  thee,  for  thou  inflictest  wounds
on  them.

Would  that  thou  knewest  that  wine  is  an  abomination,  that
thou  wouldst  take  an  oath  in  respect  to  shedeh,1  that  thou
wouldst  set  not  thine  heart  on  the  bottle  (?),  and  wouldst  forget
telek.2

Thou  art  taught  to  sing  to  the  flute  and  to  ...  to  the
pipe  (?),  to  speak  to  the  kinnor  in  anen,  and  to  sing  to  the
nezekh.3

Thou  sittest  in  the  house  and  the  girls  encircle  thee  ; thou
standest  and  makest  . . .,  thou .

Thou  sittest  in  front  of  the  wench  and  art  besprinkled  with
oil  ; thy  garland  of  ishet-penu 4 hangeth  about  thy  neck,  and
thou  drummest  on  thy  paunch.

Thou  dost  reel,  and  (then)  fallest  upon  thy  belly  and  art
besmirched  with  dirt .

[The  schoolboy  is  put  in  fetters.]  5

I have  heard  that  thou  followest  pleasures.  Turn  not  thy
back  on  my  words.  Dost  thou  give  thy  mind  to  all  manner
of  deaf  (?)  things  ?

I will  cause  thy  foot  to  stumble  (?),  when  it  goeth  in  the
streets,6  and  thou  shalt  be  beaten  with  the  hippopotamus
whip.

Howbeit,  I have  seen  many  like  thee,  that  did  sit  in  the
writing  academy  and  that  said  not  “ by  God,”  without  swearing  :
“ Books  are  nothing  at  all.”  (Yet)  they  became  scribes,
and  One  remembered 7 their  names,  to  despatch  them  on
errands.

If  thou  lookest  at  me  myself,  when  I was  as  young  as  thou,
I passed  my  time  with  the  handcuff  on  me,  and  this  it  was  that
bound  my  limbs,  when  it  stayed  on  me  for  three  months  and
I was  imprisoned  in  the  temple,  while  my  father  and  my  mother
were  on  the  land  and  my  brethren  also.  When  it  left  me  and
mine  hand  was  free,  then  surpassed  I what  had  been  aforetime,

x A sweet  intoxicating  beverage.

5 A foreign  word  for  some  kind  of  beverage.

* Nothing  but  foreign  words.  “ Kinnor  " is  the  foreign  lyre,  “ nezekh  "
probably  something  similar  ; " anen  *’  perhaps  means  warbling.

* A plant.  s Pap.  A nastasi,  v.  17  3 if.

* When  you  go  gadding  about.

7 The  king  or  the  highest  officials.


192


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


and  was  the  first  of  all  my  (comrades),  and  surpassed  them  in
books.

Do  as  I say,  and  thy  body  will  be  healthy,  and  thou  wilt  be
found  in  the  morning  1 to  have  no  superior.

[Be  diligent.]  2

I am  told  thou  forsakest  writing,  thou  departest  and  dost
flee.  Thou  forsakest  writing  as  fast  as  thy  feet  can  manage  it,
thou  art  like  a pair  of  horses  of  the  ...  3

Thine  heart  fluttereth,  and  thou  art  like  an  akhy-bird ;
thine  ear  . . .,  and  thou  art  like  an  ass  when  it  getteth  a
beating.  Thou  art  like  an  antelope  in  flight.4

But  thou  art  not  an  hunter  of  the  desert  nor  a Matoi  of
the  west.

But  thou  art  not  one  that  is  deaf,  that  cannot  hear,  and
one  speaketh  unto  him  with  the  hand.

Thou  art  like  a skipper’s  mate  that  is  skilful  in  the  boat,3
when  he  is  skipper  in  the  boat  and  standeth  at  the  prow  (?).
He  looketh  not  out  for  the  adverse  winds,  he  searcheth  not  for
the  wave.8  If  the  outer  rope  is  let  go,  the  . . . rope  hangeth
about  his  neck.7  When  he  pulleth  the  rope .

All  that  follows  is  obscure.  We  are  informed  that  he  plucketh
flowers  on  the  banks,  and  a probably  comic  description  is  given
of  his  dress  : his  wig  with  its  curled  locks,  that  reach  to  his  feet,
is  of  Ethiopian  work,  etc.  etc.

The  ending  is  : he  hath  a full 8 ear  on  the  day  of  the  ass,
and  is  a steering-oar  on  the  day  of  the  boat.9

1 The  schoolboy  wrote  “morning”  incorrectly  and  the  teacher
wrongly  corrected  it  to  “ month.”

2 Pap.  Roller,  2.  3 ff.  — Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  2.  4 ff.  ; was  also  in  Pap.
Anastasi,  v.  Translated  by  Gardiner  in  Hieratic  Texts,  p.  38.

* One  naturally  thinks  of  a race-course  or  the  like,  though  no  such
thing  is  known  of  in  Egypt.

4 The  purpose  of  this  and  the  following  paragraphs  probably  is  : you
are  wayward  and  have  an  aversion  to  my  teaching.

6 Perhaps  a sailor  is  meant  who  would  act  the  captain  and  who  fails
in  his  attempt.  But  the  whole  is  obscure.  (Gardiner's  rendering  differs
somewhat  [Translator]).

8 He  pays  no  heed  to  the  current  ?

7 He  becomes  entangled  in  the  sail  ropes  ?

8 The  pupil  does  not  hear  ?

8 This  probably  applies  to  the  ass  and  the  skipper,  with  which  he
previously  compared  him.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  193

I will  do  all  this  to  him,1  if  he  turneth  his  back  on  his
calling.

[DO  NOT  BE  A HUSBANDMAN.]  2

I am  told,  thou  dost  forsake  writing,  thou  givest  thyself
up  (?)  to  pleasures  ; thou  settest  thy  mind  on  work  in  the
field,  and  turnest  thy  back  on  the  God’s  Words.3  Dost  thou
not  bethink  thee  how  it  fareth  with  the  husbandman,  when  the
harvest  is  registered  ? 4 The  worm  hath  taken  half  of  the  corn,
the  hippopotamus  hath  devoured  the  rest.  The  mice  abound
in  the  held,  and  the  locust  hath  descended.  The  cattle  devour,
and  the  sparrows  steal.  Woe  to  the  husbandman  !

The  remainder,  that  lieth  upon  the  threshing  floor,  the
thieves  make  an  end  of  that.  The  ...  of  copper  is  destroyed  ;
the  pair  of  horses  dieth  at  the  threshing  and  ploughing.

And  now  the  scribe  landeth  on  the  embankment  and  will
register  the  harvest.  The  porters  5 carry  sticks,  and  the  negroes
palm-ribs.  They  say  : “ Give  corn.”  “ There  is  none  there.”
He  is  stretched  out  and  beaten  ; he  is  bound  and  thrown  into

the  canal . His  wife  is  bound  in  his  presence,  his

children  are  put  in  fetters  (?).  His  neighbours  leave  them,
they  take  to  flight,  and  look  after  their  corn.6

But  the  scribe,  he  directeth  the  work  of  all  people.  For  him
there  are  no  taxes,  for  he  payeth  tribute  in  writing,  and  there  are
no  dues  for  him.  Prithee,  know  that.

[Do  NOT  BE  A SOLDIER.]  7

Put  writing 8 in  thine  heart,  that  thou  mavest  protect
thyself  from  hard  labour  of  any  kind  and  be  a magistrate  of
high  repute.

1 But  he  has  not  threatened  him  with  anything  !

* Pap.  Sallier,  i.  5.  ti  fi , = Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  15.  6 ff.  Translated  by
Griffith.

* Hieroglyphic  writing  and  the  ancient  texts.

4 I.e.  the  taxes  deducted  from  it.

* These  appear  here  as  minor  officials,  the  negroes  as  police.

* Bring  it  into  safety.

7 Ostracon  in  Florence  (see  Ermas,  Zeitschr.  fiir  dgvpt.  Sprache,  xviii.
p.  96)  ; Pap.  Lansing,  recto,  9.  3 ff.  ; see  Erman  - Lange,  Pap.  Lansing,
Copenhagen,  1925,  pp.  82  ff.  ; Blackman  - Peet,  Journ.  oj  Egypt,
Archaology,  xi.  pp.  291  f,

* Ostracon  reads  " the  scribe  ” here.

13


194


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Dost  thou  not  recall  the  indolent  one  whose  name  is  un-
known ? He  will  be  loaded  like  an  ass,  while  he  carrieth  in
front  of  the  scribe  that  knoweth  what  he  is  worth  (?).

Come,  let  me  tell  thee  how  woefully  fareth  the  soldier,
according  as  his  superiors  are  many — the  general,  the  commander
of  the  auxiliary  troops,  the  saket  who  is  at  their  head,  the
standard-bearer,  the  lieutenant,  the  scribe,  the  captain  of  fifty,
and  the  commander  of  the  Iwai-troops.1  They  go  in  and  out
of  their  courts  in  the  royal  palace,  they  say  : “ Let  them  (?)
know  (?)  work."

He  is  awakened,  when  an  hour  hath  gone  by,  and  he  is
driven  like  an  ass.  He  worketh  until  the  sun  goeth  down
under  (?)  its  darkness  (?)  of  night.  He  is  hungry,  and  his  body
is  . . .,  he  is  dead  while  yet  alive.

[Do  NOT  BE  A SOLDIER.]  2

Ah,  what  meanest  thou  by  saying  : “ It  is  thought  that  the
soldier  is  better  off  than  the  scribe  ” ?

Come,  let  me  tell  thee  how  the  soldier  fareth,  the  oft-
belaboured,  when  he  is  brought,  while  yet  a . . . child,  to  be
shut  up  in  the  barracks  (?).  He  receiveth  a burning  (?)  blow
on  his  body,  a ruinous  blow  on  his  eye,  a blow  that  layeth  him
out  on  his  eyebrow,  and  his  pate  is  cleft  with  a wound.  He
is  laid  down  and  beaten,  like  a document.3  He  is  battered
and  bruised  with  flogging.

Come,  let  me  tell  thee  how  he  goeth  to  Syria,  and  how  he
marcheth  over  the  mountains.  His  bread  and  his  water  are
borne  upon  his  shoulder  like  the  load  of  an  ass  ; they  make  his
neck  as  ...  as  that  of  an  ass,  and  the  joints  of  his  back  are
bowed.  His  drink  is  stinking  water.  He  falleth  out  only  to
keep  watch.  When  he  reacheth  the  enemy,  he  is  like  a
trapped  (?)  bird,  and  he  hath  no  strength  in  his  limbs.

If  he  cometh  back  home  to  Egypt,  he  is  like  wood  that  the
worm  eateth.  He  is  sick  and  becometh  bedridden.  He  is
brought  back  upon  the  ass  ; his  clothes  are  stolen,  and  his
servant  hath  run  away.

1 Employed  in  particular  abroad

2 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv,  g.  4 If.  = Ibid.  iii.  5 6 .

3 It  is  uncertain  what  is  meant  by  this  comparison — probably  not
the  preparing  of  a sheet  of  papyrus


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  195

O scribe  Ennana,1 2  turn  thee  away  from  the  thought  that
the  soldier  is  better  off  than  the  scribe.

[Do  NOT  BE  A SOLDIER.]  4

Turn  thy  face  by  day  to  writing,  and  read  by  night,  for
thou  knowest  that  which  the  Sovereign  doeth  as  touching  all
his  measures  in  their  entirety.  All  the  subjects  are  mustered,
and  the  best  are  taken.  The  man  is  made  into  a soldier,  and
the  stripling  into  a recruit.  The  boy,  he  is  only  bred  to  be
torn  from  the  arms  of  his  mother  ; if  he  attaineth  manhood,
his  bones  are  battered.

Art  thou  an  ass  that  is  led,  (for)  it  hath  no  understanding
in  its  body  ?

Acquire  for  thyself  this  great  calling  of  a scribe  ; pleasant
and  abounding  in  possessions  are  thy  palette  and  thy  papyrus
roll,  and  blithesome  art  thou  every  day.

Prithee,  know  that.

[DO  NOT  BE  A CHARIOTEER.]  3

Set  thine  heart  on  being  a scribe,  that  thou  mayest  direct
the  whole  earth.

Come,  let  me  tell  thee  of  a miserable  calling,  that  of  the
officer  of  chariotry.  He  is  placed  in  the  stable  4 because  of  the
father  of  his  mother,5  with  five  slaves  ; two  men  of  them  are
given  him  as  helpers  (?).

He  hasteneth  to  get  steeds  from  the  stall  in  his  majesty's
presence.  MTien  he  hath  obtained  goodly  horses,  he  is  glad
and  exulteth.  He  cometh  with  them  (?)  to  his  town,  and  he
trampleth  it  underfoot 6 with  zest.  Happy  is  he  when  he  thus
trampleth  underfoot  . . .,  (but)  he  knoweth  not  (yet)  how  it
is  with  him.7

He  expendeth  his  wealth  which  he  hath  from  the  father  of

1The  schoolboy  who  copied  out  the  letter  in  Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.,  has
introduced  his  own  name  here.

2 Pap.  Sallier,  i.  3.  6 ff.  =Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  10.  3 ft.

3 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.  6.  2 ft.

4 Of  the  charioteers  of  the  king,  their  barracks.

s Out  of  regard  for  his  good  family.

• The  town,  in  his  attempt  to  drive.

7 He  has  no  thought  for  his  coming  fate.


196


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


his  mother,  that  he  may  acquire  a chariot.  Its  pole  costeth
three  deben  and  the  chariot  costeth  five  deben.1

He  hasteneth  to  trample  underfoot  from  upon  it.2  He
maketh  himself  into  one  that  is  shod  . . he  taketh  himself
and  thrusteth  himself  into  the  sandals  (?).  He  casteth  it  (?)
(i.e.  the  chariot)  away  in  the  thicket,  and  his  feet  are  cut  by
the  sandals  (?),  and  his  shirt  is  pierced  with  thorns.

When  one  cometh  to  muster  the  troops  (?),  he  is  grievously
tormented  (?)  ; he  is  beaten  upon  the  ground,  beaten  with  an
hundred  stripes.

[Do  NOT  BE  A SOLDIER,  A PRIEST,  OR  A BAKER.]  3

Be  a scribe,  who  is  freed  from  forced  labour,  and  protected
from  all  work.  He  is  released  from  hoeing  with  the  hoe,  and
thou  needest  not  carry  a basket.4

It 5 separateth  thee  from  plying  the  oar,  and  it  is  free
from  vexation.  Thou  hast  not  many  masters,  nor  an  host  of
superiors.

No  sooner  hath  a man  6 come  forth  from  his  mother’s  womb,
than  he  is  stretched  out  before  his  superior.  The  boy  becometh
a soldier’s  henchman,  the  stripling  a recruit,  the  grown  man  is
made  into  an  husbandman,  and  the  townsman  into  a groom.
The  halt  (?)  is  made  into  a doorkeeper,  and  the  (short-sighted  ?)
into  one  that  feedeth  cattle  ; the  fowler  goeth  upon  the  . . .,
and  the  fisherman  standeth  in  the  wet.

The  superintendent  of  the  stable  standeth  at  the  work,
while  his  span  is  left  in  the  field.7  Corn  is  thrown  down  to  his
wife,  and  his  daughter  is  on  the  embankment  (?).  If  his  span
leaveth  him  and  runneth  away,  he  is  carried  off  to  the  Iwai-
troops.8

1 That  would  be  273  and  455  grammes,  a considerable  amount,  if
silver  is  meant.

3 I.e.  to  ride  in  it.  The  meaning  of  the  paragraph  probably  is  : he
goes  forth  eagerly  to  war,  but  he  cannot  always  ride  in  mountainous
Palestine,  and  has  finally  to  abandon  the  chariot.

3 Pap.  Sallier,  i.  6.  9 ff.,  and,  with  variations.  Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  6.  7 ff.

4 A peasant’s  tasks.  5 The  scribe’s  profession.

6 Who  has  not  become  a scribe.

7 He  has  to  inspect  the  work  in  the  fields  What  follows  must  mean
that  while  thus  engaged  he  cannot  concern  himself  with  his  family.  The
other  manuscript  also  introduces  his  own  servant  and  maidservant.

8 See  p.  194,  note  1.  Meaning  probably  : if  during  these  non-military
activities  his  horses  get  lost,  he  is  put  into  the  infantry


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


197


The  soldier,  when  he  goeth  up  to  Syria,  hath  no  staff  and
no  sandals.  He  knoweth  not  whether  he  be  dead  or  alive,  by
reason  of  the  (fierce  ?)  lions.  The  foe  lieth  hidden  in  the  scrub,
and  the  enemy  standeth  ready  for  battle.  The  soldier  marcheth
and  crieth  out  to  his  god  : “ Come  to  me  and  deliver  me  ! ”

The  priest  standeth  there  as  an  husbandman,  and  the

we  eb-priest  worketh  in  the  canal 1 he  is  drenched  in  the

river ; it  maketh  no  difference  to  him  whether  it  be  winter
or  summer,  whether  the  sky  be  windy  or  rainy.

When  the  baker  standeth  and  baketh  and  layeth  bread  on
the  tire,  his  head  is  inside  the  oven,  and  his  son  holdeth  fast
his  feet.  Cometh  it  to  pass  that  he  slippeth  from  his  son’s  hand,
he  falleth  into  the  blaze.

But  the  scribe,  he  directeth  every  work  that  is  in  this  land.

[Be  ax  official.]  2

Let  not  thine  heart  go  afluttering  like  leaves  before  the

wind . Set  not  thine  heart  on  pleasures.  Alas,  they

profit  not,  they  render  a man  no  service . When  he

worketh  3 and  it  is  his  lot  to  serve  the  Thirty,4 *  he  worketh  and
extendeth  not  his  strength,3  for  evil  toil  lieth  (yet)  in  front  of
him.  No  servant  bringeth  him  water,  and  no  women  will
make  bread  for  him,  whereas  his  companions  6 live  according
to  their  desire,  and  their  servants  act  in  their  stead.7  (But)
the  man  of  no  sense  standeth  there  and  toileth,  and  his  eye
looketh  enviously  at  them.8

Therefore  give  heed,  thou  naughty  one  ; thou  obstinate  one,
that  will  not  hear  when  thou  art  spoken  to.  Hasten  to  it,  the
calling  with  the  gay.  . . .9  It  is  the  one  that  directeth  all  the
Councils  of  Thirty  10  and  the  courtiers  of  the  (Royal)  Circle.
Prithee,  know  that.

1 Even  the  priesthood  is  not  immune  from  forced  labour.

1 Pap.  Saltier,  i.  5.  4 ff.

3 Performs  manual  labour.

4 The  college  of  high  officials.

* He  dares  not  sleep.

* His  erstwhile  schoolfellows  who  have  become  scribes.

7 Relieve  them  of  domestic  tasks,  or  compulsory  labour  on  the  em-
bankments, etc.

8 The  schoolfellows.

* The  scribe’s  profession.

10  There  were  thus  several  such  councils.


198


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[A  FRAGMENT.]  1

I am  told  that  thou  dost  forsake  writing  and  givest  thyself
up  to  pleasures  ; thou  turnest  thv  back  on  the  God’s  Words,
and  runnest  away  from  this  calling  of  Thoth.  Thine  heart
knoweth  not  that  thou  art  . . . in  order  to  lead  others .

The  subject  of  the  fragments  following  is  perhaps  again  the
woes  of  the  soldier.

2.  ACTUAL  LETTERS  AS  MODELS  FOR  SCHOOLBOYS

Among  the  letters,  which  the  teacher  set  his  pupils  to  copy,  are
several  apparently  real  business,  or  private,  letters,  similar  to  a
number  of  fairly  well-preserved  originals  still  in  our  possession.
If  they  have  gained  the  distinction  of  being  employed  as  models,
the  teacher  at  any  rate  must  have  considered  their  style  to  be  good,
and  besides,  his  pupil  could  learn  from  them  the  various  forms  of
epistolary  composition.

That  the  teacher  selected  them  from  his  own  familv  or  official
correspondence  is  quite  clear  from  the  fact  that  these  letters  occur
in  only  one  of  the  schoolboy  manuscripts,  whereas  the  fictitious
letters,  dealt  with  later,  recur  in  various  manuscripts.

Here,  only  certain  specimens  are  given.  The  differences  m the
formulae  employed  in  the  letters  are  to  be  noted  ; these  being
determined  by  whether,  as  in  the  first  example,  persons  of  the  same
standing  are  writing  to  one  another,  or,  as  in  the  second,  a superior
to  an  underling,  or,  as  in  the  third,  an  underling  to  “ his  master.”

[Pursuit  of  a runaway  slave.]2

The  Commandant  of  the  Auxiliaries  of  Zeku,3  Kakemur,
(writeth)  to  the  Commandant  of  the  Auxiliaries,  Anii,  and  to
the  Commandant  of  the  Auxiliaries,  Bekenptah.

In  life,  prosperity,  and  health,  and  in  the  favour  of  Amunre.
king  of  gods,  and  of  the  Ka  of  King  Sethos  II,  our  good  lordd

I say  to  Re-Harakhti : “ Keep  Pharaoh,  our  good  lord,  in
health  ! Let  him  celebrate  millions  of  jubilees,  while  we  are
daily  in  his  favour.”

Furthermore  : I was  sent  forth  from  the  halls  of  the  royal
palace  after  these  two  slaves  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  third
month  of  Summer  at  the  time  of  evening.  And  when  I came

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  6.  i S.

1 Ibid.  v.  19.  2 ff.

3 Frontier  station  not  far  from  the  Bitter  Lakes

4 Meaning  : May  you  receive  this  letter  in  life,  prosperity,  etc.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  199

on  the  tenth  day  of  the  third  month  of  Summer  to  the  castle  (?)
of  Zeku,  I was  told  that  the  news  from  the  south  was  that  they
had  gone  past  on  the  . . . th  day  of  the  third  month  of  Summer.
And  when  I came  to  the  fortress,  I was  told  that  the  groom  (?)
had  come  from  the  desert  (and  had  reported)  that  they  had
crossed  the  boundary  north  of  the  Migdol 1 of  Sethos,  who  is
. . . like  Seth.

When  my  letter  reacheth  you,  write  unto  me  about  all  that
hath  come  to  pass  with  you.  Where  were  their  tracks  found  ?
Which  watch  (?)  found  their  tracks  ? What  men  pursued  after
them  ? Write  unto  me  of  all  that  was  done  about  them,  and
how  many  men  followed  them.

Live  ye  happily  !

[Order  to  carry  out  a piece  of  work.)  2

The  king’s  scribe  and  general,  Ramdse,  saith  to  the  mason,
Auroi  : This  letter  is  brought  unto  thee.

Further  : When  my  letter  reacheth  thee,  thou  art  to  go  to
the  town  of  . . . re  in  Bubastis,  and  thou  art  to  execute  every
behest,  and  art  then  to  come  to  make  report  unto  me.  Look
thou  to  it,  have  a care,  take  heed  to  thyself  ! Hold  not  back
in  any  respect  !

My  letter  cometh  unto  thee  by  the  hand  of  the  priest  Ramdse.
(He  was  ?)  present,  when  thou  earnest  unto  me  near  by  the
canal,  and  I beat  thee,  saying  : “ How  comes  it  that  thou
neglectest  my  business  ? I will  set  thee  to  work  on  the  canal.”

Prithee,  know  that !

[Business  of  various  sorts.]  3

The  scribe  Pe-uhem  gladdeneth  4 his  lord  Anhorrekh.

In  life,  prosperity,  and  health  ! This  is  written  to  let  my
lord  know.

A further  matter  to  gladden  my  lord.  I have  heard  the
order  that  my  lord  sent  me,  that  I am  to  give  fodder  to  the
horses  of  the  great  stable  of  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun,  likewise
to  the  horses  of  the  great  . . . stable  of  Binere-Beloved-of-
Amun,5  of  the  Residence.

1 Canaanite  word  for  “ fort.”  ! Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  21.  8 ff.

* Pap.  Bologna,  1094,  2.  7 ff.

1 Probably  only  means  : makes  him  a communication,  which  (as  just
below)  need  by  no  means  be  gladdening.

5 ilerneptah,  the  reigning  king  ( circa  1230  B.c.).


200


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


A further  matter  to  gladden  my  lord.  The  peasants  of  the
domain  of  Pharaoh,  which  is  in  the  charge  of  my  lord,  three
men  of  these  ran  away  from  the  superintendent  of  the  stable,
Neferhotep,  when  he  beat  them.  Now  behold,  the  fields  of
the  domain  of  Pharaoh,  which  are  in  the  charge  of  my  lord,  are
neglected  and  there  is  none  to  till  them.

This  is  written  to  let  my  lord  know.

[Request  for  assistance  in  a matter  of  taxation.]  1

The  priest  Pramheb  of  the  temple  of  Sutekh  enquireth  after
the  steward  Sethos.  In  life,  prosperity,  and  health,  and  in  the
favour  of  Amunre,  king  of  gods  !

I say  unto  Re-Harakhti,  to  Seth,  to  Nephthys,  and  to  all
the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Pe-u-nozem  : “ Mayest  thou  prosper,
mayest  thou  live,  may  I see  thee  again  in  safety,  and  fold  thee
in  my  embrace.”

Furthermore  : I have  heard  of  the  many  good  things  which
thou  hast  done  for  my  ship,  in  that  thou  didst  dispatch  it.
May  Month  reward  thee  ! May  the  sun,  thy  good  lord,2  reward
thee  !

When  my  letter  reacheth  thee,  thou  shalt  go  with  the
standard-bearer,3  Ptahemmenu,  and  shalt  make  a declaration
to  the  vizier  with  respect  to  the  much  silver,  concerning  which
the  henchman  Eai  saith  : ” Hand  it  over,”  though  it  is  not  my
tax  at  all.  And  take  the  copy  of  the  silver  4 and  of  the  dues  (?)
in  writing  to  the  south,5  and  place  them  before  the  vizier,  and
tell  him,  he  is  not  to  tax  (me  on  account  of  the)  people,  for  I
(personally)  have  no  people.  For  I am  responsible  for  the
galley,  and  I am  responsible  likewise  for  the  House-of -Nephthys, 6
and  behold,  the  multitude  7 of  temples,  that  are  in  the  district,
it  is  not  conformable  to  me.8  I am  very  miserable,  in  extremest
misery,  because  of  what  hath  been  done  unto  me.

1 Pap.  Bologna,  1094,  5.  8 S.  * The  king.

5 An  officer  of  sorts.  4 1.e.  the  tax  assessment.

5 The  vizier  will  be  in  Thebes.

• Sense  of  the  passage  • I cannot  be  assessed  in  accordance  with  the

large  number  of  people  that  I employ,  for  they  are  necessary  for  all  the

state  property  which  I unfortunately  must  administer.

7 Literally  " heap  " ; cf.  the  familiar  use  of  the  word  " heap  ” in
English.

8 It  is  out  of  keeping  with  my  personal  circumstances,  that  I should
have  to  look  after  all  of  them.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  201

Now  behold, and  speak  also  with  some  one  else

with  regard  to  the  excessive  administrative  work,  that  is  imposed
upon  me  as  dues  attaching  to  the  temple  of  Sutekh,  and  to  the
domain  of  Pharaoh,  that  are  in  my  charge.

Behold,  that  is  (for  thee)  a small  matter,  and  omit  nothing
(thereof),  together  with  the  standard-bearer  Ptahemmenu.

Fare  thee  well !

[Enquiries.]  1

The  scribe  Pe-uhem  gladdeneth  his  lord,  the  scribe  Mehu  of
the  workshop  of  Pharaoh.

In  life,  prosperity,  and  health  ! This  is  written  to  let  my
lord  know.

Something  further  to  gladden  my  lord.  The  vizier  sent
three  boys,  saying  : “ Make  them  priests  in  the  temple  of  Mer-
neptah  in  the  House-of-Ptah.”  (But)  one  laid  hold  on  them
and  took  them  away  . . . and  said  : “ They  shall  be  soldiers.”
Pray,  hasten  and  pass  by  them,  and  write  to  me  as  to  how  they
fare.

Likewise  look  up  the  merchant  and  see  whether  he  hath
come  back  from  Syria.

Likewise  thou  shalt  pass  (by  me)  here  in  Memphis  ; my
heart  is  in  ill  humour  and  I cannot  write  (it)  to  thee.

Pray  send  the  servant  T aennana,  and  write  to  me  as  to  how
thou  farest,  by  the  hand  of  any  one  who  may  be  coming  here
from  thee.

Fare  thee  well !

[Family  letter.]  2

The  scribe  Amenmose  inquireth  after  his  father,  the  Com-
mandant of  the  Auxiliaries,  Bekenptah.

In  life,  prosperity,  and  health,  and  in  the  favour  of  Amunre,
king  of  gods.

I say  to  Re-Harakhti,  and  to  Atum  and  his  Ennead  :
“ Mayest  thou  be  in  health  daily.”

Furthermore  : Pray  write  to  me  as  to  the  state  of  thy
health  by  the  hand  of  any  persons  who  are  coming  hither  from
thee,  for  I desire  daily  to  hear  as  to  how  thou  farest.  Thou
writest  to  me  neither  good  nor  ill,  and  no  person  of  them  that
thou  sendest  passeth  by  me,  that  he  may  tell  me  how  thou
1 Pap.  Bologna,  1094,  4.  10  ft.  a Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  20.  6 fi.


202


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


farest.  Pray  write  to  me  as  to  how  thou  farest,  and  how  thy
servants  fare  in  regard  to  all  their  concerns,  for  I have  an
exceeding  longing  for  them.

Furthermore  : I had  brought  to  thee  (only)  fifty  good
kyllestis-loaves,  for  the  carrier  threw  away  thirty  of  them
saying  : “ I am  too  heavily  laden.”  And  he  would  not  wait
for  me  to  have  vegetables  brought  to  him  from  the  store-
house (?),  although  he  had  not  informed  me  as  to  what  evening
he  would  be  coming  to  me.  I send  thee  by  him  two  plates  of
fat  for  unguent.

Fare  thee  well  !

[CONGRATULATION'S.]  1

The  Commandant  of  Auxiliaries  and  Overseer  of  the  Foreign
Country,  Penamun,  to  the  Commandant  of  Auxiliaries,  Pehri-
pide.

In  life,  prosperity,  health,  and  in  the  favour  of  Amunre,
king  of  gods,  and  of  the  Ka  of  King  Sethos  II  ! 2

I say  to  Re-Harakhti  : “ Keep  Pharaoh,  our  good  lord,  in
health.  May  he  celebrate  millions  of  jubilees,  whilst  thou  3
art  daily  in  his  favour  ! ”

Furthermore,  I have  heard  what  thou  hast  written,  saying  :
“ Pharaoh,  my  good  lord,  hath  carried  out  for  me  his  good
designs.  Pharaoh  hath  appointed  me  (chief  captain)  of  the
auxiliaries  of  the  well.”  4 So  hast  thou  written  unto  me.

It  is  a goodly  disposition  of  Re  that  thou  art  now'  in  the
place  of  thy  father.  Bravo  ! The  same,  (and  again)  the  same  ! °

When  thy  letter  reached  me  I rejoiced  exceedingly.  May
Re-Harakhti  grant  thee  a long  life  filling  thy  father’s  place  !
May  Pharaoh  regard  thee  yet  again ! Mayest  thou  grow
stronger,  and  write  to  me  again  as  to  how  thou  farest,  and  how'
thy  father  fareth,  by  the  hand  of  the  letter-carriers  who  come
hither  from  thee.

Furthermore  : All  goeth  w'ell  with  me.  and  all  goeth  well
with  the  domain  6 of  Pharaoh.  Have  no  anxiety  about  me.

Fare  thee  well !

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  xx.  7 ff.

2 Memeptah’s  successor.  5 The  person  addressed.

4 One  of  the  fortified  well-stations  on  the  road  to  Palestine.

‘ May  just  the  same  good  fortune  attend  you  yet  further  !

5 Which  the  writer  has  to  administer.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


203


[Reproof  of  a high  official.]  1

This  royal  decree  is  brought  to  thee.

What  concern  hast  thou  with  the  Tekten  of  the  Oasis
country,  that  thou  hast  sent  forth  this  scribe  of  thine  to  remove
them  from  their  Xiau  ? 2

If  now  ...  Re  and  Ptah  suffer  (us)  not  to  hear  aught  re-
specting (?)  these  rumours  (?)  that  one  heareth,  and  this  prince  3
then  writeth  saying  : “ Thou  art  to  bring  hither  the  Tekten
that  can  spy  ” — whither  wilt  thou  (turn)  ? To  whose  house
wilt  thou  (go)  ? He  cometh  down  on  thine  head  like  a sand
dune.  Thou  art  taken  away  and  art  placed  there .

Even  so  is  it  with  thine  other  very  grave  offence,  which
thou  now  committest  : thou  lettest  Pharaoh  come,  in  order
to  betake  himself  unto  Heliopolis,  without  causing  tools  for  the
workshop  to  be  brought  as  equipment  behind  thy  lord .

Art  thou  not  put  in  the  place  of  other  superintendents  of
the  treasury,  who  abstained  from  removing  a Tekten  from  his
Niau,  and  only  thou  (doest  this)  ?

When  the  decree  of  Pharaoh  reacheth  thee,  thou  art  to  write
a letter  to  this  scribe  of  thine,  whom  thou  didst  despatch  to  the
Oasis  country,  saying  : “ Beware  ! Abstain  from  taking  away
even  one  of  the  Tekten,  or  it  will  be  accounted  unto  thee  as  a
crime  worthy  of  death.”  And  thou  shalt  hand  over  thy  letter
to  an  henchman  of  thine,  and  thou  shalt  despatch  him  with
the  runner  4 with  all  speed.

[Ennui  in  a lonely  place.]  5

It  is  concerned  with  an  officer  who,  instead  of  marching  to
Palestine,  has  to  erect  buildings  on  the  frontier.  But  he  can  do  no
work,  and  can  only  give  information  about  dogs  and  gnats.  The
whole  is  of  course  ironical.

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  10.  8;  was  also  in  Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  The  letter
might  be  purely  fictitious.

2 The  Tekten  and  Niau  are  barbarians  of  sorts,  who  were  kept  in  the
western  desert  as  light  troops.  They  are  mentioned  also  in  Memeptah’s
hymn  of  victory.

3 The  title  indicates  one  of  the  highest  officials  in  the  administration,

4 A courier  who  maintained  communications  with  the  Oases.

5 Pap.  Anastasi , iv.  12.  5 ; was  also  in  Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  It  may  well
be  a purely  fictitious  letter.  It  appears  to  be  composed  in  verses  of  four
lines.


204  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

I reside  in  Kenkentaui,1  and  I am  without  equipment.
There  are  no  people  to  make  bricks,  and  there  is  no  straw  2 in
the  district.

Where  are  they  that  bring  me  ? Are  there  no  asses  ?

— They  are  stolen.

I spend  the  day  gazing  at  what  is  in  the  sky,  as  though  (?)
I were  catching  birds.  Mine  eye  glanceth  furtively  at  the  road,
in  order  to  go  up  to  Palestine.

I pass  the  night  under  trees  that  bear  no  fruit  (?)  to  eat.
Where  are  their  dates  ? They  have  none  (?),  they  bear  not.

The  gnat  is  there  in  the  twilight,  and  the  zewet-gnat  at  noon,
and  it  sucketh  at  every  vein.

I go  like  one  that  is  firm  upon  the  bones,  I traverse  the  lands
on  my  feet.3

If  ever  one  openeth  a bottle,  it  is  full  of  beer  of  Kedi,  and
people  came  forth  to  . . . the  cup  outside.4

There  are  two  hundred  large  dogs  here,  and  three  hundred
wolf-hounds,  in  all  five  hundred,5  which  stand  ready  every
day  at  the  door  of  the  house  whenever  I go  out,  because  they
smelt  the  seber  6 when  the  jar  was  opened.  However  (?),  have
I not  got  the  little  wolf-hound  of  Teherhu,  a royal  scribe,  here
in  the  house  ? And  he  delivereth  (?)  me  from  them.  At  every
hour,  whensoever  I sally  forth,  he  is  with  me  as  guide  upon  the
road.  As  soon  as  he  barketh  I run  to  undo  (?)  the  bolt.7

“ Isheb  ” is  the  name  of  a wolf-hound,  red,  with  a long  tail.
He  goeth  by  night  into  the  stalls  of  the  cattle.  He  beginneth
with  the  largest 8 first,  for  he  maketh  no  distinction  whatsoever,
when  he  is  fierce.

God  will  deliver  whom  He  will  (from  ?)  this  fire,  which  is
here  and  which  hath  no  compassion.9

Furthermore  : A . . . scribe  is  here  with  me,  every  vein

1 An  unknown  place.  The  name,  “ Flogging  of  Egypt,’’  is  perhaps
only  a joke.

a Which  was  necessary  for  the  manufacture  of  crude  brick.

3 He  complains  again  that  he  has  no  donkey.

1 Is  the  meaning : one  is  glad  even  if  one  can  only  admire  such  a
drink  from  outside  ?

3 The  street-dogs  of  the  Orient  are  meant.

* From  the  writing,  a drink  or  the  like.

7 Or  "to  fasten"?  Meaning  probably:  this  tame  dog  keeps  me
from  going  out.

* Of  the  cattle

* Meaning  : God  (the  King  ?)  may  let  me  go  from  here.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


205


of  whose  face  . . . ; the  . . . disease  hath  developed  in  his
eye,  and  the  worm  gnaweth  at  his  tooth.  I cannot  leave  him
destitute,  when  my  company  goeth  forward.  So  let  his  ration  be
given  unto  him  here,  that  he  may  have  rest  in  the  region  of
Kenkentaui.

[Longing  for  Memphis.]  1

Behold,  mine  heart  hath  gone  forth  secretly.  It  hasteneth
to  a place  that  it  knoweth  ; it  voyageth  downstream,  that  it

may  see  Memphis . But  I sit  and  wait  for  (a  messenger),

that  he  may  tell  me  how  Memphis  fareth.  I have  no  message,
and  mine  heart  leapeth  in  its  place.

Come  to  me,  Ptah,2  to  take  (me)  to  Memphis,  and  let  me
view  thee  unhindered.

I spend  the  day  with  mine  heart  dreaming  (?).  Mine  heart

is  not  in  my  body,  all  my  limbs , mine  eye  is  weary

with  looking,3  mine  ear  is  not  . . .,  my  voice  is  . . .,  so  that  it
speaketh  all  manner  of  things  pervertedly.  Be  gracious  to  me,
and  suffer  (me  ?)  to  mount  up  (?)  to  them.

3.  FICTITIOUS  MODEL  LETTERS

Besides  actual  letters,  which  schoolboys  were  given  to  copy  out,
literary  productions  in  the  form  of  letters  were  placed  before  them.
Firstly,  all  the  exhortations  and  warnings  given  above  onpp.  189  ff.  ;
these  have  in  every  case  been  given  an  epistolary  form,  having
prefixed  to  them  “ The  official  A.  saith  to  the  scribe  B.”  Secondly,
compositions,  which  from  their  contents  might  really  be  letters,  but
in  which  the  business  element  almost  escapes  notice,  as  it  is  cloaked
in  such  flowery  language,  and  is  so  spun  out  and  expanded.

Many  of  these  texts  recur  in  different  manuscripts — one  at  a
considerably  later  date  ‘ — and  were  thus  certainly  prized  as  examples
of  elegant  style.  In  the  case  of  several,  the  suspicion  is  unavoidable
that  the  whole  purport  of  the  mass  of  unusual  names  and  words,
which  they  contain,  was  to  familiarize  the  schoolboy  with  the
writing  of  them.


1 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  4.  ir  ff.  The  letter  might  be  fictitious.

a The  god  of  Memphis.  3 For  a messenger  ?

4 A Pap.  Rainer  in  Vienna,  belonging  to  the  Twenty-First  Dynasty.
The  letter,  which  is  known  to  us  from  a MS.  of  the  time  of  Memeptah,
must  have  been  written  under  Ramesses  II.  It  thus  continued  to  be  used
in  the  schools  for  at  least  two  hundred  years.


206


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[In  praise  of  the  new  city  called  House-of-Ramesses.]  1

House-of-Ramesses  is  the  famous  newly  founded  residence  of
Ramesses  II,  which  lay  on  the  site  of  the  later  Pelusium.  It  was
regarded  as  the  centre  of  an  empire  that  was  supposed  to  embrace
Palestine  and  Egypt.  The  letter  is  probably  based  on  a poem
similar  to  that  given  below  [pp . 2jo  ff),  celebrating  the  entry  of
the  king  into  this  city.

The  scribe  Paibes  greeteth  his  lord,  the  scribe  AmenemSpe.2

In  life,  prosperity,  and  health  ! This  is  written  in  order
to  give  information  to  m}-  lord.

Another  greeting  to  mv  lord  : I have  arrived  at  House-of-
Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun  and  have  found  it  flourishing  ex-
ceedingly, a fair  throne  (?),  whereof  the  like  existeth  not ; after
the  pattern  of  Thebes.  It  was  Re  who  founded  it  himself,
the  residence  where  life  is  pleasant.

Its  field  is  full  of  all  good  things,  and  it  hath  provisions
and  sustenance  every  day.  Its  ponds  (?)  are  full  of  fishes,  and
its  lakes  of  birds.  Its  plots  are  verdant  with  herbage,  and  its

banks  bear  dates. Its  granaries  are  full  of  barley  and

wheat,  and  they  reach  unto  the  sky.  Garlic  and  leeks  for
victuals  (are  there),  and  lettuce  (?)  of  the  . . . -garden ;
pomegranates,  apples,  and  olives ; figs  from  the  orchard,
sweet  wine  of  Kankeme,3  surpassing  honey ; red  uz-fish  from
the  canal  of  ...  ; betin(?)-fish  from  Lake  Neher; .4

Shihor  5 yieldeth  salt,  and  Lake  Her  natron.  Its  ships  fare
forth  and  come  to  port.

Provisions  and  sustenance  are  in  it  daily.  One  rejoiceth
when  one  dwelleth  in  it,  and  none  saith  unto  it,  “ Would  that ! ”
The  small  in  it  are  like  unto  the  great.6

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii,  I.  n ff.  ; Pap.  Rainer,  and  an  ostracon.  See
Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt  Archceology,  v.  p.  185.  Cf.  also  Blackman  and
Peet,  " Papyrus  Lansing  : A Translation  with  Notes,”  in  Journ.  of  Egypt.
Archaeology , xi.  pp.  293  ff.

3  In  Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.,  Amenemope  is  the  teacher,  Paibes  the  pupil.

3 The  frequently  mentioned  vineyard,  which  was  probably  situated  in
the  neighbourhood  of  House-of-Ramesses.

4 There  then  follow  five  other  kinds  of  fish  from  different  pools — all
unknown  to  us.

5 The  stretch  of  water,  also  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  which
forms  the  boundary  of  Egypt,  i.e.  the  Pelusiac  arm  of  the  Nile,  or  rather,
since  here  it  yields  salt,  the  lagoons  created  by  it.

• The  humble  person  here  lives  like  a great  person  in  other  cities


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


207


Come,  let  us  celebrate  for  it  its  festivals  of  the  sky,1  and
its  beginnings  of  seasons.

The  Zouf-swamp  cometh  to  it  with  papyrus,  and  Shihor
with  rushes.  Vine-trailers  hath  it  from  the  orchards,  and
garlands  from  the  vineyards.  Birds  (are  brought  to  it  ?)  from

the  cool  water . The  sea  hath  beg-fish  and  ad-fish,

and  the  lagoons  present  unto  it  their  . . .

The  youths  of  Great-of-Victories  2 are  in  festive  attire  every
day,  and  sweet  oil  is  upon  their  heads  in  the  newly  dressed
hair.  They  stand  beside  their  doors,  their  hands  weighed  down
with  foliage  (?),  with  greenery  from  the  House  of  Hathor,  and
with  flax  (?)  from  Lake  Her,  on  the  day  whereon  Ramesses
entereth,  even  Month  3-in-the-Two-Lands,  on  the  morning  of
the  feast  of  Khoiakh.  Every  man  and  his  fellow  likewise
utter  their  petitions.

The  draughts  of  Great-of-Victories  are  sweet ; its  tebi 4
are  as  shaau ; 5 its  khiwawa 4 taste  like  inu,5  surpassing  (?)
honey ; beer  of  Kedi 6 from  the  port,  and  wine  from  the  vine-
yards.

Sw'eet  unguents  (are  there)  from  the  waters  of  Segbain,  and
garlands  from  the  . . . -garden,  sweet  singers  of  Great-of-
Victories,  who  have  been  instructed  in  Memphis.

Dwell  (there)  happily,  and  stride  freely  forth,  not  moving
thence,  0 LTsimare-Chosen-of-Amun,  Month-in-the-Turo-Lands,
Ramesses- Beloved-of-Amun,  thou  god  !

[Letter  of  a governor  to  a vassal.]  7

The  Fan-bearer  at  the  right  hand  of  the  King,  Captain  of
Auxiliaries  and  Superintendent  of  the  foreign  lands  of  Ethiopia,
Paser,8  saith  unto  the  Protector  of  his  People.9  This  letter  is
brought  unto  thee.

1 Determined  by  events  in  the  sky  (new  moon,  rising  of  Sothis,  etc.),  in
contrast  to  the  conventional  ones  (New  Year,  first  day  of  the  month,  etc.).

2 A name  for  House-of- Ramesses.  3 The  war-god.

4 Drinks  of  sorts.  5 Fruit.

• Kedi  is  an  oft-mentioned  country,  possibly  Cilicia.  The  "port  ” is
the  harbour  belonging  to  House-of- Ramesses.

7 Pap.  Roller,  3.  3 ff.  ; also  on  an  ostracon.  See  Gardiner,  Hieratic
Texts,  p.  40.

8 A viceroy  of  Ethiopia  of  this  name  lived  under  Ramesses  II,
another  under  King  Ai  ; the  ostracon  also  gives  the  writer  of  the  letter
this  name.

9 1.e.  probably  some  petty  Nubian  dynast


208


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Furthermore  : When  my  letter  reacheth  thee,  thou  shalt
cause  the  tribute  1 to  be  furnished  with  all  that  appertaineth
thereto.  With  cattle  and  young  oxen  and  short-horned  bulls,
with  gazelles,  oryxes,  ibexes,  and  ostriches.  Their  cargo  boats,
their  cattle-transports,  and  their  boats  are  ready  to  hand  (?),
their  sailors  and  their  crews  are  prepared  for  starting.  With
much  gold  wrought  into  dishes,  and  fine  gold  in  bushels,  and
good  gold-dust  (?)  from  the  desert  in  a bag  of  red  linen.  With
ivory  and  ebony,  with  ostrich  feathers,  with  nebes-fruit  as  . . .,
and  bread  of  the  nebes,  shakarkaba,  meyenyekhis,  behkek,
and  shesa,2  which  look  like  panther-skins,  with  gummi-resin
and  haematite,  with  red  jasper,  amethyst,  and  crystal,  with

cats  from  Miu,  monkeys  and  apes . Numerous  men

of  Irmi  3 walk  in  front  of  the  tribute,  their  eberez-staves  (?)

overlaid  with  gold ; 4 tall  men  of  Tirek  in  . . .

-garments,  their  fans  of  gold,  wearing  high  feathers,  and  their
bracelets  are  of  woven  work  (?)  ; many  negroes  of  all  sorts.

Increase  thy  contributions  every  year  ! Have  a care  for

thine  head,  and  cease  from  thine  indolence. See  thou

to  it,  give  heed,  be  on  thy  guard  ! Be  mindful  of  the  day
when  the  tribute  is  brought,  when  thou  passest  before  the  king
beneath  the  window,5  and  the  counsellors  are  ranged  on  either
side  in  front  of  his  majesty,  and  the  chiefs  and  envoys  of  all
lands  stand  there  marvelling  and  viewing  the  tribute.  Thou
art  afraid  . . .,  thine  hand  sinketh,  and  thou  knowest  not
whether  death  or  life  lieth  before  thee.  Thou  hast  (only)  the
strength  to  petition  thy  gods  : “ Deliver  me  ! Prosper  me  but
this  once  ! ”

[Equipment  for  a royal  journey.]  6

The  scribe  Amenemdpe  saith  unto  the  scribe  Paibes  : This
letter  is  brought  unto  thee.

Furthermore  : Take  heed  to  have  (full)  preparations  made

1 Which  he  is  delivering  to  the  king.

1 Probably  all  are  fruits.  The  writer  throughout  the  letter  piles  one
rare  foreign  word  on  the  top  of  another.

3 A Nubian  tribe.

4 A series  of  barbarous  words,  which  probably  refer  to  the  adornment
of  the  people.

5 The  great  window  of  the  palace  in  which  the  king  shows  himself  on
ceremonial  occasions.

* Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  13.  8 fi,  ; commencement  in  Pap.  Roller,  5.  5 3,


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  209

in  front  of  Pharaoh,  thy  good  lord,  in  fair  and  excellent
order,  and  let  not  thyself  be  blamed.  Look  thou  to  it,  give
heed,  and  beware.  Be  not  remiss.

List  of  all  that  thou  must  have  provided.

Cause  to  be  procured  what  the  basket-makers  need  in  the
way  of  reeds  and  rushes.  Likewise  have  made  ten  flat  baskets
for  heaps,  one  hundred  round  (?)  baskets  for  making  presenta-
tion, and  five  hundred  baskets  for  food-stuffs  (?).

List  of  the  things  which  thou  shalt  have  made  for  them.1

(.4  long  list  of  victuals.  First  2g,ooo  loaves  of  bread  in
ten  different  varieties,  including  at  the  end,  1200  assorted
Asiatic  loaves.  Then  cakes  in  baskets  and  cups,  next  100
baskets  of  dried  meat,  250  handfuls  of  entrails,  60  measures  of
milk,  90  measures  of  cream.  Furthermore  100  heaps  of  vege-
tables, 50  geese,  jo  rams,  bunches  of  grapes,  pomegranates,  figs,
flowers,  garlands,  etc.  etc.  Lastly,  wood-fuel  and  charcoal.)

Behold,  I write  to  thee,  to  instruct  thee  in  the  regulations
for  equipping  the  ports,2  which  thou  wilt  execute  before  Pharaoh,
thy  good  lord.  Thou  art  thus  not  lacking  in  any  counsels,
whereof  thou  wilt  stand  in  need.  Suffer  not  thyself  to  be
wanting  in  understanding  in  the  . . .,  and  suffer  not  thyself
to  be  wanting  in  vigour  in  the  equipping.  ( Then  comes  an
additional  note  concerning  honey,  leeks,  etc.)

[Equipment  for  the  king.]  3

Take  heed  to  have  full  preparation  made  in  front  of  Pharaoh,
thy  good  lord,  in  fair  and  excellent  order,  with  bread,  beer,
meat,  cakes  . . .,  and  likewise  with  incense  and  with  a
pleasant  oil  (here  follow  seven  varieties  of  oil  bearing  foreign
names,  from  the  countries  of  Arsa,  Khatti,  Singar,  Emor,  Tekhis,
and  Naharina),  and  with  many  oils  of  the  harbour,  for  the
anointing  of  his  soldiery  and  chariotry  ; with  oxen  and  short-
horned oxen,  goodly,  castrated,  from  the  west,  with  fat  calves
from  the  south,  and  many  fat  birds  from  the  reed-swamp.

Xext  come  twelve  sorts  of  fish,  with  notification  of  their  places
of  origin,  then  fat  quails  (?)  and  pigeons  of  the  season  of  harvest,4

1 The  baskets.

2 This  “ equipping  ol  the  ports  ’ is  known  to  us  under  ThutmSsis  III
as  an  annual  undertaking.

3 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  15.  1 fi.  ; thid.  iii.  S.  1 if.

4 I e.  which  have  been  fattened  up  m the  held.

14


210


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


furthermore  honey,  oil  for  eating,  fat  of  geese,  cream,  milk,
lentils,  etc.  etc.,  jars  of  pewer-drink  for  the  servants,1  beer
from  Kedi,  wine  from  Syria,  and  beans  in  heaps.

Bottles  (?)  and  cups  of  silver  and  gold,2  which  are  set  out  in
array  (?)  beneath  the  (palace)  window.

Slaves  from  the  land  of  Iverke,  youths  in  relays  in  the
capacity  of  butlers  of  his  majesty  ; they  are  washed,  anointed,
and  clothed  (?)  in  . . .,  when  they  pass  under  the  window.
The  man  who  is  among  them  is  bound  for  the  kitchen,  and  will
provide  beer  of  Kedi  for  the  palace .

Canaanite  slaves  from  Syria,  goodly  youths,  and  goodly
negroes  from  Ethiopia,  destined  to  carry  the  fan  ; they  are
shod  with  white  sandals  and  clad  (?)  in  . . .,  their  armlets  (?)
are  on  their  hands.

Then  follow  all  kinds  of  effects  needed  by  the  king  : firstly,
goodly  . . . from  the  land  of  Emor,  whose  staves  are  of  meri-
wood  and  inlaid  in  the  work  of  the  land  of  Kedi.  Next  the
beauteous  chariots  of  berri-wood,  that  glitter  more  than  lapis
lazuli  ; eleven  parts  of  them  are  enumerated,  and  in  every  case
what  they  are  made  of  is  notified,  or  from  what  country  they  originate.
Furthermore  : Bows  and  many  quivers  . . sword,  lance,  and
knife,  goodly  weapons  for  his  majesty.  Goodly  whips  of  zaga-

wood,  their  lashes  being  of  red  linen . Long  staves  for

his  majesty,  whose  handles  are  wrought  with  gold,  etc.  etc.,  all
consisting  of  as  many  foreign  words  and  names  as  possible.

Flour  in  many  heaps,  and  heaps  of  flour  of  wheat,  beans,
figs  of  Syria,  pomegranates  and  apples,  and  lastly  charcoal

Large  and  well-baked  loaves,  appointed  for  the  sustenance
of  the  notables,  and  assorted  Asiatic  wheaten  loaves,  which  are
for  the  sustenance  of  the  soldiery,  and  which  lie  in  heaps  under
the  window  of  the  right  side.  Copper  ore  in  many  ingots,  and
jugs  of  . . .,  which  the  children  of  Arsa  bring  upon  the  neck
as  gifts  for  his  majesty ; the  horns  which  they  hold  in  their
hands  are  filled  with  oil  of  . . .

Beauteous  steeds  reared  in  Singar,  steers  of  the  first  quality
from  the  land  of  Khatti,  and  cows  from  Arsa,  which  are  brought
by  their  princes,  who  stand  bowing  beneath  the  (window) .

1 Thus  a beverage  of  an  inferior  kind  ; see  also  p 217  with  note  5.

2 It  might  be  supposed  that  another  document  actually  begins  here,
describing  the  presentation  of  tribute.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


211


[Equipment  of  a war-chariot.]  1

Furthermore  : Take  good  heed  to  have  made  ready  the  pair
of  horses  bound  for  Syria,  together  with  their  stable-men  and
their  grooms.  Their  coats  are  . . . ; (they  2 are)  full  of  pro-
vender  and  straw,  and  rubbed  down  twice  over.

Their  bags  are  full  of  kyllestis-bread,  and  each  single  ass
carries  them  between  two  men.3

Their  chariots  are  of  berri-wood  and  full  of  weapons.  Eighty
arrows  are  in  the  quiver  ; (there  is)  the  . . .,  the  lance,  the

sword,  the  knife, the  whip  of  zaga-wood  fully  supplied

with  lashes  (?),  the  chariot-club,  the  staff  of  the  watch,  the
spear  of  the  land  of  Khatti,  the  . . . Their4 5  points  are  of

bronze  of  six-fold  alloy,  graven, . Their  cuirasses  lie

beside  them.  The  bows .

4.  GREETINGS  TO  TEACHERS  AND  SUPERIORS

[TO  THE  TEACHER.]  3

(Thou  didst)  bring  (me)  up  as  a child,  when  I was  with  thee  ;
thou  didst  beat  my  back  and  thy  teaching  went  into  mine  ear.

I am  like  a frisky  horse  ; sleep  cometh  not  to  me  by  day
into  mine  heart,  and  it  is  not  upon  me  by  night,  for  I would
be  one  that  is  profitable  unto  his  lord,  like  a servant  profitable
unto  his  lord.

I would  build  for  thee  a new  mansion,  which  is  upon  the
ground  of  thy  city  and  is  planted  with  trees  upon  every  side
of  it.

Thy  stalls  within  (it  are  full  of  cattle),  and  its  granaries  are

full  of  barley  and  wheat ; there  is  com  therein  and ,

beans  and  lentils , flax  and  vegetables and

love-apples,6  which  are  to  be  measured  with  baskets.

1 Pap.  Koller,  i.  i ff.  See  Gardiner,  Hieratic  Texts,  p.  36.

2 The  horses  ?

* The  horses  are  thus  accompanied  by  a train  bearing  provisions  for
those  in  charge  of  them.

4 The  weapons.

5 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  8.  7 fi.  ; see  also  Blackman- Peet,  Journ.  of  Egypt.
Archeology,  xi.  p.  293.

• A fruit  often  mentioned  in  poems  of  the  time  ; the  translation
“ love-apples  " only  rests  upon  the  comparison  with  the  fruit  dudalm
mentioned  in  Genesis  and  the  Song  of  Songs.


212  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Thy  herd  doubleth  the  backs,1  and  thy  breeding-cows  are
pregnant.

1 will  plant  for  thee  five  acres  as  a vegetable  garden  to  the

south  of  thy  city,  with  cucumbers  and as  the  sand

for  multitude.

Let  ships  come  in  order  to  stow  them  aboard,  whereby  thou
mayest  know  what  thou  offerest  to  Ptah  Xefer-hor,  that  he  may
fulfil  for  thee  thy  desire.

[To  THE  TEACHER.]  2

May  Amun  afford  thee  jov  in  thine  heart,  may  he  grant  thee
a good  old  age,  that  thou  mayest  pass  a happy  life,  until  thou
attainest  honour.  Thy  lip  is  in  health,  thy  limbs  flourish,  and
thine  eye  seeth  afar.

Thou  puttest  on  fine  linen  ; thou  ridest  the  horses,3  with
a golden  whip  in  thine  hand ; thou  hast  a new  . . .,  and  the
yoke  is  of  Syrian  workmanship.  The  negroes  run  in  front  of
thee  and  execute  what  thou  wouldest  (have  done).

Thou  embarkest  on  thy  ship  of  cedar-wood,  that  is  manned
from  bow  to  stern,  and  thou  arrivest  at  this  thy  fair  mansion,
which  thou  hast  builded  for  thyself.

Thy  mouth  is  full  of  wine  and  beer,  of  bread,  and  meat,  and
cakes.  Oxen  are  slain  and  wine  (-jars)  opened,  and  pleasant
singing  is  before  thee.

The  chief  anointer  anointeth  with  kemi-unguent,  thy  water-
bailiff  beareth  garlands,  thine  overseer  of  the  country  folk
presenteth  fowl,  and  thy  fisherman  presenteth  fish.

Thy  galley  cometh  from  Syria  laden  with  all  good  things.
Thy  stall  is  full  of  calves,  and  thine  herd  (?)  flourisheth.

Thou  endurest,  and  thine  enemy  hath  fallen  ; he  that  spake
against  thee,  he  is  no  more.  Thou  enterest  in  before  the  Nine
Gods  and  comest  forth  justified.4

[To  AN  OFFICIAL.]  5

Thou  livest,  art  prosperous,  and  art  in  health.  Thou  art

not  wretched  and  sufferest  no  distress. Thou  endurest

like  the  hours,6  and  thy  counsel  endureth  ; long  is  thy  life-

1 1.e.  its  numbers

2 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  3.  2 ff . and  two  ostraca.

* I e-  drivest  thy  chariot.  J At  the  posthumous  trial.

* Pap-  Anastasi,  v.  14.  0 S ; see  also  the  verso  of  Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.

* Which  recur  without  intermission.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


213


time,  and  thine  utterances  are  excellent.  Thine  eye  seeth  what
is  beautiful,  and  thou  hearest  what  is  pleasant.

Thou  art  the  herdsman  whom  God  hath  given,  and  thou
carest  for  many.  Thou  givest  thine  hand  to  him  that  is  miser-
able, and  raiseth  up  him  that  hath  fallen.

Thou  endurest,  and  thine  enemy  hath  fallen  ; he  that  spake
against  thee,  he  is  no  more.

Thou  enterest  in  before  the  Nine  Gods  and  comest  forth
justified.

[To  THE  TEACHER  ?]  1

Good  sir,  thou  wilt  endure  and  wilt  every  day  have  victuals
by  thee,  cheerful  and  flourishing  daily,  and  praised  numberless
times.

Joy  and  gladness  join  themselves  unto  thee,  and  thy  limbs
proclaim  health.  Every  day  growest  thou  younger,  and  nought
harmful  (?)  hath  the  mastery  over  thee.

There  cometh  a year  wherein  (?)  one  calleth  to  mind  thy
beauty,  and  thy  like  is  found  not.  Thine  eye  is  bright  every
day,  and  thine  ear  is  sharpened  (?)

Thou  hast  many  beauteous  years.  Thy  months  (thou
spendest)  in  prosperity,  thy  days  in  life,  and  thine  hours  in
health.  Thy  gods  are  satisfied  with  thee  and  are  gladdened  by
thy  words.

Thou  sendest  away  (?)  the  beauteous  West,2  thou  becomest
not  old  and  art  not  sick.  Thou  completest  one  hundred  and
ten  years  upon  earth,  and  thy  limbs  are  strong,  as  happeneth
to  one  that  is  praised  like  thee,  when  his  god  rewardeth
him.

Then  the  lord  of  the  gods  entrusteth  thee  to  the  lords  of
the  Western  Mountain,3  and  bouquets  are  assigned  thee  in
Busiris,4  and  cool  water  in  the  necropolis.  Thy  soul  cometh
forth  that  it  may  walk  about  wherever  it  willeth.5

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.  4.  4.

* Since  the  West  is  the  realm  of  the  dead,  this  will  mean  : thou  puttest
off  the  day  of  death.

* I.e.  when  God  at  last  sendeth  death  to  thee.

J The  holy  city  of  Osiris,  in  the  Delta.

5 The  desire  of  the  dead  was  to  be  able  to  leave  their  tombs.


214


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


5.  A LITERARY  CONTROVERSY  1

I put  this  remarkable  composition  immediately  after  the  school-
letters.  because,  like  them,  it  was  actually  used  in  the  schools  as  a
standard  work,  and  the  spirit  which  it  breathes  is  the  same  as  that
which  prevails  in  them.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  a young
scholar  that  the  official  of  the  royal  stable.  Hori,  recommends,  in
the  capacity  of  instructor,  good  style  and  clear  ideas,  but  to  the  scribe
in  command  of  the  army,  Amenemope.  Nor  does  Hori  cherish  the
hope  of  converting  Amenemope,  but  makes  fun  of  him.  The  work  is
a satirical  letter,  and  indeed  originated  in  an  actual  correspondence,
which  gradually  developed  into  a literary  controversy.

Hori,  it  would  seem,  had  last  written  to  his  adversary  bidding
him  furnish  corn  for  the  soldiers,  and  the  latter  had  not  properly
carried  out  the  instructions,  but  had  sent  back  a reply  which  aimed  at
being  malicious,  but  which  was,  in  Hori’s  opinion,  a mere  jumble  of
praise  and  blame.  To  this  Hon  again  makes  answer  in  his  long
dispatch,  telling  his  opponent  what  he  on  his  part  thinks  of  him  as
regards  both  his  knowledge  and  the  deeds  about  which  he  brags.
At  the  same  time  he  defends  himself  against  the  attack  which  his
adversary  has  directed  against  him.

This  ink-slinging  on  the  part  of  two  officials  can  in  itself  have
possessed  no  interest  : it  must  therefore  have  been  the  style  and
the  humour  which  gave  the  work  its  value.  Though  we  naturally
cannot  fully  appreciate  either,  yet  even  a modern  reader  will  enjoy
the  polite  and  ironical  way  in  which  Hori  deals  with  his  luckless
victim.  He  is  an  educated  Egyptian,  to  whom  crudity  was  a thing
to  be  avoided.  If  the  work  strikes  us  as  monotonous  in  parts,  it
yet  atones  for  this  by  presenting  us  with  a series  of  remarkable
pictures  of  the  civilized  world  of  the  day,  particularly  in  the  account
of  the  journey  through  Palestine.  When  reading  this  work,  it  must
never  be  forgotten  that  the  author  is  presenting  us  with  an  over-
coloured  and  exaggerated  descnption.

The  work  belongs  to  the  time  of  Harnesses  II  ; that  the  author
was  actually  called  Hori,  and  his  opponent  Amenemope,  cannot  be
doubted,  for  the  different  manuscripts  all  agree  in  giving  them  the
same  names.

[1.  The  writer  of  the  letter.]

The  scribe  of  choice  perception,  patient  in  discussion  (?),  at
whose  utterances  men  rejoice  when  they  are  heard,  a craftsman

1 Preserved  completely  in  Pap.  Anastasi,  i,  in  London;  a fragment
in  a Turin  papyrus.  In  addition,  single  excerpts  on  eight  ostraca. —
Dealt  with  seriously  for  the  first  time  in  1866  by  Chabas  in  his  Voyage
d'un  igyptien  en  Syne,  but  only  in  1S85  recognized  by  Erman  to  be  a,
satire.  See  Gardiner,  Hieratic  Texts,  i , Leipzig,  xqu.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


215


in  the  God’s  Words  ;x  there  is  nothing  that  he  knoweth  not.
He  is  a champion  in  valour  and  in  the  work  of  Seshat,2  and  a
servant  of  the  lord  of  Hermopolis  in  his  academy  of  writing  ; a
teacher  of  subordinates 3 in  the  office  of  books.  The  most
eminent  of  his  companions,  and  the  commencement  of  his  family  ;
the  prince  of  his  contemporaries,  without  his  peer.  He  is  to  be
detected1  in  all  lads  ; of  active  (?)  hand,  and  his  fingers  make
the  child  become  great.  Exquisite wise  of  under-
standing his  laughter  (?).  Beloved  in  (men's)  hearts

without  being  resisted  (?)  ; men  desire  to  b?  friends  with  him
and  tire  not  of  him.  He  is  swift  to  inscribe  emptv  pages.
Youthful,  eminent  of  charm,  pleasant  of  grace  ; who  expoundeth
the  difficub  passages  kkc  him  that  composed  them.3  All  that
issueth  from  his  mouth  is  stcvped  in  honey,  and  ht  arts  are  made
healthy  therewith,  as  it  were  with  medicine.  Groom  of  his
majesty,6  who  accompanieth  the  sovereign  and  trameth  the

king’s  foals,  a keen  cultivator  of  the  stable, 7 ITori,  son

of  Wennofre,  of  Abydos,  region  of  the  righteous  ; 8 born  of
Tewosre  in  the  district  of  Bar  set/'  singer  of  Bast  in  the  Field  of
God.10

[2.  Salutation’  to  the  recipient.]

He  inquireth  after  his  friend,  his  excellent  brother,  the  royal
scribe  who  issueth  commands  to  the  victorious  army,  of  ex-
quisite taste,  goodly  of  character,  wise  of  understanding,  who
hath  not  his  equal  in  any  scribe.  The  darling  of  all  men,  as
beautiful  to  him  that  beholdeth  his  charm  as  is  a papyrus-plant
m the  heart  of  strangers.11  In  every  aspect  a scribe,  and
there  is  nothing  that  he  knoweth  not.  Men  enquire  of  him  in
respect  to  his  answer,  in  quest  of  what  is  choice.  Clever  and
of  friendly  heart ; one  that  loveth  men,  that  rejoiceth  at  a

1 Writing  and  sacred  books.  * The  goddess  of  writing.

* Or  “ assistant  teacher.”  i I.e.  his  instruction  is  to  be  detected.

5 Obscure  passages  in  ancient  books  To  be  able  to  understand  them

is  a wish  elsewhere  expressed  by  scribes  and  addressed  to  their  god
Thoth.

8 This  is  his  actual  occupation ; he  only  gives  instruction  as  a hobby.
As  horses  at  this  time  were  the  most  precious  treasure  of  the  king.  Hori
had  no  mean  position,  although  he  was  certainly  not  of  high  family,  for
he  would  not  have  concealed  that  fact  from  us

7 I.e.  a diligent  worker.  8 The  city  of  Osiris,  the  god  of  the  dead.

• In  the  Delta,  the  modem  Belbeis.  10  The  region  of  Bubastis.

u To  whom  this  common  Egyptian  plant  is  something  exotic.


216


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


righteous  act,  and  that  tumeth  his  back  on  iniquity.  The
scribe  of  the  young  (?)  . . . , AmenemSpe,  son  of  the  steward
Mose,  the  revered.1

[3.  Introductory  part  of  the  letter.]  2

Mayest  thou  live,  prosper,  and  be  in  health,  my  excellent
brother,  being  wealthy,  strongly  established,  and  without  “ Ah
that  I had  ! ”,3  while  thou  hast  what  thou  needest  for  life  in
the  way  of  sustenance  and  victuals  ; joy  and  gladness  being

united  in  thy  path. Mayest  thou  see  the  rays  of  the

sun  and  sate  thyself  therewith ; mayest  thou  pass  thy  term  of

life , thy  gods  being  pleased  with  thee,  not  being  wroth.

Mayest  thou  receive  rewards  after  old  age ; 4 mayest

thou  enter  into  thy  tomb  in  the  necropolis,  and  mix  with  the
noble  souls  ; mayest  thou  be  judged  among  them  and  be  ac-
quitted in  Busiris  before  Wennofre,5  being  established  in  Abydos
in  the  presence  of  Shu-Onuris.6  Mayest  thou  cross  to  U-peker  7
in  the  train  of  the  god.  Mayest  thou  traverse  the  Region  of  the
Goddess  (?)  in  the  train  of  Sokaris.8  Mayest  thou  join  the  crew
of  the  Neshmet  barque  without  being  held  back.  Mayest  thou
see  the  sun  in  the  sky,  when  he  divideth  the  year.9

May  Anubis  attach  for  thee  thine  head  to  thy  bones.10
Mayest  thou  come  forth  from  the  hidden  place  and  not  be
destroyed.  Mayest  thou  behold  the  light  (of  the  sun)  in  the
nether  world,  as  it  passeth  by  thee.11  May  ocean  overflow  in
thine  house,12  to  inundate  thy  path  ; may  it  stand  seven  cubits
high  beside  thy  tomb.  Mayest  thou  sit  upon  the  river  bank

. Mayest  thou  lave  thy  face  and  thine  hand.  Mayest

thou  receive  offerings,  and  may  thy  nose  inhale  the  breeze
. May  the  corn-god  give  thee  bread,  and  Hathor  beer  ;

1 His  father  is  therefore  dead.

2 This  paragraph  is  purposely  couched  in  extravagant  phraseology,
for  Hori  wishes  to  show  his  opponent  how  he  ought  to  have  -written.

3 Without  a wish.

4 All  the  ensuing  -wishes  refer  to  the  life  after  death

6 Name  of  Osiris.

* Onuris  is  an  appellation  of  Shu,  under  which  he  was  also  worshipped
at  Abydos.

7 A locality  at  Abydos,  which  played  a part  in  the  Osirian  celebrations.

8 The  funerary  god  of  Hemphis.

8 I.e.  on  New  Year’s  Day.  10  As  he  did  for  Osiris.

u The  dead  rejoice  when  the  sun  passes  by  night  through  their  realm.

12  Probably  meaning  : mayest  thou  have  no  lack  of  water  in  thy  grave.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


217


mayest  thou  suck  at  the  udder  of  the  Sekhait-cow.

May  thy  Ushebti-figures 1 help  thee  and  bear  sand  from  the
eastern  to  the  western  hill.  May  thy  sycamore  2 moisten  thy

throat -without  thy  being  destroyed.  Mayest  thou

change  thyself  into  whatsoever  thou  listest,  like  the  Phoenix,
every  form  of  thine  being  that  of  a god .

[4.  How  HE  RECEIVED  THE  LETTER.]

Furthermore  : Thy  letter  came  to  me  in  an  hour  of  leisure  (?).
I found  3 thy  message  as  I sat  beside  the  horse,  which  is  in  my
charge,  and  was  happv  and  cheerful,  and  ready  to  reply.  When
I entered  into  thy4  stall  to  look  at  thy  letter,  I found  that  it
consisted  neither  of  praises  nor  of  insults.  Thine  utterances
confuse  this  with  that,  all  thy  words  are  perverted,  they  are  not

linked  together.  All  thine  imaginings  are , thou  mixest

evil  things  with  choice,  and  best  with  . . . Thy  words  are

(not  ?)  sweet  and  are  not  bitter. shedeh-wine  mingled

with  pewer.5

T5.  Thou  hast  not  written  thy  letter  alone.]  6

I write  to  thee  and  testify  to  thee  (?) I stood  not

in  awe  of  thee,  for  I know  thy  nature.  I imagined  that  thou
wouldest  answer  it  all  by  thyself,  whereas  thy  defenders  7 stand
behind  thee  ; thou  procurest  for  thyself  many  ...  as  helpers,
as  if  thou  inert  summoning  magistrates  to  a session  (?).

Thy  looks  are  troubled,  as  thou  standest  there  coaxing  the
assistants  (?)  and  saying : “ Come  with  me  and  lend  me  a
hand.”  Thou  presentest  them  with  gifts,  each  man  severally,
and  they  say  to  thee  : “ Take  heart,  we  will  overcome  him.”  8

Thou  standest  there  and and  they  sit  and  deliberate,

they,  the  six  scribes.  Thou  goest  with  them and

1 The  little  figurines  which  were  supposed  to  relieve  the  dead  of
agricultural  labour  in  the  other  world.  In  this  connection  mention  is
always  made,  as  here,  of  the  transport  of  sand,  though  we  have  no  idea
of  what  is  meant  by  it.

2 The  tree  out  of  which  a goddess  gives  the  dead  food  and  drink.

3 I received  it  ? 4 Read  “ my  ” ?

6 Shedeh  is  a frequently  mentioned  good,  and  pewer  inferior,  beverage  ;
cf.  p.  210,  note  1.

3 In  accordance  with  the  sense,  a new  paragraph  ought  to  begin  here,
though  the  manuscript  does  not  indicate  it

7 Figuratively  for  “ thy  helpers.”

8 The  controversy  had  thus  already  lasted  some  time.


218


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


chargest  each  one  with  two  sections  (?),1 * 3 4  that  thou  mayest
complete  thy  letter  again.  (One  ?)  praise th,  two  insult  ; 2 the
other  standeth  and  instructeth  them  in  the  rules.  The  fifth
saith  : “ Hurry  (?)  not,  have  patience  (?),  and  make  it  perfect.’’

The  sixth  hasteneth  to  the  (corn)  to  measure to  have

it  withdrawn.  The  seventh  standeth  hard  by  and  . . . taketh
in  charge  the  rations  3 for  the  soldiers.

Thine  orders  are  confused  and  are  not  rightly  expressed  (?).
Kheriuf 4 playeth  the  deaf  man  and  heareth  not ; he  taketh
an  oath  by  Ptah  saying : “ I suffer  not  the  seal  to  be  set  on
the  granary.”  5 He  goeth  forth  in  a rage.  By  how  many
bushels  art  thou  short,  and  horn  many  kin  are  wanting  to  every
measure  ?

Behold  thou  art  a scribe  that  issueth  commands  to  the
army ; men  hearken  to  what  thou  sayest,  and  thou  art  not
disregarded.  Thou  art  skilled  as  a scribe,  and  there  is  nothing
thou  dost  not  know.  And  yet  thy  letter  is  too  badly  put  together
to  permit  of  it  being  listened  to .

The  close  of  the  paragraph  is  unintelligible ; Amenemope
said  of  something  or  other  : it  sitteth  on  my  fingers  like  a papyrus

roll  on  the  neck  of  a sick  man  6 it  groweth  not  weary

and  is  tied  with  the  string  of  my  seal.7

[6.  My  reply  will  be  better  than  thy  letter.]

I reply  to  thee  in  like  manner  in  a letter,  which,  (however,)
is  new  from  beginning  (?)  to  end  (?).  It  is  filled  with  expres-
sions of  my  lips,  which  I have  fashioned  by  myself  alone,  none
other  being  with  me.  By  the  ka  of  (my  god  ?)  Thoth,  I com-

1 Of  the  reply.

3 They  compose  the  friendly  and  aggressive  sections.  What  follows  is
obscure  in  detail.

3 Which  he  is  to  have  delivered  for  Hori.

4 Probably  the  superintendent  of  the  granary  ; he  will  not  deliver
in  view  of  such  doubtful  instructions.  We  actually  know  of  a super-
intendent of  the  granary  of  this  name,  who,  however,  could  at  the  most
be  only  the  grandfather  of  this  person.

3 Possibly  the  superintendent  of  the  granary  had  to  seal  it  up  again
after  every  delivery  of  grain  ; if  he  declined  to  do  this,  it  was  a sign  that
things  were  not  in  order.

• An  amulet.

7 The  ancient  seals,  in  the  form  of  a small  cylinder,  were  hung  round
the  neck  on  a string.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


219


posed  it  by  myself,  without  summoning  any  scribe  1 that  he
might  assist.

I will  give  thee  more  2 in  twenty  sections,  and  repeat  unto
thee  what  thou  hast  said,  (every)  section  in  its  place,  (all)  the
fourteen  divisions  (?)  of  thy  letter.3

Take  hold  of  the  papyrus,  that  I may  tell  thee  many  things,
that  I may  pour  out  for  thee  choice  words,  that  a Nile 4 may  be
in  full  flood,  with  waters  shimmering  in  the  season  of  inundation,
when  it  hath  taken  possession  of  the  fields  (?).

All  my  words  are  sweet  and  pleasant  . . . and  I act  not
as  thou  hast  acted  ; for  thou  beginnest  with  insults  against  me
in  the  first  section,  and  in  the  beginning  of  thy  letter  thou
dost  not  enquire  after  my  health.  (But)  what  thou  sayest 5
is  far  from  me  and  affecteth  me  not.  My  god  Thoth  is  a shield

about  me.  By  the  ka  of  Ptah,  lord  of  truth, Behold,

what  thou  hast  said  may  not  come  to  pass  ! And  all  that  hath
come  forth  from  thy  mouth  may  be  turned  against  some  (other)
foe  ! Yet  shall  I be  buried  in  Abydos  in  the  dwelling-place
of  my  father,  (for)  I am  the  son  of  a righteous  one  in  the  city
of  the  lord  (of  right  ?),  and  I shall  be  buried  among  mine  own
people  in  the  hill  of  To-Zozer.

Wherein  am  I become  evilly  disposed  towards  thee  in  my
heart,  that  thou  so  attackest  me  ? To  whom  have  I made
mention  of  thee  in  evil  wise  ? I only  wrote  for  thee  a work
like  unto  a pleasant  jest,  which  turned  out  a diversion  for
all  men.6

[7.  Answer  to  the  abuse  of  Amexemope.]

Thou  hast  said  concerning  me,  that  I am  broken  of  arm  7
and  devoid  of  strength  ; thou  hast  undervalued  me  as  scribe

1 As  thou  hast  done.  a Write  a still  longer  letter.

8 What  is  meant  is  that  Hori  intends  to  write  in  all  twenty  sections,
of  which  fourteen  will  concern  themselves  with  the  corresponding  por-
tions in  the  letter  of  Amenemope.  In  point  of  fact  the  five  or  six  intro-
ductory sections  are  followed  by  fourteen  others,  and  these  contain  the
actual  controversy.

4 A flood  of  eloquence.

5 Amenemope  has  therefore  cursed  him  in  his  letter,  and  in  particular,
as  appears  from  what  follows,  has  expressed  the  wish  that  he  should
remain  unburied.

6 Why  have  you  taken  my  harmless  jests  about  your  letter  so
seriously  ?

7 Usual  expression  for  feeble  indolent.


220


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


and  said  : “ He  knoweth  nothing  ! ” Am  I to  pass  my  time
at  thy  side  coaxing  thee  and  saying  : “ Be  my  protector,  if
another  persecuteth  me  ” ? 1 By  (?)  the  decree  of  the  mighty
lord,  whose  name  is  mighty  and  whose  statutes  abide  firmly
established,  like  those  of  Thoth,  I am  myself  a helper  of  all
my  kindred.2

(But)  I know  many  men  who  are  devoid  of  strength,3  broken
of  arm,  cut  to  pieces,  lacking  in  power,  and  yet  are  made  rich
in  their  houses  in  food  and  sustenance  and  say  not  of  aught :
“ Ah,  if  I but  had ! ” Come,  let  me  tell  thee  how  it  is  with
the  scribe  Roi,  who  is  called  the  firebrand  (?)  of  the  granary.
He  moveth  not  and  never  ran  since  his  birth.  The  work  of  an
active  man  he  abhorreth,  and  he  knoweth  it  not.  He  hath
(already)  gone  down  into  the  West,4  although  his  limbs  are
still  healthy,  and  fear  of  the  Good  God  5 bringeth  him  not  forth.

Thou  art  more  foolish  (?)  than  (?)  Kasa,  the  reckoner  of
cattle  6 . . .,  if  I tell  thee  how  it  fareth  with  him,  that  thou
mayest  not  . . .

Thou  hast  surely  heard  the  name  of  Amun-wah-su,  one  of
the  old  men  of  the  Treasury.  He  passeth  his  life  as  con-
troller in  the  workshop  beside  the  smithy.7

Come,  that  I may  tell  thee  of  Xakht,  him  of  the  wine-
store  ; 8 he  is  ten  times  better  for  thee  than  these.

I will  tell  thee  of  the  captain  of  auxiliaries,  wTho  was  in
Heliopolis,  and  is  (now)  an  elder  of  the  Palace.  He  is  smaller
than  a tom-cat  and  larger  than  a monkey.9  He  prospereth  in
his  house .

1 Meaning  : if  I were  to  ask  you  for  your  protection,  would  you  pass
any  other  judgment  upon  me  ?

2 I do  not  need  your  protection  ; the  oath  by  the  king  is  to  show  on
what  assistance  he  would  prefer  to  rely.

3 The  sloth  which  you  cast  in  my  teeth  I know  to  exist  in  others.
The  slothful  officials  whom  he  now  brings  forward  as  examples  will
certainly  be  well-known  persons  and  good  friends  of  Amenemope.

4 He  is  as  good  as  dead.  5 The  king

« We  know  of  an  “ Overseer  of  the  Cattle,”  by  name  Kasa,  a vessel

for  whose  intestines  (canopic  jar)  is  in  the  Berlin  Museum  ; this  may  be
the  person  in  question,  for  the  name  is  rare.

The  meaning  probably  is  that,  instead  of  discharging  his  own  duties,
he  is  always  sitting  and  chattering  in  a workshop,  as  if  he  were  the  high
official  set  in  authority  there

8 I.e.  probably  the  drunkard

2 I.e.  probably  from  age,  but  the  point  of  the  jest  is  not  clear.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  221

If  thou  art  here  in  the  stable , thou  hearest  the

name  of  Kisep  . . . He  moveth  over  the  ground  unnoticed,
in  disorderly  (?)  raiment  and  tightly  swathed  (?).  If  thou
seest  him  at  eventide  in  the  darkness,  thou  sayest : “ It  is  a
bird  that  passeth  by.”  Place  him  in  the  scale  that  thou  mayest

see  how  heavy  he  is ; he  will  come  out  at  twenty  deben  1 .

If  thou  blowest  beside  him  as  he  passeth,  he  will  drop  down
afar  off  like  as  if  he  were  a leaf  of  foliage.

If  I were  to  tell  thee  of  Wah,  him  of  the  cattle-stalls,  thou
wouldst  give  me  my  weight  in  thrice  refined  gold.2  I swear
by  the  lord  of  Hermopolis  and  by  Nehem-await : 3 thou  art
strong  of  arm  and  wilt  overthrow  them.4  Let  them  be  examined,
those  and  these,  that  I may  smite  them  with  mine  arms  and
mine  hands  (not)  let  go  (of  them).

Good  sir,  my  friend,  who  knoweth  not  what  he  saith,
behold,  I solve  thy  grievous  difficulties  and  make  them  pleasant
for  thee.5

[8.  Thou  playest  at  being  the  sage.]

Thou  art  come  furnished  with  great  secrets  and  tellest  to
me  a proverb  of  Hardedef,8  and  (yet)  thou  knowest  not  whether
it  be  good  or  bad.  What  chapter  precedeth  it  ?

Thou  art  a man  of  learning  at  the  head  of  his  fellows,7
and  the  lore  of  books  (?)  is  graven  on  thine  heart ; felicitous  (?)
is  thy  tongue,  wide  are  thy  words,  and  a proverb  cometh  forth

from  thy  mouth  that  weigheth  more  than  three  deben .

Mine  eyes  are  dazzled  at  what  thou  doest,  and  I am  agape  (?)
when  thou  sayest  : “As  scribe  I am  immersed  in  heaven,  in
earth,  and  in  the  underworld,  and  I know  the  mountains  in
deben  and  hin.8  The  house  of  books  is  hidden  and  is  not
seen  ; its  company  of  gods  is  concealed  and  far  from .”  9

1 1820  grammes.

2 Meaning,  probably  : so  amusing  would  it  be — of  course  ironical.

* Thoth  and  a consort  of  his,  who  also  was  venerated  in  Hermopolis.

4 Ironical : on  the  grounds  of  my  description  you  will  certainly  now
proceed  against  them.

5 Leads  on  to  the  next  section.

* Son  of  Kheops  ; see  pp.  40,  133.  He  had  therefore  left  behind  him  a
book  of  wise  sayings.  Amenemope  quoted  a proverb  in  his  letter,  although
he  had  certainly  never  read  the  book.

1 Ironical : you  come  forward  as  such.

8 I know  how  much  they  weigh  and  what  their  capacity  is.

* Meaning,  probably  : however  secret  it  may  be,  1 know  it.


222


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Thus  I answer  thee  : “ Take  care  that  thy  fingers  approach  not
the  God’s  Words  1 . Of  what  follows  all  that  is  in-

telligible is  : as  . . . sitteth,  to  play  draughts.

[9.  It  is  not  true,  if  thou  art  casting  doubts  on  my

ATTAINMENTS.]

Thou  hast  said  unto  me  : “ Thou  art  no  scribe,  thou  art
no  soldier  ! Thou  hast  made  thyself  out  to  be  a superior  . . .,
and  thou  art  not  on  the  list.”  Now  thou  art  a scribe  of  the
king,  who  enrolleth  the  soldiers,  and  before  whom  all  ...  of
heaven  2 are  opened.  Run  then  to  the  place  of  the  books,
that  they  may  let  thee  see  the  chest  with  the  registers.  If
thou  takest  with  thee  a bouquet  for  Heresh,3  he  will  speedily

open  for  thee and  thou  wilt  find  my  name  upon  the

roll  as  officer  in  the  great  stable  of  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun.
Thou  hast  further  evidence  in  the  command  of  the  stable,4  (for)
a food-allowance  is  entered  in  my  name.  So  I am  a soldier,
and  I am  a scribe.

There  is  no  stripling  of  my  generation  that  may  compare  (?)
himself  with  me.  “ Ask  about  a man  of  his  mother  ” 5 — so  hie
thee  to  my  superiors,  that  they  may  inform  thee  about  me.

[10.  As  TO  WHAT  THOU  REQUIREST  OF  ME,  FIRST  SHOW  ME
HOW  TO  DO  IT  THYSELF.]

Again  thou  hast  said  unto  me  : “ A high  mountain  range  6
standeth  in  front  of  thee.  Enter  thou  into  the  dreadful  range,
(even  if  ?)  thou  knowest  it  not.”  7 Enter  thou  in  ahead  of  me,
and  I will  come  after  thee.  However  (?),  thou  hast  not  drawn
nigh  unto  it,  and  hast  not  approached  it.  If  thou  art  dis-
covered in  it,  then  I (also)  will  come  hither  (?)  behind  thee.
Beware  of  stretching  forth  the  hand  to  pull  me  out  (?).

1 Cf.  p.  215,  note  1 ; perhaps  the  meaning  is  : beware  even  of  the
elements  of  learning,  of  -which  thou  understandest  nothing.

* This  will  be  some  jocose  expression  for  the  scribes'  bureaux.

8 Name  of  the  keeper  of  the  archives  ; the  bouquet  will  be  bakshish.

4 Perhaps  the  enactment  regulating  his  salary.

* Probably  a proverb.

8 Apparently  the  Canaanite  word  har,  " mountain,”  but,  in  view  of  the
writing,  conceived  of  as  wooded.

7 Amenemope  of  course  said  this  figuratively,  in  the  sense  of  : Carry
out  the  task  that  has  been  set  you.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


223


[n.  Once  more  a doubt  as  to  the  attainments  of  Hori.]  1

Thou  hast  said  unto  me  : “ Thou  art  in  no  respect  a scribe,
an  empty  and  cold  (?)  name  ; 2 thou  bearest  the  palette  wrong-
fully .” and  so  thou  dost  harness  thyself

against  me  yet  again,  but  thy  sayings  do  me  injustice,  and  they
will  not  be  hearkened  to.  Let  thy  letters  rather  be  taken  before
Onuris,  that  he  may  decide  for  us  who  is  right,  that  thou  mayest
not  be  moth. 3

[12.  Amenemope  cannot  calculate,  as  is  revealed  in

THE  DIGGING  OF  A LAKE  AND  THE  BUILDING  OF  A RAMP.]

Another  topic.  Behold,  thou  comest  and  fillest  me  with
thine  office.4  I will  cause  thee  to  know  how  matters  stand
with  thee,  when  thou  sayest  : “I  am  the  scribe  that  issue  th
commands  to  the  army.”

There  is  given  thee  a lake  to  dig.  Thou  comest  to  me  to
inquire  concerning  the  rations  for  the  soldiers,  and  sayest :
" Reckon  it  out.”  Thou  desertest  thine  office,  and  the  task  of
teaching  thee  to  perform  it  falleth  on  my  shoulders.

Come,  that  I may  tell  thee  more  than  thou  hast  said  : 5
I cause  thee  to  be  abashed  (?)  when  I disclose  to  thee  a command
of  thy  lord,  thee,  who  art  his  royal  scribe,  when  thou  art  led
beneath  the  window  6 in  respect  of  any  goodly  (?)  work,  wffien
the  mountains  are  disgorging  great  monuments  for  Horus,  the
lord  of  the  Two  Lands.7  For  see,  thou  art  the  clever  scribe
who  is  at  the  head  of  the  troops.8  A ramp  9 is  to  be  con-

1 Amenemope  in  his  letter  will  have  returned  once  more  to  this  doubt,
and,  since  Hori  goes  through  his  letter  with  him  section  by  section,  he
must  yet  again  tackle  the  question.

3 Is  the  meaning  : thou  hast  only  a name  without  title  ?

3 He  now  proposes  a decision  by  means  of  an  oracle,  a frequent  practice
at  this  period.  On  these  occasions  two  writings  were  laid  before  the  god,
one  affirmative  and  the  other  negative,  and  the  god  decided  between
them  by  nodding.

4 Probably  meaning  : you  talk  to  me  a great  deal  about  it.

* I e.  something  of  which  no  mention  was  made  in  your  letter.

3 The  palace  window,  from,  which  the  king  issued  commands  and  the
like.  See,  e.g.,  p.  208,  note  5.

• I.e.  when  the  king  has  had  stones  quarried,  which  are  now  to  be
used  for  building  purposes.

3 Ironical  : you  must  indeed  understand  everything.

3 In  order  to  hoist  into  position  the  great  blocks  used  in  building,  a
huge  ramp  of  bricks  was  erected,  upon  which  they  were  dragged  up.


224


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


structed,  730  cubits  1 long,  55  cubits  wide,  containing  120  com-
partments,2 and  filled  with  reeds  and  beams  ; 3 60  cubits  high
at  its  summit,  30  cubits  in  the  middle,  with  a ...  of  15  cubits,4
and  its  ...  5 cubits.  The  quantity  of  bricks  needed  for  it  is
asked  of  the  generals,  and  the  scribes  are  all  collected  together,
without  one  of  them  knowing  anything.  They  all  put  their
trust  in  thee  and  say  : “ Thou  art  a clever  scribe,  my  friend  !
Decide  for  us  quickly  ! Behold,  thy  name  is  famous  ; let  one
be  found  in  this  place  to  magnify  the  other  thirty  ! 5 Do  not
let  it  be  said  of  thee  that  there  is  aught  thou  dost  not  know.
Answer  us,  how  many  bricks  are  needed  for  it  ? See,  its
measurements  (?)  are  before  thee.  Each  one  of  its  compart-
ments is  of  30  cubits  and  is  7 cubits  broad.6

[13.  Amenemope  also  does  not  understand  how  to

ESTIMATE  THE  WEIGHT  OF  AN  OBELISK.]

Ah,  good  sir,  thou  vigilant  scribe,  who  is  at  the  head  of  the
army,  who  distinguisheth  himself  when  he  standeth  at  the  Two
Great  Gates,7  and  who  boweth  down  in  comely  fashion  below
the  window  ! A despatch  hath  come  from  the  crown-prince  at
Raka  in  order  to  rejoice  the  heart  of  the  victorious  Horus,  and
to  appease  (?)  8 the  raging  lion,  and  it  telleth  how  an  obelisk
hath  been  newly  made,  graven  with  the  name  of  his  majesty ;
it  is  no  cubits  in  length  of  shaft,  its  pedestal  measureth
10  cubits,  and  the  block  (?)  at  its  end  measureth  7 cubits  on
every  side.  The  tapering  (?)  amounteth  to  1 cubit  and  1 finger  ;

1 The  cubit  = 51  cm.

2 In  order  to  save  bricks,  large  chambers  were  left  free  in  the  ramp  and
these  were  filled  with  sand.

1 Great  brick  walls  had  reed  mats  and  beams  interspersed  between  the
courses.

4 Apparently  what  is  meant  is  that  the  base  of  the  sloping  side  w'alls
projects  15  cubits  behind.

5 The  questioners.  Do  they  all  belong,  therefore,  to  the  frequently
mentioned  College  of  the  Thirty  ? (See  pp  100,  197.)

* Observe  the  light  and  airy  way  in  which  Hori  writes  ; he  forgot  to
insert  these  specifications  above,  and  now  calmly  inserts  them  here  at  the
end,  just  as  one  would  do  in  actual  conversation.

Of  the  palace  ; for  the  window,  see  p 223,  note  6

7 This  is  only  an  exaggerated  development  of  the  epistolary  formula

“ in  order  to  rejoice  the  heart,"  t e.  to  make  a communication.  The
meaning  is  that  the  crown- prince  has  written  to  the  king  to  say  that  the
obelisk  is  ready  for  transport.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


225


its  pyramidion  1 is  i cubit  in  height,  and  its  . . . measureth
2 fingers.  Reckon  up  now  (?).  that  thou  mayest  supply  every
man  that  is  needed  for  the  dragging,  and  send  them  to  the  Red
Mountain.2  Behold,  they  are  waiting  for  them.  Be  of  assist-
ance to  the  crown-prince,  the  child  of  the  sun.  Decide  for  us
how  many  men  are  needed  to  drag  it.  Let  them  not  have  to
send  again,  for  the  monument  lieth  (ready)  in  the  quarry  !
Answer  quickly  and  hesitate  not  !

Behold,  thou  art  seeking  it  for  thyself.3  Get  thee  on  ! Lo,
if  thou  wilt  bestir  thyself,  I will  make  thee  happy.  I used
formerly  to  labour  even  as  thou.  So  let  us  join  the  fray4
together.  My  heart  is  shrewd  (?)  and  my  fingers  are  docile,
and  are  skilled  where  thou  goest  astray.  Get  thee  onwaids
and  weep  not  ; thy  helper  standeth  behind  thee.  I will  cause
thee  to  say  : “ There  is  a royal  scribe  with  Horus,  the  Strong
Bull,"  5 and  thou  orderest  men  to  make  a box  into  which  to
put  the  letters.  (The  rest  is  unintelligible.)

[14.  At  the  erecting  of  a colossus  also  Amenemope’s

CALCULATIONS  ARE  FALSE.]

It  is  said  unto  thee  : “ Empty  the  magazine  6 that  hath
been  loaded  with  sand  under  the  monument  of  thy  lord,7  which
hath  been  brought  from  the  Red  Mountain.  It  measureth
30  cubits,  when  lying  extended  on  the  ground,  and  20  cubits
in  breadth.  From  further  statements  we  only  learn  that  the
“ magazine  ” consists  of  several  divisions,  filled  with  sand  from
the  river-bank,  and  thai  they  are  all  50  cubits  in  height.

Thou  art  commissioned  to  find  out,  and  the  matter  that  is

1 The  pointed  apex  of  the  obelisk ; its  height  is  probably  reckoned  at
too  low  a figure.

s The  sandstone  quarry  near  Cairo  ; see  above,  p.  1 7,  note  1 .

* You  are  trying  at  first  to  do  it  alone,  but  are  not  succeeding.

4 The  battle  with  the  problem,  of  which  I have  had  experience  for  a

long  time  past.

6 Meaning,  perhaps  : in  accordance  with  your  character  you  will  not,
of  course,  mention  my  name,  but  you  will  see  to  it  that  what  is  written  is
well  packed  up.

• Literally  : “ corn- bin."

7 The  colossal  statue  of  a king.  The  passage  deals  with  a method
employed  in  Egypt  for  the  erecting  of  heavy  loads.  They  vTere  dragged
up  above  a chamber  (the  " magazine  ")  filled  with  sand,  and  the  sand  was
gradually  emptied  so  that  the  block  settled  down  in  the  required  place.

15


226


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


now  engaging  the  king’s  attention  (?)  is  : 1 “ How  many  men  will
demolish  it  in  six  hours  ? ” Their  hearts  are  apt,2  (but)  their
desire  to  demolish  it  is  small,  for  the  time  does  not  come  (in
which  ?)  thou  givest  a rest  to  the  soldiers,  that  they  may  take
their  meal.3  Let  the  monument  be  set  in  its  place,  for  One’s  4
desire  is  to  see  it  beautiful  !

[15.  Amenemope  cannot  even  calculate  the  provision

REQUIRED  FOR  A MILITARY  EXPEDITION.]

Thou  clever  scribe  with  understanding  heart- — there  is
nothing  whatever  that  he  knoweth  not ; thou  torch  in  the
darkness  before  the  host,  and  it  giveth  light  unto  them  ! Thou
are  despatched  on  a mission  to  Phoenicia  (?),  at  the  head  of  the
victorious  army,  to  crush  those  rebels  who  are  called  Nearin.5
The  auxiliary  troops  which  thou  commandest  number  1900,
520  Shardana,6  1600  Kehek,  (100)  Mashawasha,  8S0  negroes—
in  all  5000,  not  reckoning  their  officers.  A present  hath  been
brought  before  thee  of  bread,  cattle,  and  wine.7  The  number
of  men  is  too  great  for  thee  (?)  8 and  the  provision  is  too  small
for  them  : 300  wheaten  loaves,  1800  . . . loaves,  120  goats  of
different  kinds,  30  measures  of  wine — the  soldiers  are  so  many

and  the  provision  is  underestimated  (?) . Thou  re-

ceivest  the  provision,  and  it  is  placed  in  the  camp.  The  army
is  ready  and  equipped  ; so  divide  it  up  quickly  and  give  to  each
man  his  portion.  The  Bedouins  look  on  furtively  (and  say  ?)  :
“ Sopher  yode.”  9 Midday  hath  come,  the  camp  is  hot.  They
say  : “ It  is  time  to  start.”  “ Be  not  wroth,  O commandant  of
the  auxiliaries.  Me  have  yet  far  to  march,”  we  say.  “ Why  is

1 It  is  thus  all  the  more  annoying  that  you  do  not  know.

2 They  understand  their  work.

3 The  meaning  probably  is  : the  number  of  people  employed  in  accord-
ance with  your  advice  is  not  sufficient,  for  you  have  assumed  that  they
would  work  six  hours  without  a break.

4 The  king  (cf.  note  3)  wishes  to  inspect  the  statue  ; hence  the  set
term  of  six  hours  in  which  the  work  is  to  be  finished.

5 Canaanitish  : young  warriors.

6 The  Shardana  are  a seafaring  people,  who  were  at  this  time  in  the
habit  of  visiting  Egypt,  and  who  also  entered  Egyptian  employment
Such  was  the  case  also  with  the  Libyan  tribes  of  Mashawasha  and  Kehek.

7 Sent  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  countrv

8 Too  great  for  you  to  feed  from  this  present.

* “ O sapient  scribe  " ; shortly  afterwards,  Hori  himself  so  designates
him  in  Egyptian.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  227

there  then  no  bread  ? Our  night-quarters  are  far  off ! What
meaneth  it,  good  sir,  that  thou  beatest  us,  for  thou  art  a clever
scribe  ? 1 Approach  to  give  the  food.  An  hour  cometh,  in
which  one  is  without  a scribe  from  the  Ruler.  That  thou  shouldest
take  it  upon  thee  (?)  to  beat  us,  that  is  not  good,  comrade  ; he
will  hear  of  it  and  he  will  send  to  undo  thee.”  2

[16.  Thou  knowest  but  little  of  Syria.]

In  the  five  concluding  sections,  which  begin  here,  Hori  con-
cerns himself  with  the  “ end  of  the  letter  ” of  his  antagonist,  which
seems  particularly  to  have  amused  him  with  its  “ great  words."
In  it  Amenemope  had  drawn  attention  to  his  deeds  and  experi-
ences in  Syria,  and  proudly  assigned  himself  a foreign  designation,
that  of  Mahirf  i.e.  a hero.  Hori  “ tests  " this  narrative  and
follows  the  whole  journey  of  his  antagonist  from  Northern  Syria
to  the  confines  of  Egypt.  But  he  represents  the  journey  as  full  of
small  and  great  misadventures,  as,  according  to  his  view,  it  might
actually  have  been,  and  he  intimates,  moreover,  by  means  of  artful
questions,  that  his  antagonist  possesses  very  little  knowledge  indeed
of  the  country  he  had  visited,  and  has  seen  but  little  of  it.  Rightly
to  appreciate  this  raillery,  we  ought  also  to  be  acquainted  with
Amenemope’ s own  narrative  which  is  here  parodied.  But  even
without  that,  we  can  enjoy  the  vivid  description  of  Palestine,  a
country  which  Hori  himself  apparently  knew  well,  or  at  any  rate
better  than  his  bragging  antagonist.

Thy  letter  aboundeth  in  thrusts  (?),  and  is  loaded  with  great
words.  Behold,  they  shall  reward  thee,  even  as  them  that  look
for  a load,  and  shall  lay  more  on  thee  (?)  than  thou  wouldest.4

“ I am  a scribe,  a Mahir,”  thou  sayest  again.  There  is
truth  in  thy  words,  say  we.  Come  forth,  that  thou  mayest  be
tested.

1 The  soldiers  should  receive  their  rations  in  the  morning  when  about
to  set  out  on  the  march  ; they  have  not  yet  received  them,  and  so  have
not  started  by  midday  ; they  now  become  restless  (“  hot  "),  they  com-
plain, and  he  beats  them.

! They  will  complain  to  the  king,  who  will  depose  him.

* The  Canaanite  word  for  “ nimble,”  “ adept,”  which  here,  however,
and  subsequently,  is  the  designation  of  the  Egyptian  officer  who  travels
about  in  Syria.

4 If  it  is  to  be  so  translated,  it  will  be  a proverb  : the  porter  cannot
complain  if  he  is  given  loads  to  carry.  Meaning  : you  have  provoked
me,  and  you  are  being  paid  back.


228


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


A horse  is  harnessed  for  thee,  swift  as  a jackal  with  . .
and  it  is  like  unto  a storm  of  wind,  when  it  goeth  forth.  Thou
loosenest  the  reins  (?)  and  seizest  the  bow.  We  shall  see  what
thine  hand  will  do.  I will  expound  to  thee  the  nature  of  a
Mahir,  and  show  thee  what  he  doth.

Hast  thou  not  gone  to  the  land  of  Khatti,  and  hast  thou  not
seen  the  land  of  Upe  ? 1 Khedem — dost  thou  not  know  the
nature  of  it,  and  Igedii,  too,  what  it  is  like  ? Sumur  of  Sesse  2 —
on  which  side  of  it  lieth  the  town  of  Kher  . . . ? What  is  its
stream  like  ? Hast  thou  not  marched  to  Kadesh  3 and  Tubikhi  ?
Hast  thou  not  gone  unto  the  region  of  the  Bedouins  with  the
auxiliary  troops  of  the  army  ?

Hast  thou  not  trodden  the  road  to  Meger,4  where  the  sky
is  dark  by  day,  and  it  is  overgrown  with  cypresses  (?)  and  oaks,
and  with  cedars  that  reach  heaven  ? There  are  more  lions
there  than  panthers  and  hyenas  (?),  and  it  is  girt  about  with
Bedouins  on  (every)  side.

Hast  thou  not  climbed  Mount  Shewe  ? Hast  thou  not
trodden  (it),  while  thy  hands  are  laid  upon  . . .,  and  thy  chariot
is  battered  by  the  ropes  as  thy  horse  is  dragged  (?)  ? 5

Prithee  let  me  tell  thee  of  ..  . beret.  Thou  shrinkest  from
climbing  it  and  crossest  (rather)  its  stream  . . . Thou  be-
holdest  how  it  tastes  to  be  a Mahir,  when  thou  bearest  thy
chariot  on  thy  shoulder .

When  thou  comest  to  a halt  in  the  evening,  thy  whole  body

is  crushed and  thy  limbs  are  broken. Thou

awakenest,  when  it  is  the  hour  for  starting,  in  the  . . . night.
Thou  art  alone  to  do  the  harnessing,  brother  cometh  not  to

1 Locality  near  Damascus.  Of  the  Canaanite  place-names,  which
appear  in  the  following  passages,  some  are  known  to  us  from  the  Old
Testament,  from  cuneiform  texts,  and  from  Greek  sources  ; to  these  I
can  give  an  approximately  correct  form.  The  others  I must,  of  course,
make  pronounceable,  and  accordingly  employ  the  method  described  in
the  preface  ; any  one  who  wishes  for  information  about  their  con-
sonants, which  alone  are  known,  must  have  recourse  to  Gardiner
Hieratic  Texts,  i.

* Sesse  is  the  pet-name  for  Harnesses.  Sumur  is  the  later  Simyra  in
Phoenicia  ; the  addition  “ of  Ramesses  " indicates  that  the  king  had
erected  a building  there  of  some  size.

* The  city  on  the  Orontes.

4 Probably  a part  of  the  Lebanon.

6 Meaning,  approximately : chariot  and  horses  must  be  toilfully
dragged  up.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  229

brother ; 1 the  fugitives  (?)  have  come  into  the  camp,  the  horse
hath  been  let  loose,  the  . . . hath  been  ransacked  (?)  in  the
night,  thy  clothes  have  been  stolen.  Thy  groom  hath  awakened
in  the  night  and  hath  marked  what  they  (?)  have  done ; he  hath
taken  what  was  left,  and  hath  joined  (the  ranks  of)  the  wicked.
He  hath  mingled  with  the  tribes  of  the  Bedouins  and  changed
himself  into  an  Asiatic.  The  foe  came  to  pillage  (?)  in  secret,
and  they  found  thee  inert,  and  when  thou  didst  awake  thou
didst  find  no  trace  of  them,  and  they  have  made  aw’ay  with  thy
things.  Thou  art  become  a fully  equipped  Mahir,  and  takest
hold  of  thine  ear.2

[17.  About  Phoenicia.]

I will  tell  thee  of  another  mysterious  city,  Byblos  by  name.
What  is  it  like  ? Their  goddess — of  her  another  time.3  Hast
thou  not  trodden  it  ?

Come  teach  me  about  Berytus,  and  about  Sidon  and  Sarepta.
WTiere  is  the  stream  of  Nezen,4  and  what  is  Us  like  ?

They  say  that  another  city  lieth  in  the  sea,  whose  name  is
Tyre  of  the  Port  (?).  Water  is  taken  3 unto  it  in  boats,  and
it  is  richer  in  fish  than  in  sand.

[18.  Various  cities.]

I will  tell  thee  of  another  misery — the  crossing  of  Seram.
Thou  wilt  say : “ It  bumeth  more  than  a sting."  6 Very  ill
fareth  the  Mahir.

Come,  set  me  on  the  road  southward  to  the  region  of  Akka.
Where  is  the  road  to  Aksaph  ? Beside  what  city  ?

Pray  instruct  me  as  to  mountain  of  User.  What  is  its  peak
like  ? Where  is  the  mountain  of  Sichem  ? Who  will  take
its  ...  ? The  Mahir — -where  doth  he  make  the  journey  to
Hazor  ? What  is  its  stream  like  ?

1 1.e.  without  any  assistance,  as  the  next  sentences  show.

s Probably  as  a gesture  expressive  of  affliction  ; “ fully  equipped  ” is,
of  course,  ironical.

s For  Byblos,  see  p.  17,  note  5,  pp.  177  ff.  ; the  goddess  of  this  city  was
identified  by  the  Egyptians  with  their  goddess  Hathor,  and  was  greatly
revered  by  them.

4 The  Litani,  which  runs  into  the  sea  north  of  Tyre.

5 That  such  was  the  case  with  the  dweller  in  Tyre  we  know  from  other
sources  ; the  city  lay'  on  a small  rocky  island.

4 It  has  been  suggested  that  there  is  here  a pun  on  the  Canaanite
word  for  “ hornets.”


230  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Put  me  on  the  way  to  Hamath,  to  Deger,  and  to  Deger-el.
the  playground  of  all  Mahirs.  Pray  teach  me  about  his  road ;
show  me  Yan.  If  one  be  travelling  to  Edemem,  whither  turneth
he  the  face  ?

Turn  not  back  from  teaching  {us  ?),  and  lead  us  (?)  to  know
them  !

[19.  Other  cities.]

Come,  that  I may  tell  thee  of  other  towns,  which  he  above
them  (?).

Hast  thou  not  gone  to  the  land  of  Takhsi,1  Kafr-Mereren,
Tement,  Kadesh,  Deper,  Azai,  Har-nemi  ? Hast  thou  not  seen
Kirjath-enab  and  Beth-sopher  ? Knowest  thou  not  Ederen
and  Zedepet  likewise  ? Knowest  thou  not  the  name  of  Khelez,
which  is  in  the  land  of  Upe,  as  a bull  upon  its  boundary,  the
scene  of  the  battles  of  all  warriors  ? 2

Pray  teach  me  concerning  the  appearance  (?)  of  Keyen  ;
acquaint  me  with  Rehob  ; explain  Beth-sha-el  and  Kirjath-
el  (?).  The  stream  of  Jordan,  how  is  it  crossed  ? Show  me
how  to  pass  by  Megiddo  which  lieth  above  it.3  Thou  art  a
Mahir,  who  is  skilled  in  the  deeds  of  valour  ! A Mahir,  such
as  thou  art,  is  qualified  (?)  to  march  (?)  at  the  head  of  the  host !
Forward,  0 Maryen,4  to  shoot  ! Behold,  there  is  (?)  the  . . .
in  a ravine  (?)  two  thousand  cubits  deep,  filled  with  boulders
and  shingle.  Thou  makest  a detour  (?).  Thou  graspest  the
bow ; thou  ...  on  thy  left,  thou  lettest  the  chieftains  5 see
what  is  pleasing  to  their  eyes  until  thine  hand  groweth  weary  :
“ Abata  kemo  ari,  mahir  naem.”  6 Thou  gainest  the  name  of
a . . . Mahir  (among  the  ?)  officers  of  Egypt.  Thy  name
becometh  like  that  of  Kazardi,  the  chief  of  Eser,7  when  the
hyena  found  him  in  the  terebinth-tree.

1 A frequently  mentioned  country  that  was  situated  in  the  North.

2 Thus  a much-contested  locality  on  the  frontier.

3 So  literally.  A name  may  well  have  been  left  out.  Megiddo  lies
north  of  Karmel,  the  crossing  of  which  is  described  in  the  ensuing
paragraphs.

4 A similar  expression  to  Mahir  ; it  often  occurs  elsewhere.

5 The  friendly  barbarians.

8 The  reading  of  these  Canaanite  words  is,  as  regards  the  vowels,  of
course,  quite  uncertain.  One  may  suppose  some  such  meaning  as  “ Thou
slayest  like  a lion,  O pleasant  Mahir.''

1 Asher  ? Apparently  an  allusion  to  a legend  with  which  the  Egyptian
reader  was  also  familiar.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


231


Behold,  there  is  (?)  the  narrow  defile,  made  perilous  by
Bedouins,  who  are  hidden  beneath  the  bushes  ; some  of  them
are  of  four  cubits  and  five  cubits  from  the  nose  (?)  unto  the
sole  of  the  foot,  fierce  of  face,  their  heart  not  mild,  and  they
hearken  not  to  coaxing.

Thou  art  alone,  no  helper  is  with  thee,  and  no  army  is
behind  thee.  Thou  findest  no  guide  (?)  to  show  (?)  thee  a way
of  crossing.  Thou  determinest  (?)  to  go  forwards,  albeit  thou
knowest  not  the  way.  Shuddering  (?)  seizeth  thee,  the  (hair
of)  thy  head  standeth  on  end,  thy  soul  lieth  in  thine  hand.1
Thy  path  is  full  of  boulders  and  shingle,  and  there  is  no  passable
track,  for  it  is  overgrown  with  . . .,  thorns,  neh-plants,  and
wolfs-pad.2  The  ravine  is  on  one  side  of  thee,  the  mountain
riseth  on  the  other.  On  thou  goest  and  guidest  (?)  thy  chariot
beside  thee,  and  fearest  to  . . . thy  horse.  If  the  horse  falleth
do-wn  (?),  thine  hand 3 falleth  and  is  left  bare  (?),  and  thy  . . .
leather  falleth.  Thou  unharnessest  the  horse,  in  order  to
repair  the  hand  in  the  middle  (?)  of  the  defile  ; thou  art  not
expert  in  the  way  of  binding  it,  and  thou  knowest  not  how  to
fasten  it  together  (?).  The  . . . falleth  from  its  place,  and
the  horse  is  (already)  too  heavily  (laden)  to  load  him  (with  it).
Thou  art  sick  at  heart,  and  thou  startest  to  go  on  foot.  The
sky  is  open,4  and  thou  fanciest  that  the  enemy  is  behind  thee.
Then  trembling  taketh  hold  of  thee.  Ah,  would  that  thou
hadst  an  hedge  of  . . .,  that  thou  mightest  put  it  upon  the
other  side  ! Thy  horse  is  galled  5 up  to  the  time  that  thou
findest  quarters  for  the  night.  Thou  perceivest  how  pain
tasteth.

When  thou  enterest  Joppa,  thou  findest  the  meadow  grow-
ing green  in  its  time.6  Thou  forcest  a way  into  "...  and
findest  the  fair  maiden  that  keepeth  watch  over  the  vineyards.
She  taketh  thee  to  herself  as  a companion,  and  giveth  thee
the  colour  of  her  bosom.8  Thou  art  recognized  and  bearest
witness  ; 9 the  Mahir  is  put  on  trial,  and  thy  tunic  of  good

1 That  is  to  say,  you  are  half-dead.  2 Names  of  plants.

3 A part  of  the  chariot,  as  are  also  the  unknown  words  in  the  next
sentences.

J Unclouded,  hot.  5 Literally  : “ shaved."

8 I.e.  in  the  season  when  it  is  at  its  loveliest.

7 Through  the  wall  of  the  viney-ard.

8 She  surrenders  to  you  her  charms.

9 You  confess  ?


232  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Upper  Egyptian  linen,  thou  sellest  it 1 . . . thou  steepest  every
evening,  with  a piece  of  woollen  cloth  (?)  about  thee,  thou  slum-
berest,  and  art  inert.  Thy  . . .,  thy  bow,  thy  . . . knife,  and
thy  quiver  are  stolen,  and  thy  reins  are  cut  in  the  darkness.

Thine  horse  is  gone  and  . . . over  the  slippery  ground.  The

road  stretcheth  out  before  it.  It  smasheth  thy  chariot thy

weapons  fall  to  the  ground  and  are  buried  (?)  in  the  sand

Thou  beggest : “ Give  food  (?)  and  water,  for  I have  arrived
safely.”  They  turn  a deaf  ear,  they  do  not  listen,  they  pay
no  heed  to  thy  tales.

Thou  makest  thy  way  into  the  smithy,  and  the  workshop
surroundeth  thee.  Smiths  and  cobblers  2 are  all  about  thee.
They  do  all  that  thou  wishest.  They  attend  to  thy  chariot,
and  it  ceaseth  to  be  slack.3  Thy  . . . are  cut  aright  (?) ; its  . . .
are  adjusted.  They  place  leather  ...  on  thine  hand.4  They
put  thy  yoke  to  rights.  They  adjust  thy  . . .,  which  is
engraved.  . . . They  give  a ...  to  thy  whip,  and  attach  to
it  lashes  (?).  Forth  thou  goest  quickly  to  fight  on  the  field  of
battle,  to  accomplish  deeds  of  valour.5 *

[20.  The  frontier  stations  and  the  end  of  the  com-
position.]

Good  sir,  thou  choice  scribe,  thou  Mahir  that  knoweth  his
hand,8  leader  of  the  Nearin,  chief  of  the  Zaba,7  I have  de-
scribed to  thee  the  foreign  countries  (as  far  as  ?)  the  extremity
of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Thou  answerest  me  neither  good  nor
ill,  and  returnest  me  no  report.  Come,  that  I may  tell  thee  of
yet  more  as  far  as  (?)  the  fortress  of  Paths-of-Horus.8

1 The  meaning  of  the  passage  will  be  that  the  people  of  Joppa  allow
payment  to  be  made  for  the  escapade.

2 These  were  for  the  repairing  of  leather  articles,  etc.

* They  repair  it.  The  subsequently  enumerated  parts  of  the  chariot
are  unfortunately  all  unknown.

1 See  p.  231,  note  3.

5 Ironical,  of  course.  Amenemope  is  already  at  the  end  of  his  journey,
and  is  having  his  chariot  prepared  in  order  to  cut  a good  appearance  in
Egypt.

* Who  aims  well.

7 Canaanite  word  for  " army”  ; for  the  Nearin,  see  above,  p.  226.
note  5.  The  use  of  these  words  here  is  also  a spiteful  thrust.

8 The  frontier  fortress  of  Zaru  See  p.  26,  note  2.  The  subsequently
mentioned  places  are  in  part  stations  on  the  desert  road  near  the  frontier.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  233

I begin  for  thee  with  the  House  of  Sesse.1  Hast  thou  never
trodden  it  ? Hast  thou  not  eaten  the  fish  of  the  water  of  ...  ?
Hast  thou  not  bathed  in  it  ? Come,  let  me  recall  to  thee
Hezin.  Where  is  its  fortress  ? Come,  let  me  tell  thee  of  the
region  of  Buto  of  Ramesses  and  of  House-of-Victories  of
Usimare,1  of  Seb-el  and  Ebsekeb.  I tell  thee  how  it  is  with
Ainen  ; knowest  thou  not  its  ordinance  (?)  ? 2 Nekhes  and
Khebret,  hast  thou  not  seen  them  since  thy  birth  ? 2 O Mahir,
where  are  they  ?

Repeh  3 — what  is  its  wall  like  ? How  many  leagues  march
is  it  to  Gaza  ? Answer  quickly ! Render  me  a report,  that
I may  name  thee  " Mahir,”  and  may  make  boast  of  thy
name  to  others  ; “ Maryen  ” will  I say  to  them  (in  respect  of
thee).

Thou  art  angry  at  what  I (now)  say  to  thee.  I . . . thine
heart  in  all  callings.  My  father  taught  me  what  he  knew,  and
instructed  me  times  out  of  number.  I know  how  to  hold  the
reins  far  better  than  thou  knowest.  There  is  no  gallant  that  can
set  himself  up  over  me,  and  I am  versed  in  the  service  of  Month.4

Very  hurtful  is  all  that  which  hath  come  over  thy  tongue,
and  very  . . . are  thine  utterances 5 ; thou  comest  to  me  wrapt
up  in  confusion,  and  loaded  with  their  wrongfulness.  Thou
dividest  the  words  as  one  that  goeth  recklessly  ahead,  and  thou
dost  not  tire  of  . . .

Be  strong ! Forward ! Haste  thee ! Comest  thou  not
down  ? What  is  it  like,  not  to  know  what  one  hath  reached  ?

I retreat  (?).  Behold,  I have  arrived  (?).  Bow  thee  ; 5

is  thine  heart  heavy,  so  is  thine  heart  composed.  Be  not
vexed ! 6

I have  shorn  for  thee  the  end  of  thy  letter,  and  have  answered
for  thee  what  thou  hast  said ; thy  narratives  were  collected
upon  my  tongue,  and  remained  upon  my  lips.  They  are  con-
fused when  heard,  and  no  uninstructed  person  (?)  can  under-

1 Ramesses  II  ; see  p.  228,  note  2.

1 Meaning  ? * Raphia,  south  of  Gaza.

4 The  war-god.  Amenemope  will  therefore  have  belittled  the  military
exploits  of  Hori.

5 He  probably  means  : slanderous  and  moreover  badly  expressed.

* Be  friendly.

7 The  meaning  of  this  difficult  passage  may  perhaps  be  : If  you  wish  to
continue  the  contest,  go  ahead.  I have  gained  all  I want  and  so  bring
the  controversy  to  a close.  But  do  not  be  vexed.


234


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


stand  them.  They  are  like  the  talk  of  a man  of  the  Delta  with
a man  of  Elephantine.1

Nay,  but  thou  art  a scribe  of  the  Two  Great  Gates,2  one
that  reporteth  the  needs  of  the  lands  (to  the  king),  goodly
and  fair  to  him  that  seeth  it.3

Say  not  : “ Thou  hast  made  my  name  to  stink  before  others
and  before  all.”  Behold,  I have  only  told  thee  what  it  is  to
be  a Mahir  ; I have  traversed  for  thee  the  land  of  Retenu.4  I
have  led  before  thee  the  foreign  countries  all  together,  and  the
towns  in  their  order  (?).  Incline  thyself  to  us  3 and  look  at
it  calmly,  that  thou  mayest  be  found  able  to  describe  them  (in
the  future)  6 and  that  thou  mayest  be  accounted  by  (us  ?)
a . . . counsellor.

6.  THE  WISDOM  OF  ANII  7

This  book  is  a late  imitation  of  the  old  books  of  wisdom,  and
resembles  them  in  this  respect  also,  that  in  it,  as  in  them,  a father
is  propounding  his  teaching  to  his  son.  But  the  scope  of  this  work
seems  to  be  wider  and  its  tone  livelier — I say  " seems,”  for,  un-
fortunately, unless  a new  manuscript  turns  up.  we  shall  never  be
able  to  understand  more  than  isolated  fragments  of  this  wisdom.
The  schoolboy,  who  copied  out  the  papyrus,  has  made  mistakes
in  the  writing  of  most  of  the  words,  and  for  the  length  of  whole
passages  one  has  absolutely  no  idea  of  what  is  the  subject  under
discussion.  Possibly  he  did  not  understand  much  of  what  his  book
contained,  for  although  it  is  written  in  New  Egyptian,  this  lan-
guage already  belonged  to  a period  separated  some  three  to  four
hundred  years  from  a schoolboy  of  the  Twenty-First  or  Twenty-
Second  Dynasty,  and  thus  much  of  it  might  have  been  obscure  to
him.  We  have  evidence,  moreover,  that  this  was  actually  the
case.  The  Berlin  Museum  possesses  the  writing-equipment  of  a
schoolboy,  who  likewise  lived  in  the  Twenty-Second  Dynasty,  com-
prising a writing-board,8  upon  which  are  written  what  were  origm-

1 Who  speak  entirely  different  dialects.  Meaning  • your  style  is  so
unintelligible.

2 Of  the  Palace.

3 Meaning,  probably  : In  your  high  position  you  need  not  write  clearly,
for  it  is  all  good  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  read  it.

4 Palestine.  5 Be  friendly.

* Be  not  wroth,  but  be  glad  to  learn  from  me.

7 Papyrus  of  the  Twenty-Second  Dynasty  in  Cairo  ; published  by
Chabas  in  1874  in  the  periodical.  L’£gyptologie,  under  the  title  of  Les

maximes  dn  scribe  A ni.

8 Zeitschr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  xxxii.  p.  127.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  235

ally  the  opening  words  of  our  book.  And  yet  he  already  had  to  add
to  these  words  a rendering  in  the  language  that  was  familiar  to  him.
“ Beginning  of  the  exhortatory  instruction  (the  commencement  of  the
exhortatory  instructions)  composed  by  the  scribe  Anii  (which  the
scribe  Anii  composed)  of  the  house  of  Nefer(ke)re-teri.”  With
this  last  name  we  might  possibly  associate  a similarly  named  king
at  the  end  of  the  Old  Kingdom,  and  suppose  that  the  author  of  the
work  wished  to  place  his  sage  in  that  period,  although  he  gave  him
and  his  son  names  belonging  to  the  New  Kingdom.

[Follow  my  words.]

(I  tell  thee)  that  which  is  excellent,  that  which  thou  shalt
observe  (?)  in  thine  heart.  Do  it,  and  so  thou  wilt  be  good,  and

all  evil  is  far  from  thee. It  will  be  said  of  thee  : a good

character,  and  not : he  is  ruined,  he  is  idle.  Accept  yny  words,
and  so  will  all  evil  be  far  from  thee.

[Be  prudent  in  speech  ?]

Unintelligible.

[Be  reticent.]

Guard  thyself  against  ought  that  injureth  (?)  great  people,
by  talking  of  secret  affairs.  If  (anyone)  speaketh  (of  them)  in
thine  house,  make  (thyself  ?)  deaf .

[Boast  not  of  thy  strength  ?]

Unintelligible.

[Found  a family.]

Take  to  thyself  a wife  when  thou  art  a youth,  that  she  may
give  thee  a son.  Thou  shouldest  beget  him  for  thee  whilst  thou
art  yet  young,  and  shouldest  live  to  see  him  become  a man  (?).
Happy  is  the  man  who  hath  much  people,  and  he  is  respected
because  of  his  children  (?).

[Be  pious.]

Celebrate  the  feast  of  thy  god . God  is  wroth  with

him  that  disregardeth  it.  Let  witnesses  stand  by  thine  offering ;

it  is  best  (?)  for  him  that  hath  done  it  (?) Singing,

dancing,  and  frankincense  appertain  to  his  maintenance  (?),
and  the  receiving  of  reverence  appertaineth  to  his  possessions.1
Bestow  them  on  the  god  in  order  to  magnify  his  name .

1 God  has  a right  to  be  reverenced.


236


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[Be  discreet  on  visits.]

Enter  not  the  (house  ?)  of  another, . Gaze  not  on

that  which  is  not  right  in  (his  ?)  house  ; thine  eye  may  see  it,
but  thou  keepest  silent.  Speak  not  of  it  to  another  outside,
that  it  may  not  become  for  thee  a great  crime  worthy  of  death,
when  it  is  heard  (?).

[Beware  of  the  harlot.]

Beware  of  a strange  woman,  one  that  is  not  known  in  her

city.  Wink  (?)  not  at  her have  no  carnal  knowledge

of  her  (?).  (She  is)  a deep  water  whose  twisting  men  know  not.1
A woman  that  is  far  from  her  husband,  “ I am  fair,”  she  saith

to  thee  every  day,  when  she  hath  no  witnesses . It  is

a great  crime  worthy  of  death,  when  one  heareth  of  it,  and
although  it  is  not  related  outside .

[Be  reserved  in  thy  conduct.]

Go  not  in  and  out  in  the  court  of  justice,  that  thy  name

may  not  stink . Speak  not  much,  be  silent,  that  thou

mayest  be  happy.  Be  not  a gossip.

[The  true  piety.]

The  dwelling  of  God,  it  abhorreth  clamour.  Pray  with  a
loving  heart,  all  the  words  whereof  are  hidden.  Then  he  will
do  what  thou  needest ; he  will  hear  what  thou  sayest  and  accept
thine  offering.

[Piety  towards  parents.]

Offer  water  to  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  who  rest  in  the

desert-valley . Omit  not  to  do  it,  that  thy  son  may

do  the  like  for  thee.

[Be  not  a drunkard.]

Take  not  upon  thyself  (?)  2 to  drink  a jug  of  beer.  Thou
speakest,  and  an  unintelligible  utterance  issueth  from  thy  mouth.
If  thou  fallest  down  and  thy  limbs  break,  there  is  none  to  hold
out  a hand  to  thee.  Thy  companions  in  drink  stand  up  and
say  : “ Away  with  this  sot ! ” If  there  (then)  cometh  one  to

1 The  changing  current  ? eddy  ?

2 Possible  meaning  . Boast  not  that  you  can  drink,  etc.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  237

seek  thee  in  order  to  question  thee,  thou  art  found  lying  on  the
ground,  and  thou  art  like  a little  child.

[Lead  an  honest  life  ?]

Go  not  forth  from  thine  house  to  one  that  thou  knowest
not  (?) let  every  place  that  thou  favourest  be  known.

[Be  mindful  of  death.]

Make  for  thyself  a fair  abode  in  the  desert -valley,  the  deep
which  will  hide  thy  corpse.  Have  it  before  thine  eyes  in  thine

occupations even  as  (?)  the  great  elders,  who  rest  in

their  sepulchre  (?).  He  who  maketh  it  (for  himself)  meeteth
with  no  reproof ; good  is  it  if  thou  too  art  furnished  in  like

manner.  Thy  messenger 1 cometh  to  thee he  placeth

himself  in  front  of  thee  (?).  Say  not : “I  am  too  young  for  thee
to  carry  off,”  for  thou  knowest  not  thy  death.  Death  cometh
and  leadeth  away  the  babe  that  is  still  in  the  bosom  of  its
mother,  even  as  the  man  when  he  hath  become  old.

Here  begins  a fresh  section  of  some  length,  in  which,  firstly,
caution  in  social  intercourse  is  enjoined— most  of  it  frankly  unin-
telligible.

Behold,  I tell  thee  yet  other  excellent  things,  which  thou
shalt  heed  (?)  in  thine  heart.  Do  them,  and  thou  wilt  be  happy,
and  all  evil  will  be  far  from  thee .

[Caution  in  social  intercourse.]

Keep  thyself  far  from  an  hostile  man,  and  take  him  not  to
thee  for  a companion.  Make  to  thyself  a friend  (rather)  of
one  that  is  upright  and  righteous,  when  thou  seest  what  he  hath
done  (?) .

Make  not  a friend  of  the  slave  of  another,  whose  name

stinketh . If  one  pursueth  him  in  order  to  seize  him,

and  to  take  away  him  that  is  in  his  house,  thou  art  wretched
and  sayest  : “ What  am  I to  do  ? "

[Possessions  do  not  make  for  happiness  ?]

A man  constructed  a house  for  himself.  A piece  of  ground  (?)
is  laid  out  for  thee,  thou  hast  fenced  in  (?)  a garden  of
herbs  in  front  of  thine  arable  land ; thou  hast  planted  syca-
mores inside and  thou  Sliest  thine  hand  with  all

1 Probably  meaning  Death,  who  comes  to  summon  you.


238  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

flowers  that  thine  eye  perceiveth.  (But)  with  them  all  one  is
wretched .

Put  not  thy  trust  in  the  possessions  of  another  ; guard
thyself  from  doing  that  (?).  Rely  not  on  the  things  of  another

say  not  : “ The  father  of  my  mother  hath  an  house

. For  when  it  cometh  to  the  division  with  thy  brethren,

thy  share  (is  only)  a storehouse.  If  thy  god  grants  that  a child
be  bom  to  thee .

[Be  respectful.]

Sit  not  when  another  standeth,  one  that  is  older  than  thou,
or  that  hath  occupied  himself  in  his  calling  longer  than
thou .

The  subject  with  which  the  passages  immediately  following  are
concerned,  cannot  even  be  conjectured.

[Usefulness  of  knowledge.]

Men  do  all  that  thou  sayest,  if  thou  art  skilled  in  the  writings.
Devote  thyself  to  the  writings,  and  put  them  in  thine  heart,  and
then  all  that  thou  sayest  is  excellent.  To  whatsoever  office
the  scribe  is  appointed,  he  consulteth  the  writings.1  There  is
no  son  for  the  superintendent  of  the  treasury’,  no  heir  for  the

superintendent  of  the  fortress the  offices,  which  have

no  children ,2

[Be  cautious  in  speech.]

Speak  not  out  thine  heart  to  the  . . . man . A

wrong  word  that  hath  come  forth  from  thy  mouth,  if  (he  ?)
repeateth  it,  thou  makest  enemies  (for  thyself).  A man  falleth

in  ruin  because  of  his  tongue . A man’s  belly  is  broader

than  a granary,  and  is  full  of  all  manner  of  answers.  Choose
thou  out  the  good  and  speak  them,  while  the  bad  remain  im-
prisoned in  thy  belly.

Of  a truth  thou  will  ever  be  with  me  and  answer  him  that
injureth  me  with  falsehood,  in  spite  of  God  who  judgeth  the
righteous.  His  fate  cometh  to  carry  him  off.3

1 Through  them  he  is  always  successful  and  is  therefore  fit  to  succeed
to  any  office,  as  is  amplified  in  what  follows.

a The  most  worthy  obtains  them,  i.e.  he  who  has  learnt  most.

* If  the  sentence  is  to  be  thus  translated,  the  sage  is  here  referring  to
some  wrong  which  had  been  done  him  by  an  enemy,  and  of  which  an
account  may  have  been  given  in  the  lost  beginning  of  the  book.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


239


[Relations  with  God.]

Make  offering  to  thy  god  and  keep  thyself  from  trespassing
against  him.  Inquire  not  concerning  his  form  ; walk  not  with
swaggering  gait,  when  he  goeth  forth  in  procession  ; press  not

forward  to  carry  him.1 Let  thine  eye  mark  how  he  is

wroth,  and  have  respect  for  his  name.  It  is  he  that  giveth  power  (?)
to  millions  of  forms,  and  (only)  he  is  made  great  whom  he
maketh  great.  The  god  of  this  land  is  the  sun  which  is  in  the
horizon,  (but)  his  images  are  on  earth  ; to  them  let  incense  be
offered  daily.

[Be  grateful  to  thy  mother.]

Double  the  bread  that  thou  givest  to  thy  mother,  and  carry
her  as  she  carried  (thee).  She  had  a heavy  load  in  thee,  and
never  left  it  to  me.2  When  thou  wast  bom  after  thy  months,
she  carried  thee  yet  again  about  her  neck,  and  for  three  years
her  breast  was  in  thy  mouth.  She  was  not  disgusted  at  thy
dung,  she  was  not  disgusted  and  said  not : “ What  do  I ? ”
She  put  thee  to  school,  when  thou  hadst  been  taught  to  write,
and  daily  she  stood  there  ... 3 with  bread  and  beer  from  her
house.

When  thou  art  a young  man  and  takest  to  thee  a wife  and  art
settled  in  thine  house,  keep  before  thee  how  thy  mother  gave
birth  to  thee,  and  how  she  brought  thee  up  further  in  all  manner  of
ways.  May  she  not  do  thee  harm  nor  lift  up  her  hands  to  God,
and  may  he  not  hear  her  cry.

[On  wealth  and  its  instability.]

Eat  not  bread,  if  another  is  suffering  want,  and  thou  dost

not  stretch  out  the  hand  to  him  with  bread. . One  is  rich

and  another  is  poor . He  that  was  rich  in  past  years,

is  this  year  a groom.  Be  not  greedy  about  filling  thy  belly

. The  course  of  the  water  of  last  year,  it  is  this  year  in

another  place.  Great  seas  have  become  dry  places,  and  banks
have  become  abysses.

[On  paying  visits  ?]

Go  not  freely  to  a man  in  (his)  house,  but  enter  in  (only)
when  thou  art  bidden.  When  he  hath  said  to  thee  “ Praise  to

1 In  the  procession.

8 I (thy  father)  could  not  help  her.


* I.e.  outside  the  school.


240


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


thee”  with  his  mouth, . Then  after  an  unintelligible

passage : give  him  to  God  and  give  him  daily  again  to  God.
The  morrow  is  as  to-day.  Thou  wilt  see  what  God  will  do,  if
he  besmircheth  (?)  him  that  hath  besmirched  (?)  thee.1

[Keep  thyself  far  from  tumults.]

Enter  not  into  a crowd,  if  thou  findest  that  it  standeth  ready

for  beating that  thou  mayest  not  be  blamed  in  the

Court  before  the  magistrates  after  the  tendering  of  evidence.
Keep  thee  far  from  hostile  people .

[Treat  thy  wife  well.]

Act  not  the  official  over  thy  wife  in  her  house,  if  thou  knowest
that  she  is  excellent.  Say  not  unto  her : “ Where  is  it  ? Bring
it  us,”  if  (?)  she  hath  put  (it)  in  the  right  place.  Let  thine  eye
observe  and  be  silent,  that  so  (?)  thou  mayest  know  her  good

deeds.  (She  is)  happy  when  thine  hand  is  with  her .

Thereby  the  man  ceaseth  to  stir  up  strife  in  his  house .

[Be  careful  of  women.]

Go  not  after  a woman,  in  order  that  she  may  not  steal  thine
heart  away.2

[Behaviour  towards  superiors.]

Answer  not  a superior  who  is  enraged,  get  out  of  his  way.
Say  what  is  sweet,  when  he  saith  what  is  bitter  to  any  one,  and
make  calm  his  heart.  Contentious  answers  carry  rods,3  and  thy
strength  collapseth.  Rage  directeth  itself  (?)  against  thy  business,
therefore  vex  (?)  not  thine  own  self.  He  tumeth  about  and
praiseth  thee  quickly,  after  his  terrible  horn.  If  thy  words  are
soothing  for  the  heart,  the  heart  inclineth  to  receive  them.
Seek  out  silence  for  thyself,  and  submit  to  what  he  doeth.

[Stand  well  with  the  police.]

Make  a friend  of  the  herald4  of  thy  quarter,  and  let  him
not  become  enraged  with  thee.  Give  him  dainties  when  there

1 Might  apply  to  some  one  who  had  committed  a wrong,  the  punish-
ment of  whom  let  God  see  to  ?

2 Probably  only  the  beginning  of  a section.

* Lead  to  thy  being  beaten.

1 Here  and  elsewhere  merely  the  title  of  an  official.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  241

are  any  in  thine  house,1  and  pass  him  not  by  at  his  prayers.
Say  to  him  : “ Praise  to  thee  ” .

An  unintelligible  passage  is  followed  by  a dialogue,  with  which
the  book  concludes.

The  scribe  Khenshotep  answered  his  father,  the  scribe  Anii :

“ Ah,  would  that  I were  as  thou  (?) so  would  (?)  I act

in  accordance  with  thy  teaching,  that  (?)  the  son  should  be  pro-
moted to  his  father’s  place . Thou  art  a man  with  lofty

desires,  all  of  whose  words  are  choice.  A son  that  imagineth  (?)

evil  within  himself,  he  saith in  books.  Thy  words  are

soothing  for  mine  heart,  and  mine  heart  inclineth  to  receive  them.
Mine  heart  rejoiceth.  (But)  let  not  thine  excellence  be  too

abundant, a boy  doth  not  yet  do  according  to  the

teaching  that  instructs,  albeit  (?)  the  books  are  on  his  tongue.”  2

The  scribe  Anii  answered  his  son,  the  scribe  Khenshotep  :
“Trust  not  in  these  hazardous  things  (?).  Avoid  further  com-
plaining, mine  heart  heedeth  it  not.  Even  the  fighting  bull,  that
hath  slain  the  stall,3  cannot  leave  the  ring,  and  receiveth  his
instructions  from  the  drover.  The  fierce  lion  abateth  his  rage  and
doefully  passeth  by  the  ass.  The  horse  submitteth  to  his  yoke

. The  dog.  he  hearkeneth  to  words  and  followeth

his  master.  The  kaeri-animal 1 carrieth  the  . . . vessel,  which
his  mother  carried  not.  The  goose  alighteth  on  the  cool  pool,
when  it  is  chased,  and  then  fretteth  itself  in  the  net.  Negroes
are  taught  to  speak  Egyptian,  and  Syrians,  and  all  strangers
likewise.  I too  have  discoursed  on  all  the  callings  that  thou
mayest  hear,  and  know  what  is  to  be  done.”

What  the  son  replies  to  this  is  unintelligible ; he  probably
alludes  to  the  fact  that  most  men  are  worthless.  There  is  a multi-
tude of  all  that  is  evil  (?),  and  none  knoweth  his  teaching.  If
there  be  one  that  is  prudent,  the  bulk  is  foolish.  He  then
probably  would  vow  obedience  to  his  father  : All  thy  words  are
excellent  I give  thee  oaths,  place  them  upon  thy  way.

The  scribe  Anii  answered  his  son,  the  scribe  Khenshotep  :
“ Turn  thy  back  on  these  many  words,  which  are  far  from
being  heard.  The  bent  (?)  stick  that  lieth  in  the  field,  exposed

1 On  festival  da  vs.

2 The  meaning  of  the  whole  passage  may  be  : Go  not  too  far  in  thy
demands,  or  else,  though  I may  carry  thy  wisdom  m my  mouth,  I shall
not  conduct  myself  in  accordance  with  it.

3 The  other  oxen  of  the  stall.  4See  above,  p 189,  note  5.

16


242


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


to  (?)  sun  and  shade,  the  craftsman  fetcheth  it  and  maketh  it
straight,  and  maketh  it  into  the  whip  of  a notable.  But  the
straight  piece  of  wood,  that  maketh  he  into  a board  (P).1  O
heart  that  cannot  deliberate,  is  it  thy  will  to  give  oaths,  or  dost
thou  miscarry  ? ”

Anii  then  probablv  expresses  the  hope  that  his  son,  who  already
knoweth  the  strength  in  his  hand,2  may  be  as  sensible  as  the  child
in  its  mother's  arms.  When  it  cometh  to  years  of  discretion  and
no  longer  wishes  to  suck,  it  findeth  its  mouth  in  order  to  say  :
“ Give  me  bread.”


C.  LOVE  SONGS

Though  the  love  songs  of  the  earlier  period  are  still  unknown
to  us,  as  many  as  five  small  collections  survive  from  the  New
Kingdom.  However  much  chance  may  have  had  a hand  in
the  game,  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  as  to  that  period  having
been  the  golden  age  of  this  kind  of  lyric  poetry  ; if  for  no  other
reason  than  that  all  these  songs  strike  one  as  being  productions
of  a similar  tendency.

They  are  mostly  short  songs  without  any  rigid  structure,
simple  discourses,  in  which  now  the  beloved  speaks,  and  now
the  lover.  Every  song  was  followed,  so  one  is  led  to  suppose
from  indications  in  the  manuscripts,  by  the  playing  of  some
musical  instrument,  and  that  probably  accounts  for  the  fact
that  the  song  which  follows  hardly  ever  bears  any  relation  to
that  which  precedes.

Associated  with  love  in  this  poetry  is  a joy  in  nature,  in  the
trees  and  flowers  in  the  garden  and  on  the  water.  But  other
often  very  pretty  and  naive  pictures  and  ideas  occur,  and  on
the  whole  a great  deal  of  pleasure  can  be  derived  from  these  songs.

Their  tone,  allowing  for  the  southern  point  of  view,  is
markedly  decent ; though  one  cannot  avoid  the  suspicion  that
behind  many  a striking  expression  some  double  meaning  was
concealed  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  audience  !

The  resemblance  of  these  songs  to  the  Song  of  Songs  will
strike  every  reader,  and  a connection  is  favoured  by  another
feature  also,  namely,  that  the  lovers  call  themselves  there  as

1 Cleaning  probably  : one  can  train  every  one,  but  the  result  is  of
varying  value,  it  remains  doubtful,  however,  whether  the  sage  gives  the
preference  to  the  beautiful  whip  or  the  level  board.

1 1.e.  feels  himself  strong.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


243


here  "brother”  and  “sister.”  When  we  read  in  the  Voyage  of
Unamun  (p.  174  ff.)  that  the  prince  of  Byblos  ( circa  1100  B.c.)
had  acquired  for  himself  an  Egyptian  female  singer,  we  can  well
imagine  along  what  road  the  lyric  poetry  of  Egypt  found  its
way  into  Canaan.

Let  me  find  place  here  for  a couplet,  too  pretty  to  be  left
out.  On  the  verso  of  a papyrus,  containing  all  manner  of  high-
flown  stuff  out  of  the  schools  {Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.),  is  cursorily
jotted  down  in  a running  hand  :

When  the  wind  cometh,  he  desireth  the  sycamore  :

When  thou  comest,

" thou  desirest  me,”  so  the  line  might  be  completed.


1.  DISCOURSES  OF  THE  LOVERS.  FIRST  COLLECTION 1

Some  little  songs,  which  have  no  connection  with  one  another.
Sometimes  it  is  the  one,  sometimes  the  other,  of  the  amorous  pair
who  laments  his  or  her  pain  and  expresses  his  or  her  desire.

[The  maiden  speaks.]

my  god.  My  brother,  it  is  pleasant  to  go  to  the

(pond)  in  order  to  bathe  me  in  thy  presence,  that  I may  let
thee  see  my  beauty  in  my  tunic  of  finest  royal  linen,  when  it
is  wet  2 ...  I go  down  with  thee  into  the  water,  and  come
forth  again  to  thee  with  a red  fish,  which  lieth  (?)  beautiful  on
my  fingers Come  and  look  at  me.

[The  youth  speaks.]

The  love  of  my  sister  is  upon  yonder  side,  a stretch  of
water  is  between  (us  both),  and  a crocodile  waiteth  on  the  sand-
bank. But  when  I go  down  into  the  water,  I tread  upon  the
flood ; mine  heart  is  courageous  upon  the  waters  . . . and
the  water  is  like  land  to  my  feet.  Her  love,  it  is,  that  maketh
me  so  strong  ; yea,  it  maketh  the  water-spell 3 for  me.

I see  my  sister  coming  and  mine  heart  rejoiceth.  Mine  arms
are  opened  wide  to  embrace  her,  and  mine  heart  rejoiceth  upon

1 On  an  ostracon  in  Cairo.  First  brought  to  notice  by  Spiegelberg.
See  W.  Max  Muller,  Liebespoesie  der  alten  Agypter,  Leipzig,  1899.

* And  so  clings  to  the  body.

1 Against  the  crocodiles,  see  p 35,  note  4.


244


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


its  place 1 like  . . . eternally,  when  the  mistress  cometh
unto  me.

If  I embrace  her  and  her  arms  are  opened,  it  is  for  me  as  if
I were  one  that  is  from  Punt 2 unguent.

If  I kiss  her  and  her  lips  are  open,  I am  happy  (even)  with-
out beer. . What  follou's  is  probably  spoken  by  the  youth

to  a maidservant.  I say  to  thee  : Put  the  finest  linen  between
her  limbs,  make  not  her  bed  with  royal  linen  3 4 and  beware  of
white  linen.3  Adorn  (her  couch  with  . . . ) and  sprinkle  it
with  tishepes-oild

Ah,  would  I were  her  negress  that  is  her  handmaid,  then
would  I behold  the  colour  of  all  her  limbs.

Ah,  would  I were  the  washerman  . . . in  a single  month,  . . .
I would  wash  out  the  unguents  which  are  in  her  clothing .

Ah,  would  I were  her  signet-ring  which  is  on  (her  finger  ?)


2.  DISCOURSES  OF  THE  LOVERS.  SECOND
COLLECTION  5

[The  maiden  speaks.]

diversion.  If  thou  desirest  to  caress  my  thigh,

my  breast  will  . . . thee.  Wilt  thou  go  away  because  thou
hast  bethought  thee  of  eating  ? Art  thou  a glutton  ? 6 Wilt
thou  go  away  and  clothe  thyself  ? But  I have  a sheet.  Wilt
thou  go  away,  because  (thou  art  thirsty  ?)  ? Take  to  thee  my
breast ; what  it  hath  overfloweth  for  thee.  Fair  is  the  day
whereon

The  love  of  thee  penetrateth  my  body  like  . . . mixed  with

1 According  to  the  Egyptian  conception,  the  heart  rests  on  a support,
and  is  only  happy  as  long  as  it  remains  thereon.

2 The  land  of  perfumes.  So  sweetly  smells  the  beloved  by  reason  of
her  unguents.

2 These  must  be  inferior  sorts  of  linen,  anyhow  at  this  period.

4 A famous  perfume  ; see  p.  34

* On  the  recto  of  Pap.  Harris,  500,  in  London,  which  was  w'ritten
under  Sethos  I.  Brought  to  notice  by  Goodwin  See  \V.  Max  Muller,
Liebespoesie.

4 Literally  : "a  man  of  his  belly."


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


245


water,  like  the  love-apple,1  when  ...  is  mingled  therewith,
and  like  as  dough  is  mixed  with  . . .

Hasten  to  see  thy  sister,  as  an  horse

[The  youth  speaks.]

the  ...  of  the  sister  is  a field  (?)  with  lotus  buds,

and  her  breast  one  with  love-apples.  Her  arms  are

Her  brow  is  the  bird-trap  of  meru-wood,  and  I am  the  goose
which  is  snared  by  the  worm.

[The  maiden  speaks.]

Hath  not  mine  heart  compassion  on  thy  love  for  me  ? My
young  wolf  is  . . . thy  drunkenness.  I will  not  let  go  of  thy

love,  even  if  I (?)  am  beaten as  far  as  the  land  of

Palestine  with  shebet 2 and  clubs,  and  unto  the  land  of  Ethiopia
with  palm-ribs,  as  far  as  the  hill  with  sticks,  and  unto  the  field
with  cudgels.  I will  not  heed  their  3 designs,  so  as  to  forsake
love.

[The  youth  speaks.]

I voyage  downstream  in  the  ferry-boat with  my

bundle  of  reeds  on  my  shoulder.4  I will  go  to  Memphis  and
will  say  unto  Ptah,  Lord  of  Truth  : “ Give  me  my  sister  to-
night.” The  stream  is  wine,3  Ptah  6 is  its  reeds  ; Sekhmet  its

lotus,  Earit  its  bud,  and  Xefertem  its  flower  (?) The

dawn  breaks  through  her  beauty.  Memphis  is  a dish  of  love-
apples  set  before  the  Fair  of  Face.7

I will  lay  me  down  in  mine  house  and  be  sick  for  the  wrong
(done  me).  My  neighbours  will  enter  to  see  me.  If  my  sister
cometh  with  them,  she  will  put  to  shame  the  physicians,  for
she  kncrweth  my  malady.

The  castle  of  the  sister,  her  doorway  (?)  is  in  the  midst  of
her  house,  and  her  doors,  they  stand  open  . . . the  sister

1 See  p.  2i i,  note  6.  1 The  Hebrew  word  for  “ stick.”

3 Those  who  threaten  her.

4 Has  he  gathered  them,  and  does  he  then  bring  them  to  Memphis  ?

5 In  his  joy  at  coming  to  the  beloved,  the  world  seems  transfigured ;
everywhere  he  sees  the  gods  of  her  city.

6 Ptah  is  the  god  of  Memphis ; the  war-goddess  Sekhmet  is  the
consort  of  Ptah,  and  Nefertem,  who  himself  has  the  form  of  a flower,  is
the  child  of  that  pair.

7 Name  of  Ptah.


246


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


cometh  forth  wroth.1  Ah,  that  I were  made  the  porter,  so
that  she  might  chide  me.  Then  would  I hear  her  voice,  when
she  is  wroth,  like  a child  in  dread  of  her.

[The  maiden  speaks.]

I voyage  down  stream  (on)  the  Water  of  the  Ruler  (?)  2
and  enter  into  that  of  Re.2  My  desire  is  to  go  where  the  tents
are  set  up  at  the  opening  of  the  mouth  of  the  Mertiu.2  I will
start  to  run  ; I hold  not  my  peace,  when  mine  heart  thinketh
of  Re.  Then  will  I see  how  my  brother  entereth,  when  he  goeth
to  the  . . -3

When  I stand  with  thee  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mertiu,  thou
(leadest  ?)  mine  heart  unto  Heliopolis  (to)  Re.  I journey  back
with  thee  to  the  trees  of  the  . . . -houses.4  I will  take  the
trees  of  the  . . . -houses  (for  the  ?)  handle  on  my  fan.  I will
see  what  he  doeth,  when  my  face  looketh  on  the  . . . Mine  arms
are  full  of  branches  of  the  persea,  and  my  hair  is  weighed  down
with  unguent.  I am  like  a (princess  ?)  of  the  lord  of  the  Two
Lands,  when  I am  in  thine  arms.

3.  THE  MAIDEN  IN  THE  MEADOW  5

This  time  the  maiden  alone  speaks,  and  her  several  songs  have,
it  may  be  conceded,  some  sort  of  connection  with  one  another.
The  bird-catching  spoken  of  in  these  poems  is  not  carried  out  on  a
large  scale,  as,  for  example,  cvhen  geese  and  duck  were  captured  in
the  swamps  for  utilitarian  purposes  ; it  was  just  a pastime,  requiring
only  the  employment  of  a small  trap.

The  beautiful  cheerful  songs  of  thy  sister,  whom  thine  heart
loveth,  who  cometh  from  the  meadow.

My  beloved  brother,  my  heart  aspireth  to  thy  love .

I say  to  thee  : “ See  what  I do.  I have  come  and  catch  with
my  trap  in  mine  hand,  and  my  . . . and  my  ...”  All  birds

1 Wroth  with  the  little  doorkeeper,  who  does  not  keep  the  door  closed.

2 Probably  all  canals  at  Heliopolis.  What  is  treated  of  here  is  prob-
ably the  ceremonial  opening  of  the  main  canal  at  the  beginning  of  the
inundation — a popular  festival — such  as  was  celebrated  until  quite
recently  in  Cairo ; on  that  occasion  tents  actually  were  erected  for  the
officials.

3 She  runs  to  meet  him,  rejoicing,  when  he  sails  into  the  canal.

4 This  will  be  a place  or  garden  at  Heliopolis.  What  follows  depicts
apparently  her  proud  happiness,  but  the  details  are  obscure.

5 As  above,  p.  244,  note  g.


i


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


247


of  Punt,1  they  settle  upon  Egypt,  anointed  with  myrrh.  The
one  that  first  cometh,  it  taketh  my  worm  ; 2 its  savour  is  brought
from  Punt,  and  its  talons  are  full  of  unguent.

My  wish  concerning  thee  is  that  we  loose  them  3 together,
I alone  with  thee,  that  thou  hear  the  crying  of  my  myrrh-
anointed  one.

How  good  it  would  be,  if  thou  wert  there  with  me,  when  I
set  the  trap.  Most  good  is  it  to  go  to  the  meadow  unto  him
who  is  beloved.

The  voice  of  the  goose,  caught  on  its  worm,  crieth  out,  but
love  for  thee  holdeth  me  back  and  I cannot  loose  it.  I will  take
away  my  nets.  What  shall  I say  to  my  mother,  to  whom  I go
every  evening  laden  with  birds  ? “ Hast  thou  set  no  trap

to-day  ? ” 4 Thy  love  hath  carried  me  off.

The  goose  flieth  and  settleth , the  many  birds

wander  around,  yet  I trouble  not  myself  concerning  them,  for  I
have  only  my  love,  that  of  me  alone.  Mine  heart  is  in  full
accord  (?)  with  thine,  and  I go  not  far  from  thy  beauty.

I see  sweet  cake,  and  it  tasteth  like  salt,  and  shedeh,5

which  erst  was  sweet  in  my  mouth,  it  is  like  birds'  gall.  The
breath  of  thy  nostrils  alone  6 is  that  which  maketh  mine  heart
to  live.  I have  found  that  Amun  is  given  me  7 for  ever  and
ever.

Fairest  one,  my  desire  shall  be  that  I love  thee  as  thy  house-
wife, that  thine  arm  be  laid  upon  mine  arm If  mine

elder  brother  is  not  with  me  to-night,  then  am  I like  him  who  is
in  the  grave,  for  art  thou  not  health  and  life  ?

The  voice  of  the  swallow  speaketh,  saying  : “ The  land  is
bright,  what  is  thy  road  ? ” 8 Ah  no,  O bird  ! Thou  makest
me  to  sicken  (?).  I have  found  my  brother  in  his  bed,  and
mine  heart  is  glad  . . . He  saitn  unto  me  : I will  not  betake
me  afar  off ; my  hand  is  in  thy  hand.  I walk  to  and  fro  and  I

1 See  p.  244,  note  2.  2 The  bait  of  the  trap.

3 The  birds  from  the  trap.  4 The  mother’s  question.

5 See  p 191,  note  x.

* The  Egyptians  kissed,  at  ’.east  m the  earliest  times,  by  rubbing  noses ;
perhaps  here  is  a reference  to  that  practice.

7 Meaning  ?


Thou  must  go  away  ?


248


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


am  with  thee  in  every  pleasant  place.’'  He  maketh  me  the
chief  of  the  maidens  and  causeth  not  mine  heart  to  be  sick.

I fix  my  gaze  on  the  outer  door.  Behold,  my  brother  cometh
to  me.  Mine  eves  are  turned  upon  the  road,  and  mine  ear  heareth

I make  the  love  of  my  brother  to  be  my  sole  (?)  concern,

for  that  for  him  mine  heart  is  not  silent.

He  sendeth  me  a swift-footed  messenger,  who  cometh  and

goeth,  to  say  unto  me : Wrong  is  done  unto  me  (?)  1 .

What  meaneth  it,  that  thou  wrongest  another’s  heart  and  . . . me?

Mine  heart  recalleth  thy  love.  The  half  of  my  temple  (only)
is  braided,  when  I come  running  to  seek  thee.  I trouble  myself
no  ( longer ) over  my  hair-dressing,  yet,  if  thou  still  lovest  me  (?),
I will  put  on  my  curls,  that  I may  be  ready  at  any  time.2

4.  THE  FLOWERS  IN  THE  GARDEN  3

The  girl  looks  at  the  flowers  of  the  garden — is  she  weaving  a
garland  ? — and  with  each  one  thinks  of  her  love.  Every  song
begins  with  the  name  of  a flower,  to  which  the  first  verse  is  attached
by  a pun.

The  “ Cheerful  Songs.”  *

Mekhmekh-flowers  ! Thou  makest  the  heart  equable.5  I
do  unto  thee  that  which  it  desireth,  when  I am  in  thine  arms.

My  chief  (?)  request  is  paint  for  mine  eye,6  and  my  seeing
of  thee  is  light  for  mine  eyes.  I nestle  close  to  thee,  because
I see  thy  love,  thou  man,  for  whom  most  (?)  I crave.

How  pleasant  is  mine  hour  ! Might  an  hour  only  become
for  me  eternity,  when  I sleep  with  thee.  Thou  didst  (?)  lift  up
mine  heart when  it  was  in  night  (?).

Seamu-flowers  are  in  it  ! One  is  made  great  in  their
presence.7  I am  thy  first  sister.  I am  unto  thee  like  a garden,

1 The  meaning  of  what  follows  is  that  he  excuses  himself  and  she  does
not  believe  it.

2 Cf.  p.  1 53,  note  1.  3 As  above,  p.  244,  note  5.

4 The  same  title  is  borne  by  the  songs  on  p.  246,  which  are  in  the  same
papyrus.

6 Paronomasia.

8 Meaning,  perhaps  : when  thou  carryest  out  my  request,  it  is  to  me
as  if  I cool  my  eyes  with  cosmetic.  The  painting  of  the  eyelids  with
antimony  still  plays  a great  role  in  Egypt  at  the  present  day.

7 Paronomasia.  Does  it  mean,  one  feels  great  m the  presence  of  the
little  flowers  ?


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


249


which  I have  planted  with  flowers  and  with  all  manner  of  sweet
smelling  herbs.

Pleasant  is  the  channel  in  it,  which  thine  hand  hath  digged,
at  the  cooling  of  the  north  wind.  The  beautiful  place  where
I walk  about,  when  thine  hand  resteth  on  mine,  and  mine  heart
is  satisfied  with  joy,  because  we  walk  together.  Shedeh  1 is  it,
my  hearing  of  thy  voice,  and  I live  because  I hear  it.  When-
ever I see  thee,  it  is  better  for  me  than  food  and  drink.

Zait-flowers  are  in  it  ! I take  2 thy  chaplets,  when  thou
comest  drunken  and  thou  liest  on  thy  bed.  I will  stroke  thy
feet .


5.  THE  TREES  IN  THE  GARDEN  3

The  trees  in  the  maiden’s  garden  speak  to  her  and  to  the  beloved,
and  invite  them  to  the  feast  in  their  shade.  Possibly  the  maiden
had  spoken  to  the  trees  in  the  lost  beginning,  for  one  of  them  com-
plains that  it  was  not  regarded  as  “ first.”

The  manuscript,  as  is  shown  by  a note  at  the  end,  belonged  to  an
official  whose  duty  it  was  to  issue  copper  to  the  metal-workers.

The  . . . -tree  speaketh  : My  stones  are  like  unto

her  teeth,  and  my  shape  unto  4 her  breasts.  (I  am  the  best)
of  the  orchard,  I abide  at  every  season,  that  the  sister  may
recline  (beneath  me  ?)  with  her  brother,  when  they  are  drunken

with  wine  and  shedeh,  and  besprinkled  with  kemi-oil.

All  (trees)  in  the  garden  save  me  fade  away  ; I endure  twelve

months I stand  . . .,  and  if  the  blossom  falleth  off,

that  of  the  year  before  is  still  upon  me.5

1 am  the  first  of  all  trees  and  will  not  that  I should  be  regarded
as  second.  If  this  is  done  again,  I will  no  longer  keep  silence
and  will  betray  them,  that  the  wrong-doing  may  be  seen  and  the

beloved  be  chastised,  that  she  may  not . The  poet  then

speaks  of  the  feast  with  its  lotus  flowers,  blossoms  and  buds,  its
unguent  and  beer  of  all  kinds,  that  she  may  cause  thee 6 to  pass

1 1.e.  as  sweet  as  that.

2 A pun.  Probably  the  chaplets  with  which  he  was  adorned  at  the
banquet.

3 Papyrus  in  Turin.  First  brought  to  notice  by  Maspero  in  1886.
See  W.  Max  Muller,  Lzebespoesie.

4 Probably  the  shape  of  the  fruit,  not  that  of  the  tree.

6 Thus  a tree  which  flowers  the  whole  year  through.

* The  lover  who  is  just  coming.


250


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


the  day  in  merriment.  The  booth  of  rushes  is  a sheltered

spot I see  him,  he  is  really  coming.  Let  us  go  and

flatter  him.  May  he  pass  the  whole  day .

The  fig-tree  moveth  its  mouth,  and  its  foliage  (?)  cometh

and  saith  : to  the  mistress.  Was  there  ever  a lady

like  me  ? (Yet)  if  thou  1 hast  no  slave,  I will  be  thy  servant.

I was  brought  from  the  land  of  . . . as  a spoil  for  the  beloved.
She  hath  had  me  set  in  her  orchard,  she  putteth  not  for

me . I (busy?)  myself  with  drinking,  and  my  belly

hath  not  become  full  of  well-water.2

I am  found  for  pleasure,  — — — — to  one  that  drinketh

not.  By  my  ka ! O beloved, bringeth  me  into  thy

presence.

The  little  sycamore,  which  she  hath  planted  with  her  hand,
it  moveth  its  mouth  to  speak.  The  whispering  (?)  of  its  leaves
is  as  sweet  as  refined  honey.  How  charming  are  its  pretty
branches,  verdant  as  . . . It  is  laden  with  neku-fruits,  that
are  redder  than  jasper.  Its  leaves  are  like  unto  malachite,
and  are  ...  as  glass.  Its  wood  is  in  colour  like  unto  neshmet-
stone,3  and  is  ...  as  the  besbes-tree.  It  draweth  them  that
be  not  (already)  under  it,4  its  shadow  is  (so)  cool.

It  slippeth  a letter  into  the  hand  of  a little  maid,  the  daughter
of  its  chief  gardener,  and  maketh  her  run  to  the  beloved :
“ Come,  and  pass  the  time  in  the  midst  of  thy  maiden  (?).
The  garden  is  in  its  day.5  There  are  bowers  and  shelters  (?)
there  for  thee.  My  gardeners  are  glad  and  rejoice  when  they
see  thee.  Send  thy  slaves  ahead  of  thee,  supplied  with  their
utensils.  (Of  a truth)  one  is  (already)  drunken  when  one
hasteneth  to  thee,  ere  one  hath  yet  drunken.  (But)  the  servants
come  from  thee  with  their  vessels,  and  bring  beer  of  every  sort
and  all  manner  of  mixed  loaves,  and  many  flowers  of  yesterday
and  to-day,  and  all  manner  of  refreshing  fruit.

1 The  beloved.  The  tree  will  act  as  her  attendant.  It  can  all  the
more  be  accounted  a slave,  as  it  was  brought  like  such  an  one  from  abroad
for  the  service  of  the  maiden.  It  is,  therefore,  not  an  ordinary  Egyptian
fig-tree  that  is  here  spoken  of.

3  It  can  go  on  drinking  perpetually,  it  is  so  well  watered.

3 Whitish-blue  felspar.

4 It  entices  people  into  its  shade.

5 In  full  bloom.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


251


“Come,  and  spend  the  day  in  merriment,  and  to-morrow,
and  the  day  after,  three  whole  days,  and  sit  in  my  shadow.”

Her  lover  sitteth  on  her  right  hand.  She  maketh  him
drunken,  and  heedeth  all  that  he  saith.  The  feast  is  disordered
with  drunkenness,  and  she  stayeth  on  with  her  brother.

Her  ...  is  spread  out  under  me,  when  the  sister  walketh
about.1  But  I am  discreet,  and  speak  not  of  what  I see.  I
will  say  no  word.


D.  VARIOUS  SONGS

i.  SONGS  OF  THE  THRESHERS

As  the  thresher  drives  his  oxen  round  and  round  the  threshing-
floor,  that  they  may  tread  out  the  grain,  he  suggests  to  them  that
something  will  accrue  to  them  out  of  this  labour,  and  sings  : 2

Thresh  for  yourselves,  thresh  for  yourselves,  oxen  !

Thresh  for  yourselves,  thresh  for  yourselves ;

Straw  to  eat,3  barley  for  your  masters;

Give  yourselves  no  rest,  it  is  cool  (to-day).

or  thus  : 4

Work  for  yourselves,  work  for  yourselves,  ye  oxen  !

Work  for  yourselves,  the  offal  for  yourselves,  the  barley
for  your  masters.5

2.  SONGS  AT  BANQUETS

This  charming  song,  which  bids  one  enjoy  this  fleeting  life,  and
comes  down  to  us  from  an  earlier  period  (see  p.  133),  is  to  be  found
in  an  amplified  version  in  the  tomb  of  a Theban  priest  : *

How  quiet  is  this  righteous  prince  ! The  goodly  destiny
hath  come  to  pass.

Bodies  pass  away  since  the  time  of  the  god,  and  a generation
cometh  in  their  place.

1 When  the  guests  are  drunken,  the  lovers  walk  about  in  the  garden
and  recline  under  the  tree.

2 In  the  tomb  of  Paheri  at  El-Kab  ; already  brought  to  notice  by
Champollion.  See  Lepsius,  Denkmaeler  aus  Aegypten  und  Aethiopien,
iii.  ioc  ; Tylor  and  Griffith,  The  Tomb  of  Paheri,  p.  15.

3 They  get  this  for  payment.  4 Lepsius,  op.  cit.  10 d.

5 Ie.  for  the  masters  of  your  poor  driver.

• See  W,  Max  Muixer,  Liebespoesie.  It  is  written  in  the  old  language.


252  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Re  showeth  himself  in  the  morning,  and  Atum  goeth  down
in  Manun.1  Men  beget,  women  conceive,  and  every  nose
breatheth  air — day  dawneth,  and  their  children  go  one  and  all
to  their  places.2

Spend  the  day  merrily,  O priest  ! Put  unguent  and  fine  oil
together  to  thy  nostrils,  and  garlands  and  lotus  flowers  . . .
on  the  body  of  thy  sister  3 whom  thou  favourest,  as  she  sitteth
beside  thee.  Set  singing  and  music  before  thy  face.  Cast
all  evil  behind  thee,  and  bethink  thee  of  joy,  until  that  day
cometh  when  one  reacheth  port  in  the  land  that  loveth
silence .

Spend  the  day  merrily,  Neferhotep,  thou  excellent  priest
with  clean  hands.

I have  heard  what  came  to  pass ,4  their  walls  are

destroyed,  their  places  are  no  more,  they  are  as  if  they  had
never  been  since  the  time  of  the  god .

So  much  for  the  first  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  poem.  What
is  still  preserved  of  the  remaining  portions  shows  that  the  singer
spoke  of  the  burial  rites , of  life  as  led  in  the  nether  world,  and
of  those  acts  of  kindness  for  which  the  memory  of  the  dead  is
cherished  ; but  in  between  is  to  be  recognized  : be  mindful  of  the
day  when  thou  shalt  be  drawn  to  the  land  of  the  dead,  there  is
none  that  hath  returned.  And  the  refrain  occurs  repeatedly:
Spend  the  day  merrily.

Fragments  of  songs  with  which  the  musicians  are  entertain-
ing the  guests,  are  occasionally  to  be  found  appended  to  other
pictures  representing  a banquet  held  in  the  tomb.  There  is,  for
example,  the  well-known  painting  in  the  British  Museum,5  show-
ing three  girls  singing,  while  a fourth  accompanies  them  on  the
flute,  and  two  others  dance.  The  words  of  their  song  come,
apparently,  from  one  which  celebrates  the  blessings  of  the  recent
inundation  :

Keb 6 hath  planted  his  beauty  in  every  body.  Ptah 7
hath  made  this  with  his  hands  to  be  unguent  (?)  for  his  heart.

1 Mythical  country  in  the  West.

2 Meaning  : the  next  day  sees  them  already  in  the  tomb.

3 I e.  thy  beloved,  as  in  the  love  songs.

4 Here,  as  in  the  original  version  of  the  song,  mention  must  have  been
made  of  the  ancient  sages,  or  other  famous  men  of  old  time.

5 W.  Wreszinski,  Atlas  zur  altaegyptiscken  Kulturgeschichte,  PI.  91.

* The  earth-god.  7 The  creator  and  fashioner  of  all  things.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  253

The  canals  are  full  of  water  anew,1  and  the  earth  is  flooded
over  with  his  love.

3.  THE  GOOD  FORTUNE  OF  THE  DEAD

The  old  drinking  song,  with  its  advice  to  make  the  most  of  life,
seeing  that  no  one  knows  how  it  fares  with  the  dead,  must  have
painfully  affected  a pious  Egyptian.  So  a song  was  composed  tvhich
protested  against  the  drinking  song.  If  the  harp-player  at  the
banquet  did  sing  these  old  profanities,  he  also  sang  after  them  by
way  of  apology,  as  it  were,  the  following  song,2  which  begins  with  an
address  to  the  dead  and  to  the  gods  of  the  Theban  necropolis — for
they  hear  what  is  sung  at  the  banquet  in  the  tomb.

All  ye  excellent  nobles,  and  ye  gods  of  the  Mistress  of  Life,3
hear  ye  how  praises  are  rendered  to  this  priest,  and  homage
done  to  this  excellent  noble’s  lordly  soul,  now  that  he  is  a god
that  liveth  for  ever,  magnified  in  the  West.  So  may  they
become  4 a remembrance  in  after  days,  and  for  every  one  that
cometh  to  (this  tomb).5

I have  heard  6 these  songs  that  are  in  the  tombs  of  ancient
time.  What  they  say,  when  they  extol  the  (life)  on  earth,
and  belittle  the  region  of  the  dead — to  what  purpose  is  it  that
they  act  thus  towards  the  Land  of  Eternity,  the  just  and  the
right,  where  no  terrors  are  ? Wrangling  is  its  abhorrence,  and
there  is  none  that  girdeth  himself  against  his  fellow.

This  land  that  hath  no  foe,7  all  our  kindred  rest  in  it,  since
the  earliest  day  of  time,  and  they  that  shall  be  in  millions  of
millions  of  years,  they  come  thither  every  one.  There  is  none
that  may  tarry  in  the  Land  of  Egypt,  there  is  not  one  that  doth
not  pass  yonder.

The  duration  of  that  which  is  done  upon  earth  is  as  a dream.
(Anon)  “ Welcome,  safe  and  sound  ” is  said  to  him  that  hath
reached  the  West.

1 With  fourfold  alliteration.

2 So  in  the  just-mentioned  (p.  251)  tomb  of  the  priest  Neferhotep  ; see
Gardiner,  Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Biblical  Archceology,  xxxv.  pp.
165  fi.  The  song  is  preserved  to  us  in  the  old  language.

’The  necropolis,  in  which  there  is  supposed  to  be  no  death,  but  only
new  life

4 The  praises,  i e.  the  usual  mortuary  prayers  and  invocations.

5 Visitors  to  the  tomb  are  to  pray  for  the  dead.

• This  is  the  real  beginning  of  the  song.

; Or . where  no  foe  existeth  ?


254  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

It  is  remarkable  to  see  how  the  poet  of  a modern  time  defends
his  hereafter.  He  no  longer  speaks  in  praise  of  its  choice  victuals
and  its  water,  and  he  does  not  even  mention  Osiris,  the  kindly
king  of  the  dead.  All  he  has  to  say  in  praise  of  it  is  that  it  brings
man  rest  at  the  last,  after  the  confused  dream  of  life.  This  is
fundamentally  the  same  pessimism  as  is  found  in  the  old  drinking
song,  except  that  reverence  for  the  hereafter  is  outwardly  preserved.

E.  POEMS  TO  THE  KING

The  poems  of  this  nature  that  I lay  before  my  readers  are
only  single  examples.  They  might  be  greatly  increased,  for
whatever  its  purport  in  other  respects,  every  inscription  of  a
New  Kingdom  Pharaoh  contains  a hymn  in  praise  of  him.

i.  THE  VICTORIES  OF  THUTMOSIS  III 1

This  hymn,  composed  about  1470  b.c.,  in  the  old  language  and
on  the  old  lines,  must  have  been  a famous  composition,  for  two  later
kings,  Sethos  I and  Ramesses  II,  have  reproduced  it  on  monuments
of  their  own  and  applied  it  to  themselves.

It  consists  of  an  introduction  and  a conclusion  written  in  poetic
language,  with  ten  intervening  strophes  composed  in  the  strictly
regular  form  discussed  on  p.  xxxi.

Saith  Amunre,  lord  of  Kamak  : Thou  comest  to  me  2 and
exultest,  when  thou  seest  my  beauty,  my  son,  my  protector,
Menkheperre,3  living  for  ever.  I shine  forth  4 for  love  of  thee.
Mine  heart  is  gladdened  by  thy  beauteous  coming  to  my  temple,
and  mine  hands  impart  protection  and  life  to  thy  limbs.

How  pleasing  is  the  kindliness  which  thou  displayest  towards
my  body  ; so  will  I establish  thee  in  my  dwelling,  and  work  a
wonder  for  thee.5

I give  thee  might  and  victory  over  all  the  hill  countries ; I

1 Upon  a splendid  memorial  stela  (see  Sethe,  XJrhunden,  iv.  61 1 £f.)
which  stood  in  the  temple  of  Kamak  ; now  in  the  Cairo  Museum.  Often
translated  ; see  Breasted,  Records,  ii.  §§  656  ft.

* The  king  comes  victorious  to  Thebes,  and  the  image  of  the  god  goes
in  procession  to  meet  him  and  to  greet  him.  The  whole  poem  will  actually
have  been  composed  for  such  a festival  and  recited  at  it.

' The  king’s  official  name.

4 l.e.  come  forth  in  procession  from  the  temple.

* You  have  so  beautified  my  image,  which  is  now  displayed  to  you,
and  I will  show  my  gratitude  by  erecting  one  of  you  in  the  temple.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


255


set  thy  glory  and  the  fear  of  thee  in  all  the  low  countries,  the
terror  of  thee  as  far  as  the  four  pillars  of  the  sky.1  I make  great
the  reverence  for  thee  in  all  bodies,  and  cause  the  war-cry  of  thy
majesty  to  resound  among  the  Nine  Peoples  of  the  Bow.

The  great  ones  of  all  foreign  lands  are  held  together  in  thy
fist.  I myself  stretch  out  mine  hands  and  tie  them  for  thee.2
I bind  3 together  the  Troglodytes  4 by  tens  of  thousands  and
thousands,  the  Northerners  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  as
captives.

I cause  thy  foes  to  fall  beneath  thy  sandals,  so  that  thou
treadest  down  the  ...  of  the  rebels  ; even  as  I consign  to  thee
the  earth  in  its  length  and  its  breadth,  and  the  Westerners  and
Easterners  are  under  thine  authority.

Thou  traversest  all  foreign  lands  with  joyful  heart,  and
wheresoe’er  thy  majesty  is,  there  is  none  that  attacketh.  I
am  thy  guide,  so  that  thou  attainest  unto  them.  Thou  hast
crossed  the  water  of  the  Great  Bend  5 of  Naharina  in  victory  and
strength,  which  I have  bestowed  on  thee.  They  hear  thy
battle-cry  and  enter  into  dens.  I have  bereft  their  nostrils  of
the  breath  of  life.  I send  the  terror  of  thy  majesty  coursing
through  their  hearts.

The  serpent  which  is  upon  thy  brow,  she  consumeth  them.
She  maketh  an  easy  spoil  of  the  malignant  ones.®  She  bumeth
up  them  that  are  in  their  ...  6 with  her  flame.  She  cutteth
off  the  heads  of  the  Asiatics,  and  none  of  them  are  lost  (to  her),
fallen  and  abased  (?)  by  reason  of  her  might.

I cause  thy  victories  to  spread  abroad  into  all  lands.  That
which  she  who  is  on  my  brow  illumineth  7 is  subject  to  thee.
There  is  none  that  rebelleth  against  thee  as  far  as  that  which
the  sky  encircleth.  They  come  with  gifts  upon  their  backs  and
make  obeisance  to  thy  majesty,  even  as  I ordain.

I have  made  to  faint  them  that  make  inroads,8  that
come  nigh  thee  ; their  hearts  are  burnt  up,  and  their  limbs
tremble.

1 The  sky,  according  to  one  conception,  was  supported  on  props.

3 The  simile  is  probably  derived  from  fowling.

3 The  word  is  used  of  binding  sheaves  ; the  enemy  are  his  harvest.

4 See  p.  137,  note  1.

* The  Euphrates.

* Designation  of  a people.

7 The  royal  serpent  shines  like  the  sun,  to  whom  she  actually  belongs.

* Bedouins,  sea-rovers,  etc.


256


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


I have  come 1 that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  princes
of  Palestine  ;

I spread  them  out  under  thy  feet  throughout  their  countries.
I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  The  Lord  of  Radiance,2
Thou  shinest  in  their  faces  as  my  similitude.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  them  that
are  in  Asia  ;

Thou  smitest  the  heads  of  the  Asiatics  of  Retenu.3
I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  equipped  with  thy
panoply.

When  thou  layest  hold  on  the  weapons  of  war  in  the  chariot.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  Eastern
land  ;

Thou  tramplest  on  them  that  are  in  the  regions  of  God’s  Land,4
I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  the  star  Seshed,

Which  scattereth  its  flame  in  fire,  when  it  giveth  forth  its  dew.5

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  Western
land ;

Keftiu  and  Isi 6 are  in  awe  of  thee,

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  a young  bull,

Firm  of  heart,  with  horns  ready,  that  is  not  felled  (?).

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  them  that
are  in  their  . . . ;

The  lands  of  Meten  7 tremble  for  fear  of  thee,

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  a crocodile.

Lord  of  terror  in  the  water,  unapproachable.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  them  that
are  in  the  islands  ;

They  that  are  in  the  midst  of  the  great  green  sea  are  aware
of  thy  battle-cry.

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  the  Champion,8
Who  appeared  gloriously  upon  the  back  of  his  victim.

1 1.e.  to  meet  you  2 The  sun.

3 Palestine  ; see  above,  pp.  1 7 and  234.

4 The  land  of  sunrise,  i.e.  Arabia  and  the  like

3 Possibly  rather  “ blight  ” or  ‘ pestilence  ” [ Translator]

3 Crete  and  Cyprus  ?

7 Unidentified  : probably  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea.

8 Horus,  the  “ Champion  " of  Osiris.  He  sits  as  a hawk  upon  the
defeated  Seth.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  257

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  Tehenu  ; 1
The  Utentiu  are  subject  to  the  might  of  thy  fame.

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  a fierce-eyed  lion,
While  thou  makest  them  to  be  corpses  throughout  their  valley.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  utter-
most ends  of  the  lands  ;

What  the  ocean  encircleth  is  held  in  thy  grasp.

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  a lord  of  the  wing,2
Which  seizeth  on  what  he  seeth  according  as  he  desireth.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  them  that
are  in  the  country  nigh  at  hand  ;

Thou  bindest  the  sand-dwellers  as  captives.

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  a jackal  of  Upper  Egypt,
A master  of  speed,  a runner,  traversing  the  two  lands.

I have  come  that  I may  cause  thee  to  tread  down  the  Troglo-
dytes of  Nubia  ;

As  far  as  ...  , all  is  in  thy  grasp  ;

I cause  them  to  behold  thy  majesty  as  thy  twain  brethren,3
Whose  hands  I have  joined  for  thee  in  victory,4

and  thy  two  sisters  5 have  I put  behind  thee  as  a protection,
while  the  arms  of  my  majesty  are  uplifted  and  dispel  what  is
evil.6

I afford  thee  protection,  my  beloved  son,  Horus,  Strong
Bull,  who  shone  forth  in  Thebes,  whom  I have  begotten  from
my  divine  limbs,  Thutmosis,  who  liveth  ever,  who  hath  done  for
me  all  that  my  ka  desireth.  Thou  hast  erected  my  dwelling  in
everlasting  work,  made  longer  and  broader  than  it  was  afore-
time, and  the  great  doorway  . . . whose  beauty  makes  festive
the  House  of  Amun  (?).  Greater  are  thy  monuments  than  those
of  any  king  that  hath  been.  I gave  thee  command  to  make
them,  and  am  now  contented  therewith  ; I establish  thee  upon

1 The  Libyans  ; the  Utentiu  are  unknown.

* The  hawk.  * Horus  and  Seth.

* They  both  give  it  thee.  It  will  be  noticed  how  the  strophic  part  is
linked  to  what  follows.  This  will  also  have  been  brought  out  in  the
chanting  of  the  poem.

* Isis  and  Nephthys.

* The  last  sentence  is  garnished  with  alliterations,  five  words  beginning
■with  h following  one  another.  See  above,  p,  xjcxiv.

17


258


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


the  throne  of  Horus  for  millions  of  years,  that  thou  mayest
lead  the  living  for  ever.

2.  HYMN  TO  RAMESSES  II 1

This  fine  poem  is  to  be  found  on  various  stelae  near  to,  and
inside,  the  rock  temple  of  Abu  Simbel,  in  Nubia.  Since  it  has  no
special  connection  with  the  temple  or  the  district,  we  must  suppose
that  this  poem,  like  that  on  the  battle  with  the  Khatti,  was  one  which
particularly  took  the  king's  fancy  and  accordingly  was  immortalized.

The  beginning  contains  actually  only  the  king’s  names,  which,
however,  by  the  addition  of  epithets,  are  expanded  into  a hymn.
Then  follow  five  strophes  of  varying  length,  each  of  which  ends  with
“ King  Ramesses.”

[Expanded  titulary  of  the  king.]

Horus,  Strong  Bull,  who  is  loved  by  Truth,  Month 2 of
kings,  bull  of  rulers,  of  great  strength  like  his  father  Seth  of
Ombos.

Lord  of  the  two  diadems,  who  protecteth  Egypt  and  sub-
dueth  foreign  countries,  the  fearful,  (greatly  ?)  reverenced  in  all
lands  ; who  suffereth  not  the  land  of  Ethiopia  to  exist,  and
putteth  an  end  to  the  boasting  of  the  land  of  Khatti.

The  subjugator  of  the  adversary,  rich  in  years,  great  in
victories,  who  reacheth  the  ends  of  the  earth  when  seeking  for
battle,  who  maketh  narrow  the  wide  mouth  of  foreign  princes.3

King  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  lord  of  the  Two  Lands,
Usimare-Chosen-of-Re.

Son  of  Re,  who  treadeth  down  the  land  of  the  Khatti,
Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun,  given  life . Beloved  by  Re-Harakhti-
Atum,4  lord  of  the  Two  Lands  of  Heliopolis;  by  Amunre,4  king
of  gods,  and  by  Ptah,  the  great,  who  dwelleth  south  of  his
Wall,4  lord  of  Ankh-taui 5 ; who  appeared  upon  the  Horus-throne
of  the  living.

[The  actual  poem.]

The  good  god,  the  strong  one,  whom  men  praise,  the  lord,
in  whom  men  make  their  boast ; who  protecteth  his  soldiers,6
who  maketh  his  boundaries  on  earth  as  he  will,  like  Re  when

1 Lepsius,  Denkmaeler , ui.  195a.  Still  composed  in  the  old  language.

2 The  god  of  war.  3 Their  boasting.

4 The  three  great  gods  to  whom  the  temple  of  Abu  Simbel  is  dedicated

* Part  of  Memphis,  where  Ptah  dwells.  * Cf.  below,  p.  267.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  259

he  shineth  over  the  circle  of  the  world,-  -he,  the  king  of  Upper
and  Lower  Egypt,  Usimare-Chosen-of-Re,  son  of  Re,  lord  of
diadems,  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun,  who  is  given  life.1

He  who  bringeth  the  rebellious  one  as  captive  to  Timuris,
and  the  princes  with  their  gifts  to  his  palace.  The  fear  of  him
courseth  through  their  bodies,  their  limbs  tremble  in  the  time
of  his  terribleness,  lord  of  the  Two  Lands, — he.  King  Ramesses.

He  who  treadeth  down  the  land  of  the  Khatti.  and  maketh
it  a heap  of  corpses  like  Sekhmet,2  when  she  rageth  after  the
pestilence.  He  who  sendeth  forth  his  arrows  against  them,
and  hath  the  mastery  over  their  limbs.  The  princes  of  every
foreign  country  come  forth  from  their  land,  wakeful  and  un-
sleeping,3 and  their  bodies  faint.  Their  gifts  are  an  assortment
of  the  products  of  their  land ; their  soldiers  and  their  children
are  in  the  forepart  thereof,  in  order  to  sue  for  peace  from  his
majesty — from  him,  King  Ramesses.

Their  princes  tremble,  when  they  behold  him,  how  that  in

his  might  and  strength  he  is  like  unto  Month.  He  who

like  the  son  of  Nut.  He  is  as  it  were  a bull  with  sharpened
horns,  great  in  . . .,  (only)  letting  go  (again)  when  he  hath
made  an  end  of  his  enemies — he,  King  Ramesses.

The  strong  lion  with  . . . claws,  loud  roaring,  sending  forth
his  voice  in  the  valley  of  the  wild  game, — he,  King  Ramesses.

The  jackal  that  runneth  swiftly,  when  seeking  his  assailant,
traversing  the  circle  of  the  earth  in  a moment  of  time.  Divine
and  lordly  hawk,  furnished  with  wings,  swooping  down  among
the  small  and  the  great,  that  he  may  cause  them  no  more  to
know  themselves — he.  King  Ramesses.

He  who  causeth  the  Asiatics  (?)  to  retreat,  who  fighteth  upon
the  field  of  battle  ; the}7  break  their  bows  and  are  given  over
to  the  fire  ; his  might  hath  the  mastery  over  them,  like  unto
a flame,  when  it  hath  seized  upon  the  scrub,1  and  the  storm-
wind  is  behind  it,  like  unto  a fierce  fire  when  it  hath  tasted  of
the  blaze  ; every  one  that  encountereth  (?)  it  becometh  ashes — •
he.  King  Ramesses.

The  ruler,  strong  when  he  slayeth  them  that  know  not  his
name,  like  unto  a tempest  that  shrieketh  terribly  on  the  sea,
its  waves  are  like  mountains,  and  none  can  come  nigh  unto  it  ;

1 1 abbreviate  these  names  in  the  other  verses.

2 The  goddess  of  war.  3 In  such  haste  are  they  to  reach  Egypt.

4 Actually  a light,  inflammable  plant.  See  p 106,  note  4.


260


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


every  one  that  is  in  it  is  drowned  in  the  nether  world — he.  King
Ramesses.

The  king,  shining  forth  in  the  White  Crown,  the  strength
of  Egypt,  skilled  in  warfare  upon  the  battle-field,  valiant  in
the  melee  ; fierce  fighter  with  stout  heart ; who  setteth  his
arms  as  a wall  about  (?)  his  soldiers — he,  King  Ramesses,  who
is  given  life  like  Re.

3.  THE  BATTLE  OF  KADESH  1

The  long  and  bitter  war,  which  Ramesses  II  ( circa  1300-1234
b.c.)  waged  with  the  Asiatic  kingdom  of  the  Khatti  and  their  allies,
culminated  in  a battle  fought  at  Kadesh  in  the  valley  of  the  Orontes.
Inscriptions  and  representations  in  Egyptian  temples  supply  us
with  ample  information  as  to  the  course  of  events  in  this  battle.
The  king  had  pressed  on  ahead  with  the  first  of  his  four  armies,
without  any  suspicion  that  the  whole  of  the  enemy  forces  lay  in
u'ait  for  him  behind  the  fortress  of  Kadesh.  He  w^as  surrounded
and  was  in  terrible  danger,  but  succeeded  in  holding  out  until  an
unexpected  body  of  troops  came  to  his  help.  Finally,  when  a second
army  was  brought  up,  the  defeat  was  turned  into  a victory  for  the
Egyptians.2

This  victory  of  the  young  king  was  celebrated  in  a long  poem
written  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign  by  an  unknown  poet.  The
poet  has  dealt  freely  with  the  actual  happenings,  in  order  to  give
more  prominence  to  the  king’s  achievement.  The  poem  must  have
met  with  the  king’s  approval,  for  he  has  had  it  introduced  into  his
great  temples.

The  title  : The  Victory  which  Ramesses  II  won  over  the
Khatti  and  all  their  confederates,  is  immediately  followed  by  a
glorification  of  the  king  : a champion  without  his  peer,  with

strong  arms  and  stout  heart , beautiful  of  form  like

Atum , victorious  in  all  lands.  None  can  take  up  arms

against  him  ; he  is  a wall  for  his  soldiers,  and  their  shield  in  the
day  of  battle.  A bowman  whom  none  equalleth,  stronger  than

hundreds  of  thousands  together ; who  goeth  forward .

With  (stout)  heart  in  the  hour  of  the  encounter ; a

thousand  men  cannot  stand  before  him,  and  an  hundred

1 Already  brought  to  notice  by  Champollion  in  1828.  Treated  of  for
the  first  time  by  de  Rouge,  and  frequently  since.  Almost  completely
preserved  in  manuscript  (Pap.  Saltier,  iii„  m the  British  Museum),  and
imperfectly  in  the  temples  of  Luxor,  Karnak,  and  Abydos.

! For  full  details,  see  Breasted,  A ncient  Records  of  Egypt,  iii.  pp.  123  fi,


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  261

thousand  are  faint,  when  they  see  him.  The  terrible  one,
loudly  shouting  ; who  (causeth)  the  hearts  of  the  foreign  peoples

(to  quail),  as  doth  a fierce  lion  in  the  desert  valley.

Excellent  in  plans,  good  at  (giving)  directions,  and  his  utterance
is  found  to  be  admirable.  Who  rescueth  his  army,  (protecteth  ?)

his  body-guard,  and  delivereth  his  troops  1 ; his  heart

is  like  a mountain  of  ore, — he,  King  Ramesses.

[Introduction.]

Now  his  majesty  had  made  ready  his  infantry  and  his
chariotry,  besides  the  Shardana,  whom  his  majesty  had  taken
captive  by  the  victories  of  his  arm,2  and  he  had  given  them  the
directions  3 for  the  battle.  His  majesty  proceeded  northwards
with  his  infantry  and  his  chariotry,  and  he  began  the  goodly
march.  In  the  fifth  year,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  second  month
of  Summer,  his  majesty  passed  the  fortress  of  Zaru.4

He  was  like  Month  at  his  appearing,  and  all  foreign  countries

trembled  before  him. All  (rebels  ?)  came  bowing  down

for  fear  of  the  might  of  his  majesty.  His  army  marched  along
the  narrow  defiles,5  and  they  were  there  as  though  upon  the
roadways  of  Egypt.

And  many  days  after  this  6 his  majesty  was  in  Ramesses-
Beloved-of-Amun,  the  city  which  lieth  in  the  land  of  the  cedars.7
His  majesty  proceeded  northward,  and  came  to  the  mountain
range  of  Kadesh.  And  his  majesty  went  forward  like  his  father
Month,  lord  of  Thebes,  and  crossed  the  ford  of  the  Orontes  8

with  the  first  army  of  Amun.9 His  majesty  came  to

the  city  of  Kadesh.

And  the  wretched,  vanquished  chief  of  Khatti  had  come,
after  he  had  gathered  to  himself  all  lands  as  far  as  the  ends  of
the  sea ; the  whole  land  of  Khatti  had  come,  and  likewise

1 These  attributes  refer  to  the  role  which  the  king  played  in  the  battle,
according  to  the  conception  of  the  poet.

3 See  p.  226,  note  6.  3 The  plan  of  campaign.

4 Fortress  on  the  east  frontier  of  the  Delta  ; see  p.  232,  note  8.

5 Or  : narrow  paths.

6 The  usual,  almost  meaningless,  formula  of  narrative ; see  above,
p.  151,  note  1.

7 Some  city  in  the  Lebanon,  which  the  king  has  thus  renamed.

8 The  river  between  Lebanon  and  Anti-Lebanon  on  which  Kadesh
was  situated.

9 The  four  subsequently  mentioned  armies  of  the  king  are  named  after
his  chief  gods.


262  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Naharina,  Aradus,  Pedes,  Iran,  Kerkesh,  Reke,  Kizwadna,
Carchemish,  Ekeret,  Kedi,  the  whole  land  of  Nushashi,  Meshenet,
and  Kadesh.1  He  had  left  no  land  which  he  had  not  brought
with  him  ; all  their  princes  were  with  him,  and  every  one  had
his  foot-soldiers  with  him  and  chariotry,  a very  great  multitude
without  limit.  They  covered  mountains  and  valleys,  and  were
like  grasshoppers  in  their  multitude.  He  had  left  no  silver  in  his
land,  and  had  stripped  it  of  all  its  possessions ; he  had  given  them
to  all  countries,  in  order  to  lead  them  with  him  to  the  battle.2

Now  the  wretched  chief  of  Khatti,  with  the  many  nations
which  were  with  him,  stood  hidden  and  ready  for  battle  on  the
north-west  of  Kadesh.  His  majesty  was  all  alone  (with)  his
body-guard.3  The  army  of  Amun  marched  behind  him,  the
army  of  Re  crossed  over  the  ford  in  the  region  south  of  the  city

of  Shebten , the  army  of  Ptah  was  south  of  the  city  of

Erenem,  and  the  army  of  Sutekh  4 was  (yet)  marching  upon
the  road.  His  majesty  had  made  a vanguard  of  all  the  captains
of  his  army  ; these  were  on  the  coast  in  the  land  of  Emor.5

The  wretched  chief  of  Khatti  stood  in  the  midst  of  the
army,  which  he  had  with  him,  and  for  fear  of  his  majesty  he
came  not  forth  to  the  battle.  He  had  caused  very*  many  people
and  horses  to  come,  multitudinous  as  the  sand ; they  stood
three  men  to  a span,  and  had  joined  themselves  with  warriors

of  every  sort furnished  with  all  the  weapons  of  war,

without  number.  They  stood  in  battle  array,  concealed  on
the  north-west  of  the  city  of  Kadesh,  and  they  came  forth  from
the  south  side  of  Kadesh.  They  attacked  the  army  of  Re  in  its
centre,  as  it  marched  unheeding  and  unready  for  battle.  The
infantry  and  chariotry  of  his  majesty  fainted  before  them.

Now  his  majesty  had  halted  north  of  Kadesh,  on  the  west
side  of  the  Orontes  ; and  one  came  and  told  it  to  his  majesty.

1 The  reading  and  interpretation  of  these  names  is  still  very  question-
able. The  capital  of  Khatti  lay  in  Northern  Asia  Minor  (ruins  of  Bo-
ghazkoi)  ; Naharina  was  situated  on  the  upper  Euphrates,  Aradus  in
Phoenicia,  Carchemish  on  the  Euphrates.  In  any  case,  it  was  an  enormous
region.

2 I.e.  he  had  exhausted  it  in  order  to  give  his  confederates  their  pay.

* The  papyrus  indeed  allows  “ no  one  to  be  with  him.”

* Another  form  of  the  name  of  Seth,  who  at  this  time  held  the  position
of  war-god.

4 They  were  marching  along  the  Phoenician  coast,  no  one  having  any

idea  as  to  where  the  enemy  was  to  be  located.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


263


[The  king’s  fight.]

His  majesty  issued  forth  1 like  his  father  Month,  after  he
had  seized  his  panoply  of  war,  and  had  put  on  his  corselet ;
he  was  like  Baal  in  his  hour.2  The  great  span,  which  bore  his
majesty,  was  called  Victory-in-Thebes  and  was  from  the  great
stable  of  Ramesses.  His  majesty  (rode)  at  a gallop,  and
charged  the  hostile  army  of  Khatti,  being  all  alone  and  having
none  with  him.

When  his  majesty  looked  behind  him  he  marked  that  two
thousand  five  hundred  chariots  encircled  him  on  his  way  out,
with  all  the  warriors  of  the  wretched  land  of  Khatti  and  of  the
many  countries  which  were  with  him,  from  Aradus,  Mese,  Pedes,
Keshkesh,  Irun,  Kizwadna,  Khereb,  Ekeret,  Kadesh,  and  Reke.
They  stood  three  men  to  a span,  and  had  banded  themselves
together.

No  chief 3 is  with  me,  no  charioteer,  no  officer  of  foot-
soldiery  nor  of  chariotry.  My  foot-soldiery  and  my  chariotry
left  me  for  a prey  before  them,  and  not  one  of  them  stood  fast
in  order  to  fight  with  them.

And  his  majesty  said  : “ What  is  it  then,  my  father  Amun  ?
Hath  a father  indeed  forgotten  his  son  ? Have  I done  ought
without  thee  ? Have  I not  gone  or  stood  still  because  of  thine
utterance  ? And  I never  swerved  from  the  counsels  of  thy
mouth.  How  great  is  the  great  lord  of  Thebes,  too  great  to
suffer  the  foreign  peoples  to  come  nigh  him ! What  are  these
Asiatics  to  thee,  Amun  ? Wretches  that  know  not  God !
Have  I not  fashioned  for  thee  very  many  monuments,  and  filled
thy  temple  with  my  captives  ? I have  built  for  thee  my  temple
of  millions  of  years,4  and  have  given  thee  my  goods  for  a
possession.5  I present  unto  thee  all  countries  together,  in  order
to  furnish  thine  offering  with  victuals.  I cause  to  be  offered
unto  thee  tens  of  thousands  of  oxen,  together  with  all  sweet-
smelling plants.

1 From  his  tent.

z I e.  when  this  god,  whom  the  Egyptians  equated  with  their  Sutekh,
was  most  terrifying.

3 Here  begins  the  actual  poem,  which  largely  consists  of  speeches  by
the  king.

4 1.e.  Amun’s  temple  of  endless  duration ; he  means  especially
Karnak.

6 Or  “ made  over  to  thee  my  possessions  by  deed  ” [Translator].


264


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


“ No  good  thing  leave  I undone  in  thy  sanctuary.  I build
for  thee  great  pylons,  and  I myself  set  up  their  flag-staff's.  I
bring  thee  obelisks  from  Elephantine,  and  I it  is  who  con-
veyeth  stone.  I cause  galleys  to  voyage  for  thee  upon  the  sea,
in  order  to  fetch  for  thee  the  tribute  of  the  countries.  Mis-
chief shall  befall  him  who  thwarteth  thy  counsels,  but  well  fareth
he  that  understandeth  (?)  thee.  One  should  work  (?)  for  thee
with  loving  heart.

“ I call  to  thee,  my  father  Amun.  I am  in  the  midst  of  foes
whom  I know  not.  All  lands  have  joined  themselves  together
against  me,  and  I am  all  alone  and  none  other  is  with  me.  My
soldiers  have  forsaken  me,  and  not  one  among  my  chariotry
hath  looked  round  for  me.  If  I cry  to  them,  not  one  of  them
hearkeneth.  But  I call,  and  I find  that  Amun  is  worth  more
to  me  than  millions  of  foot-soldiers,  and  hundreds  of  thousands
of  chariots,  than  ten  thousand  men  in  brethren  and  children,
who  with  one  mind  hold  together.  The  w'ork  of  many  men  is
nothing  ; Amun  is  worth  more  than  they.  I have  come  hither
by  reason  of  the  counsels  of  thy  mouth,  O Amun,  and  from  thy
counsels  have  I not  swerved.”

I pray  at  the  limits  of  the  lands,  and  yet  my  voice  reacheth
unto  Hermonthis  ; 1 Amun  hearkeneth  unto  me  and  cometh,
when  I cry  to  him.  He  stretcheth  out  his  hand  to  me,  and  I
rejoice  ; he  calleth  out  behind  me  : “ Forward,  forward  ! I
am  with  thee,  I thj'  father.  Mine  hand  is  with  thee,  and  I am  of
more  avail  than  an  hundred  thousand  men,  I,  the  lord  of  victory,
that  loveth  strength  ! ”

I have  found  my  courage  again,  mine  heart  swelleth  for  joy,
all  that  I was  fain  to  do  cometh  to  pass.  I am  like  Month,  I
shoot  on  the  right  hand  and  fight  on  the  left.  I am  as  Baal
in  his  time  before  them.  I find  that  the  twro  thousand  five
hundred  chariots,  in  whose  midst  I was,  lie  hewn  in  pieces  before
my  steeds.  Not  one  of  them  hath  found  his  hand  to  fight.
Their  hearts  are  become  faint  in  their  bodies  for  fear,  their  arms
are  all  become  powerless.  They  are  unable  to  shoot,  and  have
not  the  heart  to  take  their  lances.  I cause  them  to  plunge
into  the  water,  as  plunge  the  crocodiles.2  They  stumble  one
over  the  other,  and  I slay  of  them  whom  I will.  Not  one  of

1 A city  south  of  Thebes,  but  probably  used  for  Thebes  here.

2 A number  of  the  enemy  was  actually  drowned  in  the  Orontes  during
the  battle,  as  the  reliefs  show.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


265


them  looketh  back,  and  there  is  none  that  turneth  him  about.
Whosoever  of  them  falleth  lifteth  not  up  himself  again.

Now  the  wretched  Prince  of  Khatti  stood  in  the  midst  of
his  army  and  watched  the  fight,  which  his  majesty  fought  all
alone  without  foot-soldiery  or  chariotry.  He  stood  with  face
averted  and  irresolute.

He  caused  many  chieftains  to  come  ; all  of  them  had  horse-
chariots,  and  they  were  equipped  with  all  their  weapons  of  war  :
namely,  the  prince  of  Aradus,  of  Mese,  of  Irun,  of  Reke,  and
of  Derdeni ; the  prince  of  Carchemish,  of  Kerkesh,  and  of
Khereb,  and  the  brethren  of  the  princes  of  Khatti — all  these
together  were  two  thousand  horse-chariots,  who  came  straight
ahead  on  to  the  fire.1

I made  for  them,  I was  like  Month,  I caused  them  to  taste
my  hand  in  a single  moment.  I slaughtered  them,  slaying
them  where  they  stood,  and  one  cried  out  to  the  other,  saying  :
“ This  is  no  man  that  is  among  us,  he  is  Sutekh,  great  of  strength ;
Baal  is  in  his  limbs.  They  are  not  the  deeds  of  a man  that
he  doeth.  (Never  yet)  hath  one  man  alone,  without  foot -soldiers
and  chariotry,  overcome  hundreds  of  thousands.  Come
quickly,  that  we  may  flee  from  before  him,  that  we  may  seek  for
ourselves  life  and  yet  draw  breath.  Lo,  as  for  anyone  that
ventureth  to  approach  him,  his  hand  is  paralysed  and  every
limb.  None  can  grasp  bow  or  lance,  when  it  is  seen  how  he
cometh,  having  run  the  course.”

His  majesty  was  behind  them  as  it  were  a gryphon  ; I slew
among  them  and  none  escaped  me.  I shouted  out  to  my  army  :
“ Steady,  steady  your  hearts,  my  soldiers.  Ye  behold  my
victory,  I being  alone.  But  Amun  is  my  protector,  and  his  hand
is  with  me.  How  faint-hearted  ye  are,  my  chariotry,  and  it  is
useless  to  trust  in  you.  There  is  not  one  among  you  to  whom  I
had  not  done  good  in  my  land.  Stood  I not  as  lord  there,  while
ye  were  in  poverty  ? Yet  I caused  you  to  become  notables,  and
daily  ye  partook  of  my  sustenance.  I set  the  son  over  the
possessions  of  his  father.  All  that  was  evil  in  this  land  is  abol-
ished. I remitted  to  you  your  dues,  and  gave  to  you  other
things  that  had  been  taken  away  from  you.2  Whosoever  came

1 I.e.  to  the  king,  whose  snake-diadem  spat  out  fire.

2 The  king  had  thus  favoured  the  soldiers  above  all  other  classes  ;
indeed,  his  dynasty  found  in  them  its  support.  The  somewhat  later


266  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

with  a petition,  to  him  I said  at  all  times  : ‘ Yea,  I will  do  it.'
Never  has  a lord  done  for  his  soldiers  what  I have  done  according
to  your  desire,  (for)  I made  you  dwell  in  your  houses  and  your
cities,  albeit  ye  did  no  soldier’s  service.  My  chariotry  likewise,
to  them  gave  I the  road  to  many  cities,1  and  thought  to  experi-
ence to-day  a like  thing  2 in  you  in  this  hour  of  entering  into
battle.  But  behold,  ye  all  with  one  consent  do  a coward's
deed  ; not  one  of  you  standeth  firm  in  order  to  reach  me  his
hand,  wiiile  I am  fighting.

“As  the  ka  of  my  father,  Amun,  endureth,  would  that  I were

in  Egypt  like  my  fathers,  who  saw  not  the  Syrians and

not  one  of  you  had  come  in  order  to  tell  his  news  in  the  land  of
Egypt.  What  a goodly  existence  he  hath,  who  conveyeth
many  monuments  to  Thebes,  the  city  of  Amun 3 ! ”

The  crime  which  my  foot-soldiery  and  chariotry  have
committed  is  greater  than  can  be  told.  But,  behold,  Amun
gave  me  his  victory,  although  no  foot-soldiery  and  no  chariotry
were  with  me.  I let  evert’  far-off  land  see  my  victory  and
my  might,  while  I w'as  all  alone,  without  a great  one  to  follow
me,  and  without  a charioteer,  without  an  officer  of  the  foot-
soldiery  or  of  the  chariotry.  The  foreign  countries  who  see
me  shall  speak  of  my  name  as  far  as  the  farthest  lands  which
are  unknown.  Whosoever  of  them  escapeth  from  mine  hand,4
he  standeth  turned  about  and  seeth  what  I do.  When  I attack
millions  of  them,  their  feet  stand  not  firm,  but  they  flee  away.
All  who  shoot  at  me,  their  arrows  are  dispersed  when  they
reach  me.

But  wffien  Menna,  my  charioteer,  saw  that  a great  multitude
of  chariots  compassed  me  round  about,  he  became  faint,  and
his  heart  failed  him,  and  very  great  fear  entered  into  his  limbs.
Then  said  he  unto  his  majesty  : “ My  good  lord,  valiant  prince,
great  protector  of  Egypt  in  the  day  of  battle,  we  stand  alone

letters,  on  pp.  193  S.  above,  present  the  other  side  of  the  picture  ; they
view  the  life  of  the  soldier  from  the  standpoint  of  the  scribe.

1 He  has  formed  soldiers'  settlements  both  of  the  infantry  and  of  the
chariotry.

2 He  means  : a like  friendly  deed.

3 Meaning,  perhaps  : would  that  ye  had  spared  me  news  of  Syria  so
that  I might  still  be  building  in  peace  at  Thebes.

4 The  papyrus  reads  here  : All  warriors  whom  mine  hand  spareth.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  267

in  the  midst  of  the  foe.  Behold,  the  foot-soldiery  and  chariotry
have  abandoned  us.  Wherefore  wilt  thou  stay  until  they
bereave  (us  of  breath)  ? Let  us  remain  unscathed,  save  us,
Ramesses.”  Then  said  his  majesty  unto  his  charioteer :
“ Steady,  steady  thine  heart,  my  charioteer.  I shall  enter
in  among  them  even  as  a hawk  striketh  ; I slay,  hew  in  pieces,
and  cast  to  the  ground.  What  mean  these  cowards  to  thee  ?
My  face  groweth  not  pale  for  a million  of  them.”  His  majesty
hastened  forwards  ; he  charged  the  foe  and  charged  them  until
the  sixth  time.  I am  behind  them  as  Baal  in  the  hour  of
his  might.  I make  slaughter  of  them  and  am  not  slothful.

Now  when  my  foot-soldiers  and  chariotry  saw  that  I was
like  Month  in  might  and  strength,  and  that  Amun,  my  father,
was  joined  with  me  and  made  every  land  straw  before  me,
they  approached  one  by  one  in  order  to  (creep  ?)  at  eventide
into  the  camp,  and  they  found  that  all  peoples,  among  whom
I had  forced  my  way,  were  lying  slaughtered  in  heaps  in  their
blood,  even  all  the  best  warriors  of  Khatti,  and  the  children
and  brethren  of  their  prince.  I had  caused  the  field  of  Kadesh
to  become  white,1  and  one  knew  not  where  to  tread  because
of  their  multitude.

And  my  soldiers  came  to  reverence  my  name,  when  they
saw  what  I had  done  ; my  notables  came  to  extol  my  might,
and  my  chariotry  likewise,  who  glorified  my  name  : “ Ah,  thou
goodly  warrior,  who  maketh  steady  the  heart,  thou  rescuest
thy  foot-soldiery  and  thy  chariotry.  0 son  of  Amun,  deft  of
hands,  thou  destroyest  the  land  of  Khatti  with  thy  mighty
arms.  Thou  art  a goodly  warrier  without  thy  like,  a king
that  fighteth  for  his  soldiers  on  the  day  of  battle.  Thou  art
stout  of  heart,  and  art  foremost  when  the  fight  is  joined.  All
lands,  united  in  one,  have  not  withstood  (?)  thee  ; thou  wast
victorious  in  the  presence  of  the  host,  in  the  sight  of  the  whole
earth — that  is  no  boast.  Thou  art  the  protector  of  Egypt,
the  subduer  of  the  foreign  countries,2  thou  hast  broken  the
back  of  Khatti  for  ever.”

And  his  majesty  said  unto  his  foot-soldiers,  his  chief  captains,
and  his  chariotry  : “ What  a crime  ye  have  committed  (?)  my

1 With  the  corpses  and  their  white  clothes.

2 Protector  of  Egypt,  etc.,  is  the  second  name  in  the  titulary  of
Ramesses  II.


268  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

chief  captains,  my  foot-soldiery  and  my  chariotry,  ye  who

have  not  fought  ! Hath  not  one  boasted  in  his  city -,

he  will  do  a deed  of  valour  for  his  good  lord ? Have

I not  done  good  to  one  of  you  ? Your  leaving  me  alone  in  the

midst  of  the  enemy,  how  excellent  that  is  in  you  !

your  breathing  the  air  while  I am  alone.  Could  ye  then  not

say  in  your  hearts  that  I am  your  wall  of  iron . It

will  be  heard  say  that  ye  left  me  alone,  without  another,  and
no  chief  captain,  no  officer  either  of  chariotry  or  of  foot-soldiery
came  to  hold  out  his  hand  to  me.  I fought  and  overcame
millions  of  lands,  all  alone.  I was  with  Victory-in-Thebes
and  Mut-is-Content,1  my  great  steeds ; in  them  (alone)  found
I succour,  when  I was  all  alone  in  the  midst  of  many  countries.
Furthermore,  I myself  will  cause  them  eat  their  provender
in  my  presence  every  day,  when  I shall  be  once  more  in  my
palace,  for  it  was  in  them  that  I found  succour,  and  also  in
Menna,  my  charioteer,  and  in  the  butlers  of  the  palace,  who
were  beside  me.  These  were  present  at  the  battle.  Lo,  I
found  that  they  came  to  my  majesty  in  valour  and  victory,
after  that  I had  overthrown  with  my  mighty  arm  hundreds  of
thousands  united  together.”2

[The  second  day  of  battle  and  the  overthrow  of  the

ENEMY.]

When  the  day  dawned,  I began  (?)  the  fighting  in  the
battle.3  I was  ready  for  the  fray  like  a bull  on  the  alert  ; I
shone  forth  against  them  like  Month,  furnished  with  fighters
and  with  mighty  men.  I forced  my  way  into  the  melee  and
fought  even  as  a hawk  striketh.  The  royal  snake  upon  my
brow,  it  overthrew  mine  enemies ; it  spat  forth  fire  into  the
face  of  the  foe.  I was  like  Re  w'hen  he  ascendeth  in  the  morning,
and  my  rays  burnt  the  limbs  of  the  enemy.

One  cried  out  to  the  other  : “ Look  to  yourselves  ! Protect
yourselves  ! Lo,  the  mighty  Sekhmet  is  with  him  ; she  is
by  him  on  his  horses,  and  her  hand  is  with  him.  If  any  draweth
nigh  unto  him,  the  blast  of  fire  cometh  and  burneth  his  limbs.”

2 Names  of  the  horses  ; Mut  is  the  consort  of  A rn u n , and  she  is  also
identified  with  the  war-goddess,  Sekhmet.

2 If  this  remark  refers  to  the  butlers,  it  wall  explain  why  they  were
not  hitherto  mentioned  in  the  poem.

* Or  “ I marshalled  the  squadrons  m battle  ” [Translator],


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  269

Then  they  began  to  kiss  the  ground  before  me.  My  majesty
was  mighty  behind  them,  I made  slaughter  among  them,  and
was  not  slack  (?).  They  were  cut  to  pieces  before  my  steeds,
they  lay  together  stretched  out  in  their  blood.

Then  the  wretched  fallen  prince  of  Khatti  sent  and  revered
the  great  name  of  his  majesty  : “ Thou  are  Re-Harakhti,  thou
art  Sutekh,  great  in  strength,  son  of  Nut ; Baal  is  in  thy  limbs,
and  terror  of  thee  is  in  the  land  of  Khatti.  Thou  hast  broken
for  ever  the  back  of  the  prince  of  Khatti.”  He  sent  his  envoy
with  a letter,  which  was  addressed  to  the  great  name  of  my
majesty,  and  apprised  the  Majesty  of  the  Palace  of  Horus,
Strong  Bull,  Beloved  of  Truth,1  as  followeth : “ 0 King,  who
protecteth  his  soldiers,  valiant  in  his  might,  a wall  for  his  troops
in  the  day  of  battle,  king  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  Usimare-
Chosen-of-Re,  son  of  Re,  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun ! The
servant  there  saith,2  and  would  have  thee  know  that  thou  art
the  son  of  Re,  who  issued  from  his  limbs,  and  he  hath  given
thee  all  lands  united  in  one.  The  land  of  Egypt  and  the  land
of  Khatti,  they  are  thy  servants  and  they  lie  at  thy  feet.
Thine  august  father,  Re,  hath  given  them  unto  thee.  Be  not
violent  with  us  ! Behold,  thy  prowess  is  great,  and  thy  might
is  heavy  upon  the  land  of  Khatti.  Is  it  good  that  thou  shouldest

slay  thy  servants  ? Yesterday  thou  didst  slay  hundreds

of  thousands,  and  to-day  thou  comest  and  leavest  (us)  no  heirs
surviving.  Be  not  severe  in  thine  utterance,  O mighty  king ;
peaceableness  is  better  than  strife  of  battle.  Give  us  breath  ! ”

My  majesty  allowed  myself  repose,  full  of  life  and  good
fortune,  and  I was  as  Month  in  his  time,  when  his  victory  hath
been  achieved.3  My  majesty  caused  to  be  brought  all  the
generals  of  the  foot-soldiers,  of  the  chariotry,  and  all  other
troops,  altogether,  in  order  to  inform  them  of  what  the  great
prince  of  Khatti  had  written  unto  Pharaoh.  They  answered  and
said  unto  his  majesty  : “ Mercy  is  good  exceedingly,  our  lord

0 king  ; in  peaceableness  is  there  nought  to  harm  (?) .

Who  will  revere  thee  on  the  day  wherein  thou  art  wroth  ? 4

1 Name  of  Ramesses  II.

5 The  old  epistolary  formula  ; see  p.  22,  note  5.

1 I.e.  when  this  war-god  rests  after  victory.

1 Meaning  possibly  : You  can  only  enjoy  men’s  respect  in  time  of
peace,  at  other  times  men  are  only  afraid  of  you.


270


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Then  his  majesty  commanded  his  1 words  to  be  heard,  and
extended  his  hand  in  peace  upon  the  march  southwards.2

And  when  his  majesty  drew  near  in  peace  to  Egypt  with
his  chief  captains,  his  foot-soldiers,  and  his  chariotry — life,
stability,  and  happiness  were  with  him,  and  gods  and  god-
desses and  all  lands  praised  his  fair  countenance —

he  arrived  safely  at  House-of-Ramesses-Great-of-Victories,3
and  rested  in  his  palace,  full  of  life  like  Re  upon  his  throne,
and  the  gods  greeted  his  ka,  saving  unto  him:  “Welcome,  our
beloved  son,  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun  ! ” They  gave  him
millions  of  jubilees,  and  eternity  upon  the  throne  of  his
father  (?)  Atum,  while  all  lands  and  all  foreign  countries  lie
under  his  feet.

4.  POEMS  ON  THE  CITY  OF  RAMESSES

Ramesses  II  built  himself  a new  residence  in  the  extreme  north-
eastern corner  of  the  Delta,  on  the  site  of  what  was  probably  the
later  Pelusium  (thus  east  of  the  Suez  Canal).  This  is  the  often-men-
tioned “ House-of-Ramesses-Great-of- Victories,”  which,  in  accord-
ance with  Jewish  tradition,  we  call  the  city  of  “ Ramesses.”  Its
geographical  position  permitted  it  to  be  regarded  as  the  capital  of  a
dominion  which  embraced  Palestine  and  Egypt.  Both  hymns  are
preserved  as  school  writing-exercises,  and,  as  they  were  written
under  Memeptah,  the  successor  of  Ramesses  II,  the  boys  have
inserted  his  name  Binere,  instead  of  Usimare,  that  of  his  father. — See
also  the  letter  on  p.  206.

[Longer  poem.]  4

The  recital  of  the  victories  of  the  Lord  of  Egypt.

His  majesty  hath  budded  him  a castle  called  Great-of-
Victories.  It  lieth  betwixt  Palestine  and  Egypt,  and  is  full  of  pro-
vision and  victuals.  It  is  like  unto  Hermonthis,5  and  its  duration
is  that  of  Memphis.  The  sun  ariseth  in  its  horizon,  and  setteth

1 The  prince  of  Khatti’s.

2 I.e.  he  turned  homewards  after  the  battle,  and  on  this  return  journey
concluded  a peace.  The  actual  peace-treaty,  however,  was  only  con-
cluded sixteen  years  later.

3 See  above,  p 206,  and  the  two  immediately  following  poems.

4 Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  1.  1 if.  ; the  first  two  sections  also  occur  in  Pap.
Anastasi,  iv.  6.  1 ff„  and  are  translated  by  Gardiner,  Journ.  of  Egypt.
firchcBology , v.  pp.  187  f.

5 An  ancient  city  not  far  from  Thebes.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


271


within  it.1  All  men  forsake  their  towns  and  settle  down  in  its
territory.  Its  western  part  is  a temple  of  Amun,  its  southern
part  a temple  of  Sutekh.  Astarte  is  in  its  Orient,  and  Buto
in  its  northern  part.  The  castle  which  is  within  it  is  like  unto
the  horizon  of  heaven.  Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun  is  in  it
as  god  ; Month-in-the-Two-Lands  2 as  herald  ; Sun-of-Princes  2
as  Vizier ; Joy-of-Egypt,  Beloved-of-Atum, 2 as  mayor,  to
whose  dwelling  the  world  goeth  down.

The  great  chief  of  the  land  of  Khatti  writeth  to  the  chief
of  Kedi : 3 “ Make  thee  ready,  that  we  mav  hasten  to  Egypt,
that  we  may  say  : ' The  will  of  God  prevaileth,’  and  that  we
may  speak  smooth  words  to  Ramesses.  He  giveth  breath  to
whom  he  will.  Every  land  existeth  according  to  his  pleasure,
and  the  land  of  Khatti  according  to  his  will  alone.  If  the  god
receive  not  his  offering,  it  beholdeth  not  the  rain  of  heaven.4
It  is  in  the  power  of  Usimare,  the  Bull  that  loveth  valour.”

Good  god,  strong  as  Month,  victorious  king,  the  . . . who
issued  from  Re,  child  and  likeness  of  the  Bull  of  Heliopolis.5
Who  standeth  upon  the  field  of  battle,  and  in  his  valour  fighteth
like  the  Strong  One  in  the  ship  “ Ruler  of  Eternity.”  6 He
who  was  a king  in  the  egg,  like  the  majesty  of  Horus.  He
hath  captured  the  lands  by  his  victory,  he  hath  subdued  the
Two  Lands  by  his  designs.  The  Nine  Peoples  lie  trodden
down  under  his  feet.  All  foreign  peoples  are  dragged  to  him
with  their  gifts,  and  all  countries  are  set  for  him  upon  the  one
road.7  He  hath  no  adversary,  the  princes  of  the  rebellious
countries  are  impotent,  become  as  wild  goats  for  terror  of  him  ;
he  entereth  in  among  them  like  the  son  of  Nut,8  and  they  fall
down  by  reason  of  his  fiery  breath  in  the  space  of  a moment.
The  Libyan  falleth  to  his  slaughtering,  men  fall  to  his  blade.

1 1.e.  the  king  abides  in  it  day  and  night.

3 Official  attributes  of  the  king.  They  function  beside  him  as  his
highest  officials,  for  the  whole  administration  devolves  on  him  personally.

3 Kedi  lies  in  the  north  and  is  perhaps  Cilicia.

4 The  Egyptian  looked  with  but  scant  respect  upon  the  countries
which  were  dependent  upon  him.  The  god,  i.e.  Ramesses,  had  it  in  his

power  even  to  withhold  rain  from  the  Khatti.

6 The  sun-god  Re.

6 Seth  in  the  ship  of  the  sun,  whom  he  protects  from  his  enemies.

7 The  road  to  his  palace.  » Seth  or  Osiris,


272  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

His  strength  is  given  unto  him  eternally,  and  his  will  enfold-
eth  the  mountains.  O Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun,  lord  of
strength,  who  protecteth  his  soldiers.1  Thou  . . . son  of
Amun ; thou  dauntless  one,  who  protecteth  his  soldiers.
Strong  Bull,  who  curbeth  the  confederacies  (?),  who  standeth

fast  on  his  war-chariot  like  the  Lord  of  Thebes 2 . His

strength  invadeth  all  foreign  countries  ; he  traverseth  the
(lands)  seeking  him  that  attacketh  him.  His  battle-cry  is  in
their  hearts,  which  are  afraid  of  his  countenance.  The  good
ruler,  the  watchful  one,  excellent  in  counsel,  he  putteth  his
name,  as  that  of  one  who  is  valiant,  in  all  lands.  O king  and
lord  of  the  Two  Lands  like  the  majesty  of  Horus,  the  princes
of  the  lands  are  put  in  awe  of  thee,  Binere-Beloved-of-Amun,
son  of  Re,  Merneptah-Contented-with-Truth.”

Good  god,  king  that  liveth  on  truth  ! King  beloved  of  the
gods  ! Excellent  egg,  son  of  Khepre  ! 3 Child,  similitude  of
the  Bull  of  Heliopolis  ! Hawk  that  did  enter  the  royal  ring,4
bom  of  Isis,  Horus  ! “ Binere  ” who  appeared  gloriously  in

Egypt,  unto  whose  throne  the  world  cometh.

How  strong  is  “Binere''’!  How  enduring  his  counsels!
His  words  are  excellent  like  those  of  Thoth,  and  all  that  he  saith
cometh  to  pass.  He  is  like  one  that  sheweth  the  way  at  the
head  of  his  army,  and  his  words  are  a wall  for  them.

How  loved  is  he  that  bendeth  to  him  his  back,  to  the
Belo  ved-of- Amun .

Victorious  soldiers  come  to  his  triumph  (?)  in  strength  and
might  ; they  cast  fire  in  Isdirekti  (?)  and  burn  up  . . .
ryena  (?).5 *  The  Shardana,®  whom  thou  carriedst  away  in  thy
strength,  they  take  captive  the  tribes  of  the  deserts.

How  pleasant  it  is,  when  thou  goest  to  Thebes,  and  thy
chariot  is  weighed  down  with  hands.7  The  chieftains  go  bound

1 Instead  of  his  army  protecting  him,  he  protects  it.  See  p.  261,

note  1.

3  He  looks  as  noble  in  battle  as  Amun.

3 Name  of  the  sun-god.  The  youthful  Horus,  to  whom  the  king  is
here  likened,  is  his  descendant.

4 The  ring  (cartouche)  in  which  the  royal  names  are  written.

5 Unreadable  names  of  countries.

3 See  p.  226,  note  6 ; p.  261,  note  2.

7 The  hands  of  the  slain  were  cut  olf.  The  king  here  carries  them  with
him  as  tokens  of  victory.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


273


in  front  of  thee,  and  thou  wilt  present 1 them  to  thine  august
father  Amun,  Bull  of  his  Mother.

Castle  of  Sese,2  that  repeateth  jubilees  ! Throne  of  Tenen 3
Thou  shinest  forth  as  . . . like  Atum,  like  the  lamp  of  thy
father  Re.

[Shorter  poem.]  4

0 Binere-Beloved-of-Amun,  thou  chief  galley  ! Club  that
shattereth,  sword  that  slayeth  the  stranger  peoples,  lance  of
the  hand!

He  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  born  in  Heliopolis,  and
victory  was  decreed  to  him  in  every  land.

How  fair  was  the  day  of  thy  presence  (?),  and  how  fair  was
thy  voice  as  thou  spakest,  when  thou  didst  build  House-of-
Ramesses-Beloved-of-Amun,  the  beginning  of  every  foreign  land
and  the  end  of  Egypt,5  (the  city),  with  beauteous  balconies  and
dazzling  halls  of  lapis  lazuli  and  turquoise,  the  place  where  thy
chariotry  is  marshalled,  the  place  where  thine  infantry  is
mustered,  the  place  where  thy  ship’s  troops  come  to  port,  when
they  bring  thee  tribute.

Praise  be  to  thee,  when  thou  comest  among  thy  slaves
(chosen)  from  the  Asiatics,6  men  of  fierce  countenances  and
burning  fingers,  (whom  thou  didst  ?)  carry  away  when  they
beheld  the  Prince7  standing  and  fighting.  Mountains  cannot
stand  before  him,  and  they  are  afraid  of  thine  awfulness.

0 Binere-Beloved-of-Amun,  thou  shalt  exist  so  long  as
eternity  existeth,8  and  eternity  shall  exist  so  long  as  thou
existeth.  Thou  shalt  abide  upon  the  throne  of  thy  father
Re-Harakhti.

1 The  temple  obtained  them  as  slaves.

* “ Sese  ” is  the  pet  name  for  Ramesses.

3 Name  of  Ptah  of  Memphis.

4 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.  7.  aft.  Translated  by  Gardiner,  Journ.  of
Egypt.  Archaology,  v.  pp.  iSof.

5 It  lies  on  the  frontier.

6 Or  - amid  thy  regiments  of  archers  [Translator].

7 Or  . who  advance  (?)  when  they  behold  the  Prince  [Translator],

8 This  ending  is  made  up  of  antiquated  phrases,  the  tone  of  which
contrasts  strongly  with  that  of  the  rest  of  this  poem


iS


274


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


5.  POEM  ON  THE  . VICTORY  OF  MERNEPTAH  1

This  poem  is  engraved  on  a memorial  tablet,  the  so-called  Israel
Stela,  set  up  in  the  funerary  temple  of  the  king,  and  also  as  is  shown
by  a fragment,  on  one  erected  in  the  temple  of  Karnak.  It  was.
therefore,  without  doubt  a poem  to  which  the  king  attached  a great
value.

It  is  mainly  a glorification  of  the  great  victory  which  the  king
won  over  the  Libyans  in  his  fifth  year  (circa  1230  b.c.),  and  by
which  Egypt  was  rescued  from  grave  peril.

Men  tell  of  his  victories  in  all  lands  ; all  lands  together  are
made  to  know,  and  they  are  made  to  see  the  beauty  of  his
valorous  deeds.

King  Merneptah,  the  Strong  Bull,  that  slayeth  his  foes,
beauteous  upon  the  battlefield  of  valour,  when  he  is  assailed.2

The  sun,  that  drave  away  the  clouds  which  were  over  Egypt,
he  that  caused  Timuris  to  see  the  rays  of  the  sun.

He  that  removed  an  hill  of  brass  from  the  back  of  the  people,
that  he  might  give  air  to  the  folk  which  were  in  captivity.

He  that  made  Memphis  3 to  rejoice  over  their  enemies,  and
made  Ptah-Tenen  to  exult  over  his  adversaries.  He  that  opened
the  gates  of  Memphis  which  had  been  shut,  and  made  its  temples
receive  their  victuals.

King  Merneptah,  the  Sole  One,  that  strengtheneth  the
hearts  of  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  breath  cometh  to  their
nostrils  at  the  sight  of  him.

The  land  of  the  Temehu 4 was  broken  in  his  lifetime,  and
terror  was  put  for  ever  in  the  heart  of  the  Mashawasha.

He  hath  turned  back  the  Libyans  who  trod  Egypt,  and  great
dread  of  Timuris  is  in  their  hearts  ; their  march  forward  hath
come  to  an  end,  and  their  feet  made  no  stand,  but  fled.

Their  archers  cast  away  their  bows,  the  heart  of  their  fleet
ones  is  wearied  with  marching.  They  loosed  their  water-skins
and  threw  them  on  the  ground ; their  sacks  were  torn  (?)  and
cast  away.5

1 Discovered  by  Petrie  in  1896.  First  translated  by  Spiegelberg,
Zeitschr.  fur  dgypt.  Spracke,  xxxiv  pp.  11  ff.  See  Breasted,  Ancient
Records  of  Egypt,  iii  pp  256  ff.

2 Expressions  which  are  used  of  bull-fights.

3 Memphis  had  been  especially  hard  pressed.  But  its  god  Ptah  had
appeared  to  the  king  in  a dream  and  bidden  him  take  courage.

1 The  Temehu,  Tehenu,  and  Mashawasha  are  Libyan  tribes.

5 In  order  to  make  flight  easier.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


275


The  miserable  chieftain,  the  fallen  one  1 of  Libya,  fled,  under
cover  of  night,  all  alone,  without  the  plume  upon  his  head,2
his  feet  failed  (?).

His  wives  were  taken  before  his  face  ; the  victuals  of  his
repast  were  captured ; he  had  no  water  in  the  skin  to  sustain
him.

The  countenance  of  his  brethren  was  fierce  to  slay  him  ;
one  fought  against  the  other  among  his  captains  ; their  tents
were  burnt  and  reduced  to  ashes  ; all  his  goods  were  food  for
the  soldiers.

He  reached  his  native  country  lamenting,  and  every  one
that  was  left  over  in  his  land  was  enraged  (?)  : “.  . . he  that
is  punished  (?)  by  fate,  he  with  the  base  plume  ! ” 3 — so  say  all
they  of  his  city  concerning  him,  and  : “ He  is  in  the  power  of
all  the  gods  of  Memphis,  the  Lord  of  Egypt  hath  cursed  his
name.  Muroayu  4 is  an  abomination  unto  Memphis,  son  to  son
of  his  family  for  ever.  Binere-Beloved-of-Amun  5 pursueth  his
children,  and  Merenptah-Contented-with-Truth  5 is  appointed
as  his  fate.”

He  hath  become  a legend  (?)  for  Libya,  and  one  generation
telleth  another  of  his  victories.  “ Will  he  not  be  against  us
again  . . . Re,”  so  saith  every  old  man  to  his  son.  “ Alas,  for
Libya  ! They  cease  to  live  in  (?)  the  goodly  fashion  of  walking
about  in  the  field.  In  a single  day  is  an  end  put  to  their  wander-
ing, and  in  a single  year  are  the  Tehenu  consumed.  Sutekh  6
hath  turned  his  back  on  their  chieftain,  and  their  settlements
are  destroyed  with  his  authority.  There  is  no  work  of  carrying
...  in  these  days.7  It  is  good  to  hide  oneself ; in  the  cave
there  is  safety.

“ The  great  lord  of  Egypt,  might  and  valour  belong  unto  him.
Who  will  yet  fight,  knowing  how  he  strideth  forward  ?

“ A witless  fool  is  he  that  awaiteth  his  onslaught,  and  he  knoweth
not  what  the  morrow  hath  in  store  for  him,  that  transgresseth  his
boundary.”  8

Egypt,  men  say  since  (the  time  ?)  of  the  gods,  is  the  only

1 Regular  designation  of  hostile  chieftains.

1 The  distinguishing  mark  of  the  Libyans.

3 See  previous  note.  4 The  chieftain's  name.

5 The  king's  name.  9 See  p.  262,  note  4.

7 This  will  have  been  the  peaceful  occupation  of  the  Libyans.  They
will  have  furnished  the  porters  for  the  caravans.

• The  utterance  of  the  old  Libyan  extends  probably  up  to  this  point.


276


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


daughter  of  Re,  and  it  is  his  son  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne
of  Shu.1  None  shall  undertake  to  trespass  against  her  inhabit-
ants ; the  eye  of  every  god  pursueth  him  that  will  plunder  her.
It  will  indeed  make  an  end  of  her  enemies,  say  the  ...  of  their
stars  and  all  the  wise  men  (?),  when  they  look  at  the  wind.2
A great  wonder  is  come  to  pass  for  Timuris.  He  that  assailed
her  is  given  captive  into  his  hands  (?)  by  the  counsel  of  the  god-
like king,  who  was  adjudged  triumphant  over  his  enemies  in  the
presence  of  Re.3  Muroayu,  the  evil-doer,  the  abomination  (?)
of  every  god  that  is  in  Memphis,  he  it  is  that  hath  been  tried
in  Heliopolis,  and  whom  the  Nine  Gods  have  found  guilty  of
his  offence.

The  Lord  of  All  4 hath  said  : “ Give  the  scimitar  5 to  my
son,  the  upright  of  heart,  the  kindly,  the  gentle,  Merneptah-
Beloved-of-Amun,  who  hath  cared  for  Memphis,  and  pleaded
the  cause  for  Heliopolis  ; who  hath  opened  the  towns  which
were  shut  up,  that  he  might  set  free  the  many  that  were  confined
in  every  region,  that  he  might  give  offerings  to  the  temples,  and
cause  incense  to  enter  before  the  god ; that  he  might  suffer  the
great  ones  to  keep  their  possession,  and  the  humble  to  return
to  (?)  their  cities.”

This  is  what  the  lords  of  Heliopolis  say  concerning  their  son
Memeptah-Beloved-of-Amun  : “He  shah  have  a lifetime  like
Re,  that  he  may  plead  the  cause  of  him  that  is  weak  against  (?)
every  foreign  land.  He  hath  made  Egypt  over  . . . unto  him
whom  he  hath  appointed  to  be  his  representative  for  ever,  that
he  may  strengthen  its  inhabitants.  Behold,  one  dwelleth  (in
peace)  in  the  time  of  the  valiant  one,  and  the  breath  of  life
cometh  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one.  Riches  pour  down
for  him  that  is  righteous,  but  no  sinner  keepeth  his  plunder  (?),
and  what  a man  hath  of  ill-gotten  wealth,  that  falleth  to  others  and
not  to  his  children.”

1 The  god  of  the  air,  the  son  of  Re.

1 The  whole  passage  is  probably  corrupt ; possibly  astrologers  and
other  magicians  are  meant.  How  much  is  to  be  included  in  their  speech
is  far  from  clear

# the  entire  passage  plays  with  the  theme  of  the  law-suit  between
Horus  and  Seth  in  Heliopolis,  when  Horus  was  justiiied  and  Seth  found
guilty.

4 Re,  who  passes  sentence.

8 Cf.  the  reliefs,  which  depict  a god  handing  this  old  sickle-shaped
weapon  to  a king.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


277


This  is  said  : When  Muroayu,  the  miserable  fallen  one,  the
fallen  one  of  Libya,  was  come  to  invade  the  Walls  1 of  Tenen  (?),
who  hath  caused  his  son,  King  Merneptah,  to  mount  his  throne,
then  said  Ptah  concerning  the  fallen  one  of  Libya  : “ Let  all
his  sins  be  diverted  together  upon  his  head.  Let  him  be  given
into  the  hand  of  Merneptah,  that  he  may  make  him  vomit
forth  that  which  he  hath  swallowed  like  a crocodile.  Behold,
the  fleeter  catcheth  the  fleet,  and  the  Sovereign  will  ensnare
in  the  net  him  that  is  aware  of  his  strength.  It  is  Amun  who
shattereth  him  with  his  hand,  so  that  he  may  deliver  him  over
to  his  ka  2 in  Hermonthis,  even  to  King  Merneptah.”

Great  joy  hath  arisen  in  Egypt,  and  jubilation  issueth  from
the  towns  of  Timuris.  They  tell  of  the  victories  which  King
Merneptah  hath  won  among  the  Tehenu.  How  they  love  him,
the  victorious  Prince  ! How  they  magnify  him  among  the
gods  ! How  fortunate  he  is,  the  lord  of  command  ! Ah,  it  is
good  to  sit  down  and  chatter  ! Men  walk  (again)  unhindered
upon  the  road,  and  there  is  no  fear  in  men’s  hearts.  The
strongholds  are  left  to  themselves,  the  wells  lie  open,3  acces-
sible (?)  to  the  messengers.  The  battlements  of  the  wall  are
quiet  and  only  the  sun  wall  awaken  their  watchmen.  The
Matoi 4 lie  inert  and  sleep,  and  the  Niau  and  Tekten  5 are  in
the  fields,  wherein  they  desire  to  be.  The  cattle  of  the  field
are  suffered  to  go  roaming  without  an  herdsman,  and  to  cross
the  waters  of  the  stream.6  There  is  no  shouting  and  calling
out  in  the  night  of  “ Halt,  halt  ! ” (?)  7 in  the  speech  of  strangers.
Men  go  and  come  singing,  and  there  is  no  cry  of  people  that
mourn.  The  towns  are  yet  once  more  inhabited,  and  he  that
hath  grown  his  corn  will  also  eat  of  it.

Re  hath  turned  him  to  Egypt.  He  is  bom  destined  to  be
her  protector,  he.  King  Merneptah.

1 1.e.  Memphis,  the  city  of  Ptah-Tenen.

3 The  king  is  conceived  of  as  a part  of  the  divine  person.  For  Her-
monthis, see  p.  264,  note  1.

3 The  fortified  well-stations  in  the  desert  are  meant.

4 A Nubian  tribe,  male  members  of  which  served  as  soldiers  and
policemen.

6 The  N.  and  T.  are  light  troops  in  the  western  desert  The  writing  of
the  name  suggests  runners  and  scouts.  See  above,  p 203,  note  2.

* Which  bounds  their  meadows.  On  the  opposite  bank,  also,  they
are  not  stolen.

7 The  untranslatable  words,  which  I have  thus  rendered,  must  have
been  the  cry  of  the  foreign  plunderers.


278


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


The  chieftains  lie  prostrate  and  say  “ Shalom,”  1
Not  one  lifteth  up  his  head  among  the  Nine  Bows.2
Tehenu  hath  been  destroyed,

The  land  of  Khatti  is  peaceful,

Canaan  is  captured  with  (?)  every  evil,

Askalon  is  carried  away,

Gezer  is  seized  upon.

Yenoam  is  made  as  nothing,

Israel  is  desolated  3 and  hath  no  seed,4
Kharu  5 is  become  a widow  for  (?)  Timuris.

All  lands  are  united  in  peace.

And  whosoever  went  a-roaming —

He  is  subdued  by  the  King  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  Binere-
Beloved-of-Amun,

Son  of  Re,  Merneptah-Contented-with-Truth,

Who  is  given  life  like  Re  every  day.


6.  SHORTER  POEMS

(a)  [On  the  accession  of  Merneptah.]  6

Rejoice,  thou  entire  land,  the  goodly  time  hath  come.  A
lord  is  appointed  in  all  countries,  and  witnesses  (?)  have  come
to  his  place,  he,  the  king,  who  reigneth  for  millions  of  years,
great  of  kingship  like  Horus,  Binere-Beloved-of-Amun,  who

oppresseth  (?)  Egypt  with  festivals,  son  of  Re Mer-

neptah-Contented-with-Truth.

0 all  ye  righteous,  come  and  behold  ! Truth  hath  repressed
falsehood,  the  sinners  are  fallen  on  their  faces,  all  that  are
covetous  are  turned  back.7

1 The  Canaanite  word  for  " hail  ”,  “ peace  ”

2 Archaic  designation  of  Egypt’s  hostile  neighbours.

3 By  far  the  oldest  mention  of  Israel,  and  the  only  mention  in  an
Egyptian  text.  In  contrast  with  the  others,  the  name  is  written  here  as
that  of  a people  and  not  of  a country.  Israel  was  thus  regarded  by  the
scribe  as  a Bedouin  tribe  Since  it  is  inserted  among  Palestinian  place-
names,  the  tribe  must  also  have  been  resident  in  Palestine.

4 A frequent  metaphor  for  countries  that  have  been  laid  waste.

3 Palestine.  The  metaphor  of  the  widow  is  chosen  for  the  sake  of  the
paronomasia.

8 Pap.  Sallier,  i 8.  9.

7 This  sounds  as  if  there  had  been  disputes  as  to  who  should  succeed
to  the  throne.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  279

The  water  standeth  and  faileth  not,  and  the  Nile  carrieth
a high  (flood).  The  days  are  long,  the  nights  have  hours,  and
the  months  come  aright.1  The  gods  are  content  and  happy  of
heart,  and  life  is  spent  in  laughter  and  wonder.

(b)  [On  the  accession  of  Ramesses  IV.]  2

What  a happy  day  ! Heaven  and  earth  rejoice,  (for)  thou
art  the  great  lord  of  Egypt.

They  that  had  fled  have  come  again  to  their  towns,  and
they  that  were  hidden  have  again  come  forth.

They  that  hungered  are  satisfied  and  happy,  and  they  that
thirsted  are  drunken.

They  that  were  naked  are  clad  in  fine  linen,  and  they  that
were  dirty  have  white  garments.

They  that  were  in  prison  are  set  free,  and  he  that  was  in
bonds  is  full  of  joy.

They  that  were  at  strife  in  this  land  are  reconciled.  High
Niles  have  come  from  their  sources,  that  they  may  refresh  the
hearts  of  others.3

Widows,4  their  houses  stand  open,  and  they  suffer  travellers
to  enter.

Maidens  rejoice  and  repeat  their  songs  of  gladness  (?).

They  are  arrayed  in  ornaments  5 and  say  (?)  : " he

createth  generation  on  generation.  Thou  ruler,  thou  wilt
endure  for  ever.”

The  ships  rejoice  on  the  deep

They  come  to  land  with  wind  or  oars,

They  are  satisfied  . . . when  it  is  said :

“ King  Hekmaatre-Beloved-of-Amun  again  weareth  the  crown.
The  son  of  Re,  Ramesses,  hath  received  the  office  of  his
father.”

All  lands  say  unto  him :

1 Even  a good  inundation  and  the  ordered  progress  of  time  are  ascribed
to  the  new  king,  perhaps  because  the  gods  are  so  well  disposed  towards
him.

a Ostracon  in  Turin  ; see  Rec.  de  Trav.,  ii.  p.  116.

* Strangers,  or  only  : the  people  ?

4 Possibly  also  : unmarried  women.  The  meaning,  in  any  case,  is  that
they  surrender  themselves.

* Literally  : inlaid  (with  gold).


280


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


“ Beautiful  is  Horus  1 on  the  throne  of  Amun  who  sendeth
him  forth,

(Amun)  the  protector  of  the  Prince,  who  bringeth  every  land.”

(c)  [Good  wishes  for  the  king.]  2

Life,  prosperitj',  health  ! This  is  written  that  One  3 may
know  it  in  the  Palace,  which  is  beloved  of  Truth,  the  Horizon
wherein  Re  dwelleth.

Turn  thy  face  unto  me,  thou  rising  sun,  that  illumineth
the  Two  Lands  with  its  beauty  ! Thou  sun  of  mankind,  that
banisheth  the  darkness  from  Egypt.

Thou  art  in  nature  like  unto  thy  father  Re,  who  ariseth  in
the  firmament.  Thy  beams  enter  (even)  into  a cavern,  and
there  is  no  place  that  is  devoid  of  thy  beauty.

Thou  art  told  how’  it  fareth  in  every  land,  W'hilst  thou  resteth
in  the  Palace.  Thou  hearest  the  words  of  all  lands,  thou  hast
myriads  of  ears.

More  bright  is  thine  eye  than  the  stars  of  heaven,  and
thou  canst  see  better  than  the  sun.  If  one  speaketh,  and  the
mouth  is  in  a cavern,  yet  cometh  it  into  thine  ear.  If  ought
is  done  that  is  hidden,  yet  will  thine  eye  behold  it.

O Binere-Beloved-of-Amun,  lord  of  grace,  who  createth
breath  ! 4

(d)  [To  the  king’s  war-chariot. j 5

This  poem  is  a curiosity.  Everything  appertaining  to  the
chariot  is  enumerated,  and,  as  each  item  is  mentioned,  a pun  is
made  upon  it  in  praise  of  the  king’s  prowess.  On  this  account
the  poem  is  practically  untranslatable,  and  all  the  more  so  since
it  teems  with  unknown  words.  Beginning  and  end  must  have  been
written  on  other  ostraca.

knoweth  every  land  ; its  ram’s  head  6 is  a wonder

for  chief  captains.

1 1.e.  the  king.

2 Pap.  A r.astasi,  ii.  5.  G ft  ; ibid.  iv.  5.  6 if.  It  stands  there  as  a
model  for  a letter  to  the  king

3 The  king.

4 By  speaking  thus  of  the  king  he  hints  at  the  benefits  which  he  him-
self hopes  to  receive  from  him.

6 Ostracon  in  Edinburgh,  Zeihchi  fin  agypt.  Sprache.  xviii.  p.  94.

* The  ram  is  Amun’s  sacred  animal,  and  its  head  is  here,  as  often,
employed^as  an  ornament.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


281


The  ...  of  thy  chariot — the  chieftains  are  friendly  towards
thee.

The  ...  of  thy  chariot — every  land  is  . . .

The  ...  of  thy  chariot — it  taketh  the  souls  ...  of  the
warriors.

The  ...  of  thy  chariot — they  are  Bata  lord  of  Saka,  when
he  was  in  the  arms  (?)  of  Bast,  cast  away  in  some  strange
land.1

The  . . . weapons  of  thy  chariot— they  ...  at  the  end  (?)
of  the  lands.

The  spear  of  thy  chariot — terror  of  thee  hath  entered  in
among  them.

The  sword  of  thy  chariot — it  maketh  afraid  them  that  are
in  thine  land.  It  filleth  its  mouth  with  the  land  of  Palestine,
and  it  carrieth  away  the  land  of  Ethiopia.

The  knife  of  thy  chariot — thy  scimitar  heweth  in  pieces
the  rebellious  hills  ; they  fall  down  as  boulders.

The  ...  of  thy  chariot — thou  breakest  (?)  their  narrow
passes.

The  ...  of  thy  chariot — they  bend  their  backs  to  thee
because  of  (thy)  victories.

The  ...  of  thy  chariot— thou  art  vise  like  ThSth.

The  club  of  thy  chariot — it  plundereth  the  distant  lands.
It  is  dashed  against  one,  and  a thousand  fall ; it  leaveth  no
heir  remaining.

The  grips  (?)  of  thy  chariot— they  are  Anat  and  Astarte.3

The  chain  (?)  of  thy  chariot — it  enchaineth  them  that  are
evil.

The  bow


F.  RELIGIOUS  POEMS

The  old  hymns  to  the  gods  still  continued  to  be  used  by
the  priests  all  through  the  New  Kingdom,  and  survived  in  the
ritual  as  long  as  there  was  an  Egyptian  religion.  But  side  by
side  with  them  a new  tendency  is  apparent,  that  is  as  alive  and
multiform  as  the  old  was  rigid  and  uniform.  In  it  are  to  be

1 See  above,  p.  150;  the  allusion  here  presumes  an  older  form  of  the
legend  ; the  cheerful  goddess  Bast  may  correspond  to  the  temptress  of
the  legend,  or  to  the  baleful  woman,  and  the  foreign  land  to  the  Valley
of  the  Cedar.

* The  two  foreign  goddesses  of  war.


282  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

seen  the  effects  of  the  religious  revival,  for  which  the  New  King-
dom affords  other  evidence,1 — relationship  with  God  becomes
a personal  one, — but  there  is  also  to  be  seen  in  it  the  new  senti-
ment, which  affects  us  so  pleasantly  in  the  other  branches
of  the  lyric  poetry  : joy  in  nature  and  a warmth  of  human
feeling.

i.  THE  GREAT  HYMN  TO  AMtJN  2

My  readers  will  expect  to  find  a hymn  to  Amunre,  the  state
god  of  the  New  Kingdom,  among  the  poems  of  this  period,  and  on
that  account  I have  placed  it  here.  Moreover,  individual  passages
in  the  hymn,  with  their  joy  in  nature  and  their  w'armth  of  feeling,
vividly  remind  one  of  hymns  which  certainly  originated  at  this
time,  above  all  the  Hymn  to  the  Sun  from  El-Amarnah.  No  argu-
ment against  this  view  is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  our  hymn  is
composed  in  the  old  language  ; for  this  was  still  the  literary  language
in  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  the  period  when  the  papyrus  in  question
was  written.

But  the  matter  is  not  as  simple  as  all  that  ; on  the  contrary,
the  hymn  is,  to  a large  degree,  built  up  out  of  older  material.  For
this  speaks  the  long  enumeration  of  the  titles  and  attributes  of  the
god,  which  are  only  too  reminiscent  of  the  old  dreary  manner  of
rendering  praise  to  divinities  ; and  all  kinds  of  other  features  also
are  to  be  found,  which  appear  in  almost  identically  the  same  words
in  the  older  religious  poems.  Compare,  for  example,  the  hymns
to  the  sun  on  pp.  138  ff.,  and  the  hymn  to  Min-Horus  on  pp.  137  f.;
it  looks  as  though  hymns  to  these  two  gods,  who  together  form
Amunre,  had  been  amalgamated,  and  then  made  to  suit  the  taste
of  the  period  by  more  recent  additions.  The  wray  in  wiiich  the  hymn
has  been  put  together  has  made  a complete  jumble  of  it.

It  would  lead  us  too  far  afield,  if,  in  dealing  with  the  hymn,  I
were  to  expatiate  upon  the  details  of  the  cult,  to  which  so  many
references  are  made.  Moreover,  for  us,  who  are  not  Egyptian  priests,
it  is  a matter  of  complete  indifference  what  crowms  and  titles  have
been  assigned  to  the  god.  I must,  however,  briefly  touch  upon
the  nature  of  this  composite  divinity.

Amun,  the  god  of  Thebes,  was  originally  only  a variant  form
of  the  ithyphallic  god  Min,  who  was  venerated  not  far  off  at  Koptos.
Like  so  many  other  gods,  he  was  later  identified  with  the  sun-
god,  and  henceforth  known  as  Amunre.  During  the  Eighteenth

1 See  Blackman,  The  Psalms  m the  Light  of  Egyptian  Research,  in
Simpson,  The  Psalmists,  Oxford,  1926.

2 A papyrus  in  Cairo,  written  about  the  time  of  Amenophis  II.  Often
treated  of,  and  lastly  by  Boeder,  Urkunden  znr  Religion  des  alten
Agyptens,  pp.  4 ff.  Scharff,  Ag.  Sonnenheder,  pp.  61  ff.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


283


Dynasty,  when  his  city  became  the  capital,  the  veneration  in  which
he  was  held  was  immense,  and  he  became  the  most  important  of
all  the  gods.

Viewed  from  another  aspect,  this  union  with  Re  did  Amun  an
injur}7,  for  as  a result  not  much  survives  of  his  original  nature —
as  Min  he  is  still  lord  of  the  Eastern  countries — and  on  the  whole
Amunre  is  actually  nothing  more  than  the  old  powerful  sun-god,
Re,  Harakhti,  Atum,  Khepre,  and  whatever  else  he  was  called.
Like  him,  he  sails  over  the  celestial  ocean,  and  like  him  wars  with
the  cloud-dragon,  Apophis  ; and  all  that  Re  possesses  in  the  way  of
sanctuaries,  ships,  names,  and  crowns,  becomes  his  property.  Like
Re  he  has  created  gods  and  men,  and  sustains  all  that  lives.  On
this  last  feature,  and  on  the  god’s  loving-kindness  and  goodness,
the  hymn  lays  particular  emphasis,  as  do  also  the  other  poems  of
the  New  Kingdom  (see  pp.  307  ff.).

[Title.]

Adoration  of  Amunre,  Bull  of  Heliopolis,  chiefest  of  all  gods,
the  good  god,  the  beloved,  who  giveth  life  to  all  that  is  warm,1
and  to  every  good  herd.

[First  canto.]

Praise  to  thee,  Amunre,  lord  of  Karnak,  who  presideth  in
Thebes  ! Bull  of  his  Mother,  the  first  on  his  field  ! 2

Wide  of  stride,  first  in  Upper  Egypt,  lord  of  the  land  of  the
Matoi,  prince  of  Punt.3

Greatest  of  heaven,  eldest  of  earth,  lord  of  what  existeth,
who  abideth  in  (?)  all  things.

Unique  in  his  nature  . . . among  the  gods,  goodly  bull  of
the  Nine  Gods,1  chiefest  of  all  gods.

Lord  of  Truth,  father  of  the  gods,  who  made  mankind,  and
created  beasts.

Lord  of  what  existeth,  who  createth  the  fruit-tree,  who
made  the  green  herb,  and  sustaineth  the  cattle.

Beauteous  form  which  Ptah  fashioned,5  the  beauteous,
beloved  boy,  he  whom  the  gods  praise.

1 1.e.  probably  all  that  lives.  To  the  god’s  beneficence  described
later  on,  reference  is  already  made  here  in  the  title.

2 The  sun  is  the  spouse  of  the  sky-goddess  and  at  the  same  time  her
son,  in  the  capacity  of  sun  of  the  next  day.  As  a bull  rules  over  the  field
wherein  he  pastures,  so  he  rules  over  the  sky  as  its  greatest  celestial  body.

3 The  Matoi  are  a people  in  Nubia.  Punt  is  the  incense-country.

4 The  leader,  the  hero  of  the  great  gods.

5 Ptah  the  craftsman-god,  has  given  Amun  his  form,


284


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


He  who  made  them  that  are  below  and  them  that  are  above,1
he  who  illumineth  the  Two  Lands.  He  who  traverseth  the
firmament  in  peace,  King  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  Re,  the
justified.3

The  chiefest  of  the  Two  Lands,  great  of  strength,  lord  of
might,  the  chiefest,  who  made  the  entire  earth.

More  eminent  of  nature  than  any  god,  over  whose  beauty
the  gods  rejoice.  He  to  whom  praise  is  given  in  the  Great
House,  who  is  crowned  in  the  House  of  Fire.3

He  whose  sweet  savour  the  gods  love,  when  he  cometh  from
Punt.  Richly  perfumed,  when  he  cometh  down  from  the  land  of
the  Matol.4  Fair  of  face,  when  he  cometh  from  God’s-land.5

The  gods  fawn  at  his  feet,  when  they  know  his  majesty  to
be  their  lord,  the  fearful,  the  terrible,  great  of  will  and  mighty
in  appearance,  who  aboundeth  in  victuals  and  createth
sustenance.

Jubilation  to  thee  who  didst  create  the  gods,  raise  up  the
sky,  and  spread  out  the  ground.

[Second  canto.]

He  who  is  in  health  hath  awakened  ! 6 Min,  Amun,  the
lord  of  Eternity,  who  created  Everlastingness  ! Possessor  of
praise,  who  presideth  in  ...  !

Firm  of  horns,7  fair  of  face.  Lord  of  the  crown  and  lofty
of  plumes,  with  beauteous  diadem  and  tall  white  crown.  The
Mehent-serpent  and  the  two  Buto-serpents  are  above  (?)  his

face, the  double  crown,  the  head-cloth,  and  the  blue

crown.  Fair  of  face,  when  he  taketh  the  atef-crown,  beloved
of  the  Upper  Egyptian  crown  and  the  Lower  Egyptian.  Lord
of  the  double  crown,  when  he  taketh  the  ames-sceptre,  lord  of
the  deeds-case,  who  holdeth  the  flail.

The  prince,  beauteously  crowned  with  the  white  crown.  Lord
of  rays,  who  createth  light.  To  whom  the  gods  offer  praise.

1 Men  and  stars.

2 If  the  scribe  gave  it  any  thought  at  all,  this  attribute  would  designate
Re  as  a former,  and  dead,  king.

3 Two  sanctuaries  in  the  ancient  capitals  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.

4 See  above,  pp.  138,  note  3.  5 yhe  gast

8 Elsewhere  descriptive  of  the  resuscitated  Osiris.

7 What  follows  describes  the  god’s  crown,  adorned  with  horns,  feathers,
fillets,  and  serpents  ; see  also  Blackman,  Journ.  of  Egypt.  Archceology,  x.
p.  194.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  285

He  who  giveth  his  hands  to  him  whom  he  loveth,  while  he
assigneth  his  foe  to  the  tire.  It  is  his  eye  1 that  overthroweth
the  enemy ; it  thrusteth  its  spear  into  him  that  drinketh  up
the  ocean,  and  causeth  the  dragon  to  vomit  forth  what  he  hath
swallowed.2

Praise  to  thee,  0 Re,  lord  of  Truth.  Thou  whose  chapel
is  hidden,  lord  of  gods.  Khepre  in  his  bark,  who  gave  com-
mand and  the  gods  came  into  being.

Atum,  who  created  mankind,  who  distinguished  their  nature
and  made  their  life  ; who  made  the  colours  different,  one  from
the  other.3

He  who  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  prisoner  ; kindly  of  heart
when  one  calleth  to  him.

He  who  rescueth  the  fearful  from  the  oppressor,  who  judgeth
between  the  miserable  and  the  strong.

Lord  of  Perception,  in  whose  mouth  is  Authority.  For  love
of  him  cometh  the  Nile,  the  sweet,  the  greatly  beloved,  and  when
he  hath  come  men  live.

He  causeth  all  eyes  to  open , his  beneficence  createth

the  light.  The  gods  rejoice  in  his  beauty,  and  their  hearts
live  when  they  behold  him.

[Third  caxto.]

0 Re,  venerated  in  Karnak,  who  appeareth  great  in  the
house  of  the  Benben,  he  of  Heliopolis.  Lord  of  the  ninth  day
of  the  month,  in  whose  honour  men  keep  the  sixth  and  seventh
day.

King,  lord  of  all  gods  ; haw’k  in  the  midst  of  the  horizon.
Master  of  mankind  . . . His  name  is  hidden  from  his  children
— in  his  name  Amun.4

Praise  to  thee,  fortunate  . . .,  lord  of  joy,  mighty  in  (his)
appearing.  Lord  of  the  crown,  lofty  of  feathers  ; with  beauteous
diadem  and  tall  white  crown.

The  gods  love  to  gaze  at  thee,  when  the  double  crown  resteth
on  thy  brow.

1 The  eye  of  the  sun,  here  conceived  of  as  a waning  goddess.

2 The  Apophis-dragon,  which  drinks  up  the  celestial  ocean,  so  that  the
sun’s  ship  may  not  be  able  to  voyage  upon  it.

* It  is  the  conception,  which  occurs  again  more  clearly  in  the  El-
Amamah  hymn  (p.  290),  that  even  the  barbarians  are  God’s  children,
whom  He  sustains.

J Paronomasia.  Amun  can  also  mean  “ the  hidden  one.”


286


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Love  of  thee  is  diffused  throughout  the  Two  Lands,  and  thy
rays  shine  in  the  eyes.  (It  is)  the  well-being  (?)  of  mankind
when  thou  arisest ; the  beasts  wax  languid  when  thou  shinest.1

Thou  art  beloved  in  the  southern  sky,  and  art  pleasant  in
the  northern  sky.2  Thy  beauty  captivateth  the  hearts,  and  the
love  of  thee  maketh  languid  the  arms.  Thy  fair  form  maketh
feeble  the  hands ; the  heart  forgetteth  when  one  looketh  upon
thee.

Thou  art  the  Sole  One,  who  made  all  that  is.  The  One  and
Only,  who  made  what  existeth.  Men  issued  from  his  two  eyes,
and  from  his  mouth  the  gods  came  into  being.3

He  who  made  herbage  for  the  cattle  and  the  fruit-tree  for
men.  He  who  made  that  whereon  live  the  fish  in  the  river,
and  the  birds  which  (inhabit  ?)  the  firmament.  He  who  giveth
breath  to  him  that  is  in  the  egg,  and  sustaineth  the  son  of  the
worm.

He  who  made  that  whereon  the  gnats  live,  the  worms,  and
the  flies  likewise.  He  who  made  that  which  the  mice  in  their
holes  need,  and  sustaineth  the  birds  (?)  on  every  tree.

Praise  to  thee,  who  didst  make  all  this.  Sole  One  and  Only
with  the  many  hands.4  Who  passeth  the  night  wakeful,  when
all  men  sleep,  seeking  the  best  for  his  cattle.5

Amun,  who  abideth  in  (?)  all  things  ! Atum,  Harakhti !
Homage  to  thee  in  all  that  they  say  ! Jubilation  to  thee,
because  thou  weariest  thyself  with  us  ! Reverence  to  thee,
because  thou  didst  create  us  !

Praise  to  thee,  saith(?)  every  beast,  jubilation  to  thee,
saith  (?)  every  wilderness,  as  high  as  is  the  heaven,  as  broad
as  is  the  earth,  and  as  deep  as  is  the  sea.6

The  gods  make  obeisance  unto  thy  majesty,  and  extol  the
might  of  their  creator.  They  rejoice  when  he  that  begat  them
draweth  nigh,  and  they  say  unto  thee  : “ Welcome,  in  peace  !

" Father  of  the  fathers  of  all  gods,  who  didst  raise  up  the

1 Here,  and  in  the  following  verse,  growing  languid  seems  to  be  re-
garded as  a pleasant  thing.

1 1.e.  to  the  gods  dwelling  there  ?

* According  to  the  legend,  men  originated  from  the  tears  of  the  sun-
god,  and  the  first  divinites,  Shu  and  Tefnet,  from  his  spitting.

4 Which  the  god  must  possess  to  have  created  so  much  for  all.

* He  is  a good  herdsman,  who  even  by  night  searches  where  he  may
find  fodder  for  his  herds.

* All  created  things  cry  aloud  to  thee  for  joy.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


287


sky,  and  lay  low  the  ground,  who  madest  that  which  is,  and
createdst  what  existeth !

“ 0 king,  chiefest  of  the  gods  ! We  revere  thy  might,
because  thou  createdst  us.  We  shout  for  joy  to  thee,  because
thou  fashionedst  us.  We  offer  thee  praise,  because  thou
weariedst  thyself  with  us.”

Praise  to  thee,  who  madest  all  that  is,  lord  of  Truth,1  father
of  the  gods,  who  madest  men,  and  createdst  beasts,  lord  of
grain,  who  makest  the  sustenance  of  the  wild  beasts  of  the
wilderness.

Amun,  bull  of  goodly  countenance,  darling  in  Karnak,
great  of  appearing  in  the  House  of  the  Benben,  crowned  again
in  Heliopolis  ! Who  didst  judge  between  the  Twain  2 in  the
Great  Hall,  chief  of  the  Great  Ennead.

Sole  One  and  Only,  without  peer,  who  presideth  in  Thebes,
the  Heliopolitan,  the  first  of  his  Ennead,  who  liveth  daily  on
Truth.3

Dweller  in  the  horizon,  Horns  of  the  East ! 4 The  wilderness
createth  for  him  silver  and  gold  and  real  lapis  lazuli  for  love
of  him,  myrrh  and  incense  mixed  from  the  land  of  the  Matoi,
and  fresh  myrrh  for  thy  nose.  Fair  of  face,  when  he  cometh
from  the  land  of  the  Matoi !

Amunre,  lord  of  Karnak,  who  presideth  in  Thebes,  Helio-
politan, presiding  in  his  harim  (?)  !

[Fourth  canto.]

Thou  sole  king  . . . among  the  gods  ; with  multitudinous
names,  whereof  the  number  is  not  known.  Who  ariseth  in
the  eastern  horizon,  and  setteth  in  the  western  horizon.  Who
is  bom  early  (?)  every  day,  who  daily  overthroweth  his  enemies.

Thoth  uplifteth  his  eyes,5  and  delighteth  him  with  his
excellence.  The  gods  rejoice  over  his  beauty,  and  the  hetet-
apes  extol  him.6

Lord  of  the  ship  of  evening  and  of  the  ship  of  morning  ; 7
they  traverse  Nun  for  thee  in  peace.

1 Elsewhere  this  is  the  designation  of  Ptah,  the  craftsman-god,  who
fashioned  everything.

2 Homs  and  Seth.  2 It  is  his  life-principle.

4 What  follows  here  applies  to  him,  the  patron  of  the  eastern  desert
and  of  the  countries  to  which  its  roads  lead.

5 Meaning  ? * The  apes  which  greet  the  sun  at  his  rising.

7 The  sun-god’s  two  ships.  Nun  is  the  celestial  ocean.


288  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Thy  crew  rejoice th,  when  they  see  how  the  foe 1 is  overthrown,
and  how  his  limbs  are  consumed  by  the  knife.  The  fire  hath
devoured  him,  and  his  soul  is  punished  yet  more  than  his  body.

That  dragon,  an  end  is  made  of  his  going.  The  gods  shout
for  joy  and  the  crew  of  Re  is  content.

Heliopolis  exulteth,  the  foe  of  Atum  is  overthrown,  Thebes
is  content,  Heliopolis  exulteth.  The  Mistress  of  Life  2 is  glad,
the  foe  of  her  lord  is  overthrown.  The  gods  of  Babylon  3 are
in  jubilation  and  they  of  Letopolis  3 kiss  the  earth,  when  they
see  him.

Strong  in  his  might,  the  most  mighty  (?)  of  the  gods.  Just
one  (?),  lord  of  Thebes,  in  this  thy  name  of  He  who  created
Right.4 *

Lord  of  victuals,  bull  of  provisions  (?),  in  this  thy  name  of
Bull  of  his  Mother.

He  who  made  all  men  that  are,  and  created  all  that  is,  in
this  thy  name  of  Atum-Khepre.3

Great  hawk,  who  maketh  festive  the  body ! 6 Fair  of
face,  who  maketh  festive  the  breast.  With  pleasing  form  and
tall  plumes, the  two  serpents  on  his  brow’.

He  to  whom  men’s  hearts  come  nestling,  who  suffereth
mankind  to  come  out  to  him,  who  gladdeneth  the  Two  Lands
with  his  going  forth.7

Praise  to  thee,  Amunre,  lord  of  Karnak,  whose  arising  his
city  loveth.

2.  THE  HYMN  TO  THE  SUN  FROM  EL-AMARNAH  8

As  is  well  known,  Amenophis  IV,  the  last  king  of  the  Eighteenth
Dynasty  ( circa  1380  b.c.),  attempted  to  establish  a reformed
religion,  which  permitted  only  the  sun  to  be  worshipped.  The
fullest  statement  of  this  faith  that  we  possess  is  the  following
beautiful  hymn,  which  is  preserved  in  its  entirety  in  a tomb  at
El-Amarnah,  the  heretic  king’s  capital.  It  appears  there  as  a

1 The  serpent  Apophis.

2 The  serpent  of  the  sun.  3 Two  cities  close  to  modem  Cairo.

4 It  can  mean  “ Truth  ” as  well  as  " Right  ”

5 The  two  names  are  puns  on  “ all  that  are  " and  “ created.”

3 His  rays  warm  the  body.

7 This  verse  shows  that  the  hymn  was  intended  for  one  of  the  festivals

in  which  Amun  was  taken  in  procession  out  of  his  temple.  The  people

pour  out  of  their  houses  to  venerate  him.

8 See  Davies,  The  Rock  Tombs  of  El~Amarnaht  vi.  pp.  29  tf.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  289

prayer  of  the  deceased,  later  known  as  King  Ai.  Shorter  versions
of  this  hymn  are  to  be  found  in  other  tombs  at  El-Amarnah.

Beautiful  is  thine  appearing  in  the  horizon  of  heaven,  thou
living  sun,  the  first  who  lived  ! 1

Thou  risest  in  the  eastern  horizon,  and  fillest  every  land
with  thy  beauty.

Thou  art  beautiful  and  great,  and  glistenest,  and  art  high
above  every  land.  Thy  rays,  they  encompass  the  lands,  so
far  as  all  that  thou  hast  created.  Thou  art  Re,  and  thou
reachest  unto  their  end  2 and  subduest  them  for  thy  dear  son.3
Thou  art  afar,  yet  are  thy  rays  upon  earth.  Thou  art  before
their  face thy  going.

When  thou  goest  down  in  the  western  horizon,  the  earth  is
in  darkness,  as  if  it  were  dead.  They  sleep  in  the  chamber,
their  heads  4 wrapped  up,  and  no  eye  seeth  the  other.  Though
all  their  things  were  taken,  while  they  were  under  their  heads,3
yet  would  they  know  it  not.  Every  lion  cometh  forth  from
his  den,  and  all  worms  that  bite.  Darkness  is  . . .,  the  earth
is  silent,  for  he  who  created  it  resteth  in  his  horizon.

When  it  is  dawn  and  thou  risest  in  the  horizon  and  shinest
as  the  sun  in  the  day,  thou  dispellest  the  darkness  and  sheddest
thy  beams.  The  Two  Lands  keep  festival,  awake,  and  stand
on  their  feet,  for  thou  hast  raised  them  up.  They  wash  their
bodies,  they  take  their  garments,  and  their  hands  praise  thine
arising.6  The  whole  land,  it  doeth  its  work.

All  beasts  are  content  with  their  pasture,  the  trees  and
herbs  are  verdant.  The  birds  fly  out  of  their  nests  and  their
wings  praise  thy  ka.7  All  wild  beasts  dance  on  their  feet,  all
that  fly  and  flutter — they  live  when  thou  arisest  for  them.

The  ships  voyage  down  and  up  stream  likewise,  and  every
way  is  open,  because  thou  arisest.  The  fishes  in  the  river  leap
up  before  thy  face.8  Thy  rays  are  in  the  sea.

Thou  who  createst  (male  children  ?)  in  women,  and  makest
seed  in  men  ! Thou  who  maintainest  the  son  in  the  womb  of

1 Other  version  : “ that  ordaineth  life.”

* Pun  on  the  name  Re.  * The  king.

4 The  Egyptian  protects  his  head,  before  all  else,  from  cold.

6 The  things  they  thus  wish  to  protect  from  thieves.

• The  morning  prayer  to  the  sun  is  an  old  custom  in  Egypt.

7 Thy  person,  thee.  As  men  raise  the  arms  in  praise,  so  the  birds
raise  their  wings.

8 In  this  way  they  too  greet^the  sun.

19


290  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

his  mother,  and  soothest  him  so  that  he  weepeth  not,1  thou
nurse  in  the  womb.  Who  giveth  breath  in  order  to  keep  alive
all  that  he  hath  made.2  When  he  cometh  forth  from  the  womb
unto  the  earth  (?)  on  the  day  wherein  he  is  born,  thou  openest
his  mouth  when  it  would  speak  (?)  and  suppliest  what  it  needeth.

The  chick  in  the  egg  (already)  chirpeth  in  the  shell,  for  thou
givest  it  breath  therein  to  sustain  its  life.  Thou  makest  for
it  its  strength  (?)  in  the  egg  in  order  to  break  it.  It  cometh

forth  from  the  egg  to  chirp ; it  walketh  upon  its  feet

when  it  cometh  forth  therefrom.

How  much  is  there  that  thou  hast  made,  and  that  is  hidden
from  (me),3  thou  sole  god,  to  whom  none  is  to  be  likened  !

Thou  hast  fashioned  the  earth  according  to  thy  desire,  thou
alone,  with  men,  cattle,  and  all  wild  beasts,  all  that  is  upon
the  earth  and  goeth  upon  feet,  and  all  that  soareth  above  and
flieth  with  its  wings.

The  lands  of  Syria  and  Nubia,  and  the  land  of  Egypt4 — ■
thou  puttest  every  man  in  his  place  and  thou  suppliest  their
needs.  Each  one  hath  his  provision,  and  his  lifetime  is
reckoned.  Their  tongues  are  diverse  in  speech,  and  their  form
likewise.  Their  skins  are  distinguished,  (for  ?)  thou  distin-
guishest  the  peoples.

Thou  makest  the  Nile  in  the  nether  world  5 and  bringest
it  whither  thou  wilt,  in  order  to  sustain  mankind,  even  as  thou
hast  made  them.  Thou  art  lord  of  them  all,  who  wearieth
himself  on  their  behalf,  the  lord  of  every  land,  who  ariseth  for
them,  the  sun  of  the  day  greatly  reverenced.6

All  far-off  peoples,  thou  makest  that  whereon  they  live.
Thou  hast  (also)  put  the  Nile  in  the  sky,  that  it  may  come
down  for  them,  and  may  make  waves  upon  the  hills  like  a
sea,  in  order  to  moisten  their  fields  in  their  townships.  How

1 The  babe,  which  after  birth  cries  when  the  nurse  is  not  dandling  it,
would  do  the  same  before  birth  if  God  did  not  soothe  it.

2 He  lets  the  embryo  breathe.

2 It  is  more  than  can  be  conceived  of,  and  so  I cannot  enumerate  it.

4 To  put  foreign  countries  on  an  almost  equal  footing  with  Egypt,  as
is  done  here  and  subsequently,  is  contrary  to  every  tradition.  And  yet
a similar  conception  already  appears  in  the  orthodox  Hymn  to  Amun
(p.  282),  which  is  at  least  a generation  older.

6 That  the  Mile,  or  at  any  rate  the  inundation,  comes  from  the  nether
world  is  an  old  Egyptian  belief.

• The  passage  alludes  to  the  weary  evening  sun,  the  morning  sun,  and
the  midday  sun.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


291


excellently  made  are  all  thy  designs,  O Lord  of  Eternity  ! The
Nile  in  heaven,  thou  appointest  it  for  the  foreign  peoples  and
all  the  beasts  of  the  wilderness  which  walk  upon  feet,  and  the
(real)  Nile,  it  cometh  forth  from  the  nether  world  for  Timuris.

Thy  rays  suckle  every  field,  and,  when  thou  risest,  they  live
and  thrive  for  thee.  Thou  makest  the  seasons  in  order  to
sustain  all  that  thou  hast  created,  the  winter  to  cool  them,  and
the  heat,  that  they  may  taste  of  thee  {?).

Thou  hast  made  the  sky  afar  off  in  order  to  rise  therein,  in
order  to  behold  all  that  thou  hast  made.1

Thou  art  alone,  (but)  thou  arisest  in  thy  forms  as  living
sun,  appearing,  shining,  withdrawing,  returning  (?) 2 Thou
makest  millions  of  forms  of  thyself  alone.

Cities,  townships,  fields,  road  and  river — all  eyes  behold
thee  over  against  them,3  as  the  sun  of  the  day  above  the  earth.

Thou  art  in  mine  heart,  and  there  is  none  other  that  knoweth
thee  save  thy  son,  Neferkheprure-Sole-One-of-Re,4  whom  thou
makest  to  comprehend  thy  designs  and  thy  might.5

The  earth  came  into  being  at  the  beckoning  of  thine  hand,
for  thou  hast  created  them.6  When  thou  risest  they  five,  when
thou  settest  they  die.  Thou  thyself  art  lifetime,  and  men  live
in  thee.  The  eyes  look  on  thy  beauty  until  thou  settest.  All
work  is  laid  aside  when  thou  settest  on  the  right.7  When  thou

risest,  (thou)  causest  (the)  ...  to  thrive  for  the  king,

since  thou  didst  found  the  earth.  Thou  raisest  them  up  for
thy  son,  the  king  of  Upper  and  Lowrer  Egypt,  who  liveth  on
Truth,  lord  of  the  Two  Lands,  Neferkheprure-Sole-One-of-Re,
son  of  Re,  who  liveth  on  Truth,  lord  of  diadems,  Ikhenaton,
great  in  his  duration,  and  for  the  great  royal  consort  whom  he
loveth,  mistress  of  the  Two  Lands,  Nefemefrure-Nefretiti,  that
liveth  and  is  young  for  ever  and  ever.

1 So  distant,  that  thou  canst  view  thine  entire  creation  from  it.

* Meaning,  probably  : according  to  the  time  of  day  thou  appearest
different  to  us,  yet  art  thou  ever  the  same  sun.

3 Wherever  a man  may  be  on  the  earth,  thou  appearest  to  him  in  the

same  place.

1 Name  of  Amenophis  IV,  appearing  in  Babylonian  as  Napkhururiya.

6 The  king  is  thus  the  founder  of  the  new  faith,  but  not  the  author  of
the  hymn.

* Its  inhabitants.

* According  to  the  Egyptian  view,  the  west  was  on  the  right-hand  side.


292


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


3.  PRAYER  FOR  THE  KING  IN  EL-AMARNAH  1

Beautiful  is  thine  arising,  O Harakhti-that-rejoiceth-in-the-
Horizon-in-his-name-Shu-which-is-the-sun,2  thou  living  sun,
save  whom  there  is  none  else  ; who  strengtheneth  the  eyes  with
his  rays,  who  hath  created  all  that  existeth.

Thou  risest  in  the  horizon  of  heaven  to  give  life  to  all  that
thou  hast  made,  to  all  men,  (all  beasts),  all  that  flieth  and
fluttereth,  and  to  all  reptiles  that  are  in  the  earth.  They  live
when  they  behold  thee  ; they  sleep  when  thou  settest.

Thou  makest  thy  son  Neferkheprure-Sole-One-of-Re  to  live
with  thee  for  ever,  and  (to  do  what)  thine  heart  (desireth),  and
behold  what  thou  doest  every  day.  He  rejoiceth  when  he
beholdeth  thy  beauty.

Give  him  life,  joy,  and  gladness,  so  that  all  that  thou  en-
circlest  may  lie  under  (his  feet),  while  he  offereth  it  to  thy  ka,

he  thy  son,?  whom  thou  thyself  hast  begotten. the

south  as  the  north,  the  west  and  the  east,  and  the  isles  in  the
midst  of  the  sea,  shout  for  joy  to  thy  ka.  The  southern
boundary  reacheth  as  far  as  the  wind  bloweth,  and  the  northern
as  far  as  the  sun  shine th.  All  their  princes  are  overthrown
and  made  weak  by  reason  of  his  might, — the  beauteous  vital
force  3 that  maketh  festive  the  Two  Lands,  and  createth  what
the  whole  earth  needeth.  Let  him  be  for  ever  with  thee,  in
that  he  loveth  to  look  on  thee.

Give  him  very  many  jubilees  with  years  of  peace.

Give  him  of  that  which  thine  heart  desireth,  to  the  extent
that  there  is  sand  on  the  shore,  that  fishes  in  the  stream  have
scales,  and  cattle  have  hair.

Let  him  sojourn  here,4  until  the  swan  turneth  black,  until
the  raven  turneth  white,5  until  the  hills  arise  to  depart,  until
water  floweth  up  stream,  while  I continue  in  attendance  on  the
good  god,6  until  he  assigneth  me  the  burial  that  he  granteth.

1 Davies,  El-A  mama,  iii.  PI.  xxix.  ; translated  pp.  31  f.

1 The  official  name  of  the  new  divinity,  in  dogmatically  exact  form.

* Therein  lies  an  antithesis  to  what  immediately  precedes  ; for  foreigners
it  is  a constraint,  for  Egyptians  a blessing.

4 In  the  newly  founded  residence.

4 Swan  and  raven  are  only  guesses.  All  that  can  be  seen  is  that  we
have  to  do  with  two  birds.

4 The  king,  till  my  death.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


293


4.  POEMS  ON  THEBES  AND  ITS  GOD  1

This  work,  of  which  the  beginning  and  end  are  lost,  might  have
once  borne  the  title  of  The  Thousand  Songs,  for,  contrary  to  all
precedent,  its  individual  sections  bear  each  a number.  Of  these
numbers,  only  two  are  wanting  to  complete  the  thousand,  and  they
will  have  stood  in  the  break  at  the  end  of  the  last  page.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  there  were  not  really  a thousand  songs,  for  the
author  only  attained  this  high  figure  by  a strange  artifice  ; he
merely  counted  the  units,  tens,  and  hundreds,  so  that  the  thousand
is  actually  only  twenty-eight.

That  he  attached  some  importance  to  his  numbers  can  be  seen
from  the  fact  that  he  begins  and  ends  every  poem  with  a pun,  which
is  meant  to  guide  the  hearer  to  the  number  in  question.  The
effort  to  find  puns  on  the  numbers  has  apparently  also  influenced
the  sequence  and  choice  of  the  subjects  treated  of.  These  poems
are  shown  by  their  contents  to  be  the  production  of  a learned  poet,
who  was  not  altogether  a bad  one  either.  They  were  written  at  the
beginning  of  the  Nineteenth  Dynasty,  as  the  episode  of  Amenophis  IV
was  still  not  forgotten  (see  p.  288).

Chapter  six.2

Every  region  is  in  terror  of  thee thy  name  is  high

and  mighty  and  powerful.  The  Euphrates  and  the  sea  are  in
fear  of  thee.  Thy  might  is  heavy  upon  the  earth  {?),  in  the  islands

in  the  midst  of  the  sea. The  dwellers  in  Punt  come

to  thee,  and  God's-Land 3 is  verdant  for  thee  from  love  of
thee.  They  bring  thee  perfumes,  to  make  festive  thy  temple
with  festal  fragrance.  Incense-bearing  trees  drop  myrrh  for
thee,  and  the  perfume  of  thine  aroma  penetrateth  into  thy

nose. . All  costly  oils  come  to  thee.  Cedar  trees  are

grown  for  thee , in  order  to  frame  thine  august  barque

Userhet.4

The  mountains  yield  thee  blocks  of  stone  in  order  to  make
great  the  gateways  (of  thy  temple}.  Ships  are  upon  the  sea
and  moor  (?)  beside  the  strand,  load  and  voyage  before

thee  ; the  river  floweth  down  stream,  and  the  north

wind,  it  bloweth  up  stream,  bringing  offerings  to  thee  of  all
that  is .

1 Papyrus  in  Leyden,  of  time  of  Ramesses  IX.  Published  by  Gardiner,
Zeitschr.  fiir  dgypt.  Sprache,  xlii.  pp.  12  ff.

2 The  might  of  Amun  is  felt  in  all  lands.

3 The  East,  where  spices  grow.


4 See  above,  p.  174.


294


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Chapter  seven  begins  with  :

The  wicked  are  cast  off  from  Thebes,1  and  then  extols  it  as
the  Mistress  of  Cities,  that  is  stronger  than  any  city.  She  gave
the  land  to  a single  lord  by  her  victories,  she  that  took  the  bow
and  grasped  the  arrow.  None  can  fight  near  her  because  her
strength  is  so  great.  Every  city  ex tolleth  {herself  ?)  in  her  name,2
she  is  their  princess,  that  is  mightier  than  they .

Chapter  eight  is  destroyed.

Chapter  nine.3

The  Ennead  which  came  forth  from  Nun,  it  assembleth
itself,  because  it  beholdeth  thee,  the  great  in  glory,  the  lord  of
lords,  who  fashioned  himself,  the  lord  of  the  . . .,  he  is  the
Lord.4

Them  that  had  slept  (?),  he  shineth  for  them,  in  order  to
illumine  their  faces  in  another  form.5  His  eyes  6 gleam  and
his 6 ears  are  opened.  All  limbs  are  clad  7 when  his  brightness
hath  come  (?).

Heaven  is  of  gold,  Nun  of  lapis  lazuli,  and  the  earth  is  o’er-
spread  with  malachite,  when  he  ariseth  therein.8

The  gods  behold  and  their  temples  stand  open.  Men  can
see  and  behold  by  him  (?).

All  trees  stir  at  his  presence.  They  turn  them  towards  his
eye,  and  their  leaves  unfold.

The  scaly  ones  leap  in  the  water . All  cattle  frolic

before  his  countenance.  All  birds  dance  with  their  wings  ;
they  know  him  in  his  good  season.  They  live  9 because  they
see  him  every  day.  They  are  in  his  hand,  sealed  with  his  seal,
and  no  god  openeth  them  save  his  majesty.10  There  is  nought
that  was  made  without  him,  the  great  god,  the  life  of  the
Ennead.

IThis  might  well  allude,  as  do  other  passages  below,  to  the  victory-
over  the  heresy.

2 See  p.  295,  note  3.

3 A morning  hymn  to  Amun  as  sun-god.

4 A six-fold  paronomasia  with  neb,  “ lord,”  and  other  words.

3 As  the  sun  of  the  new  day.

3 Probably  not  those  of  the  god  but  those  of  men.  7 Cf.  above,  p.  289.

8 The  sky.  The  earth  looks  green,  the  sky  gold  and  blue.

* Probably  not  the  birds,  but  all  the  previously  named  creatures.

10  The  sun-god  alone  provides  for  them.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


295


Chapter  ten.1

More  orderly  (?)  is  Thebes  than  any  city  : The  water  and
the  land  were  in  her  in  the  beginning  of  time,  and  the  sand
came  to  the  tillage  (?)  to  create  her  ground  upon  the  highland,
and  the  land  came  into  being.2

All  cities  are  founded  in  her  real  name,  and  they  are  named
with  the  name  of  “ City,”  3 and  they  are  under  the  supervision
of  Thebes,  the  Eye  of  Re  !

This  is  followed  by  a series  of  pirns  on  the  names  of  Thebes
and  its  divisions.

Chapter  twenty.4

How  thou  voyagest,  Harakhti,  and  doest  daily  after  thy
manner  of  yesterday ! Thou  who  makest  the  years,  and
marshallest  the  months  ; days  and  nights  are  according  to
his  march.  Thou  art  newer  to-day  than  yesterday .

Alone  watchful,  whose  abomination  is  slumber.  All  men

sleep,  but  his  eyes  are  wakeful. Who  voyageth  over

the  firmament,  and  passeth  through  the  nether  world.  The
sun  on  all  roads,  making  his  circuit  before  (men’s)  faces.  All
men  turn  their  faces  towards  him,  and  men  and  gods  say,
“ Welcome  art  thou.”

Chapter  thirty.

It  describes  how  the  enemy  of  the  boat  of  the  sun,  the  Apophis-
dragon,  is  slain  by  the  god  : The  spear  sticketh  in  the  foe,  who

hath  fallen  by  its  sharp  edge. The  ship  of  millions

hath  a fair  course,  the  crew  shout eth  for  joy,  and  their  hearts
are  glad,  for  the  foe  of  the  Lord  of  All  is  overthrown.  His
enemies  that  were  in  heaven  or  on  earth  are  no  more.  Heaven,
Thebes,  Heliopolis,  and  the  nether  world,5 — their  inhabitants
rejoice  over  their  lord,  when  they  see  him  powerful  in  his

1 Thebes  is  the  most  ancient  city  in  the  world.

2 Reference  to  the  legend  that  the  hillock,  which  rose  up  out  of  the
primaeval  ocean,  was  situated  in  Thebes.

3 Since  in  the  New  Kingdom,  Thebes  was  merely  known  as  " the  City,’  ’
other  places  are  supposed  to  have  acquired  the  designation  of  “city”
from  it.

4 To  the  sun  in  the  daytime.

5 Thebes  and  Heliopolis,  as  the  most  sacred  places,  here  represent  the
earth.


296  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

shining  forth,  furnished  with  valour  and  victory,  and  mighty
in  his  form.

Thou  triumphest,  O Amunre  ! The  caitiffs  are  overthrown,
repelled  by  the  spear.

Chapter  forty.

The  god  hath  formed  himself  and  his  form  is  not  known.

He  hath  joined  his  seed  with  his  body,  so  that  his  egg

existed  in  his  secret  self.1

Chapter  fifty.2

. The  sun  of  heaven,  whose  rays  belong  (?)  to  thy

countenance.  The  Nile  floweth  from  his  cavern  for  thy  prim-
ordial godhead  (?),  and  earth  is  established  for  thine  image.
To  thee  alone  belongeth  what  Keb  causeth  to  grow.3

Thy  name  is  strong,  thy  will  is  heavy.  Mountains  of  ore
cannot  withstand  thy  might.  Hawk  divine,  with  outspread
wings.  Speedy  one,  who  carrieth  away  his  assailant  in  the
completion  of  an  instant.

Mysterious  lion,  loud  roaring,  he  grippeth  (?)  firm  them  that
come  under  his  claws.  A bull  for  his  city,  a lion  for  his  people,
he  who  lasheth  with  his  tail  him  that  encroacheth  upon  him.
The  earth  is  moved  when  he  sendeth  forth  his  voice,  and  all
beings  are  afraid  of  his  might.  Great  of  strength,  there  is
none  other  that  is  like  unto  him, .

Chapter  sixty.4

His  is  Upper  Egypt  and  likewise  Lower  Egypt ; he  hath
taken  them  alone  in  his  might.  His  boundary  is  strong  . . .
upon  the  earth,  as  wide  as  is  the  whole  earth  and  as  high  as  is
the  heaven.  The  gods  beg  their  sustenance  from  him,  and  he
it  is  who  giveth  them  bread  from  his  possessions,  he,  the  lord
of  fields,  banks,  and  plots  of  ground.5  His  is  every  land-
register  .

His  is  the  royal  cubit,6  which  measureth  the  blocks  of  stone.

1 Refers  to  the  legend  of  how  the  sun-god  begat  himself.

2 The  might  of  Amun.

3 All  the  products  of  the  earth  are  destined  to  be  offered  to  him.

4 Amun  is  the  wealthiest  of  all  gods.

5 Amun  possessed  under  Ramesses  III  five  times  as  much  land  as  the
gods  of  Heliopolis,  and  eighty-five  times  as  much  as  those  of  Memphis.
The  preceding  verses  are  thus  not  merely  phrases.

‘ The  measure  for  building  purposes.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  297

He  who  extendeth  the  cord  1 ; upon  the  . . . whereof

the  Two  Lands  are  founded,  the  temples  and  sanctuaries.

Ever}'  city  is  under  his  shadow,  that  (?)  his  heart  may  walk
about  where  it  will.  Men  sing  to  him  in  every  chapel,  and
every  place  possesseth  ever  his  love.

Beer  is  brewed  for  him  on  the  day  of  the  festival,  and  the
night  is  spent  in  ■wakefulness,  and  his  name  circulateth  upon
the  roofs.  His  is  the  singing  in  the  night,  when  it  is  dark.2

The  gods  receive  bread  through  him,  the  rich  god,  who
protecteth  what  is  his  (?).

Chapter  seventy.3

He  who  purgeth  away  evil  and  dispelleth  sickness,  the
physician  who  healeth  the  eye  without  remedy,  who  openeth

the  eyes  and  banisheth  the  squint . Who  rescueth

whom  he  will,  though  he  be  in  the  nether  world ; who  saveth
from  Fate  to  the  full  of  his  desire.

He  possesseth  eyes  and  ears  likewise,  wherever  he  goeth,
for  him  whom  he  loveth,  that  he  may  hear  the  petitions  of  him
that  calleth  to  him.  Coming  from  afar  in  the  completion  of
an  instant  to  him  that  calleth  upon  him.  He  prolongeth  life
and  he  shorteneth  it  also.  He  giveth  to  him  whom  he  loveth
more  than  is  decreed  to  him.4

A water-charm  is  the  name  of  Amun  upon  the  flood.  No
crocodile  hath  power  when  his  name  is  pronounced.  A wind
that  turneth  back  the  adverse  blast.  . . .

With  merry  countenance,  when  he  . . .,  because  he  is
called  to  mind.  With  beneficent  mouth  in  the  time  of  tur-
moil (?).  A sweet  breeze  to  him  that  calleth  upon  him.  Pre-
serving the  weary.

The  bright  (?)  god,  excellent  of  counsels.  He  belongeth  to

him  that  leaneth  his  back  upon  him, . He  is  better

than  millions  to  him  that  trusteth  in  him.  One  man  is  stronger
by  reason  of  his  name  than  hundreds  of  thousands.  Good
protector  in  very  truth.  Perfect,  seizing  his  opportunity,  and
none  repelleth  him.

1 At  the  laying  of  the  foundation-stone  ; see  p.  52,  note  1.

2 Refers  obviously  to  a night  festival,  when  the  people  sing  in  praise  of
Amun  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses.

3 Amun  as  physician  and  helper.

4 Fate  has  fixed  for  every  one  the  duration  of  his  life.


298


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Chapter  eighty.1

The  Eight  Gods  were  thy  first  form,  until  thou  didst  com-
plete this,2  thou  alone.

Mysterious  was  thy  body  among  the  great  ones,  and  thou
didst  conceal  thyself  as  Amun  at  the  head  of  the  gods.  Thou
madest  thy  mode  of  being  as  Tenen,3  in  order  to  fashion  (?)
the  Primordial  Gods  in  thy  first  origin.

Thy  beauty  was  extolled  as  Bull  of  his  Mother,4  and  thou
withdrewest  thyself  as  the  dweller  in  heaven,  abiding  as
Re .

Thou  wast  the  first  to  be,  when  as  yet  there  was  nought.
The  land  was  not  void  of  thee  in  the  first  beginning.  All  gods
that  came  into  existence  after  thee .

Chapter  ninety.3

The  Ennead  was  joined  in  thy  limbs,  . . . every  god  was
united  with  thy  body.  Thou  didst  emerge  first  that  thou
mightest  begin  the  commencement,  O Amun,  whose  name  is
hidden  from  the  gods,6  great  aged  one,  older  than  these,7  Tenen,
who  did  shape  himself  as  Ptah.  He  then  created  Shu  and  Tefnet
by  spitting,  these  being  the  first  of  the  series  of  actual  divinities,
and  he  himself  stood  forth  as  ruler  of  the  world,  while  he  appeared
upon  his  throne,  according  to  the  dictates  of  his  heart.  He
ruled  over  all  that  was  in  his  . . .,  he  set  in  order  the  kingdom
of  eternity  unto  eternity,  abiding  as  sole  lord.

His  form  shone  at  the  First  Occasion,  and  all  that  existed
was  dumbfounded  at  his  glory.  He  cackled  as  the  Great

Cackler and  brake  into  speech  in  the  midst  of  the

silence.8  He  opened  all  eyes  and  caused  them  to  behold.  He
began  to  cry  aloud,  when  the  land  was  still  dumbfounded.
His  roaring  spread  about,  and  there  was  none  beside  him.

1 Amun  is  the  first  god  who  came  into  being.  Out  of  him  the  other
gods  came  into  existence.

2 The  creation  of  the  world  out  of  the  chaos  of  the  primordial  waters.

3 Ptah  of  Memphis,  conceived  of  as  a primordial  god.

4 The  sun-god.

5 This,  too,  is  an  account  of  the  creation.

3 Paronomasia.  Amun  can  mean  “ Hidden  One.”

7 Paronomasia  with  Tenen.

8 Into  the  silent  primordial  world  he  brought  the  first  sound,  as  he
flew  as  a goose  over  the  primeval  water,  and  he  also  brought  the  first

light.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


299


He  fashioned  that  which  is,  and  made  them  live.  He
caused  all  men  to  know  the  way,  in  order  to  go.  Their  hearts
live  when  they  see  him .

Chapter  one  hundred.1

Who  came  first  into  being  at  the  First  Occasion,  Amun,  that
came  into  existence  in  the  beginning,  and  none  knoweth  his
mysterious  nature.  No  god  came  into  being  before  him,  and  no
other  god  was  with  him,  that  he  might  have  told  him  his  shape.
He  had  no  mother,  who  might  have  given  him  his  name,  and  no
father,  who  might  have  begotten  him  and  have  said  : “ It  is  I."  2

He  who  shaped  his  egg  himself,  the  mighty  one  of  mysterious
birth,  who  (himself)  created  his  beauty.  The  divine  god,  who
came  into  being  of  himself ; all  gods  came  into  being,  after  he
began  to  be.

Chapter  two  hundred.3

Of  mysterious  form  and  gleaming  shape,  the  wondrous  god
with  many  forms.  All  gods  make  their  boast  in  him,  in  order
to  magnify  themselves  with  his  beauty,  for  he  is  so  divine.4

Re  himself  is  united  with  his  body,  and  he  is  the  great  one
who  is  in  Heliopolis.  Tenen  is  he  named,  Amun,  who  came
forth  from  Nun . His  other  form  was  the  Ogdoad.5

The  begetter  of  the  Primordial  Gods,  who  fashioned  Re  ; he
completed  himself  as  Atum,6  being  one  limb  with  him.

He  is  the  Lord  of  All,  the  first  to  exist,  and  it  is  his  soul,
men  say,  which  is  in  heaven.

He  it  is  who  is  in  the  nether  world  and  who  presideth  in  the
East.  His  soul  is  in  heaven,  his  body  in  the  West,  and  his
image  is  in  Hermonthis  exalting  his  brightness  (?).

One  is  Amun,  who  concealed  himself  from  them,7  who  hid
himself  from  the  gods,  and  his  nature  is  not  known.

He  withdrew  himself  to  heaven  and  raised  (?)  himself  to
the  Tei,8  and  no  gods  know  his  true  shape.

His  image  is  not  spread  out  in  books . He  is  too

mysterious  that  his  glory  should  be  revealed,  too  great  that

1 Amun  fashioned  himself.  2 Whereby  he  recognizes  him  as  his  son.

3 Again  the  idea  that  all  gods  are  only  parts  of  Amun.

4 They  are  proud  of  being  a part  of  him.  5 Paronomasia.

* Paronomasia  with  this  name  of  the  sun-god.  7 Paronomasia.

9 The  realm  of  the  dead.  Usually  the  nether  world,  here  conceived
of  as  in  heaven  ?


300


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


men  should  question  concerning  him,  too  powerful  that  he
should  be  known.

One  falleth  down  dead  on  the  spot  for  terror,  if  his  mysteri-
ous, unknowable  name  is  pronounced.  No  god  can  address
him  by  it,  him  with  the  soul  (?),  whose  name  is  hidden,  for  that
he  is  a mystery.

Chapter  three  hundred.1

Three  are  all  gods — Amun,  Re,  and  Ptah — -and  there  is  none
like  them.  Hidden  is  his  name  as  Amun,  Re  belongeth  to  him
as  face  (?),  and  Ptah  is  his  body.

Their  cities  abide  eternally  upon  earth,  Thebes,  Heliopolis,
and  Memphis  unto  eternity.

A message  is  sent  from  heaven,  it  is  heard  in  Heliopolis,
it  is  repeated  in  Memphis  to  the  Fair  of  Face.2  A letter  is

composed  in  the  writing  of  Thoth  to  the  City  of  Amun .

The  matter  is  answered  in  Thebes,  and  a declaration  cometh

forth : “It 3 belongeth  to  the  Ennead  ” . (Yet

another)  message  is  sent : “It 3 shall  slay  and  it  shall  keep
alive.  Life  and  death  are  in  it  3 for  all  people.”

Only  he  is  : Amun  and  Re  and  Ptah,  together  three.

Chapter  four  hundred.

Amun  is  described  as  the  god  of  generation,  who  formed  the
genitals,  the  first  to  impregnate  maidens.  First  he  begat  himself
when  he  appeared  as  Re  in  Nun,  and  fashioned  that  which  is
and  that  which  is  not.  Father  of  fathers,  mother  of  mothers,
the  bull  for  those  four  maidens.4

Chapter  five  hundred.5

He  who  throweth  his  foes  upon  their  faces,  and  there  is

none  that  can  assail  him and  his  adversaries  are  not

found  before  him.

A glaring  lion  with  raging  claws,  devouring  the  might  of
him  that  assaileth  him  in  the  completion  of  a moment.

1 There  exist  actually  only  three  gods,  and  even  they  are  only  one.

2 Ptah.  The  message  from  heaven  which  is  communicated  to  Thebes
is  probably  as  below  on  p.  301,  the  promotion  of  this  city  to  the  position
of  the  capital  at  end  of  the  heretical  period.

3 Thebes.  4 Reference  to  an  unknown  myth.

5 The  god  is  terrible  when  confronting  his  foes.  This  account  natur-
ally calls  to  our  mind  the  triumph  of  Amun  over  the  heretics,  which  we
certainly  meet  with  on  p 301,  and  in  another  poem  (pp.  309  f.).


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


301


A bull  firm  of  back  and  heavy  of  hoofs  upon  the  neck  of  his
foe,  whose  breast  he  rendeth.

A bird  of  prey,  flying  and  seizing  on  him  that  assaileth  him,
able  to  shatter  his  limbs  and  his  bones. .

The  mountains  are  moved  beneath  him  at  the  time  of  his
raging.  The  earth  tottereth  when  he  belloweth  (?).  All  that
is  trembleth  for  terror  of  him .

Chapter  six  hundred.1

Perception  is  his  heart,  and  Command  is  his  lips .

When  he  entered  the  two  caverns  under  his  feet,  the  Nile  came
forth  from  the  grotto  beneath  his  sandals.

His  soul  is  Shu,  and  his  heart  is  Tefnet.

He  is  Harakhti,  who  is  in  the  heaven.  His  right  eye  is  the
day,  his  left  the  night.2  He  it  is  who  leadeth  mankind  to  every
way.3

His  belly  is  Nun,  and  he  who  is  therein  is  the  Nile,  giving
birth  to  all  things  that  are,  and  making  to  live  what  existeth.
He  bloweth  breath  into  every  nose.

Fate  and  the  Harvest-goddess  are  with  him  for  all  people.
His  wife  is  the  field,  and  he  impregnateth  her,4  and  his  seed  is
the  fruit  tree,  his  effluence  is  grain.

Chapter  seven  hundred.

The  poet  turns  once  more  to  Thebes.  From  the  fragments,
we  can  still  learn  that  the  goddess  of  writing,  as  scribe  of  the
entire  Great  Ennead  writes  a testament  for  Thebes.  For  Atum
spake  with  his  mouth  and  with  a loving  heart,  and  the  gods
rejoiced  thereat.  They  have  confirmed  that  which  issued  from

the  mouth  of  Re. The  enemy  of  Re  is  burnt  to  ashes

and  everything  is  given  to  Thebes : Upper  Egypt  and  Lower  Egypt,
heaven  and  earth,  and  the  nether  world,  with  banks  (?),  waters,
and  mountains,  what  ocean  produceth  and  the  Nile.  All  that
groweth  upon  the  earth-god  is  hers,  and  all  that  the  sun  riseth

upon  belongeth  to  her  in  peace. Every  land  payeth  her

tribute  as  her  subject,  for  she  is  the  Eye  of  Re,  whom  none
repelleth.  The  point  of  all  this  is  quite  clear : after  the  fall  of
Amenophis  IV,  Thebes  is  again  installed  as  the  capital.

1 The  beneficent  nature  of  Amun.

* I.e  sun  and  moon.  3 By  his  giving  them  light.

4 By  the  inundation.


302


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Chapter  eight  hundred.

One  landeth  1 as  a praised  one  2 in  Thebes,  the  region  of  truth,
the  place  of  silence.  Impious  men  (?)  enter  not  into  it,  the  Place

of  Truth . How  fortunate  is  he  that  landeth  in  it !

He  becometh  a divine  soul . The  fragments  still  sur-

viving also  show  that  the  necropolis  of  Thebes  was  extolled  here  as  a
place  where  one  may  rest  in  fullest  bliss.

5.  FROM  THE  PRAYERS  OF  ONE  UNJUSTLY
PERSECUTED  3

On  the  ostraca  of  a teacher,  found  in  the  tomb  of  Ramesses  IX
(see  above,  p.  188),  are  written  a number  of  charming  hymns,  of
which  four,  at  least,  possess  a common  feature,  indicative  of  their
being  the  poems  of  one  and  the  same  person.  They  begin  with  a
somewhat  long  laudation  of  the  god,  and  at  the  end  entreat  his
assistance  against  a powerful  personal  enemy  who  has  maliciously
deprived  the  writer  of  his  post.  The  god  is  to  resist  this  enemy,
he,  the  “ righteous  judge,  that  taketh  no  bribe  ” ; thou  helpest
the  needy,  but  “ thou  extendest  not  thine  hand  to  the  powerful.”
“ Comfort  the  wretched,  O vizier,1  let  him  be  in  favour  with  Horns
of  the  Palace.”  ‘ It  might  well  be  supposed  that  this  man,  whose
verses  the  schoolboy  was  set  to  copy  out  alongside  of  poems  dating
from  the  time  of  Ramesses  II,  was  a well-known  Egyptian  man  of
letters,  a poet  who  had  fallen  into  disfavour.

[TO  THE  SUN-GOD.]

Beautiful  is  thine  (awakening),  O Horus,  who  voyageth
over  the  sky . The  fire-child  with  glittering  rays,  dis-

pelling darkness  and  gloom.  Child  increasing  in  stature  (?)
and  sweet  of  form,  resting  within  his  Eye.6  Awakening  all  men
upon  their  mats,  and  the  creeping  things  in  their  (holes).

Thy  vessel  pursueth  its  course  in  the  waters  of  Neserser,7
and  thou  voyagest  over  the  firmament  with  the  wind  that  is
favourable  to  it.  The  two  daughters  of  the  Nile  shatter  for  thee

1 “ Land  ” is  an  ordinary  euphemism  for  " die.”

2 Attribute  of  the  blessed  dead.

3 See  my  article  in  Zeitschr.  fur  agypt.  Sprache,  xxxviii.  pp.  19  S.

4 The  god  is  conceived  of  as  such  elsewhere  also  ; see  p.  308.

6 The  king.

* What  is  meant  is  shown  by  representations  of  the  sun-god,  as  a
child,  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  solar  disk.

7 See  above,  p.  6,  note  1.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


303


the  dragon,1  the  god  of  Ombos  2 shooteth  him  with  his  arrows,
Keb  standeth  as  witness  (?)  upon  his  backbone,  Selkis  . . .
on  his  throat,  and  the  fiery  blast  of  these  snakes  burneth  him
up,  even  of  them  that  are  upon  the  gateway  3 of  thine  house.
The  Greater  Ennead,  it  rageth  against  him,  and  how  it  exulteth
when  he  is  hewn  in  pieces.  The  Children  of  Horus,4  they  grasp
the  knife  that  they  may  inflict  on  him  many  wounds  (?).  Aha  !
thy  foe  hath  fallen,  and  right  standeth  firm  in  front  of  thee.

When  thou  changest  thyself  again  into  Atum,  thou  givest
thine  hand  to  the  lords  of  the  nether  world.5  They  that  sleep  6
adore  thy  beauty  all  in  concert,  when  thy  light  shineth  in  their
faces.  They  speak  to  thee  of  what  they  desire,  that  thou
mayest  once  more  vouchsafe  them  the  sight  of  thee.  When
thou  hast  passed  them  by,  the  darkness  covereth  them,  and
every  man  is  (again)  in  his  coffin.

Thou  art  a lord  in  whom  men  may  make  their  boast,  a
potent,  everlasting  god  that  giveth  judgment,  that  presideth
over  the  Court  of  Law,  that  established  Truth  and  assaileth
Iniquity.  May  he  be  put  on  trial  that  hath  trespassed  against
me.  Behold  he  is  stronger  than  I,  and  hath  robbed  me  of  mine
office,  which  he  hath  taken  from  me  by  lying.  Give  it  me  again  !
Behold,  I see  it  in  the  hands  of  (another) .

[The  same.]

Thou  lofty  one,  whose  course  is  not  known,  how  mysterious
is  thy  being ! August  mottled  one  (?),  that  giveth  light  with
his  two  divine  eyes.7  When  he  setteth  the  Two  Lands  are
blinded.  Beauteous  disk  with  shining  light,  dispelling  the  dark-
ness. Great  hawk falcon,  traversing  the  two  heavens,

voyaging  (also)  over  the  nether  sky  to  its  full  length  and
breadth,  and  never  sleepeth  he  upon  the  way.  When  day
dawneth  he  revealeth  himself  again  in  his  place,  as  the  shining
one,  whose  course  none  knoweth.  And  how  mysterious  he  is,
when  darkness  setteth  in,  the  dark  which  blotteth  out  faces ! 8

1 The  Apophis  dragon  which  threatens  the  sun.  The  daughters  of  the
Nile  are  unknown  to  us.

2 Seth,  who  is  not  regarded  here  as  an  evil  being.

3 Gateways  are  often  surmounted  by  a row  of  protective  snakes.

4 Four  beings,  whom  Horus  had  created  for  the  protection  of  Osiris.

5 The  dead,  whom  the  sun  visits  during  the  night-time.

4 The  dead.  7 Sun  and  moon.

8 When  no  one  can  be  recognized.


304  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

Thou  august  sun  with  white  light,  by  whose  beams  mankind

doth  see,  in  whose  nose  is  breath  1 . Men  live  and  die

by  his  nod.  He  it  is  who  causeth  the  closed  nostrils  to  breathe
again,  and  the  straightened  throats,  according  as  he  will.  There
is  none  that  liveth  without  him,  and  we  all  have  issued  from

his  eye.2  Give  me  thine  hand,  help  me , O judge  that

(taketh)  no  (bribe  ?) .

[To  Osiris.]

(Praise  ?)  to  thee,  w'ho  stretcheth  out  his  arms,3  and  sleepeth
upon  his  side.  Thou  who  liest  upon  the  sand,  the  lord  of  the
soil.  Mummy  with  long  member  !

Re-Khepre  shineth  upon  thy  body,  when  thou  sleepest  as
Sokaris,4  that  he  may  dispel  the  darkness  which  is  over  thee,
and  make  light  for  thine  eyes.  He  standeth  still  (?)  when  he
ariseth  over  thy  corpse,  and  waileth  over  thee  . . .

The  soil  is  upon  thy  shoulder,  and  its  comers  (?)  are  upon
thee,  as  far  as  the  four  pillars  of  the  sky.5  If  thou  movest  (?)

the  earth  quaketh . The  Nile  issneth  (?)  from  the

sweat  of  thine  hands.  Thou  spittest  out  the  air  which  is  in

thy  throat  into  men’s  noses . Trees  and  herbs,  reeds

and  . . .,  barley,  w'heat,  and  fruit  tree.6

If  lakes  are  digged , houses  and  temples  are  builded,

monuments  are  dragged,  the  soil  cultivated,  tombs  and  burial-
places  digged,— they  are  upon  thee,  and  thou  it  is  that  makest
them.  They  are  upon  thy  back.  There  are  more  of  them  than
can  be  put  in  writing,  there  is  no  page  that  sufficeth  for  them  (?).
They  are  all  placed  upon  thy  back,  and  thou  (sayest  not)  : “I
am  too  heavily  laden.”

Thou  art  the  father  and  mother  of  mankind.  They  live  on
thy  breath,  and  they  (eat)  of  the  flesh  of  thy  body.  Primordial
God  is  thy  name.

I have  ...  in  that  which  thou  knowest . 7

1 The  nose  is  regarded  as  the  place  of  breath  and  life.

2 See  above,  p.  286,  note  3.

3 The  dead  god  awakes  upon  the  sand,  where  the  dead  are  buried.

4 The  old  mortuary  god  of  Memphis.

5 From  here  onwards  the  conception  of  Osiris  is  an  unusual  one  : he  is
thought  of  as  lying  in  the  earth,  indeed  as  being  himself  the  earth.  Even
water  and  air  are  derived  from  him.

* We  owe  him  thanks  for  them  also.

7 Again,  what  followed  here  bore  personal  reference  to  the  poet,  but  it
does  not  appear  to  be  his  usual  complaint.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


305


6.  SHORTER  HYMNS  AND  PRAYERS

These  short  poems  are  preserved  to  us  for  the  most  part  in  the
form  of  school  writing-exercises,  and  many  of  the  cares  and  aspira-
tions which  they  lay  before  the  gods  are  in  accord  with  their  origin.
I give  first  place  to  those  which  are  addressed  to  the  celestial  col-
league and  patron  of  scribes,  Thdth.

[Prayer  to  Thoth.]  1

Come  to  me,  Thoth,  thou  lordly  ibis,2  thou  god,  for  whom
yeameth  Hermopolis.  Letter-writer  of  the  Nine  Gods,  great
one  in  Unu.3

Come  to  me,  that  thou  mayest  lead  me,  that  thou  mayest
make  me  cunning  in  thy  calling.  Fairer  is  thy  calling  than  all
callings,  it  maketh  (men)  great.

It  is  found  that  he  who  is  cunning  therein  becometh  a
notable.  Many  deeds  (?)  there  are  that  thou  doest  for  them,
and  they  are  in  the  Council  of  the  Thirty.4

They  are  strong  and  mighty  through  what  thou  doest.  Thou
it  is  who  careth  for  him  that  hath  no  . . . Fate  and  the
Harvest-goddess  are  with  thee.5

Come  to  me  and  care  for  me.  I am  a servant  of  thine
house.  Let  me  tell  of  thy  mighty  works  in  whatsoever  land
I be.

So  will  the  multitude  of  men  say  : “ Great  things  are  they
that  Thoth  hath  done."  So  will  they  come  with  their  children,
in  order  to  brand  6 them  for  thine  office.

A goodly  calling,  O strong  deliverer  (?),  and  happy  is  he
that  followeth  it.

[Prayer  to  Thoth.]  7

0 Thoth,  place  me  in  Hermopolis,  in  thy  city,  where  life
is  pleasant ! 8 Thou  suppliest  what  I need  in  bread  and  beer,
and  thou  keepest  watch  over  my  mouth  in  speaking.

Would  that  I had  Thoth  behind  me  to-morrow  ! 9 Come  (to

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  v.  9.  2 ff.

2 Thoth  is  depicted  as  an  ibis,  or  more  usually  with  an  ibis-head.

* This  also  is  Hermopolis,  Thoth's  city.

4 The  highest  officials.  5 I.e.  thou  hast  sustenance.

6 Like  cattle  or  slaves.  ‘ Pap.  Sallier,  i.  S.  2 fi.

8 Does  he  actually  wish  to  go  to  Hermopolis,  or  is  it  meant  figuratively  :
among  thy  faithful  ones,  in  thy  profession  ?

• l.e.  may  he  stand  by  me  at  the  posthumous  judgment !

20


306  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

me),  when  I enter  in  before  the  Lords  (of  Truth),  and  so  shall
I come  forth  justified.

Thou  great  dom-palm,  that  is  sixty  cubits  in  height,  whereon
are  fruits.  Stones  are  in  the  fruits,  and  water  is  in  the  stones.1

Thou  who  bringest  water  to  a place  afar  off,  come,  deliver
me,  the  silent  one.2

Thoth,  thou  sweet  well  for  one  that  thirsteth  in  the  wilder-
ness ! It  is  closed  to  him  that  findeth  words  to  say,  it  is  open
to  him  that  keepeth  silence.  The  silent  one  cometh  and  findeth
the  well.  The  hot-headed  (cometh)  and  thou  art  (choked  ?).3

[To  AN  IMAGE  OF  THOTH.]  4

The  scribe  has  set  up  a small  statue  of  Th5th,  the  patron
divinity  of  the  learned,  in  his  house,  and  now  greets  this  image.
It  portrays  the  god,  as  is  often  the  case,  as  a squatting  ape.

Praise  to  thee,  thou  lord  of  the  house  ! Ape  with  white
hair  and  pleasant  form,  with  friendly  nature,  beloved  of  all
men.

He  is  of  sehret-stone,  he,  even  Thoth,  that  he  may  illumine
the  earth  with  his  beauty.  That  which  is  upon  his  head  is  of  red
jasper,  and  his  phallus  is  of  quartz.5

His  love  leapeth  (?)  on  his  eyebrows,  and  he  openeth  his
mouth  to  bestow  life.6

Mine  house  is  happy  since  the  god  entered  it ; it  flourisheth,
and  is  (richly)  furnished,  since  my  lord  did  tread  it.

Be  happy,  ye  people  of  my  quarter,  and  rejoice  all  my
kindred.  Behold,  my  lord  it  is  that  maketh  7 me  ; yea,  mine
heart  longeth  after  him.

0 Thoth,  if  thou  wilt  be  to  me  a champion,  I will  fear  not
for  the  eye.8

1 In  view  of  what  follows,  the  meaning  must  be  that  some  one  parched
with  thirst  saves  himself  by  the  juice  of  these  stones.

a The  humble  one  who  has  quiet  confidence  in  God.

* The  water-holes  in  the  desert  are  often  choked  up  with  gravel  and
sand.

4 Pap.  Anastasi,  iii.  4.  12  ff.

5 The  figure  consists  of  these  semi-precious  stones.  They  were  chosen
without  regard  to  the  natural  colours  of  the  animal,  otherwise  the  moon’s
disk  on  his  head  would  not  have  been  red.

• Here  again  the  god,  and  not  his  image,  is  meant.

1 1.e.  gives  me  prosperity  and  advancement.

8 Meaning,  perhaps  : as  thou  didst,  and  dost,  heal  the  eye  of  Homs
(the  moon),  so  too  thou  wilt  show  me  favour.  (Surely  the  meaning  is


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


307


[Prayer  to  Re.]  1

Come  to  me,  Re-Harakhti,  that  thou  mayest  care  for  me.
Thou  art  he  that  doeth,  and  there  is  none  save  thee  that  doeth
aught.  Only  thou  it  is  that  doeth  anything.2

Come  to  me,  Atum  . . . ! Thou  art  the  august  god.  Mine

heart  goeth  forward  to  Heliopolis mine  heart  is  happy,

and  mine  heart  rejoiceth.

My  requests  are  heard  and  my  daily  petitions.  My  praises
at  night  and  my  prayers,  which  are  perpetually  in  my  mouth —
they  are  heard  to-day.

[Penitential  hymn  to  Re.]  3

Thou  Sole  and  Only  One,  Harakhti,  like  whom  there  is  here
none  other  ! Who  protecteth  millions,  and  delivereth  hundreds
of  thousands  ! The  saviour  of  him  that  crieth  unto  him,  the
lord  of  Heliopolis.

Punish  me  not  for  my  many  sins,  i am  one  that  knoweth
not  himself  (?).  I am  a witless  man.  All  day  long  I follow
my  mouth,4  like  an  ox  after  fodder,  and  at  eventide  ...  I
am  one  to  whom  cooling5  cometh.  All  day  long  go  I about
in  the  . . . house,  and  by  night

[Prayer  to  Amun  for  the  advancement  of  the

TEACHER.]  6

Mayest  thou  find  that  Amun  doeth  according  to  thy  desire
in  his  hour  of  favour,  and  that  thou  art  praised  in  the  midst  of
the  great,  enduring  in  the  Place  of  Truth.7

0 Amun,  thy  high  Nile  leapeth  (?)  up  to  the  hills,  a lord  of
fish,  abounding  in  fowl,  and  all  the  poor  are  satisfied.8

Put  thou  great  ones  in  the  places  of  the  great,  put  thou
the  scribe  of  the  treasury,  Kagabu,  in  front  of  Thoth,  thy
(scribe  ? of)  Truth.

that  the  image  of  Thoth  will  protect  its  possessor  from  the  evil  eye
[Translator].)

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  10.  i ft

* Meaning,  perhaps  : all  others  help  only  with  words.

* Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  to.  5 ft

4 Meaning  : I only  think  about  my  food  ? 6 Thy  favour.

* Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  10.  5 S.  7 Usual  designation  of  the  necropolis.

8 Meaning  : since  thou  conferrest  so  many  blessings  on  all,  do  some-
thing likewise  for  my  teacher.


308


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


[Prayer  to  Amun,  as  the  righteous  judge.]  1

Amunre,  who  wast  the  first  to  be  king  ! The  god  of  the
Beginning  ! 2 The  vizier  of  the  poor  ! 3 * He  taketh  not  un-
righteous reward,  and  he  speaketh  not  to  him  that  bringeth
testimony,  and  looketh  not  on  him  that  maketh  promises  (?).

Amunre  judgeth  the  earth  with  his  finger,1  and  speaketh  to
the  heart.5  He  assigneth  the  sinner  to  hell,6  but  the  righteous
to  the  West.

[Prayer  to  Amun  in  the  court  of  law.]  7

Amun,  lend  thine  ear  to  one  that  standeth  alone  in  the
court,  that  is  poor,  and  his  (adversary)  is  rich.  The  court
oppresseth  him  : “ Silver  and  gold  for  the  scribes  of  accounts  !
Clothes  for  the  attendants  ! ” 8

But  it  is  found  that  Amun  change th  himself  into  the  vizier,9
in  order  to  cause  the  poor  man  to  overcome.  It  is  found  that
the  poor  man  is  justified,  and  that  the  poor  (passeth)  by  the
rich.

Thou  pilot,  who  knoweth  the  water  ! Amun,  thou  steering-
oar  ! 10  . . .,  who  giveth  bread  to  him  that  hath  none,  sustaineth
also  a servant  of  his  house.

I take  not  unto  me  a great  one  as  protector  in  all  my  . . .,
and  I have  not  placed  my  . . . under  the  power  of  a man
my  lord  is  (my)  protector.

I know  a strong  one  ; he  is  a protector  with  strong  arm,
and  only  he  alone  is  strong.

Amun,  who  knoweth  what  is  good  (?),  thou  ...  of  him
that  calleth  unto  him  ! Amunre,  king  of  gods,  thou  ox  with
strong  arm,  who  loveth  strength  !

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  6.  5 fi.  Pap.  Bologna,  1094,  2.  3 fi.

2 Who  first  came  into  existence  in  chaos.

3 He  is  better  than  the  earthly  officials  who  oppress  the  poor.

J A movement  of  his  finger  is  enough.

6  Or  : “his  words  go  to  the  heart.”  Meaning,  probably  : one  does
not  hear  them,  but  one  knows  them.”

6 Literally  : to  the  “ place  of  ascent  " of  the  sun,  where  he  burns  up
the  wicked.

7 Pap.  Anastasi,  ii.  8.  5 fi.

8 These  are  the  bribes  they  demand.

• He  is  also  the  chief  justice.

w The  same  line  below,  p.  310.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM


809


[Prayer  to  Amun.]  1

Come  to  me,  Amun,  deliver  me  in  this  year  of  misery.
The  sun — it  hath  come  to  pass  that  it  riseth  not.  The  winter
is  come  as  summer,  the  months  are  reversed  (?),  and  the  hours
are  disordered.2

The  great  cry  unto  thee,  Amun,  and  the  small  seek  after
thee.  They  that  are  in  the  arms  of  their  nurses  say  : “ Give
breath,  O Amun.”

Then  it  is  found  that  Amun  cometh  in  peace  with  the  sweet
wind  before  him.  He  causeth  me  to  become  a vulture’s  wing  3

and  as  it  were , telling  of  the  might  for  the  herdsman  in

the  field,  the  fullers  upon  the  river-bank,  the  Mato'i,4  who  come
from  the  district,  and  the  gazelles  in  the  wilderness  (?).5

[Hymn  to  Amun  after  his  triumph.]  6

This  hymn,  which  is  especially  interesting  because  of  its
attack  on  the  El-Amarnah  heresy,  has  suffered  so  inconceivably
at  the  hands  of  the  schoolboy  who  had  to  write  it  out,  that  we  can
only  guess  at  the  purport  of  several  verses.

Amun,  thou  bull ! Thou  calf  of  the  heavenly  cow  (?),  he

who  sleepeth  in  the  stall  of  his  . . ., when  he  openeth

his  eye  the  earth  is  illumined.

Thou  findest  him  that  trespasseth  against  thee  . . . Woe
to  him  that  assaileth  thee  ! Thy  city  abideth,  (but)  he  that
assailed  thee  is  overthrown.7  Fie  on  him  that  assaileth  thee
in  any  land  !

Amunre,  thou  art  a mast  of  two  stems,8  that  sustaineth  every

wind,  whose  . . . are  of  copper, it  is  shaken  not  in

the  face  of  the  north  wind .

1 Pap.  Anastasi,  iv.  io.  I fi.

2 Probably  only  an  unusual  state  of  weather  is  meant.

3 He  probably  has  in  mind  the  vulture’s  wings  with  which  Isis  fanned
breath  into  Osiris.

4 See  p.  53,  note  8.

5 Meaning,  probably  : all  things  existing  may  tell  of  the  might  of
Amun.  Cf.  the  similar  passage,  p.  31 1.

6 Brit.  Mas.  Ostracon,  5656  ; see  Zeitschr.  fiir  agypt.  Sprache,  xlii,
p.  106.

7 Amenophis  IV,  who  wished  to  root  out  the  worship  of  Amun.  See
above,  pp.  288,  294,  300  f.

8 At  an  earlier  date  the  masts  of  Egyptian  ships  did  actually  consist
of  two  stems.


310


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Amun,  thou  herdsman,  who  early  seeth  after  the  cows,  who
driveth  the  patient  (?)  to  the  pasture.  The  herdsman  driveth
the  cattle  to  the  pasture ; O Amun,  so  drivest  thou  the  patient  (?)
to  (their)  bread.  For  Amun  is  an  herdsman,  an  herdsman  that
is  not  idle.

Amun,  thou  brazen  gateway ! 1 He  giveth  his  reward  in
its  season.  The  sun  of  him  that  knew  thee  not  hath  set,  0
Amun.  But  he  that  knoweth  thee,  he  shineth.  The  forecourt
of  him  that  assailed  thee  is  in  darkness,2  while  the  whole  earth
is  in  sunlight.  Whoso  putteth  thee  in  his  heart,  0 Amun,  lo,
his  sun  hath  risen.

Thou  pilot,  who  knoweth  the  wrater  ! Amun,  thou  steering-

oar  . Thou  experienced  one,  who  knoweth  the  shoals,

who  is  longed  after  on  the  water.  Amun  is  present  when  one
longeth  after  him  upon  the  water.

Amunre,  thou  3 Fate  and  Harvest-goddess,  in  whose  ...  is
all  life  ! He  that  knoweth  not  (thy)  name,  he  hath  woe  daily.

Amun,  I love  (?)  thee  and  I trust  in  thee . Thou

wilt  deliver  me  from  the  mouth  of  man,  on  the  day  wherein  he

speaketh  lies.  For  the  lord  of  gods,  he  liveth  on  truth .

I follow  not  the  care  (?)  in  mine  heart ; what  Amun  hath  said
cometh  to  pass.

[From  a memorial  tablet.]  4

The  author  of  these  short  poems  was  the  painter  Nebre,  who
was  employed  in  the  Theban  necropolis  during  the  reign  of  Ramesses
II.  His  son,  the  painter  N ekhtamiin,  lay  sick  unto  death,5  so
Nebre  turned  to  Amun  and  composed  adorations  to  him,  because
his  might  is  so  great,  and  addressed  prayers  to  him  ; whereupon
he  found  that  the  lord  of  gods  came  as  the  north-wind,  and
sweet  air  went  before  him,  and  he  saved  the  son.

[Praise  of  Amun.]

I will  make  him  hymns  in  his  name,  I will  give  him  praise
up  to  the  height  of  heaven  and  over  the  breadth  of  the  earth.

1 Conceived  of  as  the  place  of  justice,  which  decides  the  questions  of
reward  and  punishment  ?

* The  buildings  of  the  heretic,  in  particular  El-Amamah.

3 See  above,  p.  305,  note  5.

4 In  Berlin  ; see  Sitz.-Ber.  Bert.  Ak.,  1911,  pp.  1088  ff.  ; Battiscombe
Gunn,  Journ.  0} Egypt.  Archeology,  iii.  pp.  83  ff.

6 The  god  had  inflicted  him  with  sickness  because  he  had  laid  hands
on  a cow  which  belonged  to  Amun.


FROM  THE  NEW  KINGDOM  311

I will  declare  his  might  to  him  that  fareth  downstream  and  to
him  that  fareth  upstream.1

Be  ye  ware  of  him  ! Tell  it  to  son  and  daughter,  to  great
and  small.  Declare  it  to  generations  and  generations  that  yet
exist  not.

Declare  it  to  the  fishes  in  the  water,  to  the  fowls  in  the
heaven.  Tell  it  to  him  that  knoweth  it  and  him  that  knoweth
it  not : Be  ye  ware  of  him  ! 2

Thou,  Amun,  art  the  lord  of  him  that  is  silent,  one  who
cometh  at  the  voice  of  the  poor.  If  I call  upon  thee  when  I
am  in  distress,  thou  comest  that  thou  mayest  deliver  me.  Thou
givest  breath  to  him  that  is  wretched,  and  thou  deliverest  me
that  am  in  bondage.

Thou,  Amunre,  Lord  of  Thebes,  art  he  that  delivereth  him

that  is  in  the  nether  world,  for  thou  art . If  one  call

unto  thee,  thou  art  he  who  cometh  from  afar.

Though  the  servant  is  disposed  (?)  to  commit  sin,  yet  is  the
Lord  disposed  (?)  to  be  merciful.  The  Lord  of  Thebes  passeth
not  a whole  day  wroth.  His  wrath  is  finished  in  a moment,
and  nought  is  left.  The  wind  hath  turned  about  to  us  in  mercy,
and  Amun  hath  turned  with  (?)  his  wind.

As  thy  ka  endureth,  thou  wilt  be  merciful,  and  that  which
is  turned  away  will  not  return  again  !

To  all  this  Nebre  adds  yet  the  following  words  : “ I will  make
this  memorial  in  thy  name,  and  establish  this  hymn  upon  it  in
writing,  if  thou  deliverest  for  me  the  scribe  Nekhtamun  ” —
so  said  I,  and  thou  didst  hearken  unto  me.  Now  behold,  I do
that  which  I have  said.  Thou  art  the  Lord  unto  him  that
calleth  unto  him,  contented  with  truth,  O Lord  of  Thebes.

It  should  be  observed  that  Nebre  is  not  really  the  author  of  what
professes  to  be  his  poem,  for  the  same  conceptions  often  occur  on
other  memorials  of  this  date  from  the  Theban  necropolis.

On  these  also  the  reader  is  bidden  to  beware  of  the  divinity
who  punishes,  the  same  hope  for  mercy  is  expressed,  and  there  is
the  address  to  great  and  small,  to  him  that  knoweth,  and  to  him
that  knoweth  not,  to  the  fishes  in  the  stream  and  to  the  fowls

1 Those  who  pass  by  here  on  a journey  ?

2 These  two  strophes  invert  the  sequence  of  the  first  : be  ye  ware —
tell — declare.


312  EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE

in  the  heaven,  etc.  etc.  It  looks,  therefore,  as  though  there  was
living  in  the  holy  places,  where  the  necropolis  workers  erected  their
memorial  tablets,  some  person  who  manufactured  votive  tablets
for  the  sick  and  for  the  recovered,  and  who  supplied  them  with
verses  suitable  to  the  occasion — a man  of  defective  ediication,  at
his  wild  orthography  shows,  but  not  without  poetical  talent.


EXPLANATORY  NOTES


on  such  names  and  expressions  as  require  elucidation,  but
have  not  in  every  instance  been  commented  upon  in  a
footnote.  For  the  royal  names,  see  the  outline  of  the  history
on  pp.  xix.  ff. — ( Gr .)  following  a name  denotes  Greek
form  ; {Mod.),  the  form  in  use  at  the  present  day.

Abusimbel  : a great  rock-cut  temple  in  Nubia,  founded  by
Ramesses  II  (Mod.).

Abydos  : the  sacred  city  of  Osiris  in  Middle  Egypt  (Gr.).

Amun,  Amunre  : god  of  Thebes  (p.  282).

Anubis  : jackal-god  of  the  dead,  who  presides  over  the  burial
rites  (Gr.).

Apophis  : the  cloud-dragon,  who  threatens  the  sun.

Aradus  : a city  in  Phoenicia  (Gr.).

Arsa  : possibly  Cyprus.

Askalon  : a city  on  the  Phoenician  coast.

Astarte  : a Phoenician  goddess.

Atef-crown  : a form  of  crown,  especially  worn  by  Osiris.
Athribis  : a city  in  the  southern  Delta  near  Benha  (Gr.).

Atum  : name  of  the  sun-god  of  Heliopolis  ; especially  used  of
the  sun  in  the  night-time.

Baal  : the  Phoenician  god.

Babylon  : a city  near  modern  Cairo  (Gr.).

Bast,  Bastet  : cat-headed  goddess  of  pleasure.

Benben  : sacred  stone  in  the  temple  of  Heliopolis.

BibAn  el-Muluk  : Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  at  Thebes
(Mod.).

Blessed  : the  Blessed  Dead,  who  live  in  the  sky  as  stars.

Bow,  People  of  : the  neighbouring  peoples,  which,  according
to  ancient  tradition,  were  reckoned  nine  in  number.
Bubastis  : city  of  Bast  in  the  Delta,  near  Zagazig  (Gr.).

Bull  : designation  of  the  king  and  certain  gods  ; Bull-of-his-
Mother=the  sun-god.

313


S14


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Busiris  : the  sacred  city  of  Osiris  in  the  northern  Delta  (Gr.).

Buto  : the  snake-goddess  of  Lower  Egypt  (Gr.).

Buto  : city  of  the  above-mentioned  goddess  ; the  capital  of  the
most  ancient  Lower  Egyptian  Kingdom  (Gr.).

Byblos  : port  for  the  Lebanon,  the  modem  Gebel  (Gr.).

Carchemish  : city  on  the  Euphrates.

Crowns  : white  crown  of  Upper  Egypt,  red  crown  of  Lower
Egypt ; double  diadem,  the  combination  of  both.  Many
others  besides,  especially  for  divinities.

Deben  : weight  of  91  grammes.

Double  diadem  : see  under  Crowns.

Ehnas  : the  city  of  Herakleopolis  (Mod.).

Eight,  Eight  Gods  : beings  who  existed  in  the  primordial
waters,  before  the  world  emerged  out  of  them.

Elephantine  : island  in  the  first  cataract,  boundary  of  Egypt.

Emor  : country  in  northern  Palestine.

Evening  bark  : ship  in  which  the  sun  voyages  during  the  night.

Eye  : 1.  sun  and  moon  as  eyes  of  the  sky-god  ; 2.  the  sun,  as
the  eye  of  the  sun-god,  fights  for  him.

Fayyum  : district  of  Middle  Egypt  (Mod.).

Food,  Field  of  : field  in  the  sky,  inhabited  by  the  Blessed
Dead.

Gaza  : Philistine  coast-town .

God’s-Land  : the  countries  of  the  East.

God's-words  : Writing  and  the  ancient  writings.

Harakhti  : name  of  the  sun-god  in  Heliopolis.

Hardedef  : the  wise  son  of  King  Kheops.

Harsaphes  : the  god  of  Herakleopolis.

Harvest-goddess  : see  Renenutet.

Hathor  : the  ancient  sky-goddess,  goddess  of  women.

Hawk  : sacred  animal  of  Horus  ; then  used  of  the  sun-god  and
of  the  king.

Heaven  : conceived  of  as  an  ocean,  a cow,  or  a woman.

Heliopolis  : the  sacred  city  of  the  sun-god,  known  to-day  as
Matariyeh,  near  Cairo  (Gr.).


EXPLANATORY  NOTES


315


Herakleopolis  : city  in  Middle  Egypt  (Gr.).1

Hermonthis  : city  of  the  god  Month,  south  of  Thebes ; the
modern  Erment  (Gr.).

Hermopolis  : city  of  Thoth  in  Middle  Egypt,  the  modern
Eshmunen  (Gr.).

Hierakonpolis  : the  capital  of  the  ancient  Upper  Egyptian
Kingdom  (Gr.).

Hieratic  : see  p.  xxxivii.

Hin  : a measure  of  capacity  of  o-45  litres.

Horizon  : see  p.  15,  note  2.

Horus  : 1.  the  ancient  sky-  and  sun-god ; 2.  the  son  of  Isis
and  Osiris,  the  prototype  of  the  kings ; 3.  the  king  him-
self (Gr.).

Iaru  : field  of  the  Blessed  Dead  in  the  sky.

Ipu  : city  of  Min,  in  Upper  Egypt,  the  modern  Akhmim.

Isdes  : a god.

I si : Cyprus  ?

Isis  : the  wife  and  sister  of  Osiris  and  mother  of  Horus  (Gr.).

Joppa  : a Philistine  coast-town.

Judgment,  Posthumous:  the  deeds  of  the  deceased  were
weighed  by  Thoth  in  the  hall  of  Osiris  ; on  this  examina-
tion depended  the  fate  of  the  dead  person.

Ka  : the  vital  force,  personality  ; see  p.  24,  note  2.

el-KAb  : ancient  capital  of  Upper  Egypt  (Mod.).

Kadesh  : city  in  the  Orontes  valley  in  the  Lebanon.

Karnak  : the  main  part  of  Thebes,  with  the  great  temple  of
Amun  (Mod.).

Keb  : the  earth-god,  husband  of  the  sky-goddess  and  father  o
Osiris.

Kedi  : Asiatic  country,  possibly  Cilicia.

Keftiu  : possibly  Crete.

Kehek  : a Libyan  tribe.

Kemi  : a perfume.

Kem-wer  : region  of  the  Bitter  Lakes  in  the  Isthmus  of  Suez.

Kharu  : Palestine.

Khatti  : people  and  kingdom  in  Asia  Minor.

Khepre  : name  of  the  sun-god,  particularly  the  morning  sun
conceived  of  as  a beetle.

1 See  Blackman,  Luxor  and  its  Temples , pp.  41  ft.


316


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Kherheb  : learned  priest.

Khnum  : the  ram-headed  god,  who  fashions  all  that  is.

Khons  : the  moon-god  of  Thebes.

Koptos  : city  of  Mm,  the  modern  Kuft  in  Upper  Egypt  (Gr.).

Kyllestis  : a kind  of  bread  (Gr.).

Land  : Black  Land  is  Egypt,  Red  Land  the  rest  of  the  world  ;
the  Two  Lands  are  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt.

Letopolis  : city  north-west  of  Cairo  (Gr.).

Libyans  : the  Berbers  of  North  Africa.

Lords  : the  Two  Lords  = Horns  and  Seth.

Manun  : a mountain  where  the  sun  goes  down.

Mash  awash  a : a Libyan  tribe.

Matoi  : a Nubian  country,  the  inhabitants  of  which  served  as
soldiers  and  police  in  Egypt.

Memphis  : the  city  of  Ptah,  on  the  west  bank,  south  of  Cairo
(Gr.).

Mesekhent  : the  goddess  of  birth.

Min  : an  ithyphallic  god  ; also  identified  with  Horus.

Month  : the  hawk-headed  god  of  Hermonthis ; regarded  as
the  war-god.

Morning  bark  : the  ship  in  which  the  sun  voyages  by  day.

Naharina  : country  on  the  Upper  Euphrates.

Neith  : goddess  of  Sais  in  the  Delta  (Gr.).

Nephthys  : sister  of  Isis  and  Osiris.

Neshmet-boat  : ship  of  Osiris  at  Abydos.

Nine  : i.  the  Nine  Gods,  the  Great  Ennead=the  sun-god,  his
children,  grandchildren,  and  great-grandchildren  ; there
was  also  a Lesser  Ennead  of  less  important  divinities ;
2.  the  Nine  Peoples,  i.e.  the  hostile  neighbouring  peoples
of  Egypt.

Nun  : the  primordial  waters,  out  of  which  the  world  emerged  ;
the  celestial  ocean.

Nut  : the  sky-goddess  ; wife  of  Keb,  and  mother  of  Osiris  and
Seth.

Ombos  : city  of  Seth,  the  modern  Kom-Ombo,  south  of  Thebes

(Gr.).


EXPLANATORY  NOTES


317


Onuris  : name  of  Shu  at  Abydos.

Orion  : the  constellation  which  is  identified  with  Osiris.
Orontes  : river  between  the  Lebanon  and  the  Anti-Lebanon.
Osiris  : see  pp.  141,  304.

Ostracon  : see  p.  xlii.

Perse  A : a kind  of  tree.

Ptah  : the  god  of  Memphis,  the  fashioner  of  all  things.

Punt  : name  of  the  spice-bearing  countries  at  the  south  of  the
Red  Sea.

Ramesses,  House-of-  : see  p.  206.

Ramp  : made  of  bricks,  and  taking  the  place  of  our  scaffolding.
Re  : the  sun-god.

Renenutet,  Renenet  : the  Harvest-goddess.

Retenu  : Palestine.

Rosetau  : sanctuary  of  the  funerary  god  Sokaris,  at  Memphis.

SakkArah  : the  necropolis  of  Memphis  (Mod.).

Sekhait  : sacred  cow,  which  suckles  the  kings  and  other  super-
human beings.

Sekhmet  : the  dreadful  lion-headed  goddess  of  war.

Serpent,  royal  : the  serpent  which  the  sun-god  and  the  king
wear  as  a diadem.

Seth  : the  brother  and  murderer  of  Osiris ; war-god,  and
storm-god  (Gr.).

Shashotep  : a city  in  Middle  Egypt.

Shedeh  : a sweet  intoxicating  drink.

Shmun  : the  city  of  Hermopolis.

Shu  : the  god  of  the  atmosphere,  who  supports  the  sky,  son  of
Re  and  brother  of  Tefnet.

Sistrum  : kind  of  rattle,  the  instrument  of  women.

Sobk  : the  crocodile-god.

Sokaris  : the  ancient  funerary  god  of  Memphis,  identified  with
Osiris.

Soul  : conceived  of  as  a bird  with  human  head.

Souls  : designation  of  the  gods  of  the  prehistoric  capitals.
Supports:  four  pillars  (?),  upon  which,  according  to  one  con-
ception, the  sky  is  held  up.

Sutekh  : another  form  of  the  name  Seth.

Sycamore  : wild  fig-tree  (Gr.).


318


EGYPTIAN  LITERATURE


Tanis  : city  in  the  north-east  of  the  Delta  (Gr.).

Tefnet  : a lion-goddess  and  the  sister  of  Shu.

Tehenu  : a Libyan  people.

Temehu  : a Libyan  people.

Tenen  : a name  of  Ptah  as  primordial  god.

Thebes  : capital  of  the  New  Kingdom,  the  modern  Karnak  and
Luxor  in  Upper  Egypt  (Gr.).

Thinis  : city  of  Osiris,  near  Abydos.

Thoth  : the  ibis-headed  moon-god  and  god  of  wisdom,  the  scribe
of  the  gods.  Also  conceived  of  as  an  ape.

Timuris  : a name  for  Egypt  (Gr.).

To-zoser  : the  necropolis  of  Abydos.

Troglodytes  : predatory  people  between  the  Nile  and  the
Red  Sea  (Gr.).

Tyre  : the  Phoenician  port-town.

Ur^eus  : see  under  Serpent,  royal.

User-het  : the  sacred  ship  of  Amun.

Vizier  : current  rendering  of  the  title  of  the  official  at  the  head
of  the  Egyptian  bureaucracy.

VVawat,  Wawa  : a district  in  northern  Nubia.

Wennofre  : name  of  Osiris.

West,  Western  Mountain  : the  realm  of  the  dead.


PRINTED  BY

MORRISON  AND  GIBB  LIMITED
EDINBURGH


A SELECTION  OF

Messrs.  Methuen’s

PUBLICATIONS


This  Catalogue  contains  only  a selection  of  the  more  important
books  published  by  Messrs.  Methuen.  A complete  catalogue  of
their  publications  may  be  obtained  on  application.


ARMSTRONG  (Anthony)  (•  A.  A.’
of  Punch)

Warriors  at  Ease
Warriors  Still  at  Ease
Percival  and  I
Percival  at  Play
Me  and  Frances
How  to  do  It

Each  3 s.  6d.  net.

Livestock  in  Barracks

Illustrated  by  E.  H.  SHEPARD,

6s.  net.

Junior  Members

Illustrated  by  Ren£  Bull.

6s.  net.


BAIN  (F.  W.)

A Digit  of  the  Moon
The  Descent  of  the  Sun
A Heifer  of  the  Dawn
In  the  Great  God’s  Hair
A Draught  of  the  Blue
An  Essence  of  the  Dusk
An  Incarnation  of  the  Snow
A Mine  of  Faults
The  Ashes  of  a God
Bubbles  of  the  Foam
A Syrup  of  the  Bees
The  Livery  of  Eve
The  Substance  of  a Dream

Each  3s.  6 d.  net .

An  Echo  of  the  Spheres

i os.  6 d.  net .


BALFOUR  (Sir  Graham)

The  Life  of  Robert  Louis
Stevenson

Twentieth  Edition,  7 s.  6 d.  net.


BARKER  (Ernest)

National  Character

i os.  6 d.  net.

Greek  Political  Theory

14s.  net.

Church,  State  and  Study

1 os.  6d.  net.


BELLOC  (Hilaire)

Paris  8s.  6 d.  net.

The  Pyrenees  8s.  td.  net.

Marif  Antoinette  iSs.  net.
A History  of  England
In  5 Vols.  Vols.  I,  II  and  III
Each  15  s.  net.

On  Nothing
Hills  and  the  Sea
On  Something

This  and  That  and  the  Other
On

First  and  Last
On  Everything
On  Anything
Emmanuel  Burden
A Picked  Company

Each  3s.  6 d.  net.


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications


3


BIRMINGHAM  (George  A.)

A Wayfarer  in  Hungary

Illustrated.  8 s.  6 d.  net.
Spillikins  : Essays.  3 s.  6 d.  net.
Ships  and  Sealing-Wax  : Essays
3s.  6 d.  net.

BLEEK  (Dorothea  F.)

Rock  Paintings  from  South
Africa

Illustrated.  £2  25.  net.

BUDGE  (Sir  E.  A.  Wallis)

A History  of  Ethiopia  : Nubia
and  Abyssinia

Illustrated.  2 vols.  £3  13$.  6 d.  net.
CHESTERTON  (G.  K.)

Come  to  Think  of  It  ...

6s.  net.

G.K.C.  AS  M.C.  7 s.  6 d.  net.

The  Ballad  of  the  White  Horse
3s.  6 d.  net.

Also  Illustrated  by  Robert

Austin.  12$.  6 d.  net.

Charles  Dickens
Generally  Speaking
All  Things  Considered
Tremendous  Trifles
Fancies  versus  Fads
Alarms  and  Discursions
A Miscellany  of  Men
The  Uses  of  Diversity
The  Outline  of  Sanity
The  Flying  Inn

Each  3 s.  6 d.  net.
A Gleaming  Cohort  zs.  6 d.  net.
Wine,  Water  and  Song

is.  6 d.  net.

GLUTTON-BROCK  (A.)

What  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  ?
Essays  on  Art
Shakespeare’s  Hamlet

Each  5s.  net.
Essays  on  Books  3s.  6 d.  net.
More  Essays  on  Books
Essays  on  Life
Essays  on  Religion
Essays  on  Literature  and  Life
More  Essays  on  Religion

Each  6r.  net.
Shelley,  the  Man  and  the  Poet
7s.  6 d.  net.

CRAWLEY  (Ernest)

The  Mystic  Rose
Revised  and  Enlarged  by  THEODORE
Besterman.  2 vols.  £1  1 os.  net.
Studies  of  Savages  and  Sex
Edited  by  Theodore  Besterman.

1 os.  6 d.  net .


DAVIS  (H.  W.  C.)

Europe  from  800-1789

8s.  6 d.  net.

DERWENT  (Lord)

Goya.  Illustrated.  10s.  6 d.  net.

DUGDALE  (E.  T.  S.)

German  Diplomatic  Documents,

1871-1914

Selected  from  the  Documents  pub-
lished by  the  German  Foreign
Office.  In  4 vols.  Vol.  I,  1871-
90.  Vol.  II,  1891-8.  Vol.  Ill,
1898-1910.

Each  £1  is.  net.

EDWARDES  (Tickner)

The  Lore  of  the  Honey-Bee
Illustrated.  7 s.  6 d.  and  3s.  6 d.  net
Beekeeping  for  All

Illustrated.  3s.  6 d.  net.
The  Bee-Master  of  Warrilow
Illustrated.  7 s.  6 d.  net.
Bee-Keeping  Do’s  and  Dont’s
2s  6 d.  net.

EINSTEIN  (Albert)

Relativity  : The  Special  and
General  Theory  55.  net.

Sidelights  on  Relativity

3s.  6 d.  net.

The  Meaning  of  Relativity

5s.  net.

The  Brownian  Movement

5s.  net.

FIELD  (G.  C.)

Moral  Theory  6s.  net.

Plato  and  His  Contemporaries
12s.  6 d.  net.

FOUQUET  (Jean)

The  Life  of  Christ  and  His
Mother

From  Fouquet’s  ‘ Book  of  Hours  \
Edited  by  Florence  Hey  wood,
B.A.  With  24  Plates  in  Colours.
In  a box.  £3  3s.  net.

FYLEMAN  (Rose)

Fairies  and  Chimneys

The  Fairy  Green

The  Fairy  Flute

The  Rainbow  Cat

Eight  Little  Plays  for  Children

Forty  Good-night  Tales

Fairies  and  Friends

The  Adventure  Club

Forty  Good- Morning  Tales

Seven  Little  Plays  for  Children


4


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications


FYLEMAN  (Rose) — continued

Twenty  Tea-Time  Tales

Each  3 s,  6 d.  net.

Gay  Go  Up

Illustrated  by  Decie  Merwin.

5S.  net.

The  Rose  Fyleman  Fairy  Book  \
Illustrated  by  Hilda  Miller.  j
I os.  6 d.  net.  i

A Garland  of  Rose’s  : Collected
Poems

Illustrated  by  Rene  Bull.

8 s.  6 d.  net.

GIBBON  (Edward)

The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the
Roman  Empire

With  Notes,  Appendixes  and  Maps,
by  J.  B.  Bury.  Illustrated.  7 vols.
Demy  81 <0.  155.  net  each  volume.

Also,  unillustrated.  Crozin  Sro.

7 5.  6 d.  net  each  volume.
GLADSTONE  (Mary)  (Mrs.  Drew)
Her  Diaries  and  Letters

Illustrated.  £1  is.  net.
GLOVER  (T.  R.)

Virgil

The  Conflict  of  Religions  in  the
Early  Roman  Empire
Poets  and  Puritans

Each  iox.  6 d.  net
From  Pericles  to  Philip

125.  6 d.  net.

GRAHAM  (Harry)

The  World  we  Laugh  in  : More
Deportmental  Ditties
Illustrated  by  ‘ FISH  Seventh

Edition.  55.  net.

Strained  Relations
Illustrated  by  H.  Stuart  Menzies
and  Hendy  65.  net.

The  World’s  Workers

Illustrated  by  ‘ Fougasse  *.

5 s.  net.

Adam’s  Apples

Illustrated  by  John  Reynolds.

5*.  net.

GRAHAME  (Kenneth)

The  Wind  in  the  Willows
Nineteenth  Edition.  75.  6 d.  net.
Also  illustrated  by  Wyndhvm
Payne.  7 s.  6 d.  net.

Also  unillustrated.  35.  6 d.  net.
See  also  Milne  (A.  A.)

HADFIELD  (J.  A.)

Psychology  and  Morals

Eighth  Edition.  Croton  Svo.

65.  net.


HALL  (H.  R.)

The  Ancient  History  of  the
Near  East

Illustrated.  £1  15.  net.
The  Civilization  of  Greece  in
the  Bronze  Age

Illustrated.  £1  105.  net.
A Season’s  Work  at  Ur  of  the
Chaldees.  Illustrated.  155.  net

HEADLAM-MORLEY  (Sir  James)
Studies  in  Diplomatic  History
105.  6 d.  net.

HERBERT  (A.  P.)

Honeybubble  & Co.  65.  net.
Misleading  Cases  in  the  Common
Law

With  an  Introduction  by  Lord
Hewart.  5 5.  net.

The  Bomber  Gipsy  35.  6 d.  net.
Light  Articles  Only

Illustrated.  65.  net.
The  Wherefore  and  the  Why
Illustrated.  35.  td.  net
The  Secret  Battle  35.  6 d.  net.

HOLDS  WORTH  (Sir  W.  S.)

A History  of  English  Law
Nme  Volumes.  £1  55.  net  each.

HUDSON  (W.  H.)

A Shepherd’s  Life

Illustrated.  105.  6 d.  net.
Also  unillustrated.  35.  6 d.  net.

HUTTON  (Edward)

Cities  of  Sicily

Illustrated.  105.  td.  net.
Milan  and  Lomb.ardy
The  Cities  of  Romagna  and  the
Marches

Siena  and  Southern  Tuscany
Naples  and  Southern  Italy

Illustrated.  Each  8j.  td.  net.
A Wayfarer  in  Unknown  Tus-
cany

The  Cities  of  Spain
The  Cities  of  Umbria
Country  Walks  about  Florence
Rome

Florence  and  Northern  Tuscany
Venice  and  Venetla

Illustrated.  Each  75.  6 d.  net.

INGE  (W.  R.),  D.D.,  Dean  of  St.
Paul’s

Christian  Mysticism

(The  Bampton  Lectures  of  1899).

Sixth  Edition.  75.  td.  net.


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications


5


KIPLING  (Rudyard)

Barrack-Room  Ballads
254 th  Thousand.

The  Seven  Seas
185**  Thousand.

The  Five  Nations
143rd  Thousand.

Departmental  Ditties
1 16  th  Thousand.

The  Years  Between
95  th  Thousand.

Four  Editions  of  these  famous
volumes  of  poems  are  now  pub-
lished, viz.  : —

Crown  800.  Buckram,  7$.  6 d.  net.

Fcap.  800.  Cloth,  6s.  net.

Leather  7 s.  6 d.  net.

Service  Edition.  Two  volumes
each  book.  Square  Fcap.  8to.

3 s.  net  each  volume.
A Kipling  Anthology:  Verse.

Cloth,  6s.  net  and  35.  6d.  net
Twenty  Poems  from  Rudyard
Kipling

482nd  Thousand.  is.  net.

A Choice  of  Songs
Second  Edition.  zs.  net.

LAMB  (Charles  and  Mary)

The  Complete  Works
Edited  by  E.  V.  Lucas.  Six
Volumes.  With  Frontispieces.

6s.  net  each.

Selected  Letters
Edited  by  G.  T.  CLAPTON.

3*.  6 d.  net.

The  Charles  Lamb  Day  Book
Compiled  by  E.  V.  Lucas.

6s.  net.

LANKESTER  (Sir  Ray)

Science  from  an  Easy  Chair
Science  from  an  Easy  Chair:
Second  Series

Diversions  of  a Naturalist
Great  and  Small  Things

Illustrated.  Each  7 s.  6 d.  net.
Secrets  of  Earth  and  Sea

Illustrated.  8 s.  6 d.  net.
LODGE  (Sir  Oliver)

Man  and  the  Universe

7*.  6 d.  net  and  3$.  6 d.  net.
The  Survival  of  Man


7*.

6 d.

net.

Raymond

IQS.

6d.

net.

Raymond  Revised

6s.

net.

Modern  Problems

3 s.

6d.

net.

Reason  and  Belief

3 s.

6 d.

net.

The  Substance  of

Faith

23.

net .

Relativity  is.  net.

Conviction  of  Survival  is.  net.

LUCAS  (E.  V.)

The  Life  of  Charles  Lamb
2 Vols.  £1  is.  net.

The  Colvins  and  Their  Friends
£1  is.  net.

Vermeer  the  Magical  55.  net.
A Wanderer  in  Rome
A Wanderer  in  Holland
A Wanderer  in  London
London  Revisited  (Revised)

A Wanderer  in  Paris
A Wanderer  in  Florence
A Wanderer  in  Venice

Each  10 s.  6 d.  net.
A Wanderer  among  Pictures

8s.  6d.  net.

E.  V.  Lucas’s  London  £1  net.
Introducing  London
Introducing  Paris

Each  zs.  6 d.  net.
The  Open  Road  6s.  net.

Also,  illustrated  by  Claude  A.
Shepperson,  A.R.W.S.

lot.  6d.  net.

Also,  India  Paper.

Leather,  7 s.  6 d.  net.
The  Joy  of  Life
6s.  net.  Leather  Edition,  7 s.  6 d.  net.
Also,  India  Paper.

Leather,  7 s.  6 d.  net.
The  Gentlest  Art  6s.  6d.  net.
And  The  Second  Post  6s.  net.
Also  together  in  one  volume.

7 s.  6 d.  net.

Fireside  and  Sunshine
Character  and  Comedy
Good  Company
One  Day  and  Another
Old  Lamps  for  New
Loiterer’s  Harvest
Luck  of  the  Year
Events  and  Embroideries
A Fronded  Isle
A Rover  I Would  Be
Giving  and  Receiving

Each  3s.  6d.  net.
Her  Infinite  Variety
Cloud  and  Silver
A Boswell  of  Baghdad
*Twixt  Eagle  and  Dove
The  Phantom  Journal
Encounters  and  Diversions
Zigzags  in  France
Turning  Things  Over
Traveller’s  Luck

Each  6s.  net.


6


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications


LUCAS  (E.  V.) — continued

Roving  East  and  Roving  West

5 5.  net.

Mr.  Punch’s  COUNTY  SONGS

Illustrated  by  E.  H.  Shepard.

105.  6 d.  net.
* The  More  I See  of  Men  . . .*
Out  of  a Clear  Sky
If  Dogs  Could  Write
* . . . And  such  Small  Deer  *

Each  35.  6 d.  net .
See  also  Lamb  (Charles).

LYND  (Robert)

It’s  A Fine  World  5s.  net .

The  Green  Man

The  Pleasures  of  Ignorance

The  Goldfish

The  Little  Angel

The  Blue  Lion

The  Peal  of  Bells

The  Money-Box

The  Orange  Tree

Each  35.  6 d.  net.
McDOUGALL  (William)

An  Introduction  to  Social
Psychology  105.  6 d.  net.

National  Welfare  and  National
Decay  6s.  net.

An  Outline  of  Psychology

1 oj.  6 d.  net.
An  Outline  of  Abnormal  Psycho-
logy 1 55.  net.

Body  and  Mind  125.  6 d.  net.

Character  and  the  Conduct  of
Life  105.  6 d.  net.

Modern  Materialism  and  Emerg-
ent Evolution  7 5.  6 d.  net.

Ethics  and  Some  Modern  World
Problems  7 s.  6 d.  net.

MALLET  (Sir  C.  E.)

A History  of  the  University  of
Oxford

In  3 vols.  Each  £1  ij.  net.

MAETERLINCK  (Maurice)

The  Blue  Bird  65.  net.

Also,  illustrated  by  F.  Cayley
Robinson.  ioj.  6 d.  net.

Our  Eternity  65.  net.

The  Unknown  Guest  65.  net.
Poems  55.  net.

The  Wrack  of  the  Storm

65.  net.

The  Burgomaster  of  Stilemonde
55.  net.

The  Betrothal  65.  net.

Mountain  Paths  65.  net.

The  Great  Secret  7 s.  6 d.  net.


The  Cloud  that  Lifted  and  The
Power  of  the  Dead

7 s.  6 d.  net.

Mary  Magdalene  2 s.  net.

MARLOWE  (Christopher)

[ The  Works.  In  6 volumes,
j General  Editor,  R.  H.  Case.

The  Life  of  M.arlowe,  by  C.  F.
Tucker  Brooke,  and  Dido.
Edited  by  the  Same.

85.  6 d.  net.

Tamburlaine,  I and  II.  Edited  by
U.  M.  Ellis-Fermor.

105.  6 d.  net.

MASEFIELD  (John)

On  the  Spanish  Main

85.  6 d.  net.

A Sailor’s  Garland  35.  6 d.  net.
Sea  Life  in  Nelson’s  Time

75.  6 d.  net.

METHUEN  (Sir  A.)

An  Anthology  of  Modern  Verse
*9  5th  Thousand.

Shakespeare  to  Hardy  : An
Anthology  of  English  Lyrics
26 th  Thousand.

Each,  Cloth , 65.  net.
Leather , 75.  6 d.  net.

MILNE  (A.  A.)

By  Way  of  Introduction

65.  net.

Toad  of  To.ad  Hall
A Play  founded  on  Kenneth
Grahame’s  ‘ The  Wind  in  the
Willows.’  5j.  net.

Those  Were  the  Days

is.  6 d.  net.

Not  that  it  Matters

If  I May

The  Sunny  Side

The  Red  House  Mystery

Once  a Week

The  Holiday  Round

The  Day’s  Play

Mr.  Pim  Passes  By

Each  35.  6 d.  net.
When  We  were  Very  Young
Twentieth  Edition.  206 th  Thousand.
Winnie-the-Pooh
Ninth  Edition.  111th  Thousand.
Now  We  are  Six
Fifth  Edition,  119th  Thousand.
The  House  at  Pooh  Corner
Third  Edition.  105 th  Thousand.
Each  illustrated  by  E.  H.  Shepard.

75.  6 d.  net.
Leather , 105.  6d.  net.


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications  7


MILNE  (A-  A.) — continued

The  Christopher  Robin  Story
Book.  Second  Edition.

Illustrated  by  E.  H.  SHEPARD.

5 s.  net.

MILNE  (A.  A.)  and  FRASER- SIM-
SON  (H.)

Fourteen  Songs  from  * When  We
were  Very  Young*

Twelfth  Edition.  7 s.  6 d.  net.

Teddy  Bear  and  Other  Songs
from  * When  We  were  Very
Young  * 7 s.  6 d.  net.

The  King’s  Breakfast
Third  Edition.  35.  6 d.  net.

Songs  from  * Now  We  are  Six  ’
Second  Edition.  7 s.  6 d.  net.

More  ‘ Very  Young  * Songs

7s.  bd.  net.

The  Hums  of  Pooh  7 s.  bd.  net.
Words  by  A A.  Milne.

Music  by  H.  Fraser-Simson.
Decorations  by  E.  H.  Shepard.

MORTON  (H.  V.)

The  Heart  of  London
The  Spell  of  London
The  Nights  of  London

Each  3s.  bd  net.
In  Search  of  England
The  Call  of  England
In  Search  of  Scotland
In  Search  of  Ireland

Each  illustrated.  7s.  bd.  net.
The  Soul  of  Scotland  is.  net.

NEUBURGER  (Albert)

The  Technical  Arts  and  Sciences
of  the  Ancients.

Translated  by  H.  L.  Brose.
Illustrated.  £2  2 s.  net.

OMAN  (Sir  Charles)

A History  of  the  Art  of  War  in  i
the  Middle  Ages,  a.d.  378-14S5  j
2 vols.  Illustrated.  £1  16s.  net.  1
Studies  in  the  Napoleonic  Wars  |
85.  bd.  net.

PERRY  (W.  J.)

The  Origin  of  Magic  and
Religion

The  Growth  of  Civilization

Each  6s.  net.

The  Children  of  the  Sun

£1  1$.  net.

PETRIE  (Sir  Flinders)

A History  of  Egypt

In  6 Volumes.


Vol.  I.  From  the  ist  to  the
XVIth  Dynasty.

Eleventh  Edition , Revised.

1 25.  net.

Vol.  II.  TheXVHthandXVIIIth
Dynasties.

Seventh  Edition,  Revised,  gs.  net.

Vol.  III.  XIXth  to  XXXth
Dynasties

Third  Edition.  12 s.  net.

Vol.  IV.  Egypt  under  the
Ptolemaic  Dynasty
By  Edwyn  Bevan.  155.  net.

Vol.  V.  Egypt  under  Roman  Rule
By  J.  G.  Milne.

Third  Edition , Revised.  12 s.  net.

Vol.  VI.  Egypt  in  the  Middle
Ages

By  Stanley  Lane  Poole.

Fourth  Edition.  10s.  net.

PONSONBY  OF  SHULBREDE
(Lord)

English  Diaries  £1  is.  net.
More  English  Diaries

12s.  bd.  net.

Scottish  and  Irish  Diaries

10s.  6 d.  net.

RUTTER  (Frank)

El  Greco

Illustrated.  £1  16s.  net.

STEVENSON  (R.  L.)

The  Letters

Edited  by  Sir  Sidney  Colvin.  4
Vols.  Each  6s.  net.

SURTEES  (R.  S.)

Handley  Cross

Mr.  Sponge’s  Sporting  Tour

Ask  Mamma

Mr.  Facey  Romford’s  Hounds
Plain  or  Ringlets?  „
Hillingdon  Hall

Each  illustrated.  75.  6 d.  net.
Jorrocks’s  Jaunts  and  Jollities
Hawbuck  Grange

Each  illustrated.  6s.  net.

TAYLOR  (A.  E.)

Plato  : The  Man  and  His  Work

£1  is.  net.

Plato:  Tim/eus  and  Critias

6$.  net.

Elements  of  Metaphysics

iz s.  6 d.  net.


8


Messrs.  Methuen’s  Publications


TELDEN  (William  T.)

The  Aht  of  Lawn  Tennis

Revised  Edition
Singles  and  Doubles

Each  illustrated.  6s,  net.
The  Common  Sense  of  Lawn
Tennis

Match  Play  and  the  Spin  of  the
Ball

Each  illustrated.  51.  net.

TO.ESTON  (Mary  W.)

Daily  Strength  for  Daily  Needs
Thirty-third  Edition.  3 s.  id.  net.
India  Paper.  Leather , 6r.  net.

TRAPP  (Oswald  Graf)

The  Armoury  of  the  Castle  of
Churburg

Translated  by  J.  G.  Mann.
Richly  illustrated.

Limited  to  400  copies.

£4  14*.  6 d.  net.

UNDERHILL  (Evelyn)

Mysticism  151.  net.

The  Life  of  the  Spirit  and  the
Life  of  To-day  7*.  6 d.  net.
Man  and  the  Supernatural

7r.  6 d.  net.

Concerning  the  Inner  Life

2 s.  net.

The  House  of  the  Soul  zs.  net.

VARDON  (Harry)

How  to  Play  Golf

Illustrated.  Nineteenth  Edition)
51.  net.


WAND  (J.  W.  C.)

The  Development  of  Sacra-
mentalism  6i.  net.

A History  of  the  Modern  Church

8j.  6 d.  net.


WILDE  (Oscar)

The  Works

In  16  Vols.  Each  6s.  6 d.  net.

I.  Lord  Arthur  Savile’s  Crimb
and  the  Portrait  of  Mr.  W.  H.

II.  The  Duchess  of  Padua

III.  Poems

IV.  Lady  Windermere’s  Fan

V.  A Woman  of  No  Importance

VI.  An  Ideal  Husband

VII.  The  Importance  of  Being

Earnest

VIII.  A House  of  Pomegranates

IX.  Intentions

X.  De  Profund  is  and  Prison
Letters

XI.  Essays

XII.  Salome,  A Florentinb
Tragedy,  and  La  Sainte
Courtisane

XIV.  Selected  Prose  of  Oscar
Wilde

XV.  Art  and  Decoration

XVI.  For  Loye  of  the  King

51.  net.

XVII.  Vera,  or  the  Nihilists

WILLIAMSON  (G.  C.)

The  Book  of  Famille  Rose

Richly  Illustrated.  £8  8j.  net.


Methuen  & Co.  Ltd.,  36  Essex  Street,  London,  W.C.2


5SO
