================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Blanquerna: A Thirteenth Century Romance
Creator: Ramon Llull (E. Allison Peers, trans.)
Edition: 1926 (London: Jarrold's); translated from the Catalan
Language: English
Source: Internet Archive (blanquernaathirteenthpeers), 1926 Peers translation
Public domain: Translation published 1926; public domain.
Artifact ID: llull-blanquerna-peers-1926
================================================================================

BLANQUERNA: A
Thirteenth Century Romance.
Translated from the Catalan
of Ramon Lull by
E. ALLISON PEERS

J

{ PEED aa

athalin 3 wt
Cathe! R ws sical
r Ale
fr, ° ‘ars
\ f
Ciipazo, Ill

l 6067

ae
if
fi

Ava,
5

JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited, 34 Paternoster Row

MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd.

A LA GLORIOSA MEMORIA DE

DON MARCELINO MENENDEZ Y PELAYO
MAESTRO DE MAESTROS Y LUMINOSA GUIA
DE CUANTOS EXPLOREN EL PANORAMA ESPIRITUAL
DE LAS TIERRAS ESPANOLAS

—e.
etd
~~
=
re, =
es
\ - -
a
’
es
ré
iol
‘
‘
'
‘
>
>
.
-
~
beta

it sso 2

-

, = 1

CONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

BOOK THE FIRST
OF MATRIMONY

CHAPTER
I, Or THE MaTRIMony or Evast AND ALOMA

’ JI. OF THE BIRTH AND GOOD UPBRINGING OF BLANQUERNA .

III, Or tue Questions THAT EvastT puT To HIS SON BLAN-
QUERNA .

IV. OF THE DISAGREEMENT THAT WAS BETWEEN EvAsT AND
ALOMA : 7 n 5 C -

VY. How Evast anp ALOMA DESIRED TO LEAVE THE CHARGE
OF THEIR HOUSEHOLD TO THEIR SON BLANQUERNA .

VI. OF THE TEMPTATION WHEREWITH BLANQUERNA WAS
TEMPTED BY THE MAIDEN NaTANa

VII. Or tue conpuct TRaT Evast AND ALOMA GAVE TO THEIR
son BLANQUERNA 3 ‘ c

VIII, Or THE FAREWELL . : ‘ . : ; ‘
IX. Or THE FURTHER HISTORY OF Evast AND ALOMA .
X. Or true Hospitrar . r : ;

XI. Or Gruttony = . ‘ . . . .
XII. Or Lust . : : ; : ‘ ‘ .
XIII, Or Coverousness . : A - :

XIV. Or Prive. . . . . ° .

XV. Or StotH . 3 : : ; ° °
XVI, Or Envy. 2 g : : “ “

XVII. Or Wratn . ‘ : . . ° :

XVIII. Or Vainctory .. ; : ; - °

44

53

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

XIX.

XX.

XXII.
XXII.
XXIII.

XXIV.
XXV.

XXVI.
XXVII.
XXVIII.
X XIX.
XXX.
XXXI.
XXXII.
XXXIII.
XXXIV.
XXXV.
XXXVI.
XXXVII.
XXXVI.
XXXIX.
XL.

XLI.

BOOK THE SECOND
OF RELIGION

Part THE First

OF THE STRIFE THAT WAS BETWEEN NaATANA AND Nas-
TASIA ° e ° . e ° °

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN NATANA ENTERED A HOUSE OF
RELIGION

How NaTAaNA BECAME SACRISTINE . : ‘
OF THE DEATH OF THE ABBESS 5 c

Or ConsoLaTION

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN NaTana WAS ELECTED ABBESS

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBES8 MADE ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE FIVE CORPORAL SENSES, AND FIRST, OF
Hearinc .

OF SEEING

Or SMELLING.

Or TasTiIne . : . : : ‘ : a
Or Freiinc .

OF THE SEVEN VIRTUES, AND FIRST, OF FAITH
Or Hope

Or Cuarity .

OF Justice

OF PRuDENCE

OF FortirupE

Or TEMPERANCE . , .

Or Memory .

Or UnpbErsTANDING

Or Wi.

Or Prayer

Or WatcHInc

PAGE
96

Ior
109
IIr

II2

114

117
119
121
122
124
126
130
132
135
138
141
143
145
146
149
150

153

CHAPTER

XLII.
XLII.
XLIV.

XLV.
XLVI.

XLVII.
XLVIII.
XLIX.

CONTENTS

OF RELIGION—continued

Part THE SECOND

Or THE ‘TEN CoMMANDMENTS .
Or Fair anp or Trutu

Or UNDERSTANDING

Or Devotion

Or DiticEnce

Or Aucurigs.

Or Vatour . -

Or ConsoLaTION

Or FortiruDE

Or TEMPTATION

Or PENITENCE

Or PERSEVERANCE .

Or OBEDIENCE

Or CounseL .

OF THE ORDERING OF STUDIES
OF VAINGLoRY

Or AccusaTION

Or THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA WAS MADE
SACRISTAN .

Or THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA WAS ELECTED
ABBOT

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBOT BLANQUERNA
MADE THE Boox oF Ave Marra

Gratia PLENA

Dominus TEcuM

BENEDICTA TU IN MULIERIBUS .
BENEDICTUS FRUCTUS VENTRIS TUI

Sancta MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

LXVII.
LXVIIlI.

LXIX.
LXX.
XX
LXXIIL
LXXIII.
LXXIV.
LXXV.
LXXVI.
LXXVII.

BOOK THE THIRD
OF PRELACY

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBOT BLANQUERNA
WAS ELECTED BisHop A A : :

Or THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA ORDERED HIS
DIOCESE . . ° °

Or Poverty

Or MEEKNEsS . : ‘
Or Tears . ; :
Or AFFLICTION .

Or Mercy . ‘

Or Purity.

Or PEacz

Or PERSECUTION .

OF QuopLIBETs . “ : : : : .

BOOK THE FOURTH

OF THE APOSTOLIC ESTATE /

LXXVIII.

LXXIX.

LXXX.
LXXXI.
LXXXII.
LXXXIil.
LXXXIV.
LXXXV.
LXXXVI.
LXXXVII.

LXXXVIII.
LXXXIX.

Io

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE BisHop BLANQUERNA
BECAME Pope .

Or THE ORDINANCE WHICH THE Pore BLanQuERNA
MADE IN HIS CourT

Goria in Excetsis Deo

ET IN TERRA PAX HOMINIBUS BON VOLUNTATIS
Laupamus Te.

Benepicimus Tz .

Aporamus Tze. : é

GuoriFicaMus Tz P

GRATIAS AGIMUS TIBI PROPTER MAGNAM GLORIAM TUAM
Domine Devs Rex cerestis, Deus PATER OMNIPOTENS
Domine Fitt unicenire Jesu Curiste .

Domine Deus Acnus Det Finius Parris

e

PAGE

267

269
272
276
280
285
288
293
296
299
oF

310

316
322
331
339
345
352
359
363
368
308
378

CONTENTS

CHAPTER
XC. Qui TOLLIs PECCATA MUNDI, MISERERE NOBIS .

XCI. Qur Touts pPECCATA MUNDI, SUSCIPE DEPRECATIONEM
NOSTRAM . : . :

XCII. Qur sepgs AD DEXTERAM PATRIS, MISERERE NOBIS .
XCIII. Quontam tu sotus sanctus...
XCIV. Tu sorvs Dominus. .

XCV. Tu sorus axtissimus, Jesu Curiste, cum SANcTo
Sprritu in Gloria Det Patris. AMEN . ;

e . °

BOOK THE FIFTH
OF THE LIFE OF THE HERMIT

XCVI. OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA RENOUNCED THE
Papacy . . . id : a r

XCVII. OF THE LEAVE WHICH BLANQUERNA TOOK OF THE Popg

AND OF THE CARDINALS . 4 A 5
XCVIII. Or rue rirzE WHICH BLANQUERNA LED IN HIS HERMITAGE

XCIX. OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE HERMIT BLANQUERNA
MADE THE “ Book OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED ”

Or tue “ Boox or THE Lover AND THE BELoveD” .
“Tue Arr oF ConTEMPLATION” . ; F ‘

C. OF THE END oF THE Book . A c C

Appenpix I. AppiTIoNAL PARAGRAPHS OF THE “ Book or THE LovER
AND THE BELOVED,” FOUND IN CERTAIN VERSIONS
ONLY . s . s e e . e

II. Inpex tro Principat Worps upon whicH Notes
ARE TO BE FOUND IN THE TEXT > é 5

PAGE

381

384
388

393
395

398

532

536

IT

PREFACE

For the first time since its appearance, nearly six and a half
centuries ago, this well-known Catalan classic is translated
into English, and those who have already learned to know
and value the Book of the Lover and the Beloved in our
language may now read in its entirety the narrative in which
it is enshrined. Since the Majorcan Catalan from which
the version has been made is not generally familiar, I have
translated as literally as possible, often rejecting attractively
turned phrases in favour of the simpler and homelier read-
ings of the original medium, and endeavouring to modernise
Lull’s language only where to do so has seemed essential.
No expurgations have been made; the few expressions
which I have thought well to soften slightly are given in
Catalan in footnotes. A small number of words frequently
used by Lull, which demand explanations, are also glossed
in footnotes, and, on account of their frequency, I have
added to the book an index to them, under the English
words used in translating them. Apart from the noting of
these, no attempt has been made to provide any kind of
commentary on the text, for to do so would have been to
increase the size of this volume beyond all possibility.

By the kindness of Mossen Salvador Galmés and the
Comissiéd Editora Lulliana, the text of the edition of 1914
(Palma de Mallorca) has been used throughout. This
forms the ninth volume in the edition of Lull’s works which
is still proceeding from the press. It is based on the follow-
ing manuscripts, occasional references to which in the
footnotes are given in the form indicated in square brackets.
[A] Palatine Library of Munich: this is the best and most
reliable manuscript extant, and belongs to the first half of
the fourteenth century. [P] National Library of Paris:
this, too, is a fourteenth-century version, as is the next, [D]
from the Provincial Library of Palma de Mallorca. This,
the so-called ‘‘ Dominican’ manuscript, was originally in
the convent of St. Dominic, Palma. It contains only the

13

PREFACE

fifth book of Blanguerna, together with certain other works
of Lull. There is also a sixteenth-century Valencian printed
text [V], which is frequently corrupt, but sometimes useful
for purposes of comparison.

It should be added that the edition of the Book of the
Lover and the Beloved already published (S.P.C.K., 1923)
follows no one of these authorities exclusively, the edition
of D. Mateu Obrador (Mallorca, 1904) having been used
as a basis, and other versions drawn upon so as to make the
book as attractive and of as wide an appeal as might be.
The text of this translation will therefore not be found to
correspond exaétly with the other, which is essentially
popular in character. Some passages which may not be
genuine, and do not appear in the body of the present work,
have been added in a brief appendix.

I have been greatly encouraged and helped in preparing
this translation by Mn. Salvador Galmés, with whom I
have spent many pleasant hours in Lullian studies at Palma,
and I have also to acknowledge with gratitude the assistance
of my colleague Dr. I. G. Llubera, who has given me a
number of useful suggestions, and of my wife, who read
the entire book in manuscript. The introduction owes
something, perhaps more than I realise, to the various
works of Menéndez y Pelayo, and it is a pleasure to record
that, through the kindness of my friend D. Miguel Artigas,
a great part of the actual translation was done, with the
master’s own books before me, in that library which he
bequeathed to his native city of Santander. Work so attrac-
tive in itself, and carried out under conditions so ideal,
cannot fail to be, as this has been, full of enjoyment from
beginning to end.

E. Ave:

University of Liverpool,
Lady Day, 1925.

14

INTRODUCTION

I

Ramon Lut, the “ Apostle of Africa,” is undoubtedly one
of the most noteworthy charaCters in Europe of the thir-
teenth century. He was a native of Palma de Mallorca,
where he was born, soon after the conquest of the Balearic
Islands from the Moors, perhaps on January 25th, 1235.
Of good birth, an only son, and in favour with the royal
house (his father having played a prominent part in the
recent campaign), he received the advantages of a courtly
training; when he was of age to marry, the King,—James I,
the ‘‘ Conqueror,”—who showed considerable interest in
him, found him a bride. Before this, however, young
Ramon had given himself up to the life of a profligate.
“When I was grown,” he tells us in his autobiographical —
poem E/ Desconort, “‘ and knew the vanities of the world, _
I began to do evil and entered upon sin, forgetting the
true God, and going after carnal things.” The story runs
that, in spite of his wife’s affection and the boy and girl that
she bore him, he was passionately enamoured of a Genoese
lady, who, however, spurned his advances. On one occa-
sion he is said to have ridden on horseback into a church
where she was engaged in hearing Mass. The lady en-
deavoured to persuade him by means of letters to desist
from following her, and, as this proved useless, she sum-
moned him to her presence, and revealed to him the breast
which he had so often extolled in his verses, and which, all
unknown to him, was being slowly consumed by a malignant
cancer.

Another story goes that while Ramédn, who at this time
was about thirty years of age, sat composing verses to some
woman of whom he was enamoured, the image of Christ
crucified appeared to him. Struck with astonishment at the
vision, he dropped his pen, and fell into a supernatural

1 The day of the year is known, but there is considerable uncertainty as
to the year itself. Some make it 1232, others 1233 and 1235.

ns

INTRODUCTION

sleep. Five times in all (and this we read in his own
writings) did Christ appear to him before his conversion
was complete, but, once converted, he never looked back.

Naturally enough, when the overpowering desire came
to him to spend his life in the service of God, his thoughts
at once turned to the conversion of the race which for so
long had inhabited his native island. To acquire learning,
preach to the unbelieving Moors, debate with them upon
religion, write books which should convert them, and suffer
martyrdom for his faith, if need arose—these were Ramon
Lull’s new ambitions. After much time passed in prayerand
meditation, and a period the duration of which is uncertain
spent in freeing himself from temporal cares, he set aside
part of his wealth for the needs of his family, gave the rest
to the “‘ poor of Jesus Christ ”—as Blanquerna calls them—
and set off to obey the promptings of his conscience.

He first undertook a comprehensive pilgrimage, em-
bracing Montserrat, Santiago de Compostela! Rome and
the Holy Land, where he gained without any doubt much
experience which is reflected in his books. This concluded,
after an absence of about two years, he returned to Mallorca,
and later retired to the solitude of Mount Randa, devoting
himself to study and contemplation, until he should be fitted
to undertake what may be described as a crusade of learning
against the Moors.

There is so much of Ramén’s own thought and experi-

ence in Blanguerna that it is hardly necessary to describe in
detail his long and varied life. One of his principal ideas
was to compose an Art General which should convert the
whole world to Christianity, and in planning this he be-
“lieved himself to have been dire@tly inspired by God.
Another, and an extremely praétical scheme, which was
continually in his mind, was the establishment and endow-
ment of colleges for the training of missionaries, especially
in Arabic and in theology. Such a college was actually

2 + See Blanguerna, Chap. LKXXVIII, § 8.
I

INTRODUCTION

founded in 1275 by King James II, and to it, and the friars
minor who were trained in it, Lull refers, as will be seen,
more than once in his didaétic romance.

All his desires, however, were unfortunately not so
literally fulfilled. Indeed, from one point of view, the life
of Ramén Lull is a record of disappointment. He pre-
sented his various schemes to Kings and Popes, and was
sometimes dismissed as a visionary, a fanatic or worse. He
travelled incessantly in Italy, France, Cyprus, Egypt,
Armenia, Malta, Tunis—one hardly knows where he
stopped—preaching, pleading, leCturing, disputing, teach-
ing and begging. Again and again he conduéted campaigns
in Africa in which he endeavoured to prove by argument,
or at least to present in the light of probability, the funda-
mental truths of the Catholic Faith. It was on one of these
expeditions, when he had passed his fourscore years, that
he was stoned by a mob at Bugia; he died from the effects
of this, and according to a tradition, which may not be
correct, his death occurred on St. Peter’s Day, 1315, when
he was returning by sea to Mallorca, and was within sight
of the island.

One likes to think that such a death was his: he might.
well have been foretelling it symbolically, in his Book of the _
Lover and the Beloved:

The birds hymned the dawn, and the Lover, who is
the dawn, awakened. And the birds ended their song,
and the Lover died in the dawn for his Beloved.

Then it was that “‘ the Beloved revealed Himself to His
Lover—Stretched out His Arms to embrace him, and in-
clined His Head to kiss him.”? With the crown of mar-
tyrdom which for so long he had desired, he entered into
the joy of his Lord.

1 Book of the Lover and the Beloved, 26 (and see note, p. 415).
* Ibid. 91.

Bo 17

INTRODUCTION

II

It scarcely seems possible that Ramén Lull, with so many
other aétivities absorbing his mind, could have been a
prolific writer. Yet he is credited by some authorities with
nearly five hundred works, and by tradition with many
more. In the monumental Histoire littéraire de la France,
an annotated ligt of three hundred and thirteen works is
given, all of which the compiler believes to be by Lull
‘They are written, some in Latin, others in Catalan, and a

~~ number in Arabic—a few in all three: their subjets include

metaphysics, theology, ethics, logic, medicine, mathematics
and the natural sciences. Some of them are well worth
reading Still, and it is to be hoped that these may all be
soon translated into English. More than one resembles
Blanquerna in having a basis of narrative: such is the Book
of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men, an intensely interest-
ing volume. The Book of the Order of Chivalry was trans-
lated long ago by Caxton, and though short, and in parts
commonplace, makes an appeal to the student of chivalry.

“=... Much longer, and in some respeéts Lull’s masterpiece, is

the enormous Book of Contemplation, of which the Catalan
version has recently been republished in five large volumes.
The short Art of Contemplation, which forms part of Blan-
querna, gives some idea of its nature.

Other of the best-known works of Lull, the titles of
which fairly describe their contents, are the ingtru€tional
Doétrina pueril (Book of Doétrine for Boys), the Book of the
Philosophy of Love, the Book of the Holy Spirit, the Hours of
Our Lady Saint Mary, and the Book of the Tartar and the
Christian (commenting the hymn ‘“‘ Quicumque vult ”).

The verse of Lull, though in many places less poetical
than some of his prose, has a particular interest as being
partly autobiographical. In this conneGtion the Hundred
Names of God and the shorter verses are of less attraGtion

1 Histoire littéraire de la France, Paris, 1885. Vol. 29, pp. 67, 386.
18

INTRODUCTION

than the Song of Ramén, and that intensely pathetic record
of disillusion entitled E/ Desconort. In this last, Ramén
tells, in the bitterness of his soul, how all his efforts to carry
out his own plans for the conversion of unbelievers have
been of no effeét.1

III

Blanquerna, as we know from the text itself, was written
at Montpellier,? and in all probability between the years
1283 and 1285, which Lull is believed to have spent in that
city. In Chapter LXV there is, as will be seen, an allusion
to King James II as still reigning in Mallorca, whereas in
Chapter XCII his deposition is referred to. Since this
event took place in November, 1285, it follows that the
latter part of the book was in process of writing about that
time, and we may well believe, in view of Lull’s manifold
activities, that its composition was spread over the greater

part of the period of his stay.

1 It begins :

This is the Desconort which Ramon Lull composed in his old age,
when he saw that neither the Pope nor other Lords of the world would
give heed to his many and diverse petitions concerning the conversion
of unbelievers.

When I fell to considering the state of the world, how few are the
Christians therein and how many the unbelievers, then the thought came
to my mind to go to prelates, kings and religious to the end that...
our faith might be greatly exalted, and the infidels converted. And this
I have done for thirty years, and truly I have achieved nothing.*

Wife, children and lands have I left, and for thirty years have lived
in weariness and trials. Five times have I been to the Court (of Rome]
at my own cost; thrice have I attended general chapters of Friars
Preachers, and thrice those of Friars Minor.4

That which I urge at the Court [of Rome] passes unheeded by the
Pope and his Cardinals, who do but delay, whereat I am exceeding sad,
and cannot be comforted. For I urge upon them, and demonstrate quite
clearly how the world may be ordered and that right soon; but they
despise and mock me, as though I were a fool who spoke idly.*

©’ See Chap. XC, § 7. * Desconort, III.
* [bid., XIV. 5 [bid., XLVII.

a)

INTRODUCTION

These points, and others related to the composition of
Blanquerna, are discussed by Mossen Salvador Galmés 1n
his Preface to the edition which is here translated. The
reader is referred to this for a fuller account than can now
be given; something, however, must be said of one striking
trait in the book which would probably occur to many who
read no more than a summary of its contents. In 1294
occurred the dramatic renunciation of the papacy by
Celestine V. The fate of this pontiff was less happy, it is
true, than that of Lull’s fictitious parallel, but in other
respects there is a marked similarity between the two hap-
penings, and the question at once arises whether Blanguerna
—or rather the latter part of it—can have been written
during a later sojourn of Lull’s in Montpellier, namely in
the year 1303. But there is no evidence to support the
rather too obvious dedu€tion which leads to this view, and
against it is the quite conclusive fact that in B/anquerna the
destruction of Lull’s fondest dream—the College of
Miramar—is not mentioned: on the contrary the foun-
dation is spoken of with pride, as still flourishing. As this
blow fell on Lull before the year 1295, when he’ refers to
it in the Desconort, it must be laid down that, whatever the
date of Blanquerna, it is earlier than 1295, and that there-
fore the episode of the renunciation of the papacy is intro-
duced into the book only by a coincidence and has no set
reference to the abdication of St, Celestine.

Unlike the remainder of Lull’s prose works, Blanguerna
has won for itself a definite place, and a very high one, in
Catalan literature. It is unusually mature for the age in
which it was written—for let us realise that it is a century
older than Froissart’s Chronicles, Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales
and Wyclif’s translation of the Bible, and a full two cen-
turies than Caxton and Malory and Commines. Two hun-
dred and fifty years separate it from the masterpiece of
Rabelais, which occasionally resembles it in minor detail.

In Spain, Lull is roughly contemporary with Alfonso the
20

_ INTRODUCTION

Wise and Juan Manuel, but was older than almost all the
men who are commonly spoken of as the founders of
Spanish prose. Where, it may be asked, in English, French
or Castilian prose of the thirteenth century can one find
such a book as Blanquerna? Even when we look towards
Italy,—where genius flowered early,—though Dante,
Petrarch and Boccaccio are each and all greater writers than
Lull, we must remember that if the first was but slightly
his junior, the second and third were born about the time
of his death, and belong to the century after that of
Blanquerna.

The worst faults of the story, considered as narrative of
the class to which it belongs, are its /ongueurs (which per-
sisted in European prose fiction for centuries after its age),
the leisurely pace and the prolixity of certain parts of the
Story and the few failures in charaCterization which it con-
tains. Let us admit at once that the preternatural wisdom
of the rather forbidding Natana, and (in the early chapters)
the colloquies between Evast and Aloma, are, for the most
part, wearisome and dull: we can also, however, claim that
no ground of reproach on this score is given once Blan-
querna’s adventures have fairly started. “‘ Examples,”
pithily related, enliven the more didactic portions of the
book; and the longer instructional narratives illustrative
of the virtues and vices, whether or no they were penned
with the same intention, fulfil it none the less. One example
from among many is the story (in Chapter XIV) of the
plebeian but ambitious draper, at which Ramén will hardly
rebuke us if we smile.

Natana apart, the principal characters of Blanguerna are
all well drawn. Evaét and Aloma are admirably paired to-
gether, for if Evast is too unyieldingly ascetic to seem quite
natural, he serves the better as a foil to Aloma, who is
exquisitely human, and the most purely moving character
in the book. In her desire for a son—in her stubborn

refusal to be separated from her husband, who thinks to
21

INTRODUCTION .

free himself so easily from his matrimonial vows—in her
quick wit which conceives the daring plan of persuading her
son into a matriage—in the shrewdness with which she fore-
sees Evat’s opposition and tells him only when the deed is
done—and, most of all, in the touching farewell scene which
contrasts her so sharply with her husband: in each of these,
Aloma is all but a perfeét character of early fiction, and, did
she not degenerate into insignificance after Blanquerna’s
departure, she would be a perfect woman indeed.

The secondary charaéters have less charm. Narpan is
the bold, bad man of fi€tion: an obvious invention. Pure
inventions, too, are the shadowy opponents of the hero:
the naughty cellarer, the ingenuously wicked archdeacon,
the obstinate and rea€tionary chamberlain, and the rest.
Natana’s mother comes into the same category, though she
proves to be her daughter’s own mother when she reforms!
The numerous canons and cardinals who move in turn
across Lull’s varied stage are hardly ever presented with
the vividness of some of the less exalted personages of the
drama. Many readers will lose their hearts to the Ten
Commandments, or weep with Faith and Truth, or enlist
in the service of the lady Valour. They will be less at their
ease in the streets and squares of Rome than in that astound-
ing “‘ forest,” where palaces spring up at their creator’s good
pleasure, where emperors sit on the grass and devour dry
bread, or walk about with jug/ares and would-be hermits as
naturally as can be. The epilogue to the book, in par-
ticular, has always struck us as wonderfully modern, and of
especial skill.

IV

If Blanquerna is to be described as a Utopia (though is
it not more like a Catholic Pilgrim’s Progress ?), the use of
the word must not be taken to imply either a fantastic or
a destructive purpose. Lull thought less of pulling down .

and rebuilding the habits of Church and society than of ©
a2

INTRODUCTION

revivifying them with what he conceived to be the truly
Christian spirit. Somewhat late in life he professed as a
Franciscan tertiary—it had been a sermon heard on the
feast of St. Francis that first quickened his desires into
action—and there is much of the spirit of the “little poor
man ”’ in the social ideals of Blanguerna, Lull is devoted
to the principles of the Sermon on the Mount: whole
chapters of the book are commentaries, in effeét, on its
precepts. The Franciscan ideal of poverty, in spirit and
letter, with its insistence on detachment from the world, and
on the perils of the “‘ vice of ownership,” dominates the
narrative, especially in the se¢tion which describes the lives
of Evast and Aloma. ‘“‘ Sell that thou hast and give to the
poor, and come, follow Me” is a literal command, to be
literally obeyed. What, then, can be said of a monastery
that rejoices in its possessions, a bishop who feasts like a
king, a canon who enjoys a large income, and despises the
“poor of Christ”? And there are worse offenders than
these, nor are any spared. Laymen, as well as clerics, are
examined in the light of Christ’s precepts: wealthy and
gluttonous merchants, deceitful tradesmen, drivers of hard
bargains, hypocrites, lustful men, vain women, unfaithful
wives and husbands—all are made to look at themselves as
keenly as their creator looks at them.

The chief dida@tic element in Blanguerna has already been
hinted at: its expression of the missionary spirit. To those
who come to the book with receptive minds, there will be
no room for anything but admiration of the persistence with
which Lull returns again and again to this theme. It is so
digstressingly real to him. All kinds and classes of unbe-
lievers are journeying daily (so his vivid phrase has it)
toward the everlasting fires. It is the bounden duty of all
—how can any doubt it?—by any and every means to save
these souls, and no less so to recover the Holy Places from
the unbelievers. When the Church and when Christian
States have recovered the Christian spirit—which to a large

23

he eS

INTRODUCTION

extent (so runs his theme) they have lost—they will burn
with love, and be filled with overwhelming desire to re-
conquer Palestine and convert infidels the world over. To
preach Christ, and, if need be, to suffer martyrdom for Him,
must be the goal of every true lover:

The Beloved said to His Lover: ‘“ Thou shalt praise
and defend me in those places where men most fear to
praise me.” The Lover answered: ‘‘ Provide me then
with love.’

The marks of the love which the Lover has to his
Beloved are, in the beginning, tears; in the continuance,
tribulations; and in the end, death.?

So much is evident. Hardly less so is the method which
Lull would employ to accomplish his purpose. He may or
may not have direétly denied that, as St. Thomas in par-
ticular had taught, there are truths which are incapable of
proof, and can only be believed and defended. He does
not, at any rate, deny this in set terms in Blanguerna, which
alone concerns us here. But he does hope to establish
throughout the world his crusades of learning, in which
properly trained apologists and linguists will be able so
powerfully to defend the mysteries of the Faith by argu-
ment that they will succeed in converting, direétly or in-
dire@tly, the entire world. He is a convinced believer in
polemic, and in the service which Reason can render Faith,
though abundant evidence shows that he was equally con-
vinced of the efficacy and need of prayer.

The pra¢tical nature of Ramén the Fool, however, devises
more skilful means of attack than the sledge-hammer of
argument. Some of these seem to us in modern days extra-
ordinarily naive, if not ludicrous—though one can never,
of course, be sure how far they are merely in character, and
how far they represent Lull’s own views. Others are univer-
sally recognised as sound to-day: our modern training

* Book of the Lover and the Beloved, 135, ? [bid., 233.
24

INTRODUCTION

colleges, and facilities for learning the languages of other
nations, would have delighted the panegyrist of Miramar
had he found them in one of the fantastic lands of his fancy
or the real ones of his travels.

Vv

Of the two smaller books which form part of this
romance—The Book of the Lover and the Beloved and The
Art of Contemplation—we have written elsewhere! To-
gether they form a noteworthy contribution to the Study of
Lull as a mystic. The Book of the Lover and the Beloved
reveals something of the mystical life of Lull himself, under
the fiction of reproducing certain of the experiences of
Blanquerna. The Art of Contemplation, which illustrates
Lull’s love of method, is a practical manual of devotion. It
makes no claim to describe in detail the substance of Lull’s
own contemplation, for such a thing, as it warns us,? would
be impossible.

The contemplation and devotion which Blanquerna
had, and the art and manner thereof, none can tell it
neither explain it, save only God.

But it gives some idea of the lines on which he worked,
and incidentally sets down certain of his meditations and
prayers, thus serving as a map or guide to the lower slopes
of Mount Carmel, the mystical heights of which it would
seem that he had been enabled to scale.

The two little books, then, are complementary. The first
shows the mystic in his life; the second reveals the mystic
as a teacher. Lull did well to make them part of B/an-
querna, for without them the book, though interesting as an
example of early didaétic narrative, would entirely fail to

1 In the introductions to the separately published editions of the Book of
the Lover and the Beloved (S.P.C.K., 1923) and the Art of Contemplation

(S.P.C.K., 1925).
2 e.g. Art of Contemplation, III, 12; XII, 7.

25

INTRODUCTION

present one of the most important aspects of the life of Lull.
Like his great fellow-Spaniard, St. Ignatius Loyola, who has
much in common with him, though he lived two hundred
and fifty years later, he was before everything else a practical
mystic. Each of those two words must be duly stressed
before the complete Lull can be in the slightest degree
understood: the Book of the Lover and the Beloved and the
Art of Contemplation convey the stress required.

The former is the greater of the two. It seems likely,
indeed, that it will take a high place in the near future
among the various mystical classics by foreign writers which
have been translated into English. The vividness, pictur-
esqueness and simplicity of the great majority of its
aphorisms have commended them to many whom the pro-
fundity—even the obscurity—of a few of the later ones
repels. And every reader is attraéted by the fervour and
devotion which inspires them. ‘The greatest can hardly
be forgotten: their very brevity imprints them upon the
mind.

Said the Lover to the Beloved: ‘‘’Thou that fillest
the sun with splendour, fill my heart with love.’ And
the Beloved answered: ‘‘ Hadét thou not fulness of love,
thine eyes had not shed those tears, neither hadst thou
come to this place to see Him that loves thee.’

Said the Lover: “O ye that love, if ye will have fire,
come light your lanterns at my heart; if water, come to
my eyes, whence flow the tears in streams; if thoughts
of love, come gather them from my meditations.””?

The Beloved clothed Himself in the raiment of His
Lover, that he might be His companion in glory for
ever. So the Lover desired to wear crimson garments

daily, that his dress might be more like to the dress of
his Beloved.?

1 Book of the Lover and the Beloved, 6.
wee Cl Pe ye * Ibid., 262.

26

INTRODUCTION

VI

Lull is always a poet, and none of his books is wholly
didaétic for long. He is also, as a rule, a conscious artist:
in places he reaches heights to which justice has not yet
been done. Unfortunately, it is impossible in translation
to convey a worthy idea of one of his principal merits,—
that of style.

The charm of Lull’s style is its simplicity. Except in the
two opuscules which form part of Blanguerna, he seldom
rises in this book to the pitch of eloquence. All his narrative
is in the natural, unaffected tone of conversation,—the tone,
less of a professional preacher, or a learned master in the
sciences, than of a wandering friar—simple, naive and
picturesque. The amazing thing is that it should be the
Style of one whose synthetic and encyclopedic mind con-
ceived schemes and subtleties innumerable, who was a
*“ do&tor illuminate,’’ a ‘‘ master universal in all arts and
sciences.” No part of the narrative of Blanguerna suggests
such aman. Most of it might be a tale told round the fire
in winter, by some unlettered follower of Christ, whose only
art was love.

This translation of B/languerna into English is not only
the first ever made, but probably the first of the book in
its entirety into any other language but Castilian. It is
dedicated by a humble member of the Sociedad Menéndez
y Pelayo to the memory of that great author, critic and son
of the Church, in whose honour the Society was founded.
Every student of Spanish literature owes a debt to Don
Marcelino, for there is no field in which he has not to con-
sult his works. But never does he need the guidance of the
master more than when studying the Spanish mystics.
Ramén Lull was a favourite theme for Menéndez y Pelayo’s
‘pen. He eulogised him in almost his first critical essay—
the famous Academy discourse; discussed his work with the

27

INTRODUCTION

acumen of the born critic, in the Origins of the Novel and
elsewhere, and edited a translation of this very Blanquerna
into Castilian. For this last enterprise, it is true, the best
version of the romance was not then at his disposal, but both
his edition and the essay which precedes it will remain of
permanent value. He approached Lull’s work in Lull’s
own spirit, as all must do who would rise to his heights and
penetrate to his depths. Only readers who are untouched
by the mystical fervour of the Fool of Love, and deaf to his
simple eloquence, will put it down unsatisfied. And for
these may be repeated, in Menéndez y Pelayo’s own lan-
guage, the much-needed warning that its beauty and
Strength lie, not on its surface, but beneath:

Let none attempt to read this book who sees in what
he reads no more than a fleeting diversion. Let none
attempt to read it who has no mind to penetrate beneath
its surface... . And let none so much approach it
unless he be prepared to appreciate the simplicity and
raed which in its primitive pages he will surely

nd.

28

GLORIOUS LORD GOD, ONE IN ESSENCE AND THREE IN
PERSONS! TO THY PRAISE AND HONOUR, WITH THY
GRACE, VIRTUE, AND BLESSING, BEGINNETH THE BOOK
OF EVAST AND ALOMA AND BLANQUERNA THEIR SON:
THE WHICH IS MADE WITH INTENTION THAT MEN MAY
LOVE, COMPREHEND, REMEMBER AND SERVE THEE, WHO
ART VERY GOD, LORD AND CREATOR OF ALL THINGS.

PROLOGUE

In signification of the five Wounds which our Lord God
Jesus Christ received upon the Tree of the True Cross to
redeem His people from the bondage of the devil and the
captivity wherein they lay, we would divide this work into
five books. And herein will we give instrudtions and rules
of life in a manner according to the which there are distin-
guished five estates of persons who may find profit herein.
The first is of matrimony, the second of the religious life,
the third of prelacy, the fourth of the apostolic estate of the
Pope and his Cardinals, and the fifth of the life of the
hermit.

29

BEGINNETH THE FIRST BOOK WHICH Is
OF MATRIMONY

CHAPTER I

OF THE MATRIMONY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

In a certain city it came to pass that a goodly youth, of
right noble lineage, the son of a gentle burgess, became,
through the death of his father, very wealthy in temporal
riches. This youth, Evast by name, had been brought up
and instructed by his father in right good manners: he was
well-favoured in person, noble of heart, well equipped in all
things, and knowing so much of letters and sciences that
he had a passing great knowledge of Holy Scripture.
Greatly was this Evast sought by men of religion in the
city that he might become one of themselves, and by certain
worldly men? also who desired to be allied with him through
matrimony. Now while he was thus importuned by re-
ligious men and by men esteemed in the world, he gave
thought one night to the order of religion and the order of
matrimony, and it came to his will that he should embrace
the religious life in order to flee the vain delights of this
world. But he remembered the abundance of temporal
riches which his father had bequeathed to him and how it
was laid upon him to maintain the great house and to con-
tinue the almsdeeds which his father had made while he
lived this present life. For all the which reasons, and
because, moreover, he was the head of his line, he inclined
to the order of matrimony, determining, for so long as he
was in that estate, to give good doétrine and example to all
that were likewise therein. He desired also to have sons
who should be servants of God, to whom he might leave the
temporal goods that he possessed, that before his death he
might serve God in some religious order.

1 The meaning is hardly more than “ laymen.”

31

BLANQUERNA

2. When Evast had conceived and deliberated in his will
how that he should embrace the order of matrimony, he said
to certain of his kinsfolk, especially to those in whom he had
the greatest trust, that they should seek in the city some
damsel of noble lineage,—for by nobility of lineage the
heart is fortified against wickedness and deceit. He desired
further to have a wife who should be sound and well-formed
in body, that nature might give good constitution to their
offspring. And, above all, Evast besought his kinsfolk to
seek out for him one that was humble and well brought up,
and whose parents, together with herself, should be well
pleased and honoured by the alliance.

3. There lived in that city a lady that was much honoured,
and of great courtesy, who for long had been a widow, and
had a daughter, by name Aloma. Throughout the city it
was reported that this damsel ruled and direéted all her
mother’s house, and moreover that she was right virtuous:
the good lady that was her mother gave her this authority
that she might know in what manner to maintain and govern
her house when she should be wedded, and she gave her
occupations also, that no foolish and evil thoughts should
enter her mind through overmuch leisure and incline her to
base deeds.

4. All the qualities that Evast desired in his wife were
found in Aloma; and those that sought a wife for Evast
according to his will were certified of her virtuous life. And
so by the will of God the matrimony of Evast and Aloma
was accomplished.

5. Throughout all the city was noised abroad the day of
the wedding of Evast and Aloma, and many were the men
and women that desired upon that day to do them great
honour, But Evast would have none of it, for he desired
to give to the people an example of humility, the which
virtue is wont to be despised upon such days, and pride,
vanity and vainglory to be favoured. Wherefore, upon the
day of their wedding, Evagt and Aloma went to the church
a2

OF THE MATRIMONY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

with but few persons, to signify by such means their
humility; and that the Sacrament of the Mass should not
be thought of less account than themselves, they were
clothed in humble raiment. Together with them were
devout and holy persons, that their prayers might be the
more surely heard, and that God might be the better pleased
with the oblation made by Evast and Aloma of their persons
and of the possessions which He had given them.

6. The Mass on that day was celebrated by a holy man,
that through his holiness the grace of God might rest upon
Evast and Aloma. This holy man preached and declared
to them the intention for the which matrimony is ordained,
and gave them good doétrine, setting before them how they
must live and fulfil the sacrament of matrimony and the
promises which they had mutually made, that God might be
served thereby and His grace through them be shown forth
to all men.

7. Throughout that day were prayer and devotion made,
and a great feast for the poor of Jesus Christ, who praise
and bless God when alms are given tothem. Through these
is Jesus Christ represented at a wedding, whereto the poor
are called and such wealthy men turned away therefrom as
bear not in mind the Passion of the Son of God, wasting
and squandering those temporal goods which the poor sorely
need, and spending them in the service of men full of worldly
vanity, like unto themselves.

8. On that day of their wedding Evast and Aloma served
the poor of Jesus Christ, and in remembrance of the
humility of our Lord Jesus Christ they washed the hands
and the feet of thirteen poor men, kissing their hands and
feet, and clothing their naked bodies with new raiment.
And it was proclaimed throughout that city that every poor
man who desired to receive alms for the love of God should
come to that wedding-feast.

'g. The kinsfolk and the friends of Evast and Aloma like-
wise served the poor of Jesus Christ on that day at the
c 33

BLANQUERNA

wedding-feast. After which they departed to dine, each in
his own house, that they might not take the viands from the
poor, and Evast and Aloma dined together at the table of
the thirteen poor men. And when they had dined, Evast
went to a monastery of religious men to spend the rest of
that day in prayer and contemplation, and Aloma went to
another house wherein was an order of women, to praise and
call upon God our Lord. And to each of these two houses,
and to all the other religious houses of that city, Evast made
a gift, and commanded abundant vi€tuals to be given on
that day of his marriage.

10. Evast honoured his bride as it behoved him, and
treated her with much respeét, to the end that love and fear
might be increased within her, for these two things are well
found in the heart of a woman. He gave her authority and
management of the possessions of the house, and himself
resolved to engage in trade, that in humility he might bear
some office and not be idle, and ever have temporal goods
for the maintenance of his house. For by overmuch leisure
man comes to poverty and pride and indolence, and many
a time, through over-great confidence in their nobility and
riches, men of the city come to failure and poverty and give
themselves to vice.

11, In the house of Evast and Aloma were no servants
that were ill bred, lest their ill breeding should make some
evil thought to be born in the mind of Aloma. Each day
Evast and Aloma went to hear and behold the Holy Sacra-
ment of the Mass, and, returning to their house, gave alms
of the possessions which God had bestowed upon them.
After this they were occupied in the maintenance of their
house. During the week, and upon days of festival, they
went gladly to sermons and to hear religious men, that they
might ligten to the Word of God and receive doétrine
whereby they might continue in the estate of holy life.

12, The whole city was advantaged by the life and good
estate and example of Evast and Aloma, for by their example
34

OF THE MATRIMONY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

were greatly edified both those who dwelt in matrimony and
likewise the religious; and by all men in the city they were
loved and honoured. So greatly were they respected in that
city that men and women alike found counsel and favour in
them, and consolation in their necessities.

13. For much time and long Evast and Aloma lived to-
gether and had no children; and it chanced one day that
Aloma considered the passing of this present life, and re-
membered the intent wherein she had entered the estate of
matrimony, namely to bear children who should be servants
of God. Then her eyes filled with tears and her heart with
grief and sadness because she had no children. And she
went into a fruitful! orchard which belonged to the house,
and kneeled before a tree which was near to a fair water-
spring; there she wept for a great space, praying to Almighty
God, the Lord of all, that in His sovereign mercy He would
give her a son, who should be His servant, and take from
her the grief and sadness which was hers because she had
no children.

14. While Aloma wept thus, and besought the God of
Heaven and earth to hear her prayers, Evast after his wont
entered the orchard and beheld Aloma weeping sorely,
whereat he greatly marvelled, and spake to her as follows:
““ Wherefore weepest thou, Aloma, and why art thou so
sad? What can I do that thou mayest be comforted? I
marvel greatly to see these thy tears, and thy countenance
revealing to me such sadness of heart, when never until now
have I seen in thee a sign of trouble or displeasure. Aloma,
my beloved, tell me now, wherefore is this? I had thought
to know all thy desires, but it seemeth now that there hath
entered into thy mind that which thou hast not revealed
toame.”’

15. Aloma considered the words of Evast her lord, and
had shame to reveal to him her thoughts, for she feared and

‘1 liz. “ bearing many flowers”: the orchard was still in blossom but
gave promise of abundant fruit.
oe)

BLANQUERNA

loved him greatly. But lest Evast should harbour some
suspicion or doubtful thought concerning her, she resolved
to tell him the reason of her tears, and she said: “ Evast, my
lord, never in all my life, since I entered thy power, have I
had in my heart thought or desire which constrained me so
greatly as does now my desire to bear a son; for it would
be a grievous loss if the good things that we possess were
inherited by any other than a son of our own body.
And God gives much grace and honour to a man when
He gives him sons to serve him, whereby his name and
lineage may be preserved. And therefore, when I think
upon death, and see that I have no son to whom may
be bequeathed this house, and who may maintain these
possessions, and the alms that are given of them, I
cannot choose but weep, neither can my heart in aught
find consolation.”

16. Evast answered Aloma and said: ‘‘ Through the
virtue of God are all things created for the service of man;
and God denies to man many things which he desires, to
the end that he may know the greatness of His Power and
Will, and have patience, and submit his will to the Will of
God. All these things and many more does God ordain, to
increase the occasion and means whereby man may have
great merit, that Divine Justice may grant him great happi-
ness in the glory of Paradise. And since this is so, foolish
indeed is the person and the soul that considers not all these
things; and it is but a mark of pride to wish to have all that
may be desired. Thus for a man to have patience when he
may not obtain that which he desires is a greater and a better
thing than is the good which follows from the fulfilment of
his desire to possess all things soever that may be loved.
And if it were certain that all men loved and served God,
then to have sons would indeed be good, and my soul would
desire it greatly; but since it is in doubt whether they would
be obedient to God or no, therefore do I greatly hesitate in
desiring to have a son.”

36

OF THE BIRTH OF BLANQUERNA

17. Many other weighty arguments and sound examples
did Evast expound to Aloma that he might comfort her and
drive the sadness from her soul; and through their great
love Aloma was comforted by the words of Evast her hus-
band, and she spake these words: “I bless and adore the
Sovereign Lord Who has and holds all things in His power.
Blessed be He Who gives me to know my low estate, for
] am unworthy to have all that I desire, and as for the good
things that God hath given me, I have neither deserved
them nor can I thank Him for them as I ought. Let then
' my desires and wishes be ever subjeé to His Will. Through-
out all the days of my life I know that it behoves me to wish
only that which is good and pleasing in the sight of God;
and so greatly at fault is my wrong desire that I will ever
love and hope in the wondrous mercy of God.”

CHAPTER: Ii
OF THE BIRTH AND GOOD UPBRINGING OF BLANQUERNA

In charity, patience and humility lived Evast and Aloma
ever, and on Sundays and great festivals Evast went to the
monasteries of the city, and with the monks therein he
sang and praised his Creator. Even so likewise did Aloma
in the convents with the nuns; and they went to the hos-
pitals, doing service to the unfortunate that were therein,
and visited the poor and needy to whom they secretly gave
alms, and the orphaned children they put to some trade, to
the end that, when they were of age, their poverty should
not give them occasion to sin.

2. While Evast and Aloma did these and many other
good deeds, God, Who is the fulness of all good and grace,
was mindful of the desire of Aloma, and of her humility and
patience, and gave her a fair son who received the name of
Blanquerna. Great was the pleasure and joy and gladness
of Evast and Aloma at the birth of Blanquerna, and Evast,
delaying nothing, went to the church to give thanks to God

oH

BLANQUERNA

for the son that He had given them, and to pray that Blan-
querna his son might serve Him all the days of his life. On
the day that Blanquerna was born, Evast made many alms
to the poor of Jesus Christ; and on the eighth day the child
received baptism, having for his godfathers and godmothers
persons of holy life, that through their sanctity God might
bless Blanquerna with His grace. On that day Evast caused
Mass to be sung solemnly by a holy chaplain, the same that
gave the sacrament of baptism to Blanquerna; for that
sacrament should be given by no miserable sinner that is
unworthy of conferring it, since it is the beginning of life
and of the road whereby man travels to everlasting rest.

3. Blanquerna was given a nurse that was healthy in her
person, that he might be nourished with healthy milk, for
through poorness of milk children become weak and sickly;
and the nurse was honest and of worthy life, for in suckling
children it is greatly to be avoided that the nurse should be
sickly or sinful or given to vice, or of evil humour, corrupt
of body or in any other wise unhealthy.

4. During all that year wherein Blanquerna was born,
Aloma gave naught to her son save only milk, for by defe&
of strong digestion infants in their first year can digest no
other food, such as bread sopped in milk or oil, which
parents give them, or other such food which they are made
by force to eat; and for this reason children have pustules
or scabs, ulcers or boils, and the humours begin to rise up,
and destroy their brain or their sight or cause in them many
other infirmities.

5. This child Blanquerna was brought up with great
diligence. Aloma his mother clothed him in such manner
that in winter he felt somewhat of the cold and in summer
of the heat, for the elements whereof the human body is
composed should accord with the seasons in the which they
have their operations, to give a tempered condition to the
body, that the evil humours may not rise therein. And
— kept her son Blanquerna with her until he could
3

OF THE BIRTH OF BLANQUERNA

walk and play with other children, and she constrained him
to naught that is contrary to that which nature requires of
children at such an age: till the age of eight years she left
him to the course of nature.

6. When Blanquerna was eight years of age his father
Evast put him to study, and caused him to be instruéted in
the contents of the Book of Dodrine for Boys, wherein it is
related how in the beginning a man should instruét his son
in the mother tongue, and impart to him sound do@trine and
knowledge of the articles of the faith and the ten command-
ments of the law and the seven sacraments of Holy Mother
Church and the seven virtues and the seven deadly sins, and
the other things that are contained in the said book.

7. It chanced one day that Aloma gave to Blanquerna
her son for breakfast, before he went to school in the morn-
ing, roast meat, and afterwards a flawn to eat in school if
the desire for it came to him. When Evast his father knew
this, he reproved Aloma Sstraitly and said to her that to
children should be given naught but bread to eat in the
mornings, lest they become dainty and gluttonous, and lose
the desire to eat at table when the hour comes to dine; for
by eating only bread children find not therein such relish
that through excess of eating the operations of nature are
constrained; and even bread should only be given to
children when they ask for it.

8. Of all things that were provided at table was Blan-
querna accustomed and made to eat, lest his nature should
be habituated more to one sort of viand than to another.
He was forbidden to drink wine that was strong, and wine
that was overmuch watered, and to take strong sauces that
destroy the natural heat. A tutor, who was given to Blan-
querna for guardian and for master, took him every day to
church, and taught him to pray to God and to hear Mass
attentively and devoutly; and after Mass he took him to the
school of music that he might learn to serve a sung Mass well.

1 Doctrina pueril,—a book of instructions written by Lull himself.

JD

BLANQUERNA

g. Blanquerna learned so much grammar that he was
able to speak and to understand Latin, and afterwards he
Studied logic and rhetoric and natural philosophy, to the end
that he might the better know the science of medicine where-
with to keep his body in health, and the science of theology
whereby he should know, love and serve God and guide his
soul towards the everlasting life of Paradise.

10. When Blanquerna had learned the Book of the Prin-
ciples and Steps to Medicine whereby he gained sufficient
knowledge to learn to govern the health of his body, his
father caused him to go to the school of theology, wherein
he continually heard Holy Scripture, and was catechized
from time to time in questions of theology.

11, While Blanquerna studied thus, Evast nurtured him
in fear and in love, in the habits of the which two virtues
children and youths should ever be nurtured and brought
up, with fasting, prayer, confession and giving of alms, and
humility of speech and conversation and companionship of
good men; and in other things like to these. Evast in-
structed his son Blanquerna, to the end that when he should
be grown and arrive at man’s estate his manner of life
should by nature and good habit be pleasing both to God
and to man, and that he should not rebel against the customs
which befit good breeding and which good citizens and men
of gentle birth must ever bear in mind.

CHAPTER III
OF THE QUESTIONS THAT EVAST PUT TO HIS SON BLANQUERNA

By the grace of the Divine illumination, Evast bethought

him of the time when he desired to enter an order? of re-

ligion, and he sought to prove his son Blanquerna, and to

discover if he could rule himself and the house in such a
* Another book by Lull,—the Libre dels principis e graus de medicina.

_ * orde. This word has sometimes the general meaning of “ state,” some-
times the more restricted sense of “ order,”

40

OF QUESTIONS EVAST PUT TO BLANQUERNA

way as to serve and please God, that himself and Aloma his
wife might severally enter religious orders, and leave the
world and forsake their temporal possessions. While Evast
considered thus, Blanquerna his son returned from the
school. Now Blanquerna was a gentle youth, comely and
pleasant to look upon, and he had reached the age of
eighteen years, being ever obedient to his parents, of right
good habits and gentle upbringing.

2. “ Fair son!” said Evast. ‘‘ I would have thee answer
me this question: Near to this city there Stands a castle, at
the entrance to a great wood. It chanced that a huntsman
went into the wood to hunt deer and wild goats and such
like beasts, as was his wont. And with an arrow he wounded
a stag, but all that day he could neither lay hands upon it
nor find a trace of it. Now as the hunter returned to the
city he met a traveller who bore in his hand an arrow. And
the hunter enquired of the traveller whence he had that
arrow. ‘The traveller answered that he had found it in a
dead stag which he had sold toa butcher. And there arose
a dispute betwixt the two as to which of them should have
the price of the stag; for the hunter said that it was he that
had killed it, and that if he had not wounded it the other
would not have found it dead. The traveller said that for-
tune had given it to him, and that the hunter had already
despaired of finding the stag, for he was returning to the
city. Each of them (said Evast) brought forth many and
great arguments the one against the other. Now I would
fain know, son Blanquerna, what thy judgment would be,
as to which of these two had the right to receive the price
of the stag, or if it should be divided between them.”

3. Blanquerna answered his father Evast, and said:
‘‘ My lord and father! Thou knowest well that occasion is
more powerful than fortune,’ because in occasion is the final

1 Modern English would rather say “ design ” and “chance,” for “ occa-
sion” and “ fortune,” but in medieval literature the words here used are
of common occurrence,

41

BLANQUERNA

intention whereby the stag was wounded and killed, and
fortune has no intention either of itself or in its a€tion upon
another. And since by fortune the traveller found the stag,
but by occasion it was killed, and the occasion lay with him
that killed it, therefore, according to right and justice, to
preserve the superiority that occasion has over fortune, the
stag must be adjudged to the hunter; for, were it adjudged
to the other, an injustice would be done to occasion, and
fortune would be honoured in a fashion that befits it not.
For the which reason I adjudge the price of the stag upon
every ground to the hunter, provided that he can first prove
the arrow to be his, for it might be that the arrow was that
of another huntsman who killed the stag, and not of him
who said that he had killed it.”

4. Then Evast asked his son if it were just that the stag
should be returned to the huntsman, or the price which he
had received for it. Blanquerna answered and said that the
butcher by right and justice should have the stag, for he
had bought it according to the usages of his trade, be-
lieving it to belong to the seller. And since the traveller
had sold it in the belief that the price should be his, an
injustice would therefore be done to the butcher if the gain
which he would receive from the stag should be taken from
him. And ill-seeming would it be if the traveller should
receive injury in place of thanks, the which thing would
follow if he gave satisfaCtion to the butcher together with
the price of the stag and returned the stag to the hunter;
for the which cause it was right and just that to the hunter
should belong the price of the stag alone.

5. Evast said further to Blanquerna: ‘‘ Tell me, my son,
if the hunter is obliged to give the other aught of the price
of the stag.” “ My lord and father!” said Blanquerna,
“ Two kinds of law in general are there in the world, from
the which proceed all the categories of law in the par-
ticular; the one kind is according to God, and the other
according to the world. The manner of law that is ordained
42

OF QUESTIONS EVAST PUT TO BLANQUERNA

and disposed according to the law of God is more subtle
and the occasion of more scruples than that which is of the
world. Wherefore by this distin@tion between the two rules
aforesaid, I may know that, according to the nobler right,
the hunter is constrained to give to the traveller somewhat
in consideration of his labour and in respeét of charity,
fraternity and conscience, and furthermore, of good breed-
ing and courtesy, and against avarice, injury and envy. But
that the huntsman freely, and of his own will, may have the
virtues aforesaid, giving to the traveller some part of the
price of the stag, it is ordained by divine ordinance and
temporal justice that the huntsman by temporal law be not
constrained to give any part of the price to the traveller;
for, were he so constrained, there would follow none of the
freedom which pertains to merit, whereby man may have
the virtues aforesaid, nor would temporal law be set below
divine; in the which case God would have abased the nobler
law to magnify the less noble, which is a thing ill-beseeming
and to be rejected by all reason.”’

6. Evast said to Blanquerna: “Tell me further, my son, if
the hunter, by giving naught to the traveller, commits sin for
which he merits the pains of hell.’ Blanquerna answered:
“There isa difference, my lord and father, between sin mortal
and venial; and if the traveller had any right toa part of the
price of the stag, the ordaining of the two kinds of law afore-
mentioned would be contrary to justice and to God, and this is
a thing impossible; by the which impossibility I may under-
Stand and know that the hunter commits no mortal sin if he
give naught to the traveller. But since he will use therein no
courtesy nor charity, as is fitting, to mortify the conscience,
therefore he commits venial sin, whereby he merits not ever-
lafting damnation, yet merits less of eternal glory.”

4. All these questions, and many more which it would
take over long time to relate, did Evast put to Blanquerna
his son, and Blanquerna replied right perfectly to them all,
answering them with effective argument.

43

BLANQUERNA

8. So when Evast saw that his son shone thus in know-
ledge, and was adorned with good breeding and habits, he
was greatly pleased thereat, and he entered a chapel in his
house, wherein he and Aloma prayed to God secretly and
were wont to hear Mass daily, and to give thanks to God
when they had risen from table. The altar-piece was of
St. Andrew, in whom Evast and Aloma trusted greatly that
they should receive grace and blessing from God.

g. When Evast entered the chapel, he kneeled before
the altar and made the sign of the cross as was his wont.
Then he spake these words: ‘‘ O glorious Lord God, Who
hast not forgotten Thy servant that so oft has desired to
serve and honour Thee in the state of religion! Blessed be
Thou, O Lord, and blessed be Thy mercy, which in pity
and condescension has deigned to grant me all my will in
my son Blanquerna. For long have I hoped and desired
that my temporal goods might be entrusted to him, and that
I and Aloma might be enabled to contemplate, love and
serve Thee in a religious order, making remembrance of
Thy holy Passion and grieving for our faults and sins. I
adore, O Lord, Thy goodness, Thy greatness and Thy
power, Thy wisdom, and love, and the other virtues wherein
Thou art one God in essence, Father and Son and Holy
Spirit. Blessed be Thou, O Lord, in Thyself and in all Thy
virtues and honours, for that Thou hast given me a son so
worthy and so prudent, to whom, from this day onward, J]
may entrust and leave the conduét of this house. To Thee,
O Lord, as is my bounden obligation, I commend him.”

CHAPTER 1V

OF THE DISAGREEMENT THAT WAS BETWEEN EVAST
AND ALOMA

Evast considered long how he might reveal to Aloma his
wife the desire of his heart, and induce her to enter the
estate of religion, for he feared greatly lest she should wish
44

DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN EV AST AND ALOMA

to delay. On the day following, after Mass, Evagt and
Aloma remained in the chapel, and when all the rest had
left it, Evast spake to Aloma these words: ‘‘ Aloma, my
beloved! By the grace of God, our son Blanquerna is en-
dowed with great wisdom and moreover is of right worthy
habits and gentle breeding, and he has come now to an age
when we may leave to him the care both of himself and of
all our possessions and the management of this our house.
And the time is come for Blanquerna to take to himself a
wife, and for ourselves to leave this miserable world and
enter the estate of religion that we may live in greater san¢tity.
And as by good living we have until now enlightened and
instructed those that are in the estate of matrimony, even so
by the sanctity of a good life let us give example henceforward
to all such as are in the estate of religion. Therefore is it
fitting that we make division of our temporal possessions,
and for the love of God bestow them on the poor of Jesus
Christ, and that thou choose that convent for women which
shall please thee best, while I by thy leave will enter also a
religious order as I have so greatly desired.”’

2. Very strange seemed to Aloma these words which
Evast spake to her, wherefore she turned pale, suspecting
in her heart that she had in some manner displeased him
and given him cause to desire to leave her. Wherefore she
took counsel with herself ere she replied. Then Evast spake
to her these words: ‘‘Aloma! Wherefore answerest thou
me not? And why is it that thou hast such thought?
Hast thou not heard my words?” ‘‘ My lord!” answered
Aloma. ‘‘ Thy words have I heard indeed, and thou hast
given me to suspect that thou hast ill-will or displeasure
against me, for the which cause thou wouldst fain leave me.
If it seem to thee that in aught I have been in fault or have
sinned against thee, I pray thee that thou wilt in some other
manner be avenged, rather than leave me at the end of my
days, for greater need have I of thy aid and governance than
heretofore.”

45

BLANQUERNA

3. “ Aloma!”’ said Evast, “ Thou mayest be certain
that at no time has my will been displeased or angered with
thee or with any work of thine. Rather would I have thee
know that since it pleased God to unite us twain in matri-
mony, I have given thanks to Him every day of my life for
granting me thy sweet companionship. For among the
gifts that God has given in this world to them that love Him,
for the which they are bound to make continual thanks, is
companionship that is loyal and true. And therefore,
Aloma, think thou not neither fear in any wise that I am
displeased at aught that thou hast done; and not only so,
but I would crave thy pardon if ever I have wronged thee
or done aught that seemed to thee evil. But since we have
come to the end of our days, and since the state of religion
is of greater sanctity than the state of matrimony in the
which we now are, and since all men should approach God
by good works as nearly as they may, and we ourselves have
now both time and disposition, therefore I pray thee, who
hast never been disobedient to my words or prayers, to con-
sent to this prayer which I make thee, that we may both of
-us enter the life of contemplation, leaving the condudt of
this active life entirely to our son Blanquerna. So can we
do our utmost that by the grace of God we may dwell to-
gether, world without end, in the eternal glory of Paradise.”

4. “ My lord Evast!” said Aloma. ‘‘ With shame and
fear must I needs reply to thy words, and the God of glory
knows well that never was it in my mind or thought to dis-
obey thee in any matter soever, nor to desire disagreement
betwixt my will and thine. But since the beginning of our
union was in the state of matrimony, and the beginning
must ever have regard to the end!—that is to say, that to-
gether we should ever be and remain till death come at last
to divide us—know therefore, my lord Evast, that in no
wise will I aét contrarily to the beginning of this first eState

1 ha tots temps esguart a la fi, i.e. “looks ever towards the end (which
shall complete it).”

46

DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN EVAST AND ALOMA

wherein God has placed me, and wherein He has kept and
preserved me from sin against the estate of matrimony. In
all things else, do with me as thou wilt, so that God be
served and praised, and thou thyself have pleasure therein.
To each and every thing will I gladly consent. But never
will I abandon the estate in the which God has placed me,
nor shouldst thou, saving thine honour, counsel me to enter
another estate to the which I am less devoted than to that
of marriage wherein I now am; for lack of devotion causes
many a man and many a woman to despise their state of
life, and to forsake it. I pray thee to tell me wherefore thou
lovest the estate of religion more than that estate of matri-
mony wherein thou art.”

5. “ Aloma!” said Evast. ‘“‘ Thine answer grieves me
greatly; but I think that thou speakest thus to the end that
thy submission may please me the more, and that I may
understand how thou forsakest the estate wherein thou art
against thy will, and enterest the religious life for love of
me, wherefore I am the more thy debtor. But thou needest
not to seek my greater indebtedness or pleasure, for thyself
and thine affection well content me. Let us rather strive to
win favour and merit of God, to Whose judgment-seat we
each must come. And all that I know of thy saintly life,
and of my own faults, which are many and great, assures
me that thy gladness at passing to the holy estate of religion
will be greater than mine.”

6. When Aloma perceived that Evast thought her to be
excusing herself from his request to the end that she might
try him or have thanks of him, her eyes filled with tears,
and she fell to weeping bitterly. Then, deeply sighing, she
answered him in these words: ‘“‘ My lord Evast! God alone
can tell all that is in the heart of man. Know thou then
indeed that my heart hath never suffered such grief or pain
as now that I see myself opposed to thy will; for the love
which I have ever borne thee constrains me so greatly that
the tears of my heart rise even to mine eyes, and mine eyes

47

BLANQUERNA

have shame to be in thy presence, and my conscience would
compel me to believe that this thing, wherein there is no
fault, is sin. Wherefore, O my lord, I would have thee
know that I answer thee according to my present estate and
my will: for my will constrains me and makes me to suffer
because I obey thee not, yet it makes me to abhor the part-
ing and the separation that there would be between us if
we entered into diverse estates. And thy parting would be
grief to me because my will would fain have thee alway,
and mine eyes desire alway to see thee; so that my heart is
heavy because I cannot fulfil that which thy will desires,
since it would ever displease and afflict me.”

7. “ Aloma!” replied Evast. ‘‘ Both thy arguments and
thy affection please me, and I am sure of this, that the love
of man and wife is the will of God. And for all these
reasons, and for many beside, my heart will have much grief
if I leave thee. Whensoever I see thee I am glad, and
greatly cheered in countenance and joyful of heart when I
remember thy worthy upbringing and devout practices or
hear that men speak well of thee. But since it behoves me
to love God my Creator and Saviour more than thee or aught
beside, and since I fain would offer and receive His glorious
Body, therefore the strength of this great desire makes me
to forget the affliGion that I shall have in losing thee. Yet
know that in my heart is great suffering when I think that
I should be the occasion of aught that displeases or grieves
thee. But since the love of God gives man strength and
power to bear many trials and to despise the world, there-
fore I exhort thee to the end that love may make us both to
bear and suffer the pain of our separation, to the greater
love and service of God.”

8. “ My lord Evast!”’ said Aloma. “ True it is that in
this world there is no office so noble and profitable as to
celebrate Mass and to consecrate the sacred Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ; yet although it be so noble, for no man
= lawful to enter upon so holy a mystery except he be
4

DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN EVAST AND ALOMA

thereto duly ordained; and to this end he must do no wrong
nor cause trial to another, in whom may be engendered
wrath and occasion of sin. And every man is not worthy,
neither should he hold himself worthy, to serve in so
glorious an office. Wherefore if thou, my lord, desire to be
a clerk and to sing Mass, it suffices thee to go daily to the
church with the friars, and to assist at Mass and the other
offices, aiding them in the singing and reading of psalms,
lessons, responses and antiphons, and serving the priest
that says Mass, according to the custom which now thou
observest, desiring with all thy heart to be a minister at the
altar. But hold thyself not worthy so to be, for this thou
art not, since God hath not placed thee in that estate but in
the estate of matrimony. And I will go day by day to the
convent according to my wont, joining the nuns in singing
and responding at Mass, in honour of the holy Sacrament
of the Altar. Let us in this wise do all that we may, and
not leave that estate of matrimony wherein we are and
wherein God has placed us.”
g. “‘ Aloma!”’ said Evast. ‘‘ Wearied and fatigued am
I by the possession and handling of temporal wealth, and
my prayers thereby are impeded. Into my heart has entered
the desire to leave carnal delights and to give myself so
earnestly to prayer that naught else shall be in my heart or
in my thought save God alone. I would make penance and
satisfaction for my faults and for the evil that I have done;
for, both clothed and shod, in my meat and drink, in the com-
fort of soft beds, and in many and divers matters more have
I erred and strayed. And I have the most earnest will to
preach the word of God and the Passion of His Son Jesus
Chris our Lord. And since the religious life 1s an estate
more fitted for all these things than is the estate of marriage,
therefore would I leave the life wherein I am, and pass to
that of the blessed religious, doing penance with them and
performing all the things aforesaid. And if thou didst take
from me that happiness which the religious life can give me,
D 49

BLANQUERNA
then would& thou be an enemy to the increase of my
happiness.” + re

10. “ My lord Evast!” said Aloma. “ If thou wilt for-
sake the world to serve God the better and leave to Blan-
querna all thy possessions, I am content, so that thou and
I remain still together. In this chapel we can adore, bless
and pray to God. We should neither need to have com-
merce with temporal goods nor concern ourselves with the
necessities of the body, since with all this Blanquerna is able
to deal. For these causes therefore we need not to enter
another estate. If thou wilt do penance and lead an ascetic
life, there is a place more nigh at hand in thine own house
than in a house of religion, and thou canst do all these things
more secretly in the married State than as a religious. Like-
wise I am prepared to go with thee to a desert place or a
mountain, that there we may both do penance, and the
harder the life that we lead to serve the King of glory, the
greater will be the content within my soul. Let us both live
chastely, knowing not each other according to the flesh.
Instead of preaching, thou mayest live a holy life, and by
thy good example preach to all that are in the estate of
matriage, edifying also such men as are in the estate of re-
ligion. What thing soever that thou pleasest mayest thou
do with me, provided that thou wilt have me do naught that
is against the sacrament which binds us.”

11; “ Aloma!” said Evast. “ Great virtue is it to be
obedient, to give and to submit thy will to another for the
love of our Lord God.” ‘‘ My lord Evast!” answered
Aloma. ‘“ Great virtue is it to be lord of thine own will,
and to rule it well, which each can do better in himself than
in another.”

12. “ Aloma!”’ said Evast further. “‘ Great merit is won
by him that forsakes all things for the love of God, devoting
himself to His service.” ‘“ Evast my lord!”’ said Aloma.
“* Great merit has he that is in the world and possesses tem-
poral things without sin, and devotes himself to the service

LXe)

DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN EVAST AND ALOMA

of the poor of Jesus Christ; and great merit has he that is
rich in the goods of this world yet poor in spirit; and if it
be virtue to beg for the love of Jesus Christ, it cannot be a
vice to give to the poor who beg for love of Him; and of
doubtful wisdom is it to leave so many riches to Blan-
querna, who is young and has not yet proved his fitness
to administer the possessions of this world. Therefore
I think it good that we do in this house the penance that
thou desirest, and if it seems well to thee that we go not
without the house, I am content. Let us show our son
Blanquerna how he may rule himself and these our posses-
sions, that they may be kept and preserved for the poor
of Jesus Christ, who receive support daily in this house with
the alms that thou givest them.”

13. “ Aloma!”’ said Evast. “ Many arguments both
weighty and true have I set before thee, wherefore thou
canst and shouldst obey my requests. I pray thee then
that thou excuse not thyself, neither resist my wishes, but
make me glad and joyful, granting me that which for long
I have desired, and bring not grief nor sadness nor dis-
pleasure to my soul, knowing how loyally I have ever loved
pmee?”’

14. ‘My lord Evast!”’ answered Aloma. ‘‘I have
heard thine arguments, and I have enquired of my heart
if I could consent to thy commands and prayers, but I can
find no way whereby I may so consent. And since anger
and ill-will are oft-times engendered when one man obeys
not the prayers of another, therefore I pray thee that thou
speak no more to me henceforward of this thing, for I may
not further answer thee, and I fear lest between us there be
engendered ill-will. Let us then return to our former con-
versation, and speak of God and of His works, as is our wont.
And at whatsoever time thou wilt perform those things
which I set forth at the first, I am ready to follow thy will.”

tg. Greatly was Evast displeased when he could not
convert Aloma his wife to his will, and many were the days

sa

BLANQUERNA

and the hours wherein he spake to her further, using the
words aforementioned. But each time he caused her grief
and pain, and never could he in any wise move her; where-
fore Evast had compassion upon Aloma because of the pain
which he gave her, and resolved never more to speak to her
of the matter, but to commend it wholly to the hand of God
and to His Will. So he purposed inwardly to please Aloma
by doing penance in their house, to remain therein and
never again to leave it, lest they should see and hear the
vain things of the world without, which impede the soul
from the remembrance, understanding and love of God and
of His honours. When Evast had thus resolved in his will,
on the next morning, after Mass, he called Aloma as he was
wont, and Aloma began forthwith to weep, thinking that
he was about to speak the same words as before, which
brought grief to her soul. ‘‘ Aloma!”’ said Evast. ‘“ Weep
not; for since thou hast so high and resolute a spirit, and
wilt for naught incline to my prayers, therefore will I bend
my heart to thy will to obey thy wishes. Let us then en-
deavour ourselves to lead a life of rigid penance secretly in
this house all the days of our life, even for so long as shall
please the will of God. And let us give full authority to
our son Blanquerna over ail our goods, saving such as we
shall retain, for the need which we have thereof to sustain
our lives while it shall please God that we live. Let us give
him all that remains, and seek for him a wife forthwith.
To-morrow, after Mass, let us call him and acquaint him
with our design, after the which we can arrange our own
affairs and draw up a rule whereby we may live in penitence.”
16. Greatly joyed Aloma at these words which Evatt
spake to her, praising and blessing God that He had given
these desires to Evast her husband. And she answered
Evast that she was ready to fulfil all that he had set forth
in the words aforesaid, and that she thought it well to do
penance secretly in the house and to draw up the rule which
should bind them.
Ga

CHARGE OF THE HOUSEHOLD

CEHAPTER V

HOW EVAST AND ALOMA DESIRED TO LEAVE THE CHARGE OF
THE HOUSEHOLD TO THEIR SON BLANQUERNA

Own the next day after Mass, Evast and Aloma called Blan-
querna before the altar where stood the sign of the holy
Cross, and Evast spake to Blanquerna these words: ‘‘ Well-
beloved son Blanquerna! It behoves us to remember
whence we are come, by Whom we are created and whither
we must return; and to bear in remembrance also the
favours that we have received from the Most High. Now
has the time arrived for Aloma thy mother and me to for-
sake this world and renounce temporal riches. Our age
and the feebleness of our bodies warns us that we draw nigh
unto death. Now, therefore, henceforward is it meet that
we lead a life of austerity and that all our days be spent in
bewailing our sins, in prayer and in penance. We make
thee, then, fair son, inheritor of all our temporal goods, and
in the prayers and the good works that we shall do we give
thee a part, and from henceforth art thou lord of all our
goods. Do thou rule and govern this house in such a
manner that the goods distributed therein be not lost, and
that we ourselves receive sustenance in our lifetime, and
that such children as thou shalt have may be nurtured in
a way well-pleasing unto God.”

2. When Evast had said these words, and many more,
to his son Blanquerna, he took his seal, and Aloma took the
keys of the house, and they desired Blanquerna to receive
the seal and the keys. But Blanquerna took not that which
Evast and Aloma would have given him, but began to look
upon the Cross, and remembered the sacred Passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and how He and His Apostles were
poor in this world and despised temporal possessions. Long
did Blanquerna think upon these things ere he answered
Evast, and after his cogitation he spake these words:

53

BLANQUERNA

3. “ My lord and father!” said Blanquerna. “ Great
is the honour that thou and Aloma would do to this your son
Blanquerna, who is unworthy such great honour to receive.
And great faith and confidence have ye in your son, being
willing to entrust to him so many things, or ever ye have
proved him in loyalty, charity, justice and the other virtues.
For the honour and the favour that ye do me, may ye be
rewarded and have thanks of God. But as for me, know ye
that from henceforward I will have in my heart neither
honours nor riches nor pleasures of this world nor other
thing soever, but only God Who has created me and made
me to be His dwelling-place. Wherefore a grievous wrong
would be done to God if He were cast out from the place
wherein He would dwell, and sorely would it pain my soul
to cast out God.”

4. Great marvel had Evast and Aloma at the words of
Blanquerna their son, to whom Evast replied: ‘* What then
dost thou intend, and the words which thou speakest, what
deeds do they signify? Greatly am ] amazed at thy words.
I pray thee, tell me thy will.” ‘‘ My lord!” said Blan-
querna. “ By the Divine light is my soul moved to re-
member, comprehend and love the life of poverty, and of
the hermitage, and the renunciation of this world, that it
may the more perfectly contemplate and love the Son of
God, Who came to this world for us sinners, and suffered
most grievous Passion, which the sign of the Cross portrays
to my bodily eyes. By the which sign I your son Blanquerna
would fain follow the life of Elias and Saint John Baptist
and the other holy fathers that have passed from this life,
the which fathers did penance and led lives of discipline in
mountain and desert that they might flee from the world
and vanquish the flesh and the devil, and be not impeded
in contemplating and loving the God of glory, Who is the
beginning and end of all good.”

5. “ Blanquerna!”’ said Evast, “‘ Right glad and joyful
are we at the holy devotion which has entered into thy mind.
54

CHARGE OF THE HOUSEHOLD

Many a time did I fear to pray God that He would give me
children lest they should be sinners and live contrarily to
His commandments. But now I know that the desire of
Aloma thy mother to have thee for a son was good, since
thou desirest to be a servant of God. I reprove thee not
for thy devotion; but since thou must needs requite thy
parents for the benefits that thou hagt received of them,
therefore it behoves thee to remain in the world until thy
mother and I have passed from this life, when thou mayest
fulfil the devotion and the desire which by the Divine virtue
is in thee,”

6. “ My lord Evast!” answered Blanquerna, ‘“‘ Well
do I know the natural benefits that from thee and from my
lady Aloma I have received, and how ye have brought me
up and instructed me to the utmost of your power. -But
greater than all these are the benefits that I have received
from God; and the reason of all others for the which I am
in the world is that I may know and love and praise and
contemplate God. And since to be in the world is a thing
that is perilous, most chiefly of all to a man that is young,
therefore from the world am I fain to flee. I would go to
God Who calls me: father, mother, honours, riches, happiness
and all things would I leave for love of Him. For if I have
but God in my heart | shall want for naught; and if God
were not in my heart, who could give me the fulfilment of
that which my soul so greatly desires? ”’

7. ‘Beloved son!” said Evast, ‘“‘ If thou obeyest not
my prayers and my commandment, thou wilt do an evil
deed both to me and to Aloma and likewise to the poor of
Jesus Christ. For these last receive much alms from the
possessions of this house, which will be lost if thou dost
leave us. And thine will be the fault if we thy parents
Evast and Aloma, for want of one to govern their posses-
sions, are compelled to leave undone the penances that they
desire to perform. Thine will be the blame for the trials
which we suffer in our age; and since detriment and injury

5s

BLANQUERNA

done to others are displeasing to God, therefore, fair son,
neither in justice nor in charity canst thou or must thou
leave the possessions of this house to perish, nor be the
occasion of our trials, nor cause the benefits which will
follow from our penance to be lost.”

8. “My lord and father!” said Blanquerna. ‘‘ God
wills that man should travail in His service even until death.
Therefore it appears to me, having regard to your ages, that
thou and my lady Aloma may yet travail and administer
your possessions in this world and give therewith alms. And
though to your years the travail of this world is ill beseem-
ing, yet the greater for that very reason will be your merits
if ye serve God thereby. Wherefore do thou and Aloma
persist in your present estate, despairing not of the help of
God, neither renouncing temporal wealth, after the fashion
of many, that ye may find rest, the which rest is peril and
travail to other men. At the end of your days, when ye
have no more strength, commend ye your possessions to
some trusty man who shall do good therewith even as ye
do, or divide them all among the poor of Christ. Impede
not, my lord, my happiness or my desire; set me not in
peril for things that are temporal, fleeting and corruptible;
reprove me not where ye should give me your blessing;
and be not sad at that for the which ye should rejoice.”

g. “ Blanquerna!” said Evast. ‘Assay thou first in our
midst to do penance and lead a life of austerity, rather than
go to do penance in solitary? places. Do thou prove thy
will also to persevere at length in that which it makes thee
to desire. A great thing is this whereupon thou desirest to
enter, and thou shouldst in no wise enter thereupon sud-
denly. For oftentimes it befalls that a man thinks to con-
tinue in a life of penance before he feels how grievous and
how wearisome it is for the body to suffer. And when he
feels this, he returns to the bodily pleasures and the vain
delights which were aforetime his. And in such case he

1 agrestes, lit. “ rustic,”

56

CHARGE OF THE HOUSEHOLD

receives of men naught but disdain and reproof. Where-
fore, beloved son, be thou not over-hasty, but curb thy will,
and give thou heed to my words.”

10. “ My lord Evast, that a man should try and prove
himself in the bearing of pains and in the life of penance
is without doubt not engendered by lack of perfeé devotion
and love; for such things are lightened by the strength of
devotion and love, and the severer is the life of a man, the
greater and the nobler in him are love and devotion, as also
are patience, strength, justice, hope and the remaining
virtues. Wherefore there is naught that can trouble my
soul save that my trials and austerities should be less.”

11. Many arguments did Evast use with his son Blan-
querna, that he might cast out from his mind the thought
and the design which he had conceived. But the more he
begged him, and the stronger were the arguments that he
alleged, the greater was the assurance and determination
that he found in him. Wherefore Evast ceased from speak-
ing, for he feared that his words might be displeasing to
God, and considered how through Divine grace Blanquerna
might well be inspired by the Holy Spirit. While Evast
thought upon these things, Aloma began to speak, and she
spake these words to her son Blanquerna, weeping and
being greatly moved in her spirit:

12. “‘ Beloved son!” said Aloma, “ If thou goest to
the hermitage, what wilt thou eat? And if these garments
of thine be torn, wherewith wilt thou be clothed? And if
thou fall sick, who will tend thee? Fair son Blanquerna!
Have a thought to thy body which I so carefully have
nourished. Take pity on Evast thy father and on me, for
in thy absence and with the fear of thy death and of thy
sufferings we too shall suffer, who had hoped for help and
comfort from thee at the end of our days. And now, when
we trusted to have had of thee comfort and joy, and are
wishful to give thee to wife a fair and goodly damsel of
noble breeding, honoured ancestry and great riches, thou

7

BLANQUERNA

wouldst forsake us, and give thy body over to death for no
fault of thine; for thou hast done no such grievous wrong
that thou needest to torment both thyself and us, neither
have we done harm or wrong to thee.” All these words and
many more said Aloma to her son; and so devoutly and
with so many tears did she: speak, that Evast and Blan-
querna wept likewise, and all three were for long in tears
ere Blanquerna could answer Aloma his mother.

13. When Blanquerna had wept for long and nature had
rendered him her due, his soul had in no wise forgotten
its sacred devotion, neither did fortitude delay in strength-
ening his mind to resist his bodily nature. And by the
virtue of God, Blanquerna spake to his mother Aloma, and
to Evast, in these words: ‘‘ With the suffering of a mind
constrained by the strength of love | must resist the desire
of thy soul. Love has captured my will and makes me to
disobey thy desires, though thou hast so long and so dearly
loved me. I am thy son: from thee and from my father
Evast have I taken my being. Ye have brought me up,—
and better ye could not. All that ye have, would ye give
me. Even your own bodies would ye put into my- power.
And I cannot serve you, nor gladden you with my presence:
nay, my absence will bring you sorrow. I cannot reward
you for the good that ye have done me and the love that
ye have borne, For I am not my own; rather do I belong
to Another, Who has captured me. Were I but lord of
myself, I would give myself to you to serve and honour
you all the days of my life. If God has captured me and
withdraws me from your presence, and from the pleasures
of this world, and makes me to be alone in the woods and
the great forests, among wild beasts, and in places where
there is lack of food and raiment and companionship and
of many things necessary to man, then God, Who has given
to the birds and the beasts in such places the wherewithal
to eat, to drink and to be clothed, and Who keeps them in

» i¢. when nature had paid the tribute of tears.

58

CHARGE OF THE HOUSEHOLD

health, will give to me also all that my body needs to sustain
its life. Wherefore my soul will be able to contemplate
Him in His honour and glory; and if my body should die
for lack of that which it needs, then will God have worked
His will with that which is His own, and my soul will have
used hope, charity and fortitude towards her Creator and
with respect to the trials of the body, and her profit will
be so exceeding great that the trials of the body will be
esteemed as light afflictions and as naught. All my life long
will I pray for you to the God of glory; and if God for my
merits should will to give me aught, I will pray Him to
grant itto you. I beseech you to forgive me in that I cannot
obey you and am the occasion of your trials. And I beg of
your favour to forget me, that for my sake ye may suffer no
more trials. Bestow on me then your blessing, for I would
go to that place which God has given me to desire.”

14. When Blanquerna had said these words and many
more, he kneeled before Evast his father and Aloma his
mother, and begged their blessing, since he desired to go
to a hermitage to serve God. “ How now, son Blan-
querna?’”’ said Aloma. ‘“‘ Wouldst thou indeed depart? ”’
“ Beloved mother! ”’ said Blanquerna, “‘ I would fain take
leave of you, that I may go to those places to the which
God and my fortune may be pleased to guide me. Where-
fore I pray you to give me your blessing and in no way to
delay my journey, for the longer I am with you, the greater
will be your longing for my presence, and the yearning of
my heart for yours. And the greater freedom I give to the
desire of my soul, the greater will be my affliction and my
sorrow.”

15, “ Fair son Blanquerna!” said Aloma, ‘‘ Thou shalt
remain with us all this day and night, for it beseems not
that our farewells be so brief. Let all this day and night
be spent in leave-taking and in tears, in mutual love and
in grief at thy departure. In the morning, after Mass, thy
father Evast and I will give thee our blessing, and then

59

BLANQUERNA

shalt thou take leave of us for our whole life long: may it
please God that we find thee and know thee in His holy
glory. If thy absence give us now in this present life trial
or grief, may God in glory eternal make us glad with thy
presence so greatly beloved.”

GHAPTER V1

OF THE TEMPTATION WHEREWITH BLANQUERNA
WAS TEMPTED BY THE MAIDEN NATANA!

WueEn Aloma had ended these words, she went from the
chapel to the house of one Nastasia, a widow. This
lady had a right fair and gracious daughter, by name
Natana. And Aloma enjoyed great friendship with Nastasia
and her daughter Natana. Aloma went secretly into a
chamber apart with Nastasia and Natana her daughter, and
began to weep sorely, saying these words: “Ah, unhappy,
wretched one that 1am! For ever am I to be without com-
fort, and I had thought to be glad all the days of my life.
I have lost my son Blanquerna whom I have loved above
all things in this world, save only God. If in you I find not
counsel and aid whereby I may recover my son, my soul
will be in grief and sorrow all the days of my life.”

2. Greatly marvelled Nastasia and Natana, and to great
pity were they moved by the tears and by the words of
Aloma. “ Sister and friend!” said Nastasia. ‘‘ Weep not;
for if we can aid thee in aught, we will do it with all good
will and pleasure and with all our might, provided only that
it bring us no shame or evil repute among men.” Then
Aloma answered Nastasia, and related to her all that had
passed between herself and Evast and Blanquerna their son;
and she told her how Blanquerna would neither obey her

1 This is the Cana of some versions of the story. She is so called in the
introduction to the Book of the Lover and the Beloved (London, S.P.C.K.,
1923, p. 15).

60

OF THE TEMPTATION OF BLANQUERNA

words nor give ear to her entreaties, and how he purposed
on the morrow early to take leave of them and to depart to
desert places alone to do penance therein all the days of his
life. ‘‘ Therefore,” said she, ‘‘ the counsel and the aid that
Task of thee, if thou wilt do me pleasure, is that thy daughter
Natana shall speak with my son Blanquerna, to the end that
perchance she may turn him from his present will and in-
cline him to the state of matrimony, if he be pleased to take
her to wife. All our possessions would we give, both Evast
and I, in such a case, to Natana and to Blanquerna.”

3. So they debated, and agreement was made between
them that Aloma should bring Blanquerna to the house of
Nastasia after the hour of dinner; and that, when they were
within the house, Aloma and Nastasia should leave Blan-
querna and Natana in the room alone; and that Natana
should speak loving words whereby Blanquerna should
know that Natana would fain be his wife, and had
loved him for long with an inward love; and that in this
manner they should turn Blanquerna from his former will,
and incline him to the estate of matrimony. When this
agreement had been made, Aloma returned to her house,
and entered the chapel, where she found Evast, with his son
Blanquerna, weeping for the parting which was to be be-
tween them. Then Aloma spake these words: “ Now it is
the hour to dine. Come then and let us to table, and
afterwards we shall have leisure to weep for as long as we
will.”

4. Many were the meats that were placed upon the table,
but little did they eat thereof, either Evast or Aloma or
Blanquerna. When they had all dined, Aloma took her
cloak and commanded Blanquerna to accompany her, for
she desired to visit a lady of her acquaintance with whom
she had to speak. So Blanquerna accompanied Aloma his
mother to the house of Nastasia, and Aloma with her son
Blanquerna entered a room wherein they found Nastasia

and Natana alone. Natana was richly clad in costly gar-
61

BLANQUERNA

ments, and adorned by nature with wondrous beauty. So
Aloma said to Natana: ‘‘ Hold company, if it please thee,
with my son Blanquerna, while I speak with thy mother
Nagtasia.” ‘Then Blanquerna and Natana remained alone
in the room, and Aloma and Nastasia entered another room
to speak together.

5. While Blanquerna and Natana were sitting the one
beside the other, and Blanquerna was thinking upon his
journey, Natana began to speak to Blanquerna in these
words: ‘“‘ For long, O Blanquerna, have I desired a way
wherein I may speak to thee of that which is in my heart
and reveal it. For long have I loved thee inwardly with all
my soul, and above all things I desire to be thy wife. MSs
the Strength of my love that now constrains me to speak to
thee these words. If thou, by virtue of thy lineage and
wealth, art deserving of a richer or more honourable wife,
do thou consider the love wherewith from the depth of my
heart I love thee, and do thou consider likewise the good
intention wherewith I would be thy wife, for this comes of
no intemperate thought. And may God fulfil the desire of
my will to have sons of thee, who shall be servants of God,
and be like unto thyself in the holy life which thou dost
lead by the grace of God, and by the dotrine and example
of thy father Evast and thy mother Aloma, who are of
greater sanctity than any other persons in this city.”

6. Fair was Natana, and prudently and with a semblance
of great love did she speak these words to Blanquerna. Yet
for all that he neither forgot not cast from his heart the holy
desire that was his, nor did the fire of the Holy Spirit which
had kindled his whole soul tarry long in coming to his aid.
So when Blanquerna had thought for a brief space on the
words which Natana had spoken to him, he spake to her
these words: “‘ The King of all kings, Who is the Hope
and Consolation of all sinners, and Who forgets not His
servants in their necessities, even that Lord do I adore and

bless because from to-day temptations begin to assail me,
62

OF THE TEMPTATION OF BLANQUERNA

and the Divine Virtue aids me agains evil counsel. Glad
is my heart at this the beginning of my temptations, and
hope bids me look to the Strength which now I feel, that
it may help me in all other temptations that assail me.”
Greatly did Blanquerna praise and bless our Lord God thus
ete he madeé answer to the words of Natana.

7. Natana perceived that Blanquerna rejoiced and blessed
God, and answered not her words; wherefore, exalted some-
what within herself, she spake to him after this manner:
“Why, O Blanquerna, replies thou not to my words? And
what is this that thou sayest? And wherefore is thy soul
made to rejoice?” Blanquerna answered Natana and said:
“With the light of grace hath the Holy Spirit illumined
my soul, making me to desire the life of a hermit, that I
may have within my heart God alone. When thou, Natana,
didst reveal to me thy heart, the lust of the flesh began to
tempt my soul through my bodily nature and the work of
the evil spirit. But forthwith my soul turned to the remem-
brance of its Lover, and the Divine Light illumined my soul
with Divine Love, which made me to know that God forgets
not His servant. And His love makes me so greatly to
despise thy words, that I marvel, as I follow thine argu-
ments, how in one so fair as thou there can be so foolish a
thought as this of thine which counsels me to forsake the
love of my Sovereign Lord for the love of thee. At certain
times I have doubted if God will aid me against the temp-
tations that will come to me in the desert, but now I know
and doubt not that which I doubted aforetime. Let any
temptation come that may: this my good beginning will
cause me to despise it.”

8. Greatly did Natana marvel at the sandtity of Blan-
querna and his constancy of mind, saying: ‘‘ Blanquerna,
my friend! How is it that thou answerest not my words?”
Blanquerna answered: “ If thou wilt speak to me of God
or of doétrine wherewith I may greatly love, honour and
serve Him, then will thy words be very pleasing unto me.

63

BLANQUERNA

But speak to me henceforward no vain words soever; suffer
me rather, while my mother Aloma speaks with thy mother
Nastasia, to think upon my journey.”

g. “ Blanquerna!” said Natana. ‘‘ How couldst thou
for so long endure the bitter life of wild and desert regions?
And how dost thou purpose to endure it without first know-
ing if thou art able?” Blanquerna answered: “ Who
enabled Saint Catherine, Saint Eulalia, Saint Margaret,
and other holy virgins and martyrs, to endure trials, tor-
ments and death, for these of their own will were put to
suffering and torture, were killed or burnt alive, for love of
my Beloved, Jesus Christ. And if these, who were young
girls, frail! and of tender years, by the grace of God bore
all these things and desired to endure yet more, shall not I,
a man, endure hunger, thirst, cold, heat and fear as a hermit
for love of God? And is it not beyond comparison a surer
and a nobler thing to put my trust in the help of God in the
desert than in this city to trust in the help of Evast my
father, and of Aloma my mother, and in the riches of this
world?”

10. “‘ Oftentimes has it come to pass,” said Natana to
Blanquerna, ‘‘that a man among his kindred and his
friends has purposed right valiantly to accomplish or endure
some great feat or trial, and for this to be praised and re-
warded exceedingly. But later, when the trial comes upon
him, he shrinks from it; and that which he purposed be-
comes irksome to him, and he flees from that trial which
he believed himself able to endure. Even so, when thou,
Blanquerna, art in the desert, tasting that bitter life and
looking upon wretched and scanty vi€tuals, and grieving at
the absence of Evast and Aloma, and of thy other kinsfolk
and friends, being alone among wild beasts, then wilt thou
be of another mind than that wherein now thou art, and
then wilt thou fear things which now thou fearest not.”

_* So V (fragils). ‘The alternative reading frévo/s seems less appro-
priate.

64

OF THE TEMPTATION OF BLANQUERNA

11. “ Natana!” said Blanquerna, “I go into the forest
to contemplate my Lord God Jesus Christ and His Virgin
Mother our glorious Lady Saint Mary; and for my com-
pany I have Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice, Prudence,
Fortitude and Temperance. Faith I need that I may be-
lieve the articles of the holy Catholic Faith according to the
Roman Church, and to aid me against the temptations which
come through ignorance. Hope I bear in my company that
I may hope and trust in the strength and help and mercy
of Him Who alone can aid me. Charity my heart bears,
and it will bear me to regions wild and make it to appear
that this city and other regions inhabited are unpeopled and
desert: with Charity man conquers and vanquishes all
things. Justice makes me turn body and soul to God
because He is the Creator and Benefa¢tor both of me and
of all things that are. Prudence makes me to know and
despise this world that is full of deception and error and is
of brief duration, and makes me to desire eternal happiness.
Fortitude strengthens my heart, in the might of the Most
High, to endure every trial for His love. Temperance I
bear with me that it may rule my mouth, my appetite and
my belly. If in the desert places I may not have these
virtues, then shall I be compelled to return. And if I could
not in such places endure hunger, thirst, cold, heat, naked-
ness, fear, poverty and temptations, where would be the
virtues or the works without which I could not and would
not live, either in these places or in any other? And
thus, Natana,” said Blanquerna, “ thou wouldst affright me
with those very things which I desire to endure for His love
Who for love of me endured trials more grievous than those
whereof thou speakest; and my desire to endure these trials
and many others drives me from my home to those places
where I may find them and have them; and I would neither
be nor dwell in any place wherein they are not to be found.”’

. 12. “ Blanquerna!” said Natana, “Greatly do thy
words please me; for ever would I be with thee; =
E »

BLANQUERNA

please thee then to take me in thy company, that we may
live as penitents together in whatsoever place seems to thee
best.” Blanquerna answered: “ It would be ill beseeming
that either thou should be in my company or any other, for
no company will I have save that of God, and of trees,
grass, birds, wild beasts, fountains and streams, banks and
meadows, sun, moon and Stars; for none of these things
may hinder the soul from contemplating God.”

13. ‘ Blanquerna! ”’ said Natana, “ If I am in thy com-
pany and there comes to thee at times an inclination towards
carnal desire, the greater will be thy merit if thou abstainest
and the farther wilt thou be from lust, which is a vice, and
most displeasing to God. The greater will be thy strength
if thou dost subdue thy flesh; and if thou dost take me and
hast confidence that thou wilt subdue thy flesh, the greater
will be thy hope. The greater the merit thou canst gain,
the greater will be thy wisdom, and the more sternly thou
subduest. thyself, the greater love wilt thou have towards
God. Wherefore, for all these reasons, and for many beside,
it is good that thou take me in thy company.” Blanquerna
answered: ‘“‘ It is forbidden in the law for man to tempt
God, neither should a man tempt himself according to the
manner that thou sayest; for it is a manner of pride and
vainglory, and therein is peril by reason of the lightness
which is in man, who has fallen through the corruption of
sin, When it comes to pass that a man by some accident
falls into occasion of sin, then indeed does it behove him
to use the virtues even as thou sayest. But for naught upon
the earth would I take thee in my company: rather do I
counsel thee to forsake the world and find companionship
among women in one of the religious orders, in the con-
templation, remembrance, understanding and love of the
holy virtue of God, the vileness of this world and the glory
which is everlasting.”

14. “Blanquerna!”’ said Natana, “In our former speech

love made me to love thy body and thy fair features,
66

OF THE TEMPTATION OF BLANQUERNA

but now has my soul risen to love the virtues of thy soul.
By the virtue of thy words hast thou transformed my mind;
my soul hast thou illumined with Divine Virtue; my heart
hast thou given to God; and, whereas aforetime I desired
to be thy wife, thou hast given me now for a Spouse Jesus
Christ.” While Natana spake these words to Blanquerna,
Aloma and Nastasia gave ear and heard their speech.
Nastasia was greatly angered at the words of Natana, and
she said to Aloma: “ Lady Aloma, I will not suffer Blan-
querna henceforward to speak with my daughter.” So
Aloma and Nastasia entered the room, and the words of
Blanquerna and Natana ceased.

i 15. Blanquerna took leave of Natana. And love, un-
feigned and pure, caused Natana to weep before Aloma and
Nastasia, and to say these words: “‘ Forget me not, O Blan-
querna, in thy prayers, for thy words make this room in the
which I now am to be even as the dwelling whither thou
wouldest go.” Then Blanquerna expounded to Natana the
manner wherein the seven virtues would preserve her vir-
ginity all the days of her life. And afterwards Aloma and
Blanquerna left the house of Nastasia and returned to their
home. Aloma related to Evast that which had passed be-
tween Blanquerna and Natana, and the reasons for the
which she had led Blanquerna to the house of Nastasia.
Evast said to Aloma that from that time forward they should
in no wise hinder Blanquerna from his journey, for it was
the Lord’s doing, and a dreadful thing is it to set hindrances
before those that would serve God.

16. All that night were Evast and Aloma in the chapel
with their son Blanquerna. ‘Their tears and the devout
words that passed between them, who may recount them?
And the profitable words that Blanquerna uttered that night
concerning God and His glory, who may tell them? And
the blessings that Evast and Aloma gave to their son, who
can write them? And who is he that could have refrained
from tears had he but heard their words?

67

BLANQUERNA

CBAPTER Vil

OF THE CONDUCT THAT EVAST AND ALOMA GAVE
TO THEIR SON BLANQUERNA

On the morrow, after Mass, Evast sent word to his kinsfolk
and friends that they should come and do honour to his son
Blanquerna and give him conduét upon his way. And when
all were assembled Evast recounted to them how that the
Divine blessing had caused his son Blanquerna to be
enamoured of the life of a hermit, so that he would fain
depart to contemplate God in rustic places and in regions
uninhabited by man. Great marvel had they all at these
words, and prayed Blanquerna that he would remain rather
than sadden Evast and Aloma by leaving them, saying that
after the death of Evast they would make Blanquerna to be
among their rulers and chief men even as they had made
Evast. But Evast said to them that it was no longer fitting
to speak of that matter, for so surely had Blanquerna re-
ceived the Divine inspiration that he would for naught on
earth desist from his journey. ‘

2. “My lord Evast!” said Blanquerna, ‘‘ For the
avoiding of vainglory, and that men may not count as vain-
glorious the honour that ye and these worthy men would
do me, and because I am unworthy to receive such honour,
it would be well, if it please thee, that I should take leave
in thy house of thyself and of Aloma and of these other
worthy men, and go upon my journey secretly with the
blessing of God.” “ Blanquerna!” said Evast, “ By
reason of the vain words of men, it is unseemly to refrain
from giving a good example, the which thou dost give us
all in thus loving and serving God and in despising this
worldly life. More profit will ensue from the good example
which men will have of thee than any harm from aught
that they may say. And thou for thy part wilt be the

farther from vainglory, and in the time to come thou wilt
68

CONDUCT EV AST & ALOMA GAVE BLANQUERNA

not consent, for any temptation of the devil, to leave thy
hermitage.”

3- So Evast and Aloma, and a great company of people,
followed Blanquerna, and great was the fame of Blanquerna
throughout the city. Many blessings had he of the people;
many a sinner was convicted of his sin, and many a virtuous
man desired to multiply his good works in honouring and
serving God. Many, moreover, had great pity for Evast
and Aloma because they would see Blanquerna no more,
and many lamented that he would have to endure a life of
penance and trials in abundance in the solitary places
wherein he would find none of those things which are
needful for the support of bodily life.

4. Fair and white and ruddy was Blanquerna; right good
was he to look upon, for nature had given him every quality
which in the human body is goodly and pleasant to the eyes.
Young was he in years, yet was his soul full of virtue. In
his heart night and day dwelt remembrance and love of the
Divine dominion. The holy purpose which his will so fer-
vently desired filled all that saw him with fire and the love
of God; devotion and piety brought tears from their hearts
even to their eyes, and from their eyes the tears flowed
down.

5. When Blanquerna and they that gave him conduct
were without the city, Blanquerna prayed his father and his
mother and the other persons that they would return. But
Aloma answered, and said that she would in no wise leave
Blanquerna before they came to the forest into the which
Blanquerna was to enter. Evast and all the rest were of the
self-same mind, so they followed Blanquerna one and all.
And while they followed him, Evast enquired of Blan-
querna what was the chiefest of the reasons for the which
he had conceived the desire to be a hermit and to forsake
the world. ‘“‘ My lord!”’ said Blanquerna, ‘‘ Through the
will of God it has come to pass that ye have caused me to
be ingtruéted in theology and in other sciences whereby I

mn

BLANQUERNA
have had knowledge of God, Who is revealed by the repre-

sentation of the working of His virtue in the creatures; and
since this world is a hindrance to the contemplation of God
and the consideration of His high virtue, therefore this
world do J forsake. ‘That which I have learned I take with
me to my mountain dwelling, and I will be a hermit that
I may not be hindered in loving, knowing, praising and
blessing God with the aid of that which I have learned in
the world. This, my lord, is the chiefest reason for the
which I leave the world. Other reasons are there in plenty;
and among them is this, that I see in the world scarce any
man doing his duty in honouring, loving and knowing God,
or in rendering Him thanks for the good which he has re-
ceived, seeing that all the world has gone after vanities, after
evil, falsehood and error. Wherefore I had rather be among
the wild beasts and the trees and the birds, which are sinless,
than among so many men that know not God and have
blame as touching the benefits that they have received of
Pia

6. When Blanquerna had ended these words, Aloma
begged him that he would make her a gift. Blanquerna
asked of her what gift she would have. ‘‘ My son!”
answered Aloma, “I ask not of thee as a gift that thou
shouldst desist from thy journey, but rather a gift that thou
canst grant me.” “Ah, Aloma, mother and lady mine! ”
said Blanquerna, “‘ Well knowest thou that there is naught
that has remained in my possession, save to follow the will
-of Him Who has made me to love the contemplation of His
glories. Therefore if the gift which thou craves be in
accordance with the will of God, let all that I can give thee
be thine.” “‘ Son!” said Aloma, “‘ I ask of thee that thou
promise to return for a time to me before thy death or mine,
after which thou canst return to thy hermitage; or if thou
wilt not come to me, make me to know by a messenger the
place of thy habitation, and I will come to be with thee for
so long as thou hast thanks and pleasure of my company.”
79

OF THE FAREWELL

Blanquerna answered: “‘ Well knowest thou, Aloma, that
I have no certain knowledge either of my life or of thine.
Wherefore, if I should promise to come to thee, and after-
wards died, then mightest thou think that I had not been
true to thee; and if I returned to thee, then would the
sorrow caused thee by my departure be renewed. No
messenger could I send to thee, for all my life is to be lived
alone, with company of no man; wherefore that which thou
dost ask have I no power to give thee, according to the
manner wherein the Divine Will has ordained me to obey
His commandments.”

7. “Son!” said Aloma, ‘‘ What is the place where
thou wilt build thy dwelling? And to what parts wilt thou
go?” “Mother!” said Blanquerna, ‘I cannot certify
thee of those things that I know not. I must wander
through forests and over high mountains, to seek some
place wherein is water and wild herbs wherewith I may
sustain my body. Where the country is to be, and the place
and the surroundings, let all be in the hand of God, for in
Him is my hope, and in Him do I trust to diret me to a
fitting place, where I may love Him and know Him all the
days of my life, and pray for thee and for Evast my lord
and father.”

GAARTER VTi

OF THE FAREWELL

Wuize Blanquerna spake thus with Aloma his mother they
came to the place where Blanquerna should enter the forest.
At this place Blanquerna and all the rest made halt. Then
Blanquerna kneeled first to Evast and begged that he would
grant him grace and blessing in place of his worldly in-
heritance. And Evast kneeled and prayed to God for
Blanquerna, saying these words: “ Divine Essence, that
art infinite in goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom,
love and perfeétion, and virtue in all things without differ-

71

BLANQUERNA

ence! I adore Thee in Thy Virtue and in Thy virtues.
My son Blanquerna goes to serve Thee and to contemplate
Thee in Thy honours. In what place he will dwell, I know
not; but well do I know that Thou, in what place soever
he may be, art in essence, power and presence with all
virtues, with all powers and with all fulness. O Divine
Essence, that comprehendest all things, to Thee I commend
Blanquerna my son. Guard Thou him, since he has placed
in Thee his devotion and his hope. Fill him with love in
Thy service, and reveal Thy Virtue to his understanding,
that his will may love Thee the more fervently. Thou that
art eternal, receive my son Blanquerna, that he may per-
severe all the days of his life and think upon Thy bliss.
Impute not my guilt to my son Blanquerna, and, if in him
there be guilt or sin, may it please Thee that I for him may
do penance. Forget not how my soul delights that Blan-
querna my son goes to serve Thee nor how my body suffers
at his absence. O Simple Essence, pure a¢t without end
or beginning! Thou hast given me my son Blanquerna,
and according to my power I have brought him up to serve
Thee. Virgin is he in body and in mind. To Thee I give
and commend him in the grace of Thy Trinity, in the
blessing of the human nature which Thou didst assume.
To the Son of the Heavenly Father Who is in Thee I com-
mend my son Blanquerna. May the Queen of Heaven and
Earth, our Lady Saint Mary, Saint Michael and all the
angels, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Saint Joachim and all the
patriarchs, Saint Peter, Saint Paul and all the apoétles,
Saint Lawrence, Saint Vincent and all the martyrs, Saint
Francis, Saint Dominic and all the confessors,—may all
these be for the proteétion and help of my son Blanquerna.
In the hands of Elias and of Saint John Baptist, who were
hermits, I place him, that Thou by their merit may pre-
serve my son in his hermitage.”

2. When Evast had ended his prayer, Blanquerna begged
him to rise, that he might do to him the honour that was
2

OF THE FAREWELL

meet. So Evaét rose, and Blanquerna, kneeling, kissed the
hands and the feet of his father Evast, and Evatt kissed his
son Blanquerna, and made the sign of the Cross over his
head, and gave him his grace and blessing, weeping with
great suffering of mind. When Blanquerna had received
the blessing of his father, he kneeled before Aloma his
mother, craving her blessing and grace through the favour
of the King of Glory.

3. Blanquerna, kneeling upon his knees, regarded his
mother Aloma with devout countenance, while she, as she
Stood, gazed upon the goodly features of Blanquerna her
son. And the fervency of her love, together with her
yearning for her son, constrained Aloma so that she could
not speak. So Aloma and Blanquerna remained for a great
while in that state, that neither could speak a word to the
other. Finally Blanquerna, who desired to go upon his
journey, gathered strength of mind and said: “‘ It is the
hour of my departure, and I must needs be away.” And
he said to Aloma that he awaited her farewell and her
blessing.

4. Then by the virtue of God was power given to Aloma
to speak to her son, and she spake these words: ‘‘ Beloved
son! I must needs make remembrance of the Queen of
Heaven, Mother of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, that she
may aid thee in all thy necessities.” Then Aloma kneeled,
and kissed the ground, and raised her hands and her eyes
to Heaven, speaking with great devotion and many tears,
in these words: ‘‘ Glorious Queen and Virgin, who through
thy glorious Son art in so many places honoured and in-
voked! All alone goes from me Blanquerna my son, I know
not whither. To serve and make remembrance of thy Son
he goes, to love and to obey Him. Since he goes to honour
and love thy Son, do thou protect, defend and love my son.
Thou art with thy Son in glory. Thy Son it is that makes
my son leave me, and makes me to remain alone and com-
fortless. I will love thy Son, for thou lovest Him; thou

73

BLANQUERNA

wilt love my son, for he is loved by me. Sorrowful is my
soul at the departure of my son, but in the Presence of thy
Son thou art joyful. I have had but one son, and he it is
that thy Son takes from me. In peril of evil men and of
wild beasts He makes him to go; alone He will make him
to be all the days of his life; raw herbs he will eat; his
clothing will be but his skin, and his locks, and the air
around him. Do thou look down and see how fair is my
son Blanquerna in his person and in his mind: think thou
how sun and wind and nakedness will darken him and
destroy the beauty of his features. When he is cold, who
will give him warmth? When he is sick, who will tend
him? When he hungers, who will give him to eat? If he
fears, who will Strengthen him? If thou aidedst not my
son, even without my prayers, where would be thy pity
and thy mercy? Let the grief that I have for my son, as
I behold him going to his death, in affliction and penance,
alone in the forest, I know not whither, call to thy mind
the grief that thou hadst for thy Son when thou sawest Him
done to death and crucified. If thy Son died for love, with-
out sin, what sin has my son, save love, that makes him die?
From that which I understand of thy Son and mine, and
from the hope which I have in thee, there will surely proceed
some virtue which will be profitable to my son.”

5. These devout words and many others of pure and
unfeigned sorrow did Aloma speak to the Queen of Heaven.
While Aloma adored, Blanquerna raised his eyes to the sun
and saw that night was drawing nigh; so he said to Aloma
that it was time that she and Evast should return to the city
with all the rest, and that he should go upon his way. Then
Aloma rose, and Blanquerna kissed her hands and her feet,
and she kissed the eyes of her son and his mouth and his
cheeks, and over his head she made the sign of the Cross
and gave him her blessing and her grace. And again she
kissed her son, and spake these words: ‘‘ Fair son Blan-
querna! I offer and commend thee to the care and support

74

OF THE FAREWELL

of the glorious Virgin and of her virtues, whereby multi-
tudes of sinners gain help and proteétion. May her mother
Saint Anne, and the holy man Joseph of Arimathea who
begged the Body of Jesus Christ, be to thee protection; to
Saint Catherine, Saint Mary Magdalen, Saint Margaret,
Saint Clare and all other sainted women! I commend
thee: be thou ever in their hands! And by the grief and
sorrow that I have and shall have at thy departure, may all
that can aid and defend thee have pity upon thee and help
thee against thine enemy, even against the Spirit of evil.
And do thou, son, as thou art of so noble temper, continue
in thy holy life, that, by the grace and virtue of God, I and
Evast may see thee in the glory that knows no end.” When
Aloma had said these words, she embraced and kissed
Blanquerna her son and fell in a swoon to the ground.

6. When Blanquerna had received from Evast grace and
blessing, and Aloma had recovered her consciousness, he
kneeled, and looked up to Heaven, weeping and raising his
thoughts and his hands to God, Whom he adored in each
of the fourteen articles of the holy Catholic Faith, saying
these words: ‘‘ Lord God, Who art Unity in Trinity and
Trinity in Unity! In Thee I adore Unity of Essence and
Trinity of Persons, without composition soever and with-
out diminution. I adore, O Lord, the Father Who in His
infinite goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, love
and perfection, engendered a Son Who is infinite in good-
ness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, love and per-
fection; this Son I adore in Himself and in the Father,
and the Father I adore in Himself and in the Son. I adore
the Holy Spirit, Who proceeds from the Father and the Son
infinitely in goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom,
love and perfe@tion; this Holy Spirit I adore in Himself
and in the Father and in the Son, and the Father and the
Son I adore in the Holy Spirit. And the three Persons and

i 1 santes. ‘The reference is to canonised women, for which no single
word exists in English.

| 75

BLANQUERNA

the three essential Virtues aforesaid I adore in Essence and
Unity; and the Essence and Unity J adore in the personal
virtues. Lord God! (said Blanquerna) I adore Thee as
Creator that hast created out of nothing the world and all
that is, that Thou mayest be known and loved and that in
Thy glory we may share in Thy bliss, and Thou mayest
glorify us. I adore Thee, O Lord, as Restorer? and Saviour.
I adore Thy Conception through the operation of the Holy
Spirit in the womb of the Virgin Saint Mary, whereby two
natures were united in one Person called Jesus Christ. I
adore Thee in Thy Nativity and in the virginity of our
Lady Saint Mary, who before Thy Birth was a virgin, and
after Thy Birth remained a virgin also. I adore Thee, Lord,
in Thy Passion which Thou didst endure on the Cross to
redeem the human race; and I adore Thy Soul which
descended into Hell to bring thence Adam, Noah, Abra-
ham and the other prophets who for so long had desired
Thy holy Advent. I adore Thee, Lord, for that it pleased
Thee to rise again and to reveal Thy glorified Body to the
Virgin, that Thou mightest comfort her, and be to us an
earnest of the Resurrection. I adore Thee, Lord, for that
Thou didst ascend to the Heavens, and dost sit for ever in
glory at the right hand of the Heavenly Father. I adore
Thee and fear Thee, Lord, because at the Day of Judgment
Thou wilt come to judge the good and the evil: the good
Thou wilt send to glory without end and the evil to eternal
torment.”

7. When Blanquerna had adored God in the articles
aforesaid, he adored and blessed our Lady Saint Mary, and
blessed the angels and the apostles and all the saints in
glory, and commended himself to the prote@tion of God and
the whole court of Heaven, and gave thanks to God and
to all the company of the saints. For Evagt and Aloma he
prayed for a great space to God. And his prayer and the

+ Lit, “ Re-creator.” “‘ Re-creation,” in the sense of Redemption, also
occurs in this book.

76

FURTHER HISTORY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

manner of it were so pious and devout that all who were
with him wept, and begged the God of Heaven to guide
Blanquerna that he might have a long life and enjoy the
protection of God.

8. When Blanquerna had ended his prayer and asked
the pardon of Evast and Aloma for the grief which for his
sake they were suffering, he took from a messenger of the
house of Evast the mean garments that he was wearing and
gave him his own. He took also seven loaves in significance
of the seven virtues, which he desired to have with him all
the days of his life. Thereafter he made the sign of the
Cross before his eyes, and turned his face towards the forest,
and went forward saying these words: “‘ In the Name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, One God:
may He be the Beginning of this my journey, the Con-
tinuance and the End.”’

9. Then Evast and Aloma and all the rest remained in
that place where Blanquerna had taken leave of them, look-
ing after him as he went, until he was within the forest.
And Aloma said: ‘‘ Alas, unhappy that lam! Now have
I lost from sight my son Blanquerna, and never shall I see
him more in this present life.”” Then with great weeping
and sorrowing did Evast and Aloma and all the rest return
to the city, speaking of Blanquerna and of the great de-
votion which God had given him above that of all other
men that they had seen at any time soever in their lives.

CHa@PTER,JIX

OF THE FURTHER HISTORY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

Arrer Mass on the day following Evast and Aloma re-
mained in the chapel speaking at length of the ordering of
their lives, and they composed and set down a rule which
they should keep all the days of their life, the which rule
is as follows. In the beginning thereof it was ordered that

77

BLANQUERNA

all their goods should be commended to a faithful religious
lay brother, their needful expenses alone to be kept for their
own use, and the overplus of their income to be given to
the poor of Christ. That they should wear humble raiment;
that on three days only of each week they should eat flesh ;
that they should wear no garment of linen nor lie between
linen sheets; that they should know one another nevermore
in carnal pleasures; that at Matins they should rise and say
their Hours; that after Mass they should remain to pray
and hold converse concerning God; that ere they ate they
should wash the feet of thirteen poor men at the table from
the which they ate; that they should not leave their house;
that at night they should search their consciences to see if
they had erred against God or their rule; and that the one
should give discipline to the other, each accusing himself
of his misdeeds. ‘This then is the rule which was made by
Evast and Aloma.

2. Very careful were Evast and Aloma to find a friar to
whom they should commend their property, for none such
could they find conveniently in all the precinéts of the city ;
and Aloma proposed to Evast that they should make some
man overseer who was of their own kindred. But Evast
said that this was not wise, because kinsfolk are wont to
have overmuch pleasure in possessions commended to them,
and think and plan how they may be made the heirs. Then
Evast remembered a monk who was a priest, an old man,
of good life and a native of other parts. So Evast prayed
the abbot to give him this monk for governor, that he him-
self might continue in the rule aforesaid, which monk also
would be confessor to him and to Aloma. This monk was
accordingly sent to Evast and Aloma, and they remained
in that estate which the rule that they made describes.

3. While Evast and Aloma were in the estate aforesaid
and all the city had a lesson and an example in their lives,
it came to pass by the will of God that Evast fell exceeding
ill, so that he thought to die of his sickness. Then Evast
78

FURTHER HISTORY OF EVAST AND ALOMA

called Aloma his wife. ‘“ Aloma!” said Evast, “ With
thy counsel and good will I would fain draw up a testa-
ment, and I would have thee tell me thy mind as to how
my possessions should be ordered to the service of God; I
pray thee also to tell me thy will as to how thou dost pur-
pose to live after my death.” Greatly was Aloma distressed
at the sickness of Evast, and long did she weep ere she was
able to make reply. Then said Aloma: “ My lord Evas!
In all thy will there is naught that I may or would dispute.
Dispose thou thy possessions and mine in what manner
soever thou wilt, and dispose thou also of me as seems to
thee best. For my will is wholly subjeé& to thine.”

4. “Aloma!”’ said Evast, “‘ Among the things that men
do in this world for the love of God, it is worthy of praise
to give alms in perpetuity to the poor of Christ; wherefore
am I minded to leave all my possessions for the building
and endowment of a hospital wherein the poor and destitute
may be tended, and I would that thou aid 1n the administra-
tion of this hospital and in the service of the poor, to the
end that by thy merits God may have mercy upon me a
sinner and continue His blessing upon thee and upon Blan-
querna. Let the chaplain and the administrator of this
hospital be the holy man who now administers our posses-
sions; and after his death, let there be sought out some
other religious man, meet to have care of the hospital, and
let this ordinance be kept in the hospital after the manner
aforesaid.” Greatly did the words and the ordinance of
Evast please Aloma, and she said to him that she was in
his power to obey all his commands. So Evast made his
testament as aforesaid, and according to the above named
form commended the hospital to the care of the prince of
that land, and of the bishop, and of the chief men of the
city. He commanded likewise that after his death his body
should be borne to the church humbly, without pomp or
vainglory, and that none of his kinsfolk should follow him
to the church who thought fit to weep or show signs of

79

BLANQUERNA

sorrow for that which was according to the course of nature
and to the work of the Divine Will.

5. Then Evast confessed, and received the Body of Jesus
Christ, saying these words: “ I adore Thee, very Flesh and
very Blood of Jesus Christ, which to my bodily eyes are
represented under the form of bread. The bread I adore
not, but I adore and bless the holy Body of Jesus Christ
which in this bread is represented to my spiritual sight. I
adore Thee, Son of the living God, Who didst bear upon
the Cross that Body which I spiritually behold, the which
Thou did&t unite with Thyself. This glorious Body repre-
sents to my soul Thy great and infinite power, which be-
neath the form of bread makes very Flesh and very human
being to exist, and this form Thy great humility takes
before me a sinner, that from it I may have grace and
blessing. In Thee, O holy and glorious glorified Body, I
trust and hope, in Thee I believe, and to Thee I pray for
forgiveness. I receive Thee because Thou wilt receive me
in Thy Kingdom through the knowledge and contemplation
of Thy Virtue; and in Thy Virtue I am delivered from the
hands of my mortal enemy.” *

6. When Evast had adored and received the sacred Body
of Jesus Christ and had done all that pertains to a faithful
Christian, he slept, and by the virtue of God and the merits
of Aloma and Blanquerna, who prayed to God for him daily,
God restored to him his health. When Evast was whole
and freed from his sickness, he returned to the rule wherein
he had lived. Now one day he was seeking a letter in a
chest, and he found the testament which he had made, and
he read it. Long did Evast consider the good which would
follow, after his death, from the ordinance which he had
made. And Evast called Aloma, and said: ‘‘ Herein is
written the good that would have been done to the poor of
Christ had I passed from this life; and because God has
been pleased to lengthen my life it is not just that injury

should result to those who beg for love of Him. Wherefore,
80

OF THE HOSPITAL

if thou wilt have it so, it is good that we execute the testa-
ment in our lifetime; for perchance after our death others
might be less diligent than ourselves, and we might both
die very soon, with the result that the good that would
follow the establishment of the hospital and the aéts of
mercy to be done therein would be hindered.” Greatly did
the words which Evast spake please Aloma, and she said
to Evast that she was subjeét to his will to obey it in those
things and in all others.

GAAwPTER X
OF THE HOSPITAL

Evasr sold his house, and received for it much money.
Then in the most convenient part of the city he built a
hospital: with all his income he endowed it, and in that
hospital Evast and Aloma lived long as servants of the poor
of Jesus Christ. Evast made the sick men who lay in the
hospital his care, and Aloma the women. When they had
tended the sick and it was the hour to dine, Evast and
Aloma went together to beg for the love of God that which
they were to eat on that day, or they dined with some person
who might bid them for the love of God. Of naught that
belonged to the hospital would they eat nor squander it
upon their persons, so they begged for the love of God that
whereof they had need to sustain their lives.

2. Great was the example of the worthy life which Evast
and Aloma led, and through their merits God bestowed
favours upon many men, and heard the prayers of many
sinners in that city, and healed many sick folk in the hospital
through the intercessions of Evast and Aloma. Through
the good example of Evast many that had been hardened
sinners became penitents, and many men entered the re-
ligious life. And all the things that Evast and Aloma did

were for a rule and example and exhortation, and caused
F 81

BLANQUERNA

remorse of conscience in the men that saw them, and by
that which they did they mortified in sinners the seven
deadly sins after the manner following.

CHAPTER XI
OF GLUTTONY

Ir came to pass one day that Evast and Aloma had attended
to their sick folk, and went to seek some person who would
give them food for the love of God, for Whose love they
had given food to many that were sick in the hospital. Now
as they went along a path that was near to the palace of the
Bishop of that city, the Bishop came riding by with many
of his canons and clergy from taking his pleasure without
the city. This thing the Bishop did daily that his health
might profit and his appetite be the heartier at table. After-
ward he caused Mass to be sung, and after Mass he went
to dine. When the Bishop saw Evast and Aloma, he bade
them dine with him, so they dined with the Bishop on
that day.

2. When they had dined and were ready to give thanks
to God, a burgess of that city, the same that had bought the
house of Evast, brought a rvast peacock, well basted, to the
Bishop, who as yet had not risen from table. The Bishop
fell to eating once more and tasted the peacock, and sent a
portion thereof to Evast and Aloma, who were sitting
humbly upon the ground before the Bishop like poor folk.
All those to whom the Bishop sent a portion of the peacock
to eat, partook thereof, save Evast and Aloma, who would
not taste it. Then the Bishop enquired of them wherefore
they tasted it not. ‘“‘ My lord!” replied Evast, “‘ It is the
ordinance and will of God that man should eat to satisfy
his body according to his needs, and that which is not
needful to the body is not ordained of God and may be the
cause of sickness and death, and belongeth unto gluttony,

which is contrary to temperance. Wherefore, since we have
82

OF LOST

satisfied the body, as is fitting, neither for a peacock nor for
other meat will we aé contrarily to the will of God and to
temperance, neither will we be to ourselves the occasion of
sickness or death.”

3- All that day did the Bishop think deeply upon the
words which Evast had spoken, remembering the noble and
honourable estate wherein Evast and Aloma had lived, and
how they had forsaken the world and sold their house,
which was among the noblest and most ancient in the city,
and how it had been bought by that man who had sent the
peacock to him. As the Bishop thought in this manner and
considered the great good which Evast and Aloma did, he
felt an uneasiness within him?! because he had eaten to excess,
which uneasiness came to him many times through repletion
and often caused him sickness. Wherefore, so deeply did
the Bishop consider the good estate of Evast and Aloma,
and so fervently did he reproach himself and avow his sin,
that thenceforward he sang Mass himself each morning be-
fore riding abroad, and was chastened for the vice wherein
gluttony had held him captive; and such temperance had
he that his other virtues were increased and he lived for
many years in health and did many good works.

CHAPTER XII
OF LUST

In that city wherein Evast and Aloma lived as penitents, it
came to pass that an old man, who was given to lust, took
a wife that was young, and a woman of ripe age was wedded,
for the sake of carnal pleasure, to a gallant youth, who took
her to wife because she was rich. The youth and the damsel
were neighbours, and saw one another often, and the devil,
who strives with all his might to lead men astray, treated
with them till they were vanquished by the sin of lust.
While both were in that State of carnal sin, and knew each
1 Lit. e// senti en som ventre alcin destemprament....

83

BLANQUERNA

other therein, it chanced that upon a feast-day the old man
and the youth with their wives were in the church at Mass.
Now as they heard Mass, the rain descended heavily. Evast
and Aloma were standing at the doors of the old and the
young man, asking alms for the sake of Jesus Christ as was
their wont, when from each house came forth a servant
bearing a rain-cloak and over-shoes for her lord and lady.
The one servant said to the other: ‘“‘ Let us give alms to
these two poor folk, and let them bear the cloaks and shoes
to the church that we be not harmed by the rain.” Each
of the servants thought it well, and gave bread to Evast and
Aloma, telling them to take the cloaks and shoes to their
employers.

2. So Evast bore the cloaks and the shoes of the men,
and Aloma those of the women. And they entered the
church, which was filled with people, and in the presence
of all performed their errand. Great marvel had the people
at the humility of Evast and Aloma, and greater than all
was the marvel of the two men and the two women to whom
Evast and Aloma had brought the cloaks. And because the
holy lives of Evast and Aloma were known throughout the
city, and the noble and honourable estate of their former
days was very great, therefore the youth and the girl re-
solved that they would know each other carnally no longer,
nor commit the sin of lust. The older woman also repented
of the intent for the which she had wedded the youth, and
likewise did the old man; and each one, through the good
example of Evast and Aloma, grew to love chastity and
religion.

CHAPTER Xitt

OF COVETOUSNESS

Ir happened one day that Evast and Aloma went through

the chief square? of the city, that some man might bid them

to dine, and they found none who bade them. Now in that
1 plaga,

84. :

OF COVETOUSNESS

square! there lived a wealthy money-changer who had ever
much gold before him, and he was a man whose covetous-
ness knew no bounds. Evast and Aloma begged him for
the love of God to give them food, or else some piece of
money wherewith they could buy it. The money-changer,
who was enslaved by the sin of covetousness, answered
them and said that he would give them no food, nor aught
beside of all that he had. Then he rose from the table at
the which he sat, and went to visit a shoemaker, to the end
that he might make him some shoes.

2. Evast and Aloma went through the streets begging
for the love of God, and it chanced that they passed before
the house of the shoemaker by whom the money-changer
was being shod. The shoemaker called Evast and Aloma,
saying: ‘‘ It is the hour to dine. I ama poor man, and I
have a wife and children who live on that which I gain;
there is a little meat in the pot and I can spare a coin for
some wine. But in my house there is not bread sufficient
for all; for the love of God, I pray that one of you will
dine with me and take a share of that which God has
granted me to gain.”

3. Evast said to Aloma that she should dine that day
with the shoemaker, and that he would go and seek to dine
elsewhere. But Aloma, who loved and honoured Evast
greatly, said that she would go and seek elsewhere, and that
he should remain. Charity and love was there between
Evast and Aloma, and each had compassion on the other,
for the cold was great and the rain fell heavily, so that they
went through the streets with great distress. They strove
then together thus, and each desired the other to remain; but
Evast at all hazards resolved that Aloma should remain. So
Aloma, who was ever obedient to the will of Evast, remained,
and Evast went elsewhere to seek alms for the love of God.

4. While Evas and Aloma gave proof of the love that
each had toward the other, and the shoemaker recounted

1 plaga,
plag 85

BLANQUERNA

to them his poverty and bade one of them to dine with him,
the money-changer thought upon his great riches, and upon
death and the justice of God, and spake within himself these
words: ‘“ Alas, thou wretched one! How hast thou lived
up to this present time in blindness? And wherefore art
thou the captive and slave of the sin of avarice? And how
do thy riches and thy money avail thee without love? And
where is the thank that thou hast toward God for the goods
that He has given thee? All this that thou hast is of less
worth than the good-will of the shoemaker towards the
friends of God. Nor couldst thou with all thy wealth buy
the love and charity which is between Evast and Aloma.”’
Deeply did the money-changer think upon the holy lives of
Evast and Aloma; and through their good example and the
good-will of the shoemaker he freed himself from the bond-
age of avarice, and from that time forward was a generous
and liberal friend to the poor of Christ; and through the
virtue of liberality which was in him he had increase of
many other virtues.

CHAPTER XIV

OF PRIDE

Wute Aloma dined with the shoemaker, and Evast went
seeking food through the town, he passed by the door of
a man who was exceeding proud and wealthy. That man
was a draper,! who was making a great feast, for he desired
to give a daughter that he had to a knight greatly honoured
in that city. Evast saw at the door of his house many of
the poor who tarried there till one should give them as alms
the remnants that were left from the table. So Evast sat
among the poor, to whom he spake many good words, com-

1 The Catalan word draper has the general meaning of a merchant or
dealer in cloth, and is therefore not exactly identical with the English word
here used to translate it. As will later be seen, the cloth-merchant had a bad
reputation in Lull’s country, especially when he was an itinerant.

86

OF SLOTH

forting and consoling them in their poverty, and putting
them in mind of the poverty and humility of Jesus Christ
and of the apostles who loved poverty.

2. When it was the time and hour at which all in the
house had dined, the remnants from the table were brought
to the poor. Each poor man had his cup and his plate
wherein he received that which was given him for the love
of God. Evast had naught wherein to receive the green
stuff which was given to him, neither had he cup nor jug
for the wine, so he asked one of the poor men to allow him
for the love of God to receive his share in his own plate and
cup. Thus were companionship and fraternity made be-
tween Evast and this poor man, and they ate together at
the door of the lord of the house. While Evast and the poor
man ate, the master of the house came out with his honoured
guests, and beheld Evast seated upon the ground among
the poor.

3. Great wonder had the draper and all his companions
at the humility of Evast; and through the great humility
whereof Evast gave proof before the draper and the rest of
those that knew of him and of his holy life, the draper called
to mind his own haughtiness, and remembered how that he
was indulging it as concerning his children, by desiring to
give his daughter to a man of greater honour than befitted
her. And by the virtue of God and the good example of
Evast, the draper was freed from the bondage of pride, and
came to love humility, and gave his daughter in marriage
to another draper.

CHAPTER XV

OF SLOTH

Storu had in his power a man of great wealth who dwelt
in the city wherein Evast and Aloma lived as penitents.
This man had no wife, nor was fain to have, and his posses-
sions were a profit neither to him nor to any other. All “

i

BLANQUERNA

he sat in the square and mocked at the people who passed
by. When he saw any do good works he was wrathful; but
he was glad when he heard evil spoken of any, whether of
men or of women. One day it chanced that as that slothful
man went to dine, he found Evaést and Aloma who were in
the Street through the which he was passing. And two
women whom Evaést and Aloma had dowered, for the
love of God, were contending concerning Evast and Aloma,
for each of them wished to give meat to them on that
day.

2. The slothful man passed by and saw the hospital of
Evast and Aloma, which was very great and right well
builded. In that hospital were many that were poor, and
many servants who served them with great diligence; each
one of the poor therein lay in the fairest of beds, with as
much food before him as he needed. This slothful man
began to think upon the great good which Evast and Aloma
did. His conscience began to enquire of him if he had done
any good thing, for the love of God, with the possessions
that God had given him, and he could not assure himself
that all the alms that he had done in his life were in value
as great as the food which the sick folk in the hospital had
before them on that day.

3. “‘ Alas, wretched man that thou art!” said the man
that was in the bondage of sloth, ‘‘ how much harm hast
thou done for so long to the poor of Jesus Christ! And
where are the merits that await thee after thy death, to
present thy soul to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and to
defend it from thy mortal enemy, who after this death awaits
it that he may send it to fire everlasting ? Miserable wretch |
What man is there in this hospital as sick as art thou?”
While he spake these words within himself, he saw at the
end of the room two beds that were made but of branches
of the vine, together with a small quantity of straw, and one
covering only. So this man went to one of the beds, un-

dressed and put himself therein, and bade them bring*him
$8 ;

OF SLOT
food, for he was sick, and had come to that hospital to be
healed of the sickness which he had.

4. Of all that he desired to eat and drink the man that
was sick of sloth had plenty, and he lay in the bed until
nightfall, when Evast and Aloma came to lay themselves
there. Thus Evast found the slothful man in his bed.
““ Brother and friend!” said Evast, “‘ Who art thou that
hast placed thyself in my bed? Go thou and lie in the
other beds, for they are better than this.” ‘Sir!’ an-
swered the sick man, “‘ I desire not to leave this bed until
[am whole.” Evast and Aloma enquired of the sick man
what was his sickness. “ Sir!”’ said the sick man, ‘ Sloth
has imprisoned my soul, and suffers me not to do good
with the possessions which God has entrusted to me; and
I have faith and hope in thy prayer and in that of Aloma,
that if ye pray God to deliver me from the slavery wherein
Sloth now holds me, God will grant your petitions.”

5. Said Evast: “‘ Neither sloth nor other sin is of
Strength enough in man to destroy his free will, which God
has created in so great strength and power that by no sin
can it be conquered or subdued. But since thou hast faith
in our prayers, albeit we are unworthy that they be heard,
we will pray God to call to thy mind His glory and honour,
and the sacred Passion of Jesus Christ, and the vileness and
short duration of this world, that henceforward thou with
thy person and with all thy possessions mayest serve our
Lord God all the days of thy life.”

6. Right devoutly and with great contrition of heart did
the sick man repent, and prayed to God together with Evast
and Aloma. When their prayer was ended, the sick man
perceived that he was cured of his sickness and prayed Evast
and Aloma to lead him to the altar. So they led him before
the altar of Saint Andrew, and there he offered himself in
person, and with all his possessions, to be for all time a
servant of that hospital.

89

BLANQUERNA

CHAPTER XVI

OF ENVY

Ture was in that city a very wealthy man, who had desired
to buy Evaét’s house. That house, which was very beau-
tiful, was situated in such a place that at all times when that
rich man went out of his house he saw it, and greatly envied
it; and so great was the envy that he had of that house,
that he desired mortal injury to its owner, and daily he
considered how he might acquire it.

2. For long this man bore envy and ill-will. While he
was in this state of sin, it came to pass by the ordinance of
God that the rich man who had bought the house of Evast
passed from this life. At his door were many poor folk
awaiting alms, according to the custom whereby, when a
man is to be buried, alms are given to the poor at his house
for the good of his soul. Among these same poor folk were
Evast and Aloma, who waited there in expectation of alms.

3. Great was the humility and great the example which
all the chief mourners who had followed the body had of
Evast and Aloma, whom they saw among the poor awaiting
alms, and much speech had they concerning them. And
while they spake of Evast and Aloma, extolling the good
works which they did, the man that was envious heard them,
and knew and remembered his sin, and spake within him-
self these words:

4. “O foolish and senseless man! Of what avail is this
house to him that was lord thereof? And which has the
better fame, whether he that is dead or Evast who has sold
the house and with the money has builded the hospital
wherein so great alms are done? Sinful, envious man that
thou art! What evil did that dead man to thee, for the
which thou hast for so long and without reason soever borne
him evil will? Wretched man! How cans thou make
satisfaction for this sin, for the which Envy has held thee
90

OF WRATH

so long time at the gates of everlasting fire, which never
ceases to torment all those that in the sin of envy die?
Couldst thou do naught that would keep envy from thy
heart for ever?”

5. While he considered thus, and reproached himself for
the sin into the which he had fallen, he purposed in his
heart to do, while he had the good will, some notable thing,
that he might be strengthened in charity and virtue by the
grace of God and that envy should thus have no more power
over him. Wherefore, in the hearing of all the mourners
who had come to honour the dead man and were about to
depart, he spake these words:

6. “ O my lords, and ye that have come to this place to
honour the man who aforetime was master of this house!
I beseech you, by God and by Saint Mary, that ye follow
me to my dwelling, and that Evast and Aloma, and all these
poor men, come with us.” So Evast and Aloma, and all
the men and women that were assembled there, followed
him to his house. And when he was come to the entrance
of his house, he threw wide the doors, and there in the
Street, before them all, he confessed his sin. Then he put
Evast and Aloma in possession of his house, which was very
noble, and gave it to the hospital. And he said before them
all that he had desired to make this gift in their presence
and to say that which he had said, that he might be led
thereby to abjure envy and become subject to love, and that
he might the more be punished for his sin.

CHAPTER "XVII

OF WRATH

In the hospital of Evast there was a sick man who suffered
from an ulcer in the leg and could not be cured. And that
man was greatly constrained by his sickness. It came to
pass one day that he was suffering exceedingly by reason of

gI

BLANQUERNA

the grievousness of his sickness, and considered for how
long a time he had borne it. Wherefore such wrath entered
his mind that he desired death, and cursed himself, and the
day of his birth, and the life which he led. And so great
was his wrath, that in his mind he cursed both God and all
things that were.

2. While the sick man was thus wrathful, Evast, as was
his wont, together with the physician, tended his leg. When
the physician had placed by him the powder which he was
accustomed to give him, Evast bound up and dressed his
sore, and, kneeling down, kissed his feet, according to his
daily custom.

3. Through the great humility and charity which was in
Evast, God enlightened the conscience of the sick man and
showed him the sinfulness of his thoughts. And the sick
man thought upon the great humility of Evast, and, remem-
bering his own transgression and his wrath, spake these
words: ‘‘ Alas, thou wretched one! How Strange a thing
is this! For thou art the enemy of God and of all things,
by reason of the wrath that is in thee! Evast gives himself
to the service of God, but thou servest the devil.” - Greatly
did Evast marvel at these words, and he begged the sick
man to tell him their meaning.

4. “My lord!” said the sick man, “So great wrath
has entered my mind through the sickness which I suffer,
that I desire death rather than life; and so greatly has wrath
taken hold upon me that it has caused me to curse God and
myself and all things. But thy humility, piety and charity
make me to think upon my transgression, and to consider
the great favour which God has shown to me in giving me
as servant such a man as thyself. And since my ingratitude
and my wrong-doing are so great, it is neither just nor right
that from henceforth thou shouldst serve and keep in thy
hospital so guilty a sinner as am I,”

5. “ Brother and friend!” answered Evast. ‘‘ God wills
that I should win merit in serving thee, and that thou
92

OF VAINGLORY

shouldst win merit through patience. Thou mayest know
the vileness and the misery in the which we live in this
world; wherefore thou shouldst have pleasure in that which
makes thee wrathful. Thou hagt come into this world that
thou mayest have merit whereby God may justly call thee
to His glory. Wherefore the greater the increase which
God gives to thee of sickness, the greater is the occasion
which thou hast of patience and of keeping in remembrance
the grievous Passion which He bore by hanging on the
Cross for thee and all mankind.” So devoutly did Evast
speak to the sick man and so piously admonished he him,
that he repented of his sin, and spake these words:

6. “ Ah, patient God! Who could conceive such great
patience as Thine, Who by patience hast so conquered my
wrath that I submit myself thereto from henceforward and
for all the days of my life! The more Thou dost cause me
to suffer, the sweeter to me will be my life, and the more
clearly will Thy love and Thy dominion be manifested to
me.”’ ‘These words and many others the sick man spake,
beseeching pardon of God and rejoicing in His mercy.

CHAPTER XVIII

OF VAINGLORY

On a certain great festival it came to pass that a friar had
preached in a church wherein was assembled much people
in honour of the feast-day. A great company of notable
men followed the friar to his monastery to do him honour.
And it pleased the friar that they followed him, that the
other friars might see how he was honoured by the notable
men that gave him conduét. As they went, the friar made
conversation of a kind that should cause them to extol his
sermon. Greatly did they laud the sermon which the
friar had preached, and great pleasure had he thereat in
his mind.

93

BLANQUERNA
2. While the friar had vainglory in his mind at the

words which he heard concerning his sermon, they met the
young wife whom the good example of Evast and Aloma
had freed from the bondage of lust. When the friar saw
her, he remembered how for long he had striven to free this
girl (whose confessor he was) from sin, and that neither his
sermons nor her confessions had availed as greatly as the
good example of Evast and Aloma. While the friar con-
sidered thus, he knew that he had been guilty of vainglory,
and he resolved to chagten himself and to undergo some
penance that his sermons might never more be to him an
occasion for vainglory.

3. After he had considered thus, a lay brother who was
a companion of the preacher enquired of him: “ Which
sermon bears the more fruit—a sermon of words or a sermon
of good works and good example?” The friar answered:
‘« Since it is a greater virtue to do good works, and since to
do them costs a man more than to tell another how to do
them, therefore is the fruit of a good example greater than
the fruit of words. It is but a short time since Evast and
Aloma through their good example converted a woman to
chastity whom I was able to convert neither by preaching
nor by exhortation.”

4. When the friar had ended his words, he took leave
of the notables who would have followed him to the mon-
astery, for he desired their escort no longer. And by the
virtue of God, and the good example of Evast and Aloma,
the friar determined in his mind that his future works
should be like to the good words which he spake in his
sermons.

5. According as ye have heard, by the grace of God
Evast and Aloma by their good example mortified the sins
aforesaid; and a long time would it take to recount all the
good that resulted from the lives of Evast and Aloma. And
while they were still serving and loving God with all their
might, it pleased our Lord God to call Evast to His glorious
94

OF VAINGLORY

bliss, and to take him from the perils and the misery of this
world.

6. Dead was Evast in this world, but living was he in
glory. Aloma was left, and daily she prayed to God for
Evast, and besought Him to take her from this world when
her penance therein was ended. Grieve she dared not, for
she feared to disobey the will of God: console herself she
could not, since she had neither Evast nor her son Blan-
querna. So she grew old, and her body, through affliction
and age, caused her much trial for so long as she lived.
Then God, Who forgets not His servants, called her to His
happiness, wherein she found the soul of Evast her husband
whom she so greatly loved.

ENDED JIS THE FIRST BOOK OF EVAST
AND ALOMA

95

BEGINNETH THE SECOND BOOK WHICH
IS OF RELIGION

Part THE FIRST

CHAPTER XIX

OF THE STRIFE THAT WAS BETWEEN NATANA AND
NASTASIA

Arter Blanquerna had left Natana, she was ever wrapt in
thought concerning the words which Blanquerna had spoken
to her, and she thought upon the Passion of Jesus Christ,
and upon the trials and deaths of Saint Catherine, Saint
Eulalia and Saint Margaret, which they endured in this
world for the love of God.

2. By the virtue of God, and by the nature of cogitation,
which inclines the will toward that upon which man thinks,
Natana conceived an ardent desire to forsake the world and
to enter the estate of religion.

3. Nastasia observed that her daughter was all the day
long deep in thought, and changed completely-from her
former condition, Therefore, supposing her to be enam-
oured of Blanquerna, she spake to Natana in these words:
“ Beloved daughter! Wherefore art thou sad and whereon
dost thou think so deeply? It seems to me that thou hast
remembrance of Blanquerna. Now if thou woulds& have
Blanquerna for thy spouse, desire it no longer, for Blanquerna
is gone to be a hermit all the days of his life, as thou knowest.
If thou wouldst wed, an honest burgess has a son that is still
young, and him thou canst wed, for thy dowry is great and
thou comest of honoured lineage. Further, thou art fair in
person and of good upbringing; therefore cang thou seek
out from all the city the best and most honourable man yet
unwed, and him canst thou have for thy spouse.”

4. Natana enquired of Nastasia if she knew any man in
the world who was fairer, nobler and more powerful than

96

STRIFE BETWEEN NATANA AND NASTASIA

all other men that are in the world, and if that man would
be her spouse; for she felt herself to be so rich and so noble
in her mind that she would not from the city alone choose
the fittest man to be her spouse, but from the whole
world would she choose a man, and that man, come what
might, she would have for her husband and her spouse.
“ Daughter!” said Nastasia, ‘‘ The best man in the world
—who could choose him or know him? Nor art thou so
rich or so nobly born that kings and emperors and other
princes would give thee one of their sons in marriage.”
Said Natana: “If I lack the riches or honour or noble
breeding needful to fit me to be the wife of a king’s son,
can there be no king’s son that thou knowest who would
humble himself to be my spouse? ’’ Nastasia answered and
said that she knew no son of a king or of a prince who had
humility so great that he would lower himself by taking her
to wife.

5. Then Natana spake to Nastasia and asked her if she
had never heard men speak of Jesus Christ, Who is the Son
of the King of Heaven and Earth and of all that is, the which
Jesus Christ is the noblest and the fairest and the wisest and
the most truly to be loved of all men that ever were. In
Him (she said) is such humility that His Divine Nature was
pleased to humble Itself to be a person with human nature.
Such courtesy and humility has this Jesus Christ that pity
and love made Him humble Himself to be poor, to be tor-
mented and to be killed, so that sinners who could not be
saved or receive the blessing of God should come to eternal
life and escape the torments of hell which are likewise ever-
lasting. ‘‘ Mother!” said Natana. “‘ It is this Jesus Christ
Whom I will have for my Husband and Spouse, and I pray
thee to grant Him to me so soon as thou canst, for greatly
do I desire Him. And fear thou not concerning Him be-
cause He has so much honour and power, for oftentimes
already has He humbled Himself as much as I ask or
more.”

G 97

BLANQUERNA

6. Greatly was Nastasia displeased when she knew that
her daughter had conceived a love for religion,! and she
spake ill to her of the religious life, extolling the estate of
matrimony. So there was a dispute between Natana and
Nagtasia as to which was the worthier, whether the life of
religion or the life of matrimony. Nastasia extolled the
estate of matrimony, saying that it was made by God in
Paradise; and that by it is the world governed, for if all
were in religion, the world in a short time would be with-
out men; and that religion comes through matrimony, and
matrimony can exist without religion. Natana answered
and said that as God made the order of matrimony after the
body, even so after the spirit by the light of grace did He
make the mind of man to conceive the order of religion.
And if matrimony is an estate whereby men come into the
world, religion is an estate whereby men come to glory. And
although the fruit cannot exist without the tree, it follows
not that the tree is better than the fruit, since God created
the tree for the sake of the fruit.

7. While Natana and Nastasia disputed concerning the
estates of religion and matrimony, Nastasia said to Natana
that she herself had desired to enter the religious life, but
certain religious and certain dames of a religious order had
dissuaded her and counselled her to take a husband, and
therefore she thought that there are trials in the religious
life which are grievous to bear, while in the life of matri-
mony there are pleasures which are agreeable exceedingly.

8. “ Mother!’ said Natana, ‘‘ The men and women
who are in the state of religion are of diverse wills; and so
noble a thing is the religious life that it permits not any evil
soul to be stained with vain concupiscence. Wherefore the
greatest trial that man can have in the religious life is when
that life displeases him and he desires the vanities of this
world; and the greatest pleasure that a man can have in

* Here, as often elsewhere in the book, by “ religion” is meant the
“religious life,”—i.e, of a monk or a nun.

98

STRIFE BETWEEN NATANA AND NASTASIA

this world is that of a religious who loves his order and
considers that he has escaped from the perils and vanities of
this world, and in his mind has ever God and His honours.”

9. “ Daughter!” said Nastasia to Natana. “In this
city lives a noble youth of right good upbringing, and as
I have heard from his mother and from other persons he
would fain have thee to wife, for he is deeply enamoured
of thee.”” “ Mother!” said Natana, ‘‘ This youth, is he so
powerful that he can forgive my sins? If I am sick, can
he heal me? Or can he give me heavenly glory? Or if
there is famine upon earth, can he give generous abundance
of temporal possessions?” When Natana had vanquished
and overborne Nastasia thus with her arguments, as is set
forth above, Nastasia ended her words, lest Natana should
be yet more strongly confirmed in her devotion, intending
at another season to extol the order of matrimony. So she
rose from the place where she was seated, and went to the
window to look out at the people who passed along the
Street.

10. While Nastasia was at the window a damsel with a
great company of people passed by, on her way to pray to
God in the church, for on the morrow she was to be a bride.
Right fair was she and nobly clad, and she rode upon a
palfrey. Many honourable men followed her and many
noble ladies; jesters and tumblers who sang and played
instruments of music, and men who danced, did honour to
this damsel. Nastasia called Natana to come and stand with
her at the window. So Natana went to the window.
“Daughter !’’ said Nastasia, ‘“‘ Thou seest how fair a sight
is yonder damsel, and the great company that attends her.”
While Nastasia spake thus, there passed a corpse that was
carried to the church for burial. The grief and the tears
of the wife of the dead man, who could express them?
* Mother!” said Natana, “‘ Seest thou how great is the
sorrow of yonder woman that has lost her husband?”’
Nastasia answered not these words, but rose from the

99

BLANQUERNA

window that Natana might also depart and gaze no longer
upon the grief and tears of this woman.

11. While Nastasia and Natana were Still in the room,
a servant came to them weeping, and enquired of Nastasia
if she desired to go and do honour to a woman that had died
in childbed, and whose body they had opened to take from
it the living child. ‘‘ Mother!” said Natana, “ Dost
thou hear these words?’’ Nastasia made no answer, but
went from the house to the woman, who was to be buried
on that day. While Nastasia was without the house, Natana
thought upon her mother’s words, and how she had tempted
her to embrace the estate of matrimony. Natana feared the
devil, and the lightness of the mind of woman which so
easily is swayed, and she feared lest her mother by some
skilful art should take from her the devotion which she
had to religion. Wherefore Natana sent a secret message
to the abbess of a convent of good fame that she should
send two dames of the order to fetch her on the morrow
when her mother would be at Mass, for she wished to visit
her that she might speak with her certain words.

12. When Natana had sent this message, she returned
to the window to see the woman who wept for the death of
her husband come back from the burial. While Natana was
at the window, she heard a crier proclaiming that all should
come to see justice wrought upon the son of a burgess who
was to suffer the penalty for having killeda man. This man
who was being led to execution passed before Natana; his
father and his mother and a great company of his kinsfolk
followed him. The lamentation which they made, who
could recount it? While Natana was at the window and
saw all these things, she beheld Nastasia coming. And
Nastasia, meeting the man that was being led to execution,
wept for the sorrow of the woman that was bewailing her
son. When Nastasia was once more in the house Natana
said to her: “ My lady! I perceive that thou hast wept,

and that thy heart has been moved to devotion. Hag thou
100

HOW NATANA ENTERED A RELIGIOUS HOUSE

had contrition of heart, and does thy conscience reproach
thee because thou hast chidden me for the holy devotion
which God has put into my soul?” ‘‘ Daughter!” said
Nagtasia, ‘‘ Speak to me no more such words as these, nor
conceive of any estate save that of marriage; for if thou
dost so, thou wilt be disinherited and likewise beaten, and
thou hast kinsfolk whom I will cause to give thee many
strokes and blows.” ‘“‘ Mother!” said Natana, “ Thou
wouldst have me resemble those holy women, the saints
who bore many trials in this world for their Spouse Jesus
Christ, Who Himself endured a grievous Passion and Death
that He might give them glory without end. Threaten me
not, then, with that which I fain would have; rather do I
pray thee to give me to endure that which my will desires.”

13. All that night Nastasia thought deeply how she
might give to her daughter a husband, who should be to
her as a son, and whom she might adopt, bestowing on him
the great riches which her husband had left to Natana her
daughter, of the which riches she would bewail the loss if
her daughter entered the religious life. But Natana thought
all that night how she might enter a religious order. On
the morrow early, when Nastasia went to Mass, the abbess
sent to Natana two nuns to give her escort to the convent.
When Natana left the house, she told the servant that she
purposed to go to the convent, and commanded her to tell
this to Nastasia, that she might not think she had gone to
some place of ill repute.

Coat ireR XX

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN NATANA ENTERED A
HOUSE OF RELIGION

Wuen Natana reached the convent, the abbess and all the
sigters received her with great honour. She went into the
chapter-house with the abbess and the sisters of the house.

Then Natana spake to the abbess and to the sisters these
IOI

BLANQUERNA

words: ‘“ The Divine Virtue has conquered in me the false
temptation of the devil which caused me to tempt Blan-
querna to be disobedient to the Divine inspiration which
called him by means of the life of a hermit to contemplate
and love Him. Blanquerna has commended to me seven
ladies whom I would serve in this convent among you.
These seven ladies are the seven virtues, whereby man
serves God and Jesus Christ, journeys towards bliss, and
flees from the seven devils who are the seven deadly sins
which Evagt and Aloma mortify day by day in this city.
I would fain eat bread and drink water in this convent all
the days of my life. I would flee from the world ere it
enslave me, and hinder me from the service of these seven
ladies whom I cannot serve as well in the world as in
religion.” ’

2. Weeping and with great devotion of heart did Natana
thus speak, and so devout and noble-minded were her words
that the abbess and all the sisters were moved by her good
example to devotion and tears. The abbess answered
Natana and said: ‘‘ Blessed be the Name of Jesus Christ,
and praised be His Virtue, Who has sent us so good an
example and mirror of life to inspire us to love our order
and despise the vanity of this world.’ Then said she to
Natana: ‘‘ Welcome art thou, my daughter! The Divine
Brightness has illumined thy mind, and by this same light
dost thou illumine us that we may persevere in good works.
Greatly do I joy at being in thy company, but I must en-
quire of all the sisters, as is our wont, whether or no it be
their will that I receive thee among us.”

3. So Natana went to the church to pray the Queen of
Heaven to beg grace of her Son that the abbess and the
sisters might be pleased to receive her into their order.
While Natana prayed thus with tears, the abbess enquired
of the sisters whether or no they desired and counselled her
to receive Natana. And all the sisters were glad that Natana

should become one of them. One of the sisters said that
102

HOW NATANA ENTERED A RELIGIOUS HOUSE

Natana was wealthy, and that by her wealth much good
would come to the convent; but the abbess and the rest
teproved her, and said that when a person is received into
an order, no thought must be taken as to temporal riches,
for wrong is done to the person received if she be received
because of the riches that she forsakes and despises, and
not rather for the virtues wherewith she joins the order.

4. The sacrigtine! said to the abbess that Natana should
be proven for a time with respect to her devotion before she
was clothed; but the abbess answered that many a one for
shame remained in an order until she had conceived devo-
tion which made her love to be in religion. While the
abbess was saying these words, she sent for Natana to come,
saying that she and all the sisters would receive her into
their company.

5. The abbess enquired of Natana if she desired to take
the habit immediately, or to remain for some time in the
convent, that she might make trial of the austere life which
the sisters lived in afflictions of the body, and see if she
found the enclosure or the routine of the convent to be
over-irksome. Natana answered and said that she had no
need to make trial of her devotion, for He that had 1m-
planted in her the devotion that she had to religion could
keep it there for so long as He willed, according to His
grace and mercy. Natana desired to take the habit so soon
as she might, to the end that if her mother or her kinsfolk
wished to reclaim her, the convent, according to its privi-
lege, could forbid them.

6. While Natana received the habit of religion, and
promised to observe the rules of the order, and the abbess
gave her her benedi¢tion according to custom, Nastasia had
returned from the church thinking to find her daughter.
But the servant said that she had departed with two sisters
from the convent. Greatly was Nastasia displeased, and
she went immediately to the convent and demanded to be

1 Sacristana (fem.).
103

BLANQUERNA

taken to her daughter. So the abbess took her to Natana,
who was clothed in the religious habit. Nastasia wept
bitterly and uttered many threats when she saw her daughter
thus attired, and she returned to her house and sent mes-
sages to all her kinsfolk and to the kinsfolk of Natana’s
father.

7. These all assembled in the house of Naétasia. Greatly
were they moved with wrath against the convent; and took
counsel together, and made agreement, that if the abbess
delivered not Natana to them they would drag her thence
by force, and would rase to the ground and demolish and
burn the whole convent and put all the sisters to death. So
Nastasia and all the others came to the convent to demand
Natana: the abbess answered that they could not have her.
Then all of them together cried out and said that if she
delivered not Natana they would burn the convent and all
the sisters. Greatly was the abbess dismayed, and even so
were the sisters, and the abbess answered that they would
take counsel together whether they would give up Natana
or no.

8. So the abbess and all the sisters went into the-chapter-
house. Natana wept and prayed, and begged the abbess
and the sisters that they would in no wise cast her out from
the order and deliver her to her mother, who desired to
enslave her to the vanity of this world. In great fear and
peril were the abbess and all the sisters, and great was their
terror, and many cried out that they should deliver up
Natana. While the abbess and the sisters were in this
state of doubt, a sister said that it would be more prudent
for them to give up Natana than to die every one of them,
and have the convent destroyed. Then Natana answered,
and spake these words to the abbess and to the other sigters:

g. ‘‘ Ye have all heard that our Spouse Jesus Christ, for
love of us and to redeem us, desired death and martyrdom.
God was pleased to give devotion to the apostles, to show

that the Son of God has servants who fear not to die if
104

HOW NATANA ENTERED A RELIGIOUS HOUSE

thereby they may do honour to His honour and show love
for His love. God gave devotion to Saint Catherine, Saint
Eulalia, Saint Margaret and the other martyrs so that they
desired for love of Him to suffer death, and to give example
to all men of how they loved to die to honour God. If ye
for my sake do die, ye will die to honour God, ye will be
martyrs, and will give good example to men; but, if ye
suffer me to be dragged by force from the order, ye will
give example and precedent to the people, so that they will
for ever menace you if ye receive any women against their
will.” Thus earnestly did Natana beg her sisters not to
forsake her, nor to show that they lacked devotion; she re-
called to their minds the Passion of Jesus Christ, and gave
them remembrance of the martyrdom of Saint Catherine,
Saint Eulalia and Saint Margaret, and of the other virgins
who died to honour Jesus Christ.

10. So many devout words did Natana speak to the
abbess and the sisters, and so great was the power thereof,
that they determined to suffer death rather than to deliver
up Natana, and they trusted in the words of Natana, having
‘hope in God, Who ever defends His servants when such
is His will and pleasure. Yet neither the abbess nor any
of the sisters dared answer Nastasia and the rest concerning
the resolution which they had taken through the power of
the Holy Spirit.

11. The abbess and the sisters fled, and hid themselves,
and had great fear of death. But Natana made before her
eyes the holy sign of the Cross, and having strength and
nobility of mind, spake these words: ‘“ Hope, Strength,
Charity, Justice! Since ye have made me to be your ser-
vant, it is time that ye aided me against your enemies, who
because of me would destroy this convent and the sisters
who have no part in my sins.”’ As Natana said these words,
she went up with the keys to a window above the doorway,
and from the window she showed herself to her mother and

to all the rest, and spake these words:
105

BLANQUERNA

12. ‘ Welcome be ye, my lady mother Nastasia, and all
ye that are here. I greet you all; I make over you the holy
sign of the Cross, whereby ye remember the Passion of the
Son of God Who for us men was pleased to become Man,
and was delivered up by men to death for our salvation.
On behalf of my lady abbess, and all this community, I
greet you, and make you to know that they desire to suffer
death rather than have you rescue me. They would fain
show you that Jesus Christ has daughters who will die for
His love. In God they trust, and the justice and power of
God they remember. They are women: ye need not to
bring arms against them: they have no mind to resist you.
See, here are the keys of the door: do what ye will.”
Natana threw the keys to Nastasia, and prayed that the first
woman to be killed should be she herself, since she would
be the occasion of the death of them all, and of the de-
Struction of the convent.

13. But Hope, Charity, Justice and Strength had not
been virtues if they had failed Natana. God, Who forgets
not them that praise and love Him, put such power into
the words of Natana that Nastasia and all the rest wept for
the devout words that Natana spake, and for the holy lives
of the abbess and the other sisters in the convent, who had
chosen death for the love of Jesus Christ. So the hearts
of Nastasia and the rest were turned, and their ill-will de-
parted; and devotion came to them, with conscience of
their fault, and with abstinence, charity and justice. All of
them repented, and they praised and blessed God, Who had
given such virtue to Natana and to all the sisters in the
convent. They greeted and saluted Natana every one, bid-
ding her have no fear of them, and begging her to pray for
the pardon of God upon them for the foolishness and the
wrong which their wills had conceived.

14. In the presence of Natana they all turned and de-
parted, and Natana went to ring the bell, that the abbess

and the sisters might come to the chapter; but for the fear
106

HOW NATANA ENTERED A RELIGIOUS HOUSE

that they had they would not come. So Natana went
through the convent seeking them, and she told them of
the mercy and the pity of God, Who forgets not those that
put their trust in Him. Great was the joy of the abbess
and all the sisters. The abbess looked from the window
and saw that they had all departed. Only Nastasia remained
at the door alone, weeping and lamenting loudly, and saying
these words:

15. “Alas, thou wretched one! Where are the thanks
and the gratitude that thou hast towards God, Who has
given thee so noble a daughter? And what crime had the
abbess or the sisters of this convent committed against thee
that thou wouldst have had thy kinsfolk destroy them? Is
there any crime equal or like to thine? Can the pity and
mercy of God be greater than thy sins? Would the abbess
and the sisters of this convent pardon thee or humble them-
selves to receive among them so sinful a woman as thou? ”
Very pleasant and agreeable were the words of Nastasia to
the abbess and to all the sisters, and above all to Sister
Natana. So Nastasia gave the keys to the abbess through
the window, that the door might be opened, and she might
enter the convent to ask pardon of the abbess and all the
sisters.

16. The abbess and the sisters received Nastasia very
graciously, and together they went to the church! to praise
and bless the name of God. Hearty thanks gave they to
God, Who had delivered them from death. Then Nastasia
went to the chapter-house with the abbess and all the com-
munity. First, upon her knees, and kissing the ground, she
asked pardon of the abbess; then, in like manner, she asked
pardon of all the sisters. They forgave her every one, and
all the sisters kissed her. When Nastasia came to her
daughter to beg for her forgiveness, she kneeled and wept
bitterly, and spake these words to her daughter who kneeled
before her mother and kissed her hands and her feet, and

1 This, though called “ church,” would seem to be the convent chapel.
107

BLANQUERNA

with weeping and tears kissed the ground, praising the
virtue and the mercy of God.

17. “Beloved daughter!’’ said Nastasia, “It is a
cugtom among us that the daughter should kneel before
the mother and ask her pardon. But I by my sin have
offended so grievously against thee that I am not worthy
to ask thy pardon, nor even to be in thy presence, since I
have desired to make thee the occasion of death to all the
sisters of this house. Daughter! If in thy heart thou hast
aught of pity or of mercy, wilt thou pardon me? Canst
thou gladden and console me with thy friendship and com-
pany? And will God, by thy prayers and merits, be pleased
to have remembrance of me and call me to His glory?”
These words, and many more which it would take long to
recount, spake Nastasia to her daughter Natana, and kissed
her many times. Natana was so full of joy, of devotion and
of charity, that she could not speak; only her eyes and her
hands did she raise to Heaven and to the crucifix which was
in the chapter-house, and kissed the hands and the feet of
her mother many times. Not alone did Nastasia and
Natana weep, but the abbess and all the sisters wept like-
wise for the words of Nastasia and Natana.

18. “ Daughter! ”’ said Nastasia, “‘ Whereon is set thy
mind? Hear thou my cries, make answer to my words and
remember not transgressions that are past.” “‘ My lady!”
said Natana, “ Thine is my soul, and thine am I myself.
There can be no sin in a heart to the which God has given
such great devotion as to thine. Pardoned thee already are
thy sins and thy transgressions. And if thou hast no sin,
why shouldst thou implore pardon? If thou wilt have
aught that is of me or in me, do thou have it all.”

19. On that day the Name of God was greatly blessed
by all the sisters in the convent. Nastasia begged that they
would give her the habit of religion. But because she was
old, and of such feeble health, the abbess and Natana and
apeeters counselled her to build a house without the con-
fo)

HOW NATANA BECAME SACRISTINE

vent and before the door of the church, that there she might
abide and eat and have a pittance for her body, which she
could not have in the convent. This counsel did Nastasia
observe, and she lived in the manner aforesaid and gave
example of good to all the sisters that saw her. And her
dress was humble and in some wise like to the dress of the
sisters in the convent.

CHAPTER XXI
HOW NATANA BECAME SACRISTINE

In a short space of time Natana learned perfeétly to read,
and afterwards to sing and to recite the office. All day she
would be at prayer in the church, and she delighted to aid
the sacristine. The abbess took knowledge of the duty
which pleased Natana most, that her service might be most
pleasing to her. And, since Natana loved to be in the
church and to help the sacristine, therefore the abbess, with
the counsel of all the sisters, made Natana sacristine, saying
these words:

2. Narnia” said the abbess, “ It is time for*thee*to
serve in some office; and since thou delightest to look upon
the Cross and the Altar which call to mind our Saviour
Jesus Christ, Who is the Spouse of thy soul, and since
moreover thou wilt keep the church clean, together with
all that is used therein to honour Jesus Christ in the service
of the Church, therefore is it the will and the prayer of the
whole community that thou be sacristine.”’

3. Natana gave hearty thanks to the abbess and to all
the sisters for the honour that they desired to do her, but
she prayed that they would not grant her that honour,
whereof she was not worthy; neither had she come to the
convent to be honoured, nor did reason consent that she
should usurp the office of the sacristine, with whom was to

be found no fault.
109

BLANQUERNA

4. The abbess answered Natana, saying that it was
according to reason that the fittest person should serve in
each office, that the rule of the order might best be pre-
served; and when any sister had laboured well in her office’
then was the order wont to grant her indulgence. And
since the sacrigtine was old, and had laboured well as
sacristine, therefore they would now have her to rest, and
in patience and humility to see her office given to Natana,
and their will was that Natana should labour in that office
and be obedient to the command of the abbess.

5. So Natana was made sacristine and served right well
in her office. With Nasgtasia her mother she was ever at
prayer in the church, and they spake together of God, of
His power, of His honour, of the Passion of Jesus Christ,
of the glory of Paradise and of the pains of Hell. ‘‘ Mother !”
said Natana, ‘‘ More seemly words by far, and more pleasing
to God and to the saints in glory, are these which we use
daily, than those that we used while we were in the world
and spake of worldly things.” Nastasia, answering, blessed
the Name of God, Who had set her in that State and given
her the consolation and companionship of her daughter
Natana.

6. “ Sacristine, my daughter!” said Nastasia, ‘‘ Well
do I know that in no wise could I have had thy companion-
ship, hadst thou remained in the world and taken a husband,
so well as I have it now that thou art in religion. Now see
I how the eyes of my understanding were darkened, when
I sought to turn thee from entering the religious life. It
would be well that we should divide the temporal goods
which we possess among the poor of Christ.” Natana
answered, saying that she was considering how distribution
of the worldly possessions that her father had left her could
well be made, to the end that for a long time to come they
should yield abundant fruit. ‘‘ And therefore,” she said, “I
consider daily, having regard to the condition of this convent,

in what way we may enrich it with our temporal wealth.”
110

OF THE DEATH OF THE ABBESS

CHAPTER XXII

OF THE DEATH OF THE ABBESS

THE mercy and justice of God desired to bestow upon the
abbess her reward, for she was of a great age and had
laboured well in the service of God. So God was pleased
to call her to His glory that He might show her what
manner of Master she had served: He desired to show her
how His power could reward His servants. So He was
pleased to give to her Himself in glory and to be therein
her glory, since she had given herself to Him in this world.
The messengers that He sent to bring her to Him were the
trials that she bore patiently in her sickness, the which trials
God gave to her that she might have patience and obedience,
purify her body of all sin, and straightway, after this life,
go to her eternal rest.

2. While the abbess was sick, an agreement was made
among the sisters that they should beg her to counsel them
in the election of one to succeed her after her days were
done; for she had better knowledge of the sisters, and of
their obedience, than had any one of themselves. So certain
of the foremost among the sisters prayed the abbess secretly
to assign to themselves one of them as superior according as
seemed to her the most fitting. The abbess answered and
said: ‘‘ As it seems to me, the sister most meet to be
superior is Sister Natana, for I have found her ever obedient
and devoted to her order; and she has left great riches and
honours for the sake of religion. And since I am at the
gate of death, as well I know, ye may be assured that |
cannot speak falsely; wherefore I counsel you that ye make
Sister Natana abbess.”

3. It pleased God now that the abbess should pass from
this life to that glory which endures for ever. Right
honourably was her body disposed in burial, and great was

the honour which the chiefest citizens and the ladies of the
mer

BLANQUERNA

city and the religious orders paid on that day to the abbess.
Greatly was the abbess mourned by all the people, and by
the sisters of the convent, and most of all by Sister Natana.
Many masses were said for the abbess on that day in the
monastery; and such was her holy life that in all the
churches of the city masses were sung for her soul. All
that day was a day of weeping and prayer among the sisters,
who had log that which they moét loved in this world.
And they agreed that in the chapter-house, after the sermon
which a friar was to preach concerning the abbess, one of
themselves should comfort all the rest with words of
consolation.

CHAPTER XXIII
OF CONSOLATION

Ir was the will of all the sisters that Natana should speak
words of consolation concerning the death of the abbess.
So Natana rose to her feet, made reverence before the holy
crucifix, and gave thanks to God and to the sisters for doing
her this honour over all the rest. Natana said that there
were many sisters in the chapter who knew more of con-
solation than she, but that, since it so pleased them, she
would speak according as God should give her grace. So
Natana began, and spake after this manner:

2. “* My will is to give comfort and consolation to myself,
and that by my consolation ye may have a manner and
example of consolation to your own selves likewise. This
is the new method of a wise religious, who preached right
nobly by communing with himself.”

3. “ Dead is my superior. Charity and justice move
my soul to yearn and weep for my lady abbess. My soul -
moves my heart to bring tears to my eyes. Fain would I
weep, for tears and love agree well the one with the other.
Justice wills that a man should weep for his superior. I

must weep if I would console myself, for without tears I
wy)

OF CONSOLATION

may have no consolation. I weep because I see her no more
who loved me and was wont to point to me the way of
salvation. But I must be glad for her joy and happiness,
and for gladness too must I weep; for there is no per-
fection of gladness in this world without weeping. Loss
and emptiness have come upon us because our lady has
been perfected, and has won eternal rest. I must rejoice
at her bliss, and be sad at my own loss and emptiness; and
therefore, for joy and sorrow alike, I must weep. If for
two reasons | should weep, then must I weep doubly; if I
weep not because reason wills it, then must I of necessity
weep for my sin in weeping not. My soul forgets not itself
that it may weep. If justice would make me lose my con-
solation and punish me, then let it not allow me to weep;
and if it would comfort and reward me, I pray it to let me
weep for long with all my will.”

4. “ My will was created that it might have pleasure in
the Will of its Creator. If my will desires not that which
its Creator wills, I must needs have no more comfort. If
for my own necessities I would have had from my superior
that which was imperfection, what is become of the charity
which my superior made me to love? If I have grief at the
death of her body, I must comfort myself because of the
good of her soul, which makes me to rejoice. My superior
has gone from this life of peril: hast thou then wrath, O my
soul, that she is here no more? If thou, O body, that art
a creature by nature beast-like, wouldst take from my soul
consolation for the loss of that which is like to thee} then
will my soul comfort me by reason of that same likeness.?
Weep thou, my body, if weep thou wilt; for in thy tears
my soul will find consolation. To thee, O body, it pertains
to weep; to my soul it is given to remember the virginity,
the perseverance, the sanctity, the worthiness, the good

1 i.e, the body of the abbess.
a j.e. because the soul of the abbess, which is like to the speaker’s soul,
is saved.

H It3

BLANQUERNA

works and the holy end of my superior.” ‘Thus devoutly,
and in words that by their nature accord with consolation,
did Natana console herself, and so piously did she weep,
that she moved all the sisters to pity and tears, and con-
soled them all with her devout words and her tears. And
all the sisters praised and blessed God and His power,
saying that it was a time to love and to weep and to have
patience, and praising the Will of God Who had been
pleased to manifest His power. And their tears and love
became to them an occasion and cause of consolation.

CHAPTER XXIV

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN NATANA WAS ELECTED ABBESS

Narana and all the sisters who had a voice in the election
of an abbess went into the chapter-house. ‘“‘ Above all
things,” said Natana to them, “is it needful to have a
worthy superior, for through the goodness of the superior
God gives virtue to those that are beneath her. Wherefore,
since our abbess has passed from this life to the next, it is
needful, according to nature and reason, that we seek from
among us the one that is chiefest in holiness of life and the
love of God, for she is worthy to be our pastor according
to the ordinance and the will of God.”

2. All the sisters desired to ele&t an abbess according to
their accustomed manner, but Natana said that she had
learned a new way of election, which way is by art! and by
numbers; and this art follows the conditions of the Book
of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men, which follows the
Art of Finding Truth? “ After this manner,” said Natana,
“is found truth, and this truth will reveal to us which sigter
may best and most fittingly be made abbess.”’

3. So Natana was desired by all the sisters to tell them
the manner whereby through an art they might discover

1 i.e. method: the word is a common one with Lull.
* Works of Lull’s: see pp. 311, 327.

114

HOW NATANA WAS ELECTED ABBESS

and eleét the sister who was meetest to be abbess. Natana
answered, saying these words: ‘“ Of the art of eleétion I
will tell you in brief manner the beginnings. This art is
divided into two parts: the firs part is of choosing the
eleGtors who themselves ele@ their pastor; the second part
is of the manner wherein their superior is chosen. Where-
fore I will tell you first of the first part, and afterwards of
the second.”

4. Natana said: ‘‘ We number in this chapter twenty
women, who have a voice in the election of a pastor.
According to the art, we must ele& from these twenty
sisters an odd number, which may be five or seven, for this
number is more fitting than any other for an election, and
the number of seven is more fitting than the number of five.
Therefore let an oath to vote truly be taken first by all the
sisters; then let the first sister be asked secretly which of
the nineteen are most meet to be of the seven eleCtors; and
afterwards let the second be asked, and the third, and so
in order down to the last; and each time let the answer of
each sister be written down. Finally, let it be seen which
sisters are they that have received the most votes, and let
those that have had most votes be the seven who shall elect
the abbess.”’

5. “The second part of the election consists in the
choice by the seven electors of their pastor. First, it is
meet that the seven electors agree upon a certain number
of persons, and upon certain names for election, as seems
to them good, and let each be compared with the other
according to four conditions, namely: which of them best
loves and knows God, which best loves and knows the
virtues, which most knows and hates the vices, and which
is the meetest in her person.”

6. “‘ Each of the seven electors may choose one person
to be in the number of those to be ele¢ted superior, and
each ele¢tor herself shall be of that number. In order that
ye may the more clearly understand the art, let us suppose

115

BLANQUERNA

that the number of persons, whereof our pastor is to be
chosen and eleéted, be nine. First, then, it is meet that the
seven be divided into two parts: two of the one part and
five of the other. The five must decide which of the two
shall be elected, and the name of her that has most votes
shall be secretly written. After this, another of the five shall
be compared with her that has received most votes ; let her
be set in the place of her that has been defeated by lack of
votes; and let that defeated one be set in the place of her
that is compared with the first or with the second. And let
this be done in order with all the rest, and to this number
let there be added the eighth candidate and the ninth,
namely, the names of those that are not of the electc.s.
Now, if we take this number, there will be six-and-thirty
compartments,! in the which will appear the votes of each.
Let her be elected that has the most votes in the most
compartments.”

7. When Natana had expounded the art of election, one
of the sisters asked her: “If it should chance that the
votes in these compartments are equal, what does the art
in this event ordain?”’ Natana answered: “ The art
ordains that from the number of these, whether two or
three or more, chosen by art alone, be chosen that one who
best accords with the four conditions aforesaid, and she
who best accords with the conditions is worthy to be
electege.

8. Greatly did the art and manner of eleétion please the
sisters, and they all said that by following this art there
could be no error in the ele€tion. So they all determined
that for ever thereafter they would make eleétions in the art
and manner which Natana had described, and to this end
they set themselves to study the art, and they learned it.
After a few days they made ele¢tion according to the art,

_ 1 Majorcan Lullists disagree as to the sense of the word cambres, which
is here translated “compartments.” The most likely alternatives are
“ divisions of the ballot-box” (as in § 9) and “cells.”

116

OF HEARING

and by the art it was revealed to them that Natana was to
be abbess.

g. So Natana was elected abbess. Greatly was she dis-
pleased at being thus honoured. She blessed God for that
He had been pleased to honour her above all the rest, but
she feared lest the sisters had erred in the art, and desired
to see the six-and-thirty divisions of the ballot-box, so that
if they had erred in the art and she should not be abbess,
they might elect that one whom the working of the art
might indicate. So Natana and the sisters who were not
of the seven ele€tors examined the way which had been
followed according to the art in the ele€tion, and found that
they had followed the art as was meet. Then Natana began
to think deeply how she might learn and be able to rule
herself and the sisters, and she meditated daily how she
might direét the convent in right ways.

CHAPTER XXV

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBESS MADE ORDINANCE
CONCERNING THE FIVE CORPORAL SENSES, AND
FIRST, OF HEARING

‘Tue abbess caused the bell to be rung that the sisters might
assemble in the chapter-house, for she desired to ask counsel
of them as touching the manner wherein they might use the
sense of hearing in that convent, that the rule of their order
should be the better served. While the abbess was in the
chapter-house and the sisters were assembled for the
chapter, a sister who in the city begged for the love of God
came to the chapter-house and related to the other sisters
that she had seen a bride right fair and nobly apparelled,
who with great honour was being led to the church. The
sister related these things gladly, and gladly did the other
sisters hear her. The abbess perceived in these words the
unruliness which results when sisters who beg speak of
temporal pleasures to their companions.

i?

BLANQUERNA

2. In the chapter-house was the abbess with the sisters.
In the presence of them all the abbess blessed God and said
these words: ‘‘ Long has my soul reflected, and sought
how my mother Nastasia and I may give back to God the
possessions which He has entrusted to us. Now by the
virtue of God is my soul enlightened concerning the manner
wherein we may give our riches to this convent, namely,
upon this condition, that henceforward no sister shall go to
beg in the city, nor relate any temporal matter which she
sees or hears; for to hear of temporal pleasures makes the
vanities of this world to be remembered and desired, and
by such desires are hindered prayers and meditations upon
the Passion of Jesus Christ.”

3. A rule was made that no sister should leave the con-
vent without great necessity; and the possessions which the
abbess and her mother gave to the convent were so many
that they sufficed to satisfy the necessities for which they
were wont to beg. These possessions were administered
by lay brothers, old and worthy men, already proven in
another order. ‘These provided the convent from their
administration without entering therein, and if the abbess
or any sister needed any private thing, which they had need
to conceal from the friars, there were widows living alone
in the city, devout and honest women, and these attended
to their needs.

4. A certain fixed number of sisters were enrolled, and
beyond that number thenceforward no more were to be
received, This rule was made that the possessions which
the abbess gave to the convent might suffice, and that they
might have excuse for refusing requests to receive too many
sisters. If any lady desired to enter the convent, or to send
her daughter, she might do so by payment until the death
of some sister; and that payment would cease at the death
of a sister whose place on the foundation she could take.

5. Each day the abbess went through the convent, to see

if aught could be found that concerned the ordinance of
118

OF SEEING

hearing. One day the abbess entered the orchard and saw
two sisters who were spinning apart, and another who was
spinning alone. Then she entered the dormitory, and thence
went into the other rooms where the sisters were accustomed
to spin, and she perceived that they span not in one place
together. On the next day the abbess convened a chapter,
and made a rule that all the sisters should spin in one place,
and that one of them should read aloud from some book
that was in the mother tongue, that the other sisters might
listen. This book was to treat of the Passion of Jesus
Christ, and the lives and martyrdom of the saints,! both men
and women, and of the lives of the Holy Fathers who were
dead. In this book also should be the miracles of my lady
Saint Mary and of the virgins and martyrs and the other
saints; and this book should be read both at festivals and
on other days by each sister in turn and order. The book
was procured, and the ordinance was established in that
convent, and likewise in others that took example therefrom.

6. The abbess desired most earnestly that this ordinance
should be kept, that by the hearing of this book the minds
of the sisters should not think upon vanities nor upon
immoderate imaginings which should incline them to sin,
and that each of them should grow to love the good lives
of the saints departed. For as by seeing fair things the
soul is moved to love, even so by hearing pleasing words
it is moved to desire.

CHARTER XXXVI
OF SEEING

Tue abbess went into the chapter-house with all the sisters
of the convent, and spake these words: ‘‘ Forasmuch as
the Divine ordinance has been pleased to ordain that man
should have the use and governance of his corporal sight
which, rightly ordered, may lead to a spiritual life, there-

1 dels sants e de les santes.

119

BLANQUERNA

fore is it well that a rule and ordinance be made among us
that we may know how to use the sight of the body. Let
our eyes, then, be ordered well to gaze upon the Cross, and
upon the image of our Lady Saint Mary, and upon other
figures which present to us the lives of the saints who have
passed from this world. Let us do honour to all these, in-
voking them whensoever we see them, and remembering
in our souls those things which they signify to us.”

2. “ Let our apparel be humble; let there be no subtlety
neither any adornment in our features, but only that which
Nature has set there according to the will of God. When
women of the world come to see us or to hear our words
(as was said in the chapter concerning the hearing), when
we see their proud apparel, and their features subtly painted,
then must we praise and bless God for that He has chosen
us to be the servants of humility and kept us from the vanity
of this world. Then must the eyes of our spirits see how
Jesus Christ our Spouse, and our Lady, and the Saints, wore
humble apparel. Each one of us may win much merit if
she can remember this when she looks upon proud apparel.
Let us furthermore beg the women of the world that they
come among us humbly apparelled, and that in their features
~ there be no subtlety nor adornment, that they may not tempt
our souls to covet the vanities of this world.”

3. ““ When we behold the graveyard, then is it time to
think upon death; and with the eyes of the spirit we may
look upon the worms that shall gnaw and consume the eyes
wherewith we see, and the ears wherewith we hear, and the
tongue wherewith we speak. When we behold the vileness
of our bodies,! then is it time for us to think upon the vile-
ness of our natures, that pride may be mortified in us and
humility exalted. If we enter the orchard and see the ass
drawing the water-wheel,? and look upon the trees and the

1 Lit. Com serem en les latrines e veurem la sutzetat que ix de nostre cors.
aie pie water-wheel (cenia) is the woria of St. Teresa’s Book of her Life,
ap. II.

120

OF SMELLING

plants, then is it time for us to render thanks to God, Who
has created us to be of a nobler nature than the beasts or
the trees or the plants; for, had He so willed it, He could.
have created us after their kind.”

4. “ Let us look up to the heavens and behold how high
they be; let us gaze upon the sun, the moon and the Stars.
Let us meditate upon the sea and the earth and upon birds,
beasts, plants and men. Let us praise God Who is so great,
for if God has created so many, so various and so lovely
creatures, how much greater than them all is He, their
Creator! And if all these creatures have been created by
God for the service of man, how great should be our thanks
toward God for all these things and for many beside.” The
abbess prayed the sisters after this manner to use the eyes
both of the body and of the spirit, that their souls might
rise to the love of God and incline neither to error nor
to sin.

CHAPTER XXVII

OF SMELLING

“To smell roses, lilies and other such flowers gives delight
and pleasure to the body, and in this pleasure there is peril,
lest the soul incline to desire some vanity of the flesh.
Wherefore it is good that we who dwell in this convent to
the end that we may live lives of austerity and penance
should have no flowers save those that we place on the altar
that it may be the better adorned. When we smell the per-
fumes, of musk and of amber, which women of the world
carry in their dress, then is it good for us to remember
the sponge and the gall and the vinegar wherewith our
Spouse Jesus Christ quenched His thirst on the day of His
Passion. Further, we may remember the stable wherein
He was pleased to be born, and give ourselves thereby an
example to take no delight in odours which move man

to sin.”
121

BLANQUERNA

2. “ When women of the world sit among us, and we
smell the various dyes wherewith they have adorned their
features, then is it time to remember the wickedness of their
minds, and it is good that we reprove them. For if they
feel no shame in making manifest in our midst their foolish
purpose, in no wise should we have shame in rebuking
them, since shame is but meet in matters wherein is error
and sin.”

3. “To inhale evil odours is a thing to be shunned,
forasmuch as they corrupt the air, by the which corruption
are engendered in the body sickness and death. But even
more to be shunned is the friendship of a woman who in
her face or dress bears odours that signify the sins for the
which she longs. For if through breathing corrupted air
the body is exposed to risk of corporal death, no less so,
through the friendship and intimacy of an evil woman, is
the soul oftentimes inclined to think and desire evil works,
whereby the will and remembrance become the occasion to
man of eternal punishment.” In this manner and in many
others did the abbess ordain that through the sense of smell
there should be no occasion in the convent whereby should
be lost that bliss which is supreme and eternal.

CHAPTER XXVIII

OF TASTING

Tue abbess spake to the sisters in these words: ‘‘ The
chiefest reason for the which we live the religious life is
that we may contemplate God, and adore Him, and serve
Him; and among the things which moét impede contem-
plation and prayer is superfluity of eating and drinking:
wherefore the ordinance is good which commands us to eat
and drink with temperance. Nevertheless there must be
among us no hypocrisy, such as is found among those that

join an order and make a show of austere living in respeé&
122

OF TASTING

of meat and drink, when in truth they eat and drink deli-
cately and with superfluity.”

2. “If flesh be forbidden to a religious, it is a thing ill-
beseeming that she give savour and pleasure to her palate,
whether with fish or with other viands, through using sauces
or other things such as these. If it be good to fast, it is
unlawful to eat as much in one hour of the day as do others
in two; for were it not so, there would be no great virtue
in fasting. If our raiment and our beds give significance of
religion, the bread that we eat and the wine that we drink
must likewise signify austerity of life.”

3. “ Superfluity of eating and drinking engenders boils
and bad blood, and occasions sickness and death. Through
superfluity of victuals the body is to the soul an occasion of
desire for carnal delights. Many a religious house is poor
and in debt through exceeding superfluity of victuals. If
any that is of a religious order eats better and more deli-
cately than when he was of the world, then did he more of
penance in a worldly habit than he does in the habit of a
religious. To suffer patiently hunger and thirst is to
mortify sin and give health to the body, since nature con-
sumes in the body superfluity of evil humours.”

4. “ Let us eat and drink that we may have life to love
and serve God; let us not live that we may eat and drink.
If we are servants of God because we are His creatures, and
because He has redeemed us in the Incarnation of the Son
of God, let us not be the servants of the belly which
pardons not nor grants respite to its slaves. Let us not
trust rather in the meats which nourish the body than in
the virtues which feed the soul.” All these words and many
more spake the abbess to the sisters, to the end that each
of them should affiiét her body by hunger, thirst and meagre-
ness of victuals, and that by virtue of their austerity of life
God should pardon those in the world that are in bondage
to the sin of gluttony.

123

BLANQUERNA

CHAPTER XXIX

OF FEELING

“ Toucu is a feeling which pertains to the whole body.
The whole body is a creature of God: the whole body,
then, should feel affi€tion for the love of God. If we are
in winter, we ought to feel the cold, and if in summer, the
heat, for the love of God. If we flee from feeling cold and
heat, and flee not from feeling hunger and thirst, then do
we do injury to the mouth. In like manner as the lord wills
to be served by his vassal, even so God wills to be served
by the body, which is His own. If the body endures not
suffering, where then is the service that it renders to God?
For as God has given bodily objects for our eyes to see, and
that the soul through the same may have spiritual sight,
even so has God given feeling to the body that by the self-
same feeling the soul, which is the form of the body, may
have patience.”

2. “Rough clothing, hard beds and the religious life
agree well together: even so do white! raiment and soft
beds agree with the life of the world. If we feel vermin?
in our beds and cannot sleep, it is signified to our under-
Standing that our prayer has been brief, and we have kept
too little vigil in praying to God. Far better is it to pray
to God and keep vigil than to desire sleep and be hindered
therefrom by vermin. If then we would not feel vermin,
let us desire to keep long vigils: much sleep and religion
are opposed the one to the other, for were they in accord,
then would there be no difference between religion and the
habits of the world.”

1 blancs vestiments. But this may be an error for S/ans vestiments, “ soft
clothing.” Cf. /ax lit, the words which follow, and are translated “ soft
bed(s).””

a Lit. puces mi menjanga.

124

OF FEELING

3. “‘ If we desire to feel! carnal delights, then in our con-
ception of carnal thoughts is our virginity defiled. The
virgin body deserves to feel the fires of hell, if the soul
desires its corruption. To be conscious rather of the nature
of the body than of the virtue of the soul signifies that the
body is lord of the soul. If Jesus Christ felt for our sakes
grievous trials and the agony of death, let us for His love
endure a life of austerity. If we have come together in this
place to escape from the feelings of the world, let not us
that are in this place be in the world by virtue of our desires
for its vanities. If thou wouldst feel vanities, for the which
thou mayest be condemned to feel everlasting flames, put
thou but thy finger in the fire and see if thou canst suffer
the fire for so much as an hour.”

4. “Sickness, whether of fever or of pain or of other
kinds, makes the body to suffer, through the which suffer-
ing, if thou hast patience, thy soul may exercise its virtue.
If God wills that thy body should endure suffering, and
thou hast not patience, call to mind in thy soul whether thy
will is in conformity with the will of God or in opposition
thereto. If thou dost feel in thy mind desire and yearning
for thy kinsfolk, seek thou in thy mind if thou feelest therein
God. If thou dost feel temptation or thought of folly in thy
soul, then it is that God would make thee feel His virtue,
through prayer and remembrance of His Passion; for
through such temptation He wills that thy soul may awake
in contemplating His blessing.”

5. When the abbess had made a rule and had given
instruction to the sisters concerning the manner wherein
they should use the five senses of the body, then spake
she to the sisters these words:

6. ‘‘ By the will and ordinance of God it came to pass

1 It will be noticed throughout this chapter that the words “‘ feel ” (seatir)
and “ feeling ” (sentiment) are used where English would prefer such words
as “endure,” “ undergo,” “desire.” This emphasis on the word used in
the title of the chapter is, of course, intentional.

bas

BLANQUERNA

that Blanquerna commended to me seven queens, and
bound me to them in service and honour, the which queens
are the seven virtues to ourselves most needful, Where-
fore since it pleased you that I be abbess, I beg and com-
mand you all in common that these seven queens be held
in great esteem among us, and that we be obedient to them
in all our works. And if any of you commits deception or
fault against any one of them, let her in chapter before all
the rest sue for pardon and forgiveness, to the end that she
may have the greater shame for her fault and return not
again to a like sin, and that the rest of you take example
thereby and be ever opposed to the enemies of the seven
queens.” All the sisters approved of that which the abbess
said, and they set apart one hour of the day when they
should assemble in chapter, for each one to examine her
conscience as to whether she had done aught that was dis-
pleasing to the seven queens, or agreeable to the seven
deadly sins,

CHAPTER XXX
OF THE SEVEN VIRTUES, AND FIRST, OF FAITH

Ir came to pass one day that through the vigilance of the
devil a sister was tempted against faith, as she meditated
upon the Holy Trinity of our Lord God, and the virginity
of our Lady Saint Mary, and the sacred transubstantiated
Host of our Lord God. While this sister was tempted con-
cerning the articles of faith aforesaid, she called to mind the
rule and ordinance which was established by the abbess and
the sisters of the convent, according as is related above.
When the abbess and the sisters were in chapter, the sister
who had been tempted in this wise rose and asked for dis-
cipline, saying these words: ‘‘ It is ordained of God that
when the soul is assailed by a temptation it betake itself to
God and to the virtues which He has given us that they
may aid us in our necessities. My soul was given up to
126

OF THE SEVEN VIRTUES, AND FIRST, OF FAITH

lightness and poverty of faith, that the power of God might
be made known through its sin, and that Strength and hope
might fortify faith in my soul. But since my soul forgat
the hope and the strength of God, it doubted concerning
the Trinity of the Most High, and I pondered how there
could be in God unity of Essence and plurality of Persons
Who should be diverse without diversity and composition
of Essence. And not alone was this doubt in my mind,
but likewise did I doubt concerning the Incarnation of the
Son of God, cogitating how such great humility could be
in the Divine Nature, Which was pleased to unite with
itself human nature to be with it one Person. Concerning
the Divine virtue and power my soul doubted, cogitating
how before the birth of Christ and likewise after His birth
our Lady Saint Mary could have been a virgin. In all these
manners my mind has fallen into doubt, and most of all as
to the nature of the sacred Hoét, which has the colour and
taste of bread, yet beneath its colour and taste is the Flesh
of our Spouse Jesus Christ. For having doubted thus I beg
a penance, and before the whole community I confess the
lightness of my faith, to the end that all the sisters may take
example from me and know how to preserve themselves in
like case from temptation. And I would have an exposition
made to me concerning this matter of my doubt, that doubt
may never more return to my soul.”

2. The abbess answered: ‘‘It behoves not that our
minds should comprehend the manner of the work that
God has in Himself, wherein the Father begets the Son,
and the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son;
for if our mind comprehends not all that God has created,
which is a matter complete and finite, how much less can
it comprehend all that God works in Himself. Wherefore
that which we understand not in God is that which our
understanding suffices not to comprehend, and therefore
God wills that by the light of faith we believe that which

we cannot understand concerning His Trinity and the re-
127

BLANQUERNA

maining articles. Nevertheless God has given to the
understanding a virtue whereby through the creatures we
may have understanding of God; for even as the under-
Standing can comprehend that man is one person composed
of two diverse natures, to wit, body and soul, even so, and
beyond all comparison more easily, can God be One in
Essence yet in Persons Three, and the Three Persons be
one Essence; and if God had not such power, it would
follow that He had greater power to unite plurality in the
creature than in Himself, and this is a thing that can in no
wise be granted.”

3. “ All that which God has made in the world, has He
made to show forth to us His virtues, that He may be
known and loved of us, and through our knowledge and
love He may have reason to use in us justice and mercy,
and so may give to us eternal glory. Therefore did the Son
of God take our nature that He might use toward us humility
and give us an example of how humility may be ours. He
desired to show His Power and His Love; for His Power
and Love are better shown through the Incarnation of the
Son in human nature than through the creation of the
world out of nothing; and we are constrained to love God
more because He was pleased to take our nature and to
die for us, than we are so constrained for any other thing
that He could do for us whatsoever. Wherefore, even as
according to physical nature it seems to our understand-
ing impossible that the Son of God should become incarnate,
even so in spiritual wise does our understanding perceive,
according to the great humility, charity and power of God,
that God had the will and the power to become incarnate.
For if He desired not or were unable to unite with Himself
our nature, it would be manifest that in Him there was a
lack of will or of power, whereby He might charge us? to
know and love Him. For all these reasons, therefore,—

+ Both P and V strengthen this phrase: V reads, “ He might compel
and oblige us.”

128:

ri

OF THE SEVEN VIRTUES, AND FIRST, OF FAITH

and for this further one, that God can unite soul and body
to be one person together, even if the nature of the soul be
one thing and that of the body another,—for all these
reasons our souls can mortify the doubts which they might
have concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God.”

4. “God created Adam in the Earthly Paradise, and
made Eve his wife of a rib that He took from him: this
work was not performed after the course of nature, but
according to miraculous working. So the Conception in
the Virgin,—being, as she was, a virgin,—of the Son of
God, Who came within her as Man and God, and was born
of her, Man and God, albeit she was a virgin: this was a
miraculous work opposed to the working of nature, show-
ing that God has greater power and virtue and will than
nature, in that He works that which nature has no power
to work, and shows Himself in this way Lord over nature.
And if God used not such supernatural working, He would
not give proof that His power was above nature.”’

5. “ With the eyes of the body man cannot be seen; for
man is composed of soul and body, and the eyes of the body
can see but a part of man,—that is, the body. But with
the eyes both of spirit and body can man be wholly seen,
for the understanding sees the soul, as the eyes of the body
understand and see the body. Now with the eyes of the
body man sees in the sacred Host the form and colour of
bread, and with the spiritual eyes the Flesh of Jesus Christ;
for as the eyes of the body see physical things, so the eyes
of the spirit see spiritual things; and as the bodily eyes see
the Host by means of light and as to colour, so the spiritual
eyes see in the Host, through the virtues of God, the Flesh
of our Spouse, Who wills with infinite will, and power
omnipotent, and wisdom wherein is all fulness, that beneath
that form and colour of bread should be the very Flesh and
Blood of Jesus Christ. And if God willed it so, and it could
not be, it would follow that His power, will and knowledge
had not infinity, neither all fulness; and since our under-

I 129

BLANQUERNA

Standing sees all fulness and infinity in the virtues of God,
therefore it sees with the virtues of God that which with
the eyes of the body we cannot see.”

6. According to this and other manners, the abbess
mortified the doubts into the which the sister had fallen
concerning faith. So this sister and all the rest were
gladdened thereby in their minds; and their faith was so
severely Strengthened against the temptations which should
assault it, that thenceforward no power which the demon
had could make them to doubt the Faith or its articles. All
the sisters praised and blessed God Who had endowed the
abbess with so great wisdom, and to them had given so
good a pastor, who by her knowledge and her holy life
instructed them so deeply in the love and knowledge of
their Spouse Jesus Christ and of His works.

CHAPTER XXXI

OF HOPE

THERE was a sister in the convent who had been a great
sinner in the world, and had afterwards entered the life of
religion: this sister had committed certain deadly sins.
One day she remembered the great justice of God and the
sins that she had committed, both in the world and in her
order. So deeply did she think upon her sins, forgetting
the mercy of God, and such remorse did she feel for them,
above all for those that she had committed in the convent,
that she began to despair of the forgiveness of God, and
said within herself that, whatever were the good deeds that
she did, she could not have the blessing of God.

2. While the sister reflected thus, her will was moved
to return to the sins of her former life; but through the
merits of the penance which she had done, and through the
saintliness of the abbess and the sisters, God was pleased

to look upon her with eyes of mercy, and to call to her
130

OF HOPE

remembrance that which the abbess had ordained concern-
ing hope and the other virtues. In chapter, before the
abbess and the whole community, she confessed the temp-
tation against hope which had assailed her, and begged
forgiveness and counsel againét this temptation whereby
she was so greatly vexed.

3. The abbess answered her in these words: ‘‘ The sin
of despair is of such a kind that it causes man to think God
to be more just than merciful, and after this manner many
a sinner falls into despair. And since God is merciful, and
greater than any creature, it must needs follow that man,
who is a creature, cannot sin in the degree that the mercy
of God can pardon. Wherefore it is a needful thing that
when man thinks upon his many sins he should think also
upon the great mercy of God, to the which they do honour
and glory! that make it equal to the great justice of God.
And through this honour and glory Mercy forgives man
his mortal sins, giving him contrition and sorrow for
them.”

4. “To remember the Conception of the Son of God
and His Passion quickens hope and mortifies despair; for
if God willed to join and unite with His Nature our human
nature, and if He willed to condemn to great suffering and
to death that nature which He took that He might redeem
us from the devil, it follows that He wills to pardon us if
we trust in His pity and mercy. When a soul despairs, this
is for lack of charity, because it remembers not the sacred
humility which God showed in taking human nature,
neither remembers His Passion: thence comes it that
despair arises and conquers hope. But, when charity and
hope unite against despair and sin, they move God to
pardon, forasmuch as they make man to love and trust.
Wherefore for one that can use hope with charity in his
remembrance, understanding and will, it is a light thing
that all his sins be forgiven him.”

1 Lit. homrament e honor.

131

BLANQUERNA

5. While the abbess spake these words, the cellaress+
said to her that she herself sinned often against hope by
thinking upon the expenses of the convent and doubting
if their Store of money could suffice. The abbess answered
that the virtue which is contrary to that sin which caused
her to despair was an occasion to her how that she should
remember the wealth and bounty of God, Who to so many
creatures gives all things that they need; for if God gives
the means of life to beasts, birds and fishes that have no
reason, and to men of the world that love a worldly life, it
would be a wrongful thing if He gave not these likewise
to themselves, who were gathered in that convent to flee
from temporal delights, and who trusted in God. Where-
fore (she said) is it virtue to think upon such things and to
trust in God; and such virtue and such thought must they
have whensoever they were tempted by the sin afore-
mentioned.

CHAPTER XXXII

OF CHARITY

Berore the abbess and the whole community, a sister of the
community confessed her sin, which for long she had com-
mitted against charity; for she had loved God less for Him-
self than for the glory that He was to give her, and she had
feared Him more lest He should condemn her to eternal
torment than by reason of His goodness. The abbess spake
to that sister in these words: ‘‘ So greatly ought God to be
loved and feared for the excellence of glory and virtue that
is in Him, that He is the rather to be loved and feared for
Himself, than for the sake of winning glory or fleeing from
hell. For in loving glory man loves himself, and by reason
of the love of man for himself is it that he fears the pains

* While the duties of the cellaress were in part such as her title implies,
they also included, as this paragraph shows, a wider supervision over the
temporal business of the convent.

I 32

OF CHARITY

of hell. And because man should love God more than
himself, therefore is it contrary to charity and justice that
man should fear God because of that which is the less noble;
rather should he love and fear Him because of that which
is the more noble, since He is more worthy and noble than
are all the creatures.”

2. When the abbess had shown the reason for the which
man should love God, and had shown likewise the manner
wherein man may love glory and fear the pains of hell,
another sister said that she had sinned against God and
against all the other sisters, in that the intention for the
which she had entered the order was not for the love that
she had to God and to the sisters, but because in the world
she was poor and had not the wherewithal to live. The
abbess answered and said that in one and the same aétion
man can rule his intention both wrongly and rightly; for
if because of poverty he enters the religious life, he may yet
chiefly have love to God and to his order, and but secondary
intention to the self and its needs. ‘‘ But since,” said she,
“thou hadst intention to thyself alone when thou couldst
have entered the order for love of God and the community,
therefore art thou blameworthy before God and the sisters,
and for this thou shouldét do penance.”

3. “‘ Truth is it,”’ said another sister, “‘ that I desired to
be abbess, and that, rather to honour myself, than for
charity and love to God and the sisters.” The abbess
answered: ‘‘ To love high place for thine own honour is
pride and vainglory, and contrary to the life of Jesus Christ,
Who in this world willed to be poor. But to love it that
God may be served, and the unruly lives of others may be
guided and governed in the way of salvation, is to love God
and thy neighbour, and is charity agreeable and well-
pleasing to God. To mortify that foolish desire, namely
the love of high place for the honour which it brings, thou
shouldst remember the life of Jesus Christ and of the saints
who loved poverty, as also the trials of a superior in govern-

133

BLANQUERNA

ing those that are beneath her, and her servitude to those
that are beneath her. Furthermore, thy foolish desire was
contrary to liberty, for the sister in a convent is subject to
her superior only, but the abbess is the subject and servant
of all the sisters. Were it pleasing to God and the sisters,
and hadst thou an ordered will, I would willingly exchange
my office for thine.”

4. ‘Lady abbess,” said another sister, “‘ for long have
I desired how I might have charity towards God and my
neighbour. So I pray thee to teach me the manner wherein
I may have it.” The abbess answered: “‘ Whoso would
have charity according as is meet, must know how to under-
Stand and remember; for, except he have wisdom in
remembrance and understanding, his will cannot be in
charity. Wherefore his remembrance and understanding
must oftentimes be directed towards God, and towards His
power, knowledge and will, and His works and His virtues,
and the vileness of this world, and the glory of the next,
and the pains of hell, and he must consider the wondrous
love of God for us, and how we are all of one nature, one
flesh and one blood, the which nature and flesh and blood
the Son of God was pleased to take for us, when He willed
to suffer for us and to die upon the Cross. By this remem-
brance and understanding the will conceives charity and
love, and by forgetfulness and ignorance of these things,
charity departs from the will, and anger, ill-will, falsehood
and wrong-doing“enter, it.”

5. When the abbess had said these things, she exhorted
the sisters that before all things they should strive to have
charity, for charity resists none that would fain possess it,
and none can have thereof as much as he would. With
charity man can suffer trials, and endure with patience that
which is hard to bear, and rejoice at that which is pleasant
and desirable, whensoever the memory and understanding
are direéted thereto. So lofty and noble a virtue is charity,
that it made God to descend from heaven to earth, and made
134

OF JUSTICE

Him also to take our flesh, weep, labour, suffer and die.
And charity moved Him to create the world and all that is,
and His charity it is that sustains us, giving to us all the
creatures whereby we live, and all the creatures that do
serve us. And Divine charity has created for us Paradise
whereto it calls us, and wherein we may have eternal glory
and escape infinite pains. Wherefore, as by charity we
have boons so many and so great, and as it is given to
whosoever would have it, a great sin and a great wrong is
it if we have no charity in our minds.

CHAPTER XXXIII
OF JUSTICE

THERE was a sister in the convent grievously sick. The
abbess, according to her custom, enquired daily through-
out the convent to see if in aught she could minister to its
well-being, or if her presence could anywhere be of advan-
tage. She entered the sick room, and there found the sister
that was sick, who bore her sickness with impatience, and
spake words which signified to the abbess that justice was
not in her soul.

2. The abbess enquired of this sister what had been the
work within her of justice and of charity, fortitude and
patience. The sister answered: ‘‘ So greatly does my sick-
ness constrain me that in my soul there is no place for virtue,
but I am oppressed by wrath so great, that I had rather be
dead than living.”

3. “O, foolish one!” said the abbess. ‘‘I desire thee
to answer me and tell me which thing would torment thee
more: to be upon a great mountain full of fire and sulphur,
or to bear this sickness? If thou die without justice, then
will thy soul be borne to the fires of hell which are eternal.
Who is He that giveth thee this sickness? When thou hast
not patience, thou dost hate God, Who gives thee sickness

135

BLANQUERNA

that He may punish thee for thy sins. Thou dost oppose
His justice since thou hatest His works. No fortitude is in
thy mind, for thy sickness cagts out from it charity and
justice and sets therein impatience and wrong. When God
gives thee sickness, He asks of thee that thou thyself give
justice to Him with charity and patience, that He may give
to thee the eternal blessing of salvation.”” With such good
words did the abbess exhort the sister that was sick, that
charity, justice, fortitude and patience took possession once
again of her soul which they had lost, and the sister spake
these words:

4. “J adore and bless Thee, O Divine virtue of justice,
because Thou chaétisest me, and yet sparest me in that
Thou chastisest me not according to the multitude of my
sins. Worthy am I to suffer these trials and many beside.
Do with me that which is pleasing to Thy will: may my
will be one with Thine. I am not worthy of glory: sins
have I for the which I merit everlasting torment. If Thou
be pleased to punish me, Thou willest to use Thy great
justice. If Thou be pleased to pardon me, Thou willest to
use Thy great mercy. Whether Thou dost punish or
pardon, I adore and bless in all things Thy great justice,
and in all things I hope for the tender mercy which the
Queen of Heaven prays Thee to have upon us all.”” While
the sister spake these words, she felt within her such great
fervour and devotion, which were given her by charity,
justice, fortitude and patience, that she was enabled thence-
forward to bear her sickness lightly.

5. When the abbess had comforted and instruéted the
sister that was sick, she entered into a secret chamber
wherein was in durance a sister that had grievously strayed
and sinned against her honour and her order. When the
abbess entered to see that sister, that she might console her
in her penance, she found her in tears, upon her knees, say-
ing these words: “ O sacred justice of God, that hast all

ee in Thy power! I adore Thee and bless Thee, for
a

OF JUSTICE

in the trials that I suffer I have knowledge both of Thyself
and of my sins. From this knowledge comes gladness to
my heart, making me to love Thy justice and lament my
transgressions. Wherefore the more are the trials that Thou
sendest, the more dost Thou reveal Thyself to my knowledge,
and makest me to remember the wondrous mercy that is in
Thee. In this bodily affli€tion would I ever be, that my soul
may know Thee and love Thee and learn to be glad in Thee.”
So devout and holy were the words which the sister spake
that they moved the abbess to devotion, to mercy and to
pardon. And the abbess, weeping, spake these words:

6. “‘ There can be no defect in that wherein the holy
justice of God would participate or be. Disposed am I to
pardon thee, and to pray the sisters to pardon thee, since
Divine justice pardons all those that praise Him and bless
Him in His works. Starved and afflicted is thy body
through thy many trials; poor are thy garments, poor and
scant is thy food. Thy bed is of branches of the vine, thy
companions as to the body are solitude and darkness, but
thy soul doth company with the Divine brightness that
makes thee to love and to know the Divine justice. Thou
dost ask and it shall be given thee; thou dost repent and
shalt be forgiven. And thou art nobler through thy repent-
ance and devotion than am I through my virginity.”

7. Devoutly and with tears the abbess ended her words,
and the sister thanked her fervently, saying these words:
“Tt is the nature of a good master that he love the blessing
of his subjects. My bitter life and my imprisonment are
an instruction to the sisters that they may beware lest they
have sin and wrong-doing in their hearts. My happiness
is to affi€ét my body and contemplate God in His justice.
I repent me of my sins, and I beseech His pardon. All the
days of my life would I continue in this penance wherein
now Iam. The more do I suffer in my person, the more
is my soul exalted in God: may God be in my soul, and
penance and trials in my body,” “

I

BLANQUERNA

8. The abbess went into the garden, where she saw a
sister that was weeping beneath a tree. This sister had
enjoyed in the world great riches and honours, and because
of the delicateness of her former life she bewailed the
austerity of the life which she led in the convent. The
abbess enquired of the sister why she wept and was thus
disconsolate, and the sister related to her all that her mind
desired. “O foolish and unjust soul!” cried the abbess,
“ Hads thou never knowledge of justice, that in a religious
order chastises with austere living those that have tasted
delicate vi€tuals in the world, and humbles with lowly gar-
ments those that have worn proud raiment, and with a hard
pallet tortures those that have lain in noble beds? Foolish
one! Why goeést thou not into the church to weep? Lift
thine eyes to the Cross and behold our Spouse, Jesus Christ,
Lord of Heaven and earth,—in what a bed He lies! See
His garments that are dyed with crimson,—with the
crimson blood of His Body. See how He is naked, and
tortured and forsaken. He thirsts:. see how His thirst is
quenched with a sponge filled with salt, gall and vinegar.
See what a crown of honour He wears,—how His Body is
scourged and wounded.” So severely did the abbess thus
admonish the sister, that thenceforward she conceived no
more the foolish thought that she had had aforetime.

CHAPTER XXXIV

OF PRUDENCE

A CERTAIN sister was in sin, and had no sure knowledge
whether the sin was mortal or venial, neither would she ask
nor enquire whether that sin was mortal or venial. And
this she did because she loved to be in sin, and feared, if
she knew that the sin was mortal, to forsake it. One day
it came to pass that, while the abbess held a chapter, this

sister became conscious of the wrong that she had com-
138

OF PRUDENCE

mitted against wisdom, according to the manner related
above. The abbess answered and spake these words:

2. “ God has given to man reason and discretion that he
may use his reason against sin, and may love the virtues.
Therefore, when a man uses not his reason lest he should
become conscious of the sin wherein he dwells, the justice
of God aéts according to reason in punishing man, and
taking from him discretion and consciousness for so long
as he lives in this world. A great sinner in this world is
the man who has blinded the eyes of his understanding, so
that from henceforward he may have no consciousness of
his sins nor repent of them. Wherefore we see many men
dying in a state whereby we may know their damnation,
insomuch as they make no restitution for their wrongdoing,
neither have repentance for their sins at their latter end.
That there may be friendship and companionship, there-
fore, between justice and wisdom, justice punishes those
that love not and honour not wisdom.”

3. While the abbess spake thus in the chapter, there was
present a sister who had a son that was a prosperous advo-
cate in that city. This son, before he became an advocate,
had desired to take orders and learn the Divine Scriptures.
But his mother had put him to study law,! that he might
remain in the world and take to himself a wife. This sister
remembered how ill she had behaved to her son in respect
of his studies, and therefore she had consciousness of the
faults that she had committed against wisdom, and she
spake these words:

4. ““A sinner am I against wisdom, and against the
Holy Scriptures whereby man has knowledge of God.” So
this sister besought pardon and forgiveness for her trans-
gression, according as we have said above. The abbess said
to the sister that she had very greatly erred against the
wisdom and understanding that the Holy Spirit had given,
for the desire of her son to be a religious and to understand

1 Jeys e dret.

139

BLANQUERNA

the Scriptures of God was given to him by the Holy Spirit,
Who was pleased to put wisdom within him that He might
be known and loved of him, and to grant him celestial bliss.
Wherefore the sister was guilty of that sin and of all the
sins that her son would commit by his ill using of the
science of law, so that he would have the less of glory if
he came to salvation, and, if he came to damnation, the
greater torment. Greatly was the abbess moved against
this sister, and heavy was the penance that she gave
her.

5. While the abbess was speaking of the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, a sister became conscious of her ignorance, in
that she knew not the fourteen articles, nor the seven gifts
of the Holy Spirit, nor the eight beatitudes which Jesus
Christ promises in the Gospel, neither did she know the
seven virtues wherewith man goes to Paradise, nor the
seven deadly sins which send him to the fires of Hell, nor
the ten commandments which God gave in the Law. Of
all these things was that sister ignorant, the which things
are very profitable to be known. For this ignorance she
besought forgiveness, and prayed that these things aforesaid
might be shown her.

6. Straitly did the abbess reprove this sister, saying these
words: “‘ She that knows not the fourteen articles, wherein
is our faith, cannot hold or use the faith as is meet. And
she that knows not the seven gifts which the Holy Spirit
gave, how can she thank the Holy Spirit for them? And
she that knows not the eight beatitudes, cannot desire
eternal glory. And she that knows not the seven virtues,
where is the light that shall guide her in the way of salva-
tion? And she that knows not the seven deadly sins, from
what shall she guard herself, how shall she repent and
confess, and where is her contrition? And she that knows
not the ten commandments, wherein shall she be obedient
to God? And if she be disobedient, how shall she know
it?’ Let all who would know the things aforesaid re-
140

OF FORTITUDE

member that they and many more are written in the Book
of Dottrine for Boys

CHAPTER XXXV
OF FORTITUDE

As we call prudence, wisdom, even so do we speak of
fortitude as strength, that women may the more easily
comprehend it. Now a certain sister, who adored God
continually, beseeching Him to give her the seven virtues
wherewith to serve Him, and to defend her from the seven
deadly sins, was tempted many times by vainglory concern-
ing the goodness of her life, and the devoutness of her
prayers, wherein charity and contrition for her sins made
her to weep and to remember the mercy of God.

2. So strongly was this sister tempted to vainglory that
she believed that God would work miracles on her behalf,
and that He would honour her in His glory above all
others. It came to pass one day that while this sister had
vainglory in her prayers, she became conscious of her sin,
and marvelled greatly how that such wickedness as vain-
glorious thoughts could enter her soul while she was so
devoutly engaged in prayer. So this sister asked the abbess
in chapter, and before the whole community, whence came
to her the sin aforesaid. The abbess answered and spake
these words:

3. “Companionship and fraternity exist between one
virtue and another, so that the virtues are exalted one by
another, and the vices mortified. Now as charity, justice,
faith and hope are present in a high degree when the soul
is at prayer, and contemplates the virtues of God, prudence
and fortitude would fain be of their company. Therefore
when the soul is tempted by vainglory, and has the wisdom
to be conscious of the temptation, and reason is strong to
oppose it, and remembrance is led to comprehend the

1 See p. 39 above.
141

BLANQUERNA

misery whereto sin leads us, and understanding seeks to
comprehend the nobility of God, then wisdom puts forth
its lofty virtue and is virtue! in the company of the other
virtues. But when vainglory is victorious and the soul for-
gets its wrong-doing and comprehends not the virtues of
God and is consenting to vainglory, then by defect of
wisdom, and of strength of mind, the other virtues fall into
sin.”

4. When the abbess had described the manner wherein
vainglory tempts those that are in good works, another
sister said that she had many times been tempted to leave
her order. The abbess answered that that temptation comes
through defeé of Strength in the mind, where there is lack
of charity in loving the order and despising the world; and,
because the memory remembers the world and forgets the
honesty and holy life of sisters of religion, therefore 1s
fortitude mortified in the will. Wherefore should a man
forget the cause for the which temptation comes, and should
remember other things.

5. Another sister said to the abbess that she was tempted
every day to.eat and drink and speak against the rule of
the order. And the abbess said: “* God has been pleased
to ordain that the creatures should be many and various,
to the end that, in many and various manners, they may
serve man; and to man God has given them, that in many
and divers manners he may serve God. So this temptation
comes that fortitude by means of abstinence may conquer
gluttony and unruliness of speech, the which conquest it
makes when charity and justice aid it against sin. Where-
fore that temptation is occasion for the virtues to use that
virtue which God has given them, that the soul may have
thereby greater glory.”

6. There was a sister in the chapter, very comely and of
right honourable lineage, who had left great riches for the

+ So V. The various versions all differ among themselves : this is prob-
ably the best reading.

142

OF TEMPERANCE

sake of her order. That sister was tempted daily by pride,
and she begged the abbess to give her counsels against
pride. The abbess answered her and said that whensoever
that temptation came to her she should enter the garden
and look upon an ass drawing the water-wheel and think
how dearly she longed to be that ass. The renunciation of
esteem that she would make in order to think herself an ass
would strengthen her inwardly against pride, by causing
her to think upon God Who could make her to be an ass
if He desired. When she had meditated thus, she should
go to the graveyard and think upon the dead, and remember
the putrefaction of their flesh and the filth of their bodies! ;
and afterwards she should go into the church and look upon
the Cross, that she might remember the humility where-
with it pleased God to humble Himself. All these words
and many more spake the abbess to that sister, that she
might teach her to fortify her mind against pride, and cast
away all things rather than commit any sin against God.

CHAPTER XXXVI

OF TEMPERANCE

Tue abbess was with the sisters in chapter, and she spake
these words: ‘ By the virtue of God we have spoken and
made ordinance concerning six of the virtues. Now must
we speak of temperance, and I would fain know if there is
any one among us who has sinned in any wise against
temperance.” A sister answered and said that she had had
no knowledge of temperance, wherefore she knew not if
she had erred against it. The abbess said to this sister that
temperance is the virtue of the mean betwixt much and
little; by “‘ much” let human comprehension understand
the greatness of God, Who is greater than all things with-
out immoderateness in aught, and as to the “little,” let it
1 ‘The original reads: /o fems de son ventre.

143

BLANQUERNA

understand that in God is naught that is little. Now,
superfluity and littleness constitute the mean in the creature,
but in God there is no temperance, in that He has naught
in Himself that is either superfluity or littleness.

2. ‘“‘ Furthermore,” said the abbess, ‘‘ God has created
temperance between two limits, that is to say, in order that
it may be the mean whereby man may be able to use wisdom,
justice, fortitude and the other virtues; for in eating, drink-
ing, speaking, sleeping, watching, walking, dressing,
spending, meditating and all things else, he has need of
temperance that wisdom in him may have knowledge of
that which is too much and that which is too little, and that
charity may love the mean, and that justice from the two
vices may take temperance and give it to charity, and forti-
tude be in the mind of man in opposition to superfluity and
littleness,. as accords with temperance, whereby fortitude
may have agreement with the virtues which accord with
temperance.”

3. When the abbess had shown the agreement that is
between temperance and the other virtues, the sister re-
membered her sins against temperance, and spake these
words: “‘ Alas, sinner that Iam! How great is my guilt!
For in eating, drinking, speaking and many other things
have I erred in ignorance against justice, charity, wisdom,
fortitude and temperance. For justice gave me conscience,
and wisdom revealed to me superfluity and littleness, that
charity might love temperance; and, since my will had no
fortitude, it inclined itself to superfluity or littleness, and
used not temperance. And as God has given liberty to the
soul, which can use the virtues aforesaid, and my soul has
not desired to use them and has used the vices, therefore
am I in error, and I beg for penance and pardon and confess
myself guilty.”

4. The abbess said to the sisters: ‘‘ There are three
powers in the soul, to wit, memory, understanding and will.
All that the soul does, it does with these three powers.
144

OF MEMORY

Therefore, that there may be ordinance of the five bodily
senses which must be ruled by the soul, and likewise of the
seven virtues of the soul, let there be ordinance even as we
have said, the which we shall have if we be ordered in
respect of the three powers. First, then, let us speak of
memory.”’

CHAPTER XXXVII

OF MEMORY

““ Memory is given to the soul that it may remember the
Sovereign Good, from Whom come all good things, Who
has created us all, and to us that are gathered in this convent
has given grace to remember Him and to forget the vanities
of this world. To receive benefits from another and to
forget them is in the soul a grievous sin. Now we have
received benefits from God, and He to save us has taken
our nature and in it has suffered great trials and grievous
death; wherefore we are bound to remember these things
daily and at every hour of the day, and I desire and com-
mand each of you to call to remembrance the goodness,
greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, love and perfection of
God, and likewise His Incarnation, Passion and all else that
pertains to Him, and to put each other in mind thereof.
For by such remembrance do ye flee from temptations, and
your trials are lightened and your souls illumined by the
light of benediction.”

2. ‘It behoves us to have remembrance of the glory of
Paradise that we may desire it; of the pains of hell, that
we may fear them; of death, that we may be prepared for
it, for we know not when it will come, but only that with
certainty we must die. Let us remember whence we have
come, that there may be among us no pride; let us not
forget the corruption and putrefaétion of our bodies, that
we may have humility; let us remember each other in
charity and justice, that peace may be among us. If we

i'd 145

BLANQUERNA

learn to remember, we shall learn to forget; if we learn to
forget, we shall also learn to remember ; and if we learn to
remember and forget, we shall learn to understand and love.
Let us remember our sins that we may remember the justice
and mercy of God: let us remember the virtues that we
may love them for the sake of God.”

3. ‘It behoves us not to remember that which we have
done in the world, lest by that remembrance the will be
moved to desire the world. If we suffer temptation, let us
turn to remembrance of God and Our Lady and the saints
in Paradise, and ask their aid. Let each of us remember
the angel that God has given her to defend her from sin,
and let each do some honour to her angel daily. Let each
of us remember some especial saint who may be her advo-
cate in the court of Heaven: let us remember also the lives
of the saints, both men and women, that we may grow to
love the lives which they led. Let us remember the un-
believers, praying God to send them the light of under-
Standing and faith, that they may know it, and love it, and
be led in the way of salvation. At night, after Compline,
let each of us have remembrance whether in aught she have
offended her Creator; in the morning, after Matins, let us
remember in what state we have been during the night.”
In each of these manners and in many besides did the
abbess teach all the sisters remembrance, that they them-
selves might be remembered in the sweet and pitiful mercy
of God. And all the sisters praised and blessed God, Who
had given such wisdom, love and holiness to their abbess
Natana.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

OF UNDERSTANDING

Sister Natana the abbess said to the sigters that under-
standing is the light of the spirit, which illumines the soul

that it may understand truth concerning its Creator, and
146

OF UNDERSTANDING

His works, and that the will, before it be moved to desire
or hate, receives light from the understanding that it stray
not in its works. For even as blind men, by defeét of bodily
sight, do err in the ways wherein they walk, even so does
the soul go astray in its memory and will when it receives
not light from the understanding.

2. Oftentimes it comes to pass that by overmuch remem-
brance and desire the understanding suffers disturbance,
and therefore he that would receive spiritual light must
have temperance in his will and memory and understanding.
He that would understand, let him learn to remember and
will, and he who would remember and will, let him learn
to understand; for much understanding is engendered of
much remembrance and will, and much remembrance and
will of much understanding, when man can make accord
between the works of his remembrance and of his under-
Standing and his will.

3. If we would have understanding as touching God, we
must first use faith and afterwards understanding, and be-
lieve in excess of that which we can understand, and
understand that God in His Essence and His works is
greater than we can comprehend: for if the understanding
suffices us not to understand all that we ourselves are and
do, how much less beyond all comparison can our under-
Standing suffice to comprehend God and His works! And
were it not thus, it would follow that we ourselves in our
essence and our works were greater than God; which is a
thing impossible.

4. There is no defeét in failing to understand that which
we cannot understand, but there is defect in the man or
woman that has understanding and has never learned to use
it in respect of that which he can understand, or that desires
not to use understanding in that which he might under-
Stand, or rejects the use of the best of all the creatures that
God has created, or has no mind to enjoy that excellent
delight which comes to the soul through understanding, or

147

BLANQUERNA

fears not the sadness which comes to the soul through
ignorance. The stronger is the working of the understand-
ing, the greater and nobler and loftier is it by virtue of that
working. But by overmuch remembrance, the power of
the memory may become less, even as by overmuch loving
or hating the power of the will may grow less. He, there-
fore, that desires not to understand what is within his
comprehension,—how should he desire to remember or
love it?

5. The will must not desire that the understanding may
comprehend that which is beyond its power, but it should
desire it to be ignorant of the same. And if the under-
Sanding comprehend truth, the will must love it, and if it
comprehend falsehood, the will must hate? it; and if the
understanding comprehend the will, the will must love it,
for even as the understanding is made to comprehend the
will, even so is the will made to love the understanding.
And if the memory often remembers without understanding
and willing, the imagination is wont to be exercised in such
a way as to drive a man mad.

6. While the abbess taught the sisters thus concerning
the use of the understanding, a sister enquired of her in
what manner the memory could remember without willing
or understanding. And the abbess said to this sister that
as a man may first remember one thing and afterwards
another, he often remembers one thing and afterwards
another so that the will has no time to love or hate, nor
the understanding to comprehend. Then the memory
works by hazard in its remembrance, and by this use the
imagination becomes disordered, and by this disorder of
the imagination is destroyed the virtue of the memory.

1 desamar, more literally “ un-love,” since the verb is the simple con-
trary of amar.

148

OF WILL

CHAPTER XXXIX

OF WILL

Tue abbess said to the sisters that God has given will to
man, and to beasts, birds, fishes and all living things; but
the will that He has given to men and women is nobler than
the wills of the beasts, and the other creatures that have no
reason; the end whereof is that the human will must desire
nothing without reason. Therefore, when it comes to pass
that a man or woman loves or hates without reason, such
a one has a baser will than any other creature.

2. “It beseems the will to love that which is good and
to hate that which is evil. When a man loves that which
is the lesser good more than that which is the greater good,
then does he order his will to love that which is evil and to
hate that which is good.” Now, while the abbess with
much subtlety spake these words, a sister said to her that
it was not a lawful thing that women should speak with such
subtlety. And the abbess answered and said “ that since the
understanding could comprehend such words as these which
she had spoken, it beseemed the will to desire that the
understanding should soar in its comprehension, and that
the will thereby should be the better able to contemplate
and understand God and His works. For if God had not
willed to be contemplated by love and understanding, He
would not have placed such great virtue in the creatures
nor in the memory, understanding and will, the which
virtue He has placed in them that He may be the better
comprehended, and thereby the more loved. And if
through the direction of will and understanding toward
some subtlety there be engendered doubtfulness, then must
recourse be had to faith and fortitude, whereby the human
mind may be strengthened to believe that which it may not
understand,”

149

BLANQUERNA

3. “ Liberty in this world accords better with will than
with memory and underégtanding; and obedience is more
seemly in religion than in the world or apart from religion.
And this is because liberty is more constrained in religion
than in the world, inasmuch as the will that loves of its own
accord to subjeét itself freely to obedience has risen the
higher and will have the more merit and charity and justice,
than the will that is not under obedience. For, if it be a
pleasing thing to love of one’s own accord the Beloved,' a
greater merit is it to love against one’s own accord obedience
to a superior; for in such a case the will is submitted to
itself in loving that which inwardly it feels disposed to hate.
And if thou darest not to think upon this subtlety thou, dost
doubt concerning the exaltation of thy faith, the which thou
shouldst love that there may be in thee the greater fortitude
and hope. And this which I tell thee signifies for thee some
hidden thing, the which, at this present time wherein we
live, I dare not give thee to understand.”

4. “ Each one of you has will and understanding; let
each one submit her will to her understanding. And I
desire and command that the will of each be bound and
submitted to my will; and that my will and my under-
Standing be bound and submitted in general to the under-
standing of all of you, for this is the proper fun¢tion which
pertains to the office of an abbot or an abbess in religion.”’

CHAPTER XL
OF PRAYER

Tue abbess was in chapter with all the sisters of the com-

munity, and she desired to know the manner of their

prayers, for it is a thing most needful that prayers be duly

ordered, because prayer is the noblest work in the religious
* son amat : “the Beloved,” in particular, and “ the object of one’s

love” in general.

I ‘ O

OF PRATER

life, and prayer without rule and order is very displeasing
to God. While the abbess spake thus, a sister besought
pardon because she had sinned many times against prayer,
repeating but few words of prayer and setting her mind,
while she prayed, upon vain things opposed to prayer. The
abbess answered and said “that prayer is of four kinds. The
first kind is of the heart that contemplates God while the
mouth speaks no words. The second is when the heart
and the mouth agree in prayer, and the heart understands
that which is signified by the words. The third manner is
of a man that leads a good life and commits no mortal sin,
for all that such a man does is prayer. The fourth manner
is when the mouth speaks words of prayer and the heart
thinks upon other things. This fourth manner is displeasing
to God, and bears no fruit, and signifies defect of charity,
wisdom and fortitude, through the which defeé& the soul is
forgetful of itself and knows naught of that which is sig-
nified by the words. In such prayer man must have recourse
to the virtues aforesaid, with the aid whereof the soul may
unite with the words, and understand, remember and love
the words which the mouth speaks.”

2. ““ Ye have heard how Blanquerna adored God in the.
fourteen articles, and how Evast adored Him in Essence
and in virtues, and how Aloma prayed for her son Blan-
querna to our Lady Saint Mary. Now the great affection
and love which these had in their prayers accorded with
their words; and we also should love God and His works
so fervently that the soul and the words may unite to
pray to God and the tears rise from the heart to the
eyes and flow down therefrom, and the virtues conquer
and vanquish our sins, and our souls take comfort from
weeping and find joy in devotion, giving glory and blessing
toGod.”

3. ‘ When we are in prayer, we must remember, under-
Stand and love the virtues and the works of God, and with
faith, hope, charity, justice, wisdom, strength and temper-

Tig

BLANQUERNA

ance we must order our souls and bodies that we may be
able to raise the memory, understanding and will to con-
template and desire His glory, and after this we must
remember, understand and hate! our sins and the vileness
of this world. ‘Thus, by this work, and by the aid of the
fire of the Holy Spirit, our souls will be illumined to pray
to God aright, and our prayers heard by the justice and
mercy of God, in Whom is all perfection and in Whom
every perfect prayer finds virtue? that leads to the bliss of
salvation.”

4. “ We mus pray for the Holy Apostolic Father, for
the cardinals, for prelates, princes and all Christian people,
that God may give them devotion and that all their lives
may be spent in the knowledge and love of God, and that
through them may return the holy devotion which to the
greater exaltation of the faith was once in the world, that
is, in the earthly lifetime of our Spouse Jesus Christ and
the Apostles.”

5. ‘‘ Let not our souls, in their prayers, forget the un-
believers, for they are of our blood and of like form to our
own. Their ignorance of faith and of knowledge comes
from their lack of teachers, for so far as we can see they
have none. They know not God, neither love Him nor
believe in Him, neither do they render thanks to God for
the blessings which He gives them. Many of them daily
blaspheme our Lord Jesus Christ, believing Him to have
been a man that was deluded and a sinner. Great virtue
would it be that one should confess before these men the
Name of God and His virtue, and the honour which is in
our Spouse: well-pleasing to God would be one that taught
these men to honour Him who now do Him dishonour.
And on the Day of Judgment those that suffered that they
might exalt the Name of God would come to the Court
with garments like to those of Jesus Christ.”

1 desamar.

* P: “ perfection of virtue.’ V: “ fulness and virtue.”

lige

OF WATCHING

6. “ Let us render thanks to God for that He has given
us this our human life and made so many creatures to do
us service. Never can we thank Him enough for all the
good that we have received of Him and receive of Him
daily. Let us pray our Lady Saint Mary and all the angels
and saints of Paradise to give thanks for us. Let us accuse
ourselves of our sins and sue for pardon. Let us count
ourselves unworthy of the good that we receive and the
glory for the which we hope. Let us render thanks to God,
Who has brought us from the bondage of the world and
gathered us together in this place to live lives of penitence.
Let us beg of God virtues whereby we may be defended
from the vices. Let us by the holiness of our lives adore
our Saviour. Let us continue in love and tears, in con-
trition and devotion, never wearying of adoring, loving and
praying to Him Who has given us hearts to love, eyes to
weep and mouths to praise His virtue and His works.” In
all these ways, and in many more, did the abbess instru
the sisters in the prayer, adoration and contemplation of

God.

CHAPTER XLI

OF WATCHING

In the presence of all the sisters the abbess spake these
words: “‘ Mindful am I inwardly of how I once was wont
to look upon my lady the abbess, (to whom God grant for-
giveness) and to hide certain matters that she might have
no knowledge thereof. Wherefore, in order that at all
hours of the day your souls may fear the justice of the order,
I desire, after taking counsel with you, to make a new
eStablishment in this convent, to wit, that each week we
make secret ele€tion of one sister who shall be a spy, to
keep watch over all that ye do, and that none of you shall
know which is she, to the end that each of you may fear
the other as though she were my own presence. And in

153

BLANQUERNA

chapter that sister shall recount all that she has seen you
do that is evil or contrary to our order.”

2. ‘ Further, I will ordain that we set spies in the city
who may observe if any of our sisters enter therein for
reasons of need, and take note of their behaviour and of the
places whither they go; lest of them or of any of you they
hear dishonourable words or aught whereby sin may be
imputed to us.”

3. “And I would not only that there be watchers set
over you, but also that there be one set over me, that I may
be the better kept from every error. Therefore I desire
that three sisters be chosen each week and that these make
secret election of one that shall take note of all that I do
and that I know not which is she that keeps watch over me.
And I desire that in chapter she accuse me before all the
sisters if she have seen me do aught that is unseemly or
contrary to my order; and before all things it is good that
I do penance for this and sue for pardon.’”’ All the sisters
found that which the abbess said to be good, and they
confirmed all things soever that she was pleased to ordain.

4. For long years did the abbess Natana dwell in that
convent, following all the ordinances aforesaid; and through
her holy life and doétrine were found therein many good
sisters. Moreover, many a lady in the city took good ex-
ample from her, and many more convents followed the rules

and customs which she established.
ENDED, BY THE GRACE AND HELP OF GOD,
IS THE BOOK OF THE ORDER OF WOMEN

Now must we needs return to Blanquerna, whom we left
in the forest, about to seek a place wherein he might adore,
contemplate, love and have knowledge of God.

154

OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

Part THE SECOND

CHAPTER XLII

OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

For the whole of that day, after he had parted from Evatt
and Aloma, Blanquerna journeyed through the forest. At
nightfall he came to a fair meadow, wherein was a beautiful
fountain, beneath a tall tree. There did Blanquerna take
his rest, and he slept all that night. Before dawn he began
his prayers according as he was wont; and through the
strangeness and solitariness of the place, and the heavens
and the stars, his soul was highly exalted in the contempla-
tion of God. When he heard the wild beasts roaming
through the forest, his prayer was disturbed through his
fears, but by hope and fortitude his mind was strengthened
to trust in the sovereign aid of God.

2. Until sunrise Blanquerna remained in prayer. After
it was day he set out afresh, and journeyed until sunset,
when he came to a place wherein was a great multitude of
trees. In that place was a fair palace right nobly builded.
Blanquerna came to the door of the palace, over the which
were inscribed in letters of gold and silver these words:
“‘ Thou shalt not have strange gods. Thou shalt not for-
swear thyself. Thou shalt keep holy the Sabbath day.
Thou shalt honour thy father and thy mother. Thou shalt
do no murder. Thou shalt not commit fornication. Thou
shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness. Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife. Thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour’s possessions. These are the ten command-
ments that dwell in this palace. They have been exiled in
this forest; they are despised, disobeyed and forgotten by
those that are in the world, In this palace they weep and

1$5

BLANQUERNA

lament and bewail the honour that they were wont to have
in the world, that God might have the glory and men come
to everlasting salvation.”

3. Greatly did Blanquerna marvel when he had read the
words that were written above the portal, so he knocked at
the door with intent to enter thérein to see the ten com-
mandments. The door was opened by a comely youth.
Blanquerna was fain to enter, but the youth forbade him,
and said that no man might enter the palace who was dis-
obedient to the ten commandments. Blanquerna answered
and said that he had cast all things else from his mind, and
had given his whole soul to the service of God, the Lord
and Creator of all good things. Then he related to the
youth his story. The youth closed the door, saying that
ere he could give him leave to enter the palace, he must ask
it of the ten commandments. So the youth begged leave
of the ten commandments, relating to them the story of
Blanquerna. And this story pleased them, and they com-
manded that Blanquerna should have leave to enter and
should be brought before them.

4. Blanquerna entered a great and beautiful hall —
were written the names of those that are disobedient to the
ten commandments. In that hall were ten chairs of gold
and ivory fairly carven, in the which sat the ten command-
ments in estate of great honour. Right nobly were they
clad in silks and gold; great beards had they and long hair,
and in appearance were as aged men. Each one held upon
his knees a book, and wept and bewailed very bitterly,
saying these words:

5. “ Alas, thou that art despised of men! ”’ said the firs
commandment. ‘“‘ Dead are they that have loved thee, by
whom thou hast been served with all honour. Many are
the men in this world who believe in idols and make strange
gods of the sun and the moon and the Stars. To love one’s
son, one’s castle or oneself more than the Most High is to

make a god above Him that is Sovereign Good over all good
156

OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

things. Alas! where are they that love God above all
things? And who is he that to honour God will give him-
self up to death and to suffer all trials? The more do I
think upon the multitude of men that are in the world, and
the fewer men do I find who love God in truth, the greater
grows my pain and the more are my griefs increased. Such
sinners are had in remembrance by the mercy of God, Who
preserves them and grants them these temporal possessions.
But who is he that remembers the great justice of God?
Or that gives thanks to God according as is meet?’? When
the first commandment had said these words, he read in his
book, and wept, and as he read he bewailed himself and was
sorrowful and full of grief.

6. Greatly did Blanquerna marvel at the grief which the
first commandment suffered, and he enquired of him what
he was reading in that book. “ Beloved son!” said the
first commandment, “ In this book is written the great glory
of the bliss of Heaven and the great pain to be suffered by
them that are disobedient unto me. In this book are
written the names of all that are obedient unto me and of
all that are disobedient, and since the number of the dis-
obedient is greater far than the number of the obedient,
and there is no error or wrong in me whereby I merit dis-
obedience, and those that disobey me most are they to
whom God has granted the most of worldly honours, there-
fore now my disconsolateness and my grief grow greater
whensoever I read in this book.”

7. While the first commandment spake with Blanquerna,
the second commandment wept and lamented so bitterly
that Blanquerna gave ear to his words, and looked upon
his tears, which moved him to pity and to contrition of
mind. “Oh, negleéted wretch!” said the second com-
mandment, ‘‘ 'To swear falsely by God is to despise thy
Lord, and thereby is honour done to the creature above the
lofty dominion of the Creator. God loves a single soul
more than all the riches of this world; and a perjurer loves

=

BLANQUERNA

that for the which he perjures himself more than God or
the eternal glory which he may win.”

8. In like manner did the third commandment weep and
lament, saying these words: ‘“‘ God commanded the Jews
to keep the Sabbath, and the Son of God incarnate ordained
that Christians should keep holy the Lord’s Day. But the
Jews, who are blasphemers of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
live in error, keep the Sabbath better than do Christians
the Lord’s Day: who then shall comfort my soul because
of this sin? And men and women commit more sins on
days of festival in eating and drinking and using vanities
than on any other days of the week: who then is he that is
obedient unto me?”

9. The fourth commandment likewise lifted up his voice
and wept, saying: ‘‘ God is the Father of all creatures by
creation and grace; mother of all men is the Mercy and
Justice of God: and I am the commandment which tells
how a man should honour his father and his mother. Who
is obedient to me, in honouring God as his Creator? And
who is he that trusts in His Mercy? And who fears and
loves the Justice of God?”

10. The fifth commandment could scarce contain him-
self as he gave utterance to these words: “ Dead is charity
in him that kills his neighbour; by his sin he destroys his
soul when he is disobedient unto me. More deeply am I
disobeyed as to spiritual than as to physical death; more is
an earthly lord feared for his justice than is the God of
Heaven. Dishonoured and despised am I by those that
disobey me. Sad is my soul when it sees them travelling
along those paths by the which they go to everlasting
torments.”

11. The sixth commandment said: “I am the com-
mandment of God against fornication; I am ordained of
God to combat uncleanness of mind and body, but women
dye their eyebrows and their hair, daub colours on their

faces and adorn their garments, to the end that I may be
158

OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

disobeyed and despised. I have logt my inheritance and
my dominion through lust in those to whom I am sent. If
lust mine enemy has made me to be dishonoured, sad and
disconsolate, then will my sister Justice have vengeance on
them that have so dishonoured me.”

12, The seventh commandment, weeping, began to
speak, and said these words: “ Friendship and love is there
between me and charity and justice. Daily is theft the
cause of evil-doing and deception; I am the commandment
which forbids theft, that there may be charity among all
men. Justice punishes thieves, but it makes me not to be
obeyed for charity, but rather through fear of itself. The
good things are stolen which God has given to them that
are disobedient to me, for they render Him no thanks for
the good things that He has given them. The good which
is in them, they give and attribute it to themselves. If I
endure suffering and grief in this world, they will suffer
eternal torments in the world to come for the dishonour
which now they show me.”

13. The eighth commandment spake with suffering of
heart, and said these words: “ False witness persecutes me
daily, and makes those to be disobedient by whom I thought
to be honoured. False witness is made concerning the
honour of God by him that loves rather the honour of his
order than that of his God. To deny Trinity in God, and
the Incarnation of the Son of God, is false witness against
the goodness, power, wisdom, love and perfection of God;
to increase evil report and to deny truth are contrary to my
will. Daily am I, the commandment, given, and daily am
I disobeyed; false witness has cast me out from mine in-
heritance, and to it are given the honours that I was wont
to have. To love this world rather than the next is false
witness given against the glory of God.”

14. Envy has increased in the world, and the ninth com-
mandment lamented the harm which envy and lust had
done to him, saying these words: “‘ If thou, Charity, hadst

149

BLANQUERNA
such great power against envy, and if thou, Justice, didst

incontinently punish all them that covet the wives of their
neighbours, then should I be honoured and feared by them
that hold me in dishonour and despise my virtue. If lust
and envy have power against me, where is the aid that
through you I possess? Let not Charity and Justice neglect
to rengthen nobility of mind, that I may be honoured and
obeyed in despite of envy and lust. Obedience, my friend !
Forsake me not for envy and lust which make thee to be
displeasing unto God and likewise to me, whensoever thou
dost follow lust and envy.”

15. Blanquerna was now in the presence of the tenth
commandment, who lamented in this wise concerning for-
titude and hope: ‘‘ Alas! And who has set me in the
wrath and displeasure of fortitude and of hope? For never
in the past have I failed or deceived them. To covet the
riches and the goods of one’s neighbour is to be light-
minded and to sin against hope, and not to hope or trust
in the riches or the virtues of God. Too long do Charity
and Justice and Prudence tarry in destroying my enemies,
and in installing me once more in the friendship of Hope
and Fortitude, the which friendship in former years I en-
joyed. By those that were wont to aid me am I forgotten;
by mine enemies, despised and dishonoured.” These
words and many more spake the ten commandments, and
so bitterly did they weep and lament, that Blanquerna could
not refrain from tears.

16, For long did Blanquerna weep and remain with the
ten commandments, and he enquired of them if there were
naught wherein he could aid them or be of avail to fulfil
their desires and make their sorrow to cease. And the ten
commandments told him that naught could relieve their
great sadness save an exceeding devotion and affection of
the mind in prelates and princes and religious men, to the
end that with great fervour and love they should punish all

such as were disobedient to the commandments.
160

OF FAITH AND OF TRUTH

17. So Blanquerna kneeled to the ten commandments,
and begged of them leave and license to continue upon his
way, and grace and virtue to keep them every one and with
constant mind to be obedient to them in his hermitage.
And each of the Ten Commandments blessed Blanquerna,
and he left them with cheerful spirit, and went forth to seek

the place wherein he might dwell as a hermit all the days
of his life.

CHAPTER. Xbeiil

OF FAITH AND OF TRUTH

BLaNQueERNa set out from the palace wherein were the Ten
Commandments, and journeyed through the forest from
one part to another, seeking a place where he might build
his cell. At the hour of none, when he had said his office,
he sat down near to a fountain and ate one of the seven
loaves which he carried with him. When he had eaten,
and had drunk from the water of the fountain, he gave
thanks to God and continued upon his journey. As he
went through the forest, he saw lions and bears and wolves
and wild boars and serpents and many other evil beasts;
and because he was all alone and unaccustomed to seeing
such beasts he had fear and was affrighted in his mind.
But Hope and Fortitude recalled to him the power of God,
and Charity and Justice strengthened his mind, and he fell
to prayer, and gave thanks to God, because He had given
him such company, whereby he remembered His power,
and was enabled to trust in His hope.

2. While Blanquerna was journeying thus through the
forest, there came from before him the sound of a most
miserable and wretched voice. Greatly did Blanquerna
marvel at the sound of the voice which he heard. When
he had gone a little way he saw coming through the forest,
with none other company, two ladies, right nobly dressed

and very pleasant to look upon; but one of these ladies
E 161

BLANQUERNA

wept and bewailed herself bitterly. Blanquerna went
quickly to meet these two ladies, and enquired of her that
was weeping what was the occasion of her tears and sad-
ness. The lady that wept answered and spake these words:
“Tam Faith, and I have journeyed with this lady, who is
Truth, into the land of the Saracens, that I might convert
them into the way of salvation. And they have not been
willing to receive me nor yet Truth; neither would they
believe me, but made opposition to me and to Truth. Sad
is my soul because God is not loved in those lands, neither
honoured nor believed; and sorrow have I and pity for the
damnation of those innocent men. Needs must I weep for
the great ill that follows from the error wherein they live,
and bewail the merit that is lost in those that will not present
to them my brother and my sister.”

3. Blanquerna enquired of Faith who were her brother
and her sister. Faith replied: ‘‘ This lady is my sister, and
my brother is Understanding, to whom I am going now,
that he may visit those people from whom I come, and
demonstrate to them by necessary reasons thé fourteen
articles of faith; for the time has come when they will not
receive the authority of the saints; and there are now no
miracles such as those of old whereby they that knew not
me nor my sister were enlightened. And since the people
require arguments and necessary demonstrations, I go to
my brother, who has power, by the virtue of God, to prove
the fourteen articles,”

4. Blanquerna answered her and said that Faith would
lose her merits if her articles were demonstrated by Under-
standing, through the which articles Faith is enlightened
to believe even against Understanding. But Faith said to
Blanquerna that it was a thing ill-beseeming if the chiefest
reason for the which man desired to convert the unbelievers
were that greater merit thereby might be occasioned to
Faith; and that this should rather be the secondary inten-

tion, and that the chiefes&t intention should be that God
162

OF FAITH AND OF TRUTH

might be known and loved. “‘ Let Understanding use his
virtue,” said she, “ that I thereby may be the greater and the
more highly exalted; for even as Understanding may the
higher soar by comprehending the articles, even so may
I rise higher yet,—yea, above Understanding; for I can
believe that which he cannot comprehend; and when
men affirm that my sister Truth is not in these necessary
reasons, they speak against me and my sister and my
brother, albeit they can be calumniated by any light
reason, comparison being made between me and my sister
and my brother.”

5. Blanquerna said that many a time friars and other
men had gone to preach the Roman faith to unbelievers,
and had not been able to convert them, because it seemed
that God desired not their conversion; and when God
desired it, then would it be a light thing to convert them.
Faith answered: ‘‘ If God desired not the conversion of
men, wherefore would He have become incarnate? And
wherefore did He will to suffer upon the Cross? And
wherefore did He so greatly honour the apostles and the
martyrs who suffered death to exalt me in the world? But
God daily awaits those that will love Him, desiring them
to come to Him of their own free will and not of constraint,
that they may win great glory; and the people tempt God,
and believe that, when God wills it, He will grant them the
will to suffer martyrdom for love of Him. And what
Stronger demonstration can there be that God wills man
to bear trials and death for love of Him, than that which
is represented before our eyes by the Cross, or than the
words in the Gospel that Jesus Christ spake when He said
three times to Saint Peter that if he loved Him he must
feed His sheep? Or what can error do against God, and
against my brother and me and my sister? But since there
is no perseverance nor continuance in disputations against
the unbelievers, therefore does it appear to the people that

error cannot be vanquished by us.”
163

BLANQUERNA
6. When Faith had straitly rebuked Blanquerna, she

returned to her weeping, and began to lament and cry out
as was her wont, and continued on her way towards Under-
Standing her brother. Blanquerna followed Faith and
Truth, and comforted Faith in such manner as he was able,
saying these words: ‘‘ Wise is God in all things, and His
Justice fails in naught. Wherefore since God knows that
thou, O Faith, hast done thine utmost in desiring the con-
version of unbelievers, the Justice of God excuses thee; and
hence must thou be comforted according to the wisdom and
justice of God, and thy merit is as great as if thou hadst
converted the unbelievers whose conversion thou didést so
greatly desire.” Faith answered Blanquerna, weeping:
“ Alas, wretched one that 1am! Never did I think myself
to be so greatly despised by men. And how can any sup-
pose that I may be comforted while my Creator and my
Light is despised, unknown, unloved! and blasphemed
against by men? If I were comforted because of my merit
and my powers, where would be charity in my will? Such
consolation as this comes through defect of love, devotion
and pity which are my sisters, to whose virtue my consola-
tion would be opposed.” Thus did Faith reprove Blan-
querna, and shame and conscience overtook him. And
meanwhile they had arrived in those parts where Under-
standing had his dwelling.

CH APT Ee STaby,

OF UNDERSTANDING

In the shade of a fair tree laden with flowers and fruits,
on the fresh grass near to a crystal fountain, was a high seat
subtly carved and adorned with gold and silver and ivory
and marble and precious stones. Upon this seat sat an
ancient and reverend man, right nobly garbed in crimson

1 desamat.

164

OF UNDERSTANDING

samite, whereby is signified the Passion of the Son of God.
This man was Understanding, who was reading to many
of his disciples in philosophy and theology. While Under-
standing read to his disciples, Faith and Truth with
Blanquerna came to that place and greeted Understanding
and his disciples, and were courteously welcomed by
Understanding and by all the rest.

2. Understanding enquired of Faith and Truth how
they did, and what they had accomplished of that purpose
for the which they went upon their journey. With great
compassion and grief, Faith answered her brother, and told
him of the manner wherein she had journeyed among the
Saracens, and how she had found men learned in philosophy
that believed not in the articles of the Saracens, but neither
would they receive the authority of the saints nor believe
them. “ And therefore,’’ said she, ‘‘ my sister Truth and
I have come to thee, to pray that thou wilt go to them and
by necessary reasons wilt show to them the truth, and lead
them out of the error wherein they live, that God may be
known and loved by them and my griefs be relieved.”

3. So Understanding turned to his disciples and spake
these words: ‘‘ The time has come wherein our knowledge
is exalted; the unbelievers demand necessary demonstra-
tions and reasons, and refuse credence to aught beside. It
is time for us to go, and make use of the science which we
have; for, if we use it not as we ought, in honouring Him
from Whom we have it, we act against conscience and
against that which we know, and we desire not to have the
merit and the glory which we can have if we use our know-
ledge. Very great is the doubt which the sages of the
Saracens have in their belief; the Jews are in doubt by
reason of the bondage wherein they live, and desire to have
knowledge; and many idolaters are there who have no
belief: it is time that we go. I would know now which of
you desires to go in company with me and with my sisters.
We have a new method of argument with the unbelievers,

165

BLANQUERNA

by showing them the Brief Art of Finding Truth* ; and, when
they have learned this, we shall be enabled to confound
them by this art and by its beginnings.”

4. When Understanding had ended his words, the
disciples made excuses to him, saying thus: ‘‘ A fearful
thing is death and the endurance of trials and torments; a
thing to be shunned is it to suffer hunger and thirst, to
leave country and kindred and to go into foreign lands
among people that kill and torture those that reprove them
for their beliefs.” When the disciples said these words,
Truth could no longer hold her peace, and she spake as
follows: ‘‘ If all these things whereof ye speak are to be
feared, much more to be feared is it to be an enemy of me
and of my sister and my brother, and also of Hope, Charity,
Justice and Fortitude! If my brother has given me to you,
where is the honour that ye do me by opposing Falsehood,
who has done me such grievous dishonour before so many
people? And which of you is he that would fain be like
unto Jesus Christ, at the Day of Judgment, in His crimson
garments? And if ye died not natural deaths, which of you
would fain die to honour his Celestial Lord?”’ Then
‘Truth wept, and Faith began again to lament her bitter
griefs, and Understanding said: “‘ Alas! Where are the
thanks of those to whom I have shown the truth!” And
he said to Faith and Truth: “‘ Go to Devotion, your sister,
and pray her to come to these disciples, that are without
piety, that she may teach them to love, and give them
resolution to follow me upon that journey to make the
which ye so greatly desire.” So Faith and Truth, with
Blanquerna, went to Devotion. And while Blanquerna
followed Faith and Truth he praised and blessed God Who
had set him in this place so that he had heard the words
aforesaid, which he had never heard before.

* Another allusion to Lull’s own work: see pp. 327, 332 below.

166

OF DEVOTION

CHAPTER XLV

OF DEVOTION

Faitu and Truth, together with Blanquerna, came to a
place where sat Devotion beneath a right beauteous pine-
tree, and she was in prayer and tears, desiring the honour
of Jesus Christ and remembering His grievous Passion.
Devotion welcomed Faith and Truth, and greeted them
with cheerful countenance, but Faith and Truth greeted
Devotion with countenances that were sad and troubled.
Wherefore Devotion feared lest her brother Understanding
had some sorrow or grief, and she enquired of them con-
cerning the estate of their brother. Faith and Truth
answered Devotion by relating the happenings set forth
above, and they told how Understanding their brother
begged her earnestly that she would come to him to move
his disciples to love to the end that they might follow him,
giving praise to the Holy Divine Trinity and the Incarna-
tion of the Son of God, that God and His works might have
the honour among us which is fitting, and we ourselves be
well-pleasing to Him, and they that are in falsehood and
error be enlightened by faith and truth and understanding.

2. ‘“ How then?” said Devotion, “ Have they me not
in their minds when my brother presents to them Truth
my sister?’’ “‘ Contrary is it to nature,’”’ said Devotion,
“to know God and His works, and not to have charity and
devotion to honour God and His works. This contrariety
is engendered by forgetfulness of the Divine Virtue, and
the glory of Heaven, and the pains of Hell, and remem-
brance of the vanity of this world and fear of death. Alas,
unhappy that I am! Where are Hope and Charity and
Justice and Prudence and Fortitude that they aid you not
and aid not the wisdom of my brother?”’ Greatly mar-
velled Devotion, and sorely lacked she comfort as she spake

the words aforesaid.
167

BLANQUERNA

3. While Devotion marvelled at this ignorance of the
disciples, who feared death and trials borne for the honour
of God and the gaining of celestial happiness more than
they feared to have not Charity, Hope and Fortitude, Faith
and Truth begged Devotion that she would go to the dis-
ciples, for there had been overmuch delay, and it was time
that devout upholders of the Faith should preach to the
unbelievers; for souls are hastening daily to the eternal
flames even as the rivers hasten ceaselessly to the sea.
Devotion answered: ‘* Well know ye that no power avails
over free will in the disciples of my brother, wherefore
unless they will it freely I cannot bein them; for else would
my works be contrary to Charity and Justice which accord
with merit of glory and merit of blame. Therefore it is
well that ye return to my brother and his disciples, and
tell them that they may have me all the hours that they
will in their company and in their mind whensoever they
are pleased to have remembrance and desire for me.
And to the end that they may desire me, there is figured
upon the Cross the image of Jesus Christ, the which
should cause them to have great shame because they
desire not to have me that they may pay to Him the
honour due.”

4. Faith and Truth returned to Understanding right
disconsolate in spirit. Blanquerna took courteous leave of
them and went on in search of a habitation. And as he
journeyed all alone through the forest, he remembered the
words of Devotion, and praised and blessed the Charity,
Wisdom and Justice of God, Who had charged faithful
Christians, through the Incarnation and Passion of the Son
of God, to fear neither trials nor death that God and His
works may be honoured.

168

OF DILIGENCE

CHAPTER XLVI

OF DILIGENCE

BLANQuERNA went from one place to another in the forest,
sceking the spot which he so greatly desired. His mind
ceased not to love, nor his soul to remember, nor his mouth
to praise the Name of God. While Blanquerna journeyed
in this wise through the forest, he saw a man on horseback
riding towards him with great speed. This man carried a
goodly quantity of money. Blanquerna greeted him, and
enquired of him why he went with such great speed. And
he answered, saying that he was the minister of a king who
had sent him to a certain city to make ready for him a
lodging and to buy those things whereof the king had need
for his honour in a great court that he purposed to hold
with many noble barons. Blanquerna enquired of him
many things, but the minister would not tarry with him
lest he should be delayed in his journey, neither would he
answer those things that were asked of him.

2. All that day Blanquerna journeyed till after the hour
of none, when he ate of his bread and of some raw herbs
that were growing near a fountain. While Blanquerna was
eating, a squire came by upon a palfrey, which he rode with
great speed. This squire came from the court and was
going to a city wherein had been elected a bishop; and,
since the eleétion had been confirmed by the Pope, he went
to bear felicitations! to the chapter of the city and to the
kinsfolk of the bishop. The squire gave his palfrey to
drink at the fountain which was before Blanquerna. While
the palfrey drank, the squire related to Blanquerna his
errand as aforesaid; but in such haste was the squire that
he could scarce make Blanquerna to understand these
words nor would he allow the palfrey to drink his fill at
the fountain.

1 P: “to bear the news.”

169

BLANQUERNA

3. Blanquerna ended his meal, and fell on his knees to
give thanks to God. While Blanquerna praised God at the
hour of none according to his wont, he saw a merchant,
who had been robbed and stripped of all that he had,
approaching him on foot, weeping, and lamenting bitterly,
and saying these words: ‘‘ Alas, unhappy one! How long
hast thou laboured in many lands, how much hunger, thirst,
heat, cold and fear hast thou borne to gain that which now
thou hast lost! Miserable wretch! What wilt thou do?
And how will thy wife and thy children fare? Now art
thou robbed, and all that thou didst possess is taken from
thee. Wilt thou make outcry concerning them that have
robbed thee? Thou art in peril of death lest the robbers
kill thee, for thou journeyest often and art ever in their
hands.” ‘Fair friend!” said Blanquerna: ‘“ Whither
goest thou? And who has brought thee into this same
great sadness that thy disconsolate appearance signifies ? ”’
The merchant related to Blanquerna how he had been
robbed by a knight who had a castle near the place
through the which he was passing, and how he was going
to make outcry against that knight who had robbed him,
and how he had lost all that for the which he had ever
laboured.

4. After the merchant had been gone from Blanquerna
a little space, there came on foot another man in great haste,
laden with geese and hens which he was carrying on his
back. Blanquerna asked him if in all that forest he knew
of no place wherein he might dwell, provided only that it
should be upon a hill and a fountain should be there and
wild fruit growing, to the end that he might lead therein
the life of a hermit. But that man answered not his words,
for so intent was he upon a lawsuit wherein he was engaged
that he thought that Blanquerna was asking him concern-
ing his estate and his journey. Therefore spake he to
Blanquerna in these words: ‘‘ Sir!” said that man, ‘‘ I am

going along this way, to a town that is near to a castle, in
170

OF DILIGENCE

the which town I have a lawsuit againgt my brother. For
I demand of him a vineyard that my father has bequeathed
to me in his will. And these things that thou seest I bear
as a present for the judge and for the advocates upon either
side, and further I bear them money which I have borrowed
at an exceeding great rate of interest. I pray thee for God’s
sake that thou aid and counsel me if thou knowest aught
of the law.”

5. For long did Blanquerna marvel at the surpassing
great desire of that man to gain the vineyard, and he was
mindful of the words of Faith and Truth and Under-
Standing and Devotion, and of the wondrous diligence
which he had seen in the persons aforementioned. So
Blanquerna fell on his knees, and his heart was moved to
devotion, and his eyes to weeping and tears, and he spake
these words: ‘‘ Oh strange will, contrary both to order and
to nature, wherein is defect of courtesy and wisdom!
Whence comest thou, that makest the honour and know-
ledge of God to be forgotten, and wilt not give devotion
to them that fear to bear trials and death to the end that
God may be honoured, and the erring led into the life of
salvation! Foolish art thou, O will; small thanks hast thou
to thy Creator, and little dost thou fear the pains of hell,
whereby thou shalt never attain thy desire. Where is that
good thing wherewith thou canst be rewarded by the
minister of the king or by the squire or by the merchant
or by the countryman? Foolish one! How is it that thou
rememberest not the salvation that thou canét have in this
world? Or why fearest thou not to lose in this world that
which is irrecoverable in the next?’ Greatly was the
countryman amazed at the words which Blanquerna spake,
and leaving Blanquerna he returned to his former cogita-
tions.

171

BLANQUERNA

CHAPTER XLVII

OF AUGURIES

Farr was the day, and the sun illumined the whole wood
through the which Blanquerna journeyed. On a high hill
he espied a knight, mounted upon his horse and clad in full
armour. That knight was cunning in the interpretation of
auguries, and had come to seek omens which should signify
the truth to him concerning a combat wherein he desired
to engage against another knight that was his mortal enemy.
While the knight watched to see if he might not espy an
eagle or a crow or a sparrow-hawk or any other bird from
the which he could learn the thing that he desired to know,
Blanquerna ascended the hill to enquire of the knight if he
knew of any place which would accord with the life that he
desired to lead.

2. When Blanquerna reached the knight they saluted
each other in right friendly fashion. Each of them enquired
concerning the other’s estate, and related the reason for the
which he had come to that place. When Blanquerna had
learned the reason of the coming of the knight, he spake to
him these words: “ Sir Knight! Art thou as strong and
noble of mind as is signified by the goodly fashioning of
thy body and of thy horse and of thy armour? Thou
seemest to me right well able to defend thyself against
another knight.” “‘ Friend! ” said the knight, “ ] am strong
of person, and full well armed, and I feel within me no fault
which inclines me to evil-doing or deception; and by the
grace of God I have long held the order of knighthood;
wherefore it seems to me that I cannot be vanquished or
overcome by any single knight.”

3. “Sir Knight!” said Blanquerna. ‘ All that is done
in this world comes to pass by the aétion of two things, to
wit, occasion and fortune Occasion is that which has

* For the use of these terms, cf. p. 41 above.
rp

OF AUGURIES

regard to the things to come according to the knowledge
of discretion and reason through enlightened understand-
ing or the enlightenment of faith; but fortune is a thing
which comes to pass without occasion or prevision whatso-
ever. lI ask thee, then, which of the two is stronger, whether
occasion or fortune.” “Fair friend!’ said the knight,
“Stronger of a certainty is occasion, which accords with
reason and intention, than fortune, which accords with the
matter itself without deliberation of reason and discretion
and intention.’”’ Blanquerna answered the knight saying
“that he had spoken well; but that his actions were contrary
to his words, forasmuch as he was watching for omens; for
the birds which go flying through the air fly by occasion
to the end that they may catch their meat, but their flight
is a matter of fortune with respeé to the angle at the which
they pass a man as they fly. Wherefore a knight that does
battle with another, having first sought fortune from the
birds, is neither as strong nor as wise according to the art
of war as is he that does battle by the arbitration of reason,
and the discretion of his understanding, which signifies to
him the things that are to come according to the circum-
Stances of war. By these words mayest thou learn that thine
enemy is stronger against thee if he follow that which
reason demonstrates to him than art thou against him if
thou be guided by that which the birds chance to do,
wherein is no necessity of reason which can use its virtue;
the more so because such a usage is displeasing to God
and is contrary to hope, fortitude and justice; wherefore
thou hast the worse of thy battle.”

4. Long mused the knight upon the words which Blan-
querna spake; and through the merits of Blanquerna and
the working of reason the knight took knowledge of his
errors, and spake these words: “‘ Many a time has it come
to pass that reason has showed me how I should make
certain attacks and perform stratagems of battle; but, be-
cause I believed in omens more than in my understanding,

173

BLANQUERNA

therefore have I forsaken that which reason dictated to me,
and followed the omens, which have caused me to act in
contrary wise to reason and intellect. Blessed therefore be
God, Who has sent to me through thee this knowledge !
From this time forth no auguries nor omens shall have me
in their power.”

5. “ Sir Knight!” said Blanquerna, “‘ Another law of
battle has God made, namely that since reason dictates and
demonstrates how a man may do harm to his enemy, reason
should therefore take thought if it accords with charity,
hope, justice, prudence and fortitude; for all these virtues
are the sisters of reason, and reason may not have effect in
her thoughts if she be opposed to her sisters. Wherefore
it behoves thee to have in mind the agreement that is
between reason and the virtues aforesaid.”’ Greatly did the
words of Blanquerna please the knight, and he said to
Blanquerna that he would indeed think after this manner,
as he had never yet done at any time soever in his life.

6. Long did the knight consider if in battle he had used
charity, justice and hope; and his conscience recalled to
him the malice and the enmity which he had borne to his
foe, and how he had set his hope on auguries, and how
pride and vainglory had been in his mind in the stead of
fortitude. Therefore, when the knight had thought for
long upon these things, and upon many more whereby he
had knowledge of his errors, then praised he and blessed
God, and repented him of his faults. Commending himself
to the care and service of reason and her sisters, he spake
to Blanquerna in these words: ‘‘ Blessed be God, Who has
given me fortitude whereby in my mind I have vanquished
my enemies. Never have I fought a fight that was so full
of profit and of pleasure. Through the enemies whom I
have vanquished in my mind I will vanquish my enemies
in the mind of that knight whose mortal foe I have for so
long been. Alas! What battle is well fought and won,
but with charity, justice, patience, humility and fortitude
174

OF VALOUR

to overcome and vanquish malice, ill will, pride, evil doing
and deception?’? When the knight had ended these
words, Blanquerna took his leave of him and continued
upon his journey.

CHAPTER XLVIII

OF VALOUR!

BLANQUERNA Continued on his way with great desire to find
a place meet for his penitence. While he journeyed thus
through the forest he espied a road along the which walked
a jester? very poorly clad, his appearance and his manner
bearing witness to his poverty and sadness of mind. Blan-
querna enquired of the jester wherefore his countenance
thus bore witness to sorrow and grief. ‘‘Sir!’’ said the
jester: “‘ I have come from a court wherein a noble baron
of these parts has been of late dubbed knight. In that
court I thought to find valour which should restore my poor
garments, and should reward me for the sirventes® that I

1 To translate the words va/or and desva/or, “ valour ” and “ disvalour ”
respectively are used, rather than “‘ worth” and “ worthlessness,”’ which to
modern ears express more of the meaning of the Catalan word. Up to the
sixteenth century, the word “ valour ”’ was in general use to express the idea
of a person’s worth or importance in respect of his attributes or qualities.
The full sense in which the word is used in this book will become clear as
the reader proceeds with the narrative. In particular, Blanquerna’s descrip-
tions of the offices of valour will be noted (§§ 3, 5 below).

® The word jug/ar (“ jongleur ”) occurs so many times from this point
onwards in the book that, rather than burden the narrative with a continually
recurring foreign word, we have thought it best to translate by “ jester.”
The jug/ar was a well-known medizval figure about whom much has been
written both in Spanish and other languages. His accomplishments and
qualifications were numerous, and varied greatly with circumstances. He
could be juggler, acrobat, conjurer, satirist, buffoon, tumbler, singer, actor,
reciter, mimic, sage, musician, and much beside. But his profession in its
most general aspect consisted in the giving of amusement: “ illorum officium
tribuit letitiam,” say the Leges Palatine of the King (James II of Majorca)
to whom reference has already been made. Hence the word “ jester,” which
has in English a similarly extended meaning, seems suitable to translate jug/ar.

8 The sirvente was a kind of song or poem, usually of a satirical nature.
It has been remarked above that the jug/ares were often accomplished satirists.

175

BLANQUERNA

have made for long against those that are enemies of valour,
and because I praised those that in this world maintain
valour; but there was no reward given for valour in that
court, nor to any of its lovers. For this cause I have fallen
to thinking how I may compose another sirvente, wherein
I may speak ill of valour and its servants.”

2. “ Fair friend!” said Blanquerna: “‘ Ere thou makest
this sirvente, it behoves thee to have knowledge of valour
and of those that are its servants, that thy words may con-
tain truth.” ‘“‘ Sir!” said the jester: ‘“‘ For long have I
had knowledge of valour, and sought it in many lands, and
it has never yet aided my poverty nor enabled me to leave
the service of evil men.” ‘‘ Friend!” said Blanquerna:
‘Tf valour were that which thou sayest, it would of neces-
sity be bound to help thee; for if it did not so it would
not be valour. But it might be that that which thou namest
valour is disvalour, evil and sin. Wherefore if evil, ill-
speaking, ignorance and disvalour make thee to go about
in poverty, then sayest thou wrongly that valour has done
thee injury or wrong.” }

3. “Sir!” said the jester: “* Since thou art so doughty
a defender of valour I would have thee tell me what valour
may be. Blanquerna answered and said that valour is
valiancy! of virtues against vices, and it is that thing
whereby comes utility and preservation against deception
and sin. Comprehended in this valour are truth, liberality,
courtesy, humility, moderation, loyalty, piety, knowledge
and many virtues more, the which are daughters of faith,
hope, charity, justice, prudence, fortitude and temperance:
of these is valour the daughter.” 2 While Blanquerna thus
demonstrated the meaning of valour to the jester, a knight
passed by on foot, bearing his lance in his hand, and upon
his back his sword. When he was near to them, the jester

* valenga, ‘The word “ valiancy ” preserves the euphony and balance
of the sentence, but the meaning is rather “ utility,” “* usefulness,” “ worth.”
2 So V. Other versions have: “ of whom is the daughter of valour.”

176

OF VALOUR

said to Blanquerna that that knight was the emperor, for
he knew him and had seen him many times. The jester
and Blanquerna did reverence and honour to the emperor,
who greeted them in very friendly fashion.

4. The jester enquired of the emperor what was the
fortune that caused him thus to journey alone and on foot
through the forest. The emperor answered and related to
them both how that in the chase he had pursued a wild
boar for so long that he had become parted from his
companions; and how that he had followed the boar into
a dense forest, and the boar had slain his horse and he him-
self had wounded the boar to death. When the emperor
had related the adventure which had befallen him, he asked
the jester and Blanquerna if they could give him aught to
eat; for hunger constrained him greatly, because two days
had passed, in the which he had neither eaten nor drunk.
“Lord !’’ said Blanquerna: ‘‘ Hard by is a fountain where
thou mayest drink the pure water, and eat of the fresh grass
which grows around it.” The emperor answered saying
that without eating he could not drink, and that it was not
his custom to eat grass; but that he thought soon to die
if he found not some thing to eat of a kind whereto he was
accustomed.

5. Blanquerna led the emperor to the fountain; and
they sat all three upon the fresh, green grass near by.
Blanquerna drew out the three loaves that remained to him,
and together they brake their fast and dined. While the
emperor ate, Blanquerna enquired of him which thing was
of the greater profit to him: whether the bread that he
ate or his empire. The emperor answered and said that
in that place the bread that he ate was of greater profit and
worth! to him than his empire. Blanquerna replied:
“ Little is the worth? of an empire which is less profitable
to its lord than the bread which he eats. From this, O
jeSter, mayest thou take knowledge of that wherein true

1 més li profiteva e li valia. 8 valor.

M a

BLANQUERNA

valour consigts. All valour consists in three things: the
one is in earthly things which avail to sustain the body, the
second, in the gaining of virtues and merits, and the third,
in that all things are good in so far as by them God 1s
served, known and loved, and is pleased to use His power
in His creatures.”

6. Then the emperor enquired of the jester and of Blan-
querna what was this conversation upon valour into the
which they had entered, and they related to him the words
concerning valour which they were speaking when he met
them. And Blanquerna said to the emperor: ‘“ Lord!
Many are the noble deeds which oft-times thou hast done,
whereby thou hast been a friend of valour. Now if thou
hast done aught that is evil, and opposed to valour, it can
in no wise aid thee in this forest wherein thou hast as little
power as one of us. But if in thy soul there is nobility of
heart, which accords with valour, the virtues whereof I have
spoken are the daughters of valour and they can aid thee
in this forest to have patience and humility and consolation
in the hope of God Who can aid thee in this place and in
others.”

7. For long did they all three speak of valour, and for
long did they walk together, until they came to a fair
meadow surrounded by trees full fair. In the midst of that
meadow was builded a beautiful palace, carven and walled
with marble. Atove the portal thereof were set these
words: “ This palace belongs to the lady Valour, and no
man that is an enemy or a persecutor of valour must enter
therein, nor can enter. In this palace dwells Valour, who
is exiled from the world, and from her lovers, and from all
them that are lovers of disvalour. Daily does Valour weep
and bewail her wrongs, and fain would she recover her
honour, and she awaits trusty helpers! who shall restore
her to the world, that the honour of God may be multiplied
throughout all lands. Comfortless is Valour, and evil-

1 valedors. See note, p. 175 above.

178

OF VALOUR

doing and deception are increased. All men suffer from
the dishonour which is done to Valour. If disvalour were
valour, then would be greater in the world the honour of
God. Valour welcomes him that remembers and loves her
in his mind, and that laments the ill which she suffers, and
that desires her honour.”

8. When the emperor and Blanquerna and the jester had
read these words, they wondered greatly at the significance
thereof, and knocked at the door of the palace with intent
to enter. A fair damsel appeared at the window, and
enquired their will, and the condition and estate of all three.
Each one told the damsel his name and his estate, and they
said that they desired to enter the palace to the end that
they might look upon Valour. So the damsel related to
Valour the names and the estates of all three, and enquired
of her if she would grant them leave to enter the palace.
But Valour desired not that the emperor nor the jester
should enter, for they were her enemies, and of the number
of them that persecuted her in the world and made her to
dwell in that forest. But because Blanquerna was her
servant, she desired that he should enter and be given
friendly welcome.

g. So Blanquerna entered alone into the palace, where
he found Valour, who spake to him these words: “ I Valour
am created to signify and show forth the valour of my
Creator and my Lord. God gives valour to plants, beasts,
birds, heavens, stars, the four elements, and metals, that
man may have valour over and above all these. And when
man will not have this, he is in valour less than all these
things or than any other creature, because he loves dis-
valour, the which he desires to have, believing it to be
valour. Many men in the world have honours and riches,
wherein is disvalour; and the friends of valour are despised
and poor in the world. Many are the books wherein is
written truth concerning the Incarnation and Passion of the
Son of God, the which have valour in respect of redemp-

179

BLANQUERNA

tion; but the books have no valour for infidels, who lack
teachers. Many are they that hold the possessions of Holy
Church, that they may exalt valour. But who is he that
will exalt Holy Church in valour and in honour, against
dishonour and error and infidelity? Many are they that
desire God to have valour that they may gain honour; but
few are the men that love valour to the end that God may
have honour. If I have never done injury or wrong,
wherefore is there done to me dishonour? And if Dis-
valour has never done aéts of justice or bestowed rewards,
wherefore is there done to him honour?”’ While Valour
spake these words and many beside, her eyes were in tears,
and her heart was in sorrow and pain, and she bewailed her
wrongs bitterly.

10. Even till the morrow early was Blanquerna with
Valour, comforting her and inspiring her with hope, and
saying these words: ‘‘ Strong above all other powers is
God; His Wisdom has no fault; the world is His creation.
Wherefore is it seemly that the world should come to its
fulfilment, which could not be if disvalour went not to
destruction and valour were not continually more highly
exalted and went not ever recovering its honour. The
mercy of God is not forgetful of sinners, and the justice of
God has no friendship with the enemies of valour.” With
words such as these and with many more did Blanquerna
bring consolation to Valour. With tears and devotion he
took leave of her, vowing to submit his mind to her all the
days of his life, and Valour took him into her guardianship
and keeping.

11. Blanquerna left the palace, and, as he pursued his
journey, he related to the emperor and the jester the tears
and the despair? which he had found in Valour, and the
words which she had spoken, making complaint of her
enemies. Long did the emperor and the jester consider
and think upon the words which Blanquerna spake con-

+ desconort, “ lack of consolation,” “ comfortlessness.” See p. 19, above.
180

OF VALOUR

cerning Valour; and each was in constraint of conscience
by reason of the sins which he had many times committed
against Valour. While the emperor considered his sins, he
enquired of Blanquerna concerning his history, and Blan-
querna related it to him, together with that of Evast and
Aloma, and he related likewise how that he was seeking to
live as a hermit that he might have God and His honour
ever in his mind, and flee from the world, which is the
enzmy of valour.

12, The humility of God moved pity and patience to
pardon, and remembrance came to the emperor through
the mercy of God. Contrition and repentance for his sins
were in his heart, and he spake these words: “ O guilty
man and fool, that persecutest Valour and goest after wild
beasts, setting thyself thereby in peril of death! thou that
hast for so long served disvalour, yea, all the days of thy
life, believing it to be Valour! For sin there must needs
be made satisfaCtion, and for unruliness must atonement be
made with rule’’; wherefore in that place, in presence of
Blanquerna, he vowed that in all his empire and in his
person he would thenceforward serve Valour, that in him-
self and in others she might recover her possession, for so
long lost. ‘‘ Wherefore,’ said he, “I must needs make
ordinance concerning my empire and my person in honour
of Valour, that by my example Valour may receive her
wonted honour, and return to live among us gladly and
without sorrow.”

13. As the emperor spake these words, they began all
three to walk along a road which agreed not with the
journey of Blanquerna. So Blanquerna said to the emperor
that it behoved him to return towards those parts where he
was seeking his hermitage. Beneath a fair tree he took
leave of the emperor and the jester right courteously, and
the emperor spake to Blanquerna these words: “ Blessed
be the hour when first I met thee upon my journey.
Grievous to me is the parting from thy friendly presence.

18]

BLANQUERNA

It behoves me to put my house in order and the house of
my lady the empress, and all my empire will I put in order,
and commend it to men that love Valour, that Valour may
have satisfaction according as I have promised. Of the
ordinances of my realm will I make a book, and this jester
and many others will I send throughout the world that they
may proclaim valour in courts wherein it is despised, and
persecute and cry out against disvalour in every place
wherein it is praised. I will have them to take naught of
any man, save of me alone, that they may the better exalt
Valour. I will educate and bring up my sons right well,
and then will I resign my empire, and serve God all my
life together with thee in thy hermitage, that God and
Valour may ever be in my mind. I beg thee to pray for
me to God, that He may pardon me, and grant me thy
company.”

CHAPTER XLIX

OF CONSOLATION

In the neighbourhood of that part of the forest wherein
Blanquerna journeyed was a shepherd keeping a large flock
of beasts. That shepherd had a son of the age of seven
years, For the great love which the shepherd bore to his
son, he took him one day with him. It chanced that the
shepherd slumbered beyond his wont, and the child Strayed
from the place where his father was sleeping, and a wolf
came to the fold and found the child there and carried him
off. At the cries of the child, when the wolf carried him
away, the shepherd awoke, and saw that the wolf was
carrying off his son. So he gave chase to the wolf with
his dogs; but, ere he could reach him, the wolf had killed
and mangled the child and devoured his heart within his
breast. When the shepherd came to the place where he
found his son dead, he was in despair, and cried out in
these words:

182

OF CONSOLATION

2. “* Alas, thou wretched one! ‘Thou hast lost that which
thou most did& love. Dead is thy son; and thou art the
occasion of his death, for against the will of his mother dids
thou bring him into this forest. So hast thou given to thy
wife grief and sorrow all the days of her life. Despair above
all despair else must be thine, and tears more than any yet
shed. Needs must thou lament so bitterly that never more
canst thou have consolation or joy. Shame and guilt with
respect to thy wife are thine.’”’ As the shepherd lamented
thus, he embraced and kissed his son, saying: ‘‘ Son!
Where is the fairness that thy countenance aforetime
showed? And whither has fled the great delight that my
mind was wont to have therein? O son! Thy death makes
me to yearn for death also. Naught had I in my mind but
thee; from henceforth, what will be in my mind? I am
old and fain would die; grievous sorrow do I bear because
I feel not death; my life is death by reason of thy death;
no hope have I of comfort nor of pardon for my sin in
being the occasion of thy death.”!

3. So great were the cries and the complaints and the
weeping of the shepherd that because of his cries and the
barking of the dogs that fought with the wolf, Blanquerna
made his way towards the sound of voices, at the which he
marvelled greatly. When he arrived at that place, the
shepherd was weeping and lamenting and ever embracing
and kissing his son. Blanquerna desired to console him,
but the shepherd gave no semblance of seeing him or hear-
ing his words, so greatly afflicted was he by the anguish
and the grief which he suffered.

4. Blanquerna saw that the wolf had killed one of the
dogs, and held the other fast on the ground, and he thought
that he would aid the dog, and that together they would
slay the wolf, that by his death the shepherd might in some

1 Ma vida es mort en ta mort; no he esperanga de conort ni quem sia per-
donat lo tort que he de ta mort. "The prose rhymes, which are very characteristic
of Lull, cannot be reproduced in English.

183

BLANQUERNA

degree be comforted. So Blanquerna took a staff which the
shepherd carried, and went against the wolf right speedily
and as one that by the death of the child was moved to
pity. The wolf endeavoured to flee, but the dog held
him fast until he had been slain by Blanquerna, Then
said Blanquerna to the shepherd: ‘‘ Dead is thy foe, and
by reason of his death should thy sorrow be turned into
comfort.”

5. Many words, devout and of great consolation, spake
Blanquerna to the shepherd, but for all that he said or did
the shepherd would not answer him nor cease from bewail-
ing his grief with all his might. Greatly did Blanquerna
marvel at the grief of the shepherd, and great was his pity
thereat, and he perceived that the exceeding fury and sorrow
of the shepherd had made his memory? to flee, and that he
had no understanding of Blanquerna and of his words.
Therefore, that he might give him consolation, and under-
Standing of his words, through the which he might be the
more inclined to consolation, he began to speak after another
manner, which is according to natural reasoning; and he
spake to the shepherd these words:

6. ‘Oh, caitiff, and fool, that art the occasion of the
death of thy son! Wherefore weepest thou not, neither
lamentest the harm that thou hast wrought? Hast thou
no understanding, that thou consolest thyself thus lightly
for the loss of that which thou so greatly lovest? Dead is
thy son; and the wolf has slain thy wife and all thy dogs.”
The shepherd loved his wife very greatly, and supposed
that Blanquerna spake the truth, and that he himself had
not wept nor made lamentation as in faét he had done.
While the shepherd reflected thus, he spake these words:
“Is my wife in truth dead? And this that I do, is it to
weep or to be comforted ?”’ Blanquerna answered: ‘‘ Come
with me, and thou shalt see thy wife whom the wolf has
" 1 Or, as we should say, his “ wits”: this is a medieval use of the word

memory.”

184

OF CONSOLATION

slain.” The shepherd followed Blanquerna to the place
where the wolf lay dead. ‘ This is thy wife,” said Blan-
querna. Great was the wonder of the shepherd at the words
of Blanquerna, and he thought that he had lost his senses
and that the wolf was his wife.

7- When Blanquerna saw that the memory of the shep-
herd was beginning to return and to act once more according
to its nature, and that his understanding had begun again
to do its work, Blanquerna led the shepherd back to the
place where his son lay dead, and took the child and began
to kiss and to embrace it, and to weep and lament accord-
ing as its father had done. Greatly did the shepherd marvel
at the lamentations of Blanquerna; and the greater was his
wonder, the more did his intelleét, which he had lost, return.
When the shepherd had recovered his wits, he went again
to the place and knew that it was the wolf that was slain,
and had joy because it was not his wife, and this joy in
some wise restrained and assuaged his sorrow. ‘Then he
came to Blanquerna, who was holding the body of his son
and weeping over it. ‘ Sir!’’ said the shepherd, “‘ Why
weepest thou for my son? Give his body to me again and
let me return to the tears that were mine.” Blanquerna
answered the shepherd and said: “‘ It is a custom of the
parts whence I come that a man takes a share in the lamen-
tations and the weeping of others; wherefore I will share
in thy weeping and lamentations, that thy bewailing of the
death of thy son may be great, and indeed it 1s very right
that thou shouldét lament greatly. And if thou desirest to
follow the custom of my country I will show thee an art
and method whereby thou mayest lament and weep for the
death of thy son, since thou art guilty of his death.” “ Sir!”
answered the shepherd. ‘‘ Thy words are agrceable to me,
and I pray thee to tell me the manner and the custom of
thy country, according to the which I may greatly weep
and lament while death yet suffers me to live, that I may

endure the more torment in my lifetime.”
ois

BLANQUERNA

8. Blanquerna answered the shepherd: ‘‘ Ere thou canst
know the manner wherein thou mayest fitly bewail thyself,
thou must needs have knowledge of charity, justice, pru-
dence, fortitude and hope, and thou must needs tell me the
truth concerning that which I shall ask thee.” “ Sir!”
said the shepherd, “ All things will I learn of thee and all
that thou askest of me will I tell thee, so that thou wilt but
show me the manner wherein I may have such sorrow and
grief as may slay me, over and above the despair that I must
needs have concerning my son.” Blanquerna conjured the
shepherd to tell him the truth: which had he loved the
more, whether God, or his son? The shepherd answered
and said that he had had more love to his son than to
God. Blanquerna said that it was defect of charity in a
man to love any thing more than God; and that justice is
that which punishes men that love God less than any thing
soever. ‘“‘ As thou hadst greater love to thy son than to
God,” said Blanquerna, “ therefore has justice punished
thee in the death of thy son, and the Wisdom of God wills
that henceforward thou love God above all things, that
prudence may be in thee, and thou mayest have fortitude
to aid thee against thy present wrath, and to mortify thy
mind, and have hope of seeing thy son, who is in the glory
of God.”

g. The shepherd began to remember and understand
the words which Blanquerna spake, and the more he con-
sidered them, even so the more did he feel relief from his
sadness, and considered how that he ought rather to in-
crease his grief. Wherefore he marvelled greatly, and spake
to Blanquerna these words: ‘‘ The more deeply I have
remembrance of thy words, the less do I feel in myself of
sadness and the more am I comforted. Where is the
sorrow that by thy words thou desirest to increase in me?”
Blanquerna answered and conjured the shepherd to tell him
the truth: before the death of his son, which did he love

the more, whether joy or sorrow? The shepherd answered
186

OF CONSOLATION

and said that he loved the rather joy. Then said Blan-
querna: “ If thou lovest sadness the rather, now that thy
son is dead, then is death the mistress of joy and of sadness,
according as thou lovest. Wherefore as death has been to
thee so cruel a foe, thou shouldst not give to it such great
dominion that it should make thee to desire sorrow more
than patience and joy; but it behoves thee to be the greater
enemy of death, now that it has robbed thee of thy son,
than thou wert aforetime when thy son yet lived.”

10. “ Blanquerna!” said the shepherd. ‘‘ How may I
be the enemy of death, who has slain my son and who
refuses to slay me?” Blanquerna answered: ‘‘ With
patience and consolation, by having joy in that which is
done by the justice of God, and gladness of heart whence
comes fortitude against sorrow. To have joy at possessing
prudence, and to consider the utility even of hurt received
as touching these earthly things, puts man in opposition
to bodily and spiritual death, and in accord with that
heavenly life which is everlasting even to the end of time.”

11. Long would it take to recount the words which
Blanquerna spake to the shepherd to console him; and by
the art and method which Blanquerna used did he draw
the shepherd from sadness and lead him to comfort and joy,
the which joy the shepherd had as he spake these words:
“‘ Glad is my soul henceforward in knowing its Creator and
in having the virtues which it was neither wont to have of
old nor was able to use. For my son has departed from
great peril, and is with his Lord in glory. May my will
be ever subject in obedience to the Will of my Lord God.”
When the shepherd had said these words, and many more,
he took the body of his son and kissed it and set it upon
his back, and blessed and praised God, saying that greater
was the profit that he had gained through the death of the
child, by using the virtues aforementioned, than was the
hurt which he had received thereby. Blanquerna and the
shepherd took courteous leave the one of the other, ~

107

BLANQUERNA

Blanquerna prayed the shepherd to have God ever in his
remembrance, and consolation and patience in his will, all
the days of his life. The shepherd promised that he would
have consolation and patience, but he was troubled as to
how he should comfort his wife for the death of her son
whom she loved above all things.

12, Blanquerna counselled the shepherd that he should
comfort his wife according to the same manner wherein he
had comforted him; and he told him to recount to his wife
the death of their son, recounting together therewith the
death of a brother of his wife, whom she greatly loved; and
that afterwards the brother should come to comfort his
sister, for in that he would yet be alive she would have as
great comfort as the shepherd himself had had when he
perceived that the wolf was not his wife.

CHAP hE

OF FORTITUDE

In the forest through the which Blanquerna journeyed was
a mighty castle, which belonged to a knight, who, by reason
of the strength of his own person and his skill in feats of
arms, was passing proud and did much harm to all those
that lived around him. It came to pass one day that the
knight, armed with his accustomed weapons and alone upon
his horse, attacked the castle of a lady who had a fair
daughter. It chanced that the knight found the damsel
without the gates of the castle, together with other damsels,
her friends, and he took her and placed her across the neck
of his horse in her own despite and in despite of her com-
panions, and escaped with her into a great forest. Loud
were the cries and many the attempts that were made to
take the damsel from the knight. As the knight bore her
away she wept and lamented bitterly, and a squire who

followed the knight challenged him and fought him, but
188

OF FORTITUDE

the knight wounded the squire, and threw him from his
horse, and slew it, and continued on his way with the
damsel towards his castle.

2. It came to pass by chance that as Blanquerna was
wandering here and there! through the forest, he came upon
this knight. The damsel wept and cried and begged Blan-
querna to aid her. But Blanquerna considered how that his
bodily strength was light in comparison with the Strength
of the knight, and therefore he bethought him how he
might aid the damsel with fortitude and charity which
are spiritual forces. So he narrated to the knight this
example? :

3. “It is said that once on a time a man right learned
in philosophy and theology and the other sciences was moved
by devotion to go to preach to the Saracens the truths
of the Holy Catholic Faith, that he might destroy the error
of the Saracens and that the name of God might be adored
and blessed as is done among us. This holy man went to
the land of the Saracens and preached and demonstrated the
truth of our law and overthrew the law of Mahomet in so
far as he was able. Throughout all that land there went
forth the fame of that which he did. So the Saracen king
commanded that holy Christian man to leave his country,
saying that if he left it not he would be delivered up to
death. The holy man obeyed not this bodily command-
ment, for charity and fortitude were in his mind, and made
him to despise the death of the body. Great was the wrath
of the king against him, and he made him to appear before
him and spake to him these words:

4. “‘* Oh, foolish Christian, that hast despised my com-
mandment and the strength of my dominion! Seest thou
not that I have power enough to cause thee to be tormented
and delivered up to death? Where is thy power through

1‘per un loc e per altre. “a
2 exempli: a short, frequently fable-like story used by moralists and
preachers to illustrate a precept.

189

BLANQUERNA

the which thou hast despised my strength and my
dominion’? ‘Sire!’ said the Christian: ‘ True it is that
thy bodily power can vanquish and overcome my body.
But the strength of my mind may in no wise be vanquished
by the strength of thine, nor by the strength which is in all
the minds of all the men in thy land. And since strength
of mind is nobler and greater than strength of body, there-
fore charity, which is in my mind, has such love for the
strength of my mind, that it makes me to despise all the
bodily strength that is in thy person and thy kingdom.
Wherefore the strength and charity of my mind are ready
to do battle with the powers of thy soul and with the souls
of all them that are beneath thy sway.’ ”

5. ‘Great marvel had the king at these words which
he heard, and he enquired of the Christian what was the
occasion in his mind whereby he set at defiance all the
Strength and all the charity which were in the souls of the
men of his country. ‘ Sire!’ said the Christian: ‘ So great
a thing is the Incarnation of the Son of God and the Passion
which He suffered to save us, and so strong is truth against
falsehood, that I have such charity and Strength in my mind
that in all thy land and among all the men that own thy
sway there is no charity or fortitude which can by any
arguments do battle with mine. And this is because ye are
in error, and have not devotion concerning the Incarnation
and Passion of our Lord God Jesus Christ.’ ”

6. “The Saracen king was greatly wroth against the
Christian, and he commanded throughout all his land that
the wisest men should come together, and they that had
most of charity, and that they should vanquish in the
Christian the virtue and charity of his mind, and afterward
that they should cause his body to die a shameful death.
So they all came together against the Christian, and he
vanquished and overcame them all with spiritual Strength
and with charity; and he said to the king that he would

do harm to their bodies if he parted them from their souls,
190

OF FORTITUDE

which had greater virtue in Strength and charity than all
the souls of his subjeéts, and that he would do injury to
the soul if he rewarded not its merits.”

7. When Blanquerna had related to the knight the
example aforesaid, he enquired of him after this wise. “ Sir
Knight!” said Blanquerna: ‘‘ Which, thinkegt thou, is
stronger and nobler in power, whether the Strength of mind
which overcame and vanquished so many other minds, or
the strength of body which was greater in the Saracen king
than in the Christian?”’ The knight answered and said
that strength of mind is the greatest strength that is in man.
“Sir Knight!” said Blanquerna: “ Even as that strength
is the greater and nobler, even so must it be the more
fervently loved by charity. Well dost thou see that the
strength of my body and the strength of the damsel whom
thou hast taken are as naught by comparison with thy horse
and thy arms and thy person; see therefore wherein there
is more strength, whether in thy mind, or in thy horse and
arms and person; for if thy mind be stronger against evil-
doing and wrong and lust than are thy person and thy arms
and thy horse, thou wilt return this damsel to that place
from the which thou hast taken her, and thy mind will no
longer be inclined to evil and wrong-doing. And as God
has given strength to thy body, thou wilt have through the
virtue of God strength and nobility of mind, through the
which thou wilt have charity towards all good deeds wherein
is loyalty and courtesy, humility and wisdom.”

8. For a great space of time did the knight consider the
words which Blanquerna spake, and he desired that no evil
teaching nor villainy should vanquish or overcome his mind,
wherewith he had many times vanquished and overcome
knights in many attacks and combats. Wherefore the
knight spake to Blanquerna these words: ‘‘ Never by any
man have I been vanquished or overcome. And, if I obeyed
not thy words, wickedness and villainy would overcome my
mind, which mind is by me very greatly to be loved, for

IgI

BLANQUERNA

by its Strength have I ever been victor over mine enemies.
My mind is not vanquished by thy words, but rather does
it vanquish and overcome in me the evil-doing and the
villainy which was therein. Thou seest here this damsel:
I pray thee, bear her to the castle of her mother. I have
mortally wounded a squire from that castle, and therefore
in good sooth I may not myself bear the damsel back within
its precinéts.”” And with these words the knight took leave
of the damsel and of Blanquerna with all courtesy.

CHAPTER LI

OF TEMPTATION

GreatLy was Blanquerna displeased because he had per-
force to leave his journey to accompany the damsel whom
the knight had commended to him; but charity and forti-
tude made him to go with the damsel towards the precinéts
of the castle. Now while Blanquerna journeyed with the
damsel, he felt within his mind temptation of carnal pleasure
by reason of the surpassing loveliness of the damsel and the
solitude wherein they were both together in the forest. But
as soon as Blanquerna felt temptation, he remembered the
means! whereby man mortifies all temptation,—to wit, God
and His Passion, and the glory of Heaven, and the pains
of Hell; and he fell to prayer, and begged the aid of the
seven virtues that were in his company, and remembered
the vileness and the abomination that is in the working
of lust, and desired to have the nobler working that is in
the virtues when they unite each with the others against
the vices.

2. Many times was Blanquerna tempted by lus, for so
long as he went with the damsel, and incontinently he gave
himself to prayer, as is related above, and mortified the
temptation. By the work of the evil spirit it came to pass

1 Lit. “ medicine.”
192

OF TEMPTATION

likewise that the damsel was tempted to sin with Blan-
querna, and she had not the means! of Blanquerna where-
with to fight temptation; wherefore she spake these words :
“ Fair sir! Tam in thy power, and thy words have delivered
me from the hands of the knight. No other reward can I
give thee beyond this, that thou mayest command my
person and do therewith all thy pleasure.”

3. Blanquerna felt within himself his temptation in-
creased through the words that the damsel spake, and he
turned again to remembrance of God and the virtues,
according to his custom. While Blanquerna considered
thus in fortitude and in nobility of mind, through the light
and inspiration of Divine wisdom, he remembered and
comprehended how that God forsook many sinners, that
they might be the occasion whereby just men should
increase their virtues; wherefore Blanquerna perceived
how that the damsel was forsaken by the grace of God,
that he himself might have greater occasion of virtue, and
be the stronger against temptation and lust, to the end that
by greater fortitude he might have greater merit. So Blan-
querna kneeled upon his knees, and adored and blessed God
Who gave him so many occasions whereby he could greatly
exalt His virtues. While Blanquerna adored and blessed
God, it came to his will by the Divine Virtue that he should
instruct the maiden as to how she should meet temptation
whensoever she should be tempted by lust or other sin.

4. “‘Damsel!” said Blanquerna. “It is the nature of
understanding to make that which is much remembered
greatly to be loved or hated; wherefore whensoever man
is tempted in any wise to sin, he must have much remem-
brance of the vileness and abomination of sin and the evils
which follow therefrom; for even as a man has the greater
remembrance after this manner, even so does the under-
Standing make the will to love the sin no longer. Another
manner is there of mortifying temptation, to wit, that a

1 Ibid.
N 193

BLANQUERNA

man should have remembrance of God, and of His good-
ness, greatness, power, wisdom, love, perfection, justice,
and of how He has had great love to man, and of how He
has prepared great glory for him, and of how noble a thing
it is to use faith, hope, charity, justice, prudence, fortitude
and temperance. The third manner is that a man should
forget the sin and all the circumstances of his temptation ;
for by his forgetting sin is the will mortified as to the love
thereof; wherefore he must have remembrance of other
things. After these three manners aforesaid may every
temptation be mortified.” The damsel took knowledge that
Blanquerna spake these words to her because he knew of
that concerning the which she was tempted, and she praised
and blessed God, because He had given such virtue to
Blanquerna against temptation; and whensoever there came
to her temptation concerning him, she used the doétrine
which he had given her; by the which dodtrine she mortified
the temptation and accustomed her soul to the use of the
virtues.

5. Long did Blanquerna and the damsel jourriey through
the forest, even until the damsel was wearied with walking,
and desired to rest beneath a tree, under the shade whereof
she fell asleep. While the damsel slept, Blanquerna re-
mained in prayer, and contemplated the Divine blessing.
Now, as Blanquerna was at prayer, he heard a voice that
lamented and wept and gave signs of great distress and
sorrow. Blanquerna went towards the direction whence
that voice came and found the squire who had been
wounded by the knight, the which squire was returning in
great distress,

6. “ Fair friend!’ said Blanquerna, ‘‘ What aileth
thee? And what needest thou to repair the injury that
has been done to thee that thou mayest have consolation ? ”
“ Sirl’’ said the squire, ‘‘ Distressed am I and angered
because I cannot fulfil the errand on the which I have been
sent.” ‘The squire recounted to Blanquerna how he had
194

wi

OF TEMPTATION

followed the knight that he might take the damsel from
him, and how the knight had wounded him and borne away
the damsel. ‘“‘ Fair friend!” said Blanquerna, “ Reason
counsels thee to take comfort, since thou hagt done all that
was within thy power; for even so much thank oughtest
thou to receive as though thou hadst recovered the damsel.”
“ Sir!” answered the squire, “ It is of the nature of charity
that no man should take comfort for doing that which was
within his power, if he brings not to fulfilment the thing
which he desires; and because I desire to serve the lady
who has bred me, and through my fault my desire has not
been brought to fulfilment, therefore in her distress it is

' fitting that I have distress, albeit I have done that which
was within my power.”

7. Deeply did Blanquerna consider the words of the
squire, the which words signified great perfeCtion of charity
and fortitude, and as he considered, even so did he re-
member how through defect of charity certain men who
desired to give example of the Catholic Faith held them-
selves excused, insomuch as they did that which was within
their power and could not bring to fulfilment that thing
which they so greatly desired; through the which defeét
of fulfilment they should the rather be in distress for the
dishonour which God has of those that know Him not and
of those that honour Him not according as they know Him.
While Blanquerna was considering thus, he said to the
youth: “‘ Fairfriend! See thou there, beneath yonder tree,
the damsel whom thou seekest; and since thou hast perfect
charity, God wills that that which is in thy mind be brought
to pass, and that thou have the merit concerning that thing
for the which thou hast laboured.” Then the squire drew
near to the tree, and beheld the damsel sleeping, the which
damsel awakened and returned with the squire to the castle
and they both took leave very courteously of Blanquerna.

8. Blanquerna set forth once more upon his journey,
and, as he journeyed, he considered with much searching

195

BLANQUERNA

of heart how he might find a place wherein to serve God as
he desired. For two days Blanquerna went through the
forest without finding aught that he might eat. On the
third day he was in great distress by reason of his hunger;
and the greater was the distress of his hunger, the greater
was his hope and trust in God, that He would fortify him
against hunger and temptation, whereby the demon might
cause him else to sin against hope and patience, by means
of impatience and despair. While Blanquerna with the
help of the virtues Strove thus with all his might against
temptation and hunger, Prudence came to the aid of her
servant, and enlightened the eyes of his mind; so that he
considered how great affection and exaltation in prayer
fortify the body through the influence of devotion. As
Blanquerna considered thus, he endeavoured with all his
powers to pray and to contemplate God and to use his
virtues that he might have fruition of God!; and by the
virtue of God and the nature of the understanding which
should comprehend God and the will which should love
Him, the eyes of Blanquerna were in tears and his heart
was in charity and devotion; and so highly was Blanquerna
enraptured? in his prayer, that he felt neither hunger nor
thirst nor suffering, but his body was in great bliss, taking
virtue and strength from his prayer. In such wise did
Blanquerna adore God, and journey through the forest,
neither eating nor drinking; and whensoever he felt hunger,
even then adored he God according as is written above, and
God sent him virtue and strength whereby his soul con-
tinually had devotion, and his body was strengthened and
sustained.

* en fruir Deu. 2 tan altament fo rabit.
° ‘This passage constitutes one of the few clear references to supernatural
prayer in Blangquerna.

196

OF PENITENCE

CHAPTER Lil
OF PENITENCE

Bianguerna journeyed through the forest remembering
and loving his Creator and his God, singing: Gloria in
Excelsis Deo. While he journeyed thus, he lighted upon a
road along the which he went until the hour of none, when
he met a squire coming from another direétion, weeping
sorely and giving signs in his countenance of great sadness.
Blanquerna enquired of him wherefore he was weeping.
The squire answered: ‘‘ Sir! I weep because my master,
Narpan by name, whom I served, has withheld from me
my wages, and I have left him because I cannot serve him
as he desires, for so evil and unruly is he in his customs
that no man can suffer his wicked life.”

2. “ Fair friend!” said Blanquerna: “‘ Where is this
Sir Narpan of whom thou speakest?”’ “ Sir!” answered
the squire: “‘ He is near to this place, in an abbey. In that
house he has made his dwelling, for he went there to do
penance; but the penance wherein he lives is like to the
penance of the wolf.” Blanquerna asked the squire what was
the penance of the wolf. “ Sir!” said the squire: “ It came
to pass once on a time that the wolf entered a yard wherein
were many sheep which he killed and devoured. On the
next morning, when the master of the sheep entered the
yard and found that they were dead, he was very wroth
against the shepherd, who had not watched the yard that
night, and he killed the shepherd; and when he had killed
him he bewailed the death of the shepherd and of the sheep.
The wolf, who had beheld the shepherd slain, and heard
the grief of the farmer, had contrition of heart and said that
it beseemed him to do penance for the harm which he had
done to the farmer and because he had been the occasion
of the death of the shepherd. Now there was a vineyard
near by wherein were many bunches of ripe grapes, which

197

BLANQUERNA

belonged to the farmer whose sheep he had killed; so he
went there to do penance by eating the grapes daily accord-
ing to his desire. And in like manner the master whom
for long I have served does his penance; for in the world
he has been a sinner, and has killed many men and com-
mitted many sins, and he has come to this monastery where
he eats and drinks and lies slothfully in bed according to
his desire, and dwells in great comfort, so that from his life
all the monks of that house have bad example and many
of them also have envy of him.”

3. “ Friend!” said Blanquerna, ‘‘ Thinkest thou that if
I went to the monastery and dwelt for a space with Narpan
I could convert him to a righteous life?” The squire
answered: “‘ If thou shouldst go to him he would take and
do to thee even as was done to the parrot.”” Blanquerna
besought him to tell him the story of the parrot. “ Sir!”
said the squire, “ It came to pass in a certain country that
two monkeys placed wood upon a glow-worm, thinking
that it was a fire, and they blew upon the wood that the
fire might kindle. A parrot was in a tree and he said to
the monkeys that that which glowed was not a fire but a
glow-worm; but they would not listen to his words. A
crow said to the parrot that it was foolish to attempt the
correction of those who would not receive teaching. But
the parrot came down from the tree and placed himself
between the monkeys, to the end that they should hear
him, so one of them took the parrot and killed him. Even
so wilt thou fare if thou seek to correé one that will not
receive correction; and by his secret vices wilt thou too be
corrupted against such good habits as thou hast.”

4. Blanquerna said: “I put my trust in the counsel
which the fox gave to the boar.” The squire begged Blan-
querna to relate to him that story. Blanquerna said: “ A
fox was journeying through a forest and he found a boar
who was awaiting a lion with whom he had a mind to do

battle. The fox enquired of the boar for whom he was
198

OF PENITENCE

waiting, and the boar related to him that which was in his
mind. The fox told the boar, who had only two teeth
wherewith to fight the lion, that the lion had many teeth
and claws to use against him; and therefore it seemed
to him that the lion would have the better of the battle.
The lion came and fought with the boar, whom he killed
and devoured, because he had superiority of weapons. And
in like manner have I superiority of weapons against Narpan,
for I shall fight him with the aid of the Divine virtues and
of the virtues created, while he will have nought but vices
wherewith to fight against me, the which vices have no
power against God and His virtues.”

5. When the squire had heard this example, he left
Blanquerna and went upon his way. Blanquerna con-
sidered the peril which might befall the monastery through
the evil life of Narpan, who was feigning penitence therein;
and charity and hope made him go to the monastery, where
he found Narpan, of whom the squire had spoken to
him. “Friend!” said Narpan, ‘Whence comest thou?
Wouldst thou be for a year or more in the service of a
master?’’ “Sir!” said Blanquerna, “1 come from this
forest, and I go in search of a sufficient livelihood, and I
would fain serve a master with whom I can better my
fortune, and who may have of me some advantage also.
Wherefore, since thou hast enquired concerning my estate,
I pray thee to tell me also of the estate wherein thou
dwelles&t in this monastery.”

6. Narpan answered Blanquerna: “I am in this mon-
agtery to do penance for the sins which I have committed
in the world, from the which I have fled. My squire has
left me, and for this reason J have need of another. Where-
fore if thou wouldst live with me I will requite thy work in
such wise that thou shalt be well recompensed for it.”
“ Sir!” said Blanquerna, “If thou dost penance, and I
serve thee, it follows that I also do penance; wherefore I
will abide with thee for the space of a year in this form and

199

BLANQUERNA

condition, that thou shalt likewise do penance.” Narpan
and Blanquerna agreed concerning their undertakings, and
Blanquerna served Narpan for eight days according to his
will, to the end that Narpan might be moved in his mind
to love him and give the better credence to his words, and
also that he himself might be the better acquainted with his
customs.

7. On the eighth day Narpan commanded Blanquerna
to kill a goose from among those which he had in the
pasture, and prepare it for dinner. Blanquerna entered the
place wherein were the geese, together with a great multi-
tude of hens and capons, and he found a fox which had
entered therein. Blanquerna killed the fox and skinned it
wholly, excepting only the tail, and set it to roast; and
when Narpan came to table Blanquerna set the fox upon a
dish before him. Greatly did Narpan marvel, and he en-
quired of Blanquerna wherefore he had brought the fox and
not the goose, for the fox was horrible both to eat and to
behold. ‘“‘ Sir!” said Blanquerna, ‘‘ Geese and hens have
no enemy as mortal as is the fox; and since thou lovest
geese and hens it is fitting that thou shouldst eat their
enemy.” Greatly was Narpan displeased with Blanquerna,
and he said to him many evil things, because he had coun-
selled him that he should eat the fox, and had not made
ready the goose. “Sir!” said Blanquerna, “ Even as
foxes are opposed to geese and hens, even so are geese and
hens and capons and dainty dishes opposed to penance;
and as I am bound to thee, to serve thee according to the
forms of penance, thou wilt be doing penance if thou dos
eat the fox rather than the delightful and delicate meats
that thou desirest.”

8. All that day Narpan spent without eating flesh, and
was greatly wroth with Blanquerna. At night, when he
desired to enter his bed, Blanquerna had placed the pillow
beneath the mattress, and the mattress beneath the &raw

pallet, and the blankets were beneath the sheets and the
200

OF PENITENCE

counterpane.1 Narpan enquired of Blanquerna wherefore
he had not made the bed according to his wonted fashion.
Blanquerna answered that that bed was made according to
the work of penance, and that in no other wise could a bed
of penance be made. But Narpan was a slothful man, and
desired not that the bed should be made after this fashion.
When he waited for Blanquerna to kneel and take off his
shoes, according as he was wont, Blanquerna said to him
that humility was a friend of all those that did penance. On
that night Narpan lay in the bed which Blanquerna had
made after his own fashion, and he could not sleep, and
he thought for a great space upon the sins which he had
committed in the world, and upon the words which Blan-
querna had spoken.

9g. At midnight, when the monks rose for matins, and
Blanquerna heard the bell, he cried out to Narpan that he
should rise for prayer, for the hour of prayer had come.
Narpan answered him that he was not wont to rise at such
an hour, but Blanquerna desired that he should rise at all
hazards, so he took the sheets from him, and gave him first
of all a scapulary of rough and coarse cloth, which Narpan
was wont to wear above his under garment. Narpan
obeyed Blanquerna, since he had spent the night with his
thoughts, and contrition had begun to enter his mind. He
clothed himself in this garment, which was of goatskin, and
afterwards Blanquerna give him a skirt, which was of white
Narbonne cloth, and then he gave him a tunic which was
_ of a fine linen cloth and clothed him with it above the
skirt.

10. When Narpan had risen and clothed himself, Blan-
querna went with him to the chapel to be in contemplation
and prayer. But Narpan said to Blanquerna that he had
great shame that the Abbot and the monks should see him
thus clothed. Blanquerna answered that shame and virtue

1 i.e, to give a superficial appearance of comfort to a bed which was

uncomfortable in reality.
201

BLANQUERNA

accorded well with penitence, and that God had blessed
those that had patience and humility whensoever they were
scorned and reproved for doing works of penitence.

11. Narpan and Blanquerna remained in the chapel till
it was day and the monks were ready to enter the chapter.
After satisfaétion had been made, and discipline was ended,
they said Mass, which is said the more worthily when
satisfaction has been made in chapter. When the monks
entered the chapter and the Lord Abbot enquired of Narpan
wherefore he went so strangely clothed and rose so early,
Narpan answered that his squire had clothed him thus and
had wakened him, and that from thenceforward he desired
to be obedient to Blanquerna in all that he counselled him.
Blanquerna said to the Abbot that he desired to repeat in
chapter certain words of Narpan in the presence of the
whole community. So the Abbot and Narpan and Blan-
querna entered the chapter, and all the monks marvelled
at the garments which Narpan wore.

12. When all were in chapter, Blanquerna-rose and
spake these words: ‘‘ Three things agree with penance:
contrition of heart, confession with the mouth, and satis-
faction for the sins which a man has committed. In con-
trition it is seemly to weep and repent, and to remember
and grieve for the sins which a man has committed, and to
trust in the mercy of God, and to fear and love His justice.
In confession it is seemly that a man should confess his sins
and desire nevermore to return to them. In satisfa@tion it
is seemly that a man return that which he has wrongfully
held, that he afflict his body with vigils and prayers, coarse
meats, a hard bed, rough garments of humility, and other
things like unto these. Wherefore, since these three things
aforesaid accord with penitence, and there is a bond and
agreement between Narpan and me that I serve him accord-
ing to penitence, therefore, in presence of all, I demand of
Narpan that the relationship which is between us be
preserved,”

202

OF PENITENCE

13. When Blanquerna had ended his words, Narpan
said, in the presence of all, that he had been for long ina
state of blindness, being ignorant of the conditions which
accord with penitence, and that God had sent to him Blan-
querna who had enlightened the eyes of his soul, and that,
from that time forward, for all the days of his life, he
desired to serve God and to do penance in every manner
which should be pleasing and agreeable to Blanquerna.
The Abbot and all the monks praised and blessed God,
Who had thus shown forth His virtue in the words of
Narpan and Blanquerna.

14. Narpan and Blanquerna went apart from the rest
into the chamber of Narpan. Blanquerna was not unmind-
ful of his journey, and he desired to continue his search for
a hermitage; and therefore he spake to Narpan concerning
that which was in his mind, and prayed him that he would
free him from the promise by the which he had bound
himself to serve him for the space of a year; and that, since
Narpan had recognised his sins, he would return to him his
bond and loose him from his covenant. Right displeased
was Narpan when he heard that Blanquerna desired to leave
him, and with devotion and contrition of heart he answered
Blanquerna, weeping, saying these words:

15. “Enlightened am I by Divine inspiration, and moved
to devotion by contrition, confession and satisfaction. If
my evil customs seek to reclaim me, who will help me?
If I remain without a master, who will bring me up to love,
serve and honour God, Who is worthy of such great honour
and before Whom I have so greatly sinned? I beg of
Justice that the agreement that is between us, and the
promise which thou hast made me, be kept. If I obey my
master, why will my master become an enemy to me in
leaving me? I desire to be the companion and servant of
Blanquerna, and not his master according to our agreement.
With my lord and master Blanquerna I would fain go to
his hermitage; but I must needs remain in this monastery

203

BLANQUERNA

to make satisfa@tion to the Lord Abbot and all the monks
who for so long have served me. I must needs give a good
example, that in my amendment of life the monastery may
have some profit.”

16. So devout and full of reason were the words of
Narpan, and with such piety were they uttered, that Blan-
querna was moved thereby to devotion and tears, and there
came to him thoughts of contrition; and he considered
how he might remain all that year with Narpan to keep
him in his worthy estate of life, that both of them together
might give good example to all the monks of that com-
munity. So on that day Blanquerna confirmed to Narpan
the promise which he had made to him, and both of them
made undertaking to wear hair cloth next to the skin and
to remain as companions for the whole year in that mon-
astery, giving glory and praise to God and doing penance.
Great was the joy of Narpan and of the Abbot and of all
the monks, when Blanquerna repented him of the intention
which he had had to depart from them.

CHAPTER Eri
OF PERSEVERANCE

Aut that year Blanquerna and Narpan continued to live
together doing penance; and Blanquerna sang with the
monks in the chapel antiphons, proses, hymns and responses,
and he expounded to the monks the Scriptures. The Abbot
and all the community desired greatly that Blanquerna
should become one of them and teach them grammar and
theology and the other sciences which he knew, but Blan-
querna excused himself from being a monk because he
desired to continue in his former will to lead the life of a
hermit.

2. Upon a feast day it came to pass that the Abbot
desired to preach; but he feared to preach because he knew
204

OF PERSEVERANCE

not Latin nor was skilled in expounding the Scriptures,
and he had shame concerning Blanquerna, knowing that
he would take cognisance of all the errors in his speech.
Now the Abbot and all the monks were in chapter, and
Blanquerna and Narpan entered the chapter to hear the
Abbot who was to preach. But before the Abbot could
begin, the steward came into the chapter and told the Abbot
that a great company of knights and other men had come
to honour the festival and that they purposed to dine that
day in the monastery. The Abbot commanded that a right
worthy feast should be prepared for them, and that to their
beasts should be given oats and all things whereof they had
need, for such was the custom of that monastery. When
the Abbot had said these words, he spake to Blanquerna
as follows: ‘‘ It had been in my mind to preach, but be-
cause of my ignorance I find that I myself am not prepared
to preach according to the honour of the saint whose festival
to-day we celebrate. Therefore I could greatly wish that
thou, Blanquerna, wert a monk and might preach to us,
and to all those that come to this monastery on days of
festival; for if it be our custom to satisfy their bodies with
meat by way of alms, we do harm to their souls if we satisfy
them not with spiritual meat by sermons and by the word
of God.”

3. Blanquerna answered the Abbot, saying: “ Per-
severance is a virtue wherein is demonstrated the perfection
of the other virtues, for without perfection of virtues
perseverance can be no virtue. And inasmuch as I have
bound myself to continue to be a servant of the virtues,
therefore it behoves me to serve perseverance wherein
the virtues show forth their works. If then I were to
leave the purpose for the which I have forsaken my
home, and to take another purpose, I should do injury
to charity, fortitude and the other virtues; wherefore I
pray the Lord Abbot and all the community to hold me

excused.”
205

BLANQUERNA

4. “ Blanquerna!” said the Abbot, “ It came to pass
once upon a time that a hermit entered a city. The king
of that city was dead, and the custom was that the first
Stranger to enter therein on the third day after the death
of the king should be made king in his stead. By the
ordinance of God it came to pass that the hermit entered
the city and was made king; but the hermit disputed the
election because he desired to continue in his former life.
And there was argument between the electors who had
chosen him for king as to whether he could continue in
the devotion which was his wont. And the electors gave
judgment and sentence among themselves, saying that the
hermit could more readily be excused in intention and in
will from the office of king than he could live apart from
people in rustic spots where he led the life of a hermit, and
that in the office of kingship he could the better use forti-
tude, hope, justice and the other virtues, and hence would
be the better servant of perseverance. Wherefore in like
manner our judgment is that thou shouldst remain and
continue with us who are hermits and would fain be thy
companions.”

5. Blanquerna answered and spake these words: “‘ Ye
may remember, sirs, how Saint John Baptist was a hermit,
and dwelt alone in the forest, eating locusts and wild honey,
and was clothed in the skin of camels; and Jesus Christ
said that there was not born of woman a greater man than
Saint John Baptist. Because Saint John Baptist remained
alone in his hermitage and afflicted himself greatly, there-
fore God honoured him in His glory according to the word
which He spake concerning him.”

6. When Blanquerna had said these words, the Prior
said to Blanquerna that Jesus Christ, Who is a greater Man
than Saint John, went about and remained ever in company
with the Apostles, signifying thus that perseverance in
company with men when they are together is the nobler

virtue, and that perseverance perishes not through the
206

OF OBEDIENCE

company of other men, for it is not like to perseverance in
a man that dwells alone. And therefore, he said, according
to justice and hope, it behoved Blanquerna to obey and fulfil
the prayers of the Abbot and of the whole community.

CHAPTER LIV

OF OBEDIENCE

Tue Cellarer! said to Blanquerna that in all the world there
was no virtue of greater merit than obedience. Wherefore,
since obedience is stronger in a man who is in submission
to another, than in a man who lives alone in his hermitage,
Blanquerna would be acting contrariwise to obedience if he
forsook it in that wherein it has the greater virtue and is
the better pleasing to God.

2. Blanquerna answered: ‘‘ Once on a time it came to
pass that a blind man had a son who led him from door to
door begging alms for the love of God. The son of this
blind man had a dog. The child died, and the blind man
took the dog which led him from door to door, according
as the child had been wont to do. Now it chanced one day
that the blind man left one city to journey towards another.
On the road there ran past a hare, and the dog desired to
drive away the hare from the road, and the blind man
followed the dog. The dog went in pursuit of the hare,
and came to a great bank, and desired to go down the bank
after the hare, which had gone down the side of the bank.
The blind man followed the dog, and fell down the bank,
and brake his leg, and spake these words:

3. “‘ ‘ Great is the favour which God gives to man when
He grants him bodily sight, whereby the eyes of his under-

1 ‘The office of the ce//arer in Lull’s country was more comprehensive,
as the narrative will show, than his title implies. He was bursar and overseer
of the monastery, and frequently took a large share of responsibility for its

administration. We learn, however, from p. 223 that this monastery had

also a fresorer.
207

BLANQUERNA
Standing may obey that which is demonstrated by bodily

sight in creatures that can see, to wit, the nobility of the
Creator; but greater is the favour which God gives to the
will, which obeys the eyes of understanding, comprehend-
ing thereby those things which the will is the more bound
to obey; for a will obedient to him that has no under-
Standing is like to one in my present state; and if under-
Standing were obedient to will, the intelleét would not be
so greatly honoured if will were not the more bound to
obey it.’ ”’

4. When Blanquerna had said these words, and many
more, the Sacrigstan answered: ‘‘ Well do we know and
understand the similitude according to the which thou
speakest, signifying that the will is in peril when it obeys
understanding wherein is defect of comprehension. Where-
fore, according to thine own words, we would have charity
and justice to give judgment.” While the Sacristan spake
these words, a messenger came to him, to bid him go toa
lay brother who was sick unto death, to bear to him the
Viaticum. So the Sacrigtan and all the rest followed the
Body of Jesus Christ, and strengthened therewith the sick
brother. When the Sacristan said to the sick man that he
should believe that Host to be the Body of Jesus Christ,
the sick man answered and said that he believed not that
Host which he saw beneath the form of bread to be the
Flesh of Jesus Christ.

5. Great was the grief of the Abbot and all the rest when
they saw that the brother believed not and was in error;
and they called Blanquerna and begged him to answer the
sick man and to deliver him from his error. So Blanquerna
asked the sick man if the human understanding is nobler
in virtue than are the eyes of the body. The sick man
granted to Blanquerna that there was more nobility in the
understanding and intelle€t than in the eyes of the body
and in sight. Blanquerna said to the sick man that since

intellect was a nobler thing than bodily sight, it behoved
208

OF OBEDIENCE

man to be obedient to intelleé&t rather than to bodily sight
that man might render to intelle€t its due honour; the
which intelleét understands in the Host the working of a
miracle through the Divine power, even as it understands
the world to have been created from nothing.

6. “ By nature, beneath the form of man, are the four
elements, the which are invisible to the eyes of the body,
which see naught else save only the form of the man wherein
they are compounded; and the first form is in the second
as it were secretly. Wherefore since nature is sufficient
for that work, how much more are the power, the wisdom
and the will of God sufficient to make Flesh to be beneath
the form of bread! And were it not thus, God would not
have demonstrated His power to be above the power of
nature.” ‘These words and many more spake Blanquerna
to the sick man, who received the Body of Jesus Christ as
a faithful Christian, praising, blessing and adoring God, for
that He had brought him out of the error in the which he
had lived. ‘The sick man died and God received his soul;
and the Abbot and the monks returned to the conversation
in the which they had been with Blanquerna.

7. “ Blanquerna!” said the Abbot, “‘ This thing which
has happened is to thee an example,! signifying that God
desires thee to be His servant and company with us; for,
hadst thou not been with us, that soul which to-day has
passed from this world had been lost to God, and from his
damnation we should have taken cognisance of the ignor-
ance which is in us, forasmuch as we could not have said
to this dead man the words which thou hast spoken to him.
Many times has it come to pass that God has sent to us
like incidents whereby we may perceive His will. Not only
hast thou advantaged the soul of this dead man, but to all
of us hast thou given instruction wherewith we may fight
temptation if we meet it in like manner.”

1 In the sense of exemp/i or exemplary story, commented upon above

(p. 189).
fo) 209

BLANQUERNA

8. Blanquerna answered: ‘‘ There is one manner more
wherein he who has temptation concerning the Body of
Jesus Christ may be turned from his error, to wit, by faith ;
for God desires that man should be obedient to faith, morti-
fying the imagination when it seeks to offer to the under-
standing false similitude against the operation of the Divine
power, and this manner may ye yourselves employ, albeit
ye have ignorance through defect of science.” The Abbot
answered Blanquerna: “A stronger and surer thing is it
to combat error with intelle@t and with faith than with faith
alone; and therefore justice accuses thy? conscience that
it is opposed to thy words, the which excuse thee from
companying with us.”

CHAPTER LV
OF COUNSEL

BLANQUERNA considered deeply the words which had been
spoken to him and that which had come to pass concerning
the temptation of the brother that was dead. While Blan-
querna considered on this wise the Abbot and all the monks
prayed that he would become one of them. Narpan also,
weeping, spake to Blanquerna these words: ‘‘ Beloved
friend Blanquerna! Whereof dost thou think, and where-
fore obeyest thou not the prayers of the Lord Abbot and
of all this community, and, above all, thine own under-
Standing, which will make thee to have remorse if thou
give not to these servants of God intelligence whereby they
may have of Him better knowledge. For the higher rises
the understanding to have knowledge of God, the more
truly is the will prepared to rise to an exceeding great love
of God and of His servants. Wherefore, if thou wilt devote
thyself to the service of this monastery, I will devote myself
to thee, and will be thy companion and servant, and thou
wilt bring profit to thyself and to all the rest; but if thou
Ye OU
210

OF COUNSEL

livest alone in a hermitage, to thyself alone will be the
profit.”

2. Blanquerna answered him: ‘“‘ Wrong would be done
to a contemplative man, who remains in solitude for the
love of God, if his prayers profited not others but himself
only. Wherefore have I fallen to considering this thing
after another manner, to wit, through the remembrance of
my mind that diverse wills are like unto sheep and must
be subject to the enlightened and exalted understanding
which is as their pastor; and this knowledge makes me to
think upon devotion,! and consider the harm which those
disciples of Understanding had because they had no de-
votion.” Thus did Blanquerna speak to the Lord Abbot
and to all the community, and he said that in all things a
man should take deliberation and counsel, ere he should
pass from one purpose to another, and that he himself
should take counsel with the seven virtues, who many times
had counselled him well. The Abbot and all the monks
prayed to God that, in the counsel and agreement that
Blanquerna had resolved to take, their rights and their
needs might both be had in remembrance.

3. All that day and all that night were the thoughts of
Blanquerna fixed upon other things, for man should ever
think upon certain other things for a space before he takes
with himself counsel; for the understanding begins to
return to its power again concerning that which a man
proposes to it, and hence the understanding comprehends
it the more clearly having come to the matter twice. On
the day following, after Mass, Blanquerna betook himself
to prayer; and, when his prayer was ended, he gave him-
self to thought, and had remembrance of each of the virtues
one by one, and remained in that thought until the hour of
none. After dinner Blanquerna went to the garden for
recreation to divert his mind, and after this recreation he
slept, that his meat might be the better digested, and that

1 Lit. /o capitol de devocié. "The reference is to Chap. XLV above.
211

BLANQUERNA

that night he might the better keep vigil to consider these
matters. At vesper time he desired not to keep vigil, and
he slept, that in the morning he might return yet again to
his thought, and this the more especially since in the morn-
ing hours the imagination has greatest agreement with the
understanding.

4. At the hour of matins, Blanquerna rose, and went
into the garden to gaze upon the heavens and the Stars,
that he might have the greater devotion, and he knelt upon
the ground and made the sign of the Cross, and lifted up
his hands and his eyes to the heavens with affection of will,
and prayed to God that it might please Him to remember
His servant and to enlighten him concerning those aCtions
which were the most pleasing to Him. And by the will of
God it came to pass that Blanquerna resolved to become a
monk, because he reflected that he could do greater service
to God in the monastery than in the hermitage. And Blan-
querna was strengthened in his purpose, and remembered
that whensoever he had considered that matter he had con-
ceived this same resolve, and that none of the virtues had
opposed themselves to it; and Hope gave him consolation
and trust that the time would come in the which he should
be a hermit and live the life he so greatly desired; and
Prudence demonstrated to him that the life which he would
lead in the monastery would by its nature give him increase
of holiness in his life as a hermit.

5. When Blanquerna had ended his devotions he went
to the chapter-house, wherein he found the Lord Abbot and
all the monks who were speaking with Narpan concerning
the holy life of Blanquerna. Blanquerna knelt to the Abbot
and the monks, and made his submission to the Order, and
to all its commandments, without exception soever. Great
was the joy of the Abbot and of all the rest; and Blanquerna
and Narpan received the habit and the benedi@tion of the
Abbot with great honour, and made the vows which pertain
to that Order.

210)

OF THE ORDERING OF STUDIES

CHAETER LVI

OF THE ORDERING OF STUDIES

Tue Abbot and all the monks went to the chapter with
Blanquerna to make ordinances concerning studies, It was
ordained by them all that they should set aside a part of
the monastery as a school and place of Study, that there
might be therein a place convenient for &udy. When they
had ordained a place apart they made ordinance concerning
times, for without ordinance of time no study can be profit-
able. After the ordinance of time they ordained certain
persons who should teach, having regard to age and will
and natural understanding and good breeding. After all
this they made ordinance concerning the sciences, as to
which should be those that they should Study. Now as they
were occupied in making these ordinances concerning the
sciences, a man brought into the chapter a letter from two
monks who demanded money for their expenses, and to
buy books of law. This letter the Abbot read in the
presence of all the chapter. The Abbot related to Blan-
querna how that they had two monks in Montpellier
Studying law, that they might be able to assist them in
their temporal business. As the Abbot related these things,
a squire appeared before him, saying that in a farm belong-
ing to that monastery a lay brother was gravely ill, and
begging them to send a physician who should attend to
him. The Abbot sent to the city for a physician, who
would not go without great recompense, nor would he
remain with the sick brother for more than one day. So
the brother died, for need of a physician who should visit
him continually. And the Abbot and all the rest were
remorseful because of his death.

2. According as fortune ordained, a Bishop came to that
monastery while the Abbot was in the chapter with all the
monks. The Bishop entered the chapter, and the Abbot

213

BLANQUERNA

and all the monks received him with great honour. The
Bishop was a notable clerk, and learned in many sciences,
and he made many queégtions and disputes concerning
various sciences; and in that monastery was no man who
could reply to the questions which the Bishop made, save
Blanquerna alone; who resolved and expounded all the
matters concerning which the Bishop made question. All
that day was spent by the Abbot and the monks in company
with the Bishop. And on the morning following, after
Mass, the Abbot and the monks returned to the chapter
to make ordinance concerning the sciences which Blan-
querna was to teach.

3. “ Blanquerna!” said the Abbot. “ Which sciences
seems it to thee that thou shouldst expound?” ‘“ My
lord!’’ answered Blanquerna, “ Once on a time it came
to pass that a man was mortally wounded. This man had
a wound in his face. The physician gave heed first of all
to that wound which first of all he saw, but the wounded
man had also a mortal wound in the belly, through the
which he lost so much blood while the physician tended
the wound in his face that from the worser wound he died.
On another occasion it came to pass that a fox enquired of
an eagle wherefore she had wings and feathers and beak
and claws. The eagle answered the fox, and showed her
the reasons for the which Nature had given her all these
things, which were needful to her. By these similitudes
and by many like unto them mayest thou learn which of
the sciences is the most needful of all, and which are the
sciences that thy monks ought to learn.”

4. The Abbot and all the monks begged of Blanquerna
that he would expound to them the words which he spake
by similitudes. Blanquerna expounded the example ofrthe
wounded man by another example, saying, “ Once on a
time it came to pass that an abbot sent a monk to the
schools. This monk when he left the monastery was full of
good customs, But when he went to the schools and
214

OF THE ORDERING OF STUDIES

companied with worldly men, he learned the customs of
these men and forgot his own. When the monk returned
to the monastery he was full of vice, and though he ex-
pounded science by doétrine, by his works he expounded
vice. And by his vices he corrupted all the monks and led
them into evil customs; so that they used in an evil manner
the science which they learned.” After Blanquerna had
expounded the first of these examples, he expounded also
the second by another example, saying that “once ona time
it came to pass that a nightingale was in a tree which had
many leaves and flowers. That nightingale enquired of the
tree wherefore it had so many flowers and leaves, The tree
replied that Nature had ordained that it should bear flowers
and leaves that it might afterwards bear fruit. According
to these words is it signified that, having regard to the end
for the which we are in this place and have left the world,
it behoves us to study many sciences, that we may learn
the science of theology, which is the end and the comple-
ment of all other sciences.”

5. When Blanquerna had expounded the examples afore-
said, the monks ordained that in the first place he should
teach grammar, for the better understanding of the other
sciences; that afterwards he should teach logic, for the
learning and understanding of nature; and philosophy,
that they might better understand theology; and that when
they had learned theology he should expound medicine,
and afterwards the science of law. While this ordinance
was in the making, a monk made objection that it was a
thing impossible for the disciples to learn all these sciences ;
but Blanquerna answered and said that they might learn a
convenient quantity concerning each science; and that, at
the end, they might learn in one year the beginnings and
the art of the four general sciences which are the most
necessary, to wit, theology and natural science and medicine
and law, and by these beginnings, set forth according to
art, they might use the sciences according to their needs;

215

BLANQUERNA

for by means of elementary knowledge, ordained and set
forth by art, man may make use of the elements of other
knowledge.

CHAPTER EV

OF VAINGLORY

BLanquerna expounded the sciences and the art thereof
according to the order aforesaid. In the chamber of the
Abbot one day were the Abbot and the Prior and the
Cellarer, and they spake of Blanquerna and his disciples.
The Cellarer said to the Abbot and the Prior that he feared
that the time would come in the which they would be
despised by the disciples of Blanquerna, forasmuch as
science is an occasion of vainglory and pride, whereby they
that have not science are despised. And therefore the
Cellarer counselled the Abbot and the Prior that they should
abolish these studies, the more so by reason of the great
si to which the studies led.

2. Long did the Abbot and the Prior consider aife words
of tiie Cellarer. Now the Abbot was a right devout and
holy man; and, albeit he had no great learning, he had
much natural sense mingled with devotion. Therefore
spake he to the Cellarer these words: “‘ In natural science
there is a book which treats of moral virtues, and Blan-
querna expounds under the head of theology the three
theological virtues. Wherefore these virtues will be reason
and doétrine to the disciples whereby they may have
humility and justice, and may do honour to us who en-
deavour to provide and procure for them learning. And
therefore I have trust that neither vainglory nor pride will
incline their minds, as concerning us, to aught that may
be wrong or evil.”

3. Many a time had the Prior imagined and considered
and desired that after the death of the Abbot he should
fi him; and he considered the matter, and feared that
a

OF VAINGLORY

because he had but little learning, if the Abbot were to die,
Blanquerna or one of his disciples would succeed him; and
therefore was the Prior daily in great sorrow, and he desired
that the studies should be abolished. Now the Abbot was
wise and observant, and took heed of the monks and of
their estate, and he saw that the Prior was daily in great
sorrow. So the Abbot desired to know for what occasion
the Prior had conceived such great grief; for sorrow is an
evil sign in a monk or a religious man, unless he be sad
through remembrance of his sins, or of the evil which is in
the world, whereby the honour which is due unto God is
not paid to Him.

4. The Abbot commanded the Prior by his obedience
that he should tell him his mind. The Prior answered and
said that that whereon he thought was a secret matter and
it behoved him not to tell it save in confession. The Abbot
perceived that the sadness of the Prior had naught in it of
virtue, and he remembered that day when the Cellarer spake
the words aforementioned. Therefore the Abbot related to
the Prior this example: “‘ Once on a time it came to pass
in this monastery that the son of a highly honoured burgess
desired to dedicate himself to the religious life, and his
father, with a great company of his friends, came to this
monastery and dragged him from it by force, saying that
they would not consent to his becoming a monk because
there was in us defect of learning; but they consented that
he should enter another order wherein there were right
learned men.”

5. While the Abbot spake thus with the Prior, and
counselled him in many words to take comfort, and to cast
aside his sadness, there came to the monastery two religious
men who were notable clerks, to see the Lord Abbot, who
was with the Prior, and they remained all four together for
a great space of time speaking of the things of God; and
the two friars put many questions to the Abbot and the

Prior concerning Holy Scripture, the which questions they
amy

BLANQUERNA

could not answer. While they spake thus, the Abbot had
remembrance of a monk who was of the disciples of Blan-
querna, and who every day was very joyful, and gave signs
of great happiness. So the Abbot sent a messenger to that
monk begging him that he would come and reply to the
questions which the two strange friars put. The monk
came and resolved the questions, and put to these two friars
many more which they could not answer. While they
spake thus, the Steward called to the two friars to come and
dine. Now, after the departure of the friars, the Abbot
enquired of the monk wherefore he was every day so joyful.
“My lord!” answered the monk, “So great is the
pleasure that comes to me from the science which I learn,
through the which I find in philosophy occasion to have
knowledge of God, and with such happiness do I remember
that I am in religion, and have fled from the world, that
by night and by day I have delight and joy, the more so
since my science makes me so greatly to despise the world
and vainglory, and to love humility and God.”

6. The monk returned to hear the lesson which Blan-
querna was giving, in the which lesson he was expounding
by the natural arguments of philosophy how the creatures
give knowledge of the Creator and His works. The Abbot
remained with the Prior and related to him this example:
“Once on a time it came to pass that there was a great
discussion between the pine tree and the date palm and the
fig tree, wherein each one set forth the greater nobility
which Nature had given him above all the rest. The pine
tree alleged that the pine fruit and the husk of the pine
cone were within him, to the end that the pine cone might
be preserved, and therein also the lineage of the species;
and that therefore he was the most noble. The date palm
alleged on his own behalf the sweetness of the date f-uit,
and further said that the date stone conserved his kind.
The fig tree said that hers was the greatest right, forasmuch

as all her fruit gave sweetness, and the whole of it was good,
218

OF VAINGLORY

and therefore was she more deserving than the rest. Now
in like manner,” said the Abbot to the Prior, ‘‘ may thy
soul find comfort; for we are the outer husk, and the pine
cone and the seed are Blanquerna and his disciples; we are,
as it were, that outer part of the date fruit which man eats,
and the stone is the conservation of learning. And there-
fore, after our deaths, the time will come when all this
monastery will be like to the fruit of the fig tree, and there
will be many notable clerks in our Order, both abbots and
other officers and likewise disciples.”

7. When the Abbot had spoken these words, the Prior
took knowledge of his error, and of how pride made him
to desire honour and vainglory, and he confessed his sin to
the Abbot, and his soul was enlightened concerning the
trials which his sadness had for so long made him to suffer.
And therefore he spake these words: ‘‘ Once on a time it
came to pass that a wealthy man was sick, and he lamented
bitterly concerning death, forasmuch as it would cause him
to leave his riches and his wife and his children; and
through the sadness of his soul, and the fear which he had
of death, he was tormented after a double manner, for the
sickness tormented him in one wise and the sorrow of his
soul in another.” When the Prior by this similitude had
revealed to the Abbot the thoughts which were in his heart,
he begged of the Lord Abbot pardon and forgiveness and
he left the bondage of sadness and returned to the state of
joy which was his aforetime.

8. It came to pass in that country that the King held a
great court, and asked counsel of his barons, and sent
a messenger to the Abbot bidding him come to his court
and bring with him the most learned monks that he had.
The Abbot and the Prior went to the court, with Blan-
querna and other monks; and, above all other counsels
which were given to the King, the counsel of Blanquerna
was chosen and followed. On that day Blanquerna preached

to the King and to all the people and to many religious men
219

BLANQUERNA

who had been summoned to that court; and his sermon
pleased the King and all the rest very greatly. While the
Abbot and the Prior were returning to the monastery with
Blanquerna, the Abbot and the Prior spake with Blanquerna
concerning that which he had said in the council and in his
sermon. But Blanquerna spake with them upon other
matters, that vainglory might be mortified. The Abbot
said to the Prior how that great virtue was in Blanquerna,
who was full of good customs, and how that day he had
brought honour upon all the monks of that house, and how
the King, through the profit and the pleasure? which he
had of Blanquerna, had elected to be buried in that mon-
astery.

CHAPTER LVIII
OF ACCUSATION

By Eastertide Blanquerna had ended his expositions, and
so great was the labour which his studies had caused him
that the Abbot and the Cellarer took him to visit the farms
of the monastery, to the end that he might have some bodily
recreation. The Abbot and the Cellarer prepared salted
fish and sauces and other things to take with them. Blan-
querna reproved them, saying that to carry such things
upon a journey is contrary to hope and poverty, and that
therefore it behoved them to go upon their journey with
virtues only and to leave behind them such things as are
contrary to a life of penitence and in accordance with the
active life. Many things did Blanquerna cause the Abbot
and the Cellarer to leave behind them which they had
desired to take, but the Cellarer disputed greatly with
Blanquerna, especially concerning the coverlets and cushions
and the cups and jugs which Blanquerna had discarded
from their baggage.?

1 P: “and the good knowledge.”
+P: “trunk.” 9V: “mules

OF ACCUSATION

2. As Blanquerna journeyed along the road with the
Abbot and the Cellarer, they met a Bishop who also was
taking recreation, and with him went one of his nephews
whom he greatly loved, together with a great multitude of
his companions who were hunting and carried with them
hawks, falcons and sparrow-hawks, together with dogs of
divers kinds. The Bishop invited the Abbot and his com-
panions to accompany them, and they went into the city
on that day, and dined with the Bishop. At table there
were divers meats prepared in many ways: golden cups,
jugs and basins of silver were on the table. Great was the
company of people who daily dined in the palace. After
grace, when they had risen from the table, came jesters!
with divers instruments, who sang and danced, speaking
words of a nature very contrary to those prayers which had
been said at table. ‘‘ My lord!” said Blanquerna to the
Bishop. “‘ Here are jesters who hold themselves bound to
do thee pleasure, because thou hast given them to eat.
I too have dined with thee, and if it please thee I would
fain be as one of thy jesters and speak to thee certain
words.” It pleased the Bishop and all the company that
Blanquerna should speak to them and say his words.

3. So Blanquerna rose and reproved the Bishop Sstraitly
for the superfluity of meats and the garments and the
numerous trains of those that were present, and the orna-
ments of the table, and above all things he reproved the
Bishop because he gave ear to jesters who were enemies of
the honour of Jesus Christ, through Whom the Bishop
himself was so greatly honoured and Who had created so
many creatures to give him pleasure. Blanquerna bore on
his person a crucifix, which he showed to the Bishop and
to all the company, saying these words: ‘‘ Jesus Christ has
died, and dead is devotion. In the honour of Jesus Christ
are created prelacies and canonries and prebendaryships:

1 The word is jug/ars (see p. 175 above); this passage throws further

light on their accomplishments.
221

BLANQUERNA

but who is he that does to Jesus Christ due honour?”
Blanquerna wept, and great was the shame of the Bishop
and of all the rest, and the Abbot and the Cellarer were
greatly displeased with Blanquerna for that he reproved the
Bishop so Sstraitly.

4. The Abbot and his companions came to a monastery,
wherein they Stayed; and there they found a worthy
preacher who ruled and governed the monastery; and all
the people of that distri€t honoured and loved the mon-
aftery because of that friar. Right well were the Abbot
and Blanquerna and the Cellarer welcomed on that night.
The Cellarer spake that same night with the friar who
preached so well, and counselled him to leave that Order
and to come to their monastery and join their Order. When
the Abbot and Blanquerna had left the monastery, the
Cellarer related how he had endeavoured to persuade that
friar to come and take their habit. Blanquerna reproved
the Cellarer straitly, saying these words: ‘“‘ Envy, lack of
charity, pride, avarice and wrong are in our company.
These brothers with whom we have lodged in the night
that is past have received us with right good cheer and
with courtesy, and we have seduced and enticed from them
an honoured brother who is of their number. For this sin
it behoves that accusation be made in chapter, to the end
that it be punished.”

5. At vesper time they came to a monastery that was
greatly honoured, and lodged there. While the Abbot and
Blanquerna spake with the friars, who showed them the
monastery, the Cellarer spake with a friar of that monastery,
saying that the chapel and the dormitory and the chapter-
house and the other parts of his own monastery were
greater and fairer than the chapel and the rest of the build-
ings of that house. When they had striven concerning the
buildings and the offices they discussed also the two Orders,
and each of them praised his own Order and spake ill of
the other. And Blanquerna kept the words of the Cellarer
222

OF ACCUSATION

in his memory, that he might make accusation concerning
them in chapter.

6. As they went along the road, the Abbot and Blan-
querna and the Cellarer passed by a goodly spot, wherein
was abundant water, with fields and vineyards and trees and
pastures. That place was the property of a rich burgess.
The Cellarer said to the Abbot that whensoever he passed
by that place he coveted it for their abbey, for it would
make them a right noble farm. The Abbot enquired of the
Cellarer if the Treasurer had money sufficient to buy it.
The Cellarer answered that the money which the Treasurer
had was needed to pay the debts which they owed by reason
of a castle which they had bought; but that when these
debts were paid they ought to collect sufficient money to
buy this place, and abstain greatly in their meat that they
might the sooner buy it; and that they had made like
abstinence when they had bought the castle. Blanquerna
kept these words in his heart! and said that envy, avarice
and wrong had not yet gone from their company, wherefore
he spake these words: “‘ Alas! How great is the error of
this world, for the religious is not kept from sin by his
habit but by justice and charity. To eat beans, to drink
Stale and sour wine, to wear long garments and double
cowls, to use stirrups of wood, to rise for matins, how is it
that these things aid not justice and charity that they may
company with us?”’ Blanquerna begged of the Abbot that
they should return to the monastery, for his soul was in
great travail, and he desired greatly to have recreation
according as was agreed between them, and to have the
company of his brethren, and solace in speaking with them
words of God.

7. When the Abbot and Blanquerna and the Cellarer
had returned to the monastery, and were in chapter, Blan-
querna accused the Abbot and the Cellarer of the great dis-
play which they had made when they left the monastery ;

mp: “sand.”
223

BLANQUERNA

and he said that a man who belongs to a religious order
should delight in want and in the lack of certain things
upon a journey; for such want is an occasion to him of
hope, patience, penitence, poverty and humility, and is a
good example to countrymen and to other persons whom
he may meet upon his journey.

8. The Abbot and the Cellarer accused Blanquerna for
that he had so Straitly reproved the Bishop who had invited
them to dine; but Blanquerna excused himself, saying
these words: “‘ Love, truth, justice and virtue moved me
to reproach the Bishop, and this cannot do me harm, in the
life either of the body or of the spirit. If I had shame of
my reproof of him, where would be the virtues aforesaid ?
If I had shame and fear to speak, I should delight in keep-
ing silence concerning the dishonour and wrong which has
been done to my Lord and Creator and Saviour. To love
and to die remembering Christ and His works, these things
accord one with the other and are opposed to eating and
living in forgetfulness of the honour and the- gratitude
which it behoves us to render to God.”

9. Blanquerna excused himself well, for the right was
his; and afterwards he accused the Cellarer who wished
to entice the good preacher from the friars who had given
them so honourable a welcome. Many reasons, both strong
and true, did Blanquerna allege to prove that wrong, false-
ness, villainy and covetousness are in those who would
persuade friars to leave one house for another; for it is
against the law of community that a friar shall take another
from an Order, and according to the vice of ownership may
this fault be accused and punished.

10, That a man should praise his Order is permitted,
and contrary to irregularity of orders; but to praise one
Order above another is to speak ill concerning an Order
and is contrary to the law of community and to the charity,
justice, fraternity and unity of God. To have envy of towns,

castles and farms is to sin through avarice and the vice
224

OF ACCUSATION

of ownership. To contract debt and to take loans in order
to have riches and many farms, is to make companionship
and alliance between the religious and the worldly man,
and signifies the servitude of the religious to the worldly
man, and is a sin against the poverty of the monastery and
the alms which are given therein to the poor. That a
monastery should contraé debt because it has lack of food,
which has failed because of pestilence or want of rain or
other natural cause, is a thing that may be permitted.
Blanquerna said that he accused the Cellarer of all these
things aforesaid, and he desired that in his presence there
should be given to him the discipline.

11. So the Cellarer was condemned to suffer discipline:
a monk brought many rods which were bound together,
and prepared to give discipline to the Cellarer; but Blan-
querna unbound the rods, and said that the use of many
rods in giving discipline signifies vainglory, and causes
harm to the person to whom it is given, and gives a feeling
of suffering less severe than that which was given by one
rod alone. Wherefore the Cellarer was beaten with one
rod only, whereby he had greater suffering than he would
have received from all the other rods. And the rule was
made that discipline should ever be given with one rod
only, upon the naked flesh.

12. Greatly was the Cellarer confounded, and great
shame had he, and he excused himself concerning certain
things, saying these words: “ The argument whereby I am
accused of envy and covetousness is contrary to justice and
charity which move me to desire that the monastery should
possess many towns and castles and farms, to the end that
in this monastery there may be gathered many monks, and
great alms may be made herein.” Blanquerna answered:
“ Jesus Christ might have had in this world the com-
panionship of many princes had He wished; but in token
of humility and poverty He was pleased to elect the com-

1 The reference is, of course, to the monastic, and not to the individual life.
P | 225

BLANQUERNA |

panionship of few men, to destroy pride and vainglory.
Wherefore is it a better thing to desire the holiness of a
few men, than to gather together a multitude of men in
whom is error and sin. Saint Sophia did greater alms in
building the church in Constantinople than did the
Emperor; for more pleasing to God was the mite which
she gave day by day to the work, than were all the remain-.
ing gifts which were given by the Emperor, and by the
which that church was built and completed; and as thou
hast excused thyself against justice, repentance and con-
trition, it behoves that thou shouldst again make satisfaction
through discipline.” So the Cellarer was beaten again,
because according to justice his excuse was of none avail.

CHAPTER LIX

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA WAS MADE
SACRISTAN

For so long did Blanquerna continue to give instruction to
his disciples that many grew they in number and marvel-
lously did they learn of him, becoming noble preachers and
masters. ‘Throughout all those parts there went out fame
concerning the greatness of the doétrine which Blanquerna
taught, and many other monasteries sent monks to him to
learn that doctrine which he taught, and many disciples did
the Abbot send to divers monasteries to become teachers
therein, and many men from those parts endowed in that
monastery chaplaincies in perpetuity for the repose of their
souls, Great was the increase of well-being in the mon-
astery by reason of the science that Blanquerna taught.

2. Now while Blanquerna was a teacher there it befel
that the Sacristan passed from this world to the next.
Blanquerna desired to be daily in contemplation, which
thing he could not be by reason of the hindrance caused by

his studies, to the which he devoted himself very earnestly.
226

HOW BLANQUERNA WAS MADE SACRISTAN

The Abbot and all the monks desired that Blanquerna
should become Sacristan, and that another monk, who had
become a master in the science which Blanquerna had
taught him, should teach the disciples in place of Blan-
querna. But a short space before this time, Blanquerna
had been ordained priest; with great fear did he receive
that office, whereof he thought himself not worthy, and
humbly and in secret did he sing his first Mass, without
show of vanity soever. Blanquerna was elected therefore
to be Sacrigstan. He kept the chapel in great cleanliness
and did all that pertained to his office, and sang Mass daily,
and the greater part of each day he spent in prayer. At
vesper-tide he lay down to sleep before the altar of our Lady
Saint Mary. The tears and the prayers of Blanquerna, who
may recount them? And the heights which he reached in
his contemplation, who can tell them? And the art which
he had as touching the exaltation of his soul to God, who
may know it?

3. It came to pass one evening, after Compline, that
Blanquerna was at prayer, and wept through the abundance
of his devotion, and reflected that, even while the priest
sings Mass, there are angels who do reverence and honour
to the Holy Sacrifice of Jesus Christ their Lord. Very
deeply did Blanquerna reflect after this manner. Now while
Blanquerna reflected thus, he fell asleep, and in his dreams
there came to him that which he had considered while he
was yet awake. For by the influence of the strength of his
imagination which he exercised while he was awake con-
cerning the ministry aforementioned, it seemed to him as
he slept that he was singing Mass and that Saint Michael
and Saint Gabriel served it. ‘Two or three times did Blan-
querna wake from his sleep that night, and each time did
that same dream return to him. At midnight Blanquerna
rose to ring the bell, and he said Matins with the monks.
After this, he fell to prayer, remembering that which he

had dreamed on that same night. While he yet thought
oe)

BLANQUERNA

thereon, he vested once more to sing Mass. And when he
was before the altar, it seemed to him that at either end
thereof was an angel with wings, and that each angel held
in the one hand a Cross and in the other a Book. Great
wonder had Blanquerna at that vision, and he believed that
it was with him even as it seemed; but he desired not to
proceed with the singing of the Mass until he had resolved
his doubts. So Blanquerna fell once more to remembering
the virtues whereby at every hour his needs were met:
justice brought to his mind his unworthiness to behold the
angels; prudence gave him intelligence as to how, through
the influence of his thoughts, and the weakness of his
brain, which had been enfeebled by abstinence, vigil, fast
and great watching, phantasy had represented to him certain
vanities under the guise of truth. Fortitude strengthened
his mind against the imagination, which at times is of
unruly imagining, whereby the bodily sight conceives
certain vain similitudes which are contrary to truth. By
all these virtues was Blanquerna aided, and he resolved the
doubts which had come to him, and afterwards he sang Mass
right devoutly as was his wont.

4. It came to pass one night that Blanquerna was in the
chapel alone, and he thought upon the demons and upon
the horrible shapes which they take when they desire to fill
man with terror. While Blanquerna considered thus, he
felt fear and terror enter his mind, and he had affright at
being alone in the chapel, and had a mind to sleep that
night in the dormitory; but he remembered that this was
a temptation against fortitude, and against prudence, and
that it was sent to him that fortitude and prudence might
be exalted, the which exaltation they received when Blan-
querna remembered the perfect power of God which could
defend him as well in the chapel where he was alone, as in
the dormitory among his companions. Wherefore Blan-
querna was fortified against the temptation and the fear

which had come to him, and he fell to prayer, and remem-
228

HOW BLANQUERNA WAS ELECTED ABBOT

bered the great power of God, Who willed that he should
be tempted after the manner aforesaid, that he might know
that the power of God is as great in one place as in another.

5. In many a wise was Blanquerna tempted by day and
by night, and as soon as he was tempted, he called to his
remembrance the seven virtues, and according to that
virtue which was the best fitted to mortify the temptation,
he adored God in those virtues uncreated which presented
themselves to him through the remembrance which he had
of the seven virtues created; and the more Blanquerna
was tempted, and did battle with the temptation, the
greater exaltation had his merits, and he praised and blessed
God Who gave him the occasion whereby his merits should
be the greater, that the justice of God might grant to him
great glory. Even so lived Blanquerna and served God, all
the days of his life. Great was the virtue that God for His
part showed to Blanquerna, and Blanquerna was as a shining
light and a good example, whereby all the monks and all
the people of that country were of holy life. And, through
the holy conversation of Blanquerna, God granted His
blessing to all the people and all the parts of that region,
with wealth, peace and abundance of fruits both spiritual
and temporal. So all blessed and praised God, Who had
given to one man such great virtue, that through him many
men had received many virtues by the grace of God.

CHAPTER LX

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA WAS
ELECTED ABBOT

Tue Lord Abbot grew old, and in his own person he could
no longer satisfy the needs of the monastery. So the Abbot
with all the community went to the chapter, and he begged

1 A fuller idea of the meaning of this passage may be formed from the

Art of Contemplation, below.
229

BLANQUERNA

of them indulgence, saying these words: “ For a long time
great honour has been done to me, my brethren, by you
who have held me as your superior. Such great honour I
have ever been unworthy to receive. And now I have come
to a time when I have no more strength in my person, by
the which lack of strength I am more unworthy than before
to be your pastor. I have come to the end of my days and
I would fain be in submission to some one of you, that I
may grow more obedient. I beg you to elect another Abbot
. and upon me to have compassion.”

2. Counsel was taken by Blanquerna and all the chapter,
and it was agreed that indulgence should be given to the
Lord Abbot, in significance of charity and justice which
willed that reward should be made to him for all the labour
wherein for so long he had continued, that his flock might
be served and kept. Charity willed that a fitting place
should be given to the Lord Abbot in some farm-house
where he might remain and live, and that a monk should
serve him, and that some pittance might be given to his
body whereby he should the longer live. The Abbot gave
thanks to all the chapter for the indulgence which they had
shown him, and he rendered up his seal and renounced the
office of Abbot; and the monks made ordinance that
another should be elected in his stead.

3. According to the manner of election whereby Natana
had been elected Abbess it was determined that an abbot
should be chosen. Now, when the electors enquired of
Blanquerna who should succeed the Abbot, according to
his opinion, Blanquerna answered in these words: ‘“‘ Our
common brotherhood signifies charity among us. Where-
fore, in significance that charity is with us a common virtue,
and to give good example, it would be a thing most fitting
that we should elect as pastor some bishop of these parts,
who is holier of life than are other bishops.’’ The electors
answered and said that it was not the custom of their Order

to elect as Abbot a man who was not of their Order, and
2.30

HOW BLANQUERNA WAS ELECTED ABBOT

over and above this they thought that no bishop would
forsake his diocese and pass to their Order to become
an abbot, since a bishop has a wider rule than has an
abbot.

4. Blanquerna said to the electors that it came often-
times to pass that an abbot was eleéted to a bishopric; and
that therefore it was in reason that a bishop might be
elected an abbot, since the duties of an abbot accord better
with the contemplative life than do those of a bishop, and
the work of a bishop accords better with the aétive life than
does that of an abbot. Wherefore since the contemplative
life is better and nearer to God than the aétive life, if from
the contemplative life abbots passed to the active, how much
the more should bishops leave the ative life to enter the
life of contemplation! ‘“‘ Wherefore,” said he, ‘‘ to the end
that we may introduce the custom that a bishop may be
eleéted as an abbot, and that the contemplative life may
be exalted and loved above the aétive, it is good, accord-
ing to my mind and will, that we elect for our abbot a
‘ bishop.”

5. One of the seven ele€tors was the Cellarer, and he said
to Blanquerna that if they elected as abbot a bishop or any
other person who was not of their Order or monastery, it
would seem that there was a lack in their monastery of
fitting persons, and of persons worthy to be elected abbot;
wherefore it behoved them not to eleé a bishop as abbot,
over and above the which he thought not that a bishop
could be found who would leave his diocese to become an
abbot. Blanquerna answered: “‘ Pride and vainglory, lack
of hope and the vice of ownership, are signified by the
words of the Cellarer, which are contrary to justice, charity
and hope; and since prudence wills that the fittest person
be eleéted, charity gives one common aim even to the diver-
sity of Orders, and justice condemns ownership where there
should be common charity and fraternity, and hope moves

us to remember that if our Lord and Pastor Jesus Christ
251

BLANQUERNA

suffered death to save men that are bishops, it follows that
we shall find some bishop who to honour Christ will leave
his diocese to be an abbot.”

6. The Cellarer ceased from the argument which he had
made against Blanquerna, and he began to argue after
another manner, saying these words: ‘‘ It is seemly that
an abbot be accustomed to eat of our meat, and to follow
the rules and habits of our community, to the end that he
may be a light and an example to us, whereby we may
continue in our habits; but another man who is not of our
Order is less fitted to be our abbot than is a man that is
of our Order, and who for long years has followed in
orderly wise the rule of our Order.” “ Cellarer!” said
Blanquerna, ‘‘ Still does thy will follow the path and
track of despair; for God, Who has accustomed thee
to thine Order, can so accustom and govern another
religious that is of another Order, if he enter our own.”
While Blanquerna and the Cellarer disputed after this
manner, the Bishop whom Blanquerna had reproved, as is
recounted above, came to the monastery, and the words of
Blanquerna and the Cellarer had an end, and the whole
community went out to receive the Bishop, to do honour
to him and his companions.

7. The Bishop desired to do honour to the monk who
had renounced the office of abbot, even according to the
honour which is due to an abbot; but that monk recounted
to the Bishop the indulgence which had been granted to
him by the chapter, and how he had renounced his office,
and how a very deletable place without the monastery had
been assigned to him, wherein he might live, and how in
that place he would have a pittance for his body, which
would be greater than that which he could have in the
monastery. Then the Bishop and that monk went away
to that place to live therein together. The Bishop sent
away all his companions, and kept with him one squire
only. And for a great space the Bishop lived in penance
PIE

HOW BLANQUERNA WAS ELECTED ABBOT

with that monk, and they spake daily together of God and
of His glory and despised the vanity of this world.

8. The Cellarer and the other ele€tors returned to their
former conversation, and made discussion, according to
method and to their needs, which person of all the monks
in that house was the most meet to be Abbot. To all the
electors it was manifest that Blanquerna should be Abbot
according to all the conditions which belong to that office,
with the exception of one condition only, to wit, that Blan-
querna was a greater lover of the contemplative life than of
the active; and that the office of Abbot accords with the
active life, to the end that he may the better provide for the
needs of the monastery. So there was dispute among the
electors if because of the condition aforesaid Blanquerna
should be rejected from the office of Abbot. But one of
the electors said to the rest: “ Even as Blanquerna our
master has shown us how with the virtues we may supply
our needs, even so does it behove us in this case to have
recourse to hope and justice, and to put our trust in the
holy life of Blanquerna, the which through justice may
satisfy us in the contemplative life, even as much as, or
more than if Blanquerna had more of the aétive life than
of the contemplative; and therefore let us not fear to make
Blanquerna our Abbot and our Pastor, even as he has been
our teacher.”

g. So Blanquerna was elected Abbot. Greatly was he
displeased at the election, and many reasons did he allege
wherewith he excused himself from being Abbot. None of
which reasons would the monks receive, but at all hazards
they desired with common voice that he should be their
Abbot. During all the time that he filled this office he
continued in it as was his duty, according to the which he
was bound to treat of temporal matters and to keep them
in his remembrance, albeit they hindered him from the con-
sideration of heavenly things. Oftentimes did Blanquerna
weep for the servitude to the which he was come, and

233

BLANQUERNA

desired liberty to contemplate God, and to think upon the
Passion of his Redeemer. Wherefore he spake these words :

10. “© ye virtues, my friends, that were wont to aid
me aha delivered and kept me from the servitude into the
which my father Evast and my mother Aloma desired to
place me! Whither are ye gone, and wherefore have ye
not aided me against the servitude into the which I am
come?” While Blanquerna spake these words, in his
consideration thereof he found Fortitude and Prudence,
who spake to him mentally after this manner:

11. ‘* Strong is the mind that has no pride in the honour
of the office of abbot and the dominion which it brings over
many men. Obedient is an abbot through fortitude of mind,
when he follows that which his understanding reveals to him,
making inspections of the monastery and from time to time
entering the infirmary.” While Fortitude spake thus, Prud-
ence answered him, and said that an abbot has a part in the
merits of the monks, for he has perforce to order his will
that he may be the servant and the subject of-them all.
““ Great am I,”’ said Prudence, “in the government of one
person, but greater yet in the government of many persons;
wherefore have justice and merit greater accord with me
than they were wont to have.”

12. Blanquerna was fain to rejoice because of those
things which Prudence showed him concerning the increase
of her glory; but Charity made him to remember that he
was no longer able to contemplate the things of God as he
was wont; and because he loved God more than merit and
glory, therefore did Charity and Yearning make him to
weep greatly. In this manner Blanquerna continued, and
long did he rule as Abbot; and by reason of his desire for
comfort and for contemplation he went from time to time
to the farm-house, wherein were the Bishop and the monk
who was aforetime Abbot, and with them he had recreation,
and comforted his soul in the contemplation of our Lord
God.

234

OF THE BOOK OF AVE MARIA

CHAPTER LXI

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBOT BLANQUERNA MADE THE
BOOK OF AVE MARIA

BLaNQuERNA was Abbot in an abbey that was of great
honour, which contained a great number of monks and
which enjoyed great wealth. Daily did Blanquerna con-
sider how after some new manner he might honour Our
Lady. On a certain day Blanquerna was considering the
honour of Our Lady, and through Divine virtue it came to
his will that he should build in the monastery a chamber
set apart from the rest, wherein should ever be a monk who
should daily within that chamber give greeting to Our
Lady, and eat and sleep therein, and follow not the rule
of the monastery, but be free in all those things wherein
he might the better give greeting to Our Lady and have
contemplation concerning her. The Abbot Blanquerna
caused this room to be built, and gave to it this name:
Ave Maria. Then went the Abbot into the chapter with
all the monks and spake to them these words: ‘“ All the
greatest honour that a creature may receive from the Creator
was done within the womb of Our Lady when the Son of
God took human nature within her; and therefore it be-
hoves our Order, which has Our Lady for its Head, to
honour her with all its might. Which, therefore, of you
desires to greet Our Lady and to live in that chamber which
bears the name of Ave Maria?”’ Many were the monks
who desired to be in that chamber and hold that office; but
the Abbot said that the monk who should have it must be
a great clerk, and learned in divers sciences, to the end that
by their aid he might be able to raise his understanding
to contemplate and greet Our Lady, and he must further
be devout, and a man of holy life. Wherefore there was
ele€ted from among them all the monk who had in greatest
measure the conditions afore-mentioned.

235

BLANQUERNA

2. That monk dwelt in the chamber of Ave Maria, in
the which he kept his books, making it likewise his cell,
and placing therein an image of Our Lady. A lay brother
brought to him daily his pittance from the monastery.
That monk sang Mass in the chapel, and went through all
the monastery, and spake with whomsoever he desired, and
had many privileges besides. It came to pass one day that
the Abbot entered the chamber of the monk, and desired
to know the manner wherein the monk greeted Our Lady
Saint Mary. So the monk knelt down before the image
of Our Lady, and spake these words, and many more, as
was his custom:

3. “* Hail Mary!’ Thy servant greets thee on behalf
of the angels and the patriarchs and the prophets and the
martyrs and the confessors and the virgins, both men and
maidens; and he greets thee likewise through all the
saints that are in glory. Hail Mary! He brings thee
greetings from all Christians, both righteous and sinners:
the righteous greet thee, for that thou art worthy of
greeting and art the hope of their salvation; the sinners
greet thee, because they ask of thee pardon, and have
hope that thy merciful eyes may look upon thy Son, to
the end that He may have pity and mercy upon their
sins, being mindful of the grievous Passion which He
bore to give to them salvation and to pardon their guilt
and sin.”

4. ““ Hail Mary!’ I bring thee greetings from the
Saracens, Jews, Greeks, Mongols, Tartars, Bulgarians,
Hungarians from Lesser Hungary, Cumanians, Nestorians,
Guinovins and Russians: all these, and many unbelievers
else, greet thee through me who am their representative.
I bring to thee their greetings, to the end that thy Son
may desire to have remembrance of them, and that thou
mayest beg Him to send to them ministers who may lead
them to know and to love thee and thy Son, in such manner

that they may be saved, and in this world may know and
2.36 3 .

OF THE BOOK OF AVE MARIA

desire thee and thy Son, to serve and to honour Him and
thee with all their power.”

5. “** Hail Mary!’ These unbelievers, on whose behalf
I greet thee, have ignorance concerning thy salutation,! and
the honour which God has given thee. They are men.
Like form and like nature have they to the form and nature
of thy Son, Whom thou so greatly lovest, and by Whom
thou art so greatly honoured and loved. They go through
ignorance to the eternal fire; they lose the eternal glory
of thy Son; for there is none to preach to them nor to
show them the truth of the Holy Catholic Faith. They
have mouths wherewith they could praise thee if they but
knew thee; hearts have they wherewith they might love
thee; hands have they wherewith to serve thee; feet have
they wherewith to walk in thy paths. Thou art worthy to
be known and served and loved and praised in all lands and
by all men. They greet thee, and they beg of thee, through
me, thy help and grace and blessing.”

6. “* Hail Mary!’ It behoves me to weep and to do
penance, and to endure a life of austerity, and to praise and
love and know and serve thee, that my greetings may be
to thee the more acceptable.” The monk wept bitterly as
he greeted Our Lady thus. Blanquerna wept for the great
devotion of the monk and the devoutness of the greetings
which he made to Our Lady. The sweetness and the virtue
which the Abbot and the monk had as they wept and
greeted Our Lady, who can recount it?

7. “ Beloved son!” said the Abbot, ‘‘ Greet thou Our
Lady, who is our health and blessing. By her aid are those
men saved who without it had been damned. In our
mother Eve was our damnation, and in Our Lady is our
salvation. Mary is light and splendour, illumined and
illumining alike. Hail to her, for she is a being without
evil and without defect. Let us, then, greet her and love
her. We have a Lady through whom we shall gain all the

1 i.e, the angelic greeting.

237

BLANQUERNA

virtues and conquer the vices. Remember, oh son! how
many are they that greet Our Lady, and how blessed are
they that are loved and remembered by her, who has such
noble remembrance and such merciful will. Behold the
Heavens, how great they are, and how wondrously illu-
mined by the sun, the moon and the stars! The sea, the
earth, men, birds, beasts, fishes, plants, herbs and all things
living and all things that are,—all these are in the service
of Our Lady and all these are of her Son Who has created
them. Greet her and weep, for with such greeting Our
Lady is well pleased. Greet her with remembrance, for
she ceases not to love, remember and help all that greet
her with understanding highly exalted and with effectual?
will, Son! Call thou upon all the powers of thy soul, and
see if thou dost use them all to greet Our Lady.”

8. While the Abbot urged and inspired with all his
might the monk that dwelt in the chamber of Ave Maria,
that monk spake to the Abbot in these words: “* Con-
quered is my power, and exalted is the honour of Our Lady.
No more can I love, honour and consider those things that
are above; I must needs behold my faults, which are below.
If it might so be, I should desire the more to weep and
love and have remembrance, in greeting the Queen of
Heaven and of all the earth and the sea. Each time that
I greet Our Lady she brings me consolation and joy. Her
greeting is my companionship and my consolation and my
comfort.”

g. The Abbot marvelled greatly and had great pleasure
at the words of the monk of Ave Maria, because he was
able so worthily to greet and contemplate Our Lady, and
many times in the week did he come to greet Our Lady
with the monk, to do her honour, and that each might the
better assist the other to weep, and that the soul of each,
in the other’s contemplation of Our Lady, might be the

1 efectuosa. This is probably an erroneous reading for afectuosa,
affectionate,” “ affective,”

238

GRATIA PLENA

more highly exalted. A man of such good life was this
monk of Ave Maria that there were many monks in that
house who, because of his example, served Our Lady with
greater regularity; and as often as they had temptation,
or distress of any kind, they came to this monk, to the end
that by his words they might be comforted and inStru@ted
in the service of Our Lady.

CGHAPEER LXII

GRATIA PLENA

ON a certain occasion it came to pass that through want of
rain there was a great dearth of corn in that country.
Very great alms were made by the Abbot to all the poor
who came to the monastery. For a long time they con-
tinued in that monastery to give alms, and through the
report thereof which went through all the land, and be-
cause in that monastery they gave alms of bread and of
vegetables to all that came there, the number of the poor
who came to beg alms of them increased greatly. It came
to pass one day that the Cellarer entered the granaries that
were in the monastery, and went to all the farms, and
found that the alms which the Abbot gave could not be
continued for a long time thence, for they would not have
corn enough to give until the new crops were harvested.
Greatly was the Cellarer troubled, and he said to the Abbot
that the alms must cease, because in the farms and in the
granaries he had found so little corn that within a short
time there would be a famine in the monastery.

2. Greatly was the Abbot troubled at that which the
Cellarer had said to him, and he went to the farms and to
the granaries, to learn if in truth there was so small a
quantity of corn as the Cellarer had said. As the Abbot
and the Cellarer returned to the monastery, the Abbot
passed by a farm which was held by a lay brother who

239

BLANQUERNA

above all things loved and honoured Our Lady Saint Mary.
In all that farm there was no more than one granary full
of corn. Greatly was the Abbot troubled at the lack of
corn, and greatly did he sorrow at the thought that the
alms must cease, and by reason of this sorrow his soul was
in sadness and his eyes were in tears. The brother that
held the farm enquired of the Abbot wherefore he wept.
“‘ Fair son!” said the Abbot, ‘“‘ I must needs weep at the
deaths of the poor, for these poor folk will die if the
accustomed alms which are given to them from the mon-
astery cease, and cease they must by reason of the dearth
of corn.” ‘ Lord Abbot!” said the farmer, ‘‘ Continue
ye to give alms in honour of Our Lady, for I will provide
you with sufficient corn for all this year; doubt not this,
but take ye as your surety Our Lady, who is full of grace.”
The Abbot answered: “‘ Thy surety is seemly and suffi-
cient, so much so that we should sin if we were to refuse
it, and the alms were to cease.”

3. The Abbot returned right joyfully to the monastery,
and commanded that alms should still be given daily
according to custom. For so long and to so many persons
did he give alms that all the corn in the granaries and from
all the farms was spent, excepting only the corn in the
granary which was in the farm whose holder had taken
Our Lady for surety. So the Abbot sent a message to the
farmer that he should provide him with corn according to
his promise. The farmer opened the granary and sent to
the monastery one-half of the corn which was therein.
Again at another time he opened it, and found that it was
half full even as he had left it, so he sent all the corn to
the Abbot. When the farmer had closed his granary, and
the beasts who bore the corn had left the farm, the farmer
said his Ave Marias according to his wont. When he
came to the words “‘ full of grace” he marvelled, because
he had left the granary empty of corn, and Saint Mary had

not filled it, albeit he had given her as surety to the Abbot.
240

GRATIA PLENA

4. While the farmer thought thus, he doubted whether
Saint Mary was full of grace, for it was clear to him that,
if she were so, the granary would at all times be filled with
corn. Yet once again the Abbot sent to the farmer for
corn, for that which he had last sent him was all spent.
So the farmer put his trust in Our Lady, and yet once again
he unlocked the granary and found it full of corn; and the
farmer remembered how that Our Lady was full of grace.
All that year did he find the granary full whensoever he
went to it, and the contents thereof sufficed for the needs
of the community and for all the alms which were given by
them, until the new harvest. The Abbot and the monks
praised and blessed Our Lady, who had been pleased to
have remembrance of their needs.

5. It came to pass upon a feast day that the farmer went
to the monastery to keep the feast. The Abbot enquired
of him by what means he had found sufficient corn for their
needs during the whole of the year. The farmer said to
the Abbot that among the other words which are in the
Ave Maria he had great devotion concerning the words
“full of grace”; and therefore he put his trust in Our
Lady, that she would keep the granary full of corn for so
long as there was a dearth in the land. Long did the Abbot
think upon the words which this brother had spoken con-
cerning Our Lady, and upon the devotion which he had
to the words “‘ full of grace”; and therefore in a certain
part of the monastery he caused a room to be made to the
which he gave the name Gratia Plena (Full of Grace),
and in that room he desired that this brother should remain
all the days of his life, adoring and contemplating Our
Lady who is full of grace.

6. Right holy and devout was the brother of Gratia
Plena; and, according to his power, he adored Our Lady
daily, considering the grace whereof she was so full; and
by reason of the great age and of the holy life of that brother
the monks came to him, and remained with him hour after

Q 241

BLANQUERNA

hour, listening to the devout words which edified them and
moved them to devotion and charity, by the which they
were comforted and made glad. All that monastery was
enlightened by this brother and by the brother of Ave
Maria, and many a time did the monk of Ave Maria and
the brother of Gratia Plena visit each other, and the monk
spake of the words “ Ave Maria,” and the brother of the
words “ Gratia Plena.” The pleasure and the brotherly
companionship of them both, who may recount it? And
the good example which they gave to all the monks and
friars, who can tell it?

7. The Abbot Blanquerna desired to weep and to con-
template Our Lady; for the many temporal affairs where-
with he had perforce to occupy himself in the monastery
had greatly inclined his thought toward the things of earth;
wherefore the Abbot went alone one day to visit the brother
of Gratia Plena, and desired to know the manner wherein
he contemplated Our Lady. When the Abbot entered the
chamber wherein was that brother, he found him kneeling
before the image of Our Lady, weeping and saying these
words:

8. “ Full art thou, O Mary, of the Plenitude which is
thy Son, Who is the fulness and plenitude of all that is.
In thee, who art all fulness, is the fulness of the remem-
brance and understanding and will of my soul. The whole
world cannot attain to that fulness which thou containest.
And knowest thou why? Because through thy Son thou
mayest have more fulness than the whole world, since the
whole world is not so good as art thou. Thou art fell of
grace, that we may recover the grace which we hase
lost. In thee is there fulness of our faith, hope, charity,
justice, prudence, fortitude, temperance. We have fulness
because of the fulness that is thine. And he that re-
members and loves thee is full of grace likewise; and

he that is remembered and _ loved by thee has no
defeét.”’
240

GRATIA PLENA

9. “*Full of grace!’ Filled with grace wert thou in
respect of God and of man, when the angel Gabriel gave
thee greeting. That One, God and Man, Whose mother
thou art, is full of eternal and infinite goodness, and of
infinite and eternal power, knowledge and will. Where-
fore if thine abundance is eternal and infinite in goodness,
greatness, power, wisdom and will, thy plenitude may not
be voided nor lessened nor multiplied. Wherefore, as thou
that art full of grace art that same Mary that has such
fulness, my soul is filled with charity, whereby it may fully
know and love thee, and mine eyes are filled with weeping
and tears, that they may do honour to thy honours, and
weep for my sins and my transgressions.”

10. According to these words, and to many besides, was
this brother adoring and contemplating Our Lady as the
Abbot came to visit him. Great was the wonder of the
Abbot that a lay man could utter words of such subtlety
and devotion; but he bethought himself that through the
fulness of Our Lady his words were full of the infused
science and of devotion. “ Fair son and brother!” said
the Abbot, “‘ God save thee, Who has filled thee thus with
the fulness of the grace of Our Lady.” That brother
answered the Abbot: “‘ Lord Abbot! If thou knowest
aught wherein I may greatly love and honour Our Lady,
I pray thee tell it me; for she is full of great grace and
virtue, and therefore do I need fulness of understanding
wherewith I may fully know her, that by the fulness of my
knowledge my will may have such fulness that I may
greatly love and praise her that is full of grace.”

11. When the Abbot saw the plenteousness of grace,
devotion and charity which was in the soul of that brother,
and remembered that in his own soul there was less devo-
tion than in that of this brother, he spake these words:
“ Ah! wherefore did I become Abbot and not a hermit,
that I might have such fulness of devotion as has this
brother?”’ The Abbot Blanquerna kneeled before the

243

BLANQUERNA

brother of Gratia Plena, and prayed him that he would
inStruét and teach him, that he might have once more the
devotion which he had had of old, the which he had lost
by reason of the temporal cares of his office. This brother
wept, and Blanquerna wept likewise, and each regarded
the other with looks of love, yet neither could speak to the
other, for that their love was too great; but each by signs
made significance to the other concerning the image of
Our Lady, and the Passion of her Son, and the sorrow
which she bore while they tormented her Son and slew
Him, making Him to hang upon the Cross whereon He
suffered that all might see Him and mock Him.

12. Long did they weep, and were together for much
time ere they could speak once more. And the Abbot
remained kneeling, until the brother spake to him these
words: “ Full of grace was Our Lady when her Son de-
parted this life. And that grace signifies the grace where-
with the sons of God are filled in this world when they
suffer trials and death in honour of the Son of Our Lady
Who is in glory, wherein is the fulness of grace of Our
Lady.” In this world lack we wholly fulness of grace.
So the Abbot Blanquerna bewailed the sins of those that
allow not fulness of grace to be in the world. And as
Blanquerna wept he spake these words:

13. ““ Weeping, knowledge and love! Can ye have
such power that to the remembrance of Our Lady who is
full of grace ye may bring the lack of grace which is ours
in this present life? Can it please her by your means to
incline herself to pray her Son that He may be pleased to
fill us with such grace that He may cause us to go and
preach His honour to the unbelievers? And that Holy
Church may recover that sacred land which the Saracens
hold to our dishonour, by the which dishonour is signified
ignorance, together with defect of charity and of remem-
brance of the Precious Blood which was shed for us? Is
there naught which may aid you in this matter?”
24.4

DOMINUS TECUM

~ Brother!” said the Abbot, ‘‘ Help thou me to weep and
to pray, and let us weep more fervently and at greater
length until the Queen whom thou loves so greatly be
pleased to help us, and give us in this world so much of
her grace, that all things may be ordered to the honour of
her Son.” So for a long time the Abbot and this brother
wept together; and, after their weeping was ended, they
took leave courteously the one of the other, and the Abbot
felt within his soul that the devotion which he had had of
old had returned to him; wherefore the Abbot purposed
to return ever and again to weep and to contemplate Our
Lady in the chamber of Gratia Plena.

CHAP mek LX
DOMINUS TECUM

Ir came to pass one day that, as the Abbot Blanquerna held
chapter, there came a farmer! to the chapter, saying that
a certain peasant? had come to dig in one of the vineyards
of his farm. This peasant farmer had said that the vineyard
was his, and he threatened the brother grievously, and de-
sired to turn him out of the vineyard. The Abbot asked
counsel of the monks concerning that man of whom the
farmer spake. Then an old monk spake to the Lord Abbot
in these words: ‘‘ For a long time there has been dispute
between us and this man concerning the vineyard, and
much harm has the monastery had thereof, for this man
has spoken much evil concerning us in all the land; where-
fore it is fitting that we go to the farm and turn him out
of the vineyard, or that we commend the matter to the care
of some knight who on our behalf will defend the vineyard
from him.”
1 granger, the holder or owner of a granja (farm).

2 pages, labourer, peasant, rustic. Occasionally, as at certain places in this
book, it can bear the meaning of “ small farmer,” but it is quite distinct

from graager,
24.5

BLANQUERNA
2. Deeply did the Abbot think upon the words which

the monk spake, and in presence of all he said as follows:
“ A thing ill-beseeming is it that for the sake of possessions
a religious should place himself in peril of death or kill
another, and yet it is contrary to justice that a religious
should permit himself to be deprived of that which by right
is his; wherefore, according to charity and hope, it behoves
that in this case a man have recourse to God and to the
virtues, combating vices with virtues; for with such arms
should every man do battle first of all, and especially a
religious.” When the Abbot had spoken these words, he
rode forth, and took with him the Cellarer, and went to
that place where the peasant was digging in the vineyard.
The Abbot greeted the peasant, saying: ‘‘ Dominus
tecum ” (The Lord be with thee). The peasant returned
not the greeting of the Abbot, but continued to dig in the
vineyard, and kept his arms beside him that he might be
able to defend himself. Every time that the peasant struck
with his spade the Abbot said: ‘‘ Dominus tecum,” but
the peasant gave no sign that he had heard or seen the
Abbot, but continued to dig in the vineyard.

3. The Abbot marvelled greatly that the peasant an-
swered him not, and especially did he marvel because the
virtue of the greeting was of no avail; so he perceived
that it behoved him to dismount, and to kneel before the
peasant, and greet him with devotion and humility, to the
end that from this greeting might come virtue. The Abbot
dismounted and kneeled before the peasant, raising his
eyes and his thoughts and his hands, and spake these
words:

4. “ O Queen of Heaven and of earth! Within thee was
God made man and yet was God; and in glory is the Lord
within thee as God and as thy Son. In this world our Order
is thine and is under thy proteétion. Now through this
virtue whereby the Lord was in thee, I pray thee to mediate

between this man and us, that through thee we may receive
246

DOMINUS TECUM

virtue, whereby we may be servants of the virtue which
was thine because the Lord was within thee.”

5. The Cellarer reproved the Abbot sternly, saying that
the whole monastery was disgraced by the honour which
he did to the peasant; but the Abbot answered the Cellarer,
saying that Christian humility was shown by the Son of
God, Who desired to be wholly within the Virgin Saint
Mary, as Man and as God, and to be tormented and despite-
fully used, and put to death upon the Cross; and the
weapons of a monk, he said, are humility, charity, patience
and prayer. With such devotion and humility did the
Abbot continue to pray and repeat the words ‘‘ Dominus
tecum,’’ and such great virtue did God set in the words
which the Abbot spake, and in his devotion, that the peasant
took knowledge of the injury which he did to the abbey, and
through this knowledge there came to him contrition, charity
and justice. Wherefore the peasant spake these words:

6. “ Lord Abbot! What is it that has turned my mind
to contrition, charity and justice? And who has driven
avarice, wrath and injury from my mind?” The Abbot
answered: ‘‘ Through the will of God it came to pass that
the angel Gabriel greeted Our Lady Saint Mary, and
among other words said to Our Lady: ‘ Dominus tecum:
the Lord is with thee.’ And by the virtue of these words
hope has given me confidence that the same words may
give thee virtue whereby the Lord of heaven and earth and
of all that is may be in thee and with thee, that the virtues
may be in thy mind, and that through the virtues the vices
may be displeasing to thee.”

7, When the Abbot had spoken thus, the peasant said
that these words “‘ The Lord is with thee ” had vanquished
and overcome him, and that therefore he desired ever to
be the servant of these words; so he prayed the Abbot to
give him viands from the monastery wherewith he could
live the life of a hermit upon a high hill near the abbey.
The Abbot granted to the peasant that which he asked of

247

BLANQUERNA

him, and made for him a cell in that high mountain whereon
he desired to live, that he might contemplate the Lord and
Our Lady in the words “ The Lord is with thee.” The
Abbot gave to that place the name Dominus Tecum. He
desired also to build a chapel in that hermitage, but the
peasant desired it not, lest it should become an occasion
of pilgrimages and vigils, and many persons should go
there and impede his prayers and mortify his devotion.

8. When the peasant had taken up his abode in the
hermitage of Dominus Tecum, the Abbot gave him a rule
and manner wherein by means of these words “ ‘The Lord
is with thee’ he might contemplate God and Our Lady
according to the form of these words following: ‘‘ The
Lord of the angels, and of all that is, performed in
the person of Our Lady the greatest work which any
creature may receive, namely when God was pleased to
take within Our Lady human nature. In no creature can
God perform a nobler work than this. God is Lord over
Nature in Our Lady, and in all things wherein Nature has
received its nature; but He exalted Nature in Our Lady
more than in any other creature, wherefore the Lord was
more truly within her and with her when the Angel spake
to her these words, ‘ The Lord is with thee,’ than with any
other creature; and therefore we should all do reverence
and honour to these words.”’ After this wise and in many
a manner beside did the Abbot give rule and do@trine to
the hermit as to how he should contemplate God and Our
Lady in these words ‘“‘ The Lord is with thee.”’

g. Long time abode the hermit in that place in penance
and austerity of life, and in contemplation of God and of
Our Lady. And abundance of deep devotion exalted his
understanding, through the infused science,! that he might
the better comprehend these things, than they are compre-

4 The “infused ” science is, of course, mystical theology, and is here con-
trasted with the “ acquired ” science, i.¢. of theology in the usual sense of
that word.

248

BENEDICTA TU IN MULIERIBUS

hended by the understanding of many monks who possess
the acquired science, the which, through lack of devotion,
may not be capable of such knowledge of the Divine
Essence and of its operation. So great was the devotion
of the hermit that many monks came to him to revive their
devotion and knowledge, by reason of the holy life which
he led, and by the devout and lofty matter of his speech
concerning the words ‘‘ The Lord is with thee.”

CHAPTER LXIV

BENEDICTA TU IN MULIERIBUS

It was the custom of the Abbot Blanquerna to go often to
visit the monk who had been Abbot before him, and like-
wise the Bishop who dwelt in that farm wherein was also
the monk aforesaid. It happened one day that the Abbot
was passing through a great forest, as he went to the farm
wherein dwelt the monk and the Bishop. Upon the way
was a fair fountain, beneath a lofty tree, in the shade
whereof lay an armed knight who was going to seek
adventure for the love of his lady. This knight had taken
his helmet from his head by reason of the great heat. His
horse was cropping the cool grass near the fountain; and
the knight was singing a new song in the which he spake
ill of troubadours who had spoken ill of love, and who had
not praised above all ladies that lady whom the knight
loved as his own.

2. The Abbot Blanquerna heard the song and compre-
hended the words thereof, and came to the place where the
knight was singing. The Abbot dismounted, and took his
seat near to the knight, and spake to him these words: “ It
is the nature of love that it causes that thing to be loved
which is pleasing and agreeable to man. It appears to me,
according to the significance of thy song, that thou art
enamoured of some lady. Her dost thou praise above all

249

BLANQUERNA

ladies else. I pray thee tell me, if there were another lady
nobler and fairer and more beautiful than thine, wouldst
thou love her more than that lady whom now thou lovest ?”
The knight left his singing, and answered the Abbot,
saying these words:

3. “If fortune willed that there were any lady nobler
and fairer than is she to whom love has bound me, then
love would work wrong if it made me not to love her above
all ladies else; for a lover who loves not the highest has
defect of love, and love works defect against that lady who
is the fairest if it gives her not a better and more fervent
love than has any lady else of her worth and of her wealth.”
When the knight had spoken these words, the Abbot put
to him these questions:

4. “Sir Knight! I pray thee tell me wherefore thou
bearest arms.” The knight answered: “‘ To the end that
I may defend my body against them that would harm me.”
The Abbot enquired of the knight if he had arms where-
with he could defend his lady against that lady who was
loved by himself. The knight answered: ‘“‘ May love and
beauty and valour assist me to prove that my lady is fairer
and worthy of higher praise than any lady else.” “‘ Sir
Knight!” said the Abbot, “‘ After a nobler wise can my
Lady be praised than can thine, and even so should she
be praised, for her love and beauty and valour have greater
favour; wherefore my Lady is worthier of praise than
thine, and I am nobler in the love and service and praise
of my Lady than art thou in that of thine.”

5. Greatly was the knight displeased at the words of the
Abbot, and he said that if the Abbot were also a knight
he would slay him or take him captive because of the words
that he spake, and that by force of arms he would compel
him to own that his lady was fairer and worthier than any
other. “ Sir Knight!” said the Abbot. “‘ Knowledge and
reason are spiritual arms wherewith man conquers evil-

doing and error. Wherefore if thou desirest to fight with
250

BENEDICTA TU IN MULIERIBUS

me using these arms, that we may see which lady is the
fairer and more beautiful and worthy of the greater honour,
thy reasons make me not to fear. Rather do I feel courage
and strength within me whereby I may compel thee to own
that my Lady is fairer than thine.”

6. So between the Abbot and the knight there was a
great dispute as to which of their ladies was the fairer.
Both were of accord that each should praise his lady, that
it might be seen of which of them could the greater praise
be spoken. The Abbot desired that the knight should first
praise that lady whom he loved. So the knight praised his
lady, saying these words: ‘So fair and gentle is my lady
that love has made me to overcome and vanquish many
knights, and to honour my lady have I many times run
into mortal danger; for her have I borne grievous hunger
and thirst, heat and cold, and many trials have I suffered
in my body to do her service. Wherefore, as all these
things are greater and of greater worth than those where-
with thou servest thy lady, therefore, Sir Monk,”’ said the
knight, “is it signified that if thy lady were fairer and
worthier than mine thou wouldst do, and wouldst have
done, greater things, and have borne greater trials, in the
love and service of thy lady, than those things which I have
done and suffered in praise of mine.” Many other words,
the which words it would take long to relate, spake the
knight to the Abbot in praise of his lady.

7. “Sir Knight!” said the Abbot. ‘‘ Many things
could I relate to thee truthfully in praise of my Lady; but
one thing alone suffices for my Lady’s praise, and this will
prove that she is fairer and more beautiful than thine.
Therefore against the things which thou hast said will I
not speak, but will say alone in her praise: ‘ Blessed art
thou among women.’”’ The knight desired that the Abbot
should expound to him that article of praise aforesaid, so
the Abbot expounded to him this thing which the angel
Gabriel spake to Our Lady, in the words following:

Dasa

BLANQUERNA

8. “It was the will of the Son of God, and He was
pleased to choose Our Lady Saint Mary above all other
women, and to give her greater grace than that which is
in any woman else; for God took of the Virgin Saint Mary
human flesh when He became incarnate within her, and
she, being a virgin, conceived by the grace of the Holy
Spirit in her womb God and man. This Lady is Mother
both of God and man. The God of Whom she is the
Mother is greater than all the creatures; and the Son of
Man of Whom she is Mother is greater than all the creatures
likewise, because He is one Person with the Son of God
Who of all creatures is Creator. This is she that is my
Lady, and she is the Head of our Order; and this one
article of praise suffices to. vanquish any other praise soever
which can be uttered concerning any woman.”

g. Long did the knight reflect upon the praise which
the Abbot had spoken concerning Our Lady Saint Mary;
and through the light of grace and the merits of the Abbot,
the knight reflected upon the vain and foolish love which
he had borne to his lady, and how that through this love
he was in mortal sin, and in peril of damnation, and how
his lady had no power wherewith to defend him from the
fire of hell, nor could give him as a reward the glory of
heaven, nor could even lengthen his life. As the knight
reflected thus, he sighed and wept and spake these words:

10. “ How late, O love, art thou in filling this guilty
sinner with love for that Lady who is the fairest !2_ If I,
O love, had known thee and loved thee, then had I been
the servant and subjeét all the days of my life of that fairest
Lady, whose servant is this monk that has done her honour
in making her known to me as worthier than all women
else. If in thee, O love, there were pity, or pardon, or
gifts,? or patience, or charity or humility, could& thou
make me to be a servant of this fairest of women? Or

1 Lit. “ /a dona mellor.”

2 ni perdé ni do: a play upon words which occurs frequently in the book,
252 : a

BENEDICTA TU IN MULIERIBUS

would death stay till I had done many things for love of
her?” These words and many more did the knight utter
with such great contrition and devotion that the Abbot
was moved thereby to devotion and to tears.

11. “ Sir Monk!!” said the knight, ‘‘ Tell me if it be
possible that the Lady whom thou lovest would suffer me
to love her, and to Strive for love of her with all my might,
all the days of my life, in battles and combats, wherein I
should ever be opposed to such as do her dishonour and
deny her worth.” The Abbot answered the knight, “‘ The
greater is the worth of the fairest of women, the more does
she delight in a sinful man who suffers for her sake and
becomes her servant and her lover; wherefore she is worthy
to have honour above all ladies else.” Great joy had the
knight of this, and many tears did he shed, saying these
words:

12. “‘ No lettered man am I, nor am I versed in divers
tongues, whereby through my words I may sing the praises

of Our Lady to unbelievers; but with arms will I go and

do honour to that Lady whom God has honoured above all
women else. A new way will I make whereby Our Lady
may be honoured. And this is that way, that I will go
and do battle in the land of the Saracens against some knight
who is no servant of Our Lady; and when I have overcome
him, another will I overcome also.” When the knight had
spoken these words he took leave of the Abbot, and the
Abbot gave him his blessing, and set for a name to that
new rule which the knight had taken: “ Benedi¢ta tu in
mulieribus.”

13. Through the will of God it came to pass that this
knight who had taken the service of “‘ Benedi¢ta tu ’’ came
to the country of a Saracen king. When he arrived there,
he went, all armed, upon his steed, to the palace of the
king, saying that he desired to speak with him. The king

1 Sényer en monge! The en is roughly the Catalan equivalent of “ Mr”.
The mode of address is therefore quite deferential.
Pi

BLANQUERNA

was pleased to give the knight admittance, and caused him
to be brought before him. When the knight came before
the king, he spake to him in these words: “ The servant
and the lover am I of a Lady who is worthier than all
women else, and who through the grace of the Holy Spirit
is Mother of God and Man. And with any man in thy
Court who denies this honour to Our Lady will I here do
battle, to the end that I may compel him to give due honour
to Our Lady the Virgin Saint Mary, in whose service I am
newly admitted knight.”

14. The Saracen king said to the knight that he be-
lieved not that Our Lady was the Mother of God, but that
he believed indeed that she was a holy woman and a virgin
and the mother of a man that was a prophet; and that
therefore he desired not that the knight should do battle,
but rather that he should set before him arguments, since
he denied to Our Lady that honour which the knight
attributed to her. The knight answered the king and said
that the greatest honour which Our Lady has is that of
being the Mother of God; and that he would do battle with
every man who forbade that such honour should be paid to
Our Lady. But since he was unlettered and knew not the
Scriptures, therefore he desired not to answer the king by
argument, but rather would he do battle by force of arms
with all the knights of his court, one after the other.

15. Great wrath had the king against this knight who
challenged all his court, and he commanded that he should
be delivered up to a cruel death. But a Saracen knight said
to the king that if this knight were put to death, excepting
in battle, it would appear that there was defect of chivalry
in his court; and he prayed the king to allow him to do
battle with the knight. It pleased the king and all his
court that battle should be done between these two knights.
When they were on the field of battle, the Christian knight
had remembrance of his Lady and said: ‘“ Blessed art thou
among women.” And he made before his face the sign of
se

BENEDICTUS FRUCTUS VENTRIS TUI

the Cross, and set spurs to his horse, and wounded the
Saracen knight; and by force of arms overcame and slew
him.

16, The king was moved with great wrath, and even so
were all the rest. The king commanded that knight after
knight should do battle with this Christian until they had
vanquished him. So another knight entered the field, and
all the day long they fought, yet neither of them van-
quished the other. All that night the two combatants
rested, and the king was arbiter in the battle, that it might
not be said that by force of will the Christian knight was
wronged therein. When the morrow came, both knights
returned to the battle-field, and when the Christian knight
was about to strike the Saracen with his sword the Saracen
declared himself vanquished, and acknowledged that Our
Lady was worthy to be lauded and praised according as
the Christian praised her. In the presence of all he spake
these words, and said that he would fain be of the rule and
order of “‘ Benedi¢ta tu,” and that he was prepared to do
battle with any other Saracen knight who denied to Our
Lady her due honour. Great was the wrath of the king,
and he commanded that both knights should be taken and
put to death. So they became martyrs for Our Lady, who
honoured them with the glory of her Son, because for her
sake they had suffered martyrdom. Even so is she ready
to honour all those who in like manner will do her honour.

CHAPTER LXV
BENEDICTUS FRUCTUS VENTRIS TUI

Wuewn the Abbot had reached the farm wherein lived as
contemplatives the Bishop and the monk, the Abbot related
his adventure with the knight whom he had found by the
. fountain singing of love, and he recounted the words which
this knight had spoken and the rule to the which he had

255

BLANQUERNA

bound him. Long did the Bishop think upon the history
which the Abbot had related concerning the knight, and
he had remembrance of those words in the Ave Maria
which follow the words ‘‘ Blessed art thou among women ”’ ;
and when the Bishop had thought for a great space thereon
he spake to the Abbot after this manner:

2. “I bless the Divine light of pity and grace which has
enlightened that sinful man and bound him all the days of
his life to be a servant of that blessed Fruit which was in
the womb of Our Lady. Him do I adore, and bind myself
to praise, with all the physical powers of my body, and
with all the powers of my soul.’’ Courteously and with
great devotion the Bishop took leave of the Abbot and of
the monk whose companion he had been in honouring
Our Lady, and returned to his diocese.. The canons and
all the chapter and all the men of the city had wondrous
joy that their Bishop had returned to them, for they had
thought to have lost him.

3. Day by day the Bishop considered how he might find
some manner wherein to honour the Fruit that Our Lady
bare in her womb through the grace of the Holy Spirit.
It came to pass one day that the Bishop held synod, and
preached to all the clergy, asking of them counsel as to
how he might greatly honour the Blessed Fruit of Our
Lady. It chanced that there was in that synod a clerk
who came from an isle beyond the sea, the which is called
Majorca; and he said to the Bishop, in the presence of all,
that that isle belonged to a noble and learned king, the
which king of Majorca is called En Jacmet That king
is a man of noble customs, and has much devotion as to
the manner wherein Jesus Christ may be honoured by
preaching among the unbelievers; and to this end he has
ordained that thirteen friars minor shall Study Arabic in
a monastery called Miramar,? established and set apart in

1 i.e. James (for the prefix, see p. 253, above).
* See Introduction, pp. 17, 20, and p. 325, below.

256

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

a fitting place, and he himself has provided for their needs;
and when they have learned the Arabic tongue they will
be able to go, by leave of their General, to honour the
Fruit of Our Lady, and in His honour suffer hunger and
thirst, heat and cold, fears and tortures and death. And
this establishment, he said, has been made in perpetuity.

4. Greatly did it please the Bishop and all the rest to
hear of this establishment, and greatly did they praise the
devotion of the king and all the friars who for the love of
God desired to suffer martyrdom. After a few days the
Bishop ordained and built in a fitting place, far from any
town, a monastery right fair; and by the will of the Pope,
and of the chapter of that diocese, the monastery was
endowed, that within it thirteen persons might live and
Study, and learn divers sciences and divers tongues, that
Holy Church might acquit its debt of honour to the Blessed
Fruit of Our Lady. And to that monastery the Bishop
gave the name Benedictus Fructus; and he resigned his
bishopric, and, together with some canons and monks and
laymen, established himself in that monastery to honour
the Fruit of Our Lady, according to the rule and manner
of the monastery of Miramar, the which is in the Island of
Majorca.

CHAPTER LXV!

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

Tue monk that had aforetime been Abbot had a great
yearning for the Bishop, who had of late been in his com-
pany. That monk had remembrance of these words in the
Ave Maria: “‘ Holy Mary, pray for us,” and he desired
to preach these words all the days of his life in honour of
Our Lady. The monk considered how many are the
preachers who preach the word of God in towns and
churches, but that to the shepherds who wander through
the woods and mountains no preachers are sent. Where-

R Pies

BLANQUERNA

fore the monk spake to the Abbot Blanquerna these
words:

2. “ According to my knowledge there is a sore lack of
preachers to those people that live and dwell* in the moun-
tains and in the forests, and come not to church; therefore
would I have a rule and office, whereby all the days of my
life I may preach to these shepherds and speak to them of
the words ‘Holy Mary, pray for us’ ; for the shepherds
have opportunity for thought and reflection, because they
are all alone, and there is none to hinder them from think-
ing upon that which a man might say to them concerning
the honour of Our Lady; and the greater is their thought,
the more may devotion and love of Our Lady be increased
in them.”

3. The Abbot was right pleased at the devotion of the
monk, and at the manner of life which he desired to lead
from thenceforward in honour of Our Lady; and he re-
turned to the monastery to see how he might make establish-
ment, with the consent of the chapter, that ever thereafter
it should be a custom that one man of that monastery should
be a preacher to the shepherds, and that his office should
bear the name “ Ora pro nobis.” That establishment gave
pleasure to all the community; and the monk who had of
old been Abbot took that office, and begged the Abbot for
a rule and instruction whereby he should preach to the
shepherds concerning the words: ‘“‘ Holy Mary, pray for
us.” So the Abbot gave this rule and instrution for the
which the monk begged, in these words which follow:

4. “It is a thing most natural,” said the Abbot, “ that
between the understanding and the will there should be
strait agreement, since the understanding comprehends that
which the will loves, and the will loves that which the
understanding comprehends; wherefore that sermon is
profitable wherein are shown forth such arguments as may
be proved by the nature of understanding. Furthermore,

1 son e€ estan.

258

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

since shepherds are folk more likely to be led to under-
standing by means of argument than by authority, there-
fore they will the more readily love the honours of Our
Lady if they have understanding thereof through reasons
necessary and probable, than they would do if they had to
believe them by authority.”

5. ““ When the understanding has comprehended one
of the arguments which a preacher has expounded, the
understanding commits it to the memory, and understands
in turn the remaining arguments of the preacher; and
when the sermon is long, and the arguments therein are
over-subtle, the memory cannot render to the understand-
ing all that which the understanding has commended to it;
whereof proceed ignorance and want of devotion in those
that hear sermons. Wherefore, as this is so, it is a
seemly ordinance that all such sermons as are made be
* dbgief.””

6. “It is the nature of will to love that which is most
pleasing to it. Wherefore, the better is the content of an
argument, the more needful is it to pronounce it at the end,
that the will may have desire for it, and through desire
may come devotion to the words, and devotion may be
turned into action; wherefore it is fitting that in a sermon
the best word be kept till the end.” Many things
spake the Abbot which it is needful for a preacher to know,
especially concerning good works and devout words.

7. When the Abbot had made exposition to the monk
of Ora pro nobis, according to the manner aforesaid
and in many another wise, concerning the method of his
preaching, the Abbot made contemplation of Our Lady
in presence of the monk, to the end that the monk might
have rule and doétrine concerning the preaching of “ Ora
pro nobis.” The Abbot therefore spake these words:

8. “Holy Mary! I adore and bless thy glorious Son,
to Whom thou dost pray for us sinners. If thou hast greater
desire to pray for us sinners than have we ourselves, it befits

=e

BLANQUERNA

us not to beg thee to pray for us; but, because we should
not be worthy to be heard in thy prayers if we prayed not
to thee and trusted not in thy prayers, therefore are we
bound to pray to thee and to contemplate thee and thy
honours, that we may do honour and reverence to thee,
and that thou mayest have mind of us with pious remem-
brance, and look upon us with thine eyes of mercy, in these
dark days wherein we live, having defect of devotion and
charity; through the which defect we forget the Passion
of thy Son, making not remembrance thereof as we ought,
nor doing all that we might and ought to do in honour of
thee and of thy Son; yet cease thou not to pray for us with
all thy power. Wherefore, as this is so, do thou, O Queen
of all kings and of all queens, lend us thine aid that we
may honour thee in honouring thy Son in those places
wherein He is despised, unloved, disbelieved and mocked
by those men to whom He looks to do Him honour and
defend Him as touching the faults which are attributed to
Him by such as are in error and journey towards the
eternal fires.”

9. “O Queen! So soon as thou wert filled with the
Holy Ghost and with the Son of God Whom thou didst
conceive, thou wert bound to pray for us sinners; for the
greater are thine honours, the more does it behove all men,
both righteous and sinful, to trust in thee; and the more
earnestly do we trust in thee, the more does justice make thee
to have care for the healing of our diseases and the pardon-
ing of our sins.”

10. ‘“‘ Look down, O Queen, among us, and see how
many men praise and adore thee, singing to thee, making
remembrance of thee, and doing thee reverence. Where is
thy justice, thy pity, thy charity and thy nobility if thou
pray not for us? And if for us thou prayedst to thy glorious
Son, and thy Son heard not thy prayers, where would be the
love that He was wont to have toward thee, becoming in-

carnate within thee, and making remembrance of thee and
260

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

commending thee to Saint John when He hung upon the
Cross and was near to death?”

11. “ Beloved son!” said the Abbot to the monk,
“ According to the manner whereof thou hast heard, do
thou go to preach among the shepherds, dwelling with
them, and causing them to make contemplation of Our
Lady; and return thou to us for certain festivals in every
year. Have thou grace and blessing of God and of Our
Lady. To honour Our Lady hast thou humbled thyself;
and thou shalt indeed be exalted if thou makes her to be
remembered and invoked and loved, for her prayers will
make thee rise even to the glory which is without end.”
Then the monk took leave of the Abbot and of his com-
panions, and went from them to those places wherein dwelt
the shepherds.

12. The monk of Ora pro nobis went over moun-
tains and plains and through forests, preaching to the
shepherds concerning the honours of Our Lady, who prays
both for righteous men and for sinners. It came to pass
one day that the monk came to a great valley wherein were
many herds of beasts. In that valley there was a cave,
wherein a shepherd secretly held a woman whom he had
carried off from her husband and with whom he dwelt in
sin. The monk came by chance to that cave, in the which
the shepherd and the woman were eating. Courteously
did they welcome him and invited him to dine with them.
‘* Sir!” said the shepherd, “‘ Our meat is bread and water,
and a little cheese and a few onions; may it please thee to
eat with us of that which God has given us.” The monk
ate with the shepherd and drank of the water, as was his
wont when he dined with the shepherds to whom he
preached.

13. While they ate, the shepherd had to go to drive his
sheep from a field of corn which they had entered, and
the monk was left with the woman, of whom he enquired

concerning her history; and the woman related to him
261

BLANQUERNA

how that she was the wife of another shepherd, and
was living with this shepherd in sin, and had repented
her of the fault which she had committed against her
husband; but for fear of her husband she dared not return
to him, and the shepherd with whom she lived desired not
to leave her, for the great love that he bore her. The
shepherd returned, and they continued to eat together;
and, when they had eaten, the monk made the sign
of the Cross and blessed their table, and spake these
words:

14. ‘‘ Once on a time it came to pass that a shepherd
lived in sin with a woman upon a high mountain. That
woman prayed daily to Our Lady Saint Mary that she
would deliver her from her sin. One night the shepherd
slept; and he thought that he saw Our Lady Saint Mary,
who wrote down the names of all those for whom she
prayed to her Son, and wrote in her book the name of the
woman with whom the shepherd lived. So the shepherd
entreated Saint Mary that his name also might be written
in that book. Saint Mary answered, and said that since
he prayed not to her daily, he was not worthy that his
name should be written therein.”

15. “Sir!” said the shepherd to the monk: ‘‘ Knowest
thou if Our Lady would pray for me if I begged her daily
so to do?”’ The monk answered and said that he would
be surety to him that Our Lady would pray for him, pro-
vided only that he did no dishonour to her Son, to Whom
all they that are in sin do dishonour, and all they that leave
their sin do honour. As the monk spake these words, the
shepherd had knowledge of the sin wherein he lived, and
he spake to the monk as follows:

16. “ I am in the sin of lust, and I would fain leave it,
that I may honour the Son of Our Lady and that Our Lady
may pray for me; but were I to leave this woman she
would have no counsellor, neither dares she to return to

her husband, wherefore I am compelled to live in sin.” The
262

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

monk enquired of the woman if she trusted so much in the
prayers of Our Lady that she would go with him to her
husband. The woman answered, and said that she would
indeed return to her husband, and accuse herself of her
faults, that he might take vengeance upon her, and that
she would trust in Our Lady to help her in the penitence
which her husband would make her to suffer by reason of
his vengeance.

17. So the monk and the woman journeyed to the house
of the husband of that woman; and the shepherd, who
remained in the valley, did penance continually, and gave
adoration and praise to Our Lady daily. While the monk
and the woman journeyed, they found, asleep, in the shade
of a tree, the shepherd who was the husband of that woman,
and who was going to seek his wife, with arms wherewith
to slay the shepherd who had carried off his wife from him.
So the monk and the woman kneeled before the sleeping
shepherd, and the monk spake these words:

18. “ Holy Mary, pray for us! Holy Mary! Fulfilled
is thy prayer in this woman who is a sinner, and repents
her of her sin; hadst thou not prayed for her, she would
not have repented thereof. It behoves thee to bring it to
pass that this shepherd may receive grace of thy Son,
whereby he may pardon his wife. It behoves thee to re-
ward the hope which we have placed in thee that thou
wilt help us.”” When the monk had said these words, the
woman, weeping and with great contrition of heart, spake
as follows: ‘‘ Guilty am I, and greatly have I sinned against
my lord and master, who may use toward me justice or
pardon. To all that he may do I am resigned. If it came
to pass that my husband would pardon me, then should I
desire to lead the life of a hermit, dwelling for ever alone,
and doing penance for the sin which I have committed
against him. If my husband strikes me or tortures me or
‘throws me into captivity, he will aét according to justice,

and with patience will I bear my punishment. Thanks
263

BLANQUERNA

will I give to the Queen of Heaven, and bless her Son,
Whose will it is that in this world I suffer for my sins
whereof indeed I am guilty.” While the woman spake
thus, she repeated often these words: “‘ Holy Mary, pray
for us,” for she saw that these words would aid her in her
necessities.

19. While the monk and the woman were on their knees
before the sleeping shepherd, the shepherd dreamed that
he was being tortured because he had killed a man, and
that as his soul was about to leave his body, a demon very
horrible to behold desired to take it; but Our Lady
kept his soul within his body that the demon might not
take it, and she prayed her Son to be pleased to pardon
him for the death of the man whom he had wrongly killed.
When the shepherd had dreamed thus, he heard, as it were
in his dream, the words which his wife and the monk were
repeating. At these words the shepherd awoke, and saw
his wife, with the monk, who were kneeling before him,
and adoring and invoking Our Lady with tears, as they
spake the words aforesaid.

20. The shepherd marvelled greatly when he beheld his
wife with the monk; and by the virtue of the words which
they spake, and of the dream which he had dreamed, he
was moved to forgiveness and to tears, and together with
them he made prayer and praise to Our Lady. For a long
time were they together weeping and in prayer; and, after
they had prayed, the shepherd spake these words: “ If lust
moves the body to sin, how much the more ought remem-
brance of the Passion of Christ, and of the nobility of Our
Lady, to move the will to pity and forgiveness! And he
that repents and judges himself should not be punished
twice. If I forgive not, I do wrong in asking for forgive-
ness. Not only do I pardon, but I would forfeit all that
I have to give to any man that asked of me pardon. If
Our Lady on my behalf asks pardon, it is right that J like-
wise should show pardon,” .

264

SANCTA MARIA, ORA PRO NOBIS

21. The woman kneeled before her husband, and kissed
his hands and his feet, and her husband pardoned her, and
commanded her to return to his house wherein she should
remain in that peace which for so long she had enjoyed.
“ My lord!” said the woman. ‘‘ Unworthy am I to be
in company with thee; not only does it behove thee to
pardon me, but likewise to bestow on me a gift, whereby
I may be alone and in poverty live the life of a hermit,
eating raw herbs and doing penance for the wrongs and the
sins which I have committed against thee.”’ So ordinance
was made between these three, that the good woman should
do penance in a cave, which was in a high mountain near
to a spring, and that from time to time her husband should
bring to her some pittance wherewith she might sustain
her body, and that henceforth they should never know one
another in carnal delight but should live each one in
chastity. Very great was the devotion and the holy life of
each, and whensoever the husband went to visit the woman,
very great were the blessings which each bestowed upon
the other, and the instruction which each of them gave to
the other, that they might do honour therewith to God and
to Our Lady.

22. Ina meadow, near to a fair spring, there was a great
company of shepherds who kept their flocks. The monk
of Ora pro nobis came to that meadow, and greeted the
shepherds, and said that he was a preacher to shepherds,
and begged them that they would hear a sermon which he
desired to preach to them. So the monk preached to the
shepherds with examples,! that he might move them the
more to devotion. So many pleasing sermons did the monk
preach to the shepherds, that they thought daily upon that
which he spake to them; and, thinking thereon, they grew
to love and to honour God and to pray to Our Lady. For
seven days did the monk remain with them in that place.
. On the eighth day he took leave of them, and went to
See note, p. 189, above.

265

BLANQUERNA

preach to other shepherds who dwelt in those regions.
The good things and the praises whereby God was
honoured by those shepherds to whom the monk preached,
who may tell them? And the wondrous fame which the
monk won in every land, who can relate it? And the
shepherds who came to hear him, who can count them?

ENDED IS THE BOOK OF RELIGION

266

BEGINNETH THE THIRD BOOK
VoniCil HseeOF PRELACY

CHAPTER LXVII

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE ABBOT BLANQUERNA
WAS ELECTED BISHOP

Wuen the Bishop had resigned his bishopric, and had set
himself to study Arabic, the canons met in the chapter-
house to make ordinance concerning the election of a
pastor. One of the canons said that they ought to enquire
of the Bishop as to which of them he thought should be
Bishop in his stead, for since he had been Bishop and had
renounced his see, desiring to die in honour of Jesus Christ,
it was fitting that they should enquire of him and that he
should have a vote in the chapter. All the canons found
this counsel good. So he that was aforetime Bishop came
to the chapter-house, and in the presence of all said that
they should elect for their Bishop the Abbot Blanquerna,
for he knew none that was so worthy of the office; yet he
thought not that Blanquerna would desire to be Bishop.
And if Blanquerna refused election, his counsel was that
they should ele&t his successor according to the manner
and art of election.

2. Greatly was the Archdeacon displeased at that which
was said by him that was aforetime Bishop, and certain of
the canons were displeased likewise, for they were canons
secular, and feared that, if the Abbot Blanquerna were
elected, he would cause them to become canons regular;
but the greater number of the canons found it good that
the Abbot Blanquerna should be Bishop; nevertheless they
desired to make election by following the art of election.
But the Archdeacon, together with certain of the canons,
opposed the holding of an election according to theaart.
Wherefore the rest, who desired that Blanquerna should
be Bishop, elected him to the office without the art; a

207

BLANQUERNA
certain of the canons dissented, and elected the Archdeacon
for their Bishop.

3. Great discord was there among the canons by reason
of the discordance in the ele¢tion which they had held. So
two canons went to the Abbot Blanquerna, and said to him
that he had been elected Bishop, and that he had received
more votes than the Archdeacon; wherefore they prayed
him, on behalf of all their companions, that he would
accept the bishopric, and go to Rome, to the end that his
eleCtion might be confirmed. The Abbot Blanquerna made
excuses, saying that with the contemplative life 1t accorded
not that a man should leave the life of religion to be a
Bishop, and he said that he would in no wise accept the
office. Greatly were these two canons displeased that the
Abbot desired not to be Bishop, and the rest were dis-
pleased likewise, of those that had elected him Bishop.
The Archdeacon went to Rome to seek his confirmation
as Bishop; but the greater number of the canons sent
against him an advocate, begging that their lord the Pope
would make commandment that the Abbot Blanquerna
should be Bishop.

4. When the Pope had heard either side, he spake these
words: “ Any semblance soever of simony is a thing to
be shunned in an eledtion, and opposition to it is a thing
most fitting; wherefore it seems to us that the Abbot
Blanquerna, who desires not to be Bishop, nor to pass from
a cloistered life to a sphere of life more ample, is worthy
to be elected Bishop.” So the Holy Father willed that at
all hazards Blanquerna should be Bishop, and sent to him
the commandment that he should so become. Great was
the displeasure of the Abbot and of all the community at
the commandment of the Pope, and Blanquerna sent to the
Pope two monks to excuse him, and to show the right
which he had so to do; for (said they) if he that was
aforetime Bishop could resign his diocese that he might

choose a Straiter life, it was evident that Blanquerna
268

HOW BLANQUERNA ORDERED HIS DIOCESE

could refuse eleétion, since he had taken the habit of a
monk, to the end that he might lead a life of greater con-
templation.,

5. So the monks went to Rome, and begged of their
lord the Pope that he would not take from them the Abbot
Blanquerna, for greatly would they be impoverished thereby,
and great things had he done for the monastery, and most
of all they made this prayer because he himself desired to
be excused for the reasons aforesaid. But the Pope desired
at all hazards that the Abbot Blanquerna should be Bishop,
that he might do great things for his diocese even as he
had done for the monastery; therefore the Pope was
pleased to command him by his obedience that he should
accept the office of Bishop. So the Abbot was compelled
to leave his office, and to accept the office of Bishop.
Greatly were all the monks displeased thereat, and great
pleasure had the canons who had elected him.

CHAPTER®LXViTI

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA ORDERED
HIS DIOCESE

Tue Bishop was in chapter together with all his canons,
and he spake these words: “ It is your will, reverend sirs,
that I be your pastor. As Abbot, I was in servitude, but
now my servitude is greater, for with greater risk and peril
does a pastor guard his well-fed sheep than his lean. Now
since ye desire that I be your pastor, I beg of you aid and
counsel, that ye may assist me in my pastoral office and in
the guarding of my sheep. Firét of all I desire to know
what is the income of the Cathedral Church, how many
are the canons and the beneficed clergy of the diocese, and
in what manner the income of the Cathedral is divided.
Let all these things be set forth in writing, to the end that

I may take counsel with myself, and see if there is aught
269

BLANQUERNA

as touching this church that can be bettered and ordered
to the greater honour of God, and that good example like-
wise may be given to the lay folk, who oftentimes fall into
sin through the evil compos that they have of their pastor
and of his companions.’

2. In the presence of the Bishop and of all se canons,
the writing for the which the Bishop asked was made, in
the which writing it was found that the Bishop had within
his diocese four and twenty canons, exception being made
of the Sacrist and the Archdeacon, the Provost and the
Master of the Schools Likewise were there thirteen
chaplaincies,? and other offices also, according as is fitting
in a Cathedral Church. Great was the income of the
church, and the share of the Bishop amounted to three
thousand pounds yearly.

3. Long did the Bishop think upon the estate of his
diocese, and upon the manner wherein he could better it.
It came to pass at Mass one day that the Gospel was sung
wherein Jesus Christ makes promise of eight Beatitudes.
When the Mass was ended, the Bishop held chapter,
according to the custom which he had on one day in every
week. When the Bishop was in chapter with all the
canons, he spake to them these words: “‘ Ye have heard,
reverend sirs, in the Gospel, how that our Lord God Jesus
Christ makes promise of eight Beatitudes. With your
counsel and will, I should desire to make in this diocese a
rule and an ordinance, according to the which these eight
Beatitudes may be ours. First of all I begin with my
income, whereof I will make three parts: the one shall be
given for alms, the second shall go to make peace between
those that are at enmity, the third shall be set aside for the
expenses which are necessary for my needs and for those
that are in my household.”

+ cabiscol, i.e. caput schole (in Castilian, maestrescue/a).
* capellantes (Castilian, cape//antas), canonical benefices to which certain
obligations are attached.

2.70

HOW BLANQUERNA ORDERED HIS DIOCESE

4. The Archdeacon answered the Bishop, and said that
dishonour would come to him and to all the clergy of the
diocese, if he kept not in his house a large retinue, that he
might have a great and honourable train, the which he
could not keep with a third part of his income only. The
Bishop answered that honour must not be desired save
with intention to the service of God, and that to give alms
is to do greater honour to God than to have an excessive
retinue whereby a man may have vainglory; for the palace
of a prelate is more honourable when at his gates there are
many poor to whom alms are given, than when upon his
table are many silver cups, and many persons dine with
him, and many beasts are in his stables and many vestments
in his wardrobes, and in his chests many pieces of gold.

5. The Bishop desired also that division into three parts
should be made in the number of the canons, and that one
part should be set aside for the service of the eight Beati-
tudes, the second for the study of theology and canon law,
and the third for the service of the Cathedral Church; and
he desired that all these four-and-twenty canons and he
himself and all the rest should be made regular. After this
he desired that the priests who sang Mass and served the
chaplaincies should, after Mass and the Hours, be set to
Study theology and law, and that they should take their
food together in the refectory and sleep in the dormitory,
to the end that, after the deaths of the canons, others should
be chosen from among them, and the care of the parish
churches should be given to them; and this ordinance he
desired to be made for all time, and to be confirmed by
the Pope, and likewise by the whole chapter.

6. Great was the strife that was between the Bishop and
the Archdeacon, and certain of the canons who were of the
same mind as the Archdeacon; but the Bishop said that
he would not continue as their Bishop if they confirmed
not that ordinance, and that he would send to the Holy

1 For this sentiment, cf. p. 456 (§ 292), below.
274

BLANQUERNA

Father to the end that he might confirm it; and if he
would not confirm it, let him hold him excused from being
Bishop, for he would not be the pastor of sheep whom he
could not defend from the wolves. The Bishop sent to
the Pope, by canons holy and devout, a report of the pro-
ceedings concerning this matter. Immediately the Pope
replied in writing to the Bishop, desiring that all should
be done according to his will; and saying that he rejoiced
that he had confirmed him as Bishop, for he had great hope
of the good that he would perform. When the messengers
had returned from the court, the Bishop Blanquerna made
ordinance concerning his diocese as he had said; and first
he made ordinance concerning study, and afterward con-
cerning the eight Beatitudes.

CHAPTER LXIX

OF POVERTY

Wuen the Bishop was with the canons in chapter, he said
to them that Jesus Christ promised the Kingdom of Heaven
to the poor, wherefore he desired that one canon should be
set aside for the office of poverty, the which canon should
preach concerning poverty, and be at the head of the poor
that were in that city, and that for the love of God he
should give up the income of his canonry, and beg the
wherewithal to live, and go poorly clad, and reprove them
that were not poor in spirit. When the Bishop had set
forth the details of this office, a certain canon, who was a
man of holy life, rose upon his feet, and begged that he
might have the office of poverty, promising to fulfil with
all his power the conditions aforesaid, the which were
fitting to the office.

2. The office was given to this canon, and the Bishop
caused it to be proclaimed in all the churches that he was

at the head of the poor, and that he would beg for them;
Pau

OF POVERTY

and he gave much pardon to any man who would give to
the canon. So that canon gave up his rich vestments for
the love of God, and all the beasts that he possessed, and
all the livery of his household; and went about poorly clad,
begging for the destitute poor, and for the poor that were
sick, and for poor maidens that desired to marry, and for
children that were orphans and needy, to all of whom he
caused some trade to be taught whereby they might live.

3. It came to pass one day that the Canon of Poverty
went to dine at the house of the Archdeacon. While the
Archdeacon was eating delicate meats, served in divers
fashions, the Canon of Poverty cried in a loud voice: ‘‘ Let
us flee from here! Let us flee! For the Archdeacon is
devouring and wasting the possessions of the poor of Jesus
Christ! ”’ And, crying thus, the Canon went out from
the house of the Archdeacon, and, as he cried, he went
through the town and to the houses of the other canons,
and many poor men went with him, who cried out like-
wise, using these same words that were uttered by the
Canon. Great was the shame of the Archdeacon, and in
many a man did the Canon awaken remorse by his reproof
of him.

4. On another day it came to pass that the Canon of
Poverty. was dining with the Master of the Schools. While
they ate, there entered into his courtyard many beasts
laden with corn for him, for he was a mercenary man, and
hoarded money wherewith to enrich a nephew of his whom
he greatly loved. As soon as the Canon saw the beasts
entering the courtyard, he rose from the table, and went
through the streets, gathering together the poor; and,
when he had gathered many poor folk together, he came
to the palace of the Bishop, and cried ‘‘ Justice! Justice!”’,
and all the poor folk cried out the same thing with him.
Great was the wonder of the Bishop at these cries, and
greatly marvelled all the rest. The Bishop and his canons
went out to the gate, where they found the poor, who with

S 273

BLANQUERNA

their advocate the Canon cried ever: “‘ Justice! Justice!”
The Bishop enquired of the Canon wherefore he thus cried,
and the Canon spake to the Bishop these words:

s. “ My Lord Bishop! It is written that all that remains
to thy clergy over and above their necessities belongs to
the poor. Now the Master has made storage of much
corn, and desires to sell it, to the end that he may buy a
castle for his nephew. I ask therefore that the money
which he will receive for the corn may be given to me, for
it belongs to these poor folk whom thou hast commended
to me; and his nephew is not a cleric, neither has he him-
self a mouth or a belly which has need of so much corn:
I demand therefore that justice may be done.” The Bishop
sent for the Master and enquired concerning the truth of
that which the Canon of Poverty had said; and he found
that it was even as he had said. So the Master had shame
and confusion, and the Bishop gave sentence that all that
corn should be given to the poor; and if the nephew of
the Master desired to be treated as poor, that he should
have a share likewise, even as the others of the poor.

6. The Canon of Poverty preached in every place in
praise of poverty and in condemnation of riches. One day
it came to pass that a very wealthy and honourable burgess
of that city had invited him to dine. Before they ate, the
Canon prayed the burgess to show him all his house. So
the burgess led him through all the rooms of his house,
and the Canon saw that there was no room nor any chamber
that had lack of aught; for the house was very fair and
wondrously fashioned. In every room was all that per-
tained to its office; for in the chambers there were many
beds and rich coverings, and in the hall were many weapons
and many benches, in the Stables many beasts, in the
kitchen many utensils, in the courtyard many hens and
geese, and much wood, and in the garden many trees. In
the granaries was much corn, and in the pantry much bread
and wheat; in the armoury were many silver cups, in the
274

OF POVERTY

wardrobes many vestments, and in the chests many pieces
of gold. The burgess and his wife and his children and all
his retinue had abundance of clothing and of all that they
needed. When the Canon had seen all these things, he
said that neither here nor there was there a place, neither
in any room, wherein he could see poverty; wherefore he
desired not to dine with the burgess, since he was a servant
of Wealth, the which was contrary to Poverty who was his
Lady.

7. The Canon desired therefore to leave the house of
the burgess and to go and dine elsewhere. But the burgess
said to him that he had a secret room in his house, the
which he had not yet seen, and he desired that he should
see it. So the burgess led the Canon to that room, which
was poorly furnished. In that room the Canon dined that
day with the burgess and with his wife secretly, and they
ate meagrely. And the burgess showed him a poor bed
wherein he and his wife lay, and he showed him the hair
shirts which they wore, and he showed him a book wherein
was made note of the alms which he did secretly. In another
secret room was the crucifix before the which the burgess
and his wife were oft-times to be found in prayer and in
contemplation, praying to God and speaking to one another
concerning Him. Greatly did the Canon marvel concern-
ing the lives of the burgess and his wife; and he enquired
of the burgess wherefore he kept his retinue and his house
with so great abundance of clothing and of victuals, and
wherefore he had it apparelled with all things. The burgess
answered, and said that the greater was the number of the
things in his house the poorer was he in spirit; for the
greater was the abundance and the riches of others, the
oftener did he see and despise them, wherefore was he the
poorer in spirit. Greatly was the Canon pleased at the
lives of the burgess and his wife, and he praised and blessed
God, Who had given him so worthy a companion in the
service of Poverty.

275

BLANQUERNA

CHAPTER LXX
OF MEEKNESS

Tue Bishop Blanquerna gave the office of meekness to a
certain Canon, the which Canon was to preach meekness
and to be himself meek, that his sermons might have the
greater truth. The remaining offices he divided among the
remaining canons whom he set apart for the service of the
Beatitudes, and for his own he kept the office of peace. It
came to pass one day that the overseer of the Archdeacon
had bought meat and hens and partridges; and the Canon
of Poverty, going with a great company of poor folk
through the streets, met the overseer of the Archdeacon,
who passed with two men that were laden with flesh. The
Canon and the poor folk cried out: ‘‘ Thieves, thieves !
See, the Archdeacon is taking meat from the poor of Jesus
Christ! ’’ Great scandal and wrath had the overseer
thereat, and more wrathful still was the Archdeacon when
the overseer told him of it. So great was his wrath
that he desired to Strike the Canon of Poverty, but the
Canon of Meekness reminded him how that Our Lor?
Jesus Christ was meek upon the Cross, whereon Hi
suffered Himself to be nailed, and tortured, and woundec
and put to death, albeit He had done no sin. Where-
fore, since the Archdeacon had sinned, how great should
be his patience, for the Canon of Poverty accused him
according to justice, and reproved him for the harm
which he did to the poor, who had been commended to
the Canon of Poverty, through the will of the Bishop
and of all the chapter. So devoutly and with such
humble words did the Canon of Meekness speak in
this wise to the Archdeacon that the Archdeacon took
knowledge of his sins, and had patience, and refrained

from wrath and ill-will, and begged forgiveness of the
Canon of Poverty.

276

OF MEEKNESS

2. In that city there was a lady who greatly loved her
husband, but the husband was given to lust, and this lady
was impatient of his sins, to wit, his sins of unfaithfulness
to her. It came to pass one day that she was going with
certain other ladies to church, and on the way she met the
Canon of Meekness, who was preaching meekness and
patience, saying these words: ‘‘ Strong is the meek and
simple man over the man that is wrathful and impatient
and proud; for meekness does battle with the aid of
charity, justice, prudence and fortitude, and wrath and
impatience do battle using things that are contrary to these
virtues aforesaid.’”’ Long did the lady think upon the
words which the Canon preached, and she thought that
she would endeavour to corre€t her husband for his vices
and his lust with words that were simple and humble, and
with meekness and patience. Wherefore this lady spake
meek and humble words to her husband, the which words
seemed good to him; and the more her husband sinned,
the more did she increase the consciousness of his sin
within him, through the which he was remorseful, and
thence came there to him chastity, justice and shame,
which agree with consciousness of sin, and together with
fortitude they overcame the lust that was in his mind.

3. In the chief square of the city preached the Canon
of Meekness, and a man that was there reproached another
for theft, and the other excused himself with great wrath
and many threats, and in such wise did he excuse himself
that it would have appeared by his words that he was God,
and that he could neither go astray nor commit sin; and
the more he excused himself, the greater grew and in-
creased the wrath in him that had accused him, and the
greater was his suspicion concerning him, since wrath and
suspicion are ever in accord, and men that sin excuse them-
selves more vehemently in their words than do they that
have no sin. Now while the two disputed thus, the Canon,
who was preaching, spake these words: “‘ Wrongly was

277

BLANQUERNA

Jesus Christ accused when they said that He was possessed
and had a devil, and humbly and devoutly and with few
words did He answer, saying that He was neither possessed
nor yet had a devil. Wherefore, he that excuses himself
more vehemently than did Jesus Christ would make it to
appear by his words that he can neither go astray nor
commit sin.”

4. While the Canon spake these words a slate fell from
a roof and struck the Canon on the head and wounded him
sorely; and the Canon had patience, and bore the wound
in peace, and spake words that were humble and devout.
While they led the Canon to the surgeon two men began
to quarrel, and the one endeavoured to strike the other with
a knife, and he struck the Canon of Meekness in the arm,
and wounded him sorely; and the Canon with meekness
begged for him the pardon of God, and praised and blessed
God, Whose will it was that he should have patience and
speak words of meekness. Greatly did the words of the
Canon edify all them that were with him, and especially
him that excused himself so vehemently concerning the
charge of theft.

5. After some time the Canon was healed of his wounds.
Now the Prince of that land disendowed the Church, and
did to it many wrongs; for that Prince was not a good
Christian, neither desired he to obey the Bishop Blan-
querna as concerning that which he commanded him by
virtue of his office. To the Pope came knowledge of the
wrong which that Prince did to the Church, and the Holy
Father sent a message to the Bishop that the Prince should
be excommunicated and forbidden the offices of the Church.
But all feared to forbid them to him, because they knew
that he was a wicked and cruel man, and they had fear of
death; wherefore they were afraid to forbid them to him.
One day the Bishop was in chapter with the canons, and
the canons who held the offices of the eight Beatitudes were

present. There was discussion among them which of the
278

OF MEEKNESS

eight by virtue of his office should go to the Prince with
the message of the Pope, and it was decided by the chapter
that the Canon of Meekness should have that office, be-
cause of the meekness of Jesus Christ, Who was their
Pastor, Whose advocates are all the pastors of this world; and
because this must needs be done with meekness of speech
and contrition of heart, therefore was it decreed that the
Canon of Meekness should bear this message to the Prince.

6. When the Canon was brought before the Prince, he
spake these words: ‘‘ Our Lord Jesus Christ said that the
meek should possess the earth. Since I am meek, it is
decreed that I should be sent to thee to tell thee that thou
art forbidden the offices of the Church by reason of the
wrong that thou doest her. Meekness has vanquished me
and makes me to be in peril of death. If there is within
thee fortitude, justice, humility and patience, meekness will
make my words to be pleasing to thee; but if within thee
there is wrath, disobedience and wrong, then will my words
of humility combat thy words of pride.”

7. Greatly did this message displease the Prince, and
he commanded that the Canon should be stripped and
bound and scourged before him, and afterwards delivered
to a cruel death. While the Canon was being bound and
scourged, he prayed to God for the Prince, and for them
that scourged him, and he praised God, Who made him
to bear punishment for the sins which he had committed
in this world. The more violent were his scourging and
his torture, the more of piety was in his looks, and the
more devoutly did he speak, using these words: “* Lord
Jesus Christ! Thou hast created me in Thy likeness and
hagt taken a human nature which is like unto my nature.
In like manner as Thou dids& will to be tormented, dost
Thou make me to be tormented, to the end that I may be
more like unto Thee: I cannot reward Thee for the gifts
which Thou desirest to give me. I bless Thee, O Lord,
for that Thou desirest to honour me; if I were wrathful

279

BLANQUERNA

with them that torment me I should not be meek nor like
unto’ Thee. 4

8. Greatly marvelled the Prince at the words which the
Canon spake. Wherefore he commanded that he should
no more be scourged nor harmed, and spake these words:
“ Not long is it since the clergy were proud and spake evil.
Whence comes it that thou dost speak such devout and
humble words? Can the time have come when humility
and devotion have agreement within you clergy, and when
we that are laymen may take example from you? I beg
and conjure you by God to speak to me concerning the
estate of the Bishop and of thy companions; for there is
in thee some new virtue, that in such a case as this they
have sent to me a man like thyself.”

g. So the Canon related to him the history of the Bishop
Blanquerna, and how he was aforetime Abbot, and how he
had been eleéted Bishop, and how he had ordered his
diocese, and how he himself was one of the eight com-
panions that by their lives were to give example of the
eight Beatitudes that Jesus Christ promised to the Apostles
and to such as followed them. Then the Divine Light
warmed the heart of the Prince with heavenly love, and he
spake these words: “ It behoves not that such a Bishop
or his companions should be disobeyed in aught.” So the
Prince and the Canon of Meekness went to the Bishop
Blanquerna, and the Prince begged forgiveness and made
satisfaction, and took leave of the Bishop and of the chapter
with their grace and blessing.

CHAPTER LXXI
OF TEARS

Tue Bishop Blanquerna gave a rule to the Canon of Tears
whereby he was to weep and suffer all those things for the
which tears are fitting, and he gave him an art and a rule

whereby his heart might be moved to love God so greatly,
280

OF TEARS

that it should bring tears to his eyes and make them to
weep. It came to pass one day that this Canon passed by
a slaughter-house, and he saw therein the Canon of Meek-
ness, who was gazing at the lambs which he saw the
slaughterers bind and slay, and he observed that they
lamented not but received their death in peace. The Canon
of Tears enquired of the Canon of Meekness wherefore he
was in that place, and he answered him, saying that he was
there to behold the slaughter of the lambs, and to remember
thereby his Lord Jesus Christ, Who suffered Himself to
be bound and slain as meekly as did the lambs, that He
might save sinners. When the Canon of Tears had heard
these words, he said that it behoved him to weep for the
death of his Lord Jesus Christ. So for a great space these
two canons were in tears and had devotion together, and
oftentimes did they come to that place to weep together,
for the comfort which they had from weeping, and for the
profit which they brought to many men in that place, the
which men had contrition for their sins and wept for the
Passion of Jesus Christ.

2. The Canon of Tears passed by the Synagogue of the
Jews, and saw many Jews entering therein that they might
pray to God; so he sat at the door of the Synagogue. The
Canon remembered how that the Jews had been the cause
of the Passion of Jesus Christ, and how they dishonoured
Him in the world, and believed not in Him but maligned
Him daily. While the Canon thought upon these things,
and on the damnation whither the Jews through ignorance
go, he wept right bitterly, saying these words: “ Ah,
Charity and Devotion! How is it that ye go not to honour
our Lord among these people who think that they honour
Him, yet do Him dishonour? Ah, Pity! How is tt that
thou hast not mercy upon these people who daily through
ignorance journey towards the fire that is everlasting? ”’

1 'To this day the custom of killing lambs on Good Friday remains in

Majorca.
281

BLANQUERNA

Many other words spake the Canon, and long did he weep
in that place, and many times came he to weep in that
place, to the end that Divine grace might enlighten those
that had strayed, and give devotion to Christians, that by
the virtue of God they might have greater diligence than
now they have in enlightening the unbelievers.

3. A certain worthy lady had a husband whom she
greatly loved, and he had been in captivity, and with a
large sum of money had been redeemed. This lady sold
all her possessions and those of her husband that she might
pay the ransom, and, since this sufficed not, she went
through the chief squares begging. The Canon of Tears
found her one day in the principal square of the city. As
she begged she wept, and related to a great company of
notable citizens the story of the captivity of her husband
and the torment which he suffered in prison. Together
with her she led four small children. All the citizens had
pity upon this lady, giving her money, and consoling her
in her tribulation. When the lady had spoken and received
alms, the Canon of Tears, weeping, spake these words:
““'This lady weeps for her husband, and has pity for the
torment which he suffers in prison. Her children have
come to poverty, wherefore she goes with them begging.
All her power does this lady put forth to ransom her
husband. But who is he that puts forth all his power in
honouring his Creator, Redeemer,! Benefactor, and the
Lord of all things that are? That Lord is more greatly to
be loved than is the husband of this lady: yet that place
is in captivity wherein He was conceived and born and
crucified, for the Saracens hold it in their power. Which
of you will assist me to weep for the ignorance of all such
as put not forth their whole power to honour their Lord?”
The Canon wept, and the people that were present began
to count their money and to speak of their merchandise,
whereat the tears of the Canon began to be increased.

1 Lit. recreador.
282

OF TEARS

4. At the entrance to the city were certain women of a
brothel. It came to pass one day that the Canon of Tears
passed by that place, and saw a great company of these
women; so he seated himself beside them and began to
say these words: ‘‘ I will weep for the sins of these women
who sell themselves to devils for money. The whole world
is not so great in value as one soul, yet each of these women
gives her soul to the devil for a single piece of money. It
behoves me to weep that the Prince of this land forbids
not these women to be in this place and cause men to sin.
Mine eyes shed tears because in this city there is none
whose business it is to see that these poor women live not
by this office.” While the Canon wept thus, the women
wept, together with the Canon, and excused themselves,
alleging their poverty. So the Canon and the women were
all in tears, and they that passed along the street had pity
upon them. While they wept thus, a rich burgess who had
no children entered the city riding upon his palfrey, and
his wife and his retinue accompanied him; and he heard
the words of the Canon and of the women, and through
the merits of the Canon God was pleased to inspire the
burgess and his wife with Divine grace, so that they
received these women as their daughters and took them to
their home; and the burgess established a hostel wherein
should live all of these women that desired to forsake the
sin of lust; and the burgess and his wife brought them up
to be servants, or in some other trade whereby they might
gain their livelihood. Furthermore the burgess treated
with the Prince and with the governors of the city, so that
never thereafter were such women suffered to be on any
of the roads which are at the entrance of the city, to the
end that men and women who entered and left the city
should have no bad example from them.

5. At Eastertide, and upon Easter Day, the Canon of
Tears desired to have some rest from the weeping to which

he had given himself by reason of the Sacred Passion of
283

BLANQUERNA

his Lord. So he went to the church wherein the Bishop
Blanquerna was to preach; and as he was at the entrance
thereof, he saw many women entering the church, the
which women were arrayed in noble garments. They had
dyed their eyebrows and their hair; and on their faces were
colours of white and scarlet, that they might be looked
upon by men, who should have desire for them in respect
of the pleasures of lust. Young men nobly arrayed and
with garlands upon their heads entered the church also,
and they looked rather upon the women than at the Altar
or the Cross, wherein is represented the Passion of the Son
of God. When the Canon had seen all these things, he
seated himself at the door of the church, and wept for the
sins of these people and their negleét of the Passion of the
Son of God.

6. While the Canon wept thus, the Bishop Blanquerna
came to the church, where he found the Canon weeping,
and enquired of him wherefore he wept. Then the Canon
made answer in these words: ‘‘ The Son of God had re-
membrance of the people whom He had lost, and came to
take human flesh and suffer Passion, that He might redeem
His people, and now His Passion is forgotten, and there
is none that is joyful for His Resurrection. Yet they have
remembrance of lust. Women and men bearing the signs
of lust come to this church that they may behold us weep-
ing; and I must console myself with tears, for my tears
are all my consolation, and the thoughts which their sins
awaken within me are my despair.

7. Greatly was the Bishop pleased at the tears of the
Canon, and he sat beside him, and they both wept for a
great space, and all the people that were in the church knew
the reason of their tears, and those men and women that
bore the signs of lust were in great shame and confusion
thereat. Then the Bishop preached, and said that thence-
forward he desired that men and women should not be

together in a church wherein there were no means to
284

OF AFFLICTION

prevent them from looking upon each other; and he gave
as an example the temples of the Saracens and the Jews,
saying that if they have this ordinance, albeit they live in
error, how much the more should the Christians who follow
the true religion have it, and look to it that no dishonour
be done to the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar, since this is
worthy of such great honour.”

8. Daily went the Canon to the church to weep for
sinners, and daily went he through the streets and wept
whensoever he had occasion thereof; and he endeavoured
to weep whensoever he perceived that God was not loved,
neither known nor obeyed, that the people might have
contrition and knowledge thereof, and beg of God forgive-
ness and devotion. The good which he did, and the evil
which came to an end through that which he did, who can
recount it? Of a truth, they that now take their ease will
have no more rest, if they once desire to resemble him.

CHAPTER LXXII

OF AFFLICTION

Tue Canon of Affliction prayed daily concerning fasts and
vigils and affliction, saying that Jesus Christ promises to
all them that will suffer hunger and thirst for love of Him
that they shall be filled. It came to pass one day that a
waggoner was eating bread and onions while his mule ate
oats. That waggoner was pale and thin, and his mule was
fat. The Canon demanded of the waggoner why he thought
more of his mule than of his own person; and the waggoner
said that the mule could not draw her loads without sufh-
cient oats, but that he himself could live upon bread and
onions. When the waggoner had said these words, the
Canon spake as follows in the presence of many men:

2. “ To fast and to eat poor food through avarice is none

occasion of the bliss which God promises in the Gospel;
285

BLANQUERNA

neither does it accord with justice that a man should satiate
an ass and starve his own body through avarice.”

3. It came to pass one day that the Canon of Affliction
was preaching in the chief square of the city and the Arch-
deacon passed through the square upon his horse, for he
was going to take recreation in a castle! that belonged to
him; and in his retinue there were barrels of wine, and
hens which had already been killed that they might be
very tender for their dinner; new white bread was there
likewise, with sauces and sweetmeats. The Archdeacon
was very fat and a great eater. Then in presence of
them all the Canon enquired of the Archdeacon which
satiety was of greater profit to the soul, whether the satiety
of temporal viands or satiety of the grace which God
promises to all them that for love of Him will suffer
hunger and thirst and affiGtion. The Archdeacon had
no reply ready, wherefore he went from him without
making any answer.

4. The Canon left the city, and went into another city
to preach affliction; and at the fork of two roads he met
two monks who were disputing the one with the other, for
one of them desired to follow the one road and the other
to follow the other road. The one had devotion to go and
preach in a certain village, but the other excused himself
because the village was far away, and upon the road he
would have hunger and thirst; wherefore, to avoid hunger
and thirst, he desired to follow the other road. When the
Canon of Affliction had learned the reason of their dispute,
he reproved that brother very sternly who feared to suffer
hunger and thirst to preach the word of God; for if Jesus
Christ feared not hunger and thirst and death that He
might save His people, how much the less should any man

2 This word (caste//) can mean: (1) a castle, (2) the inhabitants of a
castle, (3) a small town or village built around a castle and depending upon
it, (4) the inhabitants of such a town or village. The present paragraph and
the next illustrate two of these meanings. 2 castell.

286

OF AFFLICTION

excuse himself from suffering hunger and thirst that he
might honour and preach the word of God!

5. When the Canon had gone so far that he came to
the gate of the city whither he was going, he found a man
who had given to a poor person a piece of money, that
God might hold him excused for having broken his fast
on one day in Lent. The Canon and that man disputed
together for a great space of time as to whether that piece
of money excused him or not from his fast; the man alleged
his reasons, saying that greater good resulted from the
piece of money than from his fast, wherefore the alms that
he did excused him therefrom. The Canon said the alms
were not in that case given according to justice; for if a
man had sinned through superfluity of gluttony, it behoved
him that he should be punished for his sin by hunger, the
which hunger he had not through giving the piece of
money. So the Canon reproved the man very straitly and
vanquished him in argument.

6. When the Canon entered the city, he found a great
multitude of poor folk who were going through the streets,
begging alms for the love of God. All the poor folk came
towards the Canon, and the Canon went about with them
to the houses of wealthy men, crying, “‘ Hunger, hunger! ”’
It came to pass one day that a rich merchant commanded
that they should give the Canon and the poor folk to eat
until they were filled. When the Canon and the poor folk
had eaten, they cried more loudly than before, ‘‘ Hunger,
hunger!”’ Great was the wonder of the merchant, and
he supposed that they had not eaten enough, and com-
manded them to be given more. “ Sir!” said the Canon,
“We have eaten and drunk sufficiently by the grace of
God and by thy favour; but we cry concerning hunger,
that thou and others may hunger and thirst for the love of
God, that ye may be satisfied with the blessing of salvation.”

7. The Canon endeavoured, in so far as he was able, to

have hunger and thirst that he might punish himself for
287

BLANQUERNA

his sins, and give doétrine to the people whereby they
might suffer affiGtions and have remembrance of the
hunger which Jesus Christ suffered in the desert and the
thirs& which He endured upon the Cross. And the Canon
had not alone the office of preaching concerning bodily
hunger, but also that of the hunger of the spirit, that the
people might have hunger for justice, charity and the other
virtues, and that they might be filled therewith and so lead
good lives.

CHAPTER LXXIII

OF MERCY

Tue Canon of Mercy preached daily concerning mercy.
It came to pass one day that according to the decree of
justice a certain man was to suffer death. That man had
a wife and five children, who lived upon the evil gains
which that man had won at his trade. When the King
commanded that justice should be done to him, the woman
came to the Canon who served in the office of Mercy and
begged him to intercede for her and for her children with
the King, that he might have mercy upon her husband,
and that she and her children might have the wherewithal
to live. So the Canon went to the King, and spake to him
these words:

2. “Sire! Mercy and justice are sisters. Wherefore,
if thou hast been chosen king to the end that thou mayest
serve justice, it behoves thee, if ever thou hast been in-
clined to sin, to be the servant of mercy, that thou mayest
be pardoned, and that there may be fulfilled in thee that
word which Jesus Christ spake in the Gospel that they who
themselves have mercy shall receive mercy. If thou art
not sometimes merciful, thou wilt not be forgiven; and as
I am an advocate of mercy, therefore in the presence of
justice I beg of thee that thou have mercy upon this

woman and restore her husband to her.” Long did the
288

OF MERCY
King consider the words which the Canon of Mercy
spake to him, but he had fear les if he obeyed his words
he should a@ against justice, wherefore he spake these
words:

3. “ It behoves me to honour justice; and if I forgive, I
fear lest I dishonour justice; if I forgive not, I fear lest
Justice be aggrieved because I obey not Mercy her sister.
Therefore do I think very deeply, and I know not what to
choose. The Canon answered and said that the greater
likeness to God a man had in his works the better, the
nobler and the more worthily accustomed was he. Where-
fore, since God sometimes pardoned and sometimes con-
demned, and because a prince was set in the country to
represent God and to do His offices, therefore was it lawful
and right that an earthly lord should likewise sometimes
pardon and sometimes condemn. So many good reasons
did the Canon allege before the King, and so piously did
he beg him to have mercy, that the King pardoned the man
that was condemned to death, and said to the Canon that
it behoved him not to disobey any man who was so truly
a servant of mercy and who entreated him so piously as he
himself had done.

4. So fervently did the Canon serve in his office, that
he came many times to the place wherein the court was
held, to reason and to plead for the poor, without receiving
reward, and he was an advocate for the poor and the
orphans and the widows who had none other to help them.
The Canon was a notable clerk, and learned in the law,
and he reproved those advocates that falsely conducted
their lawsuits; and all the advocates feared him, and
through their fear of him they ceased to act falsely and to
practise deception in the lawsuits wherein they pleaded.
It came to pass one day that a peasant! had suffered great
wrong by reason of a field which a neighbour was en-
deavouring to take from him. This peasant had come to

1 pages. See note, p. 245, above.
T 289

BLANQUERNA

the court many times, and the judge had refused to hear
him. The peasant went to the palace of the King to tell
him of the wrong which had been done to him, but he
could not come in a fashion nor at a time at the which he
could speak with the King; for sometimes the King was
hunting, at other times he was privately in his bed-chamber,
at other times he was eating or sleeping or taking recreation.
So the peasant went to the Canon of Mercy, and begged
for his aid, and related his necessities to the Canon, telling
him how he could not gain speech with the King. The
Canon was in court, discussing a plea with a poor woman,
and he cried aloud so that all they that were in the court
could hear him, and he said: “‘ Is there none in this court
who has hope of mercy?’ Many were the men and women
that answered saying that they hoped in mercy. Then the
Canon spake to them, and begged them that they would
assist him to honour mercy, and he went with them to the
gate of the palace of the King, and in a loud voice they all
cried together, ‘‘ Mercy, mercy!”

5. Great was the wonder of the King at these cries, and
greatly marvelled all the rest; and he came to the gate, and
enquired of the Canon wherefore he and his companions
cried thus. “Sire!” said the Canon, ‘“‘ Our Lord Jesus
Christ gave Himself up to death because He had mercy,
and thou dost give thyself wholly to hunting, eating, sleep-
ing and taking recreation, and none other mercy hast thou,
save only this, Wherefore men that have need of justice
may not see thee nor speak with thee.’’ Great was the
shame of the King at the words which the Canon spake
to him, and he made ordinance that a man should Stand
at the gate of the palace to hear all those that came to him
through the defects of the Court of Justice, and that he
should make representation to the King, that the judge and
the other officials should be punished if they had not
administered justice according to the office which per-
tained to them.

290

OF MERCY

6. It came to pass one day in presence of the Canon
that a peasant,! at the beginning of the winter season in
the which man is accustomed to sow, lost one of his oxen,
so that there remained to him but one, and he gathered
together money enough to go to the market to buy another
ox. In the market was a draper? to whom the peasant
owed money, and he made complaint in the court con-
cerning the peasant. So the court gave sentence that the
peasant should pay the money. The peasant cried to the
Canon of Mercy that he would help him, and that time
should be given him wherein he could pay, and that he
should be permitted to buy the ox, that he might not lose
his sowing, and that his wife and children should have the
wherewithal to live for that year. For long did he beg
the Canon of Mercy, that he would plead for him with the
judge or with the draper, but they would not lengthen the
time of grace that the debt might be paid. The Canon of
Mercy had himself naught wherewith to help the peasant,
for he had given up all the income of his canonry for the
love of God; so he commanded the peasant to bring the
ox that remained to him. The peasant brought the ox,
and the Canon and the peasant together led the ox through
the market and through all the town, crying aloud and
enquiring if there were any man in that town who would
give himself in exchange for that ox. For long did they
walk and cry, but they found no man who would give him-
self in exchange for the ox. While the Canon and the
peasant led the ox through the town, they met the King,
who was returning from Mass, and the Canon enquired
of the King if he would give himself to the peasant in
exchange for the ox. Great marvel had the King at these
words which the Canon of Mercy spake to him, and he
enquired of the Canon what was signified by his words.

4. ‘Sire!’ said the Canon, ‘‘ God gives Himself to
such as give themselves to Him, and in so much as God

1 pages. * See note, p. 86, above.
291

BLANQUERNA

is of greater worth than those to whom He gives Himself,
He works superabundance of mercy ; wherefore greater
is the mercy which God gives in Himself when He gives
Himself to those whom He pardons and who give them-
selves to Him, than would be the mercy which thou
wouldst do in thyself to this peasant if he gave thee the
ox and thou didst give thyself to him in exchange.” Right
pleasing to the King and to all those that heard were the
words which the Canon spake concerning the mercy of
God, and he gave them great hope of mercy, and com-
manded that the money which the Court had exacted from
the peasant should be returned to him, and he himself paid
the draper on behalf of him, and caused the thing to be
written down concerning the draper, to the end that if it
should chance that he begged mercy from the King, the
King would use justice in respeét to him. Thereafter the
King made ordinance that no man for any debt soever
should be dispossessed of oxen whereof he had need in
his daily calling.

8. Day by day went the Canon through the city, and
took note of them that offended and did wrong to mercy,
and wrote down their names, and went to the Canon of
Humility that he might cause them to hav2 conscience
thereof, and to the Canon of Tears he gave their names
that he might bewail their sins, and that the Canon of
Affliction might fast because of them and make prayer.
In this manner did the Canon work night and day in the
service of Mercy; and all the eight canons who were
officers of the eight Beatitudes came together in one place,
and assisted each other to honour the Beatitudes wherein
God should be honoured. The good and the sound dis-
cipline which came from their work in that city, who can
tell it? And the good example which other cities had
therefrom, who is he that may reckon it?

292

OF PURE?

CHAPTER LXXIV

OF PURITY

Tue Canon of Purity preached daily concerning cleanness
of heart, because all they that have purity of conscience
shall in the next life see God, according as Jesus Christ
has promised in the Gospel. That Canon went through
the city, and took note of those that were in sin and those
that were in penitence; and to those that were in sin he
preached and gave many similitudes whereby he made
them to be conscious of their sins. It came to pass one
day that before a great multitude of people he put forth
this parable, speaking to them as follows:

2. “In a certain country there lived a man who had in
his belly a great serpent, which devoured him and ate his
entrails, and in his hand this man had a precious stone
which was very pleasant to look upon, so that in looking
upon it he found some recreation from the thoughts that he
had concerning the serpent which tormented him and
destroyed him without his being able to defend himself.
While this man was in that state, a physician came to him,
saying that he would cast the serpent from his belly if he
would give him that precious stone. But the man loved
the precious stone so greatly that he would not give it to
the physician; and the serpent caused the death of that
man in the presence of the physician, and the physician
carried away the stone. The serpent signifies that con-
sciousness of sin which causes the soul grief for its sins,
and by the stone are signified worldly riches, which are
won with great labour and are pleasant to possess. And
the death of the man signifies how that the riches remain
to them that live, and how the soul of him that possesses
them through evil-doing loses them and goes to the fire
which is everlasting. Wherefore, as this is so, more foolish
is he that dies in sin, having knowledge thereof, than was

293

BLANQUERNA

the man that would not give the precious stone to the
physician.”

3. While the Canon spake these words, a certain man
wept very bitterly in his presence, saying: ‘* That serpent
is in my belly, and destroys my heart, and the stone which
the physician asks of me is in my hands, and death comes
in company with the devil, who desires to take from me
the Stone and likewise to carry away my soul.” The Canon
begged the man secretly that he would expound to him that
which was signified by his words. So the man told him
that he was in sin, and had knowledge thereof, yet con-
fessed not himself, neither forsook his sin; for he had been
in this sin and had not made his confession. Straitly did
the Canon reprove that man because he forsook not his
sin, and most of all because he confessed it not. ‘ Sir!”
said the man. ‘So great is my fear that confession will
take from me the stone that I will not confess; and when
I desire to confess, I think that I shall not forsake my sins,
therefore do I despise confession, the which is of no avail
if a man confess not with intention to forsake his sins.”
Great argument was made between the Canon and that
man, as to whether the man should confess himself or not,
seeing that it was not in his will to forsake his sin. While
they thus strove, came the Canon of Mercy, whom they
appointed as judge, and he gave sentence that mercy was
the more proper to men that confessed their sins, albeit
they desired not to forsake them, than to those that con-
fessed not themselves at all; and this was so because mercy
and consciousness of sin and confession accord each with
the other against obstinacy and cruelty and despair.

4. Before them all there passed a lady right nobly clad,
and upon her features she had set divers colours that she
might be looked upon pleasantly with respect to the
pleasures of lust. Then the Canon of Purity spake before
them all, in such manner that the lady heard it, and asked
which thing was capable of being greater, whether purity
294

OF PORIET

of body or impurity of soul. A learned man, who was in
the presence of the Canon, answered and said that even as
the soul was a cleaner and purer creature than the body,
the more therefore could it be soiled through an unruly
will and through unclean remembrance, which should have
remembrance of uncleanness to the end that the will might
love it. Right pleased was the Canon with that which the
wise man had truthfully said, and he begged him to become
his companion in the service of purity. While they spake
together thus there passed before them a pig which had
wallowed in a quagmire of filth, and the Canon said, in
the presence of all, that that pig was less unclean than the
woman who had colours upon her features. Now in the
place wherein they spake, there was a foolish man who was
a kinsman of that lady, and he reproved the Canon very
sternly, and menaced him; but the Canon answered and
said that to keep silence concerning the truth is a thing
that is as contrary to purity of heart, as it is to speak against
knowledge. Wherefore he asked for sentence as to which
of the two had erred.

5. The Canon went daily to the houses of the clergy,
that he might know which of them were of honest life;
and the names of these he wrote down, and made mention
thereof to the Bishop and to the Canons, to the end that
if there came a case of election or of a gift of benefice, it
might be known to whom the gift should be made. And
many laymen he watched, and made search concerning
their sins and wrong-doings, and evil customs and habits,
and all this likewise he wrote down. He likewise asked
for aid in destroying evil customs and furthering customs
that were good; and by night he went through the streets,
crying loudly, and blowing upon a horn that men might
hear him. And he spake these words: “ Day is over,
night is come; let every man before he lie down to sleep
enquire of his conscience if this day he have done aught
that is against cleanness of heart and against his conscience ;

295

BLANQUERNA

and on the morrow let him seek forgiveness and do penance.
For if it is a thing moét foul to look upon carrion and those
unclean parts of the person which nature commands us to
cover, how much the more foul is it to remember, under-
&and and love sin and guilt, whereby the soul may no more
see God but will see itself for ever in hell, and behold only
the demons, which are things most horrible to the sight.”

CHAPTER LXXV

OF PEACE

Tue Bishop Blanquerna desired to take himself the office
of peacemaker, for they that have it will be called the sons
of God; and therefore the Bishop desired to take upon
himself that office, and to spend the third part of his income
in reconciling and making peace between those that were at
war and strife. It happened one day that the Bishop was
returning from Vespers, to the which he went daily in the
Cathedral Church, wherein also he sang Mass daily for
the greater honour of his diocese. As he was corning from
Vespers, there came to him a great multitude of Jews,
making complaint concerning the Christians, who on the
eve of the Passover had stoned and wounded two of their
number. Long did the Bishop think upon the complaints
which the Jews had made concerning the Christians, and
he reflected that if Christians and Jews held one belief, the
ill-will and strife that was among them would cease; where-
fore the Bishop went every Sabbath to the Synagogue to
preach and hold discussion with the Jews, to the end that
they might become Christians, and praise and bless Jesus
Christ, and be at peace with the Christians. Many Jews
were baptized and embraced the Holy Roman Faith; and
the Bishop, with the third part of his income which he
gave up for the love of God, made them many alms; and

he appointed for them an advocate, who should provide for
296 |

OF PHAGE

all such as became Christians, until they had some office
and manner wherein they might live by the fruits of their
labours.

2. In the precincts of the city were two knights who had
a castle which their father had left to them, and they were
at discord concerning the division thereof, and made con-
tention about a vineyard; wherefore there was great strife
between these knights, and each desired mortal injury to
the other, and there was none that could make peace
between them. So one day the Bishop Blanquerna invited
one of them to his house, and gave him a horse and begged
him to sell to him his part in the vineyard; and this he
sold to him for a thousand morabatins. On the next day
the Bishop invited the other knight to his house, and gave
him a horse, and bought his part of the vineyard for a
thousand morabatins. Thus the Bishop bought it twice,
since each knight had the intent to sell the entire vineyard,
for each held it to be his own. When the Bishop had
entered into possession of the vineyard, he went there, and
begged the two brothers to help him to divide it into two
equal parts. When the two knights and the Bishop had
divided the vineyard, the Bishop gave one part thereof to
one knight, and the other part he gave to the other, and
so made concord and peace between them.

3. In that city wherein Blanquerna was Bishop there
lived a burgess that was honoured both for his lineage and
his riches; but he was held in dishonour because he was
bound to the sin of lust. That burgess was in great discord
with his wife and his kinsfolk, because he had left his wife
for a vile woman whom he greatly loved. The Bishop
could in no wise bring it to pass that the burgess should
leave this wicked woman with whom he lived. So one day
secretly the Bishop sent her a message begging her to leave
the burgess, and this he commanded by reason of his office.
But the woman answered him, saying that she was poor,
and unless the burgess or some other person were to assist

297

BLANQUERNA

her from his wealth, she had not the wherewithal to live.
The Bishop made request to the woman with words so
devout and humble that she promised him to take a husband
and to be no longer with the burgess. Then the Bishop
gave five hundred morabatins as a dowry to the woman and
bestowed upon her a husband; and the burgess, through
the good example that the Bishop had given to him, and
because the woman desired not to return to her sin, began
once more to love his wife, and there was peace between
him and his kinsfolk, and the ill-will that was aforetime
between them ceased.

4. The devil one day put forth his strength, and brought
it to pass that a draper in that city slew a merchant, to
whom he owed much money for cloth that he had bought
of him. ‘This merchant had two sons. The one was a
grown man, and he made an outcry concerning the death
of his father; and there were great factions in the city on
the one side and on the other. No man could make peace
between them, and’ the notables of the city went to the
Bishop Blanquerna, praying him that, as he had the office
of peacemaker, he would make peace between the two
parties, in so far as he was able. So the Bishop went to
the house of the man that cried out for vengeance upon
his father, and he begged him to give him charge of his
brother, who was still at school, that he might make of
him a canon so soon as he was of age. With great pleasure
did this man give up his brother, and the Bishop invited
him to his house many times weekly, that he might grow
in friendship towards him; and he made him his bailiff;
and whensoever the brother who was at school was in his
presence, the Bishop gave signs of his great love for this
brother, that he might have the greater love from his
bailiff. When the Bishop had brought it to pass that his
bailiff both loved him and feared him,—for love and fear
accord the one with the other,—the Bishop made a great

feast, to the which came both these two fa@tions in the
298

OF PERSECUTION

city. When they had eaten and feasted for a great space,
the Bishop, in the presence of them all, presented the
brother with a benefice that was very rich; and he kneeled
to his bailiff, and, holding a cross in his hand, begged him
that, for the honour of the Cross, he would pardon the
draper, who repented very deeply of the murder which he
had committed. All the notables and the canons and the
other persons who were in that place kneeled likewise when
they saw that the Bishop kneeled. So the draper was
pardoned, and concord and friendship were made between
the two factions, and an alliance was made between them
by matrimony, in the which the Bishop gave jewels and
money from that part of his income which he had set aside
for the making of peace between all men.

5. Every day, after divers manners, did the Bishop make
peace between men, and sent gifts and invitations to the
notables of the city, both these and those, and he did them
much honour, to the end that all might love him, and,
through their love, obey him. And whensoever there was
Strife in the city, Straightway the Bishop was enabled to
make peace, by reason of the love and favour which he had
among all the people. The Bishop preached daily con-
cerning peace, and said that war and strife are the occasion
of all evil, but peace is the occasion of all good; wherefore
Jesus Christ preached peace daily for so long as He was
among us. Great was the good which the Bishop did, and
all the people praised and blessed God Who had given
them so good a pastor, and through the merits of that Bishop
God blessed that city.

CHAPTER LXXVI

OF PERSECUTION

Tue Canon of Persecution considered the greatness of the
burden that was entrusted to him by reason of his office,
that he might use justice. It happened one day that he

299

BLANQUERNA

passed before a tavern, wherein had gathered together a
great company of gamblers and of gluttons and of loose-
living men, who were drinking in the tavern and singing
and dancing and playing instruments of music. The Canon
entered the tavern and bought wine, and danced with the
gamblers, and recited these verses concerning Our Lady:

To thee, My Lady Mary, holy Maid,

I dedicate my will, which is aflame

With love so fierce that cannot be allayed,

Nor aught desires or loves beside thy fame.

All my desires are more effectual made

Than any such as on thee are not stayed,

Of men that love not, Mother of love, thy name:
Who loves thee not, no other love may claim.

Since all my love thy power has now obeyed

My knowledge and remembrance canst thou claim
For once my love before thy feet is laid

The rest are naught to me. Do thou inflame
With love our threefold powers,! O blessed Maid,
‘That we? may go to Syria unafraid

The souls of unbelievers fierce to tame

And give to Christians peace in Jesus’ Name. -

How many boast that if occasion came,

Right gladly they would die by sword or flame!
But oh, how few will go on God’s Crusade

For when they think on Death they are dismayed!

2. When he had recited these verses, he begged all the
company to be seated and to drink with him, and to relate
such things as should be agreeable. While the Canon was
among these folk, the men that passed along the street
scoffed and reproved him because he was in the company
of men so vile; but the Canon did all in his power that
he might be loved by those that were in his company, and
they all had great delight therein, and made him to be their
chief, and listened to the words which he spake to them

* Memory, understanding and will.

? The reference is apparently to the clergy in general.
300

OF PERSECUTION

concerning Jesus Christ and the Apostles and the despising
of this world. With such gentle words did he entertain
them, and so often in every week did he resort to their
company, that many of these men were converted thereby
to good customs and habits, which they forsook not for the
derision of the people.

3. The Canon went daily through the Streets of that
city, taking note of those that worked at their trades therein,
namely, the drapers, shoe makers, furriers, blacksmiths,
butchers and those that followed other trades; and, when
he knew that any of them a¢ted falsely in his profession,
he reproached him immediately, and reproved him in such
manner that he made the thing known to all those that
were in the streets; wherefore all that traded in that city
had both fear and respect for him, and many of them had
ill-will towards him; but for fear of him all these men
ceased from acting craftily in their business.

4. It came to pass one day that in the quarter of the
drapers, while the drapers had gone to dine, the Canon
came with a great multitude of loose-living ment; and
climbing up to the shutters which the drapers place over
their doors that there may be darkness in the shops, to the
end that none may see clearly the quality of their cloth,
they cut and tore in pieces and destroyed all those shutters
and all the blinds which prevent men from seeing the cloth
which is shown to them. When the drapers returned from
dining, they found the Canon and his companions at this
work of destruction in their shops. Great was the strife
between them, and on either side were evil words spoken;
and the Canon and his companions cried, “ Justice!
Justice! ’’ Then the drapers went to the Court and made
complaint concerning the Canon and his companions,
The bailiff and the judge of the city reproved and re-
proached the Canon and his companions very severely,
and blamed the Canon because he went about in the com-

1 Lit. ad gran re de tafurs ¢ d arlots.
301

BLANQUERNA

pany of men so vile. Now in the Court was the Canon of
Mercy, who had come to support the argument of his
comrade, and he spake these words: ‘‘ The Canon of Per-
secution labours for the sake of justice, the which justice
he demands; and he commands that the light of the sun,
which God gives for the eyes, wherewith it is His will that
men may see, be not taken from the shops by the false
drapers who deceive those men that buy cloth of them.
These gamblers and harlots conceal not their vices, but
make them manifest to all; the drapers conceal that which
justice commands shall be shown; wherefore the drapers
-are viler people than the gamblers, inasmuch as they are
the more opposed to justice.” When the Canon of Mercy
had spoken these words, the gamblers and the Canon of
Persecution cried in a loud voice: ‘‘ Wrong, wrong is in
the King, who in his Court has not a bailiff or a judge that
is a lover and a server of justice.” Even to the King went
the Canon and his comrades, crying, ‘‘ Wrong! wrong!”
And they made complaint against the judge and the bailiff
and the drapers, and the King made an ordinance that
from that time forward there should be nothing placed
before any shop in the quarters of the drapers which should
keep the light from those that desired in that place to buy
cloth.

5. A certain knight died in that city, and, as they bore
him to the church for burial, his wife and his kinsfolk,
clothed in black, accompanied the body, and wept very
bitterly and made great ado, tearing their hair and pluck-
ing at their faces and their clothing. Upon a great horse
fully apparelled there rode a squire in armour, weeping
and wailing for the death of his lord, and bearing his arms
reversed. The Canon of Persecution met the body, and
he perceived that, in respect of those that wept, the will
of our Lord God was dishonoured, since it was He that
had desired that the knight should pass from this world.
The Canon saw that he must needs strive for the sake of
302

OF PERSECUTION

justice, and he went to the Canon of Poverty and to the
Canon of Tears, begging them to help him to cause the
honour to be done which it behoves man to pay to the will
of God. So all these three canons went to the Prince and
to the Bishop, and laid these words before them:

6. “ Lords!” said the Canon of Persecution, ‘ In both
of you is represented the Divine dominion. I beg you,
then, to give me sentence, whether these persons that weep
for the knight whom God has willed to slay do not dis-
honour to the will of God; and if just sentence be given
that God is offended by them, I beg that satisfaction be
made, to the end that no persons henceforward may accom-
pany a corpse weeping or giving signs of sadness concerning
that which is willed by the Divine Will, nor through their
tears impede the Divine Office of the Mass.” After this
spake the Canon of Tears, saying that it is meet to weep
that there may result therefrom contrition and devotion.
“ But,” said he, “‘ they that follow this corpse weep through
vainglory and hypocrisy, wherefore their tears are opposed
to the will of God, and for this cause I cry out upon
them for that they do dishonour to the office which 1s
commended to me in weeping for an unlawful cause.”
The Canon of Poverty spake likewise, and said that the
money which was spent upon garments of mourning was
stolen from the poor, and from the soul of the man de-
ceased, and that therefore he desired to recover it, and that
thenceforward that which would have been spent upon
garments of mourning should be given to the poor, and
that no man for the death of another should be garbed in
mourning. The Prince and the Bishop took counsel with
the notables of the city concerning the words which were
spoken to them by the three canons, and they desired that
constitution according to the will of the canons should be
made for all time in that city upon the matters aforesaid.

4. At that time, after the feast of the Nativity of our
Lord Jesus Christ, it came to pass that the Archdeacon

oes

BLANQUERNA

desired to sing his first Mass.! Great was the concourse
and the assembly of many persons who had come from
diftant lands to do honour to the Archdeacon. When the
Archdeacon had entered the church with great pomp and
pride, and was about to begin the Mass, the Canon of
Persecution cried in a loud voice, saying: ‘‘ How simple
was Jesus Christ, Who in His great humility desired to be
born in the lowliest poverty! And behold, the Archdeacon
prepares great pomp and solemnity for his Mass, and in
this wise with pride and vainglory endeavours to be like
to Jesus Christ! ”’

8. When the Canon cried out thus, the people rebuked
him and threatened him; but none the less the Canon
continued to cry for so long as he might concerning the
folly which the Archdeacon committed, saying that it was
a thing ill-beseeming that any man who had within him
the devil of vainglory should sing Mass. Wherefore the
Canon of Tears wept likewise for the dishonour which was
done to the Mass, and the Bishop preached, that he might
make peace between humility and the Archdeacon. And
the Canon of Purity rebuked the Bishop who gave the
Archdeacon permission to begin with pride that office
which is the noblest and the holiest and the humblest that
may be; and he rebuked the King who had come to the
Mass, which was dishonoured by all such as had come to it.

g. In the month of April there was a great lack of rain
in that country whither the Canon of Persecution had gone
to preach; and the Bishop, with many of the clergy, and
many religious men, made procession in honour of God,
that He might give rain, for otherwise the wheat would be
destroyed. The Canon, in the likeness of a fool, which he
had oftentimes been accustomed to take, went through the
town speaking certain foolish words, to the end that thereby

+ Missa Novella, i.e. the first Mass to be sung by him after his ordination
to the priesthood. ‘The Archdeacon would not necessarily be a priest at the
time of his appointment to his office.

304

OF PERSECUTION

he might inspire men to good works. After this wise went
the Canon, and all men thought that he was a fool, and he
placed himself in the centre of the procession and spake
these words loudly that all might hear him: ‘‘ Honoured
is God by many clerks and many that are religious, to the
end that He may give rain for the wheat; but few are the
clerks or the religious who will go to honour God among
the Saracens and the Jews and the unbelievers by whom
the name of God is dishonoured and unknown. And if in
this place there are many religious and many clerks who
will pray to God for rain, how comes it that there are not
so many, even in all the world, who will go to unbelievers
to preach the Trinity and Incarnation and Passion of the
Son of God?” Loudly did the Canon cry out these words,
and for none would he be silent, and two clerks struck him
and beat him sorely by reason of the words which he spake;
and the more they beat him the more did he call upon
justice to aid him for that he served her.

10. After the procession it came to pass that a thief was
being led out to be hanged. The Canon enquired of those
that led him wherefore they were about to hang him, and
they answered and said that that man was a great gambler
and a great thief; and he enquired of the man if that which
they spake were true, and he answered that he had been a
thief in that he cheated at dicing. Whereupon the Canon
said that the King, rather than the thief, should be hanged,
and upon a gibbet that was higher. All they that were in
the household of the King were greatly displeased because
this fool spake such evil words of the King. So they
hanged the thief, and afterwards led the fool to the King
with his hands bound, and repeated to him the words
which he had spoken. The King desired to know the
reason for the which he had spoken them, and he answered
that it was because of justice, whose servant he was; for,
since the King forbade not dicing in his land, that man,
who would have been righteous and true but for the game

U | $25

BLANQUERNA

of dice, had become a thief. And when a Prince who is
the occasion of wrong-doing hangs them that do that which
he allows, he himself should be hanged rather than they
that do wrong through him. For a great space did the
King consider the words which the fool had spoken, and
he said that the fool had changed his likeness and had taken
the likeness of a fool that thereby he might make others
wise; so he commanded that honour should be done to
him, and that from thenceforward an ordinance and custom
should be made that in that country there should be no
more games of dice.

11. It came to pass one day that the Canon was leaving
the city and going to another city, and he found upon the
way a great multitude of men who came from Santiago and
were clothed after the likeness of the Apostles. The Canon
enquired of them of what Order they were, and they
answered him saying that they were of the Order of the
Apostles; and the Canon replied that his office and the
name of their Order agreed the one with the other. The
friars who named themselves of the Order of the Apostles
begged him to expound to them the agreement whereof he
spake, and the Canon said that one that is an Apostle
should be persecuted unrighteously; wherefore, if they
desired to be in the Order of the Apostles, it behoved them
to preach the word of God in the cities and the towns and
the castles and the villages through the which they would
pass, and to reproach men for sins which they saw com-
mitted, and fear neither trials nor death, but go to preach
the Catholic Faith to unbelievers, that they might be more
like to the Apostles thereby. Even so went the Canon
through every land, and he reproved all such as did not
their duty in their office, and he was persecuted and tor-
mented many times by those whom he reproved, but
through his merits God did much good in all those countries
where the Canon journeyed and sojourned, for, as the trials
and the persecutions of the Canon were increased, so like-

306

OF QUODLIBETS

wise God increased in the people through the merits of the
Canon His virtues and His grace.

CHAPTER LXXVII
OF QUODLIBETS

AccorDINnG to his custom the Bishop Blanquerna com-
manded that there should be a quodlibetal disputation, to
the end that if a clerk or lay man saw any thing that might
be bettered or made a custom, it should be propounded
after the manner of questioning, that he might cause it to
be done. It came to pass one day that while the Bishop
was in chapter, having ordered a quodlibetal disputation,
a lay man propounded this question: ‘‘ Whether the
Bishop, after he has risen in the morning, should go to
recreation before he hear Mass.’”’ Many arguments were
raised upon either side, but the Bishop resolved the question,
saying that if lay men have the custom and rule to go first
to Mass before they take recreation or do other business
soever, how much more should clerks, who live by the
patrimony of Holy Church, hear Mass or sing it before
they do other business or go to take recreation! And if
they do not this, then do they give to lay men bad example.

2. Many questions were propounded before the Bishop,
and all of them he resolved and brought to an end; and
then there were put to him ten questions, which are as
follows :

{ It is a question if Christians are to blame for the
ignorance of unbelievers who know not of the Holy Catholic
Faith.

It is a question which have the greater power and
opportunity: whether Catholics, who are in the way of
truth, to convert unbelievers to the true way of life, or
unbelievers, to drive Catholics from the truth and bring
them into error.

307

BLANQUERNA

{ It is a question if Christians are to blame because the
Saracens hold the Holy Land beyond the sea, wherein
Jesus Christ was conceived and born and crucified.

| It is a question if the articles of the Christian Faith
may be understood through necessary reasons.

{ It is a question whether the Faith is of less or greater
worth if the articles may be understood.

{ It is a question what is the chiefest reason for the
which man was created.

{ It is a question if visitation should be made to bishops
and archbishops, to the end that they may be deprived of
their sees if they use their office ill.

q It is a question which is the greater sin, that the
bishop should give the possessions of Holy Church to his
kinsfolk, or that a Christian who has been a Jew should
retain his possessions.

{It is a question if man should give the possessions of
Holy Church to make peace between Christian princes and
kings.

q] It is a question which is the noblest work that man
can undertake to honour God.

3. With great wonder did the Bishop marvel at the ten
questions aforesaid, for they were of very great profundity,
and much was spoken thereof upon the one hand and upon
the other. The Bishop desired not to determine these ten
questions, but went to the Court of Rome, that he might
propound them before the Pope and the Cardinals and
that they might determine and resolve them, and that the
works should be done which accorded with the solution
and determination thereof; and if it came to pass that they
would not do this, that he should reprove and blame them
before all men, fearing not to suffer trials or death.

4. The Bishop went to Rome to the Consigtory, and
before the Pope and the Cardinals he propounded these
ten questions aforementioned, saying these words: “‘ Error

is in the world, There is defeét of love and of devotion,
308

OF QUODLIBETS

and valour is exiled from us according as is recounted in
the Book of Religion! Wherefore I ask that these ten
questions be resolved and determined for me, and that
in the solution and determination thereof satisfaction be
made to justice, to the end that truth may cast out error
from the world and charity and devotion may be increased.”
Greatly did the questions please the Holy Apostolic Father
and the Cardinals and all the rest in the Court, and they
enquired concerning the holy life of the Bishop whom they
heard speaking many good words. While the Pope and
the Cardinals made discussion concerning the manner
wherein they should answer and determine the questions,
it came to pass by the will of God that the Pope died, and
the solution of the questions was deferred.

1 See Chap. XLVIII, above.

ENDED IS THE THIRD BOOK

309

BEGINNETH THE FOURTH BOOK, WHICH
IS OF THE APOSTOLIC ESTATE

CHAPTER LXXVIII

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE BISHOP BLANQUERNA
BECAME POPE

Ricut grieved was the Bishop Blanquerna at the death of
the Pope, for many reasons, and especially by reason of the
questions which he had propounded. Now while the
Cardinals treated concerning the ele¢tion of the next Pope,
the Bishop went to a Cardinal and enquired of him if the
eleGtion would be long delayed, begging him to bring it to
pass that an answer might be given to the ten questions
which he had propounded; for great was his desire to know
the opinions of the Cardinals concerning the determination
of the questions. The Cardinal answered the Bishop, and
said that he believed that in a short time they would elec
a Pope, since it was a thing ill-beseeming that the Papacy
should go for long unfilled, and that he for his part would
answer one of the ten questions, in a sense not determinate,
but according to his own opinion; and he said that if the
articles could be understood by necessary reasons, the faith
would have less worth, because men would have less merit
in believing it.

2. The Bishop answered and said that there are two
manners of demonstration: the one is when a thing is
demonstrated in such a way that no contradiction can be
given thereto, as when it is said that a quadrangle has more
angles than a triangle; in the other manner contradiétion
can be made, as when a cause is proved by the effe€@t; and
the sphere of faith is that wherein a demonstration can be
contradicted. Wherefore he understood it not to be true
that the articles could thus be demonstrated without
contradiction, according to the former manner of demon-
stration, for if after the former manner they could be
310

HOW BISHOP BLANQUERNA BECAME POPE

demonstrated, it would be a thing impossible that the
articles should be a matter of faith; but he asked whether
the articles could be understood or no according to the
second manner of demonstration; and he meant by demon-
stration that which could not be destroyed by necessary
reasons, and by its contrary that which could be destroyed
by necessary reasons. And he said that if the articles could
be disproved by necessary reasons, he understood it to
be proved by necessary reasons that faith will be the nobler
and the greater and the more meritorious thereby, and
understanding and charity will have the nobler disposition,
according as it is signified in the first book of the DemonStra-
tions Concerning the Articles1 And if it were not so, it would
follow that faith and understanding worked mutual de-
struction the one to the other; and this is impossible,
according to the conditions of the trees which are mentioned
in the book which is called Of the Gentile and of the Three
Wise Men?

3. Greatly was the Cardinal pleased by the answer of the
Bishop, and when he was in the Consistory with the Car-
dinals his companions, he extolled very highly the learning
of the Bishop by reason of the reply which he had made
to him. While the Cardinal thus praised the Bishop
Blanquerna, it came to pass that the cleric who had afore-
time ruled the diocese whereof Blanquerna was Bishop
came to the Court with two brothers in religion and with
a lay man; all four had learned Arabic right well, and they
came to the Court to beg for a blessing, and for letters
wherewith they might be sent to some other land to preach
therein, and to convert the inhabitants thereof, and to suffer
martyrdom, that God thereby might be praised. While
they were in the Consistory with the Cardinals, and were

1 Another of Lull’s works.

2 See p. 114. This book has not been translated into English as a whole,
but some extracts, together with a summary of the book which explains fully
the reference to the “trees,” will be found in Bulletin of Spanish Studies,
Vol. II, No. 7, June, 1925.

ada

BLANQUERNA

making their petition, the Bishop Blanquerna came among
them. Right hearty was the welcome which he had of
them; and the Cardinals made enquiry concerning Blan-
querna, and they spake much good of him, and recounted
the great good which he had done in the abbey and in his
diocese, according to the manner which we have already
related. | |

4. It came to pass one day that, while a certain Cardinal
was dining, there came to his Court a jester’ right fairly
clothed and adorned: he was a man of pleasing speech and
fair to look upon, and he sang and played instruments of
music very cunningly. That jester was called the Jester of
Valour, and was the same whom Blanquerna had met in the
forest, when he likewise met Valour and the Emperor,
according as is related in the chapter concerning Valour.?
When the Cardinal had dined, the Jester sang songs and
couplets which the Emperor had made concerning Our
Lady Saint Mary and concerning Valour, and he brought
forth his instruments of music, playing thereon the dances
and the songs which the Emperor had composed in honour
of Our Lady. Right pleasing was it to hear and to listen
to the Jester and his instruments; and the Cardinal en-
quired of him concerning his welfare and his history.

5. “ Lord!” said the Jester, ‘‘ By the working of God
it came to pass that my lord the Emperor and I encoun-
tered a holy man, Blanquerna by name, the which man was
journeying through a great forest in search of a place
wherein to make his hermitage and to adore and contem-
plate God all the days of his life. In that forest lived
Valour, who made complaint concerning those that have
changed her name, and persecute her in the world; where-
fore the Emperor has appointed divers jesters who shall
go through the world and be advocates of Valour, and
among others he has sent me to this Court that I may sing
the praise of Valour and reproach all such as are opposed

1 juglar. See note, p. 175, above. * See p. 175, above.
312

HOW BISHOP BLANQUERNA BECAME POPE

to her, and praise Disvalour in her stead.” Very pleasing
to the Cardinal and to all that were of his Court were the
words and the arguments of the Jester; and the Cardinal
ordered that he should be given a fair cup of silver where-
from he himself was wont to drink; but the Jester would
not take it, and spake these words:

6. “Commandment has been made to me by the
Emperor, my lord, and in my person upon the Holy Gospels
have I sworn, that I will take naught of any man save only
of the Emperor, my lord, who gives me wages every year
which suffice abundantly for my wants; wherefore I hold
myself excused from taking thy gift. And since through
taking gifts a jester is corrupted and bound to praise those
that should be blamed, and to blame those that should be
praised, and since by such false praise and blame Valour
is dishonoured, therefore the Lord Emperor would desire
that I should take no gift of thee, nor that any other jester
soever of his Court should dare to take any gift.”

7. “Fair friend!” said the Cardinal. ‘‘ Would thou
know the man whom thou callest Blanquerna if thou
shouldst see him?” ‘“‘ Lord!” said the Jester, “ Well
indeed should I know him if I were to see him; but I
think not that I could see him in this place, for I think that
in places uninhabited and in deserts he has made his
habitation; and in such a place does my lord the Emperor
purpose to be his companion, when he has ordered his
Empire, and when his son is fully grown that he may be
able to reign in his stead.” So the Cardinal sent for the
Bishop Blanquerna that he should go to him, and the Jester
of Valour saw him and knew him, and right great joy had
he at seeing him; but he marvelled greatly that he was so
nobly clad and wore upon his finger a golden ring. The
Bishop enquired concerning the Emperor, and related to
the Jester his own history, which the Jester desired to know
that he might reprove him if his devotion which he had
aforetime for the life of a hermit had become cold.

Sc

BLANQUERNA

8. Great joy had they the one of the other, and the
Jester prayed the Bishop that he would assist him in that
Court to uphold Valour for so long as he was there, and
the Bishop made him this promise. On the next morning
after Mass, the Jester went to the Consistory wherein were
the Cardinals awaiting each other to the end that they might
treat concerning the election. Then the Jester spake these
words: “‘ Valour has greater hope of them that are greatest
and most honoured in this world than she has of other men,
and they who because of her have the most honour do her
the most dishonour; wherefore they have the greater sin
and blame, and thereby they shall have the greater punish-
ment in the world to come, by reason of the greater dis-
honour which in this world they do to Valour, than they
whom Valour has less greatly honoured in this world.”

g. Each of the Cardinals considered very deeply the
words which the Jester spake; and the Cardinal related to
his companions that which the Jester had spoken concerning
Blanquerna. By reason of these words which the Cardinal
spake to them concerning him, and of others which they
had already heard of him, it became the will of the Cardinals
that the Bishop Blanquerna should be created Pope, and
they all said and desired that he should be Pope. So they
said the Veni Creator Spiritus and the Te Deum Laudamus,
and they desired that Blanquerna should take his seat in
the Apostolic Chair. But Blanquerna desired it not, and
spake these words:

10. “ It is bruited through all the world that the Pope
with his companions could order the whole world if he so
desired; and since the world is in such discord and dis-
order, therefore is it a dreadful thing to be Pope, and great
sin is to be attributed to the Pope if he use not his power
in ordering the world, and if his will follow not all the power
which God has given to the Papacy for the ordering of the
world. Wherefore, as I am unworthy to have power so
great, because I have defect of knowledge and will, there-
314

HOW BISHOP BLANQUERNA BECAME POPE

fore apostolical power so great and so noble should not be
committed to one of knowledge and will so weak; for the
which cause I refuse the apostolical power, and I demand
that answer be made to me concerning the questions which
I have propounded in this Court.”

11. The more vehemently did the Bishop Blanquerna
excuse himself and refuse the office of Pope, the more was
the will of the Cardinals kindled and inflamed in their
desire that he should become Pope, for it is a condition of
election that he who excuses himself the more vehemently,
and refuses an office, should the rather be eleCted, provided
that he fulfil the other conditions which make a man worthy
to be ele€ted. While they spake thus and Blanquerna
desired in no wise to be Pope, a certain Cardinal who him-
self desired to be Pope said that he would speak privately
with his companions, and he spake to them these words:
““ Many a time does it chance that men through craft and
skill make others to beg and force them to take that which
they desire to have; and it seems to me that the Bishop
Blanquerna causes himself to be begged to accept the office
of Pope to the end that we may have the greater desire to
create him Pope. And if he have such will, by reason of
that same will he is unworthy to be Pope.”

12. Much thought did the Cardinals give to that which
this Cardinal had spoken; but because in the words of
Blanquerna there was signified neither craft nor skill, and
because of the good reputation which he had, and because
this Cardinal himself desired to be Pope, as they already
knew by certain presumptions, therefore knew they that
the craft and skill were in the words of the Cardinal, and
they desired that at all hazards Blanquerna should be Pope;
but Blanquerna would not consent, until a Cardinal said to
him that if he were Pope he could ordain that which he
desired should be done concerning the solution of the
questions aforesaid. Wherefore the Bishop Blanquerna,
with great fear, and trusting that God would aid him, and

Be)

BLANQUERNA

with intent to produce much fruit and utility through his
ordering of that which the questions signified, gave con-
sent, and accepted the apostolical office, and spake these
words:

13. “ Both knowledge and will do I lack whereby I may
be fitted to receive the apostolic power. If by you I am
eleéted Pope, I beg of you aid that through our united will
and knowledge we may use the power that is given to me
and cause God to be known and loved, and His people to
have happiness through Him. If this ye do not, then do
ye do sin and wrong to me.”’ All the Cardinals gave him
promise most cordially that they would aid him with their
whole will according to the freedom of power and the
knowledge which God had given to them, and according
to the way wherein God had bound their wills to serve Him.
So it came to pass that the Bishop Blanquerna was created
Pope.

CHAPTER LXXIX

OF THE ORDINANCE WHICH THE POPE BLANQUERNA
MADE IN HIS COURT

AccorDING as we have related, Blanquerna was elected
Pope: Blessed be God because of it! Now Blanquerna
the Pope, before he would ordain aught in his Court, de-
layed for a time that he might see what was the estate
thereof, and each day he wrote, in certain tablets which he
carried, those things that were to be ameliorated in his
Court. It chanced one day that the Pope was at his window,
and he saw a Cardinal approaching with a very numerous
retinue, which belonged to his house, of men full nobly
clad and mounted; and in this retinue was a great multi-
tude of men who were of the kinsfolk of the Cardinal.
Immediately following him the Pope Blanquerna saw
another Cardinal with a small retinue, less nobly clad and
a Long did the Pope consider that which he
31

OF THE ORDINANCE OF POPE BLANQUERNA

had seen in the two Cardinals; and when he was in the
Consistory he spake these words to the Cardinal who had
come with the smaller retinue and humbly clad:

2. “I desire to know wherefore thou hast not come to
my Court with so great a retinue and with vestments so
noble as this other Cardinal who came before thee, since
thou shouldst honour my Court as greatly as this other,
seeing that thou hast the same income as he.” ‘“ Lord!”
answered the Cardinal, ‘‘ I spend upon my retinue and
upon my alms all the income which I receive from my
office, and I have sworn that I will take naught for the
service of any man; and since my income suffices not for
a greater retinue, therefore have I not been able to bring
one with me.”’ Then the Pope enquired of the other Cardinal
wherefore he had come with a company so great and so
nobly clad, and the Cardinal answered and said that it was
to honour his Court. The Pope commanded enquiry to be
made concerning his life, and he found that that Cardinal
took money for the service of men, and had broken the |
sacrament and the promises that he had made when he was
elected Cardinal; and the men who gave to him, that he
might prosper their affairs, accompanied him whensoever
he came to the Court; and for this reason he brought a
greater retinue than the others.

3. It came to pass one day that the Pope invited all the
Cardinals to visit him, and held a great Court on that day.
When they had eaten, there came into the Court a man
with shaven head and clothed in the garb of a fool. In the
one hand he carried a sparrowhawk, and in the other hand
a cord to the which was tied a dog which he led. This man
greeted the Lord Pope and the Cardinals and all the Court
on behalf of the Lord Emperor, and he spake these words:
“1 am Ramén the Fool, and I come to this Court by the
commandment of the Emperor that I may exercise my pro-
fession and seek my companions.’’ When he had spoken
these words, he gave the sparrowhawk food, and afterwards

317

BLANQUERNA

made it come to his hand two or three times. After this
he Struck and beat the sparrowhawk with the cord to the
which his dog was tied, and again he cried to it that it
should come to his hand; but the sparrowhawk, because
the Fool had struck it and put it from him, escaped and
flew out of the palace of the Pope, and became wild. When
Ramén the Fool had lost his sparrowhawk, he struck the
dog very severely two or three times; and whensoever he
called it the dog returned willingly to him.

4. “‘ Ramon the Fool!” said the Pope, ‘ Who art thou,
and wherefore sayest thou that thou hast come to this Court
to seek thy companions? And what is the significance of
that which thou hast done in our presence with the sparrow-
hawk and with the dog?” “Lord!” said Ramon the
Fool, “‘ I was aforetime in the Court of the Emperor, and
I learned to be a fool, to the end that I might gather to-
gether money; and the Emperor has spoken to me so often
of the Passion of Jesus Christ and of the nobility of God,
that I desire to be a fool that I may give honour and glory
to Him, and I will have no art nor device in my words by
reason of the greatness of my love. And since thy Court
has greater honour than any Court beside, by reason of the
Passion of my Beloved and of His Incarnation, therefore
do I think to find in thy Court many companions who are
of my office. The sparrowhawk signifies the men who
assist not to sustain the honour and governance of thy
Court without money or rewards; and when a man prays
them and gives them naught they become disheartened,
affiicted and slothful1; wherefore they escape from among
men and become wild. The dog signifies those men that
are so greatly inflamed and kindled with love for the honour
and the governance of the Court, to the end that God may
therein be honoured, that without satisfaction being given
them by any man for the trials which they bear, they suffer

: : ity their hearts are struck with sloth and with affliction ”: the sense
is slightly strained so that the similitude may be adhered to.

318

OF THE ORDINANCE OF POPE BLANQUERNA

these trials and anxieties by reason of men that desire to
gain advancement in the Court, and they are pleasing to all
men and agreeable.”

5. When Ramon the Fool had thus exercised his office,
and had answered the Pope, the Jester of Valour sang and
played instruments of music very sweetly in honour of
Valour. After this he spake these words: ‘‘ To honour a
great lord, honour is done to his horse, which is given a fair
saddle and harness; and if in his mind that lord have love
for the virtues and hatred for the vices, therein is Valour
honoured, both in his mind and in his harness; and if that
lord is honoured who loves vice and hates virtue, then is
Valour dishonoured and her enemy is honoured, even he
who loves the dishonour of Valour.” “ Jester of Valour!”
said the Pope. ‘‘ What is this that thy words signify?”
“They signify,” he answered, “ the questions which thou
hast made to thy two Cardinals: the one honours Valour
with wrong, perjury and vainglory; but the other honours
her with justice, truth, humility and fortitude.”

6. When the Jester had spoken the words aforesaid, the
Pope wept and said: “‘ Ah! Canon of Tears, I would that
thou wert in this Court, to help me weep for the dishonour
that is done herein to Valour, through the which dishonour
that honour which it beseems my Lord to have is no more.”
Bitterly wept the Pope, saying that if the dishonour which
Valour received in the Court were not cast therefrom, and
Valour were not honoured in its stead, all the Cardinals
would sin against Valour, and greatest of all would be the
sin of the Pope their lord, to whom the Cardinals promised
that with all their knowledge and will they would help him
to maintain the power which they had in honouring Valour.
Excepting only the Chamberlain, all the Cardinals said to
the Pope that they were prepared to agree together, and

‘to make ordinance of all things, to the end that Valour
might be restored to the honour which was aforetime
hers.

319

BLANQUERNA

7. Weeping, and with great devotion, and remembering
the heavy burden which had been laid upon him, namely
that he should honour the Son of God, the Pope spake
these words: ‘“‘ Fifteen are ye Cardinals that have been
given to me as companions that I may be preserved and
aided as Vicar! upon earth of Jesus Christ. Let us divide
into fifteen parts the Gloria in Excelsis Deo; and let the
first part be assigned to me, because through the dignity
of my office I am the first among you. To each of you
Cardinals let there likewise be given a part according to the
antiquity and dignity of his office, and let each part follow
the other according to its order; and let each part be an
office, which each one of you shall hold himself bound to
honour and maintain in the Court, that Jesus Christ may
be honoured in the Court, and that through it He may be
honoured in all countries of the world.”’ All the Cardinals
held that which the Pope said to be good; so the Pope
took the words ‘‘ Gloria in Excelsis Deo”; and the
Cardinal who was senior in the Court took “ Et in terra
pax hominibus bone voluntatis”; and after this the
Cardinals took the other parts according to their order and
turn, and to each part was assigned its proper office, and
each Cardinal was named after that part of the Gloria in
Excelsis Deo which came to him in order.

8. When the Pope and the Cardinals had made the
ordinance aforesaid, they ordained that each of the Cardinals
should have an equal income to be spent upon his necessi-
ties, and that each should have a certain number of persons
and of beasts according as befits justice, temperance and
humility; and that beside their expenses they should have
in equal fashion a certain allowance over and above their
incomes to devote to expenses extraordinary, and that this
should satisfy them entirely, and that they should be allowed
to take no gift, unless it were of viands, and that that

* procurador: this word is generally translated “‘ representative,” and
occasionally, when the context gives it this meaning, “ advocate.”

3210

OF THE ORDINANCE OF POPE BLANQUERNA

Cardinal who should take a gift of any man should lose his
office; and if he resigned it not, that the Pope and the
Cardinals should live upon bread and water every Friday
until he had resigned it. This ordinance was confirmed by
the Pope and by the Cardinals, and promise and sacrament
were made concerning it, and officers and spies were
appointed who should keep watch, lest any Cardinal should
sin against the ordinance aforesaid; and to these spies were
assigned others who should spy out if they used their office
well, and, if they did not so, they should lose their office
and nevermore have preferment. Right well was ordinance
made concerning the establishment aforesaid, for it was
very needful that it should be kept, that the Cardinals
might have none occasion of dissension nor of pride against
each other, by reason of a difference in power, and that the
people who came to the Court should not return despoiled,
neither in poverty, neither with evil example, nor should
they speak ill of the Pope and of his companions, but rather
they should have the greater devotion to praise and serve
God by reason of the holy life, fraternity and charity of the
Pope and of his companions.

g. After the ordinances and establishment aforesaid had
been made, it was ordained that from the possessions of
Holy Church and from the superfluity which remained to
bishops and archbishops and other prelates, after expend-
ing the possessions of Holy Church, should be made the
offices which the Cardinals had taken of the Gloria in
Excelsis Deo, and that one of the Cardinals should be
appointed to answer for the expenses of all these offices,
and that all the bishops, archbishops and prelates and their
subjects should furnish that Cardinal with the wherewithal
to provide for these offices.

10. It was ordained by the Pope and the Cardinals that
once in every week the Pope should hold chapter with the

Cardinals only, and that each should make accusation con-
cerning the others, even as is done by monks, and that each
x 321

BLANQUERNA

Cardinal should ask pardon for his sins in presence of the
re&t. The establishment was ordained by them likewise
that each Cardinal should hold chapter upon one day in
the week with his officers. Afterwards it was ordered that
one Cardinal should hold chapter with the scriveners upon
one day in the week, and then another, and the same with
the judges and the advocates according to rotation.

11. Another establishment was ordained by the Pope
and the Cardinals, which was very needful, to wit, that
throughout the world they should have representatives who
should send them letters or messengers reporting the con-
dition of every country, to the end that if any irregularity
or change were there, or there were need of any ameliora-
tion, they should be able to treat immediately concerning
that which was good for the betterment of those countries.
After this manner did the Pope Blanquerna order and
dire&t his Court. And all the good and favourable ordi-
nances which he made in his Court can no man recount.
And the merit which he will have thereby, who may tell it ?

CHAPTER LXXX

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO

Tue Pope Blanquerna went into the Consistory with the
Cardinals to the end that through their good works glory
might be given to God in the Heavens! ; and the Pope said
to the Cardinals that he prayed them that they would assist
him to use his office to the glory of God, in such wise that
they might be able to bring men back to the first intent of
the offices and the sciences, namely, that glory might be
given to God; for the world has come to such a sinful State,
that there is scarce any man who has his intent direéted
toward that thing for the which he was created, nor for the
which he holds the office which is his. While the Pope

1 en los cels.
320

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO

spake thus with the Cardinals, a Saracen messenger came
before him and the Cardinals, and presented to him a letter
from the Soldan of Babylon. In that letter were written
many things, and among them the Soldan said to the Pope
that he marvelled greatly concerning him, and concerning
all the kings and princes of the Christians, that in conquer-
ing the Holy Land beyond the seas they aéted according
to the manner of the prophet Mahomet, who held by force
of arms the lands which he conquered. He marvelled that
the Pope and the Christians worked not after the manner
of Jesus Christ and of the Apostles, who through preach-
ing and through martyrdom converted the world, and that
they followed not the manner of those who preceded them
in conquering other countries; for this cause, he said,
God willed not that they should possess the Holy Land
beyond the seas. These letters the Saracen brought to the
Holy Apostolic Father, and like letters brought he to the
kings and princes of the Christians. Deeply thought the
Pope and the Cardinals upon the words which the Soldan
had written to them; and Ramon the Fool spake these
words: “‘ Faith sent Hope to Contrition, that she might
send her Devotion and Pardon, to the end that they might
honour her in those places wherein her Beloved is dis-
honoured.” The Jester of Valour said that Valour is
brought to great dishonour in those places wherein the Son
of God and the Apostles did her more grace and honour
than in any place which is in the world. After these words
there entered the Court a messenger bringing the news that
two unbelievers had been suborned to slay a Christian king,
and that they had now themselves been delivered up to a
cruel death. When he had spoken these words, the Jester
of Valour said: ‘‘ Of what avail are the humility and charity
of Jesus Christ which He had himself towards His people,
when He willed to suffer Passion of them, if unbelievers, who
are in error, have greater devotion in dying for their master
than have Christians in honouring their superior?’ The

525

BLANQUERNA

Fool saw two Cardinals speaking, and he supposed that
they spake of his Beloved, but they spake of the election
of two bishops who had been elected after a contest; where-
fore the Fool said to the Cardinals that the most pleasant
words are those that are between the Lover and the Beloved.

2. The Pope was marvellously moved to ordain how that
example might be given of the faith of Holy Church and
how the devotion to the honour of God which aforetime
existed might return; so he sent messengers throughout
divers lands to the superiors of religious houses and to the
Masters of the Temple and of the Hospital that they should
come to speak with him concerning the making of ordi-
nances whereby glory should be given to God. When all
these had come, and were before the Pope and the Cardinals,
Ramon the Fool spake thus: ‘‘ The Lover and the Beloved
met, and kept silence with their tongues; and their eyes,
wherewith they made signs of love, were in tears; and the
love of the one spake with the love of the other.” ‘‘ This
Story,” said the Jester of Valour, ‘‘ has relation to that
which has been reported to the Holy Father and the
Cardinals concerning the Soldan and the assassins; and if
naught that is useful follows therefrom, great wrong is done
to Valour, and the most honourable of creatures, who die
for love, are not loved; albeit it is of greater valour that
lovers should speak the one to the other than that mouths
should eat.”” ‘The Fool said: ‘‘ A certain man wrote, and
in a book he wrote the names of lovers and loved, and a
man that was a lover enquired of him if in that book he
had written the name of his beloved; and he that wrote
said to him: ‘‘ Hast thou eaten food that was cooked with
the fire of love? And hast thou washed thine hands with
the tears of thine eyes? And art thou inebriated and be-
come as a fool through the love which thou hast drunk?
Hast thou ever been in peril that thou mightes honour thy
beloved? Hast thou the materials of love wherewith a man
may make ink for thy beloved to write? If all these things
324

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO

be not so, then is thy beloved not worthy to be written of
in this book.”

3. After these words, the Pope and the Cardinals and
the religious, to honour the glory of God, ordained that to
all monks that had learning there should be assigned friars
to teach divers languages, and that throughout the world
there should be builded divers houses, which for their needs
should be sufficiently provided and endowed, according to
the manner of the monastery of Miramar, which is in the
Island of Majorca. Right good seemed this ordinance to
the Pope and to all the rest, and the Pope sent messengers
through all the lands of the unbelievers to bring back
certain of them to learn their language and that they at
Rome might learn the tongues of these unbelievers, and
that certain men should return with them to preach to the
others in these lands, and that to those unbelievers that
learned Latin, and gained a knowledge of the Holy Catholic
Faith, should be given money and garments and palfreys,
that they might praise the Christians, who when they had
returned to their own lands would continue to assist and
maintain them.

4. Of the whole world the Pope made twelve parts, and
appointed to represent him twelve men, who should go
each one throughout his part and learn of its estate, to the
end that the Pope might know the estate of the whole
world. It came to pass that those who went to the un-
believers brought from Alexandria and from Georgia and
from India and Greece Christians who were monks, that
they might dwell among us, and that their will might be
united with the will of our monks, and that during this
union and relationship they might be instructed in divers
manners concerning certain errors against the faith, and
should then go and instruct those that were in their country.
Wherefore the Pope sent also some of our monks to the
monks aforesaid, and ordered that each year they should
send to him a certain number of their friars, that they

325

BLANQUERNA

might dwell with us, and, while they dwelt among us, learn
our language.

5. ‘ Beloved sons!” said the Pope to the monks: “ Jews
and Saracens are among us who believe in error, and dis-
believe and despise the Holy Faith whereby we are bound
to honour the glory of God. I desire and ask that to these
Jews and Saracens who are in the lands of the Christians
there be assigned certain persons to teach them Latin and
to expound the Scriptures, and that within a certain time
they shall learn these, and if they have not done so, that
there shall follow punishment; and while they learn let
them be provided for from the possessions of Holy Church;
and after they have learned let them be made free men and
honoured above all others, and then will they convert their
fellows and be the better fitted to understand the truth and
to convert these others.” __

6. When the Pope had spoken these words, the Cham-
berlain said that, if the Pope made this establishment, the
Jews and the Saracens that are among the Christians would
take flight to other lands and the income of Holy Church
would be diminished. But Ramon the Fool said to the
Chamberlain: “‘ Once on a time a man loved a woman,
and said to her that he loved her more than any woman
beside, and the woman enquired of him wherefore he loved
her more than any other woman, and he replied that it was
because she was fairer than any. The woman made sign
with her hand in a certain direCtion, saying that in that
direction there was a woman that was fairer; and when the
man turned and looked in that dire€tion the woman said
that if there were another woman that was fairer, he would
love her more, and this signified that his love to her was
not perfect.” The Jester of Valour said that if there were
another thing better than God the Chamberlain would love
it more than God; so there was question among them
which thing was the more contrary to the glory of God and
to Valour, whether the diminution of the income of Holy
326

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO

Church or the dishonour which the Jews and the Saracens
show to the glory of God and to Valour.

7. As the Pope desired, even so was it ordained. After
this the Pope enquired of the Masters of the Temple and
of the Hospital what part they would take in honouring the
glory of God, and both these Masters answered and said
that they were already in the Holy Land beyond the seas
to defend that land and to give example of the Catholic
Faith. The Jester enquired of Ramén the Fool if the love
which he had to his Beloved was growing in proportion as
his Beloved gave him greater pleasures. The Fool an-
swered: “If I could love Him more, it would follow that
I should love Him less if He diminished the pleasures
which He gives me.’ And he said likewise that, since he
could not do other than love his Beloved, neither could he
increase the love which he bore to Him; but the trials
which he suffered grew daily, and the greater they were,
the more were the joys increased which he had in loving
his Beloved.”’ The Holy Apostolic Father said to the two
Masters that from that which was signified by the aforesaid
words, it followed that to honour the glory of God both the
Masters should make ordinance whereby an Order should
be created, that the Jester of Valour should not cry out
upon the dishonour which is done to Valour by disputes
concerning that wherein there would be agreement if they
made an Order. He said furthermore that they should use
their houses and masterships to make schools and places
of Study, wherein their knights should learn certain brief
arguments, by means of the Brief Art of finding Truth'; that
they might prove the articles of the Holy Faith and give
counsel to Masters, princes and prelates through the art
aforesaid; and that they might learn divers languages, and
go to kings and princes of the unbelievers that one knight
_ might challenge another to maintain, by feats of arms or
by learning, the honour and truth which beseem the valour

1 See pp. 114, 332.
327

BLANQUERNA

that is in the Holy Catholic Faith. The ordinance afore-
mentioned was granted to the Pope by the two Masters
and by all the friars of their Order, and Ramon the Fool
spake these words: ‘‘ Humility conquered Pride, and the
Lover said to his Beloved: ‘ If Thou, Beloved, wert to die,
I should go to weep upon Thy tomb.’ And the Beloved
answered: ‘ Weep before the Cross, which is My monu-
ment.’ The Lover wept bitterly, and said that through
over much weeping the sight of his eyes was blinded and
knowledge became clear to the eyes of his understanding.
Wherefore the Order did all that it could to honour the
glory of God.”

8. According to the manner aforesaid, the Holy Apos-
tolic Father made ordinance concerning the ordinance of
the glory of God, and he appointed officers and ministers,
and representatives to see that this order was carried out;
and he endeavoured daily with all his power to bring it to
pass that benefit might come from the ordinance afore-
mentioned. It came to pass one day that Ramon the Fool
and the Jester of Valour brought ink and paper before the
Pope, and said that they desired to send in writing the
aforementioned ordinance to the Soldan and the Caliph of
Bagdad, that they might see if they had subjects as noble
as those of the Pope, or could make as fair an ordinance
as the Pope had made to do honour to the glory of God in
the Heavens and cause Valour to return to the world.

g. It came to pass one day that the Cardinal of Domine
Deus sent to a certain country to spy out the government
of the Bishop and all the princes of that country. While
this spy was in that land, commandment came from the
Pope to the Bishop that he should provide yearly for fifty
Tartars and ten friars whom the Pope sent to that diocese,
that the Tartars might teach their language to the friars
and the friars teach theirs to the Tartars, according as it
was ordained in the Court; and that the Bishop should

found a monastery without the city where they should live,
328

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO

and that endowment should be given to it in perpetuity.
Greatly was the Bishop displeased at the commandment
which the Pope had given him, bewailing the expense
thereof; and he spake ill of the Pope and of the Cardinals
in the presence of the prince of that country. But the
Prince rebuked the Bishop sternly, and said that never
before had he heard of any Pope or any Cardinals who had
to such extent and to the best of their power made ordi-
nances whereby the glory of God was so greatly honoured,
and that he himself, to honour the glory of God, and to
follow the good example which the Pope and the Cardinals
gave him, desired to have a share in the expenses which
the students would incur, and to bear the moiety of the
cost of the monastery. The King praised the ordinance of
the Pope and of the Cardinals greatly, and said that it
seemed to him that the time had come wherein God desired
that His servants should do Him great honour, and that
those that had strayed should be converted.

10. So soon as the spy had heard the words which the
Prince and the Bishop had uttered, he reported in writing
to his lord the Cardinal those very words that he had heard,
and he wrote likewise that, according to the knowledge
which he had gained, the Bishop had bought a castle for
a nephew of his for twenty thousand pounds. These
letters were read in the Consistory before the Pope and the
Cardinals, and the Cardinal to whom the letter had come
wrote down the name of the king, to the end that, if an
expedition were set on foot, or an occasion occurred
wherein the Church might show any favour to a king,
it should be shown to that king. The Pope sent his
messenger to the King, and gave him thanks, and com-
manded that the castle should be his, and that he should

1 The context does not make it clear whether a royal expedition is meant,
which the Pope might aid either materially or spiritually, or a papal expedi-
tion, which a secular prince might be chosen to command. Possibly the
writer has either case in mind.

39

BLANQUERNA

give ten thousand pounds for the building of the monastery ;
and he sent to the chapter of that diocese commanding that,
if the Bishop desired not to hold his office and contribute
that which he commanded him to give, they should elect
another in his place, and that the Bishop who had spoken
ill of him should have only the income of a canon. The
Fool said to the Beloved: ‘‘ Pay me and give me my
recompense for the time that I have served Thee.” The
Beloved increased in his Lover his love for Him and the
grief which he had suffered for the sake of love, and He
said to him: “‘ Behold the Pope and the Cardinals who
honour the glory of their Lord.” And the Jester sent
letters by Devotion to comfort Valour, who wept for the
dishonour which for long her enemies had done to her
Lord.

11. Throughout all the world went forth the fame of
the holy life of the Pope and the great good which he did,
and daily was valour increased and dishonour diminished.
The good which came from the ordinance which the Pope
had established illumined the whole world, and brought
devotion to them that heard the ordinance recounted; and
throughout all the world was sent in writing an account of
the process of the making thereof. It chanced one day that
the Pope had sent to a Saracen king a knight who was also
a priest, and of the Order of Science and Chivalry. This
knight by force of arms vanquished ten knights one after
the other on different days, and after this he vanquished all
the wise men of that land by his arguments, and proved to
all that the Holy Catholic Faith was true. By messengers
of such singular talent, and by many more, did the ordi-
nance aforementioned, which was established by the Holy
Apostolic Father, illumine the world.

12. It came to pass that of the fifty Tartars who learned
our language and gained understanding of our faith, thirty
were converted, and the Pope sent them with five friars to
the Court of the Khan, These thirty, together with the
33°

ET IN TERRA PAX

five friars who had learned the language of the Tartars,
came before the great Khan, and preached the faith of the
Christians, and converted many people in his Court, and
they turned the great Khan from the error wherein he lived
and made him to doubt it; and after a time, by process of
this doubt, he came to everlasting life.

13. In a certain land there were Studying ten Jews and
ten Saracens together with ten friars of religion; and when
they had learned our holy law and our letters, the half of
them were converted to our law, and they preached our
law to other Jews, and to Saracens our holy Christian faith,
in the presence of many that had not yet been converted,
and thus did they daily and continually. And because the
Papal Court did all that was in its power, and through the
continuance of the disputation, and because truth has power
over falsehood, God gave grace to all the Jews and Saracens
of that country so that they were converted and baptized,
and preached to others the Holy Faith. Wherefore the
good and the honour which, through the Pope Blanquerna,
was done to the Christian Faith, can in no wise be
recounted.

CHAPTER LXXXI

ET IN TERRA PAX HOMINIBUS BONE VOLUNTATIS

Tue Cardinal who served the office of “ Et in terra pax
hominibus bonz voluntatis ” sent his spies throughout the
city of Rome to spy out if any man was in strife with any
other; and the same thing did he throughout divers coun-
tries; and daily did he treat concerning peace even so much
as he could. It came to pass one day that a spy whom he
had sent through the city of Rome told him that in that
city were a Christian and a Jew who disputed daily con-
cerning their laws, and that they had great strife the one
with the other while they disputed, and that each bore the
other ill-will because of it, The Cardinal went to that place

331

BLANQUERNA

wherein they disputed, and reasoned with them, saying
these words:

2. “It is the nature of understanding that it compre-
hends more clearly when a man is joyful and glad than
when he is angered, for anger disturbs the understanding,
wherefore the understanding may not comprehend that
which it would have comprehended if the man had not been
angered. Another property has understanding in its com-
prehension, to wit, that a man affirms to be possible
anything which the will desires that the understanding
shall comprehend; for if, before the understanding com-
prehend it, he affirm that impossibility is therein, the
understanding will not be prepared to comprehend the
possibility or impossibility which is to be understood
therein. Another property yet has the understanding when
it soars aloft in comprehension of any matter, namely, that
the will may love equally that which it affirms or denies,
before the understanding comprehend it; for when the will
is inclined to the one side before the understanding has
comprehension thereof, the understanding is impeded from
comprehension. All these manners and many more are
needful to the understanding that it may comprehend; and
if it may not comprehend through all of them, it behoves
a man to have recourse to the Brief Art of finding Truth,
which is an art whereby the understanding may soar aloft
in comprehension, even as the voice, through the art of
music, soars aloft in song.”” After this manner the Cardinal
gave instruction to the two wise men who were disputing
together, and through the humility which he caused to come
to them, they became friends the one of the other, disputing
and agreeing with each other in love and conceding to each
other the truth. The Cardinal left them, and gave them
his benediction, and said to them that they should send each
other gifts, that there might be occasion of friendship
between them, through the which friendship they would
have understanding the more easily the one of the other.
Be

ET IN TERRA PAX

3. At that time it came to pass that two Christian kings,
of great nobility and power, had had long strife and dispute
between themselves, and had attacked each other in battle.
The Cardinal went to the two kings with letters from the
Pope that he might make peace between them, and bare
many jewels and much money that he might give jewels to
them both, and many gifts to their counsellors. With all
his power the Cardinal endeavoured to make peace between
these two kings, and since they had continued for long in
their lawsuit and there had been no peace between them,
therefore was each king so incensed against the other that
the Cardinal could not make peace, nor even a truce.
Wherefore the Cardinal wrote to the Pope in these
words:

4. “There was war between God and the human race
when Adam had sinned and all had strayed from the peace
and blessing of God. And because this strife was very
grievous, it beseemed God in His own person to come and
make peace and concord between God and His creatures;
wherefore came the person of the Son to take flesh within
Our Lady Saint Mary, and He suffered death upon the
Cross when He was grown to be a man.” ‘These letters
were read in the presence of the Pope and of the Cardinals,
and Ramén the Fool related this story: ‘‘ A certain lady
had great strife with her husband. But a fair son was born
to them, and because of the son whom each one loved, they
had peace and concord for all the time of their lives.” The
Jester of Valour said that humility, charity and peace were
sisters of Valour.

5. Long did the Pope consider that which was signified
by the words aforesaid, and by virtue of his will to work
that which was good he understood the significance of the
words. The Pope went with four Cardinals to the two
kings, who dwelt far from Rome, and to each of them he
gave gifts and jewels, and he held a great Court of prelates
and princes and barons, and this Court he held at great

38:3

BLANQUERNA

cost. Before the Pope spake concerning the making of
peace between the two kings, he said in the presence of all
that he had come to that land to set on foot an expedition
against the enemies of the Cross, and he desired and prayed
that both the kings would take part in the expedition, and
that one of them would go against the Saracens that are in
the East, and the other against those that are in the West;
and, when they had conquered them, that they would unite,
and the one would come to the other that both might
conquer the Saracens that are in the South. The Pope gave
great indulgences and ordered a Crusade, and from the
possessions of Holy Church he made great gifts to the two
kings and to other barons, and he placed their lands under
his own protection and command. So pleasing was this
ordinance to the two kings, and so great mind had they to
do deeds of arms, that both agreed to entrust their claims
to the power of the Pope; and they joined the expedition
and set aside the matter which had been at dispute between
them, that no harm might come to their expedition by
reason thereof.

6. The two kings set on foot a very great expedition,
and with them went many friars who had learned Arabic,
as messengers to the Saracens, that they might convert
them ere the two kings slew them and their souls went to
everlasting fire. The Pope returned to Rome, and did all
that was in his power for the success of the expedition. The
Cardinal who had the office of peace-maker remained for
a long time in the land of the two kings that he might set
the people at peace with each other. It came to pass one
day that, as he was riding in the city, he passed through
the chief square, wherein two drapers were disputing the
one with the other, because each had envy of the other
concerning his gains, thinking that the other took his gains
from him. The Cardinal purchased their two shops, which
belonged to a burgess of the city, and had two others made,
the one far from the other, and gave the one shop to the
334

ET IN TERRA PAX

one draper and the other to the other; and of the two shops
which he had bought he had two houses made; in each he
put a man who dwelt there as a recluse and lived upon
alms, and preached peace, and spake good words to the
people that dwelt in that square, and to others that passed
through the streets.

7. It came to pass that a spy of the Cardinal passed
through the square, and saw that both the recluses were at
strife, and spake evil words, having each one envy of the
other. When the Cardinal knew this, he took one recluse
from that place, and put him in another place far from that
from the which he had taken him, and from the house
whence he had taken him he made a place wherein should
be men to whom the recluse should speak words concern-
ing peace and God; and a like place made he for the other
recluse. Great was the good which both the recluses did
in that city, and very good was this establishment, since in
public places, wherein so much evil is done, there should
be men to mortify these evils through the example which
they give of good living, and through devout words, and
the reading of books of prayer and devotion.

8. The Cardinal went into another city which was situate
between the territory of an archbishop and a king, and they
disputed concerning the boundaries of the city, for the
which cause there was great strife between them. The
Cardinal could not make them to agree, for he could not
cast out the avarice which was deep rooted in the soul of
either. So the Cardinal went to Rome and prayed the Pope
that he would make peace between the archbishop and the
king. Immediately the Pope went to that city wherein was
the strife. He called the king and the archbishop and made
them a great feast and banquet. On the same day the Pope
preached concerning peace, saying how Jesus Christ
preached peace daily. Before they went to dine, the Pope
‘desired that the king would expound to him the cause of
his Strife with the archbishop. The king showed the Pope

338

BLANQUERNA

the boundaries which, as he said, marked out his dominion,
and the Pope said to the king that he had understood that
the dominion of the king extended farther, and he desired
that the king would take some of that which pertained to
the Church; for greater was the worth of the peace which
would follow therefrom than was the income of the land of
the archbishop. When the king saw that the Pope desired
to give him more of the city than he asked of him, he said
to the Pope: ‘‘ Lord! Come thou and take thy part of
my dominion whereof for a long time I have deprived the
Church.” And the king desired to assign to the Church
more than the archbishop asked. Great strife and dispute
was there before the Pope and the king could be made to
agree; for each desired to give up to the other his right;
wherefore the question was put into the power of two men
who knew the truth concerning the boundaries, and their
will was followed; so peace and friendship were made
between the king and the archbishop.

g. In a city wherein sojourned the Cardinal who went
seeking peace, was an old man who had a young wife. So
deeply did he love her that he had great jealousy because
of her, the which jealousy vexed him greatly; his wife like-
wise and all his household were greatly vexed because of
it. It came to pass one day that this man was in the square,
and the Cardinal passed by, and all the people said: “‘ Be-
hold the Cardinal who goes in search of peace.” This
good man wondered within himself if the Cardinal could
give him peace likewise, and bring him out of the trouble
wherein jealousy had set him. When the Cardinal went
to his lodging, the jealous man recounted to him secretly
his estate, and begged him to give him counsel as to how
he could have peace. The Cardinal spake many good words
to this man, and asked him to come daily to speak with
him for a space; and the Cardinal spake in secret with the
wife of the man, counselling her not to embroider her
garments nor to set colours in her face nor to give in her
See

ET IN TERRA PAX

person any signs of lust, and to do all honour to her husband
and to have patience when he spake sternly. When the
Cardinal had instruéted the lady without the knowledge of
her husband, he preached daily concerning God and
holiness of life, speaking evil of lust and praising chastity ;
and wheresoever he preached he took with him always this
good man who was jealous; and when he was in his house
the Cardinal invited him to come and read with him from
Holy Scripture. For a long time the Cardinal remained
in that city that he might bring peace to that man. So the
jealousy which he had aforetime remained no longer in him,
for the words which the Cardinal had spoken concerning
God, and the good life of his lady, weaned him from the
custom of thinking upon such things as make a man to be
jealous.

10. The Cardinal went to another city to find out if
there were any trouble therein. It came to pass one day
that, according to his custom, the Cardinal sent to four
notable men of the city, that they might watch and see if
in that city there were need to set any man at peace with
any other. Among these four notables was a man of
honoured lineage who had been very wealthy, and he was
in great trial night and day, casting in his mind for means
whereby he might maintain the estate of honour which he
had begun to maintain and had for a long time kept ; where-
fore that good man besought counsel of the Cardinal,
relating to him the trouble which his thoughts had given
him. That man had no wife and he had five sons. The
Cardinal counselled him that he should enter a religious
order that he might have no more fear of coming to poverty
and shame; and he commended one of his sons to the
Prince of that land, and another to the Bishop that he might
become a clerk; another of them he took himself, that he
might bring him up and give him a benefice, and the two
that remained were well provided for by the possessions of
their father; and the father entered a religious order, and

ve Jo7

BLANQUERNA

had peace all the days of his life, fleeing from the world
and from the vainglory wherein he had lived aforetime.

11. While the Cardinal was in that city there came a
message from Rome by means of a spy whom he kept there,
that he should go to Rome to make peace between the two
advocates of two princes who were sorely at strife with each
other. The Cardinal went to Rome, and secretly sent a
message to one of them, making him swear to keep secret
that which he should tell him. After the Cardinal had made
him swear this, he said that in his name he would send gifts
and jewels to the other man with whom he was at Strife;
and since this man was avaricious and would think that he
had sent him the jewels, his wrath would be restrained.
And he counselled him that, if his adversary gave him
thanks for aught that he had given him, he should make it
to appear that it was indeed he that had sent it to him. In
like manner spake the Cardinal with the other man; and
sent jewels often to either, in such wise that each thought
that the one was sending them to the other. By reason of
the jewels which the Cardinal sent, each greeted the other
and did kindnesses to the other; and though the Cardinal
said no more, they both became friends and pleasing the
one to the other. After this manner and in many another
wise did the Cardinal set men at peace, that they might
have good will and that peace might be made on earth, and
this peace be to them occasion of the life of salvation.
Great was the good that the Cardinal did, and whensoever
there was any strife in the land, men had recourse to the
Cardinal that he might make peace among them.

12, In the courts wherein lawsuits were tried and dis-
putes settled, the Cardinal had advocates to make peace
among those that came to law, and he himself came often-
times to the court to make peace between them. The
Cardinal secretly employed likewise devout and good
women to whom he gave rule and doétrine as to how they
might make peace between women that were at Strife.

338

LAUDAMUS TE

The great good which the Cardinal did in setting men at
peace with each other was so pleasing to God and to all
men that, through the merit of the Cardinal, God gave
peace and blessing to the lands whither the Cardinal went
and wherein he lived.

CHAPTER LXXXII

LAUDAMUS TE

Tue Cardinal of Laudamus Te took the office of praise;
and in the Court of Rome and through all Christian lands
he sent his representatives to praise God, and he, in his
Own person, went many times throughout these lands to
give praise to God for the work which He has in Him-
self,—that is to say, in His Divine Persons,—and for the
work which He has in the creatures. It came to pass once
that the Cardinal was praising God in a city wherein dwelt
a lady who had two sons: the one son was a clerk, and the
other a layman, and this lady and her sons praised God;
and there was question in that city which of the three
praised God the more fervently. On either side there were
persons who made argument, and recounted the praise
which each gave to God according to the manner following :

2. The good lady, who was the mother of the two sons
aforementioned, had brought up her sons to praise God,
and since the death of her husband she was accustomed to
go to other women and to reprove them for those things
wherein they erred, and to praise God in their presence as
well as she might. By reason of the reproofs which this
lady made to others concerning the garments which they
wore, and the painting of their faces, and their evil
customs, many a woman embraced good customs in that
city. And all feared this lady, because she reproved them
so straitly, and knew and spied out their secrets and their

faults.
339

BLANQUERNA

3. The clerk was a priest, and he loved poverty, and
sang Mass daily, and when it was the hour to dine he went
to the house of some man to beg him to give him meat on
that day, for the which favour he would sing Mass on the
morrow for the welfare of his soul. Oftentimes came this
clerk to eat and to beg alms with the poor at the gates of
religious houses and of the palace of the Bishop; and he
went to the clergy, reproving them for the faults which he
saw in them, and feared not to speak the truth to any clerk
whom he saw despising honesty and holiness of life: where-
fore as he reproved them he praised God, and as he praised
God he reproved them. That clerk was accustomed to go
daily through the streets of the city, and on the way, when-
soever he encountered clerks whom he saw to be in sin, he
reproved them; afterwards he went to the churches,
wherein he remained in prayer and contemplation, praising
God, and reproving the clerks in any church, when he saw
them do aught that was wrong. And the same thing did
he in all the churches.

4. The other brother, who was a layman, went through
the streets of the city, and when he found any layman who
sinned in respect of his clothing, or his walking, or his
speaking, or in anything soever, he reproved him incon-
tinently, fearing no calumny neither harm to his person;
and when he had reproved them he praised and blessed
God in the presence of those whom he had reproved. And
for the boldness which he had in reproving those who
erred, and in praising God, all the men in that city feared
him, and most of all was he feared by such as sinned.

5. Great was the good which that man did in the city,
and great likewise was the good that was done by the lady
and the clerk; wherefore there was question among the
ladies and the clerks and the laymen of that city which of
the three praised God the best; and on behalf of each there
were those that maintained that that one praised God the
best. Each of the three parties came before the Cardinal,
340

LAUDAMUS TE

and put to him the question. And the Cardinal was greatly
pleased, and brought the question to Rome that the Pope
might solve it, and that in the city of Rome also there might
be ladies and clerks and laymen who in like manner should
praise God, and that the Pope might make establishment
that for all time in the city of Rome there might be these
three offices.

6. When the Cardinal had come to Rome and had laid
this question before the Pope and the Cardinals, Ramon
the Fool came before them, and he brought fire and wood
and flour and water, and a sieve, and he said that he desired
to make a loaf compounded of hope, charity, justice,
chastity and humility, that he might give it to eat to those
in whom was despondency, cruelty, wrong, lust and pride.
After these words, the Jester of Valour said to the Cardinal
who had put the question, that he besought him to apprise
Ramon the Fool thereof, for in praise of God and to re-
prove the vices of the Court of Rome Ramon the Sage had
taken the office of fool. Greatly was the Cardinal pleased,
and even so were all the rest, that Ramon the Fool should
be apprised of that question.

7. While the Pope and the Cardinals debated the solu-
tion of the question, a courier brought to the Jester of
Valour a letter from the Emperor, instructing him to
request the Pope and the Cardinals upon his behalf to
judge which of these four persons following praised God
the most truly, the which persons praised Him in the
manner related in these words:

8. In a certain monastery there was a brother who was
a man of holy life and a notable clerk. That brother had
devotion in praising God in those works which God has in
Himself, to wit, in the generation of the Son by the Father,
and in the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father
and the Son. This brother had given himself up wholly
to praising the Trinity, saying that in all these things praise
should be given to the noblest work which exists; and

ag?

BLANQUERNA

since the noblest work of any is the generation of God and
the procession of God, in the which generation and pro-
cession there is infinity and eternity of goodness, power,
wisdom, love and perfection, therefore the friar had no
intent to praise God save in His Holy Trinity and Unity.
That friar praised God in word and thought, according
to the manner aforesaid, and with respect to the creatures,
and to the work which God has in the creatures, he en-
deavoured with all his power to prove to Christians that
concerning the which he praised God, and, from the praises
which he spake and proved, there resulted devotion and
charity in those to whom the friar praised God, and from
this devotion and charity followed many good works and
many evils ceased.

g. There was a bishop who had devotion in praising
God in His Incarnation; for the noblest work which the
Creator can perform in the creature is to unite the creature
with Himself, that they may be one person only. And
through the great devotion which the bishop had in praising
God as touching the noblest work that God can have in the
creature, the bishop had devotion to go and praise Him
among the unbelievers, that by means of his praise he
might convert them and suffer martyrdom. That bishop
went to the land of the Saracens to praise the Holy In-
carnation and Passion of the Son of God, and he did much
good in that land, and suffered martyrdom in praise of
God.

10. In that city wherein the bishop was martyred, there
was a philosopher who was a very great master in philos-
ophy, and through the words which he heard the bishop
speak concerning the Incarnation of God he became a
Christian, and had devotion to praise God in those lands
wherein He is unknown, and whose inhabitants adore and
believe in idols. That philosopher went to those countries
to praise God, and to prove that God is, and is one only,
the which God is the First Cause and Sovereign Good.
342 :

LAUDAMUS TE

He praised God likewise in the good which He performs
in creatures who by their goodness give significance of the
goodness of the Creator. While the philosopher, by means
of the creatures, proved God to exist, and to be wholly
good, the people of that city slew him, and he became a
martyr in praise of God, Whom he praised as Lord of all
creatures.

11. After the death of the philosopher, a Christian
knight came to that city wherein the philosopher had been
martyred in praise of God. In that city God worked many
miracles through the death of the philosopher, by the which
miracles many people were converted. That knight came
to the city to challenge in single combat any man who
should say that God existed not, or that God was the sun
or the moon or the other creatures which idolaters set in
the likeness of God. With a great company of knights of
that land the knight did battle, and conquered many, and
at the last an archer wounded him with an arrow which
cleft his heart, and the knight became a martyr, having
praised God in the office of arms.

12. After this letter had been read, the Pope and the
Cardinals praised and blessed God for the praise which was
given to Him in the persons of the four men above men-
tioned; and many were the arguments that were put
before the Court on the one side and the other; and the
Stronger was the argument between the partisans of each
of the four in judging which of them had praised God best,
the more was devotion increased in the people who heard
the arguments. So the Cardinal of Laudamus Te said to
the Pope that he should defer for a long time the solution
of the question aforementioned, and that men should be
chosen in his Court, who should make argument daily
upon either side, and that all the arguments should be set
down in writing; for if one suit had lasted for twenty years
in the court of two kings who made dispute concerning
their empire, how much the more should sentence be de-

343

BLANQUERNA

ferred concerning the question aforementioned, to the end
that devotion and good example might be the more
increased in that Court, by the which devotion and ex-
ample many should praise God and suffer martyrdom in
His praise |

13. That which the Cardinal demanded was granted to
him by the Pope and the other Cardinals, and endowment
was made of advocates from the possessions of Holy
Church, the which advocates were to make arguments upon
either side all the days of their life. It came to pass one
day that the advocate who made argument concerning the
bishop who died in praise of the Incarnation of God put
forward in his plea two arguments, namely, that God can
be the better praised with respect to justice and mercy in
a clerk that is a sinner, than in any other man; for since
the clerk holds the office of Jesus Christ, he is the greater
sinner, when he sins, than another man, wherefore God
can manifest greater justice in punishing him or greater
mercy in pardoning him his sins. And since this greater
demonstration of praise is given in the Incarnation of the
Son of God and in the Sacrifice of the Altar and in the
Passion of Jesus Christ, therefore the advocate thought it
to be proved that the bishop praised God more than all the
rest. Arguments of like kind were put forward by the
other advocates, and many notable arguments and questions
were made in the plea aforesaid, from the which there
followed much good in the Court.

14. While the aforementioned suit was being conduted
daily in the Court, Ramon the Fool made question to the
Pope, and the Cardinals, as to how and why it could be
that the Popes who had been poor in temporal possessions
had been praised more greatly than the Popes who were
richer, after they had acquired the Empire of Rome. The
Pope answered and said to Ramon the Fool that it was a
light matter to solve this question.

344

BENEDICIMUS TE

CHAPTER LXXXIII

BENEDICIMUS TE

Tue Cardinal of Benedicimus Te came before the Pope
and the Cardinals with a great company of men to whom
he had commended divers offices wherein God might be
blessed; they were to go through many lands to bless God,
to the end that God might bless those lands by reason of
the blessing of His Name therein. These men were to go
through the streets crying out and saying: ‘“‘ Blessed be
God Who has created the trees, beasts, birds, men, metals,
elements, skies, stars, angels and all other creatures; and
blessed be God Who is the Orderer of the world, in that
He has created divers offices therein: clerks, knights,
religious, prelates, princes, labourers, merchants, black-
smiths, carpenters, drapers, shoe-makers, furriers, butchers,
fishermen and men of all other offices.”” These men have
promised to cry out and bless God for that He was pleased
to become incarnate, and to die, and to work miracles, and
to create Paradise and Hell, and for that He will make the
good and the evil to rise again, sentencing the good to ever-
lasting glory and the evil to eternal punishment. Further-
more, these men were to cry aloud and bless God in His
Essence and in His Trinity and in His Virtues and in all
things soever wherein is significance of His nobility.

2. When the Cardinal had related to the Pope and the
other Cardinals the ordinance which he had established
that the name of God might be blessed, he prayed the Pope
to grant great indulgences to those that would hold this
office, and to cause the clerks to give them to eat, for so
long as they were in any land whither they had gone to
bless the name of God. The Pope and the Cardinals were
_ greatly pleased at that which this Cardinal had ordained,
and the Pope commanded all the bishops that each one
should provide for these men for so long as they were in

345

BLANQUERNA

his diocese, and he gave them great indulgences and sent
them away thus privileged, to go to divers dioceses by two
and two. So they praised and blessed God in marvellous
wise, crying aloud night and day concerning the Name
and the virtue of God. And for the blessing which they
gave to God, God blessed their words, and granted
devotion to many people, who by reason thereof lived holy
lives.

3. The Cardinal went through the city of Rome, bear-
ing much money, which he gave to the poor that they
might bless God; and as he went through the streets he
cried to the people that they should bless God. It came
to pass one day that a crier, who was wont to go about
crying wine, considered the great devotion of the Cardinal,
and through the Divine will the crier had devotion to be
a crier of the name of God; and he came to the Cardinal,
and with his license took the office of crying that the name
of God should be blessed; and the Cardinal gave him a
daily wage of five sous whereon he should live, and buy nuts
and fruit to give to the children who followed him, crying
also that the Name of God should be praised and blessed,
and saying: “ Blessed be God, praised be God, adored be
God, obeyed be God, and may the work and virtue of God
be ever praised and served.” That crier went daily through
Rome with many children, and they cried and blessed God
and His virtue. As the crier and the children cried out
and blessed God, many men that were sinners had remem-
brance and understanding and love of God, mortifying the
vices and nurturing the virtues in their minds, and righteous
men exalted their devotion in loving and serving God.

4. It came to pass in the city through the which went
two of these men who cried out and blessed God, that a
certain learned merchant had lost his wife, and he desired
to bless God after the manner wherein he might the most
effectually bless Him; so he sold all that he had, and spent
— upon a palfrey and upon a goblet of gold; and
oF

BENEDICIMUS TE

he rode upon the palfrey, bearing the goblet before him,
and he cried out through all the town that he would give
that palfrey and that goblet to the man who would best
instruct him to bless God. When the merchant went thus
through the city crying aloud, there were many men in the
city who had great desire to possess the palfrey, and the
goblet of gold, which was very precious, and they thought
of many and divers manners of blessing God; wherefore
there was question among them which of these was the best
way of blessing God.

4] Ina certain election a Canon received many votes that
he might be made a bishop, and he blessed God that he
was not a bishop; and the Bishop who was eleéted blessed
God because He had charged him with so great and perilous
a task and with an office so honoured and useful. Where-
fore it is a question which gave the greater benediction to
God.

| It is a question which gave the greater blessing to
God: whether a certain man whose goods God increased,
giving him wealth and honour in this world so that he
blessed God for it; or one who blessed God because he
was ill and dishonoured, and whose temporal possessions
God had taken from him.

§] A certain man wounded another mortally, though this
man had done no wrong, and the wounded man blessed
God and had patience; and the man that wounded him
likewise had patience, and praised and blessed God, and
judged himself to be guilty, while he suffered his lawful
punishment.

“| There was a man who praised and blessed God when
he saw lepers, and beasts, and men that were sinners, be-
cause God had made him neither a leper nor a beast, but
had made him a man. Another man blessed God because
He had given him grace to live without mortal sin. Where-
fore it is a question which of these blessed God the more

truly.
y 347

BLANQUERNA

{| Between a man and a woman there was question which
blessed God the more: whether the man because God had
not made him a woman, or the woman because she was not
a man, and was in greater submission in this world than is
a man.

{ There was a question likewise between a Christian
and a Saracen, which of them praised God the more truly
according to his law.

4 A like question was made between a woman and
her son, for the son blessed God because He had given
him a good mother and the mother blessed God because
He had given her a good son.

§ A certain king blessed God because He had given
him a noble people; and the people blessed God because
He had given them a worthy king. Wherefore there was
question which of them blessed God the more truly.

These questions and many more were given in writing
to the merchant, to the end that he might bestow the
palfrey and the goblet on him who had brought the question
which signified which one among all these persons blessed
God the most truly.

5. When the merchant had received the questions afore-
mentioned, he rode upon his palfrey with the questions
and the goblet of gold in his hand, and came to Rome, to
the Cardinal whose office was to bless God, and he prayed
him that he would solve the questions above-mentioned,
that he might make choice of the manner wherein he could
the most effectually bless God, and give the goblet and the
palfrey to him that had brought the best question. The
Cardinal went with the merchant to the Consistory before
the Pope and the Cardinals, to solve this question; but
agreement was made by the Pope and the Cardinals that
the questions should be debated for a long time in the
Court that they might not be forgotten, and that through
remembering them many men might have example and
—" in praising and blessing God, and that the use
34

BENEDICIMUS TE

and custom of blessing God might be increased, and the
office of the Cardinal have the greater utility; wherefore
there was made an establishment that at the gate of the
Cathedral of Rome should be set a palfrey of marble, and
a man riding thereon who should hold in his hand a goblet,
and that on the pedestal should be inscribed these questions
aforesaid, together with the reason for the which the
merchant had come to Rome.

6. It came to pass one day that the Cardinal rode through
the city to see if he could hear any man blessing God, and
he passed before a tavern wherein were many riotous men
and idlers who played at dice, and one of them cursed and
blasphemed God, saying many foul and evil words con-
cerning Jesus Christ and Our Lady Saint Mary because of
a game which he had lost at dice. The Cardinal dismounted
from his palfrey, and gave it to this ribald man who blas-
phemed God, to the end that he might bless Him and never
blaspheme Him more, and he went to the Pope and to the
Cardinals, saying to them these words: “‘ One day a certain
friar was at Mass, which a Master in theology was singing,
and he considered this Master, who for a long time through
his words had given reason whereby God could be blessed
by His disciples. Wherefore,” said the Cardinal, “ I am
in very great wrath when I think that for a game of dice
there are many riotous men and knaves who curse and
blaspheme God and Our Lady and the saints in glory. I
ask that satisfaction be made to me for the injury and
wrong which is being done to me by dicing, and hindering
the office which is commended to me. If satisfa¢tion be
not made to me and to my office by such as have power,
they will be opposed to the blessing of God, and agree to-
gether in having maledi¢tion of Him.” So vehement were
the words that the Cardinal spake to the Pope and his
companions that he made their minds to be in contrition
and in thought, and they took knowledge of the power
which they had, which was superior to their will. And the

349

BLANQUERNA

Jester of Valour said: ‘‘ What is the worth of a lover who
forbids not that dishonour be done to his Beloved?” And
Ramén the Fool said that the lover was tormented by his
Beloved, of the which lover they enquired while they tor-
mented him if it was time to rest; and he answered saying
that, provided his Beloved knew, it was time for him to
rest in the trials which he suffered for his Beloved.

7. While they spake thus there entered a Legate who
recounted how he had fulfilled his commandment in ex-
communicating a prince who had disendowed the Church;
and the Cardinal of Benedicimus Te enquired of the Pope
which thing ought the more straitly to be spoken against:
whether that for the which men blasphemed and dis-
honoured God, or the disendowment, by that prince, of one
bishopric only.

8. Blanquerna the Pope was riding one day through the
city of Rome and he saw a great company of ribald men
in a tavern, who cried out saying: ‘‘ Blessed be the Name of
God.’ The Pope enquired how it came to pass that these
ribald men blessed God in that place or how God could
be blessed by such people. ‘‘ Lord!” said a knight who
was of the city of Rome: ‘ There is a ribald man to whom
the Cardinal of Benedicimus Te gave a palfrey, and he
has made a custom of speaking these words concerning
God whensoever he is with his fellows; and so devout are
the words which he speaks to them that many a time he
makes them to weep through the words which he speaks
concerning God and His Passion, and in their poverty he
comforts them and makes them to have patience; and when
he has brought them to such devotion he makes them to
cry out and to bless the name of God; and all the ribald
men and the harlots of this city have made this man their
lord and their chief; and this man is of such good customs
that he gives great devotion to the people by his words and
his good works.”’ Greatly did the Pope rejoice at the words
which he heard concerning this man, and he said that
352

BENEDICIMUS TE

though his name might be vile, his life was holy and
glorious. So the Pope caused this man to come to him,
and he enquired of him how he could make God to be
blessed by people so vile as are ribald men and harlots,
especially when they were in taverns. ‘‘ Lord!” said the
ribald man: ‘In that place wherein the name of God is
dishonoured the most often, and by those people that bless
Him least, should man put forth his greatest power that
the name of God may be praised therein and blessed.”
The Pope thought deeply upon the words which this ribald
man had spoken to him, and he said that it was a thing very
needful that the name of God should be blessed among
those people that are unbelievers, who do no honour to the
name of God.

g. When the Pope had spoken these words there came
to him a knight, saying to him: “ Lord! I have been a
man of arms, and all my life have I spent in slaying and
destroying men that I might have of all men fame and
renown in battle. If it please thee, 1 would have this office
all the days of my life, that 1 may go among men who are
brought near to death, whether by justice or by sickness,
and that I may speak to them words of God, to the end
that I may make satisfaction to God for my sins, and that
those that die may be the more confirmed in the faith and
mercy of God because of me, and that, as they die, they
will bless and praise the name of God, and that after their
deaths I may bring consolation to their kinsfolk.” The
Pope granted this office to the knight, and when he went
to his palace he made a book wherein was the doctrine that
he gave to the knight, and the words which he should speak
to dying men, and to those who have need of consolation.
The knight learned this book, wherein were written the
words convenient for his office, and he went throughout
_ the city of Rome spying out those that were near to death ;
and he spake to them words so devout that they were con-
firmed in their faith because of them; and he made them

352

BLANQUERNA

to have such consciousness of their sins that he caused them
to make restitution for the injuries and the wrongs which
they had done, and made them to despise this world and
to desire the world to come, so that they blessed and praised
God as they died. And so many good words were spoken
by this knight, that the kinsfolk of the men that died had
consolation and patience because of them, and praised and
blessed the justice and mercy of God. So great was the
good that the knight did in that city, that when any man
was near to death or had need of consolation, they sent a
message always to this knight, and he brought with him his
book, and read and expounded the doétrine which the Pope
Blanquerna had given him.

CHAPTER LXXXIV
ADORAMUS TE

Tue Cardinal of Adoramus Te was in great thought as
to how he might bring it to pass that God should be more
perfectly adored by His people, and he reflected that he
might go to live alone for some time with a holy hermit
who dwelt upon a high mountain, and that in that place
he might consider the manner wherein he could bring it
to pass that God should be contemplated and adored,
according as is beseeming, and according as He has com-
manded His people. While the Cardinal went to the
hermit and considered that which he so greatly desired, it
chanced that he passed along a road wherein was a church
which a poor man served by providing lights for worship,
and wherein he caused Mass to be sung by begging for
alms which men gave him. In that church there was a very
great crucifix, right nobly sculptured and enchased. And
there had entered a pilgrim, who was destroying the crucifix
and knocking it to pieces with stones, and the good man
who served the church was forbidding him with all his
power. While these two men thus strove, the Cardinal

soe

ADORAMUS TE

passed by and entered the church, and marvelled greatly
at the pilgrim who was thus stoning the crucifix, and en-
quired of the pilgrim wherefore he dishonoured the figure
which is represented by the image of Jesus Christ. “ Sir!”
said the pilgrim: “‘ It was formerly the custom for people
to adore idols, and in this present time there are many men
who adore idols, and the Saracens and the Jews reproach
us who are Christians because we adore images, for an
image sculptured and enchased is more like in figure to an
idol than is an image which is unadorned. Wherefore to
signify that unadorned images are more seemly than those
that are enchased, I have made it a custom to destroy every
graven image upon an altar, for its likeness to an idol.”’

2. While the Cardinal and the pilgrim held this converse
there entered a man who came from foreign lands, and he
kneeled before the Altar and adored and prayed to God very
earnestly. The Cardinal considered that God had set some
virtue in this man, by reason of the which he adored God
so devoutly, and he desired to know of this man the manner
wherein he adored God. “Sir!” said that man: “ It is
almost a custom among the men that are in this world that
they adore God to the end that He may give them glory
and not punishment; and manya time do theyadore Him to
the end that He may give them temporal possessions accord-
ing to their need. Wherefore as it is a wrongful thing to
adore God the rather in respect of the things of man, than
for the goodness which is in God, therefore do I go to the
Pope that he may give me his benediction, and I desire to
cry aloud in all the squares and streets of cities and towns
that men should adore God chiefly and above all because
He is good, and worthy, that through His very goodness
and perfection men should adore Him and bring Him love
and do Him reverence and honour.”’

3. The Cardinal marvelled and rejoiced greatly, and with
this man who desired to cry aloud concerning the best
manner wherein man may adore God, he returned to the

Z 353

BLANQUERNA
city of Rome to make representation to the Pope concern-
ing these two men according as has been said above. As
they went all three along the road speaking of the manner
wherein man should adore God, they met an old Jew who
was going to the Court and was very wearied by reason of
the long journey which he had made. His face and his
features gave significance of great trouble and sorrow. The
Cardinal enquired of the Jew wherefore he went so sadly
and pensively. “Sir!” said the Jew: “ For a long time
I have been in grievous thought, from the which I cannot
escape, and that thought so greatly torments my soul, that
I have scarce any pleasure in aught that I hear or see.”
The Cardinal desired to know at all costs the thought
wherein the Jew had entered, and the Jew spake to him of
his trouble according to these words. “Sir!” said the
Jew: ‘‘In the beginning, as it pleased God,—Blessed be
His Name !—He honoured the people of the Jews above
all other peoples. Twice were we in captivity: the first
captivity was of four hundred years and the second of
seventy years. In these two captivities were we because
we committed many sins; yet after the punishment which
we suffered in captivity, we recovered the liberty which we
had had aforetime. But now, though we neither slay
prophets nor adore idols, and live our life in this world
with great trials, we have been in captivity more than one
thousand and two hundred years and we know not why;
wherefore I have great fear that we have been guilty of the
death of the Christ, and that for this reason we are in
captivity. Therefore go I as a man in exile throughout
many lands to enquire if any man can show and make clear
to me that we are in captivity because we adore not Jesus
Christ Whom we have crucified.”

4. When the Jew had ended his words, the Cardinal put
to him this question: ‘‘ There was debate between three
wise men which of the three adored God most perfeétly.
The one had the office whereby he went over hill and dale
354

ADORAMUS TE

and adored God in herbs, plants, beasts, birds, and men,
and in all the creatures. The second wise man adored God
in that which He did in the works which He performed
above nature, even as also in the miracles which He did, and
in the creation of the world from nothing, and in the raising
of the dead, and in everything that nature cannot perform.
The third wise man adored God in those things which God
is and in those things which God works in Himself, through
Himself, and of Himself, and in that which God works in
Himself with respeé to the creatures. And it was a question
which of these three adored God the most perfe@ly; and
if there should be another who adored God according
to the three manners aforementioned, there would be
question likewise if he adored Him more perfetly than
any of the three sages aforementioned.” ‘“‘ Sir!” said the
Jew: ‘‘ He that adores God for that which God works in
Himself is he that adores Him the most perfeétly, rather
than he that adores Him for that which He does in others;
and he that adores God according to the three manners
aforementioned adores Him more perfectly than he that
adores Him in one manner only.”’ The Cardinal answered
and said “that he had rightly judged: and they that praise
God for the works which He shows in the things of nature
are the philosophers of olden time, and they that adore God
in His miracles and in the works which they believe Him
to do above nature are the Jews; but now the time has
come wherein the Jews believe no more in miracles, and
adore not God, for they believe not that which He does
above nature to show forth His power; but the Christians
believe that God performs in Himself a greater work than
nature can either do or receive, in that the Father Who is
God has engendered the Son Who is God, and from these
proceeds the Holy Spirit Who is God, and yet together
they are no more than one God. And God the Son has
united with Himself the human nature of Christ, with
Whom He is no more than one Person; and since this

B io)

BLANQUERNA |

Christ was crucified and slain by you Jews, when He came
among you to take His human nature, and suffered death
to save you, and since ye adore Him not, therefore has He
punished you by delivering you into the captivity of the
Christians, and of the Saracens also, signifying thereby that
in every wise ye are unworthy to be free, wherefore He has
made you to be subjected to the faithful and the unfaithful
alike.” Deeply did the Jew consider the words which the
Cardinal had spoken, and through the questions and the
arguments which he had made, he perceived the truth and-
became a Christian, and received the office that he should
go into the synagogues of the Jews to adore God in the
presence of all according to the three manners aforesaid ;
and the Pope gave him the privilege of that office.

5. As the Cardinal was before the Pope, and ordained
his officers who were to help him in the fulfilment of his
office, there came before the Pope an ancient and reverend
Saracen, and on behalf of the Saracen king he presented to
the Pope a letter, in the which the Saracen king prayed
him that he would send to him to say if that which a certain
Christian had related to him of the Holy Catholic Faith
was true. This Christian, he said, had turned him from
the faith of Mahomet which he had aforetime held, but
since the Christian had told him that the Catholic Faith
could not be proved by arguments, therefore he desired not
to be a Christian, for he would not leave one faith for
another, but he said that through understanding he would
fain leave the faith of Mahomet and hold the Catholic
Faith, providing that the Pope would send to him to say
if it could be proved, and if this were so he would become
a Christian and adore Jesus Christ as God, and make over
all his domain to the Church of Rome, to the end that all
that dwelt therein should adore Jesus Christ.

6. When these letters had been read in presence of the
Pope and the Cardinals, there entered a Gentile! who came

1 i.a heathen. Cf. p. 311, above.
356

ADORAMUS TE

from a southern land which lies within the regions of the
desert, and from a city which is called Gana. In that land
there were many kings and princes who adored idols and
likewise adored the sun and the stars and the birds and the
beasts. The people of that land are very many, and they
are black, and have no law. It came to pass one day that
a man from that country considered that it was beseeming
that there should be adored some one thing only, which
should be nobler than any of those to which they did
adoration in that land, and in honour of that thing the
nature whereof he knew not, he went through every land
crying out that man should seek and make enquiry con-
cerning this thing which alone should be adored. For so
long did that man continue in this office, and so diligently
did he serve therein, that he moved the people in that land
to devotion, and they had a desire to have knowledge of
that thing which above all others should be adored; where-
fore they held a Court, and came together, and ordained
that messengers should be sent through divers lands to
enquire what that thing could be which was worthy of
adoration above all things else; and one of the messengers
was this man who came to the Pope. Straightway the Pope
sent for the articles of the faith and the books whereby it
is shown that these articles may be proved. He sent also
for the friars that had learned Arabic, the which friars went
to the Saracen king, who had sent these letters to the Pope,
and by the grace of God they converted the Saracen king
and a great multitude of people; and with the messengers
of the Pope they went to those countries through the which
the Gentile had passed, and they proclaimed and showed
by necessary reasons that God was sovereign over all things,
and that He it was Whom all the people of these lands
should adore; and they destroyed the idols wherein they
had been wont to believe. So agreement and friendship
was made between these people and the Catholics; and by
the friendship and converse which the Catholics had with

ae7

BLANQUERNA

them, many of these people in a brief space of time received
baptism.

7. Upon a certain feast day the Pope made a procession
with a great company of prelates and religious and other
clerks. Many were the songs and praises which were made
to our Lord God therein. The Cardinal of Adoramus Te
walked in that procession, and he reflected how that
there were many lands in the world wherein were numbers
of people who praised not God neither adored Him, and
he desired very earnestly that God should be adored in all
these lands. While the Cardinal considered thus it chanced
that he passed before a great company of silversmiths and
shopkeepers, who had in their shops very many cups and
basins, jugs, dishes, and bowls of gold and silver and many
other precious things, to wit, rings, purses, girdles and
precious stones. The Cardinal commanded four squires
to seize all these cups and jewels and to throw them into
the street and to say that he had commanded them to do
this. The squires performed his commandment, and the
men who owned these precious things were greatly scandal-
ised thereat, and it seemed that all the procession would be
disturbed because the Cardinal had commanded his squires
to act in this wise, and because there was like to be strife
between them and the men who owned these precious
things.

8. After this adventure there came another, namely, that
the Cardinal of Adoramus Te saw a lady who followed
the procession, the which lady was richly adorned with
gold and silver and precious stones, and her face shone
with the colours which she had placed thereon, even as
images shine when man has placed varnish upon them.
The Cardinal kneeled before the lady and made as though
he would adore her, saying that she was like to an idol and
for this reason he kneeled to her. Great was the shame of
that lady and of all the others that were with her. When
the Pope had ended the procession and had sung Mass, he
358

GLORIFICAMUS TE

desired to know for what reason the Cardinal had digturbed
the procession and had kneeled before the lady; and the
Cardinal related to him how that great devotion had come
to him as he had refle€ted how many lands there were
wherein God was not adored, and that the cups of gold and
silver and the other precious things wherewith prelates
adorn their tables and fill their chests impeded this office! ;
wherefore he had commanded that these precious things
should be destroyed. So the Pope made establishment
from thenceforward that none of these jewels should be in
any city or place wherein he was, lest they should be an
occasion to the unworthy will of any prelate. After this
he made establishment likewise that no woman that was
dressed and adorned after the manner of idols should walk
in his procession nor be in any church wherein he sang

Mass.

CHAPTER LXXXV

GLORIFICAMUS TE

Tue Cardinal to whom the Pope had commended the office
of Glorificamus Te said to the Pope that he desired to
take the office whereby he should honour in this world the
will of God against those who do it dishonour. Wherefore
the Cardinal related this Story: ‘‘ There was a king who
had gone with a great company of his retainers into a fair
forest to take recreation. In this forest he dallied and
feasted and had great delight. It came to pass that there
was evil weather in that place wherein the king dwelt, with
cold and snow and rain, and the king remained in his tent
and took many sauces and strong wines and wore much
clothing, so that neither the cold nor the evil weather in
that place could harm his person; but among his people
and his servants it caused death and destruction, for they

1 V; “impeded the office of Adoramus Te.”
359

BLANQUERNA

could not defend themselves from the evil weather.” When
the Cardinal had ended this Story, he expounded it in these
words: ‘‘ The king is the Pope, and his barons and knights
are the Cardinals and the prelates of Holy Mother Church,
who send not to far countries friars, religious and worthy
men to learn divers languages and to have converse with
the people of these lands, that they may understand them
and preach to them without interpreters; and since such
a custom would be agreeable to the will of God, all they
that could and should follow it, that the will of God may be
done in this world, and do not so, are opposed to the will
of God. They that die are the Christians in these lands,
for they dwell among the Saracens and the Tartars, to
whom they are subject, and these are ignorant of the faith
and the preachers thereof. And to the Christians in these
lands, through the captivity wherein they have perforce to
dwell, is done much wrong as to their persons, and as to
their wives and daughters; wherefore they oftentimes have
no more belief in the Holy Catholic Faith, but renounce it,
and take the faith of those among whom they live in
opposition to the will of God.”

2. When the Pope had heard these words, he made
ordinance concerning those Orders that follow after learn-
ing, that even as the prince who goes to war with another
prince is accustomed to set armed outposts on the boun-
daries of his domains, even so there should be established
monasteries in the domains of those Christians who mingle
with unbelievers, and that, whatsoever language these people
speak, the monks shall learn that language, and mingle with
them and preach tothem. These things the Pope ordained,
that with all his power he might cause the will of God to
be done.

3. The Cardinal had great will to honour the will of God,
that he might glorify God in honouring His will, and he
appointed officers, who in their divers offices should aid

him to honour the will of God. It came to pass one day
360

GLORIFICAMUS TE

that the Cardinal went through the city of Rome, and
passed through a square wherein were many people, and
he enquired of the men who were going to and fro in the
square why their will made them to go here and there thus
diligently; and each one answered that the will that caused
them thus diligently to go was that which they had with
respect to their temporal business. Wherefore the Cardinal
ordered that a man should stand in that square and cry
aloud to the people that they should direét their intent to
the service of God in their conduét of the business of this
world, and that they should conduct this business with
intent to serve God, that in all their works the will of God
should be honoured rather than the will that loves temporal
business. So that man stood in the square and cried aloud
according as the Cardinal had ordered him. Many were
the men who, through that which they heard, directed
their will to the service of the will of God.

4. The Cardinal appointed another officer who should
go through the streets crying aloud how men ought to obey
the will of God in believing the fourteen articles, and in
performing that which they were commanded:to perform
by the ten commandments; and that they should glorify
the will of God because He has been pleased to create the
world, and to become incarnate and to give the world to
men. And this officer was to say to every man that he
ought to glorify the will of God Who had made him a man
and a Christian; for had He not so willed, God had not
created the world, nor taken our nature, nor given the
world to man, and those that He has made men He might
rather have made beasts. When the Cardinal had instructed
the officer who should perform this office aforementioned,
that man enquired of the Cardinal on what he should live;
and the Cardinal said that if a jester’ lived on that which
was given to him, and knew not how to do more than tell
the people where there is good wine, how much the more

1 juglar,
361

BLANQUERNA
should he find a livelihood if he served the will of God by

repeating the words aforesaid!

s. Another office likewise was established by the Car-
dinal, which is very needful to the end that the will of
God may be honoured, to wit, that a man should go to all
clerks and religious, and that in the streets and the churches
and in whatsoever place he might find them, he should call
to their minds how they ought to obey the will of God,
Who commanded them in the Gospels to go through all
the world preaching to every creature. This officer was
appointed by the Cardinal. It came to pass one day that
this officer found two clerks in a certain street, to whom
he said that which the Cardinal had commanded him to
say; and they answered him that if God desired that a man
should go to preach to the unbelievers He would give him
the will to go; and the officer was greatly scandalised by
that which the two clerks had said, and he answered that
God had commanded them when He spake to the Apostles
in the person of Holy Church; and since God, in willing
to become man, and to die for all those that are in Holy
Church, had so straitly charged each one to do this for love
of Him, none should wait for God to compel his free will,
without the which he would be unworthy to preach the will
of God. So there was a great dispute between the two
clerks, and they came for judgment to the Court of the
Pope.

6. The Cardinal asked one of his squires, who had
served him for a long time, if he desired to serve the will
of God by going from door to door, begging for the love
of God. When men gave to him for the love of God, he
would glorify His will, and when he was refused that which
he desired for the love of God, then would he have grief
in his soul and weep, because those that give not for the
will of God, and give for their own will, are not loved by
the will of God. That squire took this office, and went
is the poor, begging for the love of God, that he might
302

GRATIAS AGIMUS TIBI

have knowledge of those that honour the will of God and
of those that prize the will of God less than the alms which
are asked of them by men, which they refuse to those that
beg for the love of God. This squire performed his office
ever very well, and when he had begged from door to door
for the meat whereof he had need on that day, he went to
the church and remained therein for the rest of the day
contemplating the will of God.

7. A certain philosopher came to the Cardinal and spake
to him these words: “ Lord! It is a custom among us to
deny that which is contrary to the course of nature. But,
though I have had this custom, I desire to change it and
to take an office wherein I may go to philosophers and great
masters, saying that if a miraculous work is a thing ill-
beseeming to nature, how much the more ill-beseeming is
it to the Lord of nature that He should not do that which
pertains to His will and is superior to the work of nature! ”’
Right well pleasing was this office to the Cardinal, and the
philosopher did much good therein, proving many things
to be true which are contrary to the course of nature, that
God may not be contrary to His own will in perfection,
justice, infinity, power, wisdom, mercy and humility. These
officers and many more did the Cardinal appoint, to the end
that in the honour which they did to the will of God He
might be glorified by men, and that they likewise through
the will of God might be glorified in the glory of God.

CHAPTER LXXXVI

GRATIAS AGIMUS TIBI PROPTER MAGNAM GLORIAM TUAM

Tur Cardinal of Gratias Agimus Tibi, who had received
the office of honouring the wisdom of God, came one day
before the Pope and his companions, and spake these words:
“Tt is a natural thing that even as the human understand-
ing is the better directed to understand God, even so is

393

BLANQUERNA

will the more prepared to love God, and to cease from
loving sin; wherefore I ask for an office wherein I may
bring it to pass that the human understanding may be
exalted to understand God, that God may be known and
loved by His people, and that His people may give Him
thanks and bless His glory.” ‘The Pope and the Cardinals
gave him the office for the which he asked.

2. While they spake thus, a student! entered the
presence of the Pope and said that through increase of the
sciences, in theology and in natural science and in law and
in medicine, there were increased the diversity of opinions
in each one of the sciences aforementioned; and the reason
of this was that authors and masters made works upon the
sciences wherein the opinions of some differed from the
opinions of others. Wherefore the student said to the Pope
and the Cardinals that all the sciences aforementioned
should be reduced by man to their brief and necessary
elements, and that they should reason thereupon by method,
to the end that, if there arose any error or false opinion, a
man should be able, by following this method, to dire
himself in the elements of each of the sciences, and to
destroy false opinions that are contrary to the sciences
aforementioned.

3. Right pleased was the Cardinal of Gratias Agimus
Tibi at that which the student had said, and he confirmed
it and counselled that his petition should be granted. After
these words there came before the Pope a master in canon
and civil law, and he said that the glosses of the writings
concerning the science of law were so numerous that the
human understanding was brought to confusion by them,
and that therefore he could not judge clearly of faéts nor
could the disciples who learned that science be taught the
elements thereof; wherefore he counselled that that science
should be reduced to a method, and to its briefest elements,
according to necessity and reason, and that to this method

1 artista, ie. student qualified in the Faculty of Arts,

364

GRATIAS AGIMUS TIBI

should be reduced the entire science of law. In like manner,
on divers occasions, a master in theology and another in
natural science and another in medicine made petition to
the Pope and the Cardinals, that of each science the brief
and necessary elements might be set forth according to
method, to the end that there should be no confusion con-
cerning any science through the increase of writings upon
it, and that when the time of Anti-Christ came they should
be the better prepared to destroy his false beliefs.

4. When the master aforementioned had spoken thus,
the Cardinal said that he was right glad at these words,
and that this matter concerned his office, the which he had
taken to honour the wisdom of God; wherefore he desired
that his office should be concerning that business. After
these words rose a wise religious, and said in the presence
of all that he desired an office in virtue whereof he should
go to the Saracens, Jews, Tartars and all unbelievers, to
expound the articles of the Holy Catholic Faith; for many
a man that was an unbeliever feared to enter the Roman
Faith because he understood not the manner wherein
Christians believe the articles, for unbelievers think that
Christians hold a belief other than that which in fact they
hold, and therefore they fear to become Christians.

5. Before the Pope and the Cardinals could give any
answer to the masters who desired the offices aforesaid,
there came before the Pope two sages, the one of whom
was a Latin and the other a Greek, and they spake to the
Pope and the Cardinals these words: “‘ Lord! In the Book
of the Holy Spirit! there is made a disputation between a
Latin and a Greek before a Saracen sage who enquires of
them which thing is true concerning the person of the Holy
Spirit, whether He proceeds from the Father and from the
Son or whether He proceeds from the Father alone. Each
of the two sages proves his opinion, according to his power,

1 Like the other books mentioned in B/amguerna, this is by Lull him-
self.

365

BLANQUERNA

by ten arguments, and the Saracen is in perplexity, knowing
not to which of the beliefs he will incline; wherefore have
we journeyed throughout the land of Greece, and likewise
through a great part of the land of the Latins, and we have
put the questions to sages in whatsoever place we have
visited, to the end that they may seek out the truth, and
decide which belief the Saracen ought to have held.” Right
pleased were the Pope and the Cardinals at that which the
two sages said, and the Pope committed the answer thereto
to the Cardinal who had taken the office of honouring the
wisdom of God. With these sages there was a Christian
who went among the Saracens and the Jews to enquire of
the Gentile which of the three laws he had taken, according
as is related in the Book of the Gentile and of the three Wise
Men.

6. The Cardinal had many men to assist him in serving
his office, and he sent them throughout the world to enquire
of divers masters how they used the sciences which they
taught; and when he found that any master used ill the
science which he taught, he punished him and deprived
him of his office; and this resulted in much good, for all
the masters feared him, through the which fear their dis-
ciples were the better grounded in the sciences which they
learned of them, because their masters taught them more
diligently and with fewer words. It happened once that
the Cardinal went to a city wherein was made much study
of the sciences. At the entrance to the city he found the
two sons of the king who was lord of that city, who caused
his sons to be taught to bear arms and to praétise fencing.
The Cardinal enquired of the maégters of the two children
if the king caused them to be taught the science of letters,
and the masters answered him that he did not, but that
he caused them to be taught to ride, and to bear arms.
“ Foolish is the king,’’ said the Cardinal, ‘‘ who teaches his
sons the rather to slay men, than to know if men should

be slain.” When he had spoken these words the Cardinal
366

GRATIAS AGIMUS TIBI

went to the king and reproved him Straitly because he
caused not his sons to be taught laws and sciences, accord-
ing as was the custom heretofore with kings and princes,
who caused their sons to be taught sciences that they might
know how to rule their people. The king was greatly
pleased at that which the Cardinal spake, and was obedient
to his counsel.

7. So great was the will of the Cardinal to increase
wisdom and to direé it aright that he went to the general
chapters of the religious orders wherein the sciences were
Studied, and there he direéted and ordained how, in honour
of the wisdom of God, the sciences should be increasingly
Studied by all men, to the end that they might know and
love God. It came to pass that the son of a certain Count
went to Bologna to study law; and the Cardinal, who went
also to Bologna, where there was to be a general chapter
of the Preachers, met with the son of the Count, and spake
to him so many good words on the road, that he taught him
to love the science of theology, which is more needful to a
clerk than the science of law; wherefore the son of that
Count returned to Paris and learned theology, in the which
he became a master.

8. The Cardinal went one day to the school of the
Preachers to hear the lesson in theology, and on the way
he found a great school of law wherein were many disciples
clothed in ecclesiastical habits. He went on farther and
found another school which was full of decretalists, who
likewise wore the ecclesiastical habit; and the Cardinal
commanded the disciples of law that since the science of
law was secular they should study in secular habit, that dis-
honour might not be done to the honour which the science
of canon law should have above that of civil law; and he
made this commandment especially, that simony might not
have its beginning in lawyers, who, after studying the
science of law, become decretalists, to the end that they
may be able to rise to some prelacy. ,

397

BLANQUERNA

g. After this ordinance was made, the Cardinal entered
the school of the Preachers, wherein a master in theology
was delivering a lecture, and in that school there was scarce
any disciple who was not a religious; wherefore the
Cardinal cried in a loud voice that to wisdom was being
done great dishonour by those that love science that is
lucrative rather than science that is of merit only, or that
which demonstrates Divine wisdom. Wherefore the Car-
dinal made a commandment that once in every week, in
each of the schools of law, Friars Preachers and Friars
Minor should preach, and that they should speak therein
of the great harm which is done to theology by those that
are beneficed from the possessions of Holy Church, and
Study the science of laws, or learn more of law than of
theology. After this manner, and in many another wise,
the Cardinal endeavoured to do honour to wisdom to the
end that by wisdom men should have knowledge how that
every man is bound to give thanks to God for the posses-
sions which He has given to him, to the which thanks
ignorance is a thing opposed.

CHAPTER LXXXVII

DOMINE DEUS REX CQ:LESTIS, DEUS PATER OMNIPOTENS

In the Consistory was the Cardinal of Domine Deus, and
he said, in presence of the Pope and of the Cardinals,
that he desired to have the office of honouring the power
of God, Who suffered dishonour in this world through
many men who dishonoured Him after divers manners.
It came to pass one day that the Pope desired to send his
messengers to a land called Georgia, whereof a Christian
king is lord; and the Pope sent to that king, begging him
to send him certain religious from among the people of his
land, that they might teach their language and their letters

to Latin friars, and that they might learn Latin, and to-
368

DOMINE DEUS

gether with the Latin friars return to their own land to
preach the holy faith and doétrine of Rome. When the
Pope Blanquerna ordained these things, the Chamberlain
said that it would be a matter of great peril to cause these
persons to be sent, and to learn their language, and to
teach our Latin to them, and that this was a thing which
required convenient place and time and great expense.

2. Greatly was the Cardinal displeased at that which the
Chamberlain had said, and he related this Story: ‘‘ Once
on a time it came to pass that a certain man named Jofa
was going along a road, and he came to a river, on the bank
whereof was a great multitude of men who were gazing at
a man who had drowned himself in the water. He enquired
of them why that man had not gone up higher, to the source
of the river, where he might have crossed to the other side.
A man answered: ‘‘ But how long a time he would have
taken to do this, seeing that it is five days’ journey to the
source of the stream!” Jofa answered: ‘‘ But how much
longer will he take to come to life again and rise from this
place!” In these words did the Cardinal sternly reprove
the Chamberlain, saying that the power of man through
long practice can direct and bring to an end all that which
the Pope desires to ordain concerning the religious of
Georgia; but no power can bring back the damned in hell
to a state of salvation, since they have passed from this
present life. The Cardinal had a squire who had served
him for long that he might gain a better promotion. It
came to pass one day that the squire was very grievously
sick of a fever. The Cardinal was greatly troubled at his
sickness, and the squire begged him that he would heal
him and take from him the fever which so severely tor-
mented him. The Cardinal answered that he had no power
to take the fever from him, for that power was from God
- alone, Whose power did all that it desired with the power
of nature. The squire recovered from his malady, and he
took the office of honouring the power of God in every land,

2A 369

BLANQUERNA

crying aloud and saying that the power of God is superior
to the power of nature, and that therefore God was able to
make the firs man, and to rise from the dead, and cause a
woman that was a virgin to conceive and bring forth a child,
through His Divine power; and that the power of the stars
and of the heavenly bodies is vanquished and overcome, or
given leave to work, by the Sovereign Power only. Right
worthy was the office which was taken by the squire; for
oftentimes Catholics were confirmed thereby in their faith,
and the unbelievers were vanquished and overcome in their
belief that a virgin could not conceive or bring forth a
child, and a man could not rise from the dead; whereas
the power of God in these things is as effeCtual as in the
creating of the world from naught, the which creation 1s
superior to the power of nature.

3. “‘ Lord!” said the Cardinal to the Pope: “* I would
fain know which has the greater power, whether truth or
falsehood.” ‘The Pope answered and said that truth has
greater power than falsehood, because truth has greater aid
of God and accords with being, and falsehood has no aid
of God and accords not with being. Wherefore after these
words the Cardinal asked the Pope how it came to pass that
falsehood could have such power in the world that there
should be more men who are idolaters and believe in idols
than there are of men that believe in God. And the Pope
answered that this thing came not to pass that falsehood
might have power over truth, but through defect of de-
votion and charity, which desires not that the truth be
shown forth; wherefore even as darkness comes through
defect of light, even so come error and falsehood from the
defect of those that dare not to say or to preach the truth.

4. In a certain province it came to pass that the devout
and blessed men who went to preach the word of God to
unbelievers were refused a hearing, and banished from the
country. And the Cardinal had recourse to the secular arm,
and treated with the Christian princes, and with the Pope,
37°

DOMINE DEUS

to the end that by force of arms they should fight and
conquer all such as allow not holy Christian men to enter
their countries and preach therein the word of God, and
that the Church should make no truce with any unbeliever
who suffered not the Christians to show forth in his land
the truth of the Catholic Faith. So great was the power of
the Christians that the unbelievers of that land suffered that
they should preach to them, and that there should be a
truce between them for so long as they suffered the Christians
to preach and to convert the unbelievers in their land.

5. It came to pass that a very powerful Saracen king
desired not that Christian monks should enter his country
to preach therein, and two friars whom the Saracens had
banished from their land came to the Cardinal of Domine
Deus saying that they could not remain in that land be-
cause the Saracens desired it not. But the Cardinal said
that they had dishonoured the power of the will, which is
Stronger and nobler than the power of the body, and there-
fore he made complaint to the Pope, saying these words:
““Lord Pope! The power of the will makes men to fast
and weep and labour to honour and praise the power of
God, and God has bound and submitted the power of the
body to the power of the spirit. Wherefore, if the king
defends himself with bodily power against the power of
our souls, it is seemly that his power should be vanquished
and overcome, through loving and honouring greatly the
Passion of God, and through the shedding of tears and of
blood, and by means of holy men who shall go both secretly
and openly among the unbelievers, that through long con-
tinuance the power of the body may be vanquished by the
power of the spirit, in significance that the power of God
vanquishes spiritually the sensual and the intellectual power
that is in creatures, according as is represented in the
Sacred Host.”

6. So fervent and devout was this Cardinal in honour-
ing the power of God, that he established divers offices to

S7

BLANQUERNA

honour the power of God. To one man he gave the office
that he should go through the world preaching and crying
aloud that man should not trust in the power of riches,
neither in friends nor wisdom nor youth, nor omens nor
fates nor divinations, nor in any other power soever
whereby man loses the grace of the Divine power. Another
office gave the Cardinal to one who should cry out that the
power of God was so great that it could do all things, and
that no sin could result therefrom. Another officer cried
that God could do no sin, because sin and lack of power
are things which agree with each other, and are contrary
to power, and to the virtues, which agree together likewise.
Another officer cried that God exhausted not His power in
respect of His creatures, for He had power to do many
things more than He did. Another cried that God in His
Trinity did all that was in His power. Many other officers
were there who honoured the power of God, and all had
tule and doctrine whereby they were to bless and honour
the power of God; and among the other officers was one
whose duty it was to show by means of nature how man
could mortify within himself the vices, and strengthen the
virtues, and weep for his sins. Another office was held by
a man who carried the branch of a tree and a bird, and led
a dog, and he cried that there was no man who could create
a leaf of that branch, neither a feather of that bird, neither
a hair of that dog, neither a nail of his own hand.

7. So great was the fame of the Cardinal and of his
officers in honouring the power of God, that whensoever a
man had defect of power, straightway he went for succour
and for counsel to the Cardinal and to his officers. And
the same thing came to pass with the Cardinal who served
the will of God, and with the Cardinal who served the
wisdom of God; so that whensoever a man had defect of
will or of knowledge or of power, incontinently he had
recourse to the Cardinals above-mentioned.

372

DOMINE FILI UNIGENITE FESU CHRISTE

CHAPTER LXXXVIII
DOMINE FILI UNIGENITE JESU CHRISTE

Great was the devotion which a certain Cardinal had to
the Person of the Son of God, Who united with Himself
human nature, and through the devotion which he had to
the Son of God he spake to the Pope and to the Cardinals
these words: “ A thing most manifest is it, O Holy Father
and Pope, that thou, with all of us that are Cardinals, hast
received honour, through the Son of God, above all other
Christians in this world; wherefore it is meet and right
and our bounden duty to send messengers throughout all
the world who shall report to us the condition of every land,
according to the manner wherein the Son of God is
honoured in the world by some, and dishonoured and
despised by others; and that this thing may be accom-
plished, I ask for this office, and for the wherewithal to
provide for my messengers, whom I will send through the
whole world, that they may report to me the condition
wherein they find it, and this will I myself report to you,
to the end that ye may make ordinance how the Son of
God may be loved and praised through all the world, and
His virtue be showed forth, with all that He did in this
world for love of us.” Right pleased were the Pope and
all the Cardinals at this office which the Cardinal of
Domine Fili demanded, and all that he asked was granted
to him; and herein was the prefiguration fulfilled that the
emperors of Rome, who were the lords of the world, had
messengers who reported to them the condition of the
world, wherein it was figured that the Pope, the Vicar of
God and lord of Rome, would know the estate of every
land, that it might be subject to the Holy Catholic Faith.
2. The Cardinal divided the world into twelve provinces,
and sent forth twelve messengers who should go through
the whole world to learn the estate thereof. It came to
373

BLANQUERNA

pass that one of the messengers of the Cardinal journeyed
southwards, and found a caravan of six thousand camels,
laden with salt, leaving a town by name Tibalbert, and
going to that country wherein is the source of the river
Damiata. So many people did this messenger find here,
that in fifteen days all the salt was sold; and these men
are all black, and adore idols, and they are men of genial
temper, who hold justice very dear, and slay every man
whom they discover in falsehood, and hold all that they
have in common, In that land is an island in the middle
of a great lake; and on that island there lives a dragon to
whom the people of that land do sacrifice, adoring it as a
god. The messenger went through these countries to
enquire concerning the customs of the people, and to
estimate the number thereof. And the people marvelled
greatly at the messenger, because he was a white man and
a Christian; for never before had they heard of any
Christian coming to that land. The messenger sent news
in writing to the Cardinal by a squire of all the things afore-
said, and many beside, and the Cardinal related them to
the Pope and to his companions. Great was the displeasure
of the Pope and of the Cardinals when they heard of the
dragon that was adored as a god, and they debated how
they might destroy the error wherein these people lived.

3. Another messenger journeyed northward, beyond the
mountains, where he heard and saw Latin peoples, who
related to him that in those parts there were many men of
divers beliefs, and that the devil kept them in error by
means of certain illusions and deceptions. For there was
one land, Gotlandia by name, where at the end of every
five years there appeared a white bear, as a sign that that
year there would be abundance of fish, whereon these
people live. There was another land wherein by enchant-
ment the trees were made to speak. Another land is there,
near to Bohemia,! where there is a hoopoe in a wood, and

1 P. Boemia. The other versions have Bocinia.

374

DOMINE FILI UNIGENITE ¥ESU CHRISTE

if any man cuts a branch from a tree in that wood, straight-
way come lightning and thunder from the heavens and set
in peril of death every man who is in that wood. In another
Jand every man thinks that he has a god in his field, and
another in his stable and another in his garden. In another
land, near to Dacia, are men who live on naught save the
beasts which they hunt, and they go in chase of the beasts
and kill them, and when they have killed one of them they
remain in that place till they have eaten it, and then seek
another. All this news, and much beside, the messenger
from beyond the mountains sent in writing to the Cardinal ;
and ordinance was made by the Pope and the Cardinals
that holy and devout men should be sent to those peoples,
to learn their languages and preach to them by example
and custom, and by metaphor and similitude, until their
sensual natures were so ordered that the virtue of the simili-
tudes worked upon the powers of the soul, and that thereby
their intellectual natures were illumined by the Holy
Catholic Faith.

4. To Barbery there went a messenger of the Cardinal
who found many knaves and harlots, who preached to the
Saracens from the Koran and spake to them of the bliss of
Paradise; and so devout were the words which they
preached, that almost all they that listened to them wept.
Great was the marvel of the messenger at the devotion
which the people had to those words, when he reflected that
that which they preached was error; and he found that the
people wept because of the fair manner of speech which
they had, and because they related the lives of many men
who died for their devotion. He found also a book Of the
Lover! and the Beloved, wherein was recounted how devout
men made songs of God and of love, and how through the
love of God they forsook the world and went through the

1 Lit. amic; and this, in general, is the original of the word here trans-
lated “ lover.” Sometimes, however, we find the word amant, which is also
thus translated, there being no real distinction.

375

BLANQUERNA

world enduring poverty. The messenger found also that,
in the courts wherein lawsuits were held, the disputes of
the questions which each had against the other were briefly
ended. All these things and many beside the messenger
reported to the Cardinal, and one translated the Book of the
Lover and the Beloved,! and brought it to pass that, through
devotion of word, sermons should be made more pleasing
to the people, and likewise that, following the custom of
the Saracens, lawsuits and disputes which are conducted
by Christians should be shortened.

5. There went a messenger to Turkey, and he found
there four friars who had learned the language of the Turks,
and the Turks forbade them to preach in their land; and
the messenger reported this in writing to the Cardinal, and
messengers were chosen whom the Pope sent with many gifts
to the ruler of the Tartars who had subjected Turkey to his
overlordship. The Pope requested the ruler of the Tartars,
by his messengers, that he would suffer the four friars to
preach the honour of the Son of God throughout all Turkey,
and the ruler suffered it by reason of the prayers and the
gifts which the Pope sent to him; so the Turks no longer
dared to forbid the friars to preach from thenceforward.

6. Across the seas there went a messenger who sent to
the Cardinal to say that two assassins had slain a certain
prince and had been put to death; and the Cardinal went
to preach to the religious who were learning divers tongues,
and he exhorted them to desire death for Jesus Christ, since
there were men living in error who desired to die that their
kinsfolk might have liberty; wherefore establishment was
made that once in every week these things should be
preached, to the end that with greater affection? they might
learn and desire to die.

* While this passage must not be taken as proving the Book of the Lover
and the Beloved to be a translation, it suggests, together with another passage

(p. 410, below), that that book was written under strong Oriental influence.
2 P has “ affliction.”

376

DOMINE FILI UNIGENITE JESU CHRISTE

7. According to this manner aforesaid, ordinance was
made that the messengers should go through all the world.
After another wise went many other men, who took the
office of relating examples! and good words to the people,
that they might oftentimes have remembrance of the Son
of God and of the Passion which He suffered for our sakes.
These messengers went through the towns and cities and
villages,* and visited the rulers and governors, to whom
they related good examples.? It came to pass one day that
a certain one of these men went to a carpenter who was
planing a log of wood, and related to him how he had
heard that a certain tree had been so strong that it had
borne a greater weight than the whole world. The car-
penter wondered at this saying, and through his wonder
he conceived devotion when the messenger expounded to
him that saying,—namely, that this tree is the Cross
whereon the Son of God was nailed, for He has taken from
His people who serve Him a greater weight than that of
all the world. And by the devotion which the carpenter
conceived, he became a man of good life, and left a certain
deadly sin wherein he had lived.

8. It came to pass one day that one of the messengers
departed from a town and went to a castle,* and on the way
he found a great multitude of pilgrims who were going to
Santiago, so he fell in company with them, and went with
them as far as Santiago; and as they journeyed along the
road he related to them examples* and devout words, and re-
counted the histories of the Old Testament and of the New,
and described to them the events which are in the lives of
the Popes and the Emperors, according as is written in the
chronicles. So great was the pleasure which the pilgrims
had in his good words, that the greater devotion came to
them in their pilgrimage, and in their journeying and
their trials they had the less suffering; wherefore many

1 exemplis. See note, p. 189, above.  castells. See p. 286, above.

3 exemplis. See note, p. 189, above. 4 Or “ village ” (caste//).

oT

BLANQUERNA

other men took that same office, to the end that they
might beguile the way of the pilgrims and set them in
devotion. ;

9. Very great was the good which resulted from this
office of the Cardinal, the which Cardinal kept the Pope
and the other Cardinals greatly pleased with the reports
and news which came to him daily from divers parts of
the world. It came to pass one day that a certain man,
with intent to gather much money, feigned that he was a
messenger and a relator of news commissioned by the
Cardinal, and he went with the pilgrims, who gave to him
freely and showed him much kindness. But that man was
not well ingtructed in relating such things as he recounted,
and the Cardinal came to know it, and commanded that
the man should be taken and put into prison, because he
had taken this office without his license; and he ordered
that none of his relators should take aught from any pilgrim,
and if he had need of aught, that he should be aided by
the bishop of the country wherein he was, and that each
relator should bear the seal of the Cardinal.

CHAPTER LXXXIX

DOMINE DEUS AGNUS DEI FILIUS PATRIS

Tue Pope was in Consistory one day with the Cardinals,
and he spake to them in these words: ‘‘ It is a thing most
certain that the orders of religion which are among us are
tuled and governed by chapter, wherein they make ordi-
nance yearly how their order may be well preserved in
religion and in holy life; wherefore it is a needful thing
that we secular clergy make ordinance of a chapter like-
wise, after such manner that our life may be pleasing both
to God and to man; for unless we hold chapter, both
general and special, we cannot be perfeétly ordered in this
world. Wherefore, as this is so, I pray each of my com-

378

DOMINE DEUS AGNUS DEI FILIUS PATRIS

panions that he help me to discuss how we may ordain
among us general and provincial chapters.” Greatly did
the words of the Pope please the Cardinals, and together
with the Pope they made ordinance of a chapter after this
manner :

2. First, it was ordained that every bishop should hold
chapter once in each year, and that he should appoint in
his diocese inquisitors, and that denunciation should be
made in chapter if any clerk were deserving of punishment
for any faults that he had committed during the year.
After this, establishment was made that once in every year
each archbishop should hold chapter with his bishops, and
that he likewise should appoint inquisitors over them who
should accuse them in chapter, that they might be punished
by the archbishops. It was ordained also by the Pope and
the Cardinals that the world should be divided into four
parts, and that the archbishops from one of these parts
should come together in one place, and those of the second
part in another, and even so with the rest; and that four
cardinals should hold chapter with them every year, each
cardinal going to one of the parts of the world, and that
the cardinals should make inquisition concerning the arch-
bishops. After this ordinance it was ordained that the Pope
should hold chapter with the four cardinals once in every
year, and appoint inquisitors over them, and punish them
if they had committed any fault against their rule. Like-
wise establishment was made that there should be inquisitors
set over the Pope, and that once in every year there should
be a chapter, and that he likewise should be punished if he
had committed any fault during the year. After this, it was
ordained that in every five years should be held a general
chapter, to the which should come the archbishops with
two auxiliaries appointed by the bishops of their arch-
dioceses. And it was ordained likewise that in every ten
years there should be held a council to the which should
come all bishops and archbishops and abbots.

379

BLANQUERNA

3. When they had made ordinance concerning the
manner wherein the chapters should be held, the Pope
said to the Cardinals: ‘‘ Which of you desires to have the
office of being inquisitor in chief, beneath the which in-
quisitor shall be set all the others, the inquisitor in chief
being director of the chapter? ’’ When the Pope had said
these words, a certain Cardinal answered that he desired to
take that office, to serve therein Domine Deus Agnus Dei
Filius Patris, and the Pope granted him that office for so
long as he used it well. And straightway they made a book
wherein was written the manner and the rule whereby the
Cardinal should proceed in his office, and how he should
hold chapter.

4. The Pope sent immediately to the prelates in every
land, and he held a council wherein was established the
ordinance aforementioned; and the Cardinal ordained and
established spies who should be watchful and make enquiry
secretly as to whether the prelates followed the establish-
ment aforementioned or no, and if the things came to the
knowledge of the chapter when the Cardinal caused in-
quisition to be made, and if the spies of the clerks against
the prelates, or of the prelates against the clerks, or of one
prelate against another, agreed with the spies of the
Cardinal. Great was the good and the utility which
resulted from the establishment aforementioned; and the
ptinces and the barons had such good example thereby
that in their courts they likewise established inquisitors
and made ordinance whereby justice and peace should be
preserved.

5. There were certain particular matters whereof in-
quisition was to be made, namely: vainglory, pride, avarice,
simony, lust, injustice, infidelity, gluttony and certain
other things like to these. It came to pass one day that
a bishop had made inquisition in his diocese, and had
taken money, and accused not the wrongdoers neither

punished them; and the inquisitors of the archbishop dis-
380

QUI TOLLIS PECCATA MUNDI, MISERERE NOBIS

covered that the bishop had pardoned those faults by reason
of the money which he had taken. When the archbishop
held chapter, these inquisitors accused the bishop, and the
bishop secretly gave money to the archbishop also, where-
fore the archbishop punished him not. But the inquisitors
of the Cardinal learned this thing and accused the arch-
bishop when he came to the chapter, and the Cardinal who
held chapter punished the archbishop and the bishop, and
deprived each"of his office.

CHAPTER XC

QUI TOLLIS PECCATA MUNDI, MISERERE NOBIS

A certain Cardinal considered for a great space of time
how he might take some office wherein to serve Jesus
Christ, Who takes away the sins of the world. As he rode
through the city of Rome, considering what office he might
have, he saw the two advocates of two princes, who disputed
feloniously the one with the other, and spake evil words.
So the Cardinal perceived that in the Court of Rome there
was need for an advocate who should be set over all other
advocates, and be feared by them all; wherefore he went
to the Pope and spake to him these words:

2. “‘ Lord Pope! Thou knowest that in thy Court there
are many advocates from divers lands, and that these are
contrary to those, and that for this cause there arise among
them disputes and strife. Now, if it please thee, I would
fain take this office of advocate, to be the occasion whereby
the advocates should be governed in their profession, and
be punished, if they be unruly, according as justice re-
quires.” The Pope was right pleased to give this office to
the Cardinal, and he made him to be lord over all the
advocates. The Cardinal had beneath him certain other
advocates who were advocates in the court in general,—

that is to say, of those that had no advocate in the court;
381

BLANQUERNA

and they were recompensed with the possessions of Holy
Church, for it was provided that they should take naught
else of any man.

3. It came to pass one day that a suit which was being
heard between a bishop and one of his canons was to be
determined, and ere sentence was given one of the two
advocates died, and the suit was impeded, wherefore the
other advocate had recourse to the Cardinal, and he
appointed an advocate, who should represent the side which
had been served by the advocate who had died. So the
sentence was given, and there was dispute in the court
whether the sentence was valid in law, or no. Judgment
was given in the court that the sentence was valid, because
the Pope had made establishment that the Cardinal should
appoint a sufficiently qualified advocate and that this
advocate should take naught of any man.

4. Again it came to pass that the advocate of an arch-
bishop made petition against the canons of his chapter, but
they had no advocate in the court, and the Cardinal gave
one of his advocates to plead on behalf of the chapter, and
he sent to the chapter to advise them of that which the
advocate of the archbishop had put forward against the
canons of that archbishop; and that advocate filled their
place in the court until the canons had sent to the court
their own advocate.

5. The Cardinal had an advocate among the rest who
was to be ever at the gate of the palace of the Pope, to be
the advocate of those that have no money to give to the
doorkeepers, and this advocate was to represent to the Pope
that which was needful on their behalf. It happened one
day that the advocate was at the gate of the palace, and a
poor clerk, from whom a bishop had wrongfully taken his
benefice, desired to have audience of the Pope, and the
gatekeepers forbade him to enter, but they allowed the
bishop to enter, who had taken from the clerk his benefice.
Wherefore the advocate of the poor presented that clerk to
382

QUI TOLLIS PECCATA MUNDI, MISERERE NOBIS

the Cardinal, and the Cardinal carried his defence against
the bishop before the Pope.

6. ‘‘ Holy Father and Pope!” said the Cardinal, “‘ The
dead are forgotten, and have no advocates who may plead
that their will may be done as concerning the testaments
which they have made; wherefore I desire to have leave of
thee to be their advocate.” The Pope desired that the
Cardinal should be advocate for the dead; and the Cardinal
appointed advocates and sent them throughout the world
to the divers parts thereof to enquire if there were any man
in those parts who made complaint of living men that had
not fulfilled the will of the dead; wherefore each of the
advocates of the Cardinal made inquisition concerning the
bishop and the archbishop of that land, as to whether or
no they had obliged the executors, who should carry out
the testaments of the dead, to do their duty; and if any
bishop or archbishop were negligent or partial in this
matter, accusation was made to the Cardinal thereof, and
the Cardinal punished him according as seemed to him
good.

7. In a town which is called Montpellier, in the which
was written this Book of Evast and Blanquerna, there was a
great Chapter General of Preachers. In this Chapter were
assembled bishops and other prelates and friars of all
Christian lands, and they read letters in the Chapter con-
cerning divers things, and recounted the deaths of friars
from all Christian lands who had died that year. After
these words there rose a layman who was the advocate of
the unbelievers when they embrace the Holy Catholic
Faith, and he said in the presence of all that if mention
were made of the deaths of the friars whose souls live in
Paradise, how much the more should remembrance be
made of the deaths of the unbelievers who die in the sin
of ignorance, and lose eternal life, and die in everlasting
fire. And he begged that instruction should be given to
them through the which these words should be fulfilled in

son

BLANQUERNA

them,—namely, that Jesus Christ has taken away the sin
of the world through His Incarnation and Passion. It
came to the knowledge of the Cardinal who was advocate
of the dead that this layman had spoken in the Chapter
according to the manner aforesaid; wherefore establish-
ment was made that, in all chapters general of religious
brothers, memorial should be made of the unbelievers who
have died in the sin of ignorance; and that the Cardinal
should send his advocates to each of these chapters, with
their letters, to the end that the Holy Catholic Faith may
be preached in all the world.

CHAPTER XCI

QUI TOLLIS PECCATA MUNDI, SUSCIPE DEPRECATIONEM
NOSTRAM

Now the Pope and all the Cardinals, with the exception of
five Cardinals only, had taken divers offices, the which
offices were named according to the Gloria in Excelsis Deo;
wherefore the Pope said to those five Cardinals that, accord-
ing to the constitution of the Court of Rome, they should
seek offices wherewith should be completed the number of
the rubrics of the Gloria in Excelsis Deo. So one of these
Cardinals rode through the city of Rome to seek what office
he might take which should bear the name of Qui tollis
peccata mundi. As he rode through the city of Rome and
passed by the Court, he saw a man who wept and spake
these words: ‘‘ Alas, thou wretched one! How great dis-
honour is done to the Holy Catholic Faith! For the Jew
who denies and mocks and believes not in the Son of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is the foundation of Holy
Church, finds reasoners and advocates to uphold him in his
suit against thee, and thou hast no man who may defend
thee nor uphold thy right against him; wherefore thou wilt
“ necessity. become poor, and be compelled to go with thy
3°4

SUSCIPE DEPRECATIONEM NOSTRAM

wife and children from door to door begging for the love
of God,”

2. Great marvel had the Cardinal at the words which
that man spake, and he enquired of him wherefore he wept,
and he spake these words. ‘“‘ Lord!” said that man: “ A
certain Jew, by reason of his great wealth, wrongs me, and
demands of me more money than I possess; and for a long
time have we been at law together, and because I cannot
give so great a recompense to the judge and to my advocate
as can he, therefore can I not have justice in the Court.
And I have great shame because through lack of money
my righteous cause is lost in the court of Rome, to the
which court Jews are more opposed through their beliefs,
and their evil will, than are other men.”

3. Great was the wonder of the Cardinal, and greatly
was he displeased in his mind when he had heard the words
that that man spake to him, and he began to think deeply.
While the Cardinal was yet in thought, a certain bishop, who
had an income of twenty thousand marks of silver, entered
Rome, and passed through a square wherein the Cardinal
was, and the people that were in the square with him said:
“Yonder is the bishop who has an income of twenty thou-
sand marks of silver, and has purchased an annuity for his
brother for thirty thousand marks of silver.”” When the
Cardinal had heard these words, he heaved a great sigh and
said within himself: ‘‘ Alas, poor in mind and in devotion
and charity! To whom has God committed His place in
the world? How ill are the possessions of Holy Church
divided }”’

4. When the Cardinal had reflected for a great space of
time, he came before the Pope and the Cardinals, and put
to them this question, saying as follows: “ It came to pass
once that Understanding was called upon to give judgment.
- Understanding had two sisters: the one was Memory, and
the other was Will. And between these two sisters there
was a dispute as to which of the two should accompany

28 385

BLANQUERNA

Understanding. Will made allegations against Memory,
saying that, by her own virtue, Understanding is diligent
in seeking out truth, and in desiring to judge according
to right; yet, by overmuch remembrance, Understanding
is oftentimes impeded in his comprehension; wherefore
it seemed to Will that she herself should accompany
Understanding ere he gave judgment. On the other side
Memory alleged against Will that by overmuch desire
UnderStanding is corrupted and inclined towards ignor-
ance; wherefore it behoved rather that Memory and
UnderStanding should be in agreement, than that Under-
Standing and Will should be so; and in this manner,
according to natural right, it was reasonable that Memory
rather than Will should accompany Understanding.”
When the Cardinal had put forward these reasons upon
either side, he prayed the Pope and the Cardinals that they
would give judgment upon this matter.

5. The dispute was long, wherefore deliberation and
counsel were needful that the true solution might be found.
The Pope and the Cardinals, when they had reviewed the
arguments upon either side, and had sought the just
solution, gave sentence that in the first place Memory
should go with Understanding, to the end that at the be-
ginning Will should not incline Understanding to take one
side, and that between either side there should be equality;
and that Will should go after, to the end that the equality
of Memory and Understanding should be preserved. Right
pleasing to the Cardinal was the sentence which the Pope
and the Cardinals had given, and he spake these words:

6. “ According to the nature of the three powers of the
soul, it is ordained in law that a judge be granted, with
whom first of all there company understanding and
memory, and that the two advocates who conduét the case,
the one against the other, should first of all have with
them memory and will. But through the giving of gifts

and bribes, will takes the place of memory in the judge,
386

SUSCIPE DEPRECATIONEM NOSTRAM

and the advocates, through the taking of gifts, have ever
more of will and less of remembrance; through the which
decrease of remembrance their underStanding is led away
from comprehension; and for this reason lawsuits are pro-
longed, and oftentimes false sentences are given, and
disputes and strifes and wars and deaths and crimes are
engendered in great number. Now, to the end that all the
evils aforesaid may cease, it would be a seemlier thing to
give to ten judges and to twenty advocates, from the
possessions of Holy Church, such income that they should
be ever in the court of Rome, and take naught else from any
man, than it is to give to this bishop an income of twenty
thousand marks of silver, for he has purchased for his
brother an annuity of thirty thousand marks of silver,
the which thirty thousand marks are alienated from the
affairs of Holy Church.” Right pleasing to the Pope
and to the Cardinals was that which the Cardinal had
said, and establishment and ordinance were made that
ten judges and twenty advocates should be ever in
attendance at the court, and that the Pope should recom-
pense them sufficiently from the wealth of Holy Church,
in such manner that they should take naught else of any
man, and that, if they took aught else, they should lose
their benefices; and by this ordinance the lawsuits in the
court were greatly shortened, and many constitutions were
made to expedite them.

7. Throughout every land went fame concerning the
ordinances aforementioned, and many men came to plead
at the court that their cases might be the more speedily
concluded. So great was the number of those that came
to the ten judges and the twenty advocates, that they
sufficed not for all the cases which came to the court, and
they had recourse to the Cardinal who was set over the
office of the judges and of the advocates, and they said that
they could not endure so much work; wherefore the
Cardinal presented their petition to the Pope and to the

387

BLANQUERNA

Cardinals, saying how they were occupied above measure
with the multitude of their cases. So the Pope and the
Cardinals ordained that in each diocese there should be
judges and advocates, who should judge and argue for the
poor in their disputes, and that these should be paid from
the possessions of Holy Church, and that they should take
naught of any man for giving sentence or pleading for
them.

CHAPTER XCII

QUI SEDES AD DEXTERAM PATRIS, MISERERE NOBIS

Ir came to pass that upon a day of high festival in the city
of Rome a deacon had sung the Gospel wherein Jesus
Christ says that it is better to enter Paradise with one eye
and with one foot, than to go with two eyes and two feet
into hell. ‘The deacon considered long upon that com-
parison, and by the grace of the Holy Spirit there came to
him the will to go through the world making comparisons ~
to all men, that he might lead them into the life of salvati¢n,
This deacon went to the Pope and to the Cardinals, jyd
begged for the office of comparisons. The Pope said unt
he would give that office to a Cardinal, and that this Cardinal
should have beneath him many officers who should go
through the whole world making comparisons, and that
this office should be called Qui sedes ad dexteram Patris,
miserere nobis. When the Pope had spoken these words,
there rose a Cardinal who took the office aforementioned.
That Cardinal ordained that a book should be written,
wherein should be kept the comparisons which his disciples
would propound to all men. It came to pass one day that
a king came to the court, and made complaint to the Pope
concerning a king that had disinherited him, and cast him
out from his kingdom albeit he had done him no wrong.
When he had ended his complaints, the king wept and

made semblance of great sorrow, saying these words: “‘ For
388

QUI SEDES AD DEXTERAM PATRIS

long have I been in the world honoured; now have I be-
come poor and despised by men because of a king that is
proud and a wrongdoer, who, through his great power and
avarice, has taken from me my dominions.” While the
king wept thus and despaired, the Cardinal of the offices
aforementioned enquired of the king which thing was the
more pleasing to him, whether justice or wrongdoing. The
king answered “Justice.” The Cardinal said to him
that it was better to be disinherited, and to be just and
patient, than to be a king that was unjust and miserly and
proud; wherefore he acted against justice if he wept at
that for the which he should rather rejoice, for it was he
who had disinherited him that should weep because he was
proud and an evildoer. After this comparison the Cardinal
made another, namely, that for one that has patience and
humility it is of more advantage to be loved by God than
it is harmful to be blamed by men. Deeply did the king
consider these words which the Cardinal had spoken, and
he spake as follows: “ If I have possessed with my body
in this world the kingdom which has now been taken from
me, henceforward may my soul possess patience, hope,
humility, justice and charity, praising and resigning itself
to the will of God.” Greatly were the Pope and the Car-
dinals pleased at that which the king had said, and from
the possessions of Holy Church they made for him honour-
able provision, and debated how that whereof he had been
deprived might be restored to him.

2. To that Court there came a Bishop who was accused
by his chapter. That Bishop was a man both just and of
holy life, and, because he used justice with his clergy, they
desired to depose him and to have over them a lord who
should be consenting to their sins. That Bishop went to
the Cardinal, and asked counsel of him which was better,
whether to allow himself to be accused without excusing
himself, and to have patience, humility and poverty, or to
excuse himself, and to permit his chapter to accuse him

389

BLANQUERNA

and to bring the accusation into court according as was
allowed by justice. The Cardinal and the Bishop spake for
a great space of time concerning the matter aforementioned,
and they debated according to which of the two manners
aforesaid the Bishop could use the greater perfection and
the more virtues; and they found that to the Bishop it was
of greater advantage that he should not make excuse for
himself, for from this course would follow greater patience
and virtue and humility; but that, with respect to justice
and charity, it was well that he should excuse himself and
that the truth should be made manifest, to the end that
justice should not lose its right in his chapter. Wherefore
the Cardinal said to the Bishop that he could make choice
of which course he desired to follow, for in either case he
could aét virtuously and in such wise as would be pleasing
to God.

3. To a certain city there came a man who made com-
parisons, and he went through the streets crying aloud:
“Which thing is the more needful, whether to bring up a
son in good customs, or to make him heir to great riches ?
Or which thing is better, whether to restore wealth ill-
gotten and to leave one’s children poor and enter into
Paradise, or to leave one’s children wealthy and make no
satisfaction for wrong-doing and enter into hell?’’ While
this man went crying aloud in this wise through the streets,
he passed by the house of a usurer, who thought deeply
upon the words that were spoken by this man, and so often
did he hear these words cried aloud that his conscience
vanquished his sensual nature and ever fortified him in
charity; so he undid the wrongs which he had done, and
brought up his children in good habits.

4. Death, who spares neither young nor old, slew the
son of an honoured citizen of Rome. That citizen had
none other sons save one, neither hoped to have any again,
and by reason of the death of his son he was moved to very
great sorrow and wrath. It came to the ears of the Cardinal
3990

QUI SEDES AD DEXTERAM PATRIS

that that citizen was in great despair, so he went to him,
and made a comparison before him in these words: ‘“ Be-
loved son! Which thing is of greater utility to a man,
whether to praise God for the good things which He has
given in this world, or to praise Him for the good things
which He takes from him?” “ Lord!” answered that
citizen: “‘ The one kind of praise has respect to gratitude,
and the other to patience; and since patience gives suffer-
ing without fault, there belongs thereto greater virtue than
to gratitude, which gives pleasure without passion.”
“ Happy son!” said the Cardinal: “ Thou hast given a
right judgment, and therein hast thou judged that thou
thyself must have patience; for God has satisfied thee in
two manners: namely, by giving thee occasion of gratitude,
for this thou hadét in praising God for giving to thee thy
son; and likewise, by giving thee patience, when He called
him from this life to the next. Now if thy son had not
died, thou hadst after one manner lost the merit which is
prepared for thee, to be to thee an occasion of great
happiness.”

5. There went a man through the city of Rome, crying
aloud: “‘ Which thing has the greater worth, whether to
sell cheaply and speak the truth, or to lie and sell dearly?”
As he cried aloud these words, there passed through the
square a great number of women. Among these was a
great lady who was wondrously adorned and garbed, and
greatly made up in her features with colours and other
adornings. And that man cried aloud, enquiring which
thing was of the greater worth, whether a fair lady who
showed herself to be enamoured of lust, or a lady that was
ugly but gave semblance of chastity. This man went
before all these women crying aloud in the words afore-
said. With that lady there went squires who followed her,
and she commanded that the man should be beaten and
scourged, because of the words which he spake. So the

squires beat the crier of comparisons and he had not
oot

BLANQUERNA

patience thereat, but made complaint to the Cardinal of
the wrong which was done to him. The Cardinal reproved
him Straitly because he had made complaint, and deprived
him of his office, and in his place set another who was a
lover of patience.

6. To a certain city there went a crier who cried aloud
enquiring which of these two things had the greater worth:
whether ‘‘ Little-care-I ” or “‘ What-will-men-say.” As he
passed through the principal square crying aloud in this
wise, the men who were therein besought him that he would
expound to them these words which he cried aloud. So he
said that “‘ What-will-men-say ”’ was the reproach which
men have when they do aught against the vanities of this
world, and “‘ Little-care-I ’’ was the despising of this re-
proach because it is contrary to virtue and to the honour of
God and the contempt of this world. Then a certain wise
man spake to this crier and said that Sir What-will-men-say
has a greater number of followers, but that Sir Little-care-I
has nobler followers.

7. It came to pass on a certain occasion that two friars
who had learned Arabic went to the country of the Saracens
to preach the Incarnation and the Passion of the Son of
God; and in one of these friars devotion and charity grew
cold, so he returned and left his companion, for death made
him to fear, and he longed for the dainty meats which he
had been wont to enjoy, and the honours which he was
accustomed to have among the people. As he returned,
he met at the entrance to a certain city a crier who cried
aloud, and asked which was of the greater worth, whether
death that came through wrong-doing or death that came
through martyrdom; and which of these manners of death
accorded better with the seven virtues or was more con-
trary to the seven deadly sins; and through which of these
manners of death is man more fitted to wear the crimson
vestments which the Son of God took in human nature.
While this man cried thus aloud, the friar, who had re-
Jee

QUONIAM TU SOLUS SANCTUS

turned from his journey, was seated beside a fair woman
and had temptation of carnal pleasure; and the crier made
comparison, asking which thing had the greater merit,
whether to go among the unbelievers in peril of death,
mortifying the fear of death through Strength of mind, or
remaining among faithful Christians and Striving again
temporal pleasures. Long did this religious think upon the
words which the crier spake, and he returned to his com-
panion, and had contrition for the weakness of mind into
the which his want of devotion had led him.

8. Another time it came to pass that that crier cried
aloud in the palace of the king, asking which thing was of
the greater worth, whether to be merely a simple knight or
to be king. Then he went to the palace of the bishop, and
cried out asking which thing was of the greater worth,
whether to be only a parish priest or to be bishop. After
this he went to an abbey, and cried aloud enquiring which
was of the greater worth, whether to be a cloistered monk
or an abbot. ‘Then he went before the Pope, crying aloud
and asking which thing was of the greater worth, whether
that the tithe of Holy Church should for ever be assigned
to the government of the world, or that the bishops should
have superfluity to spend on vanities. In all these manners
and in many more cried the officers that were appointed to
make comparisons. And very great was the good which
they did, for daily they awakened in the minds of men
devotion, conscience, diligence and the other virtues.

CHAPTER®XCI
QUONIAM TU SOLUS SANCTUS

Tus Pope Blanquerna was with his Cardinals one day, and
they considered if they could do aught whereby there should
be profit in the exaltation of the Catholic Faith. While
they were together, there entered a Cardinal who had

393

BLANQUERNA

preached to a great multitude of people, and the Pope en-
quired of the Cardinal if he had seen any man weeping
during his sermon. The Cardinal answered that he had
not, but that he had seen many men sleeping while he
preached to them. The Pope said to the Cardinals how
great a marvel it was that men had so little devotion to
sermons, and he enquired wherefore the Saracens, who are
in error, weep during sermons, A scrivener in Arabic of
the Pope answered that he had been born and brought up
in a country beyond the seas, and that he was of the number
of those Christians that were of heathen birth, and he said
that among the Saracens they preach of devotion and of
considerations upon the glory of Paradise and the pains of
hell; for the which reason they have devotion to sermons,
and they weep by reason of the devotion which they have.

2. After these words the Cardinal said that it was very
natural, and that it was a thing of utility to preach and to
prove by natural reasons the manner wherein virtues and
vices are contrary, and how one virtue agrees with another,
and one vice with another, and in what manner a man may
mortify a vice with a virtue, or with two, and how with one
virtue a man can revive another virtue; and this manner
is in the Brief Art of Finding Truth. Wherefore natural art
and devotion and consideration and brevity of sermons
accord with preaching, that men may ever have devotion
and may not be wearied.

3. When the Cardinal had spoken these words, the Pope
and the Cardinals made ordinance that as many sermons
should be preached as there are days in the year, and that
in these should be contained all the best matter which is
most meet to be preached, and that they should be of seemly
length, and understandable by the people, for through
ignorance the minds of men are oftentimes without de-
votion; these three hundred and sixty-five sermons were
to be general and to be preached one after another in every
year. After this the Pope made ordinance that men that
394

TU SOLUS DOMINUS

were devout and of holy life should go daily through the
streets of the cities and of the towns, telling aloud their
reflections upon Hell and its pains, and upon the glory of
Heaven, that men might have daily in remembrance the
pains of Hell and the glory of Paradise. When all these
things had been ordained, the Pope committed this office
to a Cardinal who should be the officer of Quoniam Tu
Solus Sanctus through the work of preaching and of telling
aloud these reflections.

4. The Cardinal who was beneficed with the office afore-
mentioned appointed advocates and officers who should go
through every land crying aloud concerning the pains of
Hell and the glories of Paradise and the death of this world,
according as is recounted in the Book of Doétrine for Boys,
the which book was written by a certain man for his beloved
son. After this he made ordinance with religious, and with
those that have the office of preaching, as to the manner
wherein they should preach; and if in this office of preach-
ing there were any excesses, how these might be corre¢ted ;
and how through preaching the will might soar so high that
God should be fervently loved and served through the
fortifying and exalting of great devotion.

CHAPTER XCIV

TU SOLUS DOMINUS

Ir came to pass that a messenger from the Cardinal of
Quoniam Tu Solus Sanétus sent a message to him that
through the diversity of languages preaching was impeded,
and that the criers of reflections could not cause men to
have devotion concerning Paradise nor fear of the pains
and torment of Hell. When this Cardinal had received the
messenger, he made representation of this matter to the
Pope, to the end that ordinance might be made whereby
1 See note, p. 39, above.

395

BLANQUERNA
preachers and criers of refle€tions should have greater
freedom in the use of their offices.

2. While the Cardinal was presenting to the Pope the
letters which his messenger had sent to him, it came to
pass that a messenger of the Cardinal of Tu Solus Dominus
came before the Pope, to whom he related that he had
found great Strife in the world among men, because these
men were of divers nations and of divers tongues; through
the which diversity of tongues men made war with each
other; and through this war and this diversity of tongues
there was diversity likewise of beliefs, and there were
created opposing sects. Long did the Pope consider the
two messages aforementioned, and he gathered all the
Cardinals together, enquiring of them what counsel might
be taken to destroy the diversity of languages, or by means
of what language all men in religion might be brought
together, that they might have understanding, and love one
another, and agree in the service of God.

3. A Cardinal answered: ‘‘ Lord Pope! With respec
to that which thou dost ask, it is a needful thing that thou
and thy court be pleasing to Christian princes and beloved
by them, and that ye make them and their subjects to agree
as touching their customs, to the end that the best customs
may be chosen, and that in every province there may be a
city wherein Latin is spoken by all; for Latin is the most
general tongue, and in Latin are many words that are found
in every language, and in Latin are all our books. After
these things are done it behoves thee to set apart men and
women to go to that city to learn Latin, to return to their
own lands and to teach it to their children so soon as they
begin to speak; and thus by long continuance wilt thou be
able to bring it to pass that in the world there shall be one
language, one belief and one faith, when one Pope after
another shall have devoted himself to this matter afore-
mentioned, according as is fitting for the accomplishment
of 2 great a business as this that thou hast begun.”

39

TU SOLUS DOMINUS

4. When the Cardinal had ended his words, the Cham-
berlain said to him that that which he had counselled would
be too grievous a thing to accomplish, and that in order to
bring it to pass there would be need of great expenditure.
While the Chamberlain spake these words, a certain man
that had been elected to a bishopric entered the presence
of the Pope, having come to the Court to be confirmed.
The diocese to the which he was eleéted had a yearly income
of fifteen thousand silver marks. To this bishop-elect there
came a messenger from the Cardinal of Domine Fili, who
related that in every place where he had been he had heard
it said that all the evil and error which were in the world
came through fault and defeét of the Pope and the Cardinals,
who might well take counsel whereby the world should be
well ordered, but had no diligence or care about this matter ;
and it was said that through the evil example which they
and their officers gave to the people, the world was in strife
and in error.

5. After the messenger had spoken these words, the
Pope enquired of the Chamberlain which thing was better,
whether to give effect to the proposal aforementioned and
assign to it five thousand marks from the income of the
said diocese, or to confirm the bishop and cause the Pope
and his Cardinals to have evil fame. The Chamberlain
answered and said that it would be better to give effect to
the proposal aforementioned, that man might be more
certain of its accomplishment. The Pope enquired of the
Chamberlain whether through the power of God and of
Holy Church it were possible that that business might
wholly or partially be brought to fulfilment, and the
Chamberlain, in shame and confusion, was compelled to
allow that the intention of the Pope might be fulfilled.

6. “Companions and lords, friends, beloved sons!”
said the Pope to the Cardinals: ‘“‘ That the Passion of
Jesus Christ may be honoured, I require you to aid me
in bringing it to pass that all the languages which exist

3017

BLANQUERNA

be reduced to one language only; for if there be no
more languages than one, men will grow to understand
each other, and through understanding they will love each
other more, and adopt the more readily the same customs
wherein they will agree. And by this proceeding our
preachers will go, alike with greater ardour and greater
prudence, to the unbelievers, and these will the sooner have
understanding concerning the truth of eternal life; and
through this business the whole world may come to good
estate, whereby they that have erred may be brought to
conversion.” Right pleased were the Cardinals at that
which the Pope besought of them, and each one offered
himself to undertake his share of the task with all the
powers of his understanding and will; and the Pope
and the Cardinals made establishment concerning that
ordinance, and commended that office to a Cardinal
who should serve it and have for his expenditure sufficient
money to maintain it.

CHAPTER XCV

TU SOLUS ALTISSIMUS, JESU CHRISTE, CUM SANCTO SPIRITU
IN GLORIA DEI PATRIS. AMEN

Tue Pope Blanquerna considered how he might bring
peace and concord to the communities that are in great
discord because they agree not in being obedient to one
prince only who may rule them in peace and justice, While
the Pope considered thus, two friars learned in Arabic,
who could not pass to a certain city wherein they desired
to preach the Gospel, sent letters to the Pope telling
him how that they were impeded, and saying that they
could not go securely along the roads, and they begged
the Pope that he would write to the prince of that land
to give them escort, wherewith they might go to that
city where they desired to be. When the Pope had
398

ITU SOLUS ALTISSIMUS

received the letter, he called the Cardinals, and spake to
them these words:

2. “ Agreement was made among us that for so long as
the Gloria in Excelsis Deo should last, and be sung in Holy
Church, there should be assigned to each clause a Cardinal
to serve its office. Wherefore it is a thing most needful
that messengers be ordained who shall go to princes
throughout the world, and treat concerning the manner
wherein our friars may go through all the world to preach
the Word of God, and that princes may have from us
letters and prayers and thanks, that they may be favour-
able to our friars through love of us. Likewise, it is
necessary that we send messengers continually to the com-
munes, and that we treat of peace throughout Lombardy
and Tuscany and Venice, and that we treat likewise con-
cerning the keeping of justice and charity between one
commune and another. Wherefore I commit this office to
the Cardinal who as yet has received none.”

3. Right pleasing to the Cardinal was this office of send-
ing messengers, the which had been given to him by the
Pope, and he sent his messengers through all the provinces,
and commanded enquiry to be made as to which lands were
best suited to the friars and to other men who had learned
divers tongues, that by these roads they might go from one
land to another. When the Cardinal had ordained all these
things, the Pope sent his messengers bearing gifts from
him to the princes of those lands, that they might cause
the roads to be made safe for those that were sent by the
Pope.

4. Along these roads the Cardinal erected hostels and
bridges and churches and other buildings, to the end that
men might travel the more securely along these roads, and
that, through the mingling of people from one country and
another there might be charity and concord, and the Holy
Roman Faith might be preached in the lands of pagans and
of unbelievers. Great were the sums of money that the

399

BLANQUERNA

Chamberlain gave to the Cardinal to the end that he might
accomplish the task aforementioned, wherefore he said to
the Pope that he should gather together treasure from the
possessions of Holy Church which might suffice for the
officers of the Gloria in Excelsis Deo; and the Pope made
ordinance that the officers aforementioned should have all
that was needful to them; and, through the example that
Holy Church had of the officers of Gloria in Excelsis Deo,
the income of the Church was greater than was the expen-
diture which they disbursed in their offices,

5. “Holy Father!” said the Cardinal to the Pope.
‘“‘ How may we order our messengers that they may bring
peace to the communes?” The Pope answered and said
to him that the messengers should go throughout the com-
munes, and keep watch and see which commune did wrong
to another; and the Pope made ordinance how that once
in every year each power! should come to a safe place
whither all the other powers should come likewise, and
that, after the manner of a chapter, they should hold dis-
cussion in all friendship and make correétion each of the
other, and that they that refused to abide by the decisions
of the definitors of the chapter should be fined. Where-
fore, by reason of the ordinance which the Pope made in
the manner aforementioned, the communes grew in peace
and in concord.

6. It came to pass one day that two messengers from
the king of India came to the Pope, beseeching him to give
them students to learn their language. So the Pope sent
immediately to the Cardinal of Tu Solus Altissimus, and
commanded him to procure that which the king of India
besought of him; for the procuring thereof accorded with
his office. The Cardinal made treaty, and procured that
which the Pope commanded him. Great was the benefit
and good was the example that resulted from the office of
the Cardinal. And because the Pope and the Cardinals

1 potestat: “ authority,” in the modern concrete sense.
400

TU SOLUS ALTISSIMUS

did their utmost to serve in the offices which they had
taken upon themselves, God gave to them blessing, and to
their works fulfilment, and made them to be pleasing to
men,

ENDED IS THE BOOK OF GLORIA IN
EXCELSIS DEO

ee a?

BEGINNETH THE FIFTH BOOK, WHICH IS
OF THE LIFE OF THE HERMIT

CHAPTER XCVI

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA RENOUNCED
THE PAPACY

Bianguerna the Pope grew old, and he remembered the
desire which he had had aforetime to lead the life of a
hermit; so he went secretly into the Consistory with all
the Cardinals, to whom he spake these words: ‘‘ Through
the Divine blessing the Papacy and the Court of Rome are
in right good estate, and by the ordinance thereof there
results wondrous good example to the Catholic Faith.
Wherefore, by reason of the grace which God has given
to the Court, and that He may maintain it in the state
wherein it now is, it would be well that we should appoint
an officer to devote himself daily to prayer and to lead the
contemplative life, praying God therein to maintain the
estate of the Court, to the profit of the Court and to His
own honour.” Each of the Cardinals held this to be very
good, and they sought out a man that was holy and devout
and of great perfection, that his prayers might be the more
pleasing to God.

2. When the Pope had learned the will of the Cardinals,
he kneeled before them all, praying them to grant that he
should renounce the Papacy, and that this office of prayer
should be given to him. All the Cardinals kneeled before
the Pope, and strove with him every one, saying that it
was a thing ill-beseeming that he should renounce the
apostolical dignity, the more so because, if he renounced
it, there would be the danger that the Court should no
longer be in the same estate wherein it was by the grace of
God and through the life of Blanquerna. The Pope Blan-
querna answered that the Cardinals had come to such great
perfection through the offices of Gloria in Excelsis Deo, that
thenceforward this goodly estate might not be destroyed,
4.02

HOW BLANQUERNA RENOUNCED THE PAPACY

especially if another Pope were eleéted by the rule and art
according to the which the Abbess Natana was elected.
For so long did the Pope kneel and weep before the
Cardinals, and with such great devotion and affection did
he beg of them indulgence, that all the Cardinals obeyed
his commandment.

3. When Blanquerna was freed from the Papacy and
felt himself at liberty to go and serve God in the life of a
hermit, who can tell the joy and the gladness that was
his? As Blanquerna thought and joyed thereon, he spake
to the Cardinals these words: ‘‘ My lords! For a long
time have I desired to be the servant and contemplator of
God in the life of a hermit, to the end that in my mind
there may be naught but God alone. To-morrow after
Mass I go to seek my hermitage, wherefore I must take
my leave, and beg for grace and blessing of you, my lords,
who will be in my memory all the days of my life, and like-
wise in my prayers; and I heartily thank God and you that
ye have assisted me so well to hold the Papacy for a great
‘space of time,”

4. Right displeased were the Cardinals when they heard
that the Pope desired to go into the forest and become a
hermit, and they prayed him to stay and live in the city of
Rome or in some other city, whichever was the more
pleasing to him, and to remain in that city in contemplation
and prayer. But the blessed Pope Blanquerna consented
not to their prayers, so greatly kindled was his soul by
virtue of the Divine inspiration; and on the morrow after
Mass he desired to go to his hermitage and to take leave
of his companions.

5. “Lord Blanquerna!”’ said the Cardinals. “ For a
great space of time have we been obedient to thee every
one and have fulfilled thy commandments. Thou art old
and worn, and hast need of good viands and a place wherein
thou mayest have corporal sustenance, to the end that thou
mayest the better labour in the spiritual and contemplative

403

BLANQUERNA

life; wherefore we pray thee that thou remain for such
time among us, until we have sought thee out a convenient
hermitage, and prepared it in such wise that thou mayest
dwell therein, and sing and celebrate the Divine office; and
until we also, with thy counsel, shall have elected a Pope
who will give us grace and blessing when thou takest leave
of us, for we shall have great sorrow at thy departure.”
With such great devotion, and with words so reasonable,
did the Cardinals beg this of Blanquerna, that he had
perforce to obey their prayers.

6. While Blanquerna was with the Cardinals in the city
of Rome, the Cardinals sent messengers through the forests
and over the high mountains, that they should seek out a
convenient place wherein Blanquerna might dwell; and
they made ready a place upon a high mountain wherein was
the church of a hermitage, near to a fountain, that Blan-
querna might dwell there, and they made ordinance that a
certain monastery which was at the foot of the mountain
should provide for the necessities of Blanquerna all the days
of his life. And during this time wherein the Cardinals
sought a place for Blanquerna to dwell, they elected as Pope
the Cardinal of Laudamus Te, the which Cardinal was
made Pope according as the art whereby he was eleéted
made plain to the Cardinals; and to this Pope was com-
mitted the office of Gloria in Excelsis Deo, the which
Blanquerna had aforetime held; and the office of that
Cardinal was committed to a Cardinal newly eleGted and
set in the place of the Cardinal of Laudamus Te.

CHAPTER XCVII

OF THE LEAVE WHICH BLANQUERNA TOOK OF THE
POPE AND OF THE CARDINALS

Bianguerna rose early, and secretly sang the Mass of the
Holy Spirit. After this the Pope sang a solemn Mass, and
preached, and related the good things and the ordinances
404

HOW BLANQUERNA TOOK LEAVE OF THE POPE

which Blanquerna had established in the Court, and how
he had renounced the Papacy, and was going to do penance
upon a high mountain, and how he desired to be in com-
pany of the trees and of the birds and of the beasts, and to
contemplate the God of glory. Such good matter had the
Pope to speak of Blanquerna the hermit, and with such
great devotion did he speak of him, that the Cardinals and
the people of Rome who were present at the sermon could
not refrain from weeping, and all lamented that Blanquerna
was to leave them, the more so because he was an old man
and desired to torment his body, in solitude, with austerity
of life.

2. While the Pope preached, all the people wept, and a
hermit who was upon the walls of Rome spake these words
to the Pope: “ Lord and Apostolic Father! There is a
great company of hermits in the city of Rome, who dwell
near the walls! and live alone, and oftentimes it comes to
pass that we have temptations, and know not how to con-
template, neither to weep for our sins. Now since Blan-
querna has appointed many officers to serve God and to
order the world, I pray Blanquerna, on behalf of all the
hermits of Rome, that he remain with us and be our
master and our visitor, and that this be his office; through
the which office he will advantage both himself and us, and
will be able to continue in the life of a hermit.”

3. The Pope and the Cardinals begged Blanquerna to
remain, and to take upon him this office whereof the hermit
spake, for great good would follow therefrom, especially
through the good example which he would give to all men.
But Blanquerna made excuse for himself, and said that in
no wise would he remain among men; and he took leave
of all of them together, praying, supplicating and beseech-
ing pardon, and begging that, if he had committed any
fault against them, they would forgive him and pray for

1 en los murs. Some authorities prefer to read “on the walls,” others,
“in the mountains” (mumts), presupposing an error in the text.

405

BLANQUERNA

him to the God of glory. When Blanquerna had ended
his words, the hermit begged for himself the office which
he had desired that Blanquerna should take, and the Pope
granted it to him with his grace and his benediction.

4. Blanquerna took the humble clothing which accords
with the life of a hermit, and made upon himself the sign
whereby is signified our redemption, and kissed the feet
and the hands of the Pope, and commended him to God
with tears. The Pope kissed him, and commanded that
two Cardinals should follow him to the hermitage wherein
he was to dwell, and that if in that place there were aught
to be prepared which he needed, these two Cardinals should
follow him and make it ready for him immediately. The
Cardinals followed Blanquerna, and all the people followed
him likewise so far as the entrance of the city. Blanquerna
prayed the Cardinals that they would return, and all the
people with them, and that they would remain within the
city; but the Cardinals would not remain, and went with
him even to the cell wherein his habitation had been
prepared.

5. Near to that habitation was a fountain wondrous fair,
and an ancient church, and a cell that was very comely.
Further, about a mile from that church there was a house
wherein dwelt a man who would serve Blanquerna and pre-
pare his food, that Blanquerna might the better have
contemplation, This man was a deacon whom Blanquerna
greatly loved, and who desired not to leave him, and in
company with this deacon Blanquerna desired to remain
that he might assist him daily in the Divine office. When
Blanquerna was in his hermitage, and had prepared it in
such a manner as beseems the life of a hermit, the
Cardinals took leave of Blanquerna very courteously, and,
_commending themselves to his prayers, they returned to
Rome. :

406

LIFE OF BLANQUERNA IN HIS HERMITAGE

CHAPTER XCVIII

OF THE LIFE WHICH BLANQUERNA LED IN HIS HERMITAGE

Bianguerna rose daily at midnight, and opened the win-
dows of his cell, that he might behold the heavens and the
stars, and began his prayer as devoutly as he might, to the
end that his whole soul should be with God, and his eyes
in weeping and tears. When Blanquerna had remained in
contemplation and tears for a long time, even to the hour
of Matins, he entered the church and rang for Matins, and
the deacon came to assist him to say Matins. After dawn
he sang Mass. When he had sung Mass, Blanquerna spake
certain words of God to the deacon, to the end that he might
cause him to love God, and they spake both together of
God and of His works, and wept together through the
great devotion which they had to the words which they
spake. After these words the deacon entered the garden,
and worked in divers manners, and Blanquerna left the
church and took recreation in his soul from the work which
his body had done, and he looked upon the mountains and
the plains that he might have recreation therein.

2. So soon as Blanquerna felt himself refreshed, he
betook himself again straightway to prayer and contem-
plation, or read in the books of Divine Scripture, and in
the Book of Contemplation, and thus he remained until the
hour of terce. After this they said terce, sext and none,
and after terce the deacon went away to prepare for Blan-
querna certain herbs and vegetables. Blanquerna likewise
laboured in the garden, or at some other business, that he
might not become slothful, and that his body might have
the greater health, and between sext and none he went to
dine. After he had dined he went back alone to the church

1 The reference is to Lull’s large work of that name, not to the brief
Art of Contemplation which follows the Book of the Lover and the Beloved
in the present volume.

407

BLANQUERNA
to give thanks therein to God. When he had ended his

prayer, he remained yet an hour, and went to take recreation
in the garden, and by the fountain, and visited all those
places wherein he could best make glad his soul. After
this he slept, to the end that he might the better endure
the labours of the night. When he had slept, he washed
his hands and his face, and remained alone until it was the
hour to ring for vespers, to the which came the deacon;
and when they had ended vespers they said compline, and
the deacon departed, and Blanquerna entered into the
consideration of those things which were the most pleasing
to him, and might best prepare him to enter upon his
prayers.

3. After the sun had set, Blanquerna mounted the high
ground which was above his cell and remained in prayer
until prime, gazing upon the heavens and the stars with
tearful eyes and devotion of heart, and meditating upon
the honours of God and upon the sins which men commit
in this world against Him. In such great affection and
fervour was Blanquerna in his contemplation, from the set
of the sun even until prime, that when he had lain down
and fallen asleep, he thought that he was with God even
as he had made his prayer.?

4. In this life and in this happy state Blanquerna re-
mained until the people of those parts conceived a great
devotion to the virtues of the altar of the Holy Trinity
which was in that church; and through the devotion
which they had, there came to that place men and women,
who disturbed Blanquerna in his prayer and contempla-
tion. And lest the people should lose the devotion which
they had to that place, he feared to tell them that they
should not come there, wherefore Blanquerna changed his

* Part of this passage will be found quoted in the popular edition of the
Book of the Lover and the Beloved (S.P.C.K., 1923). ‘The divergences which
will be found to exist between the two renderings are due to the fact that
the earlier translation was made principally from V.

408

_
——

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

cell, and went to a hill which was a mile distant from the
church, and another mile from the place where the deacon
lived; and in that place he remained and dwelt, and
would not go to the church at any time when the people
were there, neither desired that any man or any woman
should come to that cell wherein he had taken up his
abode.

5. Even so lived Blanquerna, and remained in the estate
of a hermit, considering that never had he led so pleasant
a life, nor ever had been so well prepared for the exaltation
of his soul to God. So holy was the life wherein Blan-
querna dwelt that he blessed God for it, and dire€ted in
that selfsame way all such as had devotion to the virtues
of the place wherein was the church. And, through the
holy life of Blanquerna, the Pope and the Cardinals and
their officers stood likewise the better in the grace of God.

CHAPTER XCIX

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN THE HERMIT BLANQUERNA MADE
THE ‘‘ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED ”’

Ir came to pass one day that the hermit who was in Rome,
according as we have related above, went to visit the other
hermits and recluses who were in Rome, and found that in
certain things they had many temptations, because they
knew not how to live in the manner which best beseemed
their State. So he bethought himself that he would go to
Blanquerna the hermit, and beg him to make a book which
should treat of the life of the hermit, and that by means of
that book he should learn and be enabled to keep the other
hermits in contemplation and devotion. When Blanquerna
was at prayer one day, that hermit came to his cell, and
begged him to write the book aforementioned. Long did
Blanquerna think in what manner he would make the book
and what should be the matter of it.

409

BLANQUERNA

2. While Blanquerna thought in this wise it came to his
will that he would give himself fervently to the adoration
and contemplation of God, to the end that in prayer God
should show him the manner wherein he should make the
book and likewise the matter of it. While Blanquerna
wept and adored, and God caused his soul to rise to the
supreme height of its strength in contemplation of Him,
Blanquerna felt himself carried away in spirit through the
great fervour and devotion which he had, and he con-
sidered that the strength of love knows no bounds when
the Lover has very fervent love to his Beloved. Wherefore
it came to the will of Blanquerna that he should make a
book of the Lover and the Beloved, the which Lover should
be a faithful and devout Christian and the Beloved should
be God.

3. While Blanquerna considered after this manner, he
remembered how that once when he was Pope a Saracen
related to him that the Saracens have certain religious men,
and that among others are certain men called Sufis, who
are the most prized among them, and these men have words
of love and brief examples which give to men great devo-
tion; and these are words which demand exposition, and
by the exposition thereof the understanding soars aloft, and
the will likewise soars, and is increased in devotion. When
Blanquerna had considered after this wise, he purposed to
make the book according to the manner aforementioned,
and he commanded the hermit to return to Rome, saying
that in a short time he would send to him by the deacon
the Book of the Lover and the Beloved, whereby for evermore
fervour and devotion would be increased in the hermits,
for it would seek to inspire them with the love of God.

410

OF THE “BOOK OF THE LOVER AND
Pee BELOVED”

PROLOGUE

BLANQUERNA was in prayer, and considered the manner
wherein to contemplate God and His virtues, and when he
had ended his prayer, he wrote down the manner wherein
he had contemplated God: and this he did daily, and
brought new arguments to his prayer, to the end that after
many and divers manners he should compose the Book of
the Lover and the Beloved, and that these manners should
be brief, and that in a short space of time the soul should
learn to reflect in many ways. And with the blessing of
God Blanquerna began the book, the which book he
divided into as many verses as there are days in the year;
and each verse suffices for the contemplation of God in one
day according to the Art of the Book of Contemplation.

4Il

BEGIN THE MORAL METAPHORS

1. The Lover asked his Beloved if there remained in
Him anything Still to be loved. And the Beloved answered
that he had Still to love that by which his own love could
be increased.

2. Long and perilous are the paths whereby the Lover
seeks his Beloved. They are peopled by considerations,
sighs and tears. They are lit up by love.

3. Many lovers came together to love One only, their
Beloved, who made them all to abound in love. And each
one had the Beloved for his possession, and his thoughts
of Him were very pleasant, making him to suffer pain
which brought delight.

4. The Lover wept and said: “‘ How long shall it be
till the darkness of the world is past, that the paths to hell
may be no more? When comes the hour wherein water,
that flows downwards, shall change its nature and mount
upwards? When shall the innocent be more in number
than the guilty?”

5. “Ah! When shall the Lover with joy lay down his
life for the Beloved? And when shall the Beloved see the
Lover grow faint for love of Him?”

6. Said the Lover to the Beloved: ‘‘ Thou that fillest
the sun with splendour, fill my heart with love.”” And the
Beloved answered: ‘“‘ Hadét thou not fulness of love, thine
eyes had not shed those tears, neither hadst thou come to
this place to see Him that loves thee.”

7. The Beloved made trial of His Lover to see if his
love for Him were perfect, and He asked him how the
presence of the Beloved differed from His absence. The
Lover answered: ‘‘ As knowledge and remembrance differ
from ignorance and oblivion.”

8. The Beloved asked the Lover: ‘“‘ Hast thou remem-

brance of aught wherewith I have rewarded thee, that thou
412

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

wouldst love Me thus?” “ Yea,” replied the Lover, “ for

I distinguish not between the trials that Thou sendest me
and the joys.”

g. “Say, O Lover!” asked the Beloved, ‘‘ If I double
thy trials, wilt thou still be patient?”’ “ Yea,”’ answered
the Lover, “‘ so that Thou double also my love.”

10. Said the Beloved to the Lover: ‘‘ Knowest thou yet
what love meaneth?’’ The Lover answered: “ If I knew
not the meaning of love, I should know the meaning of
trial, grief and sorrow.”

11, They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Why answerest thou not
thy Beloved when He calleth thee?” He replied: “I
brave great perils that I may come to Him, and I speak

to Him begging His graces.” -

12. “ Foolish Lover! Why dost thou weary thy body,
cast away thy wealth and leave the joys of this world, and
go about as an outcast among the people?” “ To do
honour to the honours of my Beloved,” he replied, ‘‘ for
He is hated! and dishonoured by more men than honour
and love Him.”

13. “ Say, Fool of Love! Which can be the better seen,
the Beloved in the Lover, or the Lover in the Beloved?”
The Lover answered, and said: ‘‘ By love can the Beloved
be seen, and the Lover by sighs and tears, by trials and by
grief.”

14. The Lover sought for one who should tell his Be-
loved how great trials he was enduring for love of Him,
and how he was like to die. And he found his Beloved,
Who was reading in a book wherein were written all the
griefs which love made him to suffer for his Beloved, and

the joy which he had of his love,

1 desamat, lit. “ unloved.” See note, p. 148, above. This word, which
occurs with particular frequency in the Book of the Lover and the Beloved,
implies rather indifference than hate.

413

BLANQUERNA

15. Our Lady presented her Son to the Lover, that he
might kiss His feet, and that he might write in his book,
concerning the virtues of Our Lady.

16, “Say, thou bird that singest! Haét thou placed
thyself in the care of my Beloved, that He may guard thee
from indifference, and increase in thee thy love?” The
bird replied: ‘‘ And who makes me to sing but the Lord
of love, Who holds indifference! to be sin?”

17. Between fear and hope has Love made her home.
She lives on thought, and dies of forgetfulness, the founda-
tions whereof are the delights of this world.

18. There was a contention between the eyes and the
memory of the Lover, for the eyes said that it was better
to behold the Beloved than to remember Him. But
Memory said that remembrance brings tears to the eyes,
and makes the heart to burn with love.

19. The Lover enquired of Understanding and Will
which of them was the nearer to his Beloved. And the two
ran, and Understanding came nearer to the Beloved than
did Will.

20. There was strife between the Lover and the
Beloved, and another lover saw it and wept, till peace
and concord were made between the Beloved and the
Lover.

21. Sighs and Tears came to be judged by the Beloved,
and asked Him which of them loved Him the more deeply.
And the Beloved gave judgment that sighs were nearer to
love, and tears to the eyes.

22. The Lover came to drink of the fountain which
gives love to him that has none, and his griefs redoubled.
And the Beloved came to drink of that fountain, that the
love of one whose griefs were doubled might be doubled
also.

1 desamor, See preceding note.

414

—
——

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

23. The Lover was sick and thought on the Beloved,
Who fed him on His merits, quenched his thirst with love,
made him to rest in patience, clothed him with humility,
and as medicine gave him truth.

24. They asked the Lover where his Beloved was. And
he answered: ‘‘ See Him for yourselves in a nobler house
than all the nobility of creation; but see Him too in my
love, my griefs and my tears,”

25. They said to the Lover: ‘‘ Whither goest thou?”
He answered: “‘I come from my Beloved.” ‘‘ Whence
comest thou?” “I go to my Beloved.” ‘‘ When wilt
thou return?”’ “I shall be with my Beloved.” ‘“ How
long wilt thou be with thy Beloved?” ‘‘ For as long as
my thoughts remain on Him.”

26. The birds hymned the dawn, and the Lover,! who
is the dawn, awakened. And the birds ended their song,
and the Lover died in the dawn for his Beloved.

27. The bird sang in the garden? of the Beloved. The
Lover came, and he said to the bird: “‘ If we understand
not one another in speech, we may make ourselves under-
Stood by love; for in thy song I see my Beloved before
mine eyes.”

28. The Lover was fain to sleep, for he had laboured
much in seeking his Beloved; and he feared lest he should
forget Him. And he wept, that he might not fall asleep,
and his Beloved be absent from his remembrance.

29. The Lover and the Beloved met, and the Beloved
said to the Lover: ‘‘ Thou needest not to speak to Me.
Sign to Me only with thine eyes, for they are words to My
heart,—that I may give thee that which thou dost ask.”

1 All the texts read here “‘ Lover,” though we should have expected
“ Beloved.” We must either suppose therefore that in this verse Christ is
the Lover and God the Father is the Beloved, or we may read “ Beloved,”
and assume an error on the part of the author, copied by later MSS.

2 verger: more properly “ orchard.”

415

BLANQUERNA

30. The Lover was disobedient to his Beloved; and the
Lover wept. And the Beloved came in the vesture of His
Lover, and died, that His Lover might regain what he had
lost. So He gave him a greater gift than that which he
had lost.

31. The Beloved filled His Lover with love, and grieved
not for his tribulations, for they would but make him love
the more deeply; and the greater were the Lover’s tribula-
tions, the greater was his delight and joy.

32. The Lover said: ‘‘ The secrets of my Beloved tor-
ture me, for my deeds reveal them, and my mouth keeps
silence and reveals them to none.”

33. This is Love’s contract: the Lover must be long-
suffering, patient, humble, fearful, diligent, trustful; he
must be ready to face great dangers for the honour of his
Beloved. And his Beloved is pledged to be true and free,
merciful and just with His lover.

34. The Lover set forth over hill and plain in search of
true devotion, and to see if his Beloved were well served.
But in every place he found that devotion was sorely lack-
ing. So he delved into the earth to see if there he could
find more perfect devotion, which was lacking above
ground.

35. “O bird that singest of love, ask thou of my Be-
loved, Who has taken me to be His servant, wherefore He
tortures me with love.” The bird replied: “* If Love made
thee not to bear trials, wherewith couldst thou show thy
love for Him?”

36. Pensively the Lover trod the paths of his Beloved.
Now he stumbled and fell among the thorns; but they
were to him as flowers, and as a bed of love.

37. They asked the Lover: “ Woulds thou change for

another thy Beloved?” He answered and said: “ Why,

what other is better or nobler than the sovereign and eternal
416

—
———

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED ”

Good? For He is infinite in greatness and power and
wisdom and love and perfeétion.”

38. The Lover wept, and sang of his Beloved, and said:
“ Swifter is love in the heart of the lover than is the splen-
dour of the lightning to the eye, or the thunder to the ear.
The tears of love gather more swiftly than the waves of the
sea; and sighing is more proper to love than is whiteness
to snow.”

39. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Wherein is the glory of
thy Beloved?’ He answered: ‘“ He is Glory itself.”
They asked him: “‘ Wherein lies His power?” He an-
swered: ‘‘ He is Power itself.” ‘‘ And wherein lies His
wisdom?’ ‘‘ He is Wisdom itself.” ‘‘ And wherefore is
He to be loved?”’ ‘‘ Because He is Love itself.”

40. The Lover rose early and went to seek his Beloved.
He found travellers on the road, and he asked if they had
seen his Beloved. They answered him: ‘‘ When did the
eyes of thy mind lose sight of thy Beloved?” The Lover
answered and said: “‘ Even when my Beloved is no
longer in my thoughts, He is never absent from the eyes
of my body, for all things that I see pi€ture to me my
Beloved.”

41. With eyes of thought and grief, sighs and tears, the
Lover gazed upon his Beloved; and with eyes of grace,
justice and pity, mercy and bounty, the Beloved gazed
upon His Lover. And the bird sang of that Countenance
so full of delight, whereof we have already spoken.

42. The keys of the doors of love are gilded with medi-
tations, sighs and tears; the cord which binds them is
woven of conscience, contrition, devotion and satisfaction ;
the door is kept by justice and mercy.

43. The Lover beat upon the door of his Beloved with
blows of love and hope. ‘The Beloved heard the blows of
His Lover, with humility, pity, charity and patience. Deity

2-0 417

BLANQUERNA
and Humanity opened the doors, and the Lover went in to
his Beloved.

44. Propriety and Community met, and joined together,
that there might be love and benevolence between Lover
and Beloved.

4s. There are two fires that nurture the love of the
Lover: the one is made of pleasures, desires and thoughts:
the other is compounded of fear and grief, of weeping and
of tears,

46. The Lover longed for solitude, and went away to
live alone, that he might have the companionship of his
Beloved, for amid many people he was lonely.

47. The Lover was all alone, in the shade of a fair tree.
Men passed by that place, and asked him why he was alone.
And the Lover answered: ‘‘ I am alone, now that I have
seen you and heard you; until now, I was in the company
of my Beloved.”

48. By signs of love, the Lover held converse with the
Beloved; by means of fear, and of weeping and tears and
thoughts, the Lover recounted his griefs to the Beloved.

49. The Lover feared lest his Beloved should fail him
in his greatest need; and the Beloved took love from His
Lover. Then the Lover had contrition and repentance of
heart; and the Beloved restored hope and charity to the
heart of the Lover, and to his eyes weeping and tears, that
love might return to him.

50. Whether Lover and Beloved are near or far is all
one; for their love mingles as water mingles with wine.
They are linked as heat with light; they agree and are
united as Essence and Being.

51. Said the Lover to his Beloved: ‘‘ In Thee are both
my healing and my grief: the more surely Thou healest

2 + So D (solitat); the other versions have so/iditat.
41

——

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

me, the greater grows my grief; and the more | languish,
the more dost Thou give me health.” The Beloved an-
swered: ‘‘ Thy love is a seal and an impress whereby thou
dost show forth My honour before men.”

52. The Lover saw himself taken and bound, wounded
and killed, for the love of his Beloved; and they that tor-
tured him asked him: ‘ Where is thy Beloved?” He
answered: “ See Him here in the increase of my love, and
the strength which it gives me to bear my torments.”

53. Said the Lover to the Beloved: ‘‘ I have never fled
from Thee, nor ceased to love Thee, since I knew Thee,
for I was ever in Thee, by Thee and with Thee whitherso-
ever [ went.” The Beloved answered: ‘‘ Nor since thou
hast known Me and loved Me have I once forgotten thee ;
never once have I deceived or failed thee.”

54. As one that was a fool went the Lover through a
city, singing of his Beloved; and men asked him if he had
lost his wits. ‘‘ My Beloved,” he answered, “ has taken
my will, and I myself have yielded up to Him my under-
Standing; so that there is left in me naught but memory,
wherewith I remember my Beloved.”

55. The Beloved said: ‘‘ It would be a miracle against
love that the Lover should fall asleep and forget his Be-
loved.” The Lover answered: “ It would be a miracle
likewise against love if the Beloved awakened him not,
since He has desired him.”

56. The heart of the Lover soared to the heights of the
Beloved, so that he might not be impeded from loving Him
in this abyss, the world. And when he reached his Beloved
he contemplated Him with sweetness and delight. But the
Beloved led him down again to this world that he might
contemplate Him in tribulations and griefs.

57. They asked the Lover: “ Whereinis all thy wealth ?”’

He answered: ‘In the poverty which I bear for my Be-
419

BLANQUERNA

loved.” ‘“‘ And where is thy repose?” “ In the afflictions
of love.” ‘ Who is thy physician?” “ The trust that I
have in my Beloved.” ‘ And who is thy master?” “ The
signs which in all creatures I see of my Beloved.”

58. The bird sang upon a branch in leaf and flower, and
the breeze stirred the leaves, and bore away the scent of the
flowers. ‘‘ What means the trembling of the leaves, and
the scent of the flowers?’ asked the Lover of the bird.
The bird answered: ‘‘ The trembling of the leaves signifies
obedience, and the scent of the flowers, suffering and
adversity.”

59. The Lover went in desire of his Beloved, and he
met two friends, who greeted and embraced and kissed
each other, with love and with tears. And the Lover
swooned, so strongly did these two lovers call to his memory
his Beloved.

60. The Lover thought on death, and was afraid, till he
remembered his Beloved. Then ina loud voice he cried to
those that were near him: “ Ah, sirs! Have love, that ye

may fear neither death nor danger, in doing honour to my
Beloved.”

61. They asked the Lover where his love first began.
He answered: ‘‘ It began in the glories of my Beloved;
and from that beginning I was led to love my neighbour
even as myself, and to cease to love! deception and

falsehood.”

62. “ Say, Fool of Love! If thy Beloved no longer cared
for thee, what wouldst thou do?” ‘I should love Him
still,” he replied. ‘‘ Else must I die; seeing that to cease
to love is death and love is life.”

63. They asked the Lover what he meant by perse-
verance. “‘ It is both happiness and sorrow,” he answered,

1 desamar.
420

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

“in the Lover who ever loves, honours and serves his
Beloved with fortitude, patience and hope.”

64. The Lover desired his Beloved to recompense him
for the time that he had served Him. And the Beloved
reckoned the thoughts and tears and longings and perils
and trials which His Lover had borne for love of Him;
and the Beloved added to the account eternal bliss, and
gave Himself for a recompense to His Lover.

65. They asked the Lover what he meant by happiness.
“ It is sorrow,” he replied, ‘“‘ borne for Love.”

66. “Say, O Fool! What meanest thou by sorrow?”
“It is the remembrance of the dishonour that is done to
my Beloved, Who is worthy of all honour.”

67. The Lover was gazing on a Place where he had seen
his Beloved. And he said: ‘‘ Ah, place that recallest the
blessed haunts! of my Beloved! Thou wilt tell my Beloved
that I suffer trials and sorrows for His sake.’’ And that
Place made answer: ‘“‘ When thy Beloved hung upon me,
He bore for thy love greater trials and sorrows than all
other trials and sorrows that Love could give to its servants.”

68. Said the Lover to his Beloved: ‘* Thou art all, and
through all, and in all, and with all. I would give Thee
all of myself that I may have all of Thee, and Thou all of
me.” The Beloved answered: ‘‘ Thou canst not have Me
wholly unless thou art wholly Mine.” And the Lover said:
“Let me be wholly Thine and be Thou wholly mine.”
The Beloved answered: “‘ What then will thy son have,
and thy brother and thy father?”’ The Lover replied:
“Thou, O my Beloved! art so great a Whole, that Thou
canst abound, and be wholly of each one who gives himself

wholly to Thee.”

69. The Lover extended and prolonged his thoughts of
the greatness and everlastingness of his Beloved, and he

1 Lit. custumes: “ways.”
421

BLANQUERNA

found in Him neither beginning, nor mean, nor end. And
the Beloved said: ‘‘ What measurest thou, O Fool?” The
Lover answered: “I measure the lesser with the greater,
defeé&t with fulness, and beginning with infinity and eter-
nity, to the end that humility, patience, charity and hope
may be planted the more firmly in my remembrance.”

70. The paths of love are both long and short. For love
is clear, bright and pure, subtle yet simple, strong, diligent,
brilliant, and abounding both in fresh thoughts and in old
memories.

71, They asked the Lover: ‘‘ What are the fruits of
love?’”? He answered: “‘ They are pleasures, thoughts,
desires, longings, sighs, trials, perils, torments and griefs.
And without these fruits Love’s servants have no part in
her.”’

72. Many persons were with the Lover, who made
complaint of his Beloved that He increased not his love,
and of Love, that it gave him trials and sorrows. The
Beloved made reply that the trials and sorrows whereof he
accused Love were the increase of love itself. .

73. “ Say, O Fool! Why dost thou not speak, and what
is this for the which thou art thoughtful and perplexed? ”
The Lover answered: “It is for the beauties of my Be-
loved, and the likeness between the joys and the sorrows
which are brought to me and given me by Love.”

74. “Say, O Fool! Which thing was in being first, thy.
heart or thy love?” He answered and said: “‘ Both my
heart and love came into being together; for were it not
so, the heart had not been made for love, nor love for
reflection.”

75. They asked the Fool: “ Wherein had thy love its
birth: in the secrets of the Beloved, or in the revelation of
them tomen?”’ He answered: ‘‘ Love in its fulness makes

no such distinction as this; for secretly the Lover keeps
422

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

hidden the secrets of his Beloved; secretly also he reveals

them, and yet when they are revealed he keeps them secret
sll.”

76. The secrets of love, unrevealed, cause anguish and
grief; revelation of love brings fervour and fear. And for
this cause the Lover must ever have sorrow.

77. Love called his lovers, and bade them ask of him
the most desirable and pleasing gifts. And they asked of
Love that he would clothe and adorn them with his own
garments, that they might be the more acceptable to the
Beloved.

78. The Lover cried aloud to all men, and said: ‘* Love
bids you ever love: in walking and sitting, in waking and
sleeping, in speech and in silence, in buying and selling, in
weeping and laughing, in joy and in sorrow, in gain and
in loss—in whatsoever you do, ye must love, for this is
Love’s commandment.”

79. “Say, O Fool! When came Love first to thee?”
“In that time,” he replied, “‘ when my heart was enriched
and filled with thoughts and desires, sighs and griefs, and
my eyes abounded in weeping and in tears.” ‘‘ And what
did Love bring thee?” ‘‘ The wondrous ways of my Be-
loved, His honours and His exceeding worth.”! “‘ How
came these things?” “‘ Through memory and understand-
ing.” ‘“‘ Wherewith didst thou receive them?” “ With
charity and hope.’”’ “‘ Wherewith dost thou guard them?”
‘With justice, prudence, fortitude and temperance.”

80. The Beloved sang, and said: “ Little knows the
Lover of love, if he be ashamed to praise his Beloved, or
if he fear to do Him honour in those places wherein He
is most grievously dishonoured; and little knows he of love
who is impatient of tribulations; and he who loses trust in
his Beloved makes no agreement between love and hope.”

1 valors, See note, p. 175, above.

423

BLANQUERNA

81. The Lover sent letters to his Beloved, asking Him
if there were others who would help him to suffer and bear
the grievous cares which he endured for love of Him. And
the Beloved replied to the Lover: “ There is naught in Me
that can fail or wrong thee.”

82. They asked the Beloved concerning the love of His
Lover. He answered: “ It isa mingling of joy and sorrow,
of fervour and fear.”

83. They asked the Lover concerning the love of his
Beloved. He answered: “‘ It is the inflowing of infinite
goodness, eternity, power, wisdom, charity and perfection.
This is that which flows to the Lover from the Beloved.”

84. ‘‘ Say, O Fool! What meanest thou by a marvel?”
He answered: “ It is a marvel to love things absent more
than things present; and to love things visible and things
corruptible more than things invisible and incorruptible.”

85. The Lover went to seek his Beloved, and he found
a man that was dying without love. And he said: “‘ How
great a sadness is it that any man should die without love!”
So the Lover said to him that was dying: “ Say, wherefore
dost thou die without love?’ And he answered: “ Be-
cause I have lived without love.”

86. The Lover asked his Beloved: ‘‘ Which thing is
greater—loving, or love itself?’ The Beloved answered:
“In creatures, love is the tree, the fruit whereof is loving;
and the flowers and the leaves are trials and griefs. And
in God, love and loving are one and the same thing, with-
out either griefs or trials.”

87. The Lover was in grief and sorrow, through over-
much thought. And therefore he begged his Beloved to
send him a book, wherein he might see Him in His virtues,
that his sorrow might thereby be relieved. So the Beloved
sent that book to His Lover, and his trials and griefs were
doubled.

424

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

88. Sick with love was the Lover, and a physician came
in to see him who multiplied his sorrows and his thoughts.
And in that same hour the Lover was healed.

89. Love went apart with the Lover, and they had great
joy of the Beloved; and the Beloved revealed himself to
them. The Lover wept, and afterwards was in rapture, and
Love swooned thereat. But the Beloved brought life to His
Lover by bringing to his memory His virtues.

go. The Lover said to the Beloved: ‘“ By many ways
dost Thou come to my heart, and revealest Thyself to my
sight. And by many names do I name Thee. But the love
whereby Thou dost quicken me and mortify me is one, and
one alone.”

91. The Beloved revealed Himself to His Lover, clothed
in new and scarlet robes. He stretched out His Arms to
embrace him; He inclined His Head to kiss him; and He
remained on high that he might ever seek Him.

92. The Beloved was absent from His Lover, and the
Lover sought his Beloved with his memory and under-
Standing, that he might love Him. The Lover found his
Beloved, and he asked Him whither He had been. “In
the absence of thy remembrance,” answered the Beloved,
“and in the ignorance of thy understanding.”

93. “Say, O Fool! Hast thou shame when men see
thee weep for thy Beloved?” ‘“‘ Shame apart from sin,”
answered the Lover, “ signifies defect of love in one who
knows not how to love.”

94. The Beloved planted in the heart of the Lover sighs
and longings, virtues and love. The Lover watered the
seed with his tears.

95. In the body of the Lover the Beloved planted trials,
tribulations and griefs. And the Lover tended his body
with hope and devotion, patience and consolations.

425

BLANQUERNA
96. The Beloved made a great feast, held a court of

many honourable barons, sent many invitations and gave
great gifts. To this court came the Lover, and the Beloved
said to him: ‘‘ Who called thee to come to this court?”
The Lover answered: ‘‘ Need and love compelled me to
come, that I might behold Thy adornments and Thy
wonders.”

97. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Whence art thou?” He
answered: ‘“‘ From love.” ‘‘ To whom dost thou belong?”
“T belong to love.” ‘‘ Who gave thee birth?”’ ‘ Love.”
“Where wast thou born?”’ “In love.” ‘“ Who brought
thee up?” “Love.” “How dost thou liver” “ By
love.” ‘What is thy name?” “Love.” ‘‘ Whence
comest thou?” “ From love.” ‘‘ Whither goest thou?”
“To love.” “ Where dwellest thou?” “ In love.” “ Hast
thou aught but love?” “ Yea,” he answered, “I have
faults; and I have sins against my Beloved.” “ Is there
pardon in thy Beloved?” ‘“‘ Yea,” answered the Lover,
“‘in my Beloved there is mercy and justice, and therefore
am I lodged between fear and hope.”

98. The Beloved left the Lover, and the Lover sought
Him in his thoughts, and enquired for Him of men in the
language of love.

99. The Lover found his Beloved, who was despised
among the people, and he told the Beloved what great
wrong was done to His honour. The Beloved answered
him, and said: ‘‘ Lo, I suffer this dishonour for lack of
fervent and devoted lovers.” The Lover wept, and his
sorrows were increased, but the Beloved comforted him,
by revealing to him His wonders.

100. The light of the Beloved’s abode came to illumine
the dwelling of the Lover, to cast out its darkness, and to
fill it with joys and griefs and thoughts. And the Lover
cast out all things from his dwelling, that the Beloved might
be lodged there.

426

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

101. They asked the Lover what sign his Beloved bore
upon His banner. Heanswered: ‘‘ The sign of One dead.”
They asked him why He bore such a sign. He answered:
““ Because He once died and was crucified, and because
they that glory in being His lovers must follow in His
steps.””

102. The Beloved came to lodge in the dwelling of His
Lover, and the steward demanded of Him the reckoning.
But the Lover said: ‘ My Beloved is to be lodged freely.’’1

103. Memory and Will set forth together, and climbed
into the mountain of the Beloved, that understanding might
be exalted and love for the Beloved increased.

104. Every day sighs and tears are messengers between
the Lover and the Beloved, that between them there may
be solace and companionship and friendship and goodwill.

105. The Lover yearned for his Beloved, and sent to
Him his thoughts, that they might bring him back from his
Beloved the bliss which for so long had been his.

106. The Beloved gave to His Lover the gift of tears,
sighs, griefs, thoughts and sorrows, with the which gift the
Lover served his Beloved.

107. The Lover begged his Beloved to give him riches,
peace and honour in this world; and the Beloved revealed
His Countenance to the memory and understanding of the
Lover, and gave Himself as an Aim to his will.

108. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Wherein consists hon-
our?’’ He answered: ‘In comprehending and loving
my Beloved.” And they asked him also: “ Wherein lies
dishonour?’’ He answered: “ In forgetting and ceasing
to love Him.”

109. ‘‘ Tormented was I by love, O Beloved, until I
cried that Thou wast present in my torments; and then

1 V reads: ‘‘ My Beloved is to be lodged freely,—yea, with a gift,—for
long ago He paid the price of all men.”

427

BLANQUERNA

did love ease my griefs, and Thou as a guerdon didst in-
crease my love, and love doubled my torments.”

110. In the path of love the Lover found another who
was silent, and who with tears, grief, and drawn features
made accusation and reproach against Love. And Love
made excuse with loyalty, hope, patience, devotion, forti-
tude, temperance and happiness; and he blamed the Lover
who cried out upon Love, for that he had given him gifts
so noble as these.

111, The Lover sang and said: “Ah, what great
affliction is love! Ah, what great happiness it is to love
my Beloved, Who loves His lovers with infinite and eternal
love, perfect and complete in everything!”

112. The Lover went into a far country thinking to find
therein his Beloved, and in the way there met him two lions.
The Lover was afraid, even to death, for he desired to live
and serve his Beloved. So he sent Memory to his Beloved,
that Love might be present at his passing, for with Love
he could better endure death. And while the Lover had
remembrance of his Beloved, the two lions came to him
humbly, licked the tears from his eyes, and caressed his
hands and feet. So the Lover went on his way in peace to
seek his Beloved.

113. The Lover journeyed over hill and dale, but he
could find no way of escape from the imprisonment in which
Love had for so long enthralled his body and his thoughts
and all his desires and joys.

114. While the Lover went toiling in this wise, he found
a hermit who was sleeping near to a fair spring. ‘The Lover
wakened the hermit, and asked him if in his dreams he had
seen the Beloved. ‘The hermit answered that his own
thoughts likewise, whether he was sleeping or waking, were
held captive in the prison of Love. The Lover joyed greatly
that he had found a fellow-prisoner; and they both wept,
for the Beloved has few such lovers as these.
428

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

115. Naught is there in the Beloved wherein the Lover
has not care and sorrow, nor has the Lover aught in him-
self wherein the Beloved joys not and has no part. And
therefore is the love of the Beloved ever in aétion, while
that of the Lover is in grief and suffering.1

116. A bird was singing upon a branch: “I will give
a fresh thought to the lover who will give me two.” The
bird gave that fresh thought to the Lover, and the Lover
gave two to the bird, that its afflictions might be assuaged;
and the Lover felt his griefs increased.

117. The Lover and the Beloved met together, and their
caresses, embraces and kisses, their weeping and tears, bore
witness to their meeting, Then the Beloved asked the
Lover concerning his state, and the Lover was speechless
before his Beloved.

118. The Lover and the Beloved strove, and their love
made peace between them. Which of them, think you,?
bore the stronger love toward the other?

119. The Lover loved all those that feared his Beloved,
and he feared all those that feared Him not. And there
arose this question: Which thing was greater in the Lover,
whether love or fear?

120. The Lover made haste? to follow his Beloved, and
he passed along a road where there was a fierce lion which
killed all that passed by it carelessly and without devotion,

121. The Lover said: ‘‘ He that fears not my Beloved
must fear all things, and that he that fears Him may be
bold and fervent in all things beside.”

122. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ What meanest thou by
occasion?”? He answered: ‘It is to have pleasure in

1 passié, The reference is to the Aristotelian category. Cf. accid, above.

2 ¢ fo questi¢, translated in § 119 “‘ and there arose this question.” The
translation of this phrase, which occurs frequently, is varied to avoid
monotony.

8 jurtar,an obscure word. Cf. modern Majorcan juitar, to strive.

429

BLANQUERNA

penance, understanding in knowledge, hope in patience,
health in abstinence, consolation in remembrance, love in
diligence, loyalty in shame, riches in poverty, peace in
obedience, strife in malevolence.”

123. Love shone through the cloud which had come be-
tween the Lover and the Beloved, and made it to be as
bright and resplendent as is the moon by night, as the day-
Star at dawn, as the sun at midday, and as the understand-
ing in the will; and through that bright cloud the Lover
and the Beloved held converse.

124, They asked the Lover: ‘‘ What is the greatest
darkness?’’ He answered: ‘“‘ The absence of my Be-
loved.” ‘And what is the greatest light?” ‘‘ The
presence of my Beloved.”’

125. The sign of the Beloved is seen in the Lover, who
for love’s sake is in tribulations, sighs and tears, and
thoughts, and is held in contempt of the people.

126. The Lover wrote these words: ‘‘ My Beloved de-
lighteth because I raise my thoughts to Him, and for Him
my eyes weep, and without grief I have neither life nor
feeling, neither can I see nor hear nor smell.”

127. “Ah, Understanding and Will! Cry out! and
awaken the watchdogs that sleep, forgetting my Beloved.
Weep, O eyes! Sigh, O heart! And, Memory, forget not
the dishonour which is done to my Beloved by those whom
He has so greatly honoured.”

128. The enmity that is between men and my Beloved
increases. My Beloved promises gifts and rewards, and
threatens with justice and wisdom. And Memory and Will
despise both His threats and His promises.

129. The Beloved drew near to the Lover, to comfort
and console him for the griefs which he suffered and the
tears which he shed. And the nearer came the Beloved to

1 Jadrats: “ bark.”

430

foe

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

the Lover, the more he grieved and wept, crying out upon
the dishonour which was done to his Beloved.

130. With the pen of love, with the water of his tears,
and on paper of suffering, the Lover wrote letters to his
Beloved. And in these he told how devotion tarried, how
love was dying, and how sin and error were increasing the
number of His enemies.

131. The Lover and the Beloved were bound in love
with the bonds of memory, understanding, and will, that
they might never be parted; and the cord wherewith these
two loves were bound was woven of thoughts and griefs,
sighs and tears.

132. The Lover lay in the bed of love: his sheets were
of joys, his coverlet was of griefs, his pillow of tears. And
none knew if the fabric of the pillow was that of the sheets
or of the coverlet.

133. Ihe Beloved clothed His Lover in vest, coat and
mantle, and gave him a helmet of love. His body He
clothed with thoughts, his feet with tribulations, and his
head with a garland of tears.

134. The Beloved adjured His Lover not to forget Him.
The Lover answered that he could not forget Him because
he could not do otherwise than know Him.

135. The Beloved said to His Lover: “ Thou shalt
praise and defend Me in those places where men most fear
to praise Me.”’ The Lover answered: “ Provide me then
with love.’”’ The Beloved answered: ‘‘ For love of thee I
became incarnate, and endured the pains of death.”

136. The Lover said to his Wellbeloved: ‘‘ Show me
the way wherein I may make Thee to be known and loved
and praised among men.” ‘The Beloved filled His Lover
with devotion, patience, charity, tribulations, thoughts,
sighs and tears. And to the heart of the Lover came bold-
ness to praise his Beloved; and in his mouth were praises

431

BLANQUERNA

of his Beloved; and in his will was contempt of the re-
proaches of men who judge falsely.

137. The Lover spake to the people in these words:
‘He that truly remembers my Beloved, in remembering
Him forgets all things around; and he that forgets all
things in remembering my Beloved, is defended by Him
from all things, and receives a part in all things.”

138. They asked the Lover: ‘“‘ Whereof is Love born,
whereon does it live, and wherefore does it die?”’” The
Lover answered: ‘‘ Love is born of remembrance, it lives
on understanding, and it dies through forgetfulness.”

139. The Lover forgot all that was beneath the high
heavens that his understanding might soar the higher to-
wards a knowledge of the Beloved, Whom his will desired
to contemplate and to preach.

140. The Lover went out to do battle for the honour of
his Beloved, and took with him faith, hope, charity, justice,
prudence, fortitude and temperance wherewith to vanquish
the enemies of his Beloved. And the Lover had been van-
quished had the Beloved not helped him to make known
His greatness.

141. The Lover desired to attain to the farthest goal of
his love for the Beloved; and other objeéts blocked his
path. For this cause his longing desires and thoughts gave
the Lover sorrow and grief.

142. The Lover was glad, and rejoiced in the greatness
of his Beloved. But afterwards the Lover was sad because
of overmuch thought and refleétion. And he knew not
which he felt the more deeply—whether the joys or the
sorrows.

143. The Lover was sent by his Beloved as a messenger
to Christian princes and to unbelievers, to teach them an
Art and Elements, whereby to know and love the Beloved.

1 References to certain works of Lull himself.

432

pe a

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

144. If thou seest a lover clothed in noble raiment,
honoured through vainglory, sated with food and sleep,
know thou that in that man thou seegst damnation and tor-
ment. And if thou seest a lover poorly clothed, despised
by men, pale and thin with fast and vigil, know thou that

in that man thou lookest upon salvation and everlasting
weal.

145. The Lover made complaint, and his heart cried
out for the heat of love that was within him. The Lover
died, and the Beloved wept, and gave him the comfort of
patience! and hope and reward.

146. The Lover wept for that which he had lost; and
none could comfort him, for his losses could not be re-

gained.

147. God has created the night that the Lover may keep
vigil, and think upon the glories of his Beloved: and the
Lover thought that it had been created for the rest and
sleep of those that were wearied with loving.

148. Men mocked and reproved the Lover, because he
went about as a fool for love’s sake. And the Lover
despised their reproaches, and himself reproved them, be-
cause they loved not his Beloved.

149. The Lover said: ‘‘ I am clothed in vile raiment;
but love clothes my heart with thoughts of delight, and my
body with tears, griefs and sufferings.”

150. The Beloved sang, and said: “ Those that praise
Me devote themselves to the praise of My valour,” and the
enemies of My honour torment them and have them in
contempt. Therefore have I sent to my Lover that he may
weep and lament the dishonour which I have suffered, and
his laments and tears are born of My love.”

1 P: “consolation and patience.”
2 4.“ worth.” See note, p. 175, above.

2E 433

BLANQUERNA

151. The Lover made oath to the Beloved that for love
of Him he endured and loved trials and sufferings, and he
begged the Beloved that He would love him and have
compassion on his trials and sufferings. The Beloved
made oath that it was the nature and property of His love
to love all them that loved Him, and to have pity on such
as endured trials for love of Him. The Lover was glad,
and rejoiced in the nature and essential property of his
Beloved.

152. The Beloved silenced His Lover, and the Lover
took comfort in gazing upon his Beloved.

153. The Lover wept and called upon his Beloved, until
the Beloved descended from the supreme heights of Heaven ;
and He came to earth to weep and grieve and die for the
sake of love, and to teach men to know and love and praise
His honours.

154. The Lover reproached Christian people, because in
their letters they put not first the name of his Beloved, Jesus
Christ, to do Him the same honour that the Saracens do
Mahomet, who was a knave and no true man, when they
honour him by naming him in their letters first of all.

155. The Lover met a squire who walked pensively, and
was pale, thin, and poorly clothed; and he greeted the
Lover and said: ‘* Now God guide thee, that thou mayest
find thy Beloved! ’’ And the Lover asked him how he had
recognised him; and the squire said: “‘ Some there are of
Love’s secrets that reveal others, and therefore between
lovers is there recognition.”

156. The glories, honours and good works of the Be-
loved are the riches and the treasure of the Lover. And
the treasures of the Beloved are the thoughts, desires, tor-
ments, tears and griefs wherewith the Lover ever honours
and loves his Beloved.

* P, D: that He would have his trials and suffering(s) in remembrance.

434

“BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

157. Great companies and hosts of lovers have assembled
themselves together; they bear the banner of love, whereon
is the figure and the sign of their Beloved. And they will
have with them none that has not love, lest their Beloved
should be dishonoured.

158. Men that show their folly by heaping up riches
move the Lover to be a fool for love; and the shame that
the Lover has of men at going among them as a fool makes
him to be esteemed and loved. Which of the two emotions,
think ye, is the greater occasion of love?

159. Love made the Lover to be sad through excess of
thought; the Beloved sang, and the Lover rejoiced to hear
Him, Which of these two occasions, think ye, gave to the
Lover the greater increase of love?

160. In the secrets of the Lover are revealed the secrets
of the Beloved, and in the secrets of the Beloved are re-
vealed the secrets of the Lover. Which of these two secrets,
think ye, is the greater occasion of revelation?

161. They asked the Fool by what signs his Beloved
might be known. He answered and said: “ By mercy and
pity, which are essentially in His Will, without change
soever.””

162. Such was the love which the Lover had to the Be-
loved, that he desired the good of all above the good of
each,! and for his Beloved to be everywhere known and
praised, and desired.

163. Love and Indifference met in a garden,? where the
Lover and the Beloved were talking in secret. And Love
asked Indifference for what intent he had come to that
place. ‘“ That the Lover may cease to love,” he replied,
“* and the Beloved to be honoured.” The words of Indiffer-

1 There is here a play upon words, which may be brought out by trans-
lating : ‘‘ Through the particular love which the Lover had to his Beloved,

he desired the general good above the particular, that his Beloved might be
generally known and praised and desired.” ® verger.

4:35

BLANQUERNA

ence were greatly displeasing to the Beloved and the Lover,
and their love was increased, that it might vanquish and
destroy Indifference.

164. “ Say, O Fool! In which thing dost thou take the
greater pleasure—whether in loving or in hating? ”’ “In
loving,” he replied, “ for I have only hated to the end that
I may love.”

165. ‘Say, O Lover! Which thing dost thou strive to
understand the better—whether truth or falsehood?” He
answered: “ Truth.” ‘‘ And wherefore so?’”’ “ Because
I understand falsehood that I may the better understand
truth.”

166. The Lover perceived that he was loved by his Be-
loved, and he enquired of Him if His love and His mercy
were one and the same thing. The Beloved affirmed that
in His Essence there was no distinction between His love
and His mercy. Therefore said the Lover: “ Why, then,
does Thy love torment me, and why does not Thy mercy
heal me of my griefs?’”’ And the Beloved answered: “ It
is mercy that gives thee these griefs, that thou mayest the
more perfectly honour therewith My love.”

167. The Lover desired to go into a far country to do
honour to his Beloved, and he wished to disguise himself
that he might not be taken captive on the way; but he
could not hide the tears in his eyes, nor his pale and drawn
face, nor the plaints and thoughts and sighs, the sorrow and
the griefs of his heart. And so he was taken captive on the
journey and delivered to the tormentors by the enemies of
his Beloved.

168. Imprisoned was the Lover in the prison of Love.
Thoughts, desires and memories held and enchained him
lest he should flee to his Beloved. Griefs tormented him;
patience and hope consoled him. And the Lover would
have died, but the Beloved revealed to him His Presence,
and the Lover revived.

436

“BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

169. The Lover met his Beloved, and he knew Him and
wept. The Beloved reproved him, because he wept not
until he knew Him. “ Wherein dids&t thou know Me,” He
asked, “‘ since thine eyes were not already wet with tears?”
The Lover answered: “In my memory, understanding
and will, whereby, so soon as the eyes of my body saw Thee,
my love was increased.”

170. ““ What meanest thou by love? ”’ said the Beloved.
And the Lover answered: “ It is to bear upon the heart
of the Lover the features and the words of the Beloved. It
is the yearning that is in the heart of the Lover, with desire
and tears.”

171. “ Love is the mingling of boldness and fear, that
comes through great fervour. It is the desire for the Be-
loved as the end of the will. It is that which makes the
Lover like to die when he hears one sing of the beauties
of the Beloved. It is that wherein I die daily, and wherein
for ever is my will.”

172. Devotion and Yearning sent thoughts as messen-
gers to the heart of the Lover, to bring tears to his eyes,
which for long had wept but now would weep no more.

173. Said the Lover: ‘“‘ O ye that love, if ye will have
fire, come light your lanterns at my heart; if water, come
to my eyes, whence flow the tears in Streams; if thoughts
of love, come gather them from my meditations,”

174. It happened one day that the Lover was medi-
tating on the great love which he had for his Beloved, and
the great trials and perils into the which this love for so
long had led him, and he fell to considering how that his
reward would be great. And as he thus discoursed with
himself, he remembered that his Beloved had recom-
pensed him already, since He had kindled within him a
love for His Presence, and through that very love had given
him his griefs. ae

437

BLANQUERNA

175. The Lover was wiping away the tears which for
Love’s sake he had shed, lest he should reveal the sufferings
which his Beloved sent him. But the Beloved said: “ Why
wouldst thou hide from others these marks of thy love?
For I have given them to thee that others may love My
valour also.”

176. “Say, thou that for love’s sake goest as a fool!
For how long wilt thou be a slave, and forced to weep and
suffer trials and griefs?”? He answered: “ Till my Be-
loved shall separate body and soul in me.”

177. “ Say, O Fool, hast thou riches?”’ He answered:
‘ T have my Beloved.” “‘ Hast thou towns, castles or cities,
provinces or duchies?”? He answered: “JI have love,
thoughts, tears, desires, trials, griefs, which are better than
empires or kingdoms.”

178. They asked the Lover wherein he recognised the
decrees of his Beloved. He answered: ‘ In that He allots
to His lovers equality of joys and griefs.”

179. “Say, O Fool! Which of these knows the more
of love—he that has joys thereof or he that has trials and
griefs?”’? He answered: “ There can be no knowledge of
love without both the one and the other.”

180. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Wherefore wilt thou not
defend thyself from the sins and the false crimes whereof
men accuse thee?’’ He answered and said: ‘‘ I have to
defend my Beloved, whom men falsely accuse; man may

indeed be full of deceit and error, and is scarce worthy to
be defended.”

181. “ Say, O Fool! Wherefore defendest thou Love
when it thus tries and torments thy body and thy heart? ”
He answered: ‘‘ Because it increases my merits and my
happiness,”

182. The Lover made complaint of his Beloved, because
He caused Love so grievously to torment him, And the

438

iam
———

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

Beloved made reply! by increasing his trials and perils,
thoughts and tears.

183. “Say, O Fool! Wherefore makest thou excuse for
the guilty?” He answered: ‘‘ That I may not be like to
those that accuse the innocent with the guilty.”

184. The Beloved raised the understanding of the Lover
that he might comprehend His greatness, and incline his
memory to recall his own shortcomings, and that his will
might hate them, and soar aloft to love the perfeétions of
the Beloved.

185. The Lover sang of his Beloved and said: ‘“ So
great is my will to love Thee, that all things that once I
hated are now, through love of Thee, a greater happiness
and joy to me than those that once I loved without loving

Thee.”

186. The Lover went through a great city, and asked if
there were any with whom he might speak of his Beloved
as he desired. And they showed him a poor man who was
weeping for love, and who sought a companion with whom
to speak of love.

187. Thoughtful and perplexed was the Lover, as he
wondered how his trials could have their source in the glory
of his Beloved, Who has such great felicity in Himself.?

188. The thoughts of the Lover were between forget-
fulness of his torments and remembrance of his joys; for
the joys of love drive the memory of sorrow away, and the
tortures of love recall the happiness which it brings.

189. They asked the Lover: “ Will thy Beloved ever
take away thy love?’”’ He answered: “No, not while
memory has power to remember, nor understanding to
comprehend the glory of my Beloved.”

1 escusava $. ,
2 Some versions add: And then he thought of the sun, which, though
it is so high, strikes the weak eyes of us men that are here below.

439

BLANQUERNA

190. “Say, O Fool! What is the greatest comparison
and similitude of all that can be made?” He answered:
“ That of Lover with Beloved.” They asked him: “ For
what reason?” He replied: “ For the love that they have
each one.”

191. They asked the Beloved: “‘ Hast Thou never had
pity?’ He answered: “ If I had not had pity, my Lover
had never learned to love Me, nor had I tormented him
with sighs and tears, with trials and with griefs.”

192. The Lover was in a vast forest, seeking his Beloved.
He found there Truth and Falsehood, who were disputing
of his Beloved, for Truth praised Him and Falsehood
accused Him. Wherefore the Lover cried out to Love that
he would come to the aid of Truth.

193. There came the temptation to the Lover to leave
his Beloved, that memory might awaken and find the
Presence of the Beloved once more; for in this wise he
would remember Him more deeply than he had remem-
bered Him aforetime, and the understanding would soar
the higher in comprehending Him, and the will in loving
Him.

194. One day the Lover ceased to remember his Be-
loved, and on the next day he remembered that he had
forgotten Him. On the day when it came to the Lover
that he had forgotten his Beloved, he was in sorrow and
pain, and yet in glory and bliss,—the one for his forget-
fulness, and the other for his remembrance.

195. So earnestly did the Lover desire that his Beloved
should be praised and honoured, that he doubted if he could
remember Him enough; and so strongly did he abhor the
dishonour paid to his Beloved, that he doubted if he could
abhor it enough. And for this cause the Lover was
speechless and perplexed between his love and fear of his
Beloved.

440

—

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

196. The Lover was like to die of joy, and he lived by
grief. And his joys and torments were mingled and united,
and became one and the same thing in the will of the Lover.
And for this cause the Lover was like to be living and dying
at one and the same time.

197. For one hour only the Lover would fain have for-
gotten his Beloved, and known Him not, that his grief
might have some rest. But such oblivion and ignorance
had themselves made him to suffer; therefore he had
patience, and lifted up his understanding and his memory,
in contemplation of his Beloved.

198. So great was the love of the Lover to his Beloved
that he believed all things that He revealed to him. And
so earnestly did he desire to understand Him that he strove
to understand by unanswerable reasons all things that were
said of Him. And therefore was the love of the Lover for
ever between belief and understanding.

199. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ What thing is farthest
from thy heart?’”’ He answered: “ Indifference.” “* And
why so?” “ Because nearest to my heart is love, which
is the contrary of indifference.”

200. “ Say, O Fool! Hast thou envy?” He answered:
“* Yea, whensoever I forget the bounty and the riches of my

Beloved.”

Bor, say) © Lover! Hestthou riches:”’ “ Yea," he
replied, “I have love.” ‘‘ Hast thou poverty?” “ Yea,
I have love.” ‘‘ How then is this?” ‘I am poor,” he
replied, “‘ because my love is no greater, and because it fills
so few others with love that they may exalt the honour of
my Beloved.”

202. ‘Say, O Lover! Where is thy power?” He
answered: ‘“‘In the power of my Beloved.” ‘‘ Where-
with dost thou Strive against thine enemies?”” “ With
the Strength of my Beloved,” ‘“‘ Wherein dost thou

441

BLANQUERNA

find consolation?’ ‘In the eternal treasures of my
Beloved.”

203. ‘Say, O Fool! Which lovest thou the more—
whether the mercy of thy Beloved or His justice?” He
answered: ‘“ So greatly do I love and fear justice that I find
it not in my will to love anything more than the justice of
my Beloved.”

204. Sins and merits were striving among themselves in
the conscience and the will of the Lover. Justice and re-
membrance increased his remorse, but mercy and hope
increased the assurance of pardon in the will of the Beloved ;
wherefore in the penitence of the Lover merits conquered
sins and wrongs.

205. The Lover affirmed that all was perfection in his
Beloved, and denied that in Him was any fault at all. Which
of these two, think you, is the greater,—whether that which
he affirmed or denied ?

206. There was an eclipse in the heavens and darkness
over all the earth. And it recalled to the Lover that his sins
had long ago banished his Beloved from his will, wherefore
the darkness had banished the light from his understand-
ing. This is that light whereby the Beloved reveals Himself
to His lovers.

207. Love came to the Lover, who asked him: ‘‘ What
wilt thou?” And Love replied: ‘“‘ I have come to thee
that I may nurture and direé thy life, so that at thy death
thou shalt be able to vanquish thy mortal enemies.”

208. When the Lover forgot his Beloved, Love fell sick;
and the Lover himself fell sick when he gave himself to
over-much thinking, and his Beloved gave him trials, long-
ings and griefs.

209. The Lover found a man who was dying without
love. And the Lover wept that a man should die without
love, for the dishonour which it brought to his Beloved,
Star

“BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

So he asked that man: ‘“‘ Why dost thou die without love ? ”
And he answered: “ Because no man will give me know-
ledge of love, and none has taught me to be a lover.” So
the Lover sighed and wept, and said: ‘‘ Ah, devotion!
When wilt thou be greater, that sin may grow less, and that
my Beloved may have many fervent and ardent lovers who
will praise Him and never shrink from extolling His
honours?”

210. The Lover tempted Love to see if he would remain
in his mind though he remembered not his Beloved; and
his heart ceased to think and his eyes to weep. So his love
vanished, and the Lover was perplexed and speechless. And
he asked all men if they had seen Love.

211. Love and loving, Lover and Beloved are so straitly
united in the Beloved that they are one aCtuality in Essence.
And Lover and Beloved are entities distinét, which agree
without contrariety or diversity of essence. Wherefore the
Beloved is to be loved above all other objects of affection.

212. “Say, O Fool! Wherefore hast thou so great
love?’’ He answered: “ Because long and perilous is the
journey which I make in search of my Beloved, and I must
seek Him bearing a great burden and journey with all
speed. And none of these things can be accomplished
without great love.”

213. The Lover watched and fasted, wept, gave alms,
and travelled afar that the Will of the Beloved might be
moved to inspire His subjects with love to honour His
Name.!

214. If love suffices not in the Lover to move his Be-
loved to pity and pardon, the love of the Beloved suffices
to give to His creatures grace and benediction.

1 Some versions add: But the Lover considered that water does not by
nature grow hot, nor mount on high, unless it be first heated. ‘Therefore

he prayed the Beloved that He would deign first to warm him in his journeys,
alms and vigils with the heat of love, that he might accomplish his desires.

443

BLANQUERNA

21s. “ Say, O Fool! How canst thou be most like to
thy Beloved?” He answered: “ By comprehending and
loving with all my power the virtues of my Beloved.”

216. They asked the Lover if his Beloved had defect of
aught. ‘‘ Yea,” he answered, “ of those who will love and
praise Him, and extol His valour.”

217. The Beloved chastened the heart of His Lover
with rods of love, to make him love the tree whence He
plucks the rods wherewith He chaétens His lovers. And
this is that tree whereon He suffered grief and dishonour
and death, that He might bring back to love of Him those
lovers whom He had lost.

218. The Lover met his Beloved, and saw Him to be
very noble and powerful and worthy of all honour. And
he cried: ‘“ How strange a thing it is that so few among
men know and love and honour Thee as Thou deservest ! ”’
And the Beloved answered him and said: “‘ Greatly has
man grieved Me; for I created him to know Me, love Me,
and honour Me, and yet, of every thousand, but a hundred
fear and love Me; and ninety of these hundred fear Me
lest I should condemn them to Hell, and ten love Me that
I may grant them Glory; hardly is there one who loves Me
for My goodness and nobility.” When the Lover heard
these words, he wept bitterly for the dishonour paid to his
Beloved; and he said: ‘“‘ Ah, Beloved, how much hast
Thou given to man and how greatly hast Thou honoured
him! Why then has man thus forgotten Thee?”

219. The Lover was praising his Beloved, and he said
that He had transcended place, because He is in a place
where place is not. And therefore, when they asked the
Lover where his Beloved was, he replied: ‘‘ He is, but
none knows where.” Yet he knew that his Beloved was in
his remembrance.

220. The Beloved with His merits bought a slave, and
made him to suffer griefs and thoughts, sighs and tears,
444

-—_—

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

And He asked him: ‘‘ What wilt thou eat and drink?”
The slave replied: “‘ That which Thou wilt.” ‘“ Wherein
wilt thou be clothed?” “ In that which Thou desirest.”
“ Hast thou then no remnant of self-will? ” asked the Be-
loved. He answered: “A subject and a slave has none
other will than to obey his Lord and his Beloved.”

221. The Beloved enquired of His Lover if he had
patience. He answered: ‘“‘ All things please me, and there-
fore I need not to have patience, for he that has no dominion
over his will cannot be impatient.”

222. Love gave himself to whom he would; and since
he gave himself to few and inspired few with fervent love,
being not constrained, therefore the Lover cried out on
Love, and accused him before the Beloved. But Love made
his defence and said: “ I strive not against free will, for I
desire my lovers to have great merit and great glory.”

223. There was great strife and discord between the
. Lover and Love, because the Lover was wearied at the trials
- which Love made him to bear. And they debated whether
Love or the Lover was to blame. So they came to be
judged of the Beloved; and He chastened the Lover with

griefs and rewarded him with increase of love.

224. There was a contention whether Love had more
of thought than of patience. And the Lover resolved the
contention, saying that Love is engendered in thought and
nourished with patience.

225. The Lover has for neighbours the virtues of the
Beloved; and the neighbours of the Beloved are the
thoughts of His Lover, and the trials and the tears which
he bears for the sake of Love.

226. The will of the Lover desired to soar on high, that
he might greatly love his Beloved; so he commanded the
understanding to soar as high as it might; and even so did
the understanding command the memory, so that all three

445

BLANQUERNA
mounted to the contemplation of the Beloved in His
honours.

227. The will of the Lover left him and gave itself up
to the Beloved. And the Beloved gave it into the captivity
of the Lover, that he might love and serve Him.

228. The Lover said: ‘‘O let not my Beloved think
that I have left Him to love another, for my love has united
me wholly to One, and to One alone.” The Beloved
answered and said: “‘ Let not My Lover think that I am
loved and served by him alone; for I have many lovers who
have loved Me more fervently and for longer than he.”’

229. Said the Lover to his Beloved: ‘“‘O my Beloved,
that art worthy of all love, Thou hast taught and accus-
tomed mine eyes to see and mine ears to hear of Thy
honours. And these have accustomed my heart to thoughts
which have brought tears to my eyes and to my body grief.”
The Beloved answered the Lover: “ Had I not taught and
guided thee so, thy name had not been written in the book
of those who shall come to eternal blessing, whose names
are wiped out from the book of such as shall go to eternal
woe.”

230. In the heart of the Lover are gathered the per-
fections of the Beloved, increasing his thoughts and trials,
so that he had altogether died if the Beloved had increased
in him any further the thoughts of His greatness.

231. The Beloved came to sojourn in the hostelry of the
Lover; and His Lover made Him a bed of thoughts, and
there served Him sighs and tears; and the Beloved paid
His reckoning with memories.

232. Love put trials and joys together into the thoughts
of the Lover, and the joys made complaint of that union
and accused Love before the Beloved. But when He had
parted them from the torments which Love gives to his
orl behold, they vanished and were gone,

44

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

233. The marks of the love which the Lover has to his
Beloved are, in the beginning, tears; in the continuance,
tribulations; and, in the end, death. And with these
marks does the Lover preach before the lovers of his
Beloved.

234. The Lover went into solitude; and his heart was
accompanied by thoughts, his eyes by tears, and his body
by afflictions and fasts. But when the Lover returned to
the companionship of men, these things aforementioned
forsook him, and the Lover remained quite alone in the
company of many people.

235. Love is an ocean; its waves are troubled by the
winds; it has no port or shore. The Lover perished in this
ocean, and with him perished his torments, and the work
of his fulfilment began.

236. ““ Say, O Fool! What is love?”? He answered:

Love is a working together of theory and practice towards
one end, to the which in like manner moves the fulness of
the will of the Lover, that men may honour and serve his
Beloved.” Think you now that the Lover’s will accords
truly with this end when he longs to be with his
Beloved ?

237. They asked the Lover: “ Who is thy Beloved?”
He answered: “‘ He that makes me to love, desire, faint,
sigh, weep, endure reproaches, suffer and die.”

238. They asked the Beloved: “‘ Who is Thy Lover?”
He answered: “‘ He that fears naught so that he may
honour and praise My Name, and renounces all things to
obey My commandments and counsels.”

239. “‘ Say, O Fool! Which is the heavier and more
grievous burden—the trials of love, or the trials of such as
love not?”’ And he answered: ‘‘ Go, enquire of those that
do penance for the love of their Beloved, and of those that
do penance from fear of the pains of hell.”

447

BLANQUERNA
240. The Lover slept, and Love died, for he had naught

whereon to live. The Lover wakened, and Love revived in
the thoughts which the Lover sent to his Beloved.

241. The Lover said: ‘‘ The infused science comes from
the will, devotion and prayer; and acquired science comes
from study and understanding.” Which of the two, then,
think you, is the more proper and more pleasing to the
Lover, and which possesses he the more perfeétly ?

242. “ Say, O Fool! Whence hast thou thy needs?”
He answered: “From thoughts, from longing, from
adoration, from trials and from perseverance.” ‘‘ And
whence hast thou all these things?’ He answered: ‘‘ From
love.” ‘‘ And whence hast thou love?”’ “ From my Be-
loved.” ‘‘ And whence hast thou thy Beloved?”’ “ From
Himself alone.”

243. ‘‘ Say, O Fool! Wilt thou be free of all things?”
He answered: ‘‘ Yea, save only of my Beloved.” ‘ Wilt
thou be a prisoner?”’ ‘Yea, of sighs and thoughts, of
trials, perils, exiles, tears, that I may serve my Beloved, for
to praise His exceeding valour was I created.”

244. Love tormented the Lover, for the which cause he
wept and made complaint. His Beloved called him to come
to Him, and be healed; and the nearer came the Lover to
his Beloved, the more grievously did love torment him, for
he felt the greater love; but the more he felt of love, the
greater was his joy, and the more perfe@lly did the Beloved
heal him of his troubles.

245. Love fell sick, and the Lover tended him with
patience, perseverance, obedience and hope. Love grew
well, and the Lover fell sick; and he was healed by his
Beloved, Who made him to remember His virtues and His
honours.

246. “ Say, O Fool! What is solitude?’”? He an-
swered: “‘ It is solace and companionship between Lover
448

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

and Beloved.” ‘‘ And what are solace and companion-
ship?’ “Solitude in the heart of the Lover, when he
remembers naught save only his Beloved.”

247. They asked the Lover: “ In which is there greater
peril, whether in trials borne for love’s sake or in pleasures?”
The Lover took counsel with his Beloved, and answered:
“ The perils that come through afflictions are the perils of
impatience; and those that come through pleasures are the
perils of ignorance.”

248. The Beloved gave Love his freedom, and allowed
men to take him to themselves as much as they would; but
scarce one was found who would take him. And for this
cause the Lover wept, and was sad at the dishonour which
is paid to Love in this world by the ungrateful among men
and by false lovers.

249. Love destroyed all that was in the heart of his
faithful Lover that he might live and have free course
therein; and the Lover would have died had he not had
remembrance of his Beloved.

250. The Lover had two thoughts: the one was of the
Essence and the Virtues of his Beloved, whereon he thought
daily, and the other was of the works of his Beloved.
Which of these, thinkest thou, was the more excellent and
_ the more pleasing to the Beloved f

251. The Lover died, by reason of his exceeding great
love. The Beloved buried him in his country, wherein the
Lover rose again, From which, thinkest thou, received the
Lover the greater blessing, whether from his death or from
his resurrection ?

252. In the prison-house of the Beloved were evils,
perils, griefs, dishonours and trials, that the Lover might
not be impeded from praising the honours of his Beloved,
and filling with love those men that hold Him in con-
tempt.

2F 449

BLANQUERNA

253. One day the Lover was in presénce of many men
whom his Beloved had in this world too greatly honoured,
because they dishonoured Him in their thoughts. These
men despised the Beloved and mocked His servants. The
Lover wept, tare his hair, struck his face and rent his
clothing. And he cried in a loud voice: ‘‘ Was ever so
great a sin committed as to despise my Beloved ?”’

264. “Say, O Fool! Wouldst thou fain die?” He
answered: “‘ Yea, to the pleasures of this world and the
thoughts of the unhappy sinners who forget and dishonour
my Beloved; in whose thoughts I would have no part nor
lot, since my Beloved has no part in them.”

255. “If thou speakest truth, O Fool, thou wilt be
beaten by men, mocked, reproved, tormented and killed.”
He answered: “‘ From these words it follows that if I spake
falsehoods I should be praised, loved, served and honoured
by men, and cast out by lovers of my Beloved.”

256. False flatterers were speaking ill of the Lover one
day in the presence of his Beloved. ‘The Lover was patient,
and the Beloved shewed His justice, wisdom and power.
And the Lover preferred to be blamed and reproved in
this wise, than to be one of those that falsely accused
him.

257. The Beloved planted many seeds in the heart of
His Lover, but one of them only took life and put forth
leaf and gave flower and fruit. And it is a question
if from this single fruit there may come forth divers
seeds.

258. Far above Love is the Beloved; far beneath it is
the Lover; and Love, which lies between these two, makes
the Beloved to descend to the Lover, and the Lover to rise
toward the Beloved. And this ascending and descending
are the beginning and the life of that love whereby the Lover
suffers and the Beloved is served.
45°

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

259. On the right side of Love Stands the Beloved, and
on the left side is the Lover; and thus he cannot reach the
Beloved unless he pass through Love.

260. Before Love stands the Beloved, and beyond the
Beloved is the Lover; so that the Lover cannot reach Love
unless his thoughts and desires have first passed through
the Beloved.

261. The Beloved made for His Lover Two like unto
Himself to be equally beloved in honour and valour. And
the Lover conceived equal love for all Three, albcit love is
one only in significance of the essential unity of One in

Three.

262. The Beloved clothed Himself in the raiment of
His Lover, that he might be His companion in glory for
ever. So the Lover desired to wear crimson garments daily,
that his dress might be more like to the dress of his Beloved.

263. “Say, O Fool! What did thy Beloved before the
world was?’ Heanswered: “‘ My Beloved was,—because
of His Nature and His divers properties, eternal, personal
and infinite, wherein are Lover and Beloved.”

264. The Lover wept and was sad, when he saw how
the unbelievers were losing his Beloved through ignorance ;
but he rejoiced in the justice of his Beloved, Who punishes
those that know Him and are disobedient to Him. Which,
think you, was greater, whether his sorrow or his joy? And
was his joy greater when he saw his Beloved honoured than
his sorrow at seeing Him despised ?

265. The Lover contemplated his Beloved in the greatest
diversity and harmony of virtues; and in the greatest con-
trariety of virtues and vices; and again in His Being and
perfection, which have greater harmony between themselves
than non-existence and imperfection.

266. The diversity and harmony which the Lover found
in the Beloved revealed to him His secrets, to wit, His

451

BLANQUERNA

plurality and unity, to the greater concordance of essence
without contrariety.

267. They said to the Lover: “If corruption, which is
contrary to being, in that it is opposed to generation, which
is the contrary of non-existence, were eternally corrupting
and corrupted, it would be impossible that non-existence or
end should harmonise with corruption or the corrupted.”
By these words the Lover saw in his Beloved eternal
generation.

268. If that which increases the love of the Lover for
his Beloved were falseness, that which diminished this love
would be truth. And if this were so, it would follow that
there would be defe&t of the great and the true in the
Beloved, and that there would be in Him harmony with the
false and the. mean.

269. The Lover praised his Beloved, and said that if in
Him were the greatest degree of perfection and the greatest
possible freedom from imperfection, his Beloved must be
simple and pure actuality in essence and in operation. And
while the Lover praised his Beloved thus, there was revealed
to him the Trinity of his Beloved.

270. In the numbers i and i the Lover found greater
harmony than between any others, because by these num-
bers every bodily form passed from non-existence to exist-
ence. And by considering this harmony of number, the
Lover came to the contemplation of the Unity and the
Trinity of his Beloved.

271. The Lover extolled the power, the wisdom and the
will of his Beloved, Who had created all things, save only
sin; and yet, but for His power and wisdom and will, had
sin not existed. But neither the power, the wisdom nor
the will of the Beloved are an occasion of sin.

272. The Lover praised and loved his Beloved, for He
had created him and given him all things; and he praised
452

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

and loved Him too because it pleased Him to take his form
and nature. And it may be asked: “ Which praise and
which love had more of perfection?”

273. Love tempted the Lover concerning wisdom, and
asked him whether the Beloved showed the greater love in
taking his nature, or in redeeming him. And the Lover
was perplexed, and replied at last that the Redemption was
necessary to put away unhappiness, and the Incarnation to
bestow happiness and bliss. And this reply provoked the
question again: ‘‘ Wherein was the greater love?”

274. The Lover went from door to door asking alms, to
keep in mind the love of his Beloved for His servants, and
to practise humility, poverty and patience, which are virtues
well-pleasing to the Beloved.

275. They asked pardon of the Lover, for the love of his
Beloved; and the Lover not only pardoned them but gave
them himself and his possessions.

276. With tears in his eyes the Lover described the
Passion and the pains which his Beloved bore for love of
him; and with sad and heavy thoughts he wrote down the
words which he had related; and by mercy and hope he
was comforted.

277. Love and the Beloved came to see the Lover, who
slept. The Beloved cried out to His Lover, and Love
wakened him; and the Lover was obedient to Love and
made answer to his Beloved.

278. The Beloved taught His Lover how to love; and
Love instructed him in perils! ; and Patience, to bear
afflictions for the love of Him to whom he had given him-
self to be a servant.

2179. The Beloved asked men if they had seen His Lover,
and they asked Him: ‘“‘ What are the qualities of Thy

1 g perillar, “ in the undergoing of perils.” D has a parlar, “ in speech.”

453

BLANQUERNA

Lover?’’ And the Beloved said: ‘“‘ My Lover is ardent
yet fearful; rich and yet poor; joyful, sad and pensive;
and every day he grieves because of his love.”

280. They asked the Lover: ‘‘ Wilt thou sell thy
desire?’’? He answered: “I have sold it already to my
Beloved, for such a price as would buy the whole world.”

281. ‘‘ Preach, thou, O Fool, and speak concerning thy
Beloved; weep and fast.” So the Lover renounced the
world, and went forth with love to seek his Beloved, and
praised Him in those places wherein He was dishonoured.

282. The Lover builded and made a fair city wherein
his Beloved might dwell; of love, thoughts, tears, com-
plaints and griefs he builded it; with joy, hope and devo-
tion he adorned it; and with faith, justice, prudence, forti-
tude and temperance he furnished it.

283. The Lover drank of love at the fountain of his
Beloved, and there the Beloved washed the feet of His
Lover, though many a time he had forgotten and despised
His honours, and the world had suffered thereby.

284. “Say, O Fool! What is sin?’’ He answered:
“Tt is intention directed and turned away from the final
Intention and Reason, for the which all things have been
created by my Beloved.”

285. The Lover saw that the world is a thing created,
since eternity is more in harmony with his Beloved, who
is Infinite Essence in greatness and in all perfe@tion, than
with the world, which is a finite quantity; and therefore
in the justice of his Beloved the Lover saw that His
eternity must have been before time and finite quantities
were.

286. The Lover defended his Beloved against those who
said that the world is eternal, saying that the justice of his
Beloved would not be perfeét, if He reStored not to every
soul its own body, and for this no place or material order
454

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

would suffice; nor, if the world were eternal, could it be
ordered for one end only; and yet, if it were not so ordered,
there would be wanting in his Beloved perfection of wisdom
and will.

287. “Say, O Fool! Wherein hast thou knowledge
that the Catholic Faith is true, and that the beliefs of the
Jews and Saracens are falsehood and error?” He an-
swered: “In the ten conditions of the Book of the Gentile
and the Three Wise Men.’’1

288. “Say, O Fool! Wherein is the beginning of
wisdom?’’ He answered: “ In faith and devotion, which
are a ladder whereby understanding may rise to a compre-
hension of the secrets of my Beloved.” ‘‘ And wherein
have faith and devotion their beginning?’’ He answered:
“In my Beloved, Who illumines faith and kindles devo-
tion.”

289. They asked the Lover: “‘ Which thing is greater—
whether the possible or the impossible?” He answered:
“The possible is greater in the creature, and the impos-
sible in my Beloved, since possibility and power are in
agreement, and impossibility and actuality.”

290. “Say, O Fool! Which thing is the greater—
whether difference or harmony?” He answered: “ Save
in my Beloved, difference is greater in plurality, and har-
mony in unity; but in my Beloved they are equal in
difference and in unity.”

291. “* Say, O Lover, what is valour?’’ He answered:
“It is the opposite of that which this world holds to be
valour, and which false and vainglorious lovers desire; for
they go after valour, and in truth have it not,? being per-
secutors of true valour.”

1 See p. 366, above. , ;
2 gui volen valer havents desvalor, "This theme is expounded in Chap.

XLVIII, above,
455

BLANQUERNA . |

292. “Say, O Fool! Hast thou seen one without his
reason?” He answered: “I have seen a Bishop who had
many cups on his table, and many plates and knives of
silver, and in his chamber had many garments and a great
bed, and in his coffers great wealth—and at the gates of
his palace but few poor.”

293. “ Knowest thou, O Fool, what is evil?’”’ He
answered: ‘‘ Evil thoughts.” “And what is loyalty?”
“It is fear of my Beloved, born of charity and of shame,
which men reproach.” ‘‘ And what is honour?” He
answered: “ It is to think upon my Beloved, to desire Him
and to praise His honours.”

294. The trials and tribulations that the Lover endured
for love’s sake made him weary and inclined towards 1m-
patience; and the Beloved reproved him with His honours
and His promises, saying that he whom either trouble or
happiness affected knew but little of love. So the Lover
was contrite and wept, and he begged his Beloved to restore
his love again.

295. “Say, O Fool! What is love?” He answered:
‘‘ Love is that which throws the free into bondage, and to
those that are in bonds gives liberty.”” And who can say
whether love is nearer to liberty or to bondage?

296. The Beloved called His Lover, and he answered
Him, saying: ‘‘ What wilt Thou, O Beloved, Thou that
art the sight of my eyes, thought of my thoughts, love of
my love and fulness of my perfections,—yea, and the source
of my beginnings ?”’

297. “ O Beloved,” said the Lover, ‘‘ I come to Thee,
and I walk in Thee, for Thou dost call me. I go to make
contemplation in contemplation, with contemplation of
Thy contemplation. In Thy virtue am I, and with Thy
virtue I come to Thy virtue, whence I take virtue. And I
oo Thee with Thy greeting which is my greeting in Thy
45

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

greeting, by the which I hope for eternal greeting in bless-
ing of Thy blessing, wherein I am blessed in my blessing.”

298. “ High art Thou, O Beloved, in Thy heights, to
the which Thou dost exalt my will, which is exalted in Thy
exaltation with Thy height. And this exalts in my remem-
brance my understanding, which is exalted in Thy exalta-
tion, that it may know Thy honours, and that the will may
have thereof exaltation of love and the memory may have
high remembrance.”

299. “ O Beloved, Thou art the glory of my glory, and
with Thy glory in Thy glory, dost Thou give glory to my
glory, the which has glory of Thy glory. And by this Thy
glory both trials and griefs are in equal measure glory to
me, for they come to me to honour Thy glory with the joys
and the thoughts that come to me from Thy glory.”

300. ““O Beloved! In the prison-house of love dost
Thou hold me enthralled by Thy love, the which has
enamoured me of itself, through itself and in itself; for
Thou art naught else save love, wherein Thou makest me
to be alone, with Thy love and Thy honours for my only
company. For Thou alone art in myself alone, who am
alone with my thoughts, because Thy uniqueness? 1n virtues
makes me to praise and honour its valour without fear of
them that know Thee not and have Thee not alone in their
love.”

301. “ Solace of all solace, Beloved, art Thou; for in
Thee I solace my thoughts with Thy solace which is solace
and comfort of my griefs and my tribulations, which are
caused by Thy solace, when Thou solacest not the ignorant
with Thy solace, and fillest not more with love those that
know Thy solace that they may honour Thy honours.”

302. The Lover made complaint to his Lord concerning
his Beloved, and to his Beloved concerning his Lord. And

1 The play upon words would require “‘ a/oneness.”

457

BLANQUERNA

the Lord and the Beloved said: ‘‘ Who is this that makes
division in Us, that are One only?’ The Lover answered
and said: ‘It is pity, which belongs to the Lord, and
tribulation, which comes through the Beloved.”

303. The Lover was in peril in the great ocean of love,
and he trusted in his Beloved, Who came to him with
troubles, thoughts, tears and weeping, sighs and griefs;
for the ocean was of love, and of honour that is due to His
honours.

304. The Lover rejoiced in the Being of his Beloved,
for (said he) “from His Being is all other Being derived,
and by It sustained, and constrained and bound to honour
and serve the Being of my Beloved. By no being can He be
condemned or destroyed, or made less or greater.’”’ “What
is the Being of thy Beloved?” He answered: “ It is a
bright ray throughout all things, even as the sun which
shines over all the world. For if it withdraw its brightness,
it leaves all things in darkness, and when it shines forth it
brings the day. Even more so is my Beloved.”

305. “O Beloved, in Thy greatness dost’ Thou make
my desires, my thoughts and my afflictions great; for so
great art Thou that all things which have remembrance and
understanding and joy of Thee are great; and Thy great-
ness makes all things small which are contrary to Thy
honours and commandments.”

306. “In Eternity my Beloved has beginning, and has
had beginning and will have beginning, and in Eternity
He has no beginning neither has had nor will have begin-
ning. And these beginnings are no contradi€tion in my
Beloved, because He is eternal, and has in Himself Unity

and Trinity.”

307. ‘‘My Beloved is one, and in His unity my thoughts
and my love are united in one will; the unity of my Beloved
is the source of all wnities and all pluralities ; and the
458

“BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

plurality that is in my Beloved is the source of all pluralities
and unities.”’

308. “ Sovereign Good is the good of my Beloved, Who
is Good of my good. For my Beloved is Good without
other good; for, were He not so, my good were of another
Sovereign Good. And since this is not so, let all my good,
therefore, hereafter in this life, be to the honour of the
Sovereign Good, for even so beseems it.”’

309. “ Thou knowest my sinfulness, O Beloved; be
Thou merciful, then, and pardon. Thy knowledge is
greater than mine; yet even | know Thy pardon and love,
since Thou hast made me to have contrition and grief, and
the desire to suffer death that Thy Name may be thereby
exalted.”

310. “ Thy power, O Beloved, can save me through
Thy goodness, mercy and pardon, yet it can condemn me
through Thy justice, and my failures and imperfedtions.
But let Thy power be perfected in me, for it is wholly
perfection, whether it bring salvation or eternal punish-
ment.”

311. ‘““O Beloved, Truth visits my contrite heart, and
draws water from mine eyes, whensoe’er my will loves her;
and since Thy truth, O Beloved, is sovereign, it exalts my
will, that it may do honour to Thy honours, and bears it
down, that it may hate my sins,”

312. “ Never was aught true that was not in my Beloved,
and false is that which is not in my Beloved, and false will
be that which will not be in my Beloved. Wherefore all
that will be, or was, or is, must needs be true if my
Beloved is therein; and false is that which is in truth, if
my Beloved is not therein, without any contradiction follow-
ing therefrom.”

313. The Beloved created, and the Lover destroyed.
The Beloved judged, and the Lover wept, Then the Be-

459

BLANQUERNA
loved redeemed him, and again the Lover had glory. The

Beloved finished His work, and the Lover remained for
ever in the companionship of his Beloved.

314. By verdant paths of feeling, imagination, under-
Sanding and will, the Lover went in search of his Beloved.
And in those paths the Lover endured perils and griefs for
the sake of his Beloved, that he might exalt his will and
understanding to his Beloved, Who wills that His lovers
may comprehend and love Him exceedingly.

315. The perfe€tion of the Beloved moved His Lover
to be, and his own shortcomings moved him to be no more.
Which of these two forces, think you, has by nature the
greater power over the Lover?

316. “ Thou hast placed me, O Beloved, between my
evil and Thy good. On Thy part may there be pity,
mercy, patience, humility, pardon, restoration and help;
on mine let there be contrition, perseverance and re-
membrance with sighs and weeping and tears for Thy
sacred Passion.”

317. ““O Beloved, Thou that makest me to love! If
Thou aidest me not, why dids&t Thou will to create me?
And why didst Thou endure such grief for my sake and
bear Thy so grievous Passion? Since Thou didst help me
thus to rise, Beloved, help me also to descend to the remem-
brance and hatred of my faults and sins, that my thoughts
may the better rise again to desire, honour and praise Thy
valour.”

318. “ My will, O Beloved, hast Thou made free to
love Thy honour or despise Thy valour, that in my will
my love to Thee may be increased.

319. ‘In granting me this liberty, O Beloved, hast Thou
put my will into danger. Remember, then, Thy Lover in
this danger, who places in servitude his free will, praises

Thy honour, and increases in his body grief and tears.”
460

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

320. ““O Beloved! Never from Thee came fault nor
sin to Thy Lover, nor can Thy Lover attain to perfection
but through Thy grace and pardon! Then, since the
Lover has Thee in such possession, do Thou remember
him in his tribulations and perils.”

321. “O Beloved, Who in one Name, Jesus Christ,
art named both God and Man, by that Name my will must
needs adore Thee as God and Man. And if Thou, Beloved,
hast so greatly honoured Thy Lover, through none of his
merits, who names Thee thus, and wills Thee to be thus
named, wherefore honourest Thou not so many ignorant
men, who knowingly have been less guilty of dishonouring
Thy Name, Jesus Christ, than has this Thy Lover?”

322. The Lover wept, and he spake to his Beloved in
these words: ‘‘O Beloved, never wert Thou sparing or
aught but liberal to Thy Lover, in giving him being, in re-
deeming him and in granting him many creatures to serve
him. Then wherefore, O Beloved, Thou who art sovereign
liberality, shouldst Thou be sparing to Thy Lover of tears,
thoughts, griefs, wisdom and love that he may do honour
to Thy Name? So then, O Beloved, Thy Lover asks of
Thee long life, that he may receive of Thee many of the
gifts aforesaid.”

323. ‘‘O Beloved, if Thou dost help just men against
their mortal enemies, help to increase my thoughts and
desires for Thy honour. And if Thou dost help sinners to
lead just lives, help Thy Lover that he may sacrifice his will
to Thy praise, and his body for a testimony of love in the
path of martyrdom.”

324. “My Beloved makes no difference between
humility, humble and humbled, for all these are humility
in pure aétuality.”” Wherefore the Lover reproves Pride,
for he desires to raise to the heights of his Beloved those

1 doe perdé. See p. 252, above.
461

BLANQUERNA

whom He has so greatly honoured in this world, but
whom Pride has clothed with hypocrisy, vainglory and
vanities,

325. Humility has humbled the Beloved to the depths
of the Lover, through the contrition, and likewise through
the devotion, of the Lover. And it is a question, in which
of these two manners the Beloved has humbled Himself the
more.

326. The Beloved had mercy upon His Lover, because
of His perfeét love, and because of His Lover’s needs.
Which of these two reasons, think you, moved the Beloved
the more strongly to forgive the sins of His Lover?

327. Our Lady and the angels and saints in glory
prayed to my Beloved. And when she remembered the
errors wherein the world lies through ignorance, she re-
membered also the great justice of my Beloved, and the
great ignorance of His lovers.

328. The Lover lifted up the powers of his soul, and
mounted the ladder of humanity to glory in the Divine
Nature; and by the Divine Nature the powers of his soul
descended, to glory in the human nature of his Beloved.

329. The straiter are the paths whereby the Lover jour-
neys to his Beloved, the vaster is his love; and the straiter
his love, the broader are the paths. So that however it be
the Lover receives love, trials and griefs, joys and consola-
tions from his Beloved.

330. Love comes from love, thoughts come from griefs,
and tears from griefs likewise; and love leads to love, as
thoughts lead to tears and griefs to sighs. And the Beloved
watches His Lover, who bears all these affictions for His
love.

331. The desires of the Lover and his memories of the
nobility of his Beloved kept vigils and went on journeys and

pilgrimages. And they brought to the Lover graces which
462

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

lit up his understanding with splendour, whereby his will
increased in love.

332. With his imagination the Lover formed and
pictured the Countenance of his Beloved in bodily wise,
and with his understanding he beautified It in spiritual
things; and with his will he worshipped It in all creatures.

333. The Lover purchased a day of tears with another
day of thoughts; and he sold a day of love for a day of
tribulations; and both his thoughts and his love were
increased.

334. The Lover was in a far country, and he forgot his
Beloved, but was sad at the absence of his lord, his wife,
his children and his friends. But soon the memory of his
Beloved returned to him, that he might be comforted, and
that his exile might cause him neither yearning nor sorrow.

335. The Lover heard the words of his Beloved; his
understanding beheld Him in them; his will had pleasure
in that which he heard; and his memory recalled the
virtues and the promises of his Beloved.

336. The Lover heard men speak evil of his Beloved,
and in this evil-speaking his understanding perceived the
justice and patience of his Beloved; for His justice would
punish the evil-speakers, while His patience would await
their contrition and repentance. In which of these two,
think you, did the Lover believe more earnestly ?

337. The Lover fell sick, and made his testament with
the counsel of his Beloved. His sins and faults he be-
queathed to contrition and penance; worldly pleasures to
contempt. To his eyes he left tears; to his heart sighs
and love; to his understanding the graces of his Beloved,
and to his memory the Passion which his Beloved endured
for love of him. And to his aétivity he bequeathed the
guidance of unbelievers, who go to their doom through

ignorance,
463

BLANQUERNA

338. The scent of flowers brought to the Lover’s mind
the evil Stench of riches and meanness, of lasciviousness,
of ignorance and pride. The taste of sweet things recalled
to him the bitterness of temporal possessions and of enter-
ing and quitting this world. The enjoyment of earthly
pleasures made him feel how quickly this world passes, and
how the delights which are here so pleasant are the occasion
of eternal torments.

339. The Lover endured hunger and thirst, heat and
cold, poverty and nakedness, sickness and tribulation; and
he would have died had he not had remembrance of his
Beloved, Who healed him with hope and memory, with the
renunciation of this world and contempt for the revilings
of men,

340. The Lover made his bed between trials and joys:
in joys he lay down to sleep and in trials he awakened,
Which of these two, think you, is more proper to the bed
of the Lover ?

341. In anger the Lover lay down to sleep, for he feared
the revilings of men; in patience he awakened, remember-
ing the praises of his Beloved. Of which, think you, had
the Lover the greater shame—whether of his Beloved or
of men?

342. The Lover thought upon death, and he was afraid,
until he remembered the city of his Beloved, to the which
city love and death are the gates and the entrance.

343. The Lover made complaint to his Beloved con-
cerning the temptations which came to him daily to affli@
his thoughts, And the Beloved made answer, saying that
temptations are an occasion whereby man may have re-
course to memory, making remembrance of God and loving
His honours and perfeétions.

344. The Lover lost a jewel which he greatly prized,
and was sorely distressed, until his Beloved put to him this
464

ye
—_—

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED ”

question: “‘ Which thing profiteth thee the more, whether
the jewel that thou hadst or thy patience in all the works
of thy Beloved?”

345. The Lover fell asleep as he thought upon the trials
and the hindrances which he met in serving his Beloved;
and he feared lest through those hindrances his works
might be lost. But the Beloved sent consciousness to him,
and he awakened to the merits and powers of his Beloved.

346. The Lover had to make long journeys over roads
that were rough and hard; and the time came when he
should set out, carrying the heavy burden that Love makes
his lovers to bear. So the Lover unburdened his soul of
the cares and pleasures of this world, that his body might
bear the weight with more ease, and his soul journey along
those roads in company with its Beloved.

347. Before the Lover, one day, they spake ill of the
Beloved, and the Lover made no reply neither defended his
Beloved. Which, think you, was the more t2 be blamed,
the men who spake ill of the Beloved, or the Lover who was
silent and defended Him not?

348. As the Lover contemplated his Beloved, his under-
Standing conceived subtleties and his will was kindled with
love. In which of the two, think you, grew his memory
more fruitful in thinking on his Beloved?

349. With fervour and fear the Lover journeyed abroad
to honour his Beloved. Fervour bore him along and fear
preserved him from danger. And while the Lover was
journeying thus, he found sighs and tears, which brought
him greetings from his Beloved. Through which of these
four companions, think you, received the Lover the greatest
consolation in his Beloved ?

350. The Lover gazed upon himself that he might be a
mirror wherein to behold his Beloved; and he gazed upon
his Beloved, as in a mirror wherein he might have know-

26 465

BLANQUERNA

ledge of himself. Which of these two mirrors, think you,
was the nearer to his understanding?

351. Theology and Philosophy, Medicine and Law met
the Lover, who enquired of them if they had seen his Be-
loved. The first wept, the second was doubtful, but the
other two were glad. What, think you, was the meaning
of each of these happenings to the Lover that was seeking
his Beloved ?

352. Full of tears and anguish the Lover went in search
of his Beloved, by the paths of the senses and likewise by
intelle€tual roads. Into which of these two ways, think you,
did he enter first, as he went after his Beloved? And
in which of them did the Beloved reveal Himself to him
the more openly?

353. At the Day of Judgment the Beloved will cause all
that men have given Him in this world to be placed on one
side, and on the other side all that they have given to the
world. Thus shall it be clearly seen how truly! they have
loved Him, and which of their two gifts is the greater and
nobler. '

354. The will of the Lover was enamoured of itself, and
the understanding asked: “‘ Is it more like the Beloved to
love oneself or to love the Beloved? For the Beloved is
worthier of love than anything beside.”” With what answer,
think you, could the will make reply to the understanding
most truly ?

355. “ Say, O Fool! What is the greatest and noblest
love to be found in the creature?’ He answered: ‘“‘ That
which is one with the Creator.’’ ‘“ And wherefore so?”
“* Because there is naught wherewith the Creator can make
nobler a creature.”

356. One day the Lover was at prayer, and he perceived
that his eyes wept not; and to the end that he might weep

. 1 com coralment, lit. “ how much from their heart,” hence “‘ how truly,”
how sincerely,”

466

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

he bade his thoughts to think upon wealth, and women,
and sons, and meats, and vainglory. And his understand-
ing found that each of the things aforesaid has more men
as servants than has his Beloved. And thereupon were his
eyes wet with tears, and his soul was in sorrow and pain.

357. The Lover was walking pensively, thinking on his
Beloved, and he found on the way many people and great
multitudes who asked him for news. And the Lover, who
was rejoicing in his Beloved, gave them not that which they
asked of him, and said that he could not reply to their
words without departing far from his Beloved.

358. Behind and before was the Lover vested in love,
and he went seeking his Beloved. Love said to him:
“ Whither goest thou, O Lover?” He answered: “I go
to my Beloved, that thou mayest be increased.”

359. “Say, O Fool! What is Religion?” He an-
swered: “* Purity of thought, and longing for death whereby
the Beloved may be honoured, and renouncing the world,
that naught may hinder one from contemplating Him and
speaking truth concerning His honours.”

360. “Say, O Fool! What are trials, plaints, sighs,
tears, afflictions, perils in a Lover?’’ He answered: “ The
joys of the Beloved.” ‘“‘ And why are they so?” “ That
He may be the more deeply loved by reason of them, and
the Lover be the more bounteously rewarded.”

361. They asked the Lover: ‘“‘ Wherein is love the
greater, in the Lover that lives or in the Lover that dies?”
He answered: ‘“‘ In the Lover that dies.” “‘ And where-
fore?’’ “ Because in one that lives for love it may yet be
greater, but in one that dies for Jove it can be no greater.”

362. Two lovers met: the one revealed his Beloved, and
the other comprehended Him. And it was disputed which
of those two was nearer to his Beloved; and in the solution

1 Or “ Within and without was the Lover covered with love.”

467

BLANQUERNA

the Lover took knowledge of the demongtration of the
Trinity.

363. “Say, O Fool! Wherefore speakest thou with
such subtlety?”’? He answered: “ That I may raise my
understanding to the height of the nobility of my Beloved,
and that thereby more men may honour, love and serve

Him.”

364. The Lover drank deeply of the wine of memory,
understanding and love for the Beloved. And that wine
the Beloved made bitter with His tears, and with the weep-
ing of His Lover.

365. Love heated and inflamed the Lover with remem-
brance of his Beloved; and the Beloved cooled his ardour,
with weeping and tears and forgetfulness of the delights of
this world, and the renunciation of vain honours. So his
love grew, when he remembered for Whom he suffered
griefs and afflictions, and for whom the men of the world
bore trials and persecutions.

366. “Say, O Fool! What is this world?” He an-
swered: “It is the prison-house of them that love and
serve my Beloved.” “ And who is he that imprisons
them?”’ He answered: “ Conscience, love, fear, renuncia-
tion and contrition, and the companionship of wilful men;
and the labour that knows no reward, wherein lies punish-
ment.”

Because Blanquerna had to compose the book of the
Art of Contemplation, therefore desired he to end the Book
of the Lover and the Beloved, the which is now ended, to
the glory and praise of our Lord God.

+ Some versions end thus: “ And whois he that freesthem?” ‘‘ Mercy,
pity and justice.” “ And where are they then sent?” ‘‘’'To eternal bliss,
and the joyful company of true lovers, where they shall laud, bless and glorify
the Beloved everlastingly, to whom be ever given praise, honour and glory
throughout all the world.”

468

BEGINNETH THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION

PROLOGUE

So high and excellent is our Sovereign Good, and so low
is man through his guilt and sins, that oftentimes it befalls
a hermit or a holy man to be greatly impeded in lifting up
his soul to contemplate God; and, since an art or method
in this business is of great help therein, Blanquerna fell to
considering how he might make an Art of Contemplation
which should lead him to have devotion in his heart, and
in his eyes weeping and tears, and make his will and under-
Standing the higher rise to the contemplation of God in
His honours and His wonders.

2. When Blanquerna the hermit had considered thus,
he made by art a Book of Contemplation, the which he
divided into twelve parts, namely these: Divine Virtues,
Essence, Unity, Trinity, Incarnation, Pater Noster, Ave
Maria, Commandments, Miserere mei Deus, Sacraments,
Virtues, Vices.

3. The art of this book is that the Divine virtues should
first be contemplated in relation to each other, and that then
they should be contemplated with the other parts of the
book, the soul of the contemplative being fixed upon the
Divine virtues in his memory, understanding and will; and
also that he should learn to unite in his soul the Divine
virtues and the other parts of the book, to the honour and
glory of the Divine virtues, which are these: Goodness,
Greatness, Eternity, Power, Wisdom, Love, Virtue, Truth,
Glory, Perfeétion, Justice, Liberality, Mercy, Humility,
Dominion, Patience.

4. These virtues may be contemplated in divers manners,
one of which is to contemplate one with another, or one
with two or three or more. A second manner is that
whereby man may contemplate these virtues in their rela-
tion with Essence or Unity or Trinity or Incarnation, and

469

BLANQUERNA

so with the other parts of this book. Another manner is
that whereby with these virtues is contemplated Essence or
Unity or Trinity or Incarnation. Another manner is in the
words of the Pater Noster and the Ave Maria, etc. A man
may contemplate God and His works with all the sixteen
virtues or with any of them, according as he would
make his contemplation long or short, and as the matter
of the contemplation befits certain virtues rather than
others.

s. The conditions of this art are that a man should be
suitably disposed toward contemplation and in a fitting
place, for by repletion, or with overmuch grieving, or in a
place wherein is bustle and noise or excess of heat or cold,
his contemplation may be hindered. And the chief con-
dition of all in this art is that a man be not impeded by
temporal cares in his memory, understanding or will, when
he enters upon contemplation.

6. Seeing that we are occupied in treating of other books,
we will but briefly relate the way and manner wherein Blan-
querna followed the art of contemplation. And with the
first part of the book we will first begin.

CHAPTER |

OF THE MANNER WHEREIN BLANQUERNA CONTEMPLATED THE
VIRTUES OF GOD

BLaNnQuERNa rose at midnight and gazed upon the heavens
and the stars, and cast out all things from his thoughts, and
fixed them upon the virtues of God. For he was fain to
contemplate the goodness of God in all the sixteen virtues,
and the sixteen virtues in the goodness of God; for the
which cause, falling on his knees, and raising his hands to
the heavens and his thoughts to God, he spake these words
with his lips and pondered them in his soul with all the
powers of his memory, understanding and will;

479

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

2. “ O Sovereign Good, Thou that art infinitely great
in eternity, power, wisdom, love, virtue, truth, glory, per-
fection, justice, liberality, mercy, humility, dominion,
patience! I adore Thee as I remember, comprehend, love
and speak of Thee and of all these virtues herein named,
which are one thing with Thyself, as Thou art one with
them, one very Essence without difference soever.”

3. “O Sovereign Good, that art so great, Sovereign
Greatness, that art so good! Wert Thou not eternal, Thou
wert not so great a good that my soul could fill its memory
with remembrance of Thee, nor its understanding with
understanding of Thee, nor its will with love of Thee. But
since Thou art infinite and eternal Good, Thou cans fill
my whole soul and every soul with infused grace and bless-
ing, that memory, understanding and love may be given to
Thee, O infinite and eternal Sovereign Good.”’

4. Through the power which Blanquerna remembered
in Sovereign Goodness, he gained power and strength to
raise his consideration above the firmament, and considered
a greatness so exceeding great that it had infinite power of
movement, like unto a flash of light shining in the six
common directions—to wit, above and below, before and
behind, to left and to right; and finding no limit, nor be-
ginning nor end. As Blanquerna thus considered, he
marvelled greatly, the more so when to the consideration
of this goodness he joined that of eternity, which has neither
beginning nor end. And while Blanquerna was wholly
absorbed in this consideration, he remembered how great
a good is that of Divine power, which can be so great and
so everlasting, and whose knowledge and will are infinite
and eternal, as are its virtue, truth, glory, perfe¢tion,
justice, liberality, mercy, humility, dominion and patience.

5. As Blanquerna pursued his contemplation in this wise,
his heart began to burn within him, and his eyes to weep,
at the great joy which he had in remembering, understand-
ing and loving such noble virtues in Sovereign Goodness.

471

BLANQUERNA

But ere he could perfe@ly weep, his understanding de-
scended to the level of the imagination, and he fell to
thinking and doubting how it could be that, before the
world was, God should have justice, liberality, mercy,
humility, dominion; and, through the alliance of under-
Standing and imagination, doubt chilled the warmth of his
heart and the tears in his eyes grew fewer. So Blanquerna
parted understanding and imagination and exalted the
former above the latter, remembering how the Sovereign
Good is infinite in all perfe€tion, and how for this cause,
through His own virtue and glory, He may have and can
have to so great a degree of perfection all the virtues above
named before the world was as well as now that the world
is; only that, while the world was not, there was lacking
any person who might receive from the Sovereign Good the
grace and the influence of these above-named virtues.

6. Greatly now joyed the will of Blanquerna because
his understanding had cast down the imagination which
impeded its working and had soared aloft, leaving the
imagination behind, to comprehend the infinite power of
God, which in justice, liberality, and the like, must needs
have been before the world was; for, were this not so, it
would follow that in Sovereign Goodness there was defect
of greatness, power, eternity and virtue. And since it is
impossible that in God is any defect at all, for that cause
the will set the heart of Blanquerna so fiercely on fire that
his eyes were abundantly filled with tears.

7. While Blanquerna contemplated and wept, his
memory, understanding and will conversed mentally with
each other within his soul, and they found great delight in
the virtues of God, as these words show: ‘‘ Memory,” said
Understanding, ‘‘ what remembrance hast thou of the
goodness, wisdom and love of God? And thou, O Will,
what dost thou love in them?” Memory answered and
said: ‘‘ When I consider in my remembrance how great a
good it is to know oneself to be greater and nobler in know-
472

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

ledge and will than any beside, I feel not so high nor so
great as when I remember the Sovereign Good, Who is
infinite in knowledge and will. And when I consider
eternity, power, virtue, truth, and the rest, then I do feel
myself to be magnified and exalted as I think upon these
things.”” With these words and many others did Memory
reply to Understanding; and Will replied in like manner,
saying that she felt not so great nor high when she loved
the Sovereign Good because He is more loving and wise
than any beside, as when she loved Him because of His
infinite and eternal wisdom and love. After these words,
Understanding said to Memory and Will that her own
State was like to theirs in the contemplation of the Sove-
reign Good.

8. Memory, Understanding and Will agreed among
themselves that they would contemplate the Sovereign Good
in His virtue, truth and glory. Memory recalled the virtue
of the infinite Good, His virtue being infinite in truth and
glory. Understanding comprehended that which Memory
recalled, and Will loved that which Memory recalled and
Understanding comprehended. Once again Memory
turned to remembrance, and recalled the infinite truth of
Sovereign Good, in the which truth are virtue and glory.
And Understanding comprehended infinite glory, which is
in virtue and truth, and our glorious Sovereign Good; and
Will loved this wholly and in the unity of one actuality, in
one and the same perfection.

g. Blanquerna enquired of his Understanding: “* If the
Sovereign Good give me salvation, what wilt thou thereby
comprehend?”’ Understanding answered: “I shall com-
prehend the mercy and humility and liberality of God.”
“ And thou, O Memory, if He condemn me, what wilt thou
remember?’’ He answered: ‘“‘I shall remember the
justice and dominion and perfection and power of God.”
“ And thou, O Will, what wilt thou love?’’ He answered:
“T will love that which Memory recalls, so that I be 1n a

473

BLANQUERNA

place where I may love it; for the virtues which are in the
Sovereign Good are worthy in themselves to be loved.”

10. After these words, Blanquerna remembered his sins,
and comprehended how great a good it is that in God there
is patience; for were there no patience in God, so soon as
man sinned he would be punished and cast out from this
world. And therefore he enquired of his Will: ‘“ What
thanks shall I render to the patience of God which has thus
borne with me?”’ Will answered and said that he should
love justice in his Sovereign Good, even were it possible
that his Understanding should know that he was to be
punished by damnation for his sins. Blanquerna was
greatly pleased at the answer which Will had made; and
with his mouth and with the three powers of his soul he
praised and blessed patience in the Sovereign Good through
all the Divine virtues.

11. In this wise did Blanquerna contemplate the Divine
virtues, from midnight until the hour when he should ring
for matins, and he gave thanks to God because He had
humbled him by guiding him in his contemplation. And
as he was about to cease from contemplation and to ring
for matins, he began to bethink himself that he had not
contemplated the patience of God as highly as the other
virtues, because he had contemplated it in relation to him-
self, as has been declared above. Therefore it behoved him
to turn once more to contemplation, and he said that he
adored and contemplated the patience of God in that it was
one self-same thing with Sovereign goodness and with all
the other virtues, without difference soever. Wherefore
Understanding greatly marvelled how patience could be
one thing in essence with the remaining virtues. But
Memory recalled that in God the virtues have no diversity
the one from the other, but that, since their operations in
the creatures are diverse, they themselves appear diverse,
even as the reflection of a person appears when he looks
into two mirrors, of which one is crooked and the other
474

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

Straight, yet the reflection itself is one, in each of the mirrors,
without diversity soever.

CHAPTER {I

OF THE MANNER IN WHICH BLANQUERNA CONTEMPLATED BY
THREE AND THREE THE VIRTUES OF GOD

’

“ Divine Goodness,” said Blanquerna, “ Thou that art of
infinite greatness in eternity, Thou art the good whence
springs all good beside; from Thy great good comes all
that is good both great and small, and from Thy eternity
comes all that abides. Wherefore in all wherein Thou art
goodness and greatness, and eternity, I adore Thee, call
upon Thee, and love Thee above all that I can understand
and remember. And I pray Thee to make great and abiding
that good which Thou hast granted me, that I may praise
and serve Thee with all that pertains to Thy honour.”

2. ““ Eternal Greatness in power! Far greater art Thou
than I can remember or comprehend or love. My power
rises to Thee, that Thou mayest make it great and abiding,
that I may remember, comprehend and love Thy power
which is infinite and eternal, from whose influence we trust
there may fall upon us grace and blessing, whence we our-
selves may become great and may abide even unto eternity.”

3. ‘“ Eternity, Thou that hast power of knowledge with-
out end or beginning! Thou hast given me a beginning
and created me that I may abide without end. Thou hast
power to save or to damn me. That which Thou wilt do
with me and with others, Thy knowledge eternally knows
and Thy power can accomplish. For in Thy eternity is no
movement or change. No power have I to know how Thou
wilt judge me, for my power and knowledge have a begin-
ning. So, then, may it please Thee, that whatsoever Thou
wilt do with me, my power and knowledge and abidingness
in this world may be to Thy glory and to the praise of
Thine honour,”

475

BLANQUERNA

4. “ Power, that hast all knowledge and will in thyself !
Knowledge, that hast all power and will in thyself! Will,
that hast all power and knowledge in thyself! Take all
my knowledge and power—for already hast Thou taken all
my will—that they may love and serve Thee. Thou, O
Power, canst know and will, inasmuch as Thou art without
increase or diminution or any change soever. Thou,
O Knowledge, dost know even as Thou dost will. And
Thou, O Will, dost will even as Thou dost will in will,
power, and knowledge. Wherefore, since thus it is, and
naught can make it otherwise or different, may grace come
to my power from this great influence, that 1 may ever have
power, knowledge and will to honour Thy power,—to my
knowledge that J may honour Thy knowledge,—and to
my will that I may honour Thy love.”

5. “Wisdom Divine! In Thee are virtue and love.
Thou knowest Thyself to be love above all other love, and
virtue above all other virtue: Thou knowest Thyself to be
wisdom greater than all wisdom beside. Wherefore if my
knowledge perceive that my will has small virtue in loving
Thy Will, Thy knowledge must needs know that Thy love
is greater in loving me, than is my love in loving Thee.
And if Thou knewest not this, Thy knowledge could not
know how much greater virtue there is in Thy love and
Thy will than in mine, nor could my knowledge and will
have the virtue wherewith to contemplate God in perfec-
tion.”” While Blanquerna pursued this contemplation, he
bethought himself that if God knew that His will loved sin,
He would have no virtue wherewith to love Himself. And
thus Blanquerna comprehended that, if he ceased to love
God, he would have no virtue wherewith he might cease
to love sin. So Blanquerna wept abundantly, when he
remembered his sin and guilt at such times as he had
sinned,

6. “ Love Divine! Thy virtue is more real than that of
es love beside, and Thy Truth is more real than all truth
47

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

beside. For if the virtue of the sun be real in giving light,
and the virtue of fire in giving warmth, far more real is
Thy virtue in loving. For between the sun and its splendour
there is a difference, and between fire and its heat. But
between Thy love and virtue and truth there is no essential
difference; and all that Thy love disposes in truth, It does
with infinite virtue in love and in truth; whereas all that
is done by things beside is done with virtue finite in quantity
and time. Wherefore, since this is so, to Thee, O love,
O virtue, O truth, I bind and submit myself all the days
of my life, that I may honour Thy graces, and proclaim
to unbelievers, and to Christians who have lost their
devotion, the truth of Thy virtue and Thy truth and Thy
love.”

7. Virtue, Truth and Glory met in the thoughts of Blan-
querna, when he contemplated his Beloved. Blanquerna
considered to which of these three he would give the
greatest honour in his thoughts and will; but since he
could conceive in them no difference soever, he gave them
equal honour in remembering, comprehending and desiring
his Beloved. And he said: ‘‘ I adore Thee, O Virtue, that
hast created me; I adore Thee, O Truth, that shalt judge
me; I adore Thee, O Glory, wherein I hope to be glorified
in Virtue and Truth, which will never cease to give glory
without end.”

8. Blanquerna enquired of the Truth of his Beloved:
“If in Thee glory and perfeCtion were not that which Thou
art, what then wouldst Thou be?”” And Understanding
answered Blanquerna: ‘‘ What but falsehood, or a truth
like to that of thine, or naught at all, or that in which there
would be affliction everlasting?”’ And Blanquerna said:
“ And if truth were not, what then would glory be?” And
Memory answered: ‘‘ It would be naught.”? “ And if
perfection were not, what would glory be?” “ It would
be that which is naught, or nothingness,”

1 Lit. defalliment, defect ; here total defect, complete loss, non-existence.

477

BLANQUERNA

9. Blanquerna fell to considering colour, and compre-
hended the difference that is between white and red, and
the contrariety that is between white and black. He con-
sidered the glory, perfeétion and justice of his Beloved, and
herein he could comprehend neither difference nor con-
trariety. He considered whiteness, and could comprehend
therein neither difference nor contrariety. He considered
glory, and comprehended perfeétion and justice. He con-
sidered perfeCtion, and comprehended justice and glory.
He considered justice, and comprehended glory and per-
fection. Great marvel had Blanquerna as he considered
thus, and in that consideration did he exalt his memory and
understanding and will to the contemplation of his Beloved.
He desired His glory, and his eyes were filled with tears;
and he wept, for he feared the justice of his Beloved.

10. Memory, Understanding and Will endeavoured in
Blanquerna to soar to the Beloved. Memory desired to
soar that she might think upon perfection; Understanding,
that he might comprehend justice; and Will, that she
might love liberality. And none of these three powers could
rise above any other, for each had need of the three virtues
of the Beloved, signifying that the three virtues in the
Beloved are one and the same.

11. “* Justice,” said Blanquerna, “‘ what thing desirest
thou in my will?’’ Memory answered for Justice: “I
desire therein contrition and fear; I desire tears in thine
eyes, in thy heart sighs, and in thy body afflictions.” “And
thou, Liberality, what desirest thou in my will?” Under-
standing answered for Liberality: ‘‘ I desire to possess it
wholly, for love, for repentance and for the despising of
the vanities of this world.” ‘‘ And thou, Mercy, what de-
sirest thou of my memory and understanding?” Will
answered for Mercy: “I desire thy memory wholly, for
remembrance of the gifts of Mercy and her pardon,} and

* son do eé son perdd, lit. “its giving and forgiving.” See note, p. 252,
above.

478

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

thine understanding wholly for comprehension of the same,
and these yet more for the contemplation of Mercy herself.”
So Blanquerna gave himself wholly to that which the virtues
of his Beloved desired of him.

12. Blanquerna adored and contemplated, in his Be-
loved, liberality, mercy and humility, and he found them
greater and nobler than when he contemplated them in
himself. Wherefore he said to Understanding that in his
Beloved he could not wholly comprehend liberality, mercy
and humility; and to Will he said that the mercy of his
Beloved had so great liberality that he might take there-
from as much humility as he would, and have therefrom as
much mercy and liberality as was needful for his salvation.

13. Blanquerna perceived that he was in peril of think-
ing the dominion of his Beloved to be greater than His
mercy and humility, because His dominion is over all men,
while His mercy and humility illumine not those that be-
lieve not the Catholic Faith. But the Beloved awakened
the memory of Blanquerna, and brought to his mind that
mercy made the Son of God to humble Himself by taking
our flesh, and dying, as to His Manhood, upon the Cross.
And this He did that His dominion might be revealed and
proclaimed throughout all the world by those unto whom
God has humbled Himself in the Holy Sacrifice, and whom
He has so greatly honoured; and His mercy waits for them
to make satisfaction for mortal sins, so many and so grievous,
displeasing both to God and man.

14. Blanquerna said that in this world it befits not a
prince to have dominion without humility and patience,
signifying that it befits not that there should be dominion
without humility and patience in God. Wherefore Blan-
querna, as prince and lord of his memory, understanding
and will, humbled himself, though a prince, to have patience,
that he might contemplate humility, dominion and patience
in his Beloved, from Whom he holds his principality in fief,
to give account thereof to his Beloved.

479

BLANQUERNA

15. So Blanquerna ended his prayer; and, on the day
following, he returned to it after another manner, to wit,
that he left patience and fell to considering dominion,
taking the virtues by three and three that he might follow
a new manner. And on the day following he considered
the virtues by four and four, by five and five, or by two and
two, uniting them with Greatness or Eternity, and so with
the other virtues. And in every such combination of one
virtue with another appeared new argument and diverse
material and manner for the contemplation of his Beloved.
And, therefore, because he followed an art in his contem-
plation, did Blanquerna so abound in the contemplation of
his Beloved that his eyes were ever in tears and his soul was
filled with devotion, contrition and love.

CHAPTER III

OF ESSENCE

BLanguerna began to contemplate the Divine Essence
together with the Divine virtues; and, remembering,
comprehending and loving the virtues, he said these
words :

2. “ Divine Essence! So great art Thou in goodness
and eternity, that between Thyself and Thy goodness,
greatness and eternity is no difference soever. Thou art
Essence, and Thou art God, for between Deity and God
there is no difference. I adore Thee as One and the Same,
as Deity and God, as Essence and Being. For if as Deity
and God, as Essence and Being, Thou wert not One, with-
out difference soever, Thy greatness would be finite and
determined, inferior to Thy goodness and Thy good, Thy
eternity and Thy eternal Being. Whence it would follow
that Thy Deity was one thing, and God another, and the
same of Thy Being and Thy Essence. But since Thy

greatness is infinite in goodness and eternity, therefore, O
480

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

Sovereign Essence, do I adore Thee and bless Thee in
one pure and simple adtuality with all Thy virtues.”

3. “ Of Thy goodness and of Thy good, O glorious
Essence, my soul remembers and comprehends that which
it can remember and comprehend of no other thing. For
goodness and good, greatness and great, abidingness and
abiding are not one thing in creatures: were they so, there
would be no difference between essence and being in
creatures. And, but for this, Thy goodness were not sove-
reign in greatness as is fitting. Wherefore—to signify the
nobility of Thy Being and Essence—Thy Essence and
Being are greater as being One, than created essence, and
created being, wherein greatness is lacking; by which lack
we have knowledge of Thy infinite greatness, and this I
praise, holding suspended all the greatness of my will in
adoring, contemplating, praising and serving Thy glorious
Essence.”

4. “ In the creature is essence distinct from power, know-
ledge and will created. For one thing is power, another is
knowledge and yet another is will. Wherefore essence
cannot be one self-same thing with power, knowledge and
will. But since Thou, O glorious Essence, makest no
difference between Thy power, knowledge and will, nor is
there in Thy power, knowledge and will any difference
soever, therefore art Thou one Essence, and between Thy
Being and Thy power, knowledge and will is there in no
wise any difference. And since this is so, therefore art Thou
Sovereign Good, since all other good lacks power, know-
ledge and will which is one and the same thing with its
essence, and by its nature is inclined to corruption; to the
which inclination its nature had been contrary, were there
no difference between its Being and its Essence.”

5. ‘“‘O glorious Essence! Thy power can work no
defeét in Thy Being, but my power can work defect against
my being; and this is so because my being is one thing,
my essence another, and yet another my power. And, since

20 481

BLANQUERNA

my power is far other than my being and my essence, it
can work against my being and my essence. But Thy
power is Thy Essence and Thy Being without difference
soever, and therefore canst Thou do naught against Thy
Essence and Thy Being—wherefore, O Essence, hast Thou
power eternal, infinite and complete, in truth, virtue, glory
and perfection.”

6. “ After human kind is named humanity, which is of
human kind the essence; after the chevalier is named
chivalry; after the just man is named justice; and after
the wise man, wisdom. In Thy Deity art Thou, O God:
he who speaks of Thy Deity, speaks of God, and he who
speaks of God speaks of Thy Essence. For Thy Virtue
suffices to be Thy Essence and Thy Being in truth, in
glory and in perfection. And there is greater truth in that
Thy Being and Thy Essence are One and the Same, than
in that in the creature essence is one thing and being
another, in that the just is one thing and justice another.
Wherefore many that are just and chivalrous and human
may differ in divers regards under justice, chivalry and
humanity. But it is not thus with Thy Being and Essence,
for Thy glory and perfeCtion have virtue and truth, wherein
is no diversity of Being and Essence.”

7. “If there were no justice in the creature it were im-
possible that the just man should be created, even as it
were a thing impossible that human kind should exist if
humanity existed not. Wherefore when man and humanity
and all things else existed not, there resided already in Thy
justice both justice and the ‘ just,’ without there being the
‘just’ in Thy Essence, nor, in the just that is Thine, justice
according to the creature, but rather justice and the just
according to Thyself. For even as man cannot be without
that which is not man—to wit, elements, matter, form,
accidents, nature and cause—even so in Thy Essence there
could be neither justice nor the just, if therein there could

be accident or quality or difference of Being and Essence
482

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

nor, if Thy justice had need of aught but God and Divine
Essence, could it be infinite, eternal, full of virtue, perfect
and complete.”

8. “ Divine Essence! Ere ever he was made on whom
Thou dost bestow Thy gifts, there was in Thee liberality ;
for if Thou art liberality and liberality is Thyself, Thy
liberality is in no wise behind Thy Essence in Thy eternity
and infinity. And the same is true of Thy mercy and of
the remaining virtues. Neither now, when there are crea-
tures on whom Thou dost bestow gifts and forgiveness, are
Thy mercy and liberality any greater. And were there
difference between Thy mercy and liberality in Thy
Essence, then hadst Thou not been liberal nor merciful till
Thou hadst made the creature. And it were impossible
that Thou shouldst have created any thing, hadst Thou not
had mercy and liberality before creation was.”

g. Blanquerna considered that humility, dominion and
patience are in the creature qualities, but in God are
Essence; and since these qualities are distant far from
Essence, in comparison with the humility, dominion and
patience which are Essence, therefore Blanquerna adored
humility, dominion and patience, as Divine Essence and
Being, and said these words: “‘ Humility that humbles not,
and dominion that has no domain, and patience that is not
patient cannot of their nature be Sovereign Essence in
goodness and greatness that are eternal and to all creatures.
Neither does it beseem the Essence of God that there
should be humility as between greater and less, nor that
there should be lord or vassal, doer or sufferer according
to the rule of less and greater.”” Now, while Blanquerna
contemplated in this wise, he became troubled, and feared
lest he should utter a contradiction; but, by reason of the
height to which his understanding had risen in his con-
templation, he knew that his imagination sinned in making
a comparison falsely, and his memory recalled that to God
must be attributed all good things that are in the creatures,

483

BLANQUERNA

inasmuch as they must of need be every one in the Divine
Essence, lest it should follow that there were any imper-
feGtion in God. And since humility, dominion and patience
are good things in the creature, they must likewise be in
the Divine Essence; but since in creatures they are not in
so great perfection as in God, we must needs understand
that in another and a nobler way humility, dominion and
patience are in the Divine Essence—a way unlike that in
which they exist in the creature, wherein they are qualities
of accident, having beginning and end.

10. As he contemplated, Blanquerna said that the
Essence of his Beloved is immovable, in that He compre-
hends and is comprehended not; and unchangeable, in
that He is eternal; and incorruptible, in that eternal are
His power, His will, His knowledge, His virtue, His per-
fection, His justice. And therefore ought that so glorious
Essence to be more often and more firmly in his remem-
brance, understanding and will, than any other essence or
essences whatsoever.

11. “ The king, with his dominion, and with his Strength,
beauty, wisdom, power and justice, and with his other
attributes likewise, has no more of human essence than the
man that is of an ill-favoured countenance, and a vassal,
and a poor man and of small power and knowledge; and
this is so because the king may lose all these things afore-
said. But of the Essence of God and of His virtues is it
not so; for, since this Essence and these virtues are one
and the same thing in goodness, greatness, eternity and the
rest, no other thing may have the virtues of God, nor be
His Essence. And therefore the Divine Essence is in
virtue, in presence, in wisdom, in power, and in all that
pertains to His Essence, in every place and through every
place, in every time and through every time; and this thing
may not be save in the will of God alone.”

12. In this and in many another wise did Blanquerna
arr the Essence of God, uniting virtues in turn
484

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

with others, that he might make new argument and
lengthier matter for the contemplation of His Essence.
And, when he had ended his prayer, he wrote down the
substance of his contemplation, and afterwards read that
which he had written; but in his reading he had less of
devotion than in his contemplation. Wherefore less devout
contemplation is to be had in reading this book than in
contemplating the arguments set forth therein; for in con-
templation the soul soars higher in remembrance, under-
standing and love of the Divine Essence, than in reading
the matter of its contemplation. And devotion accords
better with contemplation than with writing.

CHAPTER. IV

OF UNITY

BLanguerna turned his thoughts and considerations with
his love to the contemplation of the Unity of God, and he
said these words: “‘ Sovereign Good! Alone is Thy Good-
ness in infinite greatness and in eternity and in power, for
there is none other goodness such as can be infinite, eternal
and of infinite power; wherefore, O Sovereign Good, I
adore Thee alone in one God Who is Sovereign in all per-
fections. Thou art one only Good whence all other good
descends and springs. Thy Good of Itself alone sustains
all good beside. Thy Good alone is the source of my good,
wherefore all my good gives and subjects itself to the
honour, praise and service of Thy Good alone.”

2. “O loving Lord! Greatness that art without begin-
ning and end in Thy Essence full of virtue and complete
in all perfection, Thou dost accord with one God alone and
not with many, because eternity that is without beginning
or end in its abidingness, accords well with greatness which
in essence and virtue has neither beginning nor end, but
is itself both beginning and end in all its fulness. And

485

BLANQUERNA

were it not so, O Lord, it would follow that justice and
perfection were contrary things: in eternity, if eternity,
which has neither beginning nor end in duration, accorded
also with greatness in essence, which has finite and deter-
mined quantity. And since Thou, my God, art One with
Thy justice and perfe€tion, thereby is it signified to my
understanding that Thou art One God eternal and alone.”

3. The memory of Blanquerna remembered the good-
ness, greatness, eternity, wisdom, will and power of God.
By His goodness he understood a power with more of good-
ness than any other; by His greatness, a power that was
greater; by eternity, a power more abiding; by wisdom,
a power more wise; by will, a power more gracious than
any other power soever. Wherefore, when the understand-
ing had comprehended Divine power, the memory thought
upon one power alone, above all others Sovereign, and
therefore the understanding comprehended that God was
One and One only, for, were there many gods, it were a
thing impossible that the understanding could comprehend
a greater and nobler power than all beside.

4. Blanquerna considered the virtue that is in the plants
and in things which Nature orders to one end, and his
understanding comprehended that every thing that is in
nature has one virtue which is lord over all other virtues
that are in that body; and therefore Nature in each ele-
mental body has natural appetite rather to one end than
to another, since one end—that is, one perfection—has
below it all perfections beside. While Blanquerna con-
sidered this, his memory bore his understanding to the
comprehension of the end for which all men are made and
created, and of how beasts, birds, plants, metals, elements,
heavens, stars have one end only, namely, to serve man;
and thereby is signified, according to the perfection of
power, justice, wisdom and will, that all men are to honour
and serve one God alone; for were there many gods, each

god, according to his perfection and justice and power,
486

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

knowledge and will, would have made and created men and
creatures for many ends. As Blanquerna contemplated the
Unity of God according to the manner aforesaid, he felt
himself to be uplifted exceedingly in his memory and under-
Standing and will.

5. To man is given will, whereby he wills to possess for
himself alone his castle or his city or his kingdom, or his
possessions or his wife or his son, or his memory or his
understanding or his will, and so of other things. And
when to his hurt he finds his peer in these things, he is
moved to passion thereby, which is contrary to glory and
dominion. When Blanquerna had remembered all this, he
remembered the glory and the dominion of God, and com-
prehended that if there were many gods and lords of the
world, their glory and dominion could not be so great as
is that of one God alone. And since there must needs be
postulated of God the highest glory and dominion, there
was demonstrated therefore to the understanding of Blan-
querna that God is One and One only. And, that his under-
Standing might rise to greater heights of comprehension,
his will was greatly exalted in fervour to the contemplation
of his Beloved, the Spouse of his Will. And he said these
words:

6. “ True is it, O Lord God, that there is no other God
save Thyself alone. To Thee alone I offer and present
myself, that I may serve Thee. From Thee alone I hope
for pardon, for there is none other liberality to give nor
mercy to forgive, save Thine only. Humble am I indeed
if I humble myself to Thee. Lord am I, if I am Thine
alone. Victory have I above mine enemies if I can only
suffer for Thee. Wheresoever I may be, with all that I am,
I give myself to Thee alone, and Thine alone I am, a guilty
sinner. Of Thee alone I beg forgiveness, in Thee I trust,
and for Thee I incur perils. Whatsoever may become of
me, let it be all to one end, to wit, Thy praise, honour and
glory. Thee alone do I fear, from Thee alone is etl

407

BLANQUERNA

Strength, for Thee I weep, for Thee I burn with love, and
none other Lord will I have, save Thee only.”

CHAPTER Vv.

OF TRINITY

BLanqueRNa was fain to contemplate the holy Trinity of
our Lord God, wherefore, at the beginning of his prayer,
he begged of God that He would exalt the powers of his
soul that they might rise to the contemplation of His
virtues, whereby he might contemplate His glorious
Trinity. And therefore he said these words: “ Divine
Essence, glorious and holy, in Whom is the Trinity of
Divine Persons! I ask of Thee this boon, that it may
please Thee to humble Thyself that my soul may rise to
contemplate Thy Trinity with Thy virtues proper, essential
and common to the three Persons, and Thy three proper-
ties personal and essential. I am not worthy to ask of Thee
this boon, nor to receive it; but since Thou canst give it,
and I therewith can the better love, know and praise Thee,
for this cause I ask it of Thee, for my soul desires to know
and love all these things, that it may the better love and
know, praise and serve Thee, and make Thy glories and
honours loved and known.”

2, Blanquerna trusted in the help of God, and said these
words: “‘ Never was it in creatures, nor is nor shall be, that
infinite and eternal Good should proceed or be engendered,
seeing that all created good is finite and determined in
greatness and eternity. Ifin the creature there were a Good
which was infinitely great in eternity, knowledge, power
and will, it would indeed be possible that one infinite Good
should engender another; for were it not so, it were
impossible that in the creature there should be such an
infinite Good as we have postulated above.” When Blan-

querna had committed this to his memory, undergtanding
488

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

and love, he remembered and understood that if the Sove-
reign Good exceeds created good in greatness, eternity,
power, knowledge and love, It must needs have also a
higher and nobler work and aétuality; for, had It not this,
it were impossible that It should exceed created good in
infinity of goodness, greatness, eternity, power and wisdom.

3. When Blanquerna, by the help of God, had lifted up
the powers of his soul, even to the highest degree to which
he had been able to raise them, he strove after another
manner to raise them yet higher. And he fell to consider-
ing how great a good it is that God should be engendered,
Who is Good, infinite and eternal, powerful, wise, loving,
virtuous, true, glorious, perfect, just, liberal, merciful,
humble, patient, and over all things Lord. When Blan-
querna had considered this for a great space of time, he
thought again how great a good it is that to God should be
attributed a procession of all these virtues aforesaid which
are common to the Persons. And yet again he considered
how great is that Good whereby God is engendered, and
whence proceeds God, the eternal and infinite. When
Blanquerna had considered all these things, he considered
after the manner of negation how the good of which he
had thought might not be in the Sovereign Good. And
immediately he felt his soul to be void of devotion and
understanding, and returned to the consideration of that
upon which he had thought by affirmation, and then he
felt his soul to be full of remembrance, understanding and
love of the Sovereign Good, and he fell to weeping and
praising God Who granted him so high a degree of con-
templation.

4. Blanquerna had remembrance in his soul of created
virtue and was fain to lift it higher through the potency
of virtue uncreate. And his memory recalled these words:
“ Philosophers have said that the world is eternal, and this
they have said with intent to honour virtue uncreate which
must needs work in a manner both infinite and eternal.

489

BLANQUERNA

Wherefore, as they knew not in God His Trinity and His
eternal work, they attributed to God an infinite and eternal
work in the world, and in those things whereof the world
is made. But it better beseems the virtue of God to per-
form in Himself an eternal and infinite work in power,
wisdom, love, perfe€tion and glory, than in any other thing
that is not God Himself.” And therefore the perfect
justice, wisdom, glory and truth of God signified to Blan-
querna that the world had had a beginning, and that the
work of the Divine Essence in Itself, whereby the Father
begat the Son, and the Holy Spirit proceeded from the
Father and the Son, is a work infinite, eternal and wholly
perfeé&t. And were it not so, it would follow that the world,
in receiving eternity, would have just so much infinite
virtue as has the Divine power in giving out virtue unto
eternity; and this is a thing impossible. When this im-
possibility was shown to Blanquerna, his understanding _
was so greatly exalted that his will soared high in love to
the Trinity; so that love gave afflictions to his body, to his
eyes tears, to his heart sighing and devotion, to his mouth
prayers and praises of his glorious God. ?

5. Fearfully did Blanquerna pronounce these words to
the Holy Trinity with lips and mind: ‘ Sovereign Trinity
All-Excelling, through Thy common virtues my under-
standing soars that it may contemplate and love Thee, and
in Thy virtues personal and proper my understanding fails
me when it has knowledge of Thee. But my will, illumined
by the light of faith through Thy blessing, soars to love
Thee, wherefore am I contemplating Thee by intelle& and
by faith without there following any contradiétion.”

6. While Blanquerna contemplated thus the Sovereign
Trinity, Error and Ignorance were fain to incline him to
believe no longer in the Trinity of God, and he considered
how in all trinity there was composition. Then Blanquerna
thought once more upon the infinite greatness in power,
perfection and eternity, and comprehended thus how it be-
490

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

seemed not that, if plurality and eternity created could not
be without such composition, it should follow that the
Sovereign Trinity must needs be compounded. For as the
Sovereign Trinity and Plurality is superior to plurality and
trinity created, in goodness, greatness, eternity, power and
the rest, It must needs be above it also in simplicity; for,
if the Unity of God is in simplicity Sovereign over all unity
created, the Sovereign Good must needs have plurality that
It may be in simplicity above plurality created.

7. “O Holy Trinity! In that I comprehend Thee not
Thy greatness is the greater and my understanding the less,
and in that I believe without comprehending Thee is my
faith greater than my understanding, and Thy greatness
than my faith. And this is so because Thy greatness is
infinite in all perfection, and my faith and understanding
are limited and bounded by Thy greatness. Wherefore,
since through believing in Thee I am greater by faith than
by understanding, if I understood Thee I should be greater
in loving than in believing. And, were this not so, it would
follow that love agreed rather with ignorance than with
understanding, in the which case love would of necessity be
less in the heights of understanding, and greater in its
deeps. And this is impossible, unless there should follow
contradiction of merit or of understanding through faith,
which remains that which it was, according to the diversity
of objeéts between faith and understanding. This diversity
we have signified above in the Divine virtues common to
all three Divine Persons and according to the properties
both personal and Divine.”

8. To the end that he might use the art of contempla-
tion, Blanquerna considered within himself generation in
infinity and eternity, that he might not think Divine
generation to be like to that which 1s in creatures, which
he could not conceive in his mind to be a thing of infinity
and eternity. And hence he comprehended in Sovereign
generation simplicity without composition or corruption,

491

BLANQUERNA

and in the lower generation he could not believe there was
neither corruption nor composition, because his under-
Standing had knowledge that the generation of the creature
cannot increase perfeétion in eternity and infinity, in his
understanding and memory.

g. ‘“ O Holy Trinity! If Thou wert not, wherein would
God be like unto man? Or how would that word be true
which says: Let us make man in our image and likeness?
And if Thou, O Trinity, art unlike any trinity of ours, it
is that Thou art a Being infinite and eternal in Wisdom,
Power and Perfeétion.” Thus did Blanquerna contemplate
the Holy Trinity, and thereto did he lift up the powers of
his soul, even to such heights as he could, that he might
be obedient to the commandment of God which commands
man to love God with all his strength, and with all his
mind and with all his soul,—that is to say, with memory,
intellect and will.

CHAPTER Vi

OF INCARNATION

BLanguERna remembered the holy Trinity of our Lord and
God, that his understanding might comprehend how
through the influence of the great goodness of eternity,
power, wisdom and will of the glorious Trinity, God should
perform a work in the creature which should be of great
benignity, abidingness, power, wisdom and charity; and for
this cause his understanding comprehended that according
to the operation which is in the Divine Persons, it was
fitting that God should take our human nature, in which
and through which might be shown forth His Divine
virtues and His works which He has in His Divine Persons;
and that thus the wills of Blanquerna and all men beside
might love God and His works, Wherefore Blanquerna
spake these words:

492

Tee? OF CONTEMPLATION”

2. “ Divine Virtue,” said Blanquerna, “ Thou art in-
finite in goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, love
and all perfection; wherefore if there were aught else
infinite in greatness, eternity and patience, Thou couldst
infinitely work therein through greatness, eternity, action
and the like, since Thou hast the power to work, as that thing
would have power to receive. But inasmuch as all virtue is
finite, save Thine, therefore neither in eternity nor in in-
finite greatness is any thing sufficient to receive the impress
of Thy work, without beginning of time or quantity. Now
to show forth all these things Thy wisdom willed to create
a creature greater in goodness and virtue than all other
creatures and virtues created, and the Son of God willed
to be one Person with that creature, to show that Thy good-
ness had been able to give Him greater virtue than all
creatures else, even as He could make Him greater than
the creature and than all other creatures.”

3. ‘‘ Thy human nature, O Lord, has a glory greater
than all other glories created, and this because its per-
fection surpasses all other perfection; and since Thy justice,
O Lord, has greater goodness, power, wisdom and love than
any other, therefore it was fain to give greater glory and
perfection to Thy humanity than to any other nature created.
Whence, since this is so, it is most meet that all the angels,
and all the souls of the saints, yea, and all the bodies of the
just when the resurrection is past, should have glory in Thy
human nature, and thereby rise to have greater glory in Thy
Divine Nature.”

4. When Blanquerna had considered for a great space
of time the things set down above, he felt his memory,
understanding and will to be greatly uplifted in contem-
plation. Yet even so his heart gave no tears to his eyes
that they might be bathed in weeping, and therefore did
Blanquerna prepare to uplift the powers of his soul Still
higher that they might multiply devotion the more in his
heart, and fill his eyes with weeping and with tears; for

493

BLANQUERNA

high contemplation goes ill save with weeping. Wherefore
Blanquerna caused his memory to descend, and to think
upon the vileness and the misery of this world, and the sins
that are therein, and the great wickedness committed by
our father Adam against his Creator, in disobeying Him,
and the great mercy, liberality, humility and patience of
God, when it pleased Him to take human flesh and when
He willed to give His Body to poverty, scorn, torments,
trials, and to vile and grievous death; although He had no
guilt nor sin such as are ours. While the remembrance of
Blanquerna called these things to mind, his understanding
was lifted up to comprehend and follow his remembrance,
and together they contemplated the lofty and Divine
virtues, to wit, goodness, infinity, eternity, and the rest.
And therefore the will had so much devotion from the
nobility of the virtues and the Passion and Death of the
Nature of Jesus Christ, that it gave to the heart sighs and
griefs, and the heart gave to the eyes weeping and tears,
and to the mouth confession and praise of God.

5. For a great space of time did Blanquerna weep as he
contemplated the Incarnation of the Son of God after the
manner aforesaid; but, as he wept, the imagination strove
to represent the fashion wherein the Son of God conformed
Himself to human nature; and since he might not imagine
it, the understanding had no longer knowledge and Blan-
querna fell to doubting, and his tears and sighs ceased, by
reason of his doubt, which destroyed his devotion and made
it to vanish. When Blanquerna felt to what state his
thoughts had descended, he lifted up once more his memory
and understanding to the greatness of the goodness, power,
wisdom and perfection of God, and in the greatness of these
virtues his understanding comprehended that God may con-
form to Himself human nature, though the imagination
know it not neither may imagine it. For greater is God in
goodness, power, wisdom and will than is the imagination
in its imagining; and in remembering and understanding
494

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”
thus Blanquerna destroyed the doubt which he had had

concerning the Incarnation; and devotion and contrition
returned to his heart, and weeping and tears to his eyes,
and his contemplation was loftier and more fervent than at
the beginning.

6. Long did Blanquerna contemplate the Incarnation of
the Son of God after the manner aforesaid. And when he
felt that his mind was wearied by one matter he took another,
that through the renewing of the matter his mind might
regain strength and virtue for contemplation. So Blan-
querna remembered how the holy Incarnation and Passion
of the Son of God are honoured in the goodness, greatness,
eternity, power, etc., of God, and how in this world:He has
honoured with His grace many men who render Him* not
the honour which they might. After this he remembered
how many men there are in this world who are unbelievers
and honour not the human nature of Jesus Christ which
God in Himself has so greatly honoured, but believe not,
and blaspheme that same nature, and hold that sacred land
wherein He took that nature, and wherein, to honour us
and restore us to the Sovereign dominion which we had
lost, He suffered Passion and Death. Then, after Blan-
querna had fixed the powers of his mind upon that matter,
his devotions, sighs, tears and griefs were renewed within
him, and his mind soared higher and yet higher in con-
templating the sacred Incarnation of the Son of God. And
therefore he said these words: ‘‘ Oh Lord God, Who hast
so highly honoured and exalted our nature in Thy Divine
virtues! When comes that time wherein Thou wilt greatly
honour our remembrance, understanding and will, in Thy
holy Incarnation and Passion? ”

7. So lofty was the contemplation of Blanquerna that the
powers of his soul discoursed with one another within his
mind. Memory said that great goodness performed a great
work, and great power worked great might. Understand-
ing answered that great mercy, humility, liberality and love

495

BLANQUERNA

conformed lesser virtues to greater. And Will said that
above all creatures he must needs love his Lord Jesus
Christ. But at one thing he marvelled,—to wit, how that
Jesus Christ so greatly loved His people, and willed to
suffer for them so great Passion, and how God willed so
greatly to humble Himself, and how in the world there are
so many men, unbelievers, idolaters and ignorant of His
honour. Understanding answered and said that that thing
was matter for the will, how that it should have such devo-
tion as to make a man desire martyrdom that the Incarnation
should be honoured; and that it was matter for the memory,
how that it should have remembrance so lofty of the virtues
of God that He might be exalted in such necessary demon-
Strations as should show forth to unbelievers the sacred
Incarnation and Passion of the Lord Jesus Christ.

8. By the Divine Light the spirit of Blanquerna was
illumined and inflamed, and he spake these words: “O
Incarnation, O greatest truth of all truths, uncreated and
created! Wherefore are greater in number the men that
scorn thee, and know thee not, neither believe thee, than
they who honour and believe thee? What wilt thou do?
Wilt thou punish so great and mortal failings? O mercy
wherein is so great benignity, love, patience and humility !
Wilt thou pardon them?” So Blanquerna wept, and be-
tween fear and hope he sorrowed and joyed, as he contem-
plated the sacred Incarnation of the Son of God.

CHAPTER VII

OF THE PATER NOSTER

Bianguerna called to mind the Divine virtues, and through
them was fain to contemplate God in the Pater NoSer, and
to set the virtues and the Pater Noster in his memory,
understanding and will. Wherefore he spake to God these
oe : “O Father, Thou art Lord over us—that is, God
49

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

the Father is Father of God the Son, Who is infinite and
eternal in goodness, power, wisdom, love, perfection and
all His other attributes, and Thy Divine Essence is Father
of the human nature of Jesus Christ by creation and by
benignity, mercy, liberality, humility and charity. And
therefore said Jesus Christ, when He made the prayer of
Pater Noster, that in Thee is the personal Father, Father,
rightly so called, of God the Son, and that Thou art that
Essence, which is Father of His humanity, and likewise of
all other creatures. Because, then, the Apostles were crea-
tures, and because they believed in His Trinity and Incar-
nation, therefore our Lord Jesus Christ commanded them
that they should say the Pater Noster.”

2. “Thou, O Lord, art in the heavens God the Father
of God the Son, which heavens are Thy infinite greatness,
goodness, eternity, power, wisdom, love, etc., and these are
Essence wherein is God the Father Who begat God the
Son; and, since infinite perfection is in Thy Essence in
goodness, greatness, eternity, etc., therefore with the
heavens, which are high, may be compared Thy virtues,
which are so high that none others save Thine alone suffice
to reach heights so exceeding great. By which heights and
excellences Thou dost make known in the Pater NoSter that
Thou art Father, because Thou art higher than all creatures,
and because in Thy heavens are Thy works, whereby Jesus
Christ called Thee Father, of Himself and of us. Where-
fore, if Jesus Christ, Who is God and Man, in the heavens
and equal with Thee as touching His Godhead, and upon
the earth as touching His Manhood, bears Thee witness
that Thou art His Father and ours and art in the heavens,
it is meet and right that we, who are here below on earth,
should believe His witness and say this prayer of Pater
Noster.”

3. “ Hallowed be, Lord God, Thy holy and glorious
Name, in Thy goodness,’ greatness, eternity, power, etc.,
which is the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,

Pasi 497

BLANQUERNA

through generation and procession, without which genera-
tion and procession there could not be in Thy Essence these
proper and diverse Names eternally and infinitely in good-
ness, virtue, truth and perfection, But since the Father is
eternal, the Son eternal and the Holy Ghost eternal, and
each one of these Persons is infinite in perfection, therefore
are there in Thy Essence Names eternal and infinite in
perfection, and therefore is it worthy and meet that Thy
personal Names should be hallowed in Thy Divine Essence,
eternal, infinite and complete.”

4. “ Not alone, O Lord, does justice require that Thy
Name be hallowed in Thy virtues, but of reason also it is
worthy and meet that It be hallowed among us here below
throughout all the world; and therefore hast Thou, O Lord,
established upon earth the Holy Roman Church, that Thy
Name may be named and known throughout all the world,
and hallowed in the souls of men and in the holy Sacrament
of the Altar. And that the Pope and his colleagues the
Cardinals and the other prelates may not be neglectful, nor
for other business cease to strive for the hallowing of Thy
Name, therefore hast Thou given us commandments with
Thine own mouth in the Pater Noster and at the hour of
Thy passing from this world, which commandments Thou
didst make to Thy ministers the Apostles after Thy passing.”

5. “ Thy kingdom, O Lord, is Thy very Essence and
Thy personal properties, wherein are goodness, greatness,
eternity, etc. May that Kingdom come, O Lord, to our
souls, through remembrance, understanding and love of
Thy universal properties and Thine own personal proper-
ties, to the end that Thy Kingdom may be honoured among
us here below and we ourselves may rise to dwell in Thy
glorious Kingdom perpetually.”

6. “ Thy will is done, O Lord, in the heavens and on
earth. In the heavens it is done, because Thy Essence is
goodness wherein are goodness and will which issues from
paeaeiee Father and Son in goodness, greatness, eternity,
49

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

etc. Perfected is Thy will, O Lord, in the Son that is be-
gotten eternally and infinitely in all perfection; and there-
fore is it the will, O Lord, of justice, perfeGtion, virtue and
truth that Thy will be done on earth, that is, in the human
nature which Thou didst take, wherein is earth corporal
and elemental. And this Will was done by the work of the
Holy Ghost when He gave Thee flesh in the womb of the
glorious Virgin.”

7. “ O Lord, so lofty and so marvellous is Thy Will that
throughout this whole world Thou art to be obeyed through
Thy goodness and Thy power, Thy justice and Thy per-
fection. Thou art obeyed, O Lord, through Thy goodness,
humility, patience and mercy, in those who desire to serve
Thee, and who upon earth withdraw apart their memory,
understanding and love, that they may contemplate and
serve Thee. And Thy will is obeyed, O Lord, through
Thy justice, dominion, power and truth, in the punishment
with pains of hell of those who may not flee from Thy sen-
tence and domination, and who fix their remembrance,
understanding and will upon earthly vanities, despising the
blessings of Heaven.”

8. “Our daily bread, O Lord, is Thy sacred and
glorious Body sacrificed upon the Altar. Thy Body is in
the heavens, yet daily It is among us here below in this
Sacrifice, which in our minds we see through the working
of Thy great benignity, wisdom, power, humility, mercy
and will. For as the eyes of our body and our other senses
fail us when we see this Bread—that is, Thy Body and
Blood—even so, O Lord, may the powers of the soul suffice,
Thou Thyself helping us, that we may see this our Bread
through the working of the virtues of Thine Essence. For
if Thy power is great in infinity, it follows that under the.
form of bread may be sacrificed one Body of Flesh and
Blood in divers places, signifying Thy power to be infinite.
And if Thy benignity, humility, will and liberality are in-
finitely great according to the infinity of Thy perfect justice,

499

BLANQUERNA

it is signified thereby that Thou wilt give us our daily bread
in this world which is to-day, for this is the day of choice
between damnation and salvation, which day for every one
of us will pass away.”

g. ‘‘ Forgive us, O Lord, the debt that we owe Thee,
for we can never pay Thee, being sinners every one in our
father Adam. So great are our debts to Thee that we can
never pay Thee, for Thou didst create us, and didét will,
through love of us, to become Man, to be tortured and
crucified for us, and to die. And since Thy perfeétion is
infinite in Thy goodness, greatness, eternity, etc., Thou
needest not, O Lord, that we should pay Thee; for didst
Thou so need, there would be in Thee want of perfection.
And since we resolve! the debts which we owe to our
sensual natures, in mortifying them with fastings, afflic-
tions and prayers, even as we mortify our understanding by
believing the marvels which Thy virtues work, then if
Thou, O Lord, forgavest and pardonedst us not our debts,
as we for love of Thee forgive our debtors, there would be
in us greater justice and perfection than in Thyself. And
this may not be; whence, O Lord, it is fitting that Thou
shouldst not require of us our debts, which we could in no
wise pay Thee.”

10. “‘ Well do we know, O Lord, that Thy great good-
ness, love, liberality and mercy make Thee to desire us to
have great merit, that Thy justice may with reason give us
great glory and perfection, and therefore dost Thou allow
us to be tempted by the world, the flesh and the devil. And
since we are poor in memory, understanding and love, it
befalls us many a time to be conquered and overcome by
our temptations. Wherefore since Thou, O Lord, art so
great in benignity, mercy, liberality and humility, give
Thou to us that which we merit not, if we endure, but

* The original has /exam, from a verb which occurs throughout the para-
graph in the double sense of “ loose ” and “ forgive.” It is difficult to bring
this out in the English.

500

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

conquer not, our temptations, for it suffices us that we are
in Thy kingdom and have Thy glory without merits of
our own.”

11. “ Deliver us, O Lord, from the evil that we have
when we know Thee not and love Thee not and forget
Thee; for in this evil all others have their beginning. And
since that deliverance is to be effected, O Lord, by the
remembrance, understanding and love of Thy goodness,
greatness, eternity, power, etc., if Thou Who hast created
us and canst aid us defendest us not neither deliverest us
from evil, Thy mercy and humility will be without love,
and we shall be creatures without a Lord Who loves His
subjects, and this is ill-beseeming. Wherefore my memory
hopes, O Lord, in Thy succour.’’ Thus and in many other
ways that can neither be told nor written did Blanquerna
contemplate in his soul the virtues of God together with
the Pater Noster.

CHAPTER VIII

OF AVE MARIA

BLANQUERNA was fain to contemplate the Queen of Heaven,
and of the earth and sea and all that is, with the virtues of
her glorious Son, our Lord God. Wherefore he spake these
words: ‘‘ Hail, Mary! The goodness of thy Son, Who is
infinitely great in eternity, power, wisdom and love, gives
thee salutation, because the Son of God took thy nature,
wherewith He is yet one Person only, equal in goodness,
greatness, eternity, and the like, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost and to all essence in goodness and virtue.”

2. “Full of grace! Power, Knowledge and Will, which
are one power, knowledge and will in essence, and one
power, knowledge and will in filiation, have been incar-
nated in Flesh of thy flesh and Blood of thy blood. This
Power, Knowledge and Will is one Son and one only of

the Sovereign Father. And through this Son there is
gor

BLANQUERNA

created, within thee, a Son Who is Man, one Person in
unity with a Son Who is God. And therefore, O Queen,
art thou filled with grace through the Son of God and thy
Son that is Man. And the Son that is God is thy Son, Who
is one Person with the Son of God. Wherefore, since this
is so, from the inflowing of the fulness of grace whereof thy
Son is full, art thou, O Queen, full of grace which is greater
than we can remember or comprehend or love. And from
thy fulness of grace comes an inflowing to the memory,
understanding and will which contemplate the fulness of
thy grace. Blessed then, O Queen, be thy grace, which is
so full that it fills all those who through the same shall
attain perpetual fulfilment.”

3. “ The Lord is with thee, O Queen, namely Virtue,
Truth and Glory—that is, the Son of God. This Virtue,
Truth and Glory have infinity in power, knowledge and
will, This infinity is Sovereign Good in eternity. The
Lord within thee, O Queen, is God and Man: God,
through His Divine Father, and Man, in that He took of
thee flesh and blood. And that this Lord is within thee,
O Queen, makes thee to be in great virtue and truth, who
after thy Son art pre-eminent in virtue, truth and glory over
all other creatures. And this is the reason thereof, that,
excepting thy Son, the Lord is in no creature so virtuously,
truly and gloriously as in thee, for to no other creature has
He given such power to receive His virtue as to thee.
Therefore, since by His virtue thou canst receive greater
virtue than any other creature, His glory is more truly in
thee than in any other.”

4. “Blessed art thou, O Queen, among women; for
greater perfection, greater justice, greater liberality is given
to thee than to any other woman soever—yea, than to all
men and to all angels and to all other creatures. For the
perfection, justice and liberality which are given to thee,
are Christ thy Son, Who is perfeCtion of all other perfeétion,
and justice of all other justice, and liberality of all other
502

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

liberality; and beside thy Son there were none who should
have such Being or perfection. From this perfeétion,
O Queen—to wit, thy Son—comes it by justice that thou
art blessed above all women, because thou hast more of
perfection than they all. Then since in thee is such per-
fection, that perfection which is of justice and liberality
wills that thou shouldst give perfe€tion to every soul—in
its remembrance if it remember thee, in its understanding
if it understand thee, and in its will if it love thee. And
were this not so, there would be a lack of justice and
liberality in thy Son, as also in thee, which is a thing un-
beseeming and impossible.”

5. “ Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, O Queen, with
mercy and humility, which have united that fruit with the
Divine Nature, a union greater than any other that may be
between God and the creature. And therefore, O Queen,
to no other creature, nor to all other creatures, has the
Divine Nature given so much of mercy and humility, as to
the Fruit of thy womb. For this thy Son, glorious Man,
is Man in the Son of the glorious God, Who makes Him
to be Man, while He is yet with Himself one Person,
namely God and Man. And that Person, Who is God,
and is infinite mercy and humility in goodness, eternity,
power, wisdom, love and the like, has blessed thy Son in
His being one with infinity of mercy, humility, goodness,
eternity, power, etc. Wherefore, as this is so, O Queen,
what fruit may be so blessed or more blessed than the fruit
of thy womb?”

6. “ O Queen! So great is the brightness of the sun,
that it gives radiance to the moon, the stars and the air;
and since mercy and humility are greater in thy Son than
is the sun’s brightness, therefore, O Queen, there comes to
ourselves and to the angels an influence from the blessing
of the fruit of thy womb, greater than is the brightness of
the sun and of all other lights created. And since in thee,
O Queen, mercy and humility have so greatly exalted thy

$03

BLANQUERNA

Fruit, and have set thee in such excellent places, it is right
that thou shouldst remember us according to thy greatness
in mercy and humility. If mercy has been pleased to honour
thee, do thou by thy mercy be pleased to remember us.
And if humility willed to incline itself to thee that thou
mightest be exalted, do thou incline thy thoughts to us that
to them we may rise and receive the blessing of thy womb.”

7. “ The Holy Ghost has come upon thee, O Queen,
and has overshadowed thee with the power of the Most
High. That Holy Spirit, O Queen, has come upon thee
with the Lord of all the world—yea, and of the world to
come. He has overshadowed thee with a virtue which
comprehends all virtues, and with virtues which are one
virtue. The nature which He has taken in thee He has
overshadowed with infinite goodness, greatness, eternity,
power and the like, and thee has He overshadowed with
that nature which He has taken in thee, through the which
thou art mother of every virtue and of all virtues created.
All of these derive brightness from thy shadow, and
through thy shadow they are guided to the brightness of
thy Son. By thy shadow, o’ershaded by shadow human
and divine, the Saints in glory are in eternal shade, being
shielded from the perpetual fire, in which is no shadow of
respite from the heat neither of forgiveness.”

8. “ O Queen of Heaven! Thy Son for reasons twain
is Lord over every creature: the first, in that He is God;
the second, in that He is Man conformed to God and made
one with Him. Then as thy Son is doubly Lord of all the
world, thou thyself for reasons twain must over all the
world be lady pre-eminent: the first, in that thou art
Mother of God; the second, in that thou art Mother of
that Man Who is made one Person with God. And as this
is so, do thou, O Lady, have remembrance of that where-
over thou art placed, that He Who hath placed thee there
may have pleasure therein, and that we ourselves may be
exalted in the nobility of His dominion.”

504

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

9. Thus in the 4ve Maria did Blanquerna contemplate
Our Lady with the virtues of her Son; and, while he con-
templated, his remembrance and understanding and will
were so highly exalted that he took no knowledge if he were
weeping or no, And when he had ended his contemplation,
he knew and remembered that his heart had given no tears
to his eyes, that they should be in weeping and tears as he
contemplated. And since it was ill-beseeming that he
should contemplate Our Lady without weeping, therefore
Blanquerna fell to contemplating her anew and to remem-
bering the patience of her glorious Son on the day when
He was stripped of His garments, spat upon, beaten,
crowned with thorns, nailed to the Cross, wounded and
killed. He remembered how that Our Lady loved Him
with wondrous love, and that, while men tormented Him,
He looked upon her, and she upon Him, with looks devout
and sweet. How that Our Lady lamented over her Son
when she saw Him die; how that she was sore afflicted,
as she saw herself divided from Him by death; how that
she knew Him to have done no wrong, but to be Lord and
God. And while Blanquerna thus contemplated, and led
the powers of his soul to consider the virtues of God and
of Our Lady, his heart was so moved with devotion that
his eyes thereby had abundance of weeping and of tears.

CHAPTER IX

OF THE COMMANDMENTS

BLANQUERNA remembered in the Gospels the answer that
Jesus Christ had given concerning the Commandments,
and he was fain to contemplate these with the Divine
virtues of God. And he said these words to his will:
“ Thou shalt love thy Lord God, for thou art commanded
thereto by the goodness, greatness and eternity of God.
Whence if thou, O Will, wert so great that eternally, with-

be)

BLANQUERNA

out beginning or end, thou couldst love God, thou wouldst
be constrained thus to obey His Commandment, for the
Lord Who commands thee thus is infinitely good and
eternal. But since thou hast a beginning, thou couldst not
love before thou wert in being; yet now that thou art, thou
art constrained to love, and, if thou lovest not, thou art
disobedient to infinite and eternal goodness; for the which
disobedience He will doom thee to infinite and eternal
affliction and torment.”

2. The Understanding said to Blanquerna that the
power, wisdom and love of God commanded the will to
love God with the whole heart. And as he understood that
the will could love God wholly through His power, know-
ledge and will, he said that the power which it had of not
loving God in its totality was not of the power, knowledge
and will of God, but was of guilt, fault and sin, inclining
to powerlessness whatsoever wills not to be power in the
power, knowledge and will of God, by Whom is sustained,
kept and defended power created against power of guilt,
if all created will gives itself to love and obey the com-
mandment of God.

3. While the Waleuaenenee of Blanquerna reflected,
and mentally spake to his Will the aforementioned words,
the Will replied by asking if it were a licit thing to love
naught else save only God. The Understanding answered
_and said that it might love all things created so that it loved
them with respect to God—that is to say, if it loved them
that it might the better love God.

4. As the Understanding and the Will of Blanquerna
thus discoursed, the Memory recalled how in the Com-
mandment it is said that man is to love God with all his
soul; and being itself one of the three powers of the soul
it held itself obliged with all its might to remember virtue,
truth and glory. And Memory said to Understanding that
she recalled how that he, being one of the three powers of
eon was wholly constrained to comprehend the virtue,
50

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

truth and glory of God. When Understanding had com-
prehended the argument which Memory recalled and
related to him, he was conscious of the many times that
he had failed to comprehend the virtue, truth and glory of
God, that Will through faith should have the greater merit.
And since to Understanding in his totality has been given
as great a commandment as to Will, therefore the Under-
standing exalted himself in all his power to comprehend
the virtue, truth and glory of God, and besought forgiveness
because through ignorance he had gone astray, that faith
might be greater in Will.

5. Blanquerna said to God that His Justice was perfect,
and that therefore the commandment which He gave must
be just and perfect to all thought; which commandment
would have no perfection if it commanded human thought
otherwise than to love wholly the justice and perfection of
God, since thought is wholly created and dowered by the
justice and perfection of God. While Blanquerna thus
spake concerning thought, and concerning the justice and
perfection of God, Will said to Understanding that she set
her love more firmly upon the greater part of that which
he comprehended when he comprehended with all his
power. Thus was Understanding reproved as to that in
which for long he had erred—to wit, that he had not risen
to comprehend all that he might, that he might have the
greater glory. For the commandment is given to the whole
of thought, which signifies all the power of the under-
Standing. As Will said these words to Understanding,
came contrition to her, with consciousness that she had
not commanded Understanding to love God with all his
power, as commandment was given to her. Then, since
Will had contrition, Memory recalled that many a man
disobeys the commandment of God, yet thinks that he
obeys it, by exalting faith and mortifying the under-
Standing, through which mortification comes error, sin and

ignorance.
507)

BLANQUERNA

6. Again Blanquerna considered the commandment of
God to the Will, to wit, that man shall love God with all
his heart; and then, that he shall love Him with all his
soul; and again, that he shall love Him with all his thought.
Wherefore in these three times in which the commandment
is made, has man knowledge of the liberality of God which
brings mercy to his understanding, that it may comprehend
divers works in the three powers of the soul, according to
the diversity of the three commandments aforesaid. For
in that God commands man to love with all his heart is
signified faith, whereby the will may love above that which
the understanding can comprehend. In that He commands
man to love Him with all his soul is signified that all three
powers of the soul should be fixed equally on some end
equally remembered, comprehended and loved. And in
that He commands man to love Him with all his thought
is signified that God commands man wholly to exalt his
understanding, that in remembering God he may have
greater remembrance, and in loving Him greater will. And
the greatness of these lies in the exaltation of the under-
standing, whereby God loves to be widely known.

7. Blanquerna said to his soul that to love God with all
his heart and soul and thought is the first commandment;
wherefore the understanding comprehended the second
commandment in its relation to the first, in the which
second commandment was signified equality of love
between Blanquerna and his neighbour, in that God
commands the will that man shall love his neighbour
even as himself. And since He says not “ with all his
soul and all his thought’ nor even “ with all his heart,”
there is made a difference between the first command-
ment and the second, by the which difference is signified
that the first has precedence over the second, and that
the second is subjected and must be ruled by the firs;
so that man, in loving, comprehending and remembering

God above himself and his neighbour, may do obedience
508

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

and reverence in honouring the humility and dominion
of God.

8. To love, remember and comprehend God above all
beside, and one’s neighbour as oneself, are two command-
ments which are the beginnings of the others. He that in
these two commandments is obedient, obeys God in all the
rest; and he that in any of the others is disobedient to God
disobeys Him in the first two commandments; and he that
loves himself and his neighbour equally with God is dis-
obedient to the firs commandment and to all the rest.

CHAPTER X

OF THE MISERERE MEI DEUS

Wiru the virtues of our Lord God Blanquerna contem-
plated God in His Essence and Trinity and Incarnation in
the sayings of the holy Prophets, as exemplified in these
words: “ David begged forgiveness of God according to
His mercy, and therefore at the beginning his soul con-
sidered together grace and mercy, with goodness and
eternity; for the goodness of God is greater than any other
goodness, and His eternity than any abidingness soever.
And since goodness and eternity accord with greatness, and
the mercy of God is great over all other mercy, therefore
David besought goodness for the great good of piety, of
gifts and forgiveness; and he besought eternity that such
gifts and forgiveness might be eternal and without end.
And this petition he made because in the Divine Persons
there is conformity in personal properties, which are in
Essence goodness, greatness, eternity and mercy.”

2. ‘It beseemed not David to make distinction in the
Essence of God between greatness, mercy and justice; for
these are one thing only. In praying that God would
pardon him according to His great mercy, he signified His
great justice; for it beseems great mercy according to

Soo

BLANQUERNA

great justice to give and to pardon, and this signifies that
it is greater justice that great mercy should forgive great
faults and bestow great gifts than that lesser mercy should
grant gifts and forgiveness. And, were this not so, it would
follow that great mercy and great justice would have be-
tween each other no concord or agreement.”

3. When Blanquerna considered the words aforesaid,
his soul rejoiced greatly in his hope of the mercy and justice
of God and of their greatness; and therefore he understood
how great good, both endless and eternal, was prepared for
the man that begs for mercy from the greatness and justice
of God. When Blanquerna in the Essence of God had
contemplated goodness, greatness, eternity, mercy and
justice, he entered into another consideration, and con-
templated the virtues aforesaid in the three Divine Persons,
saying these words:

4. ‘“O Lord God Who art Father, great in Thy power,
knowledge and will, by virtue of Thy goodness, eternity,
mercy and justice! Behold David, in the person of the
Roman Church, beseeches Thy Son, Who is great in power,
knowledge and will by virtue of goodness, eternity, justice
and mercy; for in that he besought Thee to have mercy
according to Thy greatness, Thou must needs have mercy
with greatness as mighty as is Thine Own, which we our-
selves could not receive but with that which is equal to Thy
greatness, namely, Thy glorious Son, Whom Thou didst
give us in the Incarnation and Redemption. Through this
Thy Son is signified to us Thy glorious Trinity and Incar-
nation; for if in Thy Divine Nature there were no distinc-
tion of Persons, Thou couldét neither give nor pardon
according to Thy great mercy, for we should have no
strength to receive it. But since Thy Son was pleased to
take our flesh, therein could our poor nature receive it,
since in that Thy Son is God, He is equal in virtue with
Thy greatness, and in Him and through Him Thou, even

as Thou art, canst give and pardon and judge.”
ro

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

5. Blanquerna remembered truth, glory and perfeétion
in God, and through the words of David he comprehended
that greatness accords with truth, glory and perfection,
which greatness must needs be infinite, for were it finite
it would not accord with truth, glory and perfe€tion, which
are virtues infinite in God. Whence, as greatness and
mercy are infinite virtues, and as David besought mercy
according to the greatness of God, it is signified thereby
that the Son, in Whom is truth, glory and perfeétion, be-
sought the Father that His gifts and forgiveness might be
equal to the infinite grace which the Father has in truth,
glory and perfection. Whence, as this is so, it is signified
thereby that David besought God for His gifts and for-
giveness in the person of the humanity of Jesus Christ, to
the which humanity they could not have been given had
union not been made between it and some Person of equal
truth, glory and perfection, and further, with some Person
residing in the Divine Essence.

6. “ Liberality, humility, dominion and patience, O Lord
God,” said Blanquerna, “are in Thee virtues infinitely
great; for, were they not so, they would be contrary to
Thy mercy, which is infinite, and it would follow that
David would have begged of Thee gifts and forgiveness
which Thou couldst not have given him through defect of
Thy virtues. And since it is impossible that in Thee there
should be any defeét at all, Thy liberality must needs have
within it a gift proportionate to itself; in Thy humility
there must be that which is humble wherein all may humble
themselves; and Thy dominion must have that which is
proportionate to itself, that Thy mercy, likewise so pro-
portioned, may have a Lord Who can give. And it is
beseeming that Thy mercy have patience in giving the
same patience that is in itself. And were this not so,
David might have asked for greater Mercy than Thou
coulds have or give him, which is a thing wholly un-
beseeming.”’

gil

BLANQUERNA

4. According to the manner aforesaid, Blanquerna con-
templated God in His Essence, Trinity and Incarnation,
with his art, expounding the words of David together with
the Divine virtues. By this art man may reveal the secrets
and the dark sayings which were written by the Prophets
to the end that the understanding might exalt itself to
search the deep things of God, that its comprehension
might be higher, and in the heights of the understanding
the will might be lifted up to love God greatly in His
Essence, in His Trinity, in His Incarnation and in all His
works.

CHARTER’

OF THE SEVEN SACRAMENTS OF HOLY CHURCH

In the Sacraments of Holy Church Blanquerna was fain to
contemplate the virtues of God, and he spake to God in
these words: “‘O Lord God! In the Holy Sacrament of
Baptism willest Thou to show forth the greatness of Thy
power, knowledge, will and virtue; for by great virtue of
power, knowledge and will dost Thou reveal to our human
understanding a most strange and marvellous work in
Baptism, when, by water and by the words of the priest
and by the faith of the sponsors, the infant, who may not
use understanding or will, is in the Sacrament cleansed and
purified from original sin. This work, O Lord, is great
and marvellous above all works of nature, signifying that
Thy virtue is so great in power, knowledge and will that
Thou hast power, knowledge and will to work in super-
natural wise all that which is of Thy good will and pleasure.”

2. “As in a city, Lord, there are many and various
offices, even so in the city of Holy Mother Church are the
offices of the seven Sacraments. As all these offices serve
to ennoble the city, so the seven Sacraments serve to
demonstrate the noble use which Thy glorious virtues have

in the creatures, as is therein shown forth and revealed.
$12

“THE ART QF CONTEMPLATION”

And therefore, Lord, the goodness and greatness of Thy
dominion prove how all creatures are obedient in the seven
Sacraments to Thy power, knowledge and will.”

3. “ Glorious God! As the infant has no eyes of reason
till he is grown, the sponsors must needs have the virtue
which Thy virtue gives and renders to the infant when he
is of the age to be confirmed and to perform that which his
sponsors have promised for him. That the sponsors should
have such virtue, that at the confirmation of the child their
obligation should be fulfilled, and that the child should
receive virtue through his confirming by the Bishop—all
this is significant of great virtue, truth, perfe€tion and
dominion, which in the Sacrament of Confirmation perform
all that Thy will demands, without opposition of any other
power, which is powerless against Thine.”

4. Blanquerna was fain to enter into contemplation of
the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar with the Divine virtues; and
therefore at the beginning he direéted the powers of his
soul towards that contemplation, to the end that, when he
should be engaged therein, he might not be impeded by
insubordinate remembrance or will, nor yet, through his
bodily senses, be disobedient to the Divine virtues. And
therefore he said to his soul these words:

5. “ Osoul, my friend! Thou knowest that the humility
of God is great, and great equally therewith is His Power;
and since humility and power are one thing in virtue with
wisdom, will, truth and perfection, the bodily eyes which
see bread made Flesh in the Sacrifice of the Altar are little
prone to be disobedient to the Divine virtues aforesaid,
which are so great that they have power and will and know-
ledge, that beneath the form of bread there may be Very
Flesh and Very Blood of the Body of Jesus Christ. And
if this could not be so, it would follow that the eyes had
truer power to take for objects corporal things than hast
thou, my soul, to take Divine virtues and their works,
Furthermore it would follow that there would be lack of

2K be

BLANQUERNA

greatness in the virtues of God, and that truth would accord
better with bodily things than with spiritual. And this is
a thing ill-beseeming, since God is spiritual Essence and
His virtues are spiritual, and the body and the bodily senses
are things corporal and corruptible.”

6. For a great space Blanquerna conversed in his mind
with the three powers of his soul. Understanding an-
swered him, saying that he comprehended such greatness
in the virtue and the power of God that He could cause
Very Flesh and Very Blood to be, under the form of bread;
but he comprehended not the reason why God should will
to make that Sacrament nor why He had need to make it.
Blanquerna answered Understanding, saying that he should
unite in his comprehension the great goodness, wisdom,
love, perfection, humility, liberality, mercy and patience of
God, and comprehend how great is the power shown by
God in that there may be accidents without substance, and
substance without accidents. So great a work cannot be
performed in the course of nature; therefore, if it be per-
formed by the power of God, that power is seen the more
clearly to be above nature. And since the will desires this
in order that the power may be seen to be the greater and
nobler, it is shown to have more of love than has power;
and if neither the power could work it nor the will desire
it, so great a good would not accord with knowledge, nor
would humility be so great towards us, nor would mercy,
liberality or patience accord so well with goodness and
greatness; and because in this work we may know that
the nobility of the Divine virtues accords best with great-
ness, virtue and truth, hereby is signified the reason why
God has willed to create and order the Holy Sacrament of
the Altar. | .

7. Understanding, my friend!” said Blanquerna,
“ Strive thou in virtue, for thou hast more virtue in under-
Standing, than have the eyes of the body in seeing, or the
senses of taste and touch in tasting and touching, for in
514

ae ant Or CONTEMPLATION”

many a thing dost thou see these err and fail daily. Let
not thyself be vanquished by the bodily senses, but defend
thyself from them by the Divine virtues. Comprehendest
thou how wondrous a work is the Trinity in God, and how
far above nature is the Incarnation of the Son of God? To
show forth the wonder of this work, God was pleased to
institute the Holy Sacrifice, that thereby we might have
daily remembrance of the wondrous and supernatural work
of the Divine virtues. For as we ourselves, corporally and
physically, make the sign of the figure of our Lord God
Jesus Christ on the Cross, even so in the Sacrifice of the
Altar is made the sign of the miraculous and spiritual work
which is performed by the Divine virtues.”

8. Understanding considered deeply the words which
Blanquerna spake to him, and comprehended by these
words that the imagination had for long impeded him from
comprehending the Sacrament of the Altar, because it
caused him to represent it to himself more powerfully in its
physical and natural aspect than as in the virtues and the
works of his glorious God, to which virtues and works
imagination could not soar. And therefore Understanding
performed the words of Blanquerna, and he soared aloft in
adoration and contemplation of the Holy Sacrament of the
Altar.

g. There was debate between the Memory of Blan-
querna and his Understanding, which Sacrament was more
opposed to the bodily senses,—the Sacrament of the Altar
or the Sacrament of Penance. For the Memory recalled
that man has sinned against God, and that the Holy
Apostolic Father is a man, and that men are his ministers
who absolve and pardon and give penance to their fellow-
men. And Understanding said that the Sacrament of the
Altar manifests itself in bodily and sensible form, having
indeed bodily form, but a form invisible to the bodily senses.
For a great space Understanding and Memory held debate
upon this matter, and they came to Blanquerna for judg-

oe)

BLANQUERNA

ment. And Blanquerna said that the Sacraments were
equally opposed to the senses, for by the Divine virtues,
which are incorporeal, were created and instituted the two
Sacraments aforesaid and likewise the rest, all of them super-
natural, that their sovereignty over virtue natural and
created might be shown. And when Blanquerna gave this
sentence, he spake these words:

10. “ As the Divine virtue causes the virtue of Flesh and
Blood to exist under the form of bread, so also It causes
the virtue of pardon to exist under the form of a man,—
to wit, the priest. And as the virtue which is of Flesh
and Blood, under the form of the Host, is not of the Host,
but of God, so the virtue of the priest in pardoning is not
of the priest, but under the form of the priest is the Virtue
of God.” a :

11. “ Blanquerna! ” said Remembrance, ‘“‘ As thou dost
speak thus subtly, couldst thou prove to me that since God
has power to make the Sacrament of Penance He must
needs will that this Sacrament should be, for God can do
many things which His Will desires not to perform?”
Blanquerna answered, and said that as in the great good-
ness, mercy, humility and virtue of God and in His other
attributes it is signified that God wills and needs must will
according to the greatness of His justice, which wills that
the virtues be shown forth in exceeding greatness through
the Sacrament of the Altar, so by that same ordinance,
great justice wills, and must needs will, that the Sacrament
of Penance exigt, that the Divine virtues may be shown
forth, and men may be direéted in contrition, penance,
restitution, counsel, affliction, repentance, hope and other
things like to these, which could not be without the Sacra-
ment of Penance.

12. To signify the order which is in the three Divine
Persons, and how by means of this order the Person of the
Son came to take our human nature, and how lack of order

beseems not Baptism and Confirmation, the Holy Sacrifice,
516

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

Penance, Matrimony and Un@tion, therefore is it fitting
that there be an Order of Priesthood whereby may be
ordered each one of the Sacraments aforesaid. And this is
signified in the Divine virtues and in the greatness according
to the which they are signified and demonStrated to us.

13. In the virtues aforesaid Blanquerna perceived the
Order of Matrimony, even as he had seen in them the other
sacraments. And he saw that as justice signified that in
temporal things a difference is made to divers men, so also.
it made it meet that a difference should be made between
man and woman, that chastity and virginity should be con-
trary to lasciviousness, and that from sensual things the
powers of the soul may take order and arrangement, and
the commandments of the Divine Sovereignty may be
obeyed.

14. “In the Earthly Paradise,” said Memory to Will,
““God created matrimony, and in significance of that
matrimony He wills that in this world the Sacrament of
Matrimony shall exist; for, if it were not, the wisdom and
will of God would not unite with perfection in showing
forth the great glory of God which accords with justice, to
the which is opposed irregular union between man and
woman. Through such irregularity man is unworthy of
coming to the glory of God, for it would be against both
greatness and perfection if man, after irregular union be-
tween man and woman, came to the truth and glory of
God. And Divine Wisdom and Virtue would have placed
greater virtue in the bodily elements which duly join and
unite, that a body may be duly begotten, than in the wills
of man and woman, to the end that children may be begotten
and the human race preserved in the world.”

15. Blanquerna remembered that in this world man has
a beginning, a mean and an end, and that for this cause,
to signify the eternal dominion of God, Divine Wisdom
has ordained that at the entrance of man into the world the
first sacrament should be Baptism, and that Extreme

Be |

BLANQUERNA
Un@tion should be the last; and thus is signified the sub-

mission wherein man has lived in the world, in his obedience
to the first sacrament and to the others which are between
the first and the last. And since justice has greater reason
to judge one that is obedient unto law, and mercy to pardon
him by Confession, Contrition, Confirmation and the other
sacraments from first to last, therefore the great Justice and
Sovereignty of God wills that Extreme Unction may be a
sacrament, that thereby a seal, as it were, may be set upon
all the other sacraments, and the sacrifice shown forth of
the Body of Our Lord God upon the Cross, which Body
was anointed with His sacred Blood, with the tears which
flowed from His eyes, and the sweat which came to Him
in the agony of His death.

CHAPTER XII

OF VIRTUES

BLANQuERNA remembered the seven virtues which many a
time had aided him against the Spirit of Evil, and in them
he was fain to contemplate the Divine virtues which the
seven virtues had revealed to htm. Wherefore he said these
words: “ O Faith, that art worthy of all love, great art thou
in believing great things of God, and good art thou, since
by thee man comes to eternal happiness; illumined with
Divine wisdom art thou through the light of grace; that
which is true dost thou love, for the love of the King of
Heaven makes thee to love His virtue and truth, His glory
and perfection.”

2. “O Faith, my friend! Thou dost believe in God, in
Unity of Essence and Trinity of Persons. A great thing
is it to believe in things invisible, to believe that infinite
Good is that which is infinitely and eternally engendered
from infinite and eternal Good. And to believe that from

both issues infinite and eternal Good is a belief truly great
518

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

and marvellous, and illumined with the wondrous bright-
ness of the light of grace. And therefore, O Faith so lovely,
since thou art great, my soul must needs give great thanks
and render a tribute of great love to the Eternal Greatness
and Goodness which has made thee to be so great, and in
thy greatness has made me great likewise.”

3. “ Through thee, O Faith, I do believe that by great
charity, power, knowledge, humility and mercy, the Son of
God took flesh of our Lady Saint Mary, which flesh He
united with Himself, becoming therewith one Person having
Natures human and Divine without corruption, alteration,
composition and accident of Divine Nature, and without
change of the human nature which He assumed. Where-
fore I believe these things so great and marvellous by the
exceeding greatness and virtue, doctrine, mercy and be-
nignity of the Sovereign Good; and therefore my soul is
greatly constrained to remember, comprehend, love, honour
and serve the Divine virtues which thou, O Faith, dost make
to shine in me so numerously and with so great grace and
such brightness.”

4. Blanquerna discoursed in his soul with Hope, and
said that of great things man should have great hope; for
from such great goodness, greatness, eternity, power,
wisdom, love, virtue, truth, glory, perfection, justice,
liberality, whence is engendered and whence issues such
great good as the virtues aforesaid, should be hoped and
desired great happiness. For it is impossible that from
such great and noble things as those aforesaid there should
not flow an influence exceeding great of so great happiness
to lovers of the Divine virtues.

5. “‘ Consider, O Hope, how great a thing it is that the
Son of God, Who is so great in virtues, should unite Him-
self with man’s own human nature, which is a thing created,
and to give that creature to death and torment for us sinners
and that thou mayest be greater in trusting in the virtues of
the Sovereign Good. See, O Hope, how that God has

ee,

BLANQUERNA

created things great and many and various and beautiful
and virtuous and good: angels, heavens, sun, moon, stars,
earth, sea, men, beasts, birds, fishes, plants, metals and
other things created. Wherefore, as these things aforesaid
are so many, so noble and so great, therefore, O Hope, it
behoves thee to trust and hope in goodness, greatness,
eternity, power, etc., for great blessings and graces.”

6. ““O Hope, were there no Trinity or Incarnation,
thou could& not hope for such great gifts and blessings
from God as now thou canst. For the virtues of God would
not show themselves to be so great in our sight as in fact
they show themselves, seeing that Trinity and Incarnation
exist. And if Resurre€tion were not, thou wouldst be less
than thou art, for we should not see the charity nor the
power, nor the mercy, humility, dominion and patience
which in God are so great, as we see them in believing the
Resurrection to be true. And therefore, O Hope, we see,
thou and I, together with the Divine virtues, Resurrection,
and the greatness of the Divine virtues together with the
Resurretion. And therefore, O Faith and Hope, do ye
agree in being the greater in yourselves, and we are the
greater in you, and we have greater agreement thereby with
belief.”

7. “OQ Divine Love, that hast within thyself a Lover
infinite and eternal in loving! From Thee, that art so
great in Thy heights in all perfeétion, shall come all graces;
for if in Thine Essence there are Persons three, Beloved
and Loving, Eternal and Infinite in power, knowledge,
will, virtue, perfection and glory, from that great inflowing
of love which is in Thee will so much come to us here below
that we shall love to honour and serve no other, save Thyself
alone.”

8. “ It is the nature of good that it shall engender other
good, and it is the nature of power that it shall engender
other power; and the same is true of virtue, glory and
perfection, Wherefore, since thou art so great and so noble,
520 |

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

O Love, for thou art infinite in goodness, eternity, wisdom,
power and the like, how may it be that we, who are thy
creatures, created by thee anew, thy slaves whom thou hast
bought, are not enamoured of thee more strongly ?. Wherein,
O Love, is the accord which thou hast with liberality, mercy,
humility and patience? For with such accord must there
needs be pity in thee, and in ourselves must there be happi-
ness, hope and love.”

g. ““ O Divine Justice ! Among ourselves justice is predi-
cated of the just; and in Thee just and justice are one and
the same thing. Then, since Thou art just and justice
infinite in Being and Essence without difference, and since
that which is in Thee just and justice, Being and Essence,
is goodness, eternity, power, wisdom, love, virtue, truth,
glory, perfection, mercy, liberality, humility, dominion and
patience, it must needs be, according to such universal
virtues and properties, that Thou art to ourselves just and
justice, with mercy, humility, charity and patience, and that
of Thee we have justice, whereby we may live justly,
praising, honouring and serving Thee. And if in ourselves
there is no justice of that justice which is in Thee, where
then is the influence which from Thy justice comes to us?
And where is the accord that is between Thy justice and
Thy goodness, charity, mercy, humility, liberality and
patience?”

10. ‘‘O Divine Essence! The great justice which is in
Thee causes the Just, Infinite, Eternal in goodness, power,
wisdom and charity to engender Another Just, Infinite,
Eternal in goodness, power, wisdom and charity, and from
both of these Just aforesaid proceeds Another, Eternal and
Infinite in goodness, power, wisdom and charity. Where-
fore, as this is so, there proceeded from this Thy justice so
great an influence that it made One of ourselves to be one
Person with One of the Three that are in Thyself. Whence,
from the great inflowing of justice which came to One of
us with charity, mercy and humility, there will come to us

521

BLANQUERNA

all that whereby we may become just in loving, knowing,
honouring and serving Thee. And if this Thou dost not,
where is the influence of humility, patience, charity and
liberality that is in Thee? Or Who is that Lord that is
ours, since it is a reasonable thing that a lord should love,
help and bestow gifts upon his subjects? ”’

11. “I pray Thy power, knowledge and will, O Lord
God, for prudence, which Thou wilt give me through the
benignity which is in Thee, according to justice and mercy.
Through Thy power and knowledge canst Thou give it
me, and since I ask it therewith to love Thee, therefore
truth and justice should make Thee to love prudence in
me, that thereby I may know Thee, and knowing, love Thee,
and through this knowledge and love may know and will
to praise, honour, obey and serve Thee.”

12. “O Greatness of justice! If Thou wilt have this
justice, O Lord God, upon us sinners to punish us, then
mayest Thou exercise it the better if Thou dost punish us
who know Thy Trinity and Incarnation and yet honour,
love and serve Thee not, rather than those who know not
Trinity in Thee, and who knowing not the Incarnation,
believe it not. And if Thou wilt have mercy, humility and
pity on us, Thou mayest the better have it if we know Thee
and love Thee, than if we are disobedient to Thee through
ignorance. Wherefore, as this is so, then, according to all
these reasons and many besides, Thou wilt give prudence
to ourselves, faithful Christians, and to unbelievers alike,
that we may know and love Thee, since Thy liberality
accords with Thy will, which has created us principally
that we may know and love Thee before all things
else.”

[13. ““ Ah Temperance, my friend! Daily do I need
thee against my enemies, who hinder me from contem-
plating the virtues of my Lord, for Whose sake I have
come to this hermitage. I beg for thee of the virtues of

the Lord Who has created thee, for I need thee in order
Ke.

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

to serve them. Father and mother, kindred and wealth
have | left, that in this hermitage I may company with thee.
Without thee can man do naught againgt gluttony or
drunkenness, though he wear honest raiment or embrace
the estate of the hermit or the religious life. And I may
not have thee without the goodness, greatness, wisdom,
power, love, virtue, humility, mercy, and liberality of the
Lord, in Whom are all these virtues.”

14. ““O Temperance, man cannot overmuch remember
God, nor understand nor love Him; but by surfeit of
remembrance, understanding and love with weeping and
fasting, afflictions and vigils, the body weakens and lan-
guishes and dies, and the soul may not as fervently or
continuously contemplate the virtues of God. Therefore,
O Temperance, do I need thee both in body and spirit:
give thyself to me that thou mayest possess me and be my
ruler, and no longer be in the servitude of my gluttony and
my belly.” In this manner and in many another did Blan-
querna pray for virtues created to virtues uncreate that he
might therewith serve God.

CHRAPTER XIII

OF VICES

BLANQUERNA remembered the seven deadly sins whereby
the world is in disorder, namely the world created by the
virtues of God. And therefore Blanquerna enquired of
Divine Goodness: “‘ Whence come these demons afore-
said, to wit, the seven deadly sins, which destroy the
world?’ Wherefore Blanquerna said these words: “‘ Sove-
reign Goodness, that art so great in virtue and perfection,
and that in eternity and nobility art above all creatures!
Whence have come gluttony, lust, covetousness, sloth,
pride, envy and anger? For these seven beasts destroy,
corrupt and ruin the good things which are Thine by

a3

BLANQUERNA

creation and sovereignty. And since Thou art so powerful,
wise, loving and virtuous, wherefore dost Thou suffer that
so much evil, deception, error, affliction and ignorance
should be in the world through the seven demons afore-
said?”

2. “ If Thou, O Goodness, wert evil or defe& of good,
these seven deadly sins might have come from Thee.
Wherefore, since Thou art fulness of all fulness, and since
perfection is contrary to defeét, and since all sin and evil
must needs have a beginning, let Thy Eternity, then, which
existed before such beginning was, tell me whence have
come sin and defect.”

3. Blanquerna contemplated Sovereign Goodness in
greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, love, etc., according
to the manner aforesaid, and he felt in his soul that Memory
and Understanding were holding converse. Memory said
to Understanding that she recalled how that Will desired
gluttony, lust and thzir companions. And Understanding
answered that the desire that desired gluttony or lust or
other vice is born of the will, and therefore the will is to
blame because from it proceeds the desire which desires
sin, and through that desire the understanding which com-
prehends sin is to blame, and the desire and the free will
with that will inclines to desire sin. And therefore the
memory which recalls all these things is to blame. And
since Memory, Understanding and Will are creatures of
Sovereign Goodness, and give occasion to remember, under-
stand and love sin, therefore said the Understanding of
Blanquerna to his Memory, justifying the goodness of God,
that the seven demons have their beginnings in the works
of remembrance, understanding and will, which treat of
things displeasing to the goodness of God.

4. “O Divine Wisdom! Thou that art Light of all
lights, show me the manner and the art whereby I may
mortify the seven vices in my memory, understanding and
will.” Then Memory recalled the Divine virtues; Under-
$24

“THE ART OF CONTEMPLATION”

standing comprehended the shortness of life in this world
and the pains of hell; Will loved God and all His virtues,
ceased to love sin and prayed for pardon, and despised the
vanity of this world. And Blanquerna felt in his soul that
his vices and sins were mortified through the working of
his remembrance, understanding and will. And therefore
he spake to Divine Wisdom these words:

5. “ O Sovereign Doétrine! From Thee comes virtue,
from Thy power comes power, and from Thy love comes
desire to the soul which desires to remember, comprehend
and love Thee. When memory desires not to remember
Thee, nor understanding to comprehend Thee, nor will to
love Thee, come wrongs and faults from that which the will
has no will to desire, and from that which it wills to desire
in remembering, comprehending and loving or loving not.
And therefore, O Sovereign Doétrine, be Thine all my
remembering, understanding and desiring, together with
my memory, understanding and will, that I may contem-
plate, remember, comprehend and love Thy virtues, and
cease to love vices, wrongs and sins, to the end that Thy
praise, Thy honour and Thy dominion may daily be in my
memory, understanding and will.”

6. “O Sovereign Liberality and Mercy! Thou hast
given me memory to remember, understanding to com-
prehend, and will to love Thy virtues. But these suffice
me not if Thou give me not remembrance in remembering
Thy virtues, understanding in comprehending them, and
will in desiring them, and if Thou give me not the seven
virtues which are opposed to the seven deadly sins, I pray
Thee, too, to give me remembrance, understanding and
will to remember, understand and cease from loving
gluttony, lust and the other vices. Wherefore, since Thy
power can give me all these things which are so needful to
me, and since for all these things Thou hast created me,
I pray Thee to grant me gifts whereby all my powers may
honour Thy graces.”

be)

BLANQUERNA

7. “O Glory and Perfection! To give the power to sin
is to give occasion for having faith, hope, charity and the
other virtues. The gift of the power to have faith, hope,
charity and the like, is a gift against gluttony, lust and the
other vices. Wherefore I pray Thee to give me these
virtues, and therewith freedom as to sin, that Thou mayest
grant me to remember, comprehend and love Thy graces,
and to remember, comprehend and cease to love my sins
and the vain delights of this world.” Blanquerna wept and
sighed as he prayed for these gifts, and God granted him
that which he desired, and Blanquerna rendered Him
thanks with tears. The contemplation and devotion which
Blanquerna had, and the art and manner thereof, none can
tell it neither explain it, save only God.

ENDED JIS THE BOOK OF “THE Vig,
OF CONTEMPLATION”

526

CHAPTER C

OF THE END OF THE BOOK

One day Blanquerna was contemplating God, and he had
with him the Book of Contemplation! ; and there came to
Blanquerna a jester,? full of tears, and giving signs in his
features that the sorrow of his soul was very great; and he
spake to Blanquerna these words: ‘‘ Blanquerna, my lord |
The fame of thy holy life has gone out through all the
world, whereat my conscience torments me with contrition
of soul, for the faults which I have committed in my office;
wherefore have I come to thee that thou mayest give me
penance.”” Blanquerna enquired of him what was his office,
and he answered that he was a jester. “‘ Fair friend! ” said
Blanquerna: “ The office of jester was made with good
intent, namely, to praise God and to give solace and com-
fort to them that are tried and tormented in the service of
God. But we have come to a time wherein scarce any man
fulfils the final intent for the which all offices were in the
first place ordained; for the office of clerk was founded first
of all upon a good intent, and the same is true of the office
of knight, jurist, artist, physician, merchant, religious,
hermit and every other office; but now have we come to
a time wherein a man fulfils not as much as he might the
intention for the which the offices and sciences were made.
And for this cause the world is in error and strife, and God
is neither known nor loved nor obeyed by those that are
bound to love and know and obey and serve Him. Where-
fore, fair friend, I give thee this penance, that thou go
throughout the world, crying out and singing first of one
office and then of another, and making known the intent
for the which were made in the beginning the office of ©
jester and all other offices. Thou shalt bear with thee like-
wise this romance of Evast and Blanquerna, wherein are
signified the reasons for the which in the beginning the
offices aforementioned were established; thou shalt reprove

1 See note, p. 407. 2 juglar. See note, p. 175.

527

BLANQUERNA

and correét all such as use not their offices well, according
to thy power, and according to time and place and oppor-
tunity; and fear thou not reproofs, neither trials nor death,
in being pleasing to God.”’ The jester took this penance
of Blanquerna, and received the office which he had given
him, and went through all the world relating the intent
wherein were made the offices of theology, clerkship,
religion, chivalry, prelacy, lordship, merchandise, medicine,
law, philosophy and other things like to these; and he
reproved those that kept not the final intent for the which
these things aforementioned were established, and in public
places and in courts and in monasteries he read the romance
of Evaést and Blanquerna to the end that devotion should
be increased, and that he might have the greater strength
and courage of mind to perform the penance which Blan-
querna had given to him.

2. We have related the romance of Evast and Blan-
querna, and the tale now returns to the Emperor whom
Blanquerna found in the forest; the which Emperor had
made ordinance concerning his empire to his son, for whom
he made the Book of the Doctrine of Princes, according to the
which he should rule his house and his person and his land;
and after all these things he forsook the world, and went to
seck Blanquerna, to the end that they might together live
the lives of hermits and contemplate our Lord God.

3. While the Emperor went in search of Blanquerna he
met a Bishop who was going to the Court to expound the
Brief Art of Finding Truth, the which Bishop purposed to
plead with the Lord Pope that this art might be read and
expounded in all seminaries of common studies, to the end
that through exaltation of the understanding there might
be greater devotion in the world to the love and honour
and service of God, and that greater knowledge of Him
might be given to the unbelievers who journey in ignorance
to eternal torment; and to the end that this task might be

accomplished, the Bishop purposed to give up all the days
528

OF THE END OF THE BOOK

of his life and all the income of his diocese. When the
Emperor and the Bishop had met, they made the acquaint-
ance the one of the other, and greeted and welcomed each
other very courteously. Each enquired of the other con-
cerning his estate and his purpose, and each gave the
other fitting answer. Great pleasure had the Emperor at
the devotion of the Bishop and the Bishop at the
devotion of the Emperor, the which Emperor prayed the
Bishop to be an advocate, in the Court of Rome, of
Valour, who by so many persons has been wronged and
prevented from giving due praise and honour to God;
and he begged him to command the Jester of Valour to
sing these stanzas in the Court, to the end that the Pope
and the Cardinals might have the better remembrance of
the lives of the Apostles, in whose time there yet lived
holiness of life and devotion and valour:

§] O God, true Lord, our glorious King,
Who with us men dost deign to be,
Remember those that to Thee sing,
Who fain would suffer death for Thee.
O, make them worthy praise to bring,
And service to Thy Majesty

With all their might,
For all they wish and hope must be
Good in Thy sight.

§ Once more is born a fervent zeal,

Once more an apostolic love,

In those who as they praise Thee kneel

The sweet assault of death to prove.

Let him go forth whose faith is real

The wondrous power of God above
O’er earth to cry—

For God all-wise, our hearts to move,
Came from on high.

1 The metre and rime-scheme of these verses correspond exactly to that
of their original,—as also do those of the verses on p. 300,—except that in
the Catalan the two final quatrains have the same rimes as the latter half of
che stanza preceding them.

21 529

BLANQUERNA

q The Minorites from near and far,

Remembering God’s blessed Son,

Who calls us to a holy war,

And bids us work with Him as one,

Have made the house of Miramar,

By fair Majorca’s king begun
The Moors to save,

For whom our God great things has done
Their souls to have.

But what see we the Preachers do
That love so much to serve! our Lord?
Where do the priors and abbots go,
Bishops, that great possessions hoard,
Prelates, that prize this world below,
Kings sleeping with unbuckled sword

In sloth so base,
Yet thinking to have Heaven’s reward
And see God’s Face.

{ Both great and small, both young and old,

Delight to scoff and do me wrong,

While sighs and tears of love untold

My body make to suffer long.

But memory, will and mind are bold,

And joyfully I’ll sing this song
Throughout my days;

To Him alone will I belong
And tell His praise.

| Sweet Mary would I serve right well,
As I have done.
Through her I lost all fear of hell

And new love won.

{| Blanquerna! Who can show thy cell?
Where art thou gone?
Fain would I be where thou dost dwell
With God alone!

4. “ How, lord!”’ said the Bishop to the Emperor:
“ Hast thou likewise knowledge of Blanquerna?”” The
Emperor answered him and related how that he had met

1 servir (P, D). The other versions have /ruir, “ have fruition of.”

53g

OF THE END OF THE BOOK

Blanquerna one day when he was going alone through that
forest wherein Blanquerna sought his hermitage, and how
he had promised him that he would make satisfa€tion to
Valour for the wrong which he had done her. The Bishop
recounted to the Emperor the holy life of Blanquerna, and
showed him the parts wherein he could find the place where
Blanquerna lived the life of a hermit. Right pleased was
the Emperor at that which the Bishop had related to him
concerning Blanquerna, and that he had shown him the
ways whereby he might find him. The Bishop took the
stanzas, and bade the Emperor very courteously adieu, and
commended him to the benediction of God.

7 ENDED IS THE ROMANCE OF EVAST AND BLANQUERNA
WHICH IS OF THE LIFE OF MATRIMONY AND OF THE ORDER
OF CLERGY, TO GIVE DOCTRINE WHEREBY MAN MAY SO LIVE
IN THIS WORLD THAT IN THE NEXT HE MAY DWELL ETERNALLY
IN THE GLORY OF GOD.

531

APPENDIX I

ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPHS OF THE “‘ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND
TME BELOVED,”’ FOUND IN CERTAIN VERSIONS ONLY

Tur Lower entered a delightful meadow, and saw in the
meadow many children who were pursuing butterflies, and
trampling dewn the flowers; and the more the children
labowreé to catch the butterflies, the higher did these fly.
And the Lover, as he watched them, said: “‘ Such are they
whe with subtle reasoning attempt to comprehend the
Beloved, Who opens the doors to the simple and closes
them to the subtle. And Faith reveals the secrets of the
Scloved through the casement of love.”

The Lever went one day into a cloister, and the monks
enquired ot him if he, teo, were a religious. “ Yea,” he
answered, “ot the order of my Beloved.” ‘ What rule
dest theu follow?” He answered: “ The rule of my Be-
lowed.” “ To wham art thou vowed?” He said: “To
my Beleved.” “ Hast thou thy will?’ He answered:
“Nay, it is given to my Beloved.” “ Hast thou added
aught to the rule of thy Beloved? ’’ He answered: “* Naught
can be added to that which is already perfeét.” “‘ And
wheretore,”” continued the Lover, “ do not ye that are re-
ligious take the Name of my Beloved? May it not be that,
as ve bear the name of another, your love may grow less,
and, hearing the voice of another, ye may not catch the
voice of the Beloved?”

They asked the Lover: “‘ What is the world?” He
answered: “ [tis a book for such as can read, in the which
is revealed my Beloved.” They asked him: “ Is thy Be-
loved, then, in the world?’’ He answered: “ Yea, even
as the writer is in his book.”’ “ And wherein consists this
book f’’ He answered: “In my Beloved, since my Be-
loved contains it all, and theretore is the world in my
Beloved rather than my Beloved in the world.”

“Say, O Lover, who is he that loves and seems to thee
as a fool?” The Lover answered: ‘“‘ He that loves the
shadow and makes no account of the truth.” ‘“ And whom
dost thou call rich?’ ‘ He that loves truth.” “ And who
is poor?’ ** He that loves falsehood.”

532

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

They asked the Lover: ‘Is the world to be loved?”
He answered: “ Truly it is, but as a piece of work, for its
artificer’s sake, or as the night by reason of the day which
follows it.” : ‘

The Lover gazed at the rainbow, and it seemed to him
as though it were of three colours. And hecried: “‘ O mar-
vellous distinction of three, for the three together are one!
And how can this be in the image, unless it be so of itself,
in truth?”

Two men were disputing concerning simplicity, the one
against the other. And the one said: “ The simple man
is he that knows naught.” The other said: “ The simple
man is he that lives without sin.””. And the Lover came and
said: “ True simplicity has he that commits all his ways
to my Beloved. For simplicity is to exalt faith above under-
standing, which it so far exceeds, and in all that pertains
to my Beloved it is to avoid completely all things vain,
superfluous, curious, over-subtle and presumptuous. For
all these are contrary to simplicity.”

Another time they both enquired of him, asking that he
would tell them if the science of the simple is a great one.
He answered: ‘‘ The science of great sages is as a great
heap of a few grains, but the science of the simple is a small
heap of numberless grains, because neither presumption
nor curiosity nor over-subtlety is added to the heap of
simple men.” “ And what is the work of presumption and
curiosity? ’’ ‘The Lover answered: “ Vanity is the mother
of curiosity, and pride is the mother of presumption, and
therefore is their work the work of vanity and pride. And
the enemies of my Beloved are known by presumption and:
curiosity, even as love for Him is acquired by simplicity.” .

Many lovers came together, and they enquired of the
Messenger of Love where and in what thing the heart was
most ardently inflamed with devotion and love. The
Messenger of Love answered: “In the House of God,
when we humble ourselves and adore Him with all our
powers; for He alone is Holiest of the holy. And they
that know not how to do this, know not what it is truly to
love Him.”

Soe

BLANQUERNA

The Lover thought upon his sins, and for fear of hell
he would fain have wept, but he could not. So he begged
Love to give him tears, and Wisdom answered that he must
weep earnestly and often, but for the love of his Beloved
rather than for the pains of hell; for tears of love are more
pleasing to Him than tears shed through fear.

The Lover obeyed Wisdom; and, on the one hand, he
shed many and great tears for the sake of Love, and, on
the other, few and small tears for fear, that by love and not
by fear he might honour his Beloved. And the tears which
he shed for love brought him solace and repose, while the
tears of fear gave him sorrow and tribulation.

They asked the Lover in what manner the heart of man
was turned towards the love of his Beloved. He answered
them and said: ‘‘ Even as the sunflower turns to the sun.”
“‘ How is it, then, that all men love not thy Beloved?”
He answered: ‘‘ They that love Him not have night in
their hearts, because of their sin.”’

The Lover met an astrologer, and enquired of him:
‘“‘ ‘What means thy astrology?”’ He answered: “It is a
science that foretells things to come.” “‘ Thou art deceived,”
said the Lover; “it is no science, but one falsely so called.
It is necromancy, or the black art, in disguise, and the
science of deceiving and lying prophets which dishonour
the work of the sovereign Master. At all times it has been
the messenger of evil tidings; and it runs clean contrary
to the providence of my Beloved, for in place of the evils
which it threatens He promises good things.”

The Lover went forth, crying: ‘‘ Oh, how vain are all
they that follow after lust of knowledge and presumption |!
For through lust of knowledge do they fall into the greatest
depths of impiety, insulting the Name of God and with
curses and incantations invoking evil spirits as good angels,
investing them with the names of God and of good angels,
and profaning holy things with figures and images and by
writings. And through presumption all errors are implanted
in the world.” And the Lover wept bitterly for all the
insults which are offered to his Beloved by ignorant men.

One day the Lover was looking towards the east, and
504

“ BOOK OF THE LOVER AND THE BELOVED”

towards the west, towards the south and towards the north,
and he espied the Sign of his Beloved. And therefore he
caused that Sign to be engraven, and at each of its four
extremities he had a precious jewel set, as bright as the
sun. That Sign he wore ever upon him, and it brought
the Truth to his remembrance.

The Lover passed through divers places, and found many
men who were rejoicing, laughing and singing, and living
in great joy and comfort. And he wondered if this world
were meant for laughing or for weeping.

So the Virtues came, to pronounce upon that question.
And Faith said: ‘‘ It is for weeping, because the faithless
are more in number than the believers.” Hope said: “ It
is for weeping, because few are they that hope in God,
whereas many put their trust in the riches of earth.”
Charity said: “It is for weeping, because they that love
God and their neighbour are so few.” And there followed
the other Virtues, and so declared they all.

The lovers sought to prove the messenger of Love, and
they said that they should go through the world, crying
that worshippers must honour servants as servants and the
Lord as a lord, that their requests might better be heard,
and because there needs not to love, save the Beloved, nor
to trust, save in Him alone. i P

They asked the messenger of Love whence came to the
Beloved so many useless servants, viler, more abject and
more contemptible than secular men. The messenger of
Love answered.and said: “‘ They come through the fault
of those whose task it is to furnish their Sovereign,—the
King of Kings,—the Beloved,—with servants. They make
no question, as they ought, concerning the wisdom or the
lives or the habits of those whom,they choose. And those
whom they will not take for His train they allow to serve
the Eternal King in His palace, and in the most holy
minigtry of His Table. Wherefore ougth they to fear the
severest retributions when they are called by the Beloved
to their account.” ~

They asked the Lover this question: > Wherein dies
« a @
520

BLANQUERNA

love?” The“Lover answered: “In the delights of this
world.” ‘And whence has it life and sustenance?” “ In
thoughts of the world to come.” Wherefore they that had
inquired of him prepared to renounce this world, that they
might think the more deeply upon the next, and that their
love might live and find nourishment.

APPENEE GT!

INDEX TO PRINCIPAL WORDS UPON WHICH NOTES
ARE TO BE FOUND IN THE TEXT

@
advocate”; 320 Master of the Schools 270 °
art 114 Natana 60
Beloved 150 naught, nothingness 497
castle * 286 occasion an
cellarer 7, 267 orchard a
cellaress 132 order et 40
chaplaincy , 6296 peasant » ji 245
church 107 | powem  - 400
compartments 116 question — 4.29
defect 477 | Redeemer, redemption
despair e- 180] © See Restorer ;
disvalour 175 religion 98 |
draper | 86 religious life 98, 225

* effectual 238 representative*, > 320
example 189 resolve 500
farmer 245 Restorer 76
feel, feeling > ae sir |
forgiveness 202 sirvente
fortune 41 solitary
frail 64 student
fruitful = 5 trees =,

Gentile 311; Bea unloved

gifts m2 valiancy

hate . 148 valour

infused science 248 village & 286

jester 175 walls ‘ity ae
ae 245 | water-wheel ~ = 420
over an ways . | 21
