================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Two Treatises of Government
Creator: John Locke
Translator: —
Edition: London, 1764 (reprint of the corrected posthumous text; collated with Locke's final corrections)
Source: Internet Archive (bim_eighteenth-century_two-treatises-of-governm_locke-john_1764); long-s normalized to s
Public domain: Published 1764 (text of 1689/1698); public domain.
Artifact ID: locke-two-treatises-government-1764
================================================================================

The present Edition of this Book has not
only been collated with the first three Edi-
tions, which were published during the
Author's Life, but also has the Adyantage of
his last Corrections and Improvements, from
a Copy delivered by him to Mr. Peter Coste,
communicated to the Editor, and now lodged
in Christ College, Cambridge.


1
7 oy C _ 66.3 7 * 8
64th 4, 78 24
2 — 3 , * b Y * —
| ob
J


MVSEVM |
BRITANNICVM


„ 1 * _ |


PE WEL) 7" 44 22


0 r

.... 12
«& © * 1 a - —
EP. . :


.


2
EY HL 7
ol 5 — #


.


2


4, 1
FRET


Po / -
LE


N
oo
wy
2
a


Selg Fd


TWO TREATISES OF GOVERNMENT
BY IOHN LOCK E


SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX ESTO


LONDON PRINTED MDCLXXXVIIT
REPRINTED, THE SIX TH TIME, BY A, MILLAR, H.
WOODFALL, I. WHISTON AND B. WHITE, I. RI.
WIG TON, I. DAVIS AND . REYMERS, R. BAL p-
WIN, HAWES CLARKE AND COLLINS; W. IOHN-
S TON, W. OWEN, I, RICHARDSON, s. CROWDER,
T. LONGMAN, B. LAW, ©. ,RIVINGTON,
DILLY, R. WITHY, C. AND. R. WAT. X BAKER,
T. PAYNE, A. SHUCKBURGH, I, HINXMAN

MKDCCLXIL11


3 s


ne


'LNANNYAAOD
TIAIO 40 ANI UNV LINALXIA
TVNIOINO. Au AHL ONIN AA
NOo Avss NV SI MIALLVT 4H
NM O NHL AAA O
NY dALOoAAAd Yuv Sud -
-104 SIH NV AAN AJI4 LAA OA
Als JO NOILVANAOA CNY 844410
-NINd IS IVA AHL dAN AO THL NI
"'LNAIWNYATAOD JO SASI.LVIAN.L OML


8


*


PR E F ACE
Reader, thou hast here the beginning and


end of a discourse concerning government;
what fate has otherwise disposed of the
papers that should have filled up the
middle, and were more than all the rest,
it is not worth while to tell thee. These,


which remain, I #79 are sufficient to esta-


blish the throne of our great restorer, our
present King William; to make good his
title, in the consent of the people, which
being the only one of all lawful governments,


he has more fully and clearly, than any


prince in Christendom ; and to justify to the
world the people of England, whose love of
their just and natural rights, with their re-
solution to preferve them, saved the nation
when it was on the very brink of slavery and
ruin, If these papers have that evidence, I
flatter myself is to be found in them, there
will be no great miss of those which are lost,
and my reader may be satisfied without them:
for I imagine, I shall have neither the time,


vor inclination to repeat my pains, and fill


up the wanting part of my answer, by tracing
vir Robert again, through all the windings
and obscurities, which are to be met with
in the several branches of his wonderful sy-
stem. The king, and body of the nation,


have since so throughly confuted his Hypo-


thesis, that I suppose no body hereafter will
Sts have


have either the confidence to appear against
our common safety, and be again an advocate
for slavery ; or the weakness to be deceived
with contradictions dressed up in a popular
stile, and well- turned periods: for if any one
will be at the, pains, himself, in those parts,
which are here untouched, to strip Sir Ro-
bert's discourses of the flourish of doubtful
expressions, and endeavour to reduce his
words to direct, positive, intelligible propo-
fitions, and then compare them one with an-
other, he will quickly be satisfied, there was
never so much glib nonsense put together in
well-sounding English. If he think it not
worth while to examine his works all thro),
let him make an experiment in that part,
where he treats of usurpation ; and let him
try, whether he can, with all his skill, make
Sir Robert intelligible, and consistent with
himself, or common sense. I should not
speak so plainly of a gentleman, long since
past answering, had not the pulpit, of late
years, publicly owned his doctrine, and made
it the current divinity of the times. It is
neceflary those men, who taking on them to
be teachers, have so dangerously misled others,
should be openly shewed of what authority
this their Patriarch is, whom they have i
blindly followed, that so they may either
retract what upon so ill grounds they have
vented, and cannot be maintained ; or else
justify those principles which they preached
up for gospel; though they had no better an


author


*


2
1
.
\
5 |


v | N

\ author than an English courtier : for I should

not have writ against Sir Robert, or taken the

| pains to shew his mistakes, inconsistencies,
and want of (what he so much boasts of, and
pretends wholly to build on) scripture-proofs,

were there not men amongst us, who, b
crying up his books, and espousing his doc-
trine, save me from the reproach of writing
against a dead adversary. They have been so
zealous in this point, that, if I have done
him any wrong, I cannot hope they should

| spare me, I wish, where they have done the
truth and the public wrong, they would be as
ready to redress it, and allow its just weight to
this reflection, viz. that there cannot be done
a greater mischief to prince and people, than
the propagating wrong notions concerning
government ; that so at last all times might
not have reason to complain of the Drum
Ecclesiastic. If any one, concerned really for
truth, undertake the confutation of my Hy-
pothesis, I promise him either to recant my
mistake, upon fair conviction; or to answer
his difficulties. But he must remember two
things.

First, That cavilling here and there, at |
some expression, or little incident of my dis- {1
course, 1s not an answer to my book. |
' Secondly, That I shall not take railing for
arguments, nor think either of these worth
my notice, though I shall always look on
myself as bound to give satisfacton to any
one, who shall appear to be conscientiously

{scrupulous


g » 1 #6. bf 9 *
r
n 4
, *
d *


scrupulous in the point, and shall shew any
just grounds for his scruples. ATTY
I have nothing more, but to advertise the
reader, that Observations stands for Observa-
tions'on Hobbs, Milton, &c. and that a bare
uotation of pages always means pages of his
— 680" Edition 1680.


CONTENTS OF BOOK I


Chap. I. The Introduction I
Chap. II. Of Paternal and Regal Power 5
Chap. III. Of Adam's Title to Sove-
reignty by Creation 16
Chap. IV. Of Adam's Title to Sove-
reignty by Donation Gen. i. 28. 24


Chap. V. Of Adam's Title to Sove-
reignty by the Subject ion of Eve 49
Chap. VI. Of Adam's Title to Sove-
reignty by Fatherhood | 57
Chap. VII. Of Fatherhood and Property
considered together as Fountains of So-


vereignty „


Chap. VIII. Of the Conveyance of A-
dam's sovereign Monarchical Power 93


Chap. IX. Of Monarchy by Inheritance


from Adam 97
Chap. X. Of the Heir to Adam's Mo-
narchical Power 119


Chap. XI. Who Heir 2


* 2 * ”
* 47 l m 2 r * an MT” OP” * ”
=P tv F,-* a 28 ef l y v . 4 fo * > * *
— * — . — 4 5 4 . - . . vw * 8 -


CONTENTS OF BOOK 11


Chap. I. The Introduction 193
Chap. II. Of the State of Nature 195
Chap. III. Of the State of War 206
Chap. IV. Of Slavery | 212
Chap. V. Of Property | 215
Chap. VI. Of Paternal Power 23


Chap. VII. Of Political or Civil Society 261
Chap. VIII. Of the Beginning of Political


Societies | 279
Chap. IX. Of the Ends of Political so?

ciety and Government 305
Chap. X. Of the Forms of a Common-
Wealth 310
Chap. XI.' Of the Extent of the Legit. 9

lative Power 312


Chap. XII. Of the Legislative, Execu-
tive, and Federative Power of the |
Common-wealth 324 |

Chap. XIII. Of the Subordination of the |
Powers of the Common-wealth 328

Chap. XIV. Of Prerogative 2

Chap. XV. Of Paternal, Political, and
Despotical Power, considered together 348


Chap. XVI. Of Conquest 353
Chap. XVII. Of Usurpation 372
Chap. XVIII. Of Tyranny 373


Chap. XIX. Of the Dissolution of Go-
vernment 23884


—
*
— LI *
— * —
— -
red. p TSS 4
. a 7
- 172 b "ACS e 14
by ,
A 5 :
LD
wel”. ” 3 -
« * o
= = of w-
_ -,
8


e
5 N . by
N 4
"YL...
* s
,
. ” *
= * "©
— > ad...
1 7 F
=


— _ \
- * a
= mn. : p
E + >
* "x 244 ** 1 1
. 8
— 4 * .
2 7
i be "© p A
— . - =
0 4 * 4 * 4 ”
. CET \
* * ; 4


» OF GOVERNMENT


BOOK I


Chap. I. §. 1. Slavery is fo vile and miserable
an estate of man, and so directly opposite to
the generops temper and courage of our na-


tion; that it is hardly to be conceived, that


an Englisbman, much less a gentleman, should
plead for it. And truly I should have taken
Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha, as any other
treatise, which would persuade all men, that
they are slaves, and ought to be fo, for such
another exercise of wit, as was his who writ
the encomium of Nero; rather than for a
serious discourse meant in earnest, had not the
gravity of the title and epistle, the picture in
the front of the book, and the applause that
followed it, required me to believe, that the

| | B author


wo


2 9 4 OUS . nes
. Ahab et 1 — — = nes — — —— —


2 Or GoveRNMENT,


author and publisher | were both in earnest,
therefore took it into my hands with all the
expectation, and read it through with all the
attention due to a treatise that made such a
noise at its coming abroad, and cannot but
confess my self mightily surprised, that in a
book, which was to provide chains for all
mankind, I should find nothing but a rope
of sand, useful perhaps to such, whose {kill
and business it is to raise a dust, and would
blind the people, the better to mislead them;
but in truth not of any force to draw those
into bondage, who have their eyes open, and


so much sense about them, as to consider,


that chains are but an ill wearing, how much
care soever hath been taken to fi e and polish
them.

F. 2. If any one think I take too much
liberty in speaking fo freely bi f a man, who
is the great champion of absolute power, ank
the idol of those who worship it; I beseech
him to make this small allowance for orice;
to 6ne, who, even after the reading of Sir
Robert's book, cannot but think him̃self, as -
the laws allow him, a freeman: and I know * =
no fault it is to do fo, unless any one better
{skilted in the fate of it, than I, sfiould have it
revealed to him, that this treatise, whith' has
lain dormant fo long, was, when it appeared
in the world, to carry, by strength” of its
arguments, all liberty out of it; "and Wees,


© TT 7


1 „ 1 an


Or GovERNM RENT. 3
from thenceforth our author's short model
was to be the pattern in the mount, and the
perfect standard of politics for the future.
His system lies in a little compass, it is no
more but this, |

That all government is absolute monarchy.

And the ground he builds on, is this,

That no man it born free.

§. 3. In this last age a generation of men


has sprung up amongst us, that would flattef


princes with an opinion, that they have a
divine right to absolute power, let the laws
by which they are constituted, and are to
govern, and the conditions under which they
enter upon their authority, be what they will,
and their engagements to observe them never
so well ratified by solemn oaths and promises.
To make way for this doctrine, they have
denied mankind a right to natural freedom ;

whereby they have not only, as much as in
them lies, exposed all subjects to the utmost
misery of tyranny and oppression, but have
also unsettled the titles, and shaken the thrones.
of princes: (for they too, by these mens


# system, except only one, are all born slaves,


and by divine right are subjects to Adam's
right heir;) as if they had designed to make
war upon all government, and subvert the
very foundations of human society, to serve
their present turn. | |
F. 4. However we must believe them upon
their own bare words, when they tell us, we
B 2 are


9 OI, — 2 9


Scripture or reason I am
say so, notwithstanding the noise of divine
, right, as if divine authority hath subjected


us to the unlimited will * another. An
admirable state of mankind, and that which


4. Or GovERNMENT.


are all born slaves, and we must continue fo,
there is no temedy for it ; life and thraldom
we enter'd into together, and. can neyer be


quit of the one, till we ak with the. other.
ure do not any.where


they have not had wit enough to find out till
this latter age. For, however Sir Nobert
Filner seems to condemn the novelty of the

opinion, Patr. p. 3. yet I believe-it


will be hard for him to find any other age,


or country of the world, but this, which has
asserted ' monarchy to be jure diuvino. And
he confesses, Patr. p. 4. That Heyward,
Blackwood, Barclay, and others, that have


bravely vindicated the right of kings in most
points, never thought of this, but with one
consent adwitted the natural liberty aud equality


of mankind.


§. 5. Ry . this doctrine came at first


tobe broached, and brought in fashion amongst


us, and what fad effects it gave rise to, I leave


to historians to relate, or to the memory of


those, who were contemporaries with Sib-
thorp and Manvering, to recollect. M)


business at present is only to consider what Sir
Robert Filmer, who is allowed to haye carried


this. argument farthest, and is supposed to


kave brought 1 it to Feier, has said i in Ut;
for


OY GOVERNMENT. 5
for from him every one, who would be as
"Fashionable as French was at court, has
learned, and runs away with this short system
of politics, vis. Men are not born free, and
" therefore could never have the liberty to choose
either governors, or forms of government.
Princes have their power absolute, and by
divine right; for slaves could never have a
right to compact or consent. Adam was an
absolute monarch, and fo are all. frings
over” fince. pela ;


* CSM ASP. If.
Of Paternal and Regal Power.
F. 6. 8 IR Robert Filmer's great position is,
Q that nen are not naturally free. This


is the foundation on which his abfolute mo-
narchy stands, and from which it erects itself


tye ty
it. But if this andarion Lat all his fabric
falls with it, and governments must be left
again, to the. old way of being made by con-
trivance, and the consent of men ('A»Spuriyn
xrleis) making use of their reason to unite
together 1 mae By 12 To prove this grand
position of nis, h e tells us, p. 12. M#:


B 3 are


wa


— 2 . mo AN at.
b l , = Si > PT - 1 = . \
_ . 4 — — * * 3 - , 1 by a ET ”
4 ———— VE tit. * * by l
— P . * 5 %
4 ' :
- ; "
. LY .
* *
* Ul
£ *
U
5 0 +
*


6 Or GovzanMtNwT.
are. born in subjettton. to their parents, and
therefore cannot be free. And this autho-
rity. of parents, he calls ral authority, p.
| 12, 14. Father ly authority, right of father»
Z bard, p. 12, 20. One would have thought
3 he would, in the beginning of such. a work
as this, on which was to depend the autho-
rity. of princes, and the obedience of sub-
jects, have told us expresly, what that fa -
therly authority is, haye defined it, though
not limited it, because in some other treatises
| of his he tells us, it is unlimited, and “ un-
| limitable ; he should at least have given us
such an account of it, that we might have
had an entire notion of this fatherbood, or
fatherly authority, whenever it came in our
Way in his writings : this I expected to have
| found in the first chapter of his Patriarcha.
| But instead thereof, having, 1. en passant,
| made his obeysance to the arcana imperii,
| P>5--2. made his compliment to the rights
| 1 liberties of this, or any other nation,
| p. 6. which he is going presently to null and
destroy 3. and, 3, made his leg to those learned
men, who: did not see so far into the matter
| as. himself, p. 7. he comes to fall on Be/-
af % 2... larmine,


:
_
5 v —


In grants and. gift chat have their original from God
or nature, as the power of the father hath, ne inferior power
man can limit, nor make any law of prescription against


— —


—— — "WR


| thee. . Observations, 158,  -
The scripture teaches, that supreme 2 was originally
the father, without any limitation. Oz&/ervations, 275.


Or:-*Govennment. 7
larmint, p. 8. and, by a victory over him,
<stablishes' his Fatherly authority beyond any
question. Bellarmine being routed by his
own: confesfion, p. 11. the day is clear got,
and there is no more need of any forces: for
having done that, T observe not that he states
the question, or rallies up any arguments to
make good his opinion, but rather tells us
the ' story, as he thinks fit, of this strange
kind of domineering phantom, called the


fatherhood, which whoever could catch,


presently got empire, and unlimited absolute
power. He affures us how this farherhoud

an in Adam, continued its course, - and
kept the world in order all the time of the
patriarchs till the flood, got out of the ark
with Noah and his sons, made and supported
all the kings of the earth till the captivity of
the Hraelites in Egypt, and then the poor


fatherbood was under hatches, till God, 5


giving the Israelites kings, re-eflabhshed the
ancient and prime right of the lineal succession
in paternal government. This is his business
from p. 12. to 19. And then obviating an
obje&ion, and clearing a difficulty or two
with one half reason, p. 23. f confirm the
natural right of regal power, he ends the
first chapter. I hope it is no injury to call an
half quotation an half reason; for God fays,
Honour thy father and mother; but our author
contents himself with half, leaves out 59
75 B 4. wuorber


. A - pl ” 4
+ * ”
- * 4


N *
} ” *Y% .
by


8 Oy GovERNM ENT.


motber quite, as little serviceable to 8 pure
7 But of that more in another place.
abt I do not think our author so little

in the way of writing discourses of this


? —_ nor so careless of the point in hand,
that he by over-sight commits the fault, that


he himself, in his Anarchy of a mixed Mo-


narchy, p. 239. objects to Mr. Hunton in these
words: Where first 1 charge the aut bor, that
128 hath not given us any definition, or description


onarchy in general; for by the rules of me-
bod he should have fir Ae And by the
like rule of method Sir Robert should ha told
us, what his fatherhood or fatherly authority
18, before he had told us, in whom it was to
be found, and talked so much of it. But per-
haps Sir Robert found, that this fatherly au-


9 this power of fathers, and of kings, for


he makes them both the same, p. 24. would
make a very odd and frightful figure, and
very disagreeing with what either children
7 of their parents, or subjects of their
kings, if he should have given us the whole
Fang N together in that gigantic form, he
20 painted it in his own fancy; and there-
fore, like a wary physician, when he would
his patient swallow some harsh or . cor-
rofrue ligyor, he mingles it with a large quan-


tity. of that which may dilute it; that the


F£attered parts may go down with less ling,
aud Ge less aversion.


% 4 X * - $8.
g %. Lb py * . *
* \
222 '


Or GoveERNMENT. 9
FS. 8. Let us then endeavour. to fird-what
account he gives us of this 'fathexly autho-
-pity, as it lies scattered in the several parts of
his writings. And first, as it was vested in
Adam, he fays, Not only Adam, but the suc-
 ceeding patriarebe, had, by right of fatber-
bod, royal authority over their children, p. 12.
This lordship which Adam by command had over
_ © the whole world, and by right descending from

Bim the patriarchs did enjoy, was as large and

- araple as the absolute dominion of any monarch,

she hath been fince the creation, p. 13. Do-
minion of life and death, making war, and con-

cluding peace, p. 13. Adam ard the patriarchs

had absolute power of hfe and death, p. 35.
Kings, in the right of parents, succeed to the


*


exercise of supreme jurisdiction, p. 19. As
kingly power is by the law of God, so it hath
no inferior law to limit it; Adam was lord of
all, p. 40. The father of a family governs
by no other law, than by his un will, p. 78.
"The superiority of princes is above laws, p. 79.
The unlimited jurisdiction of kings is fo amply
deseribed by Samuel, p. 80. Kings are above
the laws, p. 93. And to this purpose see a
eat deal more which our author delivers in
Bodin's words: It is certain, that all laws,
privileges, and grants of princes, have no force,
"but during their life; if they be not ratified
. by the express consent, or by sufferance of tbe
prince ollowing, especially privileges, Obset-
vations, p. 279. The reason why laws have
| 4 | been


10 Or GovVvERNME NT.


been also made by kings, was this; when kings
4 were either 2 with wars, or Ut Bradted with
public cares, so that every private man could
not have access to their persons,” to learn their
wills and pleasure, then were laws of necessity
invented, that Jo every particular suby 145 might
find his prince's pleasure decypbered unto him in
the tables of his laws, p. 92. In a monarchy, |
the king must by necessity be above the laws,” |
p. 100, A perfect Pu is that, wherein

the king rules all things according to his own

will, p. 100. Neitber common nor flatute laws

are, or can be, any diminution of that general

power, which fings have over their people by

right of fatherhood, p. 115. Adam was the
father, king, and lord over his family; a son,

a fuljedt, and a servant or slave, were |

and the fame thing at firsl. The father had

fower to dispose or sell his children or servants ;

. e x

goods in scripture, the man-servant an

our fad 1 penn yoga =
frons and substance of the owner, as other goods

were, Observations, Pref. God also hath given

to the father a right er liberty, to alien his
' Power over his children to any other; whence

we find the sale and gift of children to have

much been in use in the beginning ꝙ the world,

when men had their servants for a possession

and an inheritance, as well as other goods;
whereupon we find the power of castrating and
making eunuchs much in use in old times, Ob-

servations,


Or GovERNMENT. 11
servations, p. 155. Law is nothing else but
the will of bim that hath the. power of the
supreme father, Observations, p. 223. It was
God's ordinance that the supremacy should be
unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the
acts of his will; and as in him fo in all others
that have fupreme potver, Observations, p.
2 v
ed 9. I have been fain to trouble my reader
with these several quotations in our author's
own words, that in them might be seen his
own description of his fatherly authority, as
it lies scattered up and down in his writings,
which he supposes was first vested in Adam,
and by right belongs to all princes ever since.
This fatherly authority then, or right of
berhood, in our author's sense, is a divine
unalterable right of sovereignty, whereby a
father or a prince hath an absolute, arbitrary,
unlimited, and unlimitable power over the
lives, liberties, and estates of his children and
subjects ; so that he may take or alienate their
estates, sell, castrate, or use their persons as
he pleases, they _ all his slaves, and he
lord or proprietor of every thing, and his
unbounded will their law. |
F. 10. Our author having placed such a
mighty power in Adam, and upon that sup-
position-founded all government, and all power
of princes, it is reasonable to expect, that he
should have proved this with arguments clear
and evident, suitable to the weightiness of
9 I | ; the


12 Or GOVERNM TNT.

the cause; that since men had nothing else
left them, they might in slavery have such
undeniable proofs of its necessity, that their
consciences might be convinced, and oblige
them to submit peaceably to that absolute
dominion, which their governors had a right
to exercise over them. Without this, what
good could our author do, or pretend to do, by
erecting such an unlimited power, but flatter
the natural vanity and ambition'of men, too
apt of itself to grow and encrease with the
possession of any power ? and by persuading
those, who, by the consent of their fellow-
men, are advanced to great, but limited,
degrees of it, that by that part which is
given them, they have a right to all, that


was not so; and therefore may do what they


please, because they have authority to do
more than others, and so tempt them to do
what is neither for their own, nor the good
of those under their care; whereby great
mifchiefs cannot but follow. r
FS. 11. The sovereignty of Adam, being that
on which, as a sure bafis, our author builds
his mighty absolute monarchy, I expected,
that in his Patriarcba, this his main suppo-
fition would have been proved, and established
with all that evidence of arguments, that such
à fundamental tenet required; and that this;
on which the great stress of the bufinefs
depends, would have been made out with
reasons sufficient to justify the confidence


ö 17 Tor 71 74 .
PT, {1 * 1 8 with
—


Or GovERNMENT. 13


with which it was assumed. But in all that
treatise, IL could find very little tending that
Way; the thing is there so taken for granted,
without proof, that I could scarce believe my-
self, when, upon attentive reading that trea-
tise I found there so mighty a structure
raised upon the bare supposition of this
foundation: for it is scarce credible, that
ina discourse, where he pretends to confute
the erroneous principle of man's natural
Freedom, he. should do it by a bare suppo-
sition of Adam's authorit 77 without offering
any proof for that authority. Indeed he


8 . says, that Adam 2 royal 22


thority, p. 12, and 1 Absolute lordsbi and
Sa lise and bath, p- 13. #4 uni-
versal monarchy, p. 33 Absolute power of
life and death, p. 35. He is very frequent
in such assertions; but, what is strange, in
all his whole Patriarcha 1 find not one pre-
tence of a reason to establish this his reat
foundation of government; not any t ng
that looks like an argument, but these words:
To confirm this natural right of regal power,
We find in the Decalogue, that the law which
enjoyns abedience to kings, is delivered in the
4475 » Honour thy father, as if all power were
inally in the father. And why may I not

pF, 4 as well, 255 in the Decalogue, the law
that enjoyns obedience to queens, is aer
in the terms of Honour thy mother, as if all
Barer were originally in the mother? The
| argument,


14 Or GCovrinMent.”
argument, as Sir Robert puts it, will hold as


well for one as the other : but of this, m 0 re |


in its due place, LE
FS. 12. All that I take notice of here, is,


that this is all our author says in this first, or


any of the following chapters, to prove the
absolute power of Adam, which is his great
principle : and yet, as if he had there settled
it upon sure demonstration, he begins his


second * with these words, By con-
e


ferring these proofs and reasons, drawn from
the authority of the scripture. Where those


2 and reasons for Adam's sovereignty are,
ating that of Honour thy fatber, above men-


tioned, I confess, I cannot find; unless what


he says, p. 11. In these words we have ax.


evident confession, viz. of Bellarmine, that crea-
tion made man prince of his posterity, must be
taken for proofs and reasons drawn from
scripture, or for any sort of proof at all:
though from thence by a new way of in-
ference, in the words immediately following,


he concludes, the royal authority of Alanr


sufficiently settled in him. |
8. 13. If he has in that chapter, or any


where in the whole treatise, given any other


roofs of Adam's royal authority, other than
by often repeating it, which, among some


men, goes for argument, I defire any body
for him to shew me the place and page, that
I may be convinced of my mistake, and ac-
knowledge my oversight. If no such argu-


ments


* *
PR .
Y + * *
| 8 bs
* 8 F N 2
r


Or, GOVERNMENT. 18


ments are to be found, I beseech those men,
who have so much cried up this book, to
consider, whether they do not give the world
cause to suspect, that it is not the force of
reason and argument, that makes them for
absolute monarchy, but some other by in-
terest, and therefore are resolved to applaud
any author, that writes in favour of this doc-
trine, whether he support it with reason or no.
But I hope they do not expect, that rational
and indifferent men should be brought over to
their opinion, becaule this their great doctor
of it, in a discourse made on purpose, to set
up the absolute monarchical power of Adam,
in opposition to the zatural freedem of man-
kind, has faid so little to prove it, from whence
it is rather naturally to be concluded, that
there is little to be said. N. 8

§. 14. But that I might omit no care to
inform myself in our author's full sense, I
consulted his O&/ervations on Aristotle, Hobbes,
&c. to see whether in disputing with others
he made use of any arguments for this his
darling tenet of Adam's sovereignty ; since in
his treatise of the Natural Power of Kings, he
hath been so sparing of them. In his Obser-
vations on Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan, | think he
has put, in short, all those arguments for it
together, which in his writings I find him
any where to make use; of: his words. are
these: F Cad created only Adam, and of a.
Piece of hun made the uuman, and if. by gene-


ration


16 Or GOVERNMENT.
ration from them two, as parts of them, all


mankind be propagated : if also God gave to
Adam not only the dominion over the woman
and the children that should issue from them,
but also over all the earth to subdue it, and
over all the creatures on it, so that as long
as Adam lived, no man could claim or enjoy
any thing but by donation, afsignation or per-
mission from him, I wonder, &c. Obsgrvations,
165. Here we have the sum of all his
arguments, for Adam's sovereignty, and against
natural freedom, which I find up and down
in his other treatises: and they are these fol-
lowing; God's creation of Adam, the dominion
he gave him over Eve, and the dominion he
had as father over his children : all which I
shall particularly consider.


—


CHAP. III.
Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty by Creation.


& 15. QIR Robert, in his preface to his

| Observations on Aritotle's politics,
tells us, A natural freedom of mankind cannot
be supposed without the denial of the creation of
Adam: but how Adam's being created, which
was nothing but his receiving a being im-
mediately | Hr omnipotence and the hand
of God, gave Adam a sovereignty over any
thing, I cannot see, nor consequently under-


sand, how a Juppesition of natural freedom 4


\
"4
I.


3 emmoss


*
= *
« *
32 4
|
As
v4
*
F =
”.
a
93 ,
*
x
I
hy
AT
*
15
5
+
ak
95
A
* *}
\
-.F
.
8
-4Þ
iy 2
£
*


I, = - * .
%K


Or GOVERNMENT. 17


à denial of Adam's creation, and would be
glad any body elle (fince our author did not
vouchsafe us the favour)” would make it out
for him: for I find no difficulty to suppose


the freedom of mankind, though I have always
believed the creation of Adam. He was


created, or began to exift, by God's imme


diate power, without the intervention of
parents or the pre-existence of any of the


same species to bEget him, when it pleased
| God he should; and fo did the lion, the


king of beasts, before him, by the same
creating power of God: and if bare existence
by that power, and in that way, will give
dominion, without any more ado, our author,
by this argument, will make the lion have
as good a title to it, as he, and certainly the
antienter. No! for Adam had his title by
the appointment of God, says our author in
another place. Then bare creation gave him
not dominion, and one. might have supposed
mankind free without the. denying the creation


of Adam, since it was God's appointment made


im monarch. Io
F. 16. But let us see, how he. puts his
creation and this appointment together. By
she appointment of God, says Sir Robert, as soon
as'Adam was created, he was monarch of the


| world, though he had no subjefts 5 for though


there could not be actual government til there
were” subjects, yet by the right of nature it was
a ud Adam 50 be "governor of bis posterity:
> C |


thqugn


—— gn Ay Jo
*


—_ —


18 Or GovERNME NT.


though not in act, yet at least in habit, Adam *
was a king from bis creation. I wish he had
told us here, what he meant by God's ap-


point ment: for whatsoever providence orders,


or the law of nature directs, or positive re-
velation declares, may be said to be by God's
appointment: but I suppose it cannot be meant
here in the first sense, i. e. by providence ;
because that would be to say no more, but
that as soon as Adam was created he was de


facto monarch, because by right of nature it


was due to Adam, to be governor of his po-


fterity. But he could not de facto be by


providence constituted the governor of the
world, at a time when there was actually no


government, no subjects to be governed,


which our author here confesses. Monarch
of the world is also differently used by our
author ; for sometimes he means by it a
proprietor of all the world exclusive of the
rest of mankind, and thus he does in the
same page of his preface before cited : Adam,
says he, being commanded to multiply and people
the earth, and to subdue it, and having dominion
given bim over all creatures, was thereby the


monarch of the whole world; none of his posterity


had any right to possess any thing but by his
grant or permission, or by succession from him.
2. Let us understand then by monarch pro-
prietor of the world, and by appointment God's
actual donation, and revealed positive grant
made to Adam, i. Gen. 28. as we see Sir


Robert


ant
had
ap-
ers,
re-
od's


ant


— 1
8 1 2 —
... SL NN” 7 ORE I c


FR
F
*


IH Or GOVERNMENT. 19
Nobert himself does in this parallel place,
and then his argument will stand thus, 4%
the pofitrve grant of God: as soon as Adam
was created, he was proprietor of the world,

because by the right of nature it was due to
Adam r be governor of his posterity. In which
way of arguing there are two manifest false-
hoods. First, It is false, that God made that
grant to Adam, as soon as he was created, since,
tho' it stands in the text immediately after his
creation, yet it is plain it could not be spoken
to Adam, till after Eve was made and brought
to him: and how then could he be monarch
| by appointment as soon as created, especially
- fince he calls, if I mistake not, that which
God says to Eve, iii. Gen. 16, the original
grant of government, which not being till
after the fall, when Adam was somewhat,
at least in time, and very much distant in
condition, from his creation, I cannot see,
how our author can say in this sense, that
Ey God's appointment, as soon as Adam was
created, he was monarch of the world. Se-
condly, were it true that God's actual do-
nation appointed Adam monarch of the world
as soon as he was created, yet the reason here
given for it would not prove it; but it would
always be a false inference, that God, by a
positive donation, appointed Adam monarch of
the world, because by right of nature it was
© due to Adam to be . governor of his posterity :
for having given him the right of government
by nature, there was no need of a positive
Ss C 2 donation


vs


, . "Ws.
4 >
3-20: 1 2
_

LC * * 2
3


.


*
”


_— by


but in habit; for when he had once published


20 Or GOVERNMENT.


donation ; at least it will never be a proof of
such a donation.

§. 17. On the other fide the matter will
not be much mended, if we understand 4
God's appointment the law of nature, (thoug
it be a pretty harsh expression for it in this
place) and by monarch of the world, sovereign
ruler of mankind: for then the sentence
under consideration must run thus: By the
law of nature, as soon as Adam was created
he was governor of mankind, for by right of
nature it was due to Adam to be governor of


His posterity ; which amounts to this, he was


governor by right of nature, because he was
governor by right of nature: but supposing.
we should grant, that a man is % nature
governor of his children, Adam could not
hereby be monarch as soon as created: for this
right of nature being founded in his being
their father, how Adam could have a natural
right to be governor, before he was a father,


' when by being a father only he had that right,


is, methinks, hard to conceive, unless he will
have him to be a father before he was a fa-
ther, and to have a title before he had it.

$. 18. To this foreseen objection, our
author answers very logically, e was governor
in habit, and not in act: a very pretty way
of being a goyernor without government, a
father without children, and a king without


subjects. And thus Sir Robert was an author


before he writ his book; not un add it is true,


it,


will
d 2


dug
this


.


21


f Or GOVERNMENT.
f of it, it was due to him by the right of nature,
to be an author, as much as it was to Adam


to be governor of his children, when he had


begot them: and if to be such a monarch of
the world, an absolute monarch in habit, but
got in act, will serve the turn, I should not
much envy it to any of Sir Robert's friends,
that he thought fit graciously to bestow it


upon, though even this of act and habit, if it
signified any thing but our author's skill in


distinctions, be not to his purpose in this


place. For the question is not here about


Adam's actual exercise of government, but
actually having a title to be governor. Go-


g


f


en HY
IE


vernment, says our author, was due to Adam
by the right of nature: what is this right of


nature? A right fathers have over their chil-


dren by begetting them; generatione jus acqui-
ritur parentibus in liberos, says our author out
of Grotius, Observations, 223. The right then
follows the begetting as arising from it; so
that, according to this way of reasoning or
distinguishing of our author, Adam, as soon as
he was created, had a title only in habit, and
not in act, which in plain Englisb is, he had
actually no title at all.

§. 19. To speak less learnedly, and more
intelligibly, one may say of Adam, he was
in a possibility of being governor, since it was
possible he might beget children, and thereby


- acquire that right of nature, be it what it


will, to govern them, that accrues from
C 3 thence :;


22 Or GOVERNMENT.

thence: but what connection has this with
Adam's creation, to make him say, that as
| soon as he was created, he was monarch. f the
world? for it may be as well said of Noah,
that as soon as he was born, he was monarch
of the world, fince he was in possibility
(which in our author's sense is enough to
make a monarch, 4 monarth in habit, to out-
live all mankind, but his own posterity.
What such necessary connection there is be-
twixt Adam's creation and his right to govern-
ment, so that a natural freedom of mankind
cannot be supposed without the denial of the
creation of Adam, I confess for my part I
do not fee; nor how those words, by the


appointment, &c. Observations, 254. how ever


explained, can be put together, to make any
tolerable sense, at least to establish this po-
fition, with which they end, viz. Adam was
a hing from his creation; a king, says our
author, not in at, but in habit, i. e. actually
no king at a.. . nt?
FS. 20. I fear I have tired my reader's pa-
tience, by dwelling longer on this passage,
than the weightiness of any argument in it
seems to require: but I have unavoidably
been ee in it by our author's way of
writing, who, hudling several suppositions
together, and that in doubtful and general
terms, makes such a medly and confusion,
that it is impossible to shew his mistakes,


'without examining the several senses wherein


1
: *
© 0
* * - * . 7 * 0 4
0 by 1 1
3 CY 8
1 1
- 23.
- - \
* 14


|
* 9 5
by
,
o 4
4
”
l


Or GOVERNMENT. 23
his words may be taken, and without seeing


h pow, in any of these various meanings, they
a 1 will consist together, and have any truth in
2 them: for in this present passage before us,
”> how can any one argue against this position
h of his, that Adam was à king from bis crea-
tion, unless one examine, whether the words,
T from his creation, be to be taken, as they


may, for the time of the commencement of
his government, as the foregoing words im-
port, as soon as he was created he was monarch;


EN or, for the cause of it, as he says, P- IT.
d © creation made man prince of his posterity * how
- * farther can one judge of the truth of his


being thus king, till one has examined
ve whether king be to be taken, as the words
in the beginning of this passage would per-
2 suade, on supposition of his private domi-
nion, which was, by God's positive grant,
9s * monarch of the world by appointment; or king
on supposition of his fatherly power over his
V off-spring, which was by nature, due by the
_ 3 regbt of nature; whether, I say, king be to
be taken in both, or one only of these two

2 senses; or in neither of them, but only this,
it that creation made him prince, in a way
ly different from both the other? For though
of this assertion, that Adam was king from his
creation, be true in no sense, yet it stands
here as an evident conclusion drawn from the
1, preceding words, though in truth it be but
3 a bare assertion joined to other assertions of
n the same kind, which confidently put to-

3 C4 gether


008
6


—


8. 21.


24 Or GOVERNMENT.


gether in words of undetermined and du-
bious meaning, look like a sort of arguing,
when there is indeed neither proof nor con-
nection: a way very familiar with our author:
of which having given the reader a taste here,
I shall, as much as the argument will permit
me, avoid touching on hereafter; and should
not have done it here, were it not to let the
world see, how incoherences in matter, and
suppositions without proofs put handsomely
together in good words and a plausible stile,
are apt to pass for strong reason and good
sense, till they come to be looked into with
attention. TOME e


.
Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty by Donation,
| Gen. i. 28. 3


AVING at last got through
the foregoing passage, where we
have been so long detained, not by the force
of arguments and opposition, but the in-
tricacy of the words, and the doubtfulness
of the meaning ; let us go on to his next


argument, for Adam's sovereignty. Our au-


thor tells us in the words of Mr. Se/den, that


Adam by donation from God, Gen. i. 28. was


made the general lord of all things, not without


such a private dominion to himself, as without


his grant did exagggde his children. This deter-
mination of Mr. Selden, says our author, 18


3 can sanant


DD eas. ;
. 223 . Se Res. =


4 ak * 1 — > fon, " 2 f 3 7
3 * 1 Wap 3 0


4
d » „ , % > s a
5 "a . * 8 E oe Ix * r 2 _
: 4 N 1 0 — 8 3 -
& 4 * 3 2 * %


GOVERNMENT.


O 25


consonant to the hiflory of the Bible, and na-
tural reason, Observations, 210.


And in his
Pref. to his Observations on Arivile, he
says thus, The first government in the world


was monarchical in the father of all flesh, Adam


being commanded to multiply and people the earth,
and to subdue it, and having dominion given
him over all creatures, was thereby the monarch
of the whole world: none of his posterity had
any right to possess any thing, but by his grant
or permission, or by succession from him : The
earth, saith the Psalmist, hath he given to the


children of men, which shew the title comes


From fatherhood.


8. 22. Before I examine this argument, and
the text on which it is founded, it is neces-
fary to desire the reader to observe, that our
author, according to his usual method, begins
in one sense, and concludes in another ; he
begins here with Adam's propriety, or private
dominion, by donation ; and his conclusion is,
which shew the title comes from fatherhood.
FS. 23. But let us see the argument. The
words of the text are these; and God blessed
them, and God said unto them, be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth and subdue it,
and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and


over the fowl of the air, and over every living


thing that moveth upon the earth, i. Gen. 28.
from whence our author concludes, that
Adam, having here dominion given him over
al creatures, was thereby the monarch of the
8 : whole


— — ———


26 OF GovERNME NT.


whole world: whereby must be meant, that
either this grant of God gave Adam property, 4
or as our author calls it, private dominion over
the earth, and all inferior or irrational crea-
tures, and so consequently t that he was thereby
monarch ; or 2dly, that it gave him rule and
dominion over all earthly creatures whatso=
ever, and thereby over his children; and so.
he was monarch : for, as Mr. Selden has pro-
perly worded it, Adam was made general lord
of all things, one may very clearly understand
{xg that he means nothing to be granted
to Adam here but property, and therefore he |
fays not one word of Adam's monarchy. But
our author says, Adam was hereby monarch of
te world, which, properly speaking, fignifies
fovereign ruler of all the men in the world;
and so Adam, by this grant, must be con-
stituted such a ruler. If our author means
otherwise, he might with much clearness
have said, that Adam was hereby proprietor of
the whole world. But he begs your pardon
in that point: clear distinct speaking not
ferving every where to his purpole, you must
not expect it in him, as in Mr. Selden, or
other such writers.
F. 24. In opposition therefore to our au-
thor's doctrine, that Adam was monarch of the
hel: world, founded on this place, I shall
shew, 5
1. That by this grant, i. Gen. 28. God
gave no immediate power to Adam over men,
over


ä *
9
*
Falk
N
a
„ 4
1
5
3
0
* T5
2
*
Aa
14


Or GOVERNMENT. 27


* over his children, over those of his own
0 K 4 species ; and so he was not made ruler, or
a. monarch, by this charter. i
\ 2. That by this grant God gave him not
8 4 private dominion over the inferior creatures,
„ but right in common with all mankind ; so
o ® neither was he monarch, upon the account
of the property here given him.
4 8. 25. 1, That this donation, 1. Gen. 28.
d gave Adam no power over men, will appear
4 if we consider the words of it: for fince
e all positive grants conyey no more than the
+ | express words they are made in will carry,
f let us see which of them here will comprehend
„ mankind, or Adam's posterity ;' and those,
I imagine, if any, must be these, every living
? 2 thing that moveth the words in Hebrew are,
i Ferm MN 7. e. Bestiam Reptantem, of which
words the scripture itself is the best inter-
pPreter: God having created the fishes and
2 fowls the 57h day, the beginning of the 675,
: hae creates the irrational inhabitants of the
dry land, which, v. 24. are described in
' 2 these words, let the earth bring forth the living


creature after his kind; cattle and hy en,


things, and beasts of the earth, after his kind,
and, v. 2. and God made the beasts of the earth
after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and
every thing that creepeth on the earth after his
kind : here, in the creation of the brute in-
habitants of the earth, he first speaks of them
all under one general name, of living crea-
8 . fure 65


28 OF GOVERNMENT.


tures, and then afterwards divides them into
three ranks, 1. Cattle, or such creatures as
| were or might be tame, and fo be the private
| possession of particular men; 2. TN which,
ver. 24, and 25. in our Bible, is translated
beasts, and by the Sepruagint bngiæ, wild beasts,
and is the same word, that here in our text,
ver. 28. where we have this great charter to
Adam, is translated lving thing, and is also
the same word used, Gen. ix. 2. where this
rant is renewed to Noah, and there likewise
tranflated beast. 3. The third rank were the
creeping animals, which ver. 24, and 25.
are comprised under the word, en m, the
fame that is used here, ver. 28. and is trans-
lated moving, but in the former verses creep-
mg, and by the Septuagint in all these places,
zer, or reptils; from whence it appears,
that the words which we translate here in
God's donation, ver.28. /zving creatures moving,
are the same, which in the history of the
creation, ver. 24, 25. signify two ranks of
terrestrial creatures, viz. wild beasts and rep-
| fils, and are so understood by the Septuagint.
$. 26. When God had made the irrational
| animals of the world, divided into three kinds,
from the places of their habitation, vig.
fishes of the sea, fowls of the air, and living
creatures of the earth, and these again into
cattle, wild beasts, and reptils, he considers
of making man, and the dominion he should-
have over the terrestrial world, ver. 26. _
then


if,
4


5

15

05
” F


Or GOVERNMENT. 29


then he reckons up the inhabitants of these
three kingdoms, but in the terrestrial leaves


diut the second rank T1 or wild beasts: but
here, ver. 28, where he actually exercises


this design, and gives him this dominion, the


text mentions the fishes of the fea, and fowls


of the air, and the terrestrial creatures in the


words that signify the wild beasts and reptils,


though translated J iving -thing that moveth,


leaving out cattle. In both which places,
though the word that signifies wid beafts be
omitted in one, and that which signifies cattle
in the other, yet, since God certainly exe-
cuted in one place, what he declares he de-
signed in the other, we cannot but under-
stand the same in both places, and have here
only an account, how the terrestrial irrational
animals, which were already created and
reckoned up at their creation, in three di-
stin& ranks of cattle, wild beasts, and reptils,


were here, ver. 28. actually put under the


. dominion of man, as they were designed,


ver. 26. nor do these words contain in them
the least appearance of any thing that can
be wrested to signify God's giving to one
man dominion over another, to Adam over
his posterity.

§. 27. And this further appears from Gen.
ix. 2. where God renewing this charter to


| Noah and his sons, he gives them dominion
over the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the
sea, and the terrestrial creatures, expressed by


EXE:


30 Or GOVERNMENT.


Im and e wild beasts and reptils, the


same words that in the text before us, i. Gen.
28. are translated every moving thing, that
moveth on the earth, which by no means can


comprehend man, the grant being made to


Noah and his sons, all the men then living,
and not to one part of men over another :
which is yet more evident from the very next
words, ver. 3. where God gives every Wh?
every moving thing, the very words used,
ch. 1. 28. to them for food. By all which
it is plain that God's donation to Adam,
ch. i. 28. and his defignation, ver. 26. and
his grant again to Noah and his sons, refer
to and contain in them neither more nor less
than the works of the creation the 5th day,
and the beginning of the 6th, as they are
set down from the 2oth to 26th wer. in-
clusively of the 1st ch. and fo comprehend
all the species of irrational animals of the
terraqueous globe, tho' all the words, whereby
they are expressed in the history of their
creation, are no where used in any of the
following grants, but some of them omitted
in one, and some in another. From whence


I think it is past all doubt, that man cannot


be comprehended in this grant, nor any do-
minion over those of his own species be
conveyed to Adam. All the terrestrial ir-
rational creatures are enumerated at their
creation, ver. 25. under the names beasts of
the earth, cattle and creeping things; but man,

being


22.


4 Tu, * 8 1 *


*


et! d a9. he 4.


1
4
ME!

9
N


Or GovERNMENT. 31


being not then created, was not contained


*
»7 *
4
*
4
*
Fr
—


under any of those names; and therefore,


vyhether we understand the Hebrew words


right or no, they cannot be supposed to
comprehend man, in the very same history,


and the very next verses following, especially


since that Hebrew word u which, if any


in this donation to Adam, ch. i. 28. mult


- comprehend man, is so plainly used in con-
tradistinction to him, as Gen. vi. 20. vii. 14.
21, 23. Gen. viii. 17, 19. And if God made
all mankind slaves to Adam and his heirs by


giving Adam dominion over every living thing
that moveth on the earth, ch. 1. 28. as ouc
author would have it, methinks Sir Robert
should have carried his monarchical power


one step higher, and satisfied the world,


that princes might eat their subje&s too,
since God gave as full power to Noah and


his heirs, ch. ix. 2. to eat every living thing
hat moveth,. as he did to Adam to have do-


minion over them, the Hebrew words in both


places being the same.


§. 28. David, who might be supposed to


- understand the donation of God in this text,


and the right of kings too, as well as our


author in his comment on this place, as the
learned and judicious Ainsworth calls it, in the


- 8th P/alm, finds here no such charter of mo-
| narchical power, his words are, Thou hast made
bim, 1. e. man, the Son of man, a little hwer


4


*
i
+0

5


#&
Po A
5.3
1
*h


ban the angels; thou madest him to have dominion


A over the works of thy hands ; thou hast put all


7 Pings


32 OFT GOVERNMENT.


things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, and
the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air,
and fish of the sea, and whatsover passeth thro'
the paths of the sea. In which words, if any
one can find out, that there is meant any
monarchical power of one man over another,
but only the dominion of the whole species
of mankind, over the inferior species of crea-
tures, he may, for aught I know, deserve to
be one of Sir Robert's monarchs in habit, for
the rareness of the discovery. And by this
time, I hope it is evident, that he that gave
dominion over every living thing that moveth on
the earth, gave Adam no monarchical power
over those of his own species, which will


yet appear more fully in the next thing I am

to shew. |
§. 29. 2. Whatever God gave by the words
of this grant, 1. Gen. 28. it was not to Adam
in particular, exclusive of all other men :
whatever dominion he had thereby, it was not
a private dominion, but a dominion in common
with the rest of mankind. That this do-
nation was not made in particular to Adam,
appears evidently from the words of the text,
it being made to more than one; for it was
spoken in the plural number, God blessed
them, and faid unto them, Have dominion.
God says udto Adam and Eve, Have domi-
nion; thereby, says our author, Adam was
monarch of the world : but the grant being
to them, i. e. spoke to Eve also, as many
interpreters


OF GoveRNMENT. 33


nterpreters think with reason, that these
words were not spoken till Adam had his


4


wife, must not she thereby be lady, as well


as he lord of the world? If it be said, that
Eve was subjected to Adam, it seems she was


not so subjected to him, as to hinder her do-


minion over the creatures, or property in them:
for shall we say that God ever made a joint
grant to two, and one only was to have the
benefit of it ?

FS. 30. But perhaps it will be said, Eve
was not made till afterward : grant it so,
what advantage will our author get by it?
The text will be only the more directly
against him, and shew that God, in this
"donation, gave the world to mankind in
common, and not to Adam in particular.
The word them in the text must include the
species of man, for it is certain them can by
no means signify Adam alone. In the 26th


verse, where God declares his intention to


give this dominion, it is plain he meant,
that he would make a species of creatures,
that should have dominion over the other
Apecies of this terrestrial globe: the words are,
And God said, Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness, and let them have dominion
over the fish, &c. They then were v have do-
minion. Who? even those who were to


have the image of God, the individuals of
that species of man, that he was going to
make; for that them should signify Adam
1


D singly,


|
|
|


34 OF GOVERNMENT.
singly, exclusive of the rest that should be


in the world with him, is against both serip- |


ture and all reason: and it cannot poshbly
be made sense, if man in the former part of
the verse do not signify the same with them
in the latter; only man there, as is usual, is
taken for the species, and them the individuals
of that species : and we have a reason in the
very text. God makes him in bis own image,
after his own likeness; makes him an intel-
lectual creature, and so capable of dominion :
for wherein soever else the image of God con-
sisted, the intellectual nature was certainly a
part of it, and belonged to the whole species,
and enabled them to have dominion over the
inferior creatures; and therefore David says
in the 8th P/a/m above cited, Thou hast made
him. little lower than the angels, thou hast made
him to have dominion. It is not of Adam king
David speaks here, for verse 4. it is plain, it
is of man, and the son of man, of the species
of mankind.

8. 31. And that this grant spoken to Adam
was made to him, and the whole species of


man, is clear from our author's own proof out


of the Psalmist. The earth, saith the Psalmist,
hath he given to the children of men; which
shews the title comes from fatherhood. These


are Sir Robert's words in the preface before


cited, and a strange inference it is he makes;


God hath given the earth to the children of
men, ergo the title comes from fatherhood, It is


pity


JC


_


[ —
A Might have had the countenance of the sound


% a—_


9


, Or GOVERNMENT. 35
5 ty the propriety of the Hebrew tongue had not


ed fathers of men, instead of children of men,
express mankind : then indeed our author


of the words, to have placed the title in the
atherhood. But to conclude, that the father-
good had the right to the earth, because God

ave it to the children of men, is a way of
arguing peculiar to our author: and a man
must have a great mind to go contrary to the
found as well as sense of the words, before

e could light on it. But the sense is yet
Harder, and more remote from our author's
A : for as it stands in his preface, it is
2 2 Adam's being monarch, and his
reasoning is thus, God gave the earth to the
children of men, ergo Adam was monarch of the
world, I defy any man to make a more
Pleasant conclusion than this, which cannot
'be excused from the most obvious absurdity,
till it can be shewn, that by children of men,
he who had no father, Adam alone is fig-


nified; but whatever our author does, the


scripture speaks not nonsense.

S8. 32. To maintain this property and private
' dominion of Adam, our author labours in the
following page to destroy the community


l granted to Noah and his sons, in that parallel


place, ix. Gen. 1, 2, 3. and he endeavours to
do it two ways. |


I. Sir Robert would persuade us against


15 7
85
Ls
vb
Y


the express words of the scripture, that what
# | D 2 | was


34 OF GOVERNMENT.


singly, exclusive of the rest that should be
in the world with him, is against both serip-
ture and all reason: and it cannot possibly
be made sense, if man in the former part of
the verse do not signify the same with them
in the latter ; only man there, as is usual, is
taken for the species, and them the individuals
of that species : and we have a reason in the
very text. God makes him in bis own image,
after his own likeness; makes him an intel-
Iectual creature, and so capable of dominion -
for wherein soever else the image of God con-
sisted, the intellectual nature was certainly a
part of it, and belonged to the whole species,
and enabled them to have dominion over the
inferior creatures; and therefore David says
in the 8th P/a/m above cited, Thou hast made
bim litthe lower than the angels, thou hast made
him to have dominion. It is not of Adam king
David speaks here, for verse 4. it is plain, it
is of man, and the son of man, of the species
of mankind.


8. 31. And that this grant spoken to Adam


was made to him, and the whole species of


man, is clear from our author's own proof out
of the Psalmist. The earth, faith the Psalmist,
hath he given to the children of men; which
shews the title comes from fatherhood. These
are Sir Robert's words in the preface before
cited, and a strange inference it 1s he makes ;


God hath given the earth to the children of


men, ergo the title comes from fatherhood. It is


pity


*


o
5 AE OO 2 . 2 7 -
a — l 1 ene
: jo — * N — fe Fw ny oy 2
* | —


Or GOVERNMENT. 35


pity the propriety of the Hebrew tongue had not
used fathers of men, instead of children of men,
to express mankind : then indeed our author


might have had the countenance of the sound
of the words, to have placed the zz in the


— <" 5 0
r


© fatherhood. But to conclude, that the sather-
Hood had the right to the earth, because God
gave it to the children of men, is a way of
J arguing peculiar to our author: and a man
hae could light on it. But the sense is yet
harder, and more remote from our author's


must have a great mind to go contrary to the
sound as well as sense of the words, before


purpose : for as it stands in his preface, it is


to ov Adam's being monarch, and his


reasoning is thus, God gave the earth to the
children of men, ergo Adam was monarch of the
world, I defy any man to make a more
pleasant conclusion than this, which cannot
be excused from the most obvious absurdity,
till it can be shewn, that by children of men,
he who had no father, Adam alone is fig-
nified ; but whatever our author does, the
scripture speaks not nonsense.

FS. 32. To maintain this property and private
dominion of Adam, our author labours in the


following page to destroy the community


granted to Noh and his sons, in that parallel


Place, ix. Gen. 1, 2, 3. and he endeayours to


do it two ways. .

1. Sir Robert would persuade us against
the express words of the scripture, that what
8 $ D 2 | was


36 Or GovERNM ENT.


was here granted to Noah, was not granted
to his sons in common with him. His words
are, As for the general community between Noah
and his sons, which Mr. Selden will have to
be granted to them, ix. Gen. 2. the text doth not
warrant it. What warrant our author would
have, when the plain express words of scrip-
ture, not capable of another meaning, wall
not satisfy him, who pretends to build wholly


on scripture, is not easy to imagine, The text


says, God blessed Noah and his sons, and said
unto them, 1. e. as our author would have it,
unto him : fer, saith he, although the sens are
there mentioned with Noah in the blessing, yet


it may best be understood, with a subordination
or benediction in succession, Observations, 211.
That indeed is beft, for our author to be un-
derstood, which best serves to his purpose ; ©
but that truly may best be understood by any
body else, which best agrees with the plain
construction of the words, and arises from
the obvious meaning of the place; and then
with subordination and in succession, will not


be best understood, in a grant of God, where A


he himself put them not, nor mentions any


such limitation. But yet, our author has
reasons, why it may best be understood so. The
blessing, says he in the following words, night
truly be fulfilled, if the sons, either under & ©


after their father, enjoyed a private dominion,
Observations, 211. Which is to say, that a
grant, whose express wards give a joint title


In


* 8
© * ay — * "4 # * EN Tos
— » _— on” — SS * wy Tr w_ þ 4
— . 0


1.
/'%
„
# N


5 yy
».
MN


5

|

by
On .


">. E 3 = - h * E 2 x
— Le e — *
8 25 eg
EE oo 2


Or GOVERNMENT. 37


in present (for the text says, into your hands
they are delivered) may Left be understood with
4 subordination or in. succession ; because it is
| possible, that in sbordination, or in succession, it
4 may be enjoyed. Which is all one as to say,
4 that a grant of any thing in present possession
may best be undersiood of reversion ; becaule it
is possible one may live to enjoy it in rever-
t sion. If the grant be indeed to a father and
d to his sons after him, who is so kind as to
let his children enjoy it presently in common
with him, one may truly say, as to the event
one will be as good as the other; but it can
never be true, that what the express words
grant in possession, and in common, may best
be understood, to be in reversion. The sum
of all his reasoning amounts to this: God
did not give to the sons of Noah the world in
common with their father, because it was
ossible they might enjoy it under, or after
Mw A very good fort of argument again(t
an express text of scripture : but God must
not be believed, though he speaks it himself,
when he says he dces any thing, which will
not consist with Sir Robert's hypothesis.
$. 33. For it is plain, however he would ex-
clude them, that part of this henediction, as he
would have it in succession, must needs be meant
to the sons, and not to Noah himself at all: Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth,
* fays God, in this blessing. This part of the
begnediction, as appears by the sequel, con-
j D 3 cerned


— wt =
* * + op 3 * wn of
- £ OE 3 4 — | a. + Jinn 2 * 7


N IV] NP OV  -- JS gw "Wy - Vo


en. bs


38 Or GOVERNME Nx.


cerned not Noah himself at all; for we read
not of any children he had after the flood;

and in the following chapter, where his pos-
terity is reckoned up, there 1s no mention
of any; and so this benedi&tion in succession
was not to take place till 350 years after:
and to save our author's imaginary monarchy,
the peopling of the world must be deferred
350 years; for this part of the benediction
cannot be understood with subordination, un-
less our author will say, that they must ask
leave of their father Noah to lie with their
wives. But in this one point our author 1s


constant to himself in all his discourses, he


takes great care there should be monarchs in
the world, but very little that there should be
people ; and indeed his way of government is
not the way to people the world : for how much
absolute monarchy helps to fulfil this great and
primary blessing of God Almighty, Be frutt-
Jul, and multiply, and replenish the earth,

which contains 1n it the improyement too of
arts and sciences, and the conveniences of
life, may be seen in those large and rich coun-
tries which are happy under the Turkish go-
vernment, where are not now to be found
one third, nay in many, if not most parts
of them one thirtieth, perhaps I might say not
one hundredth of the people, that were for-
merly, as will eafily appear to any one, who
will compare the accounts we have of it at


this


Or GOVERNMENT. 39


this time, with antient history. But this by
the by

S8. 34. The other parts of this Bhqenediction,
or grant, are so expressed, that they must
needs be understood to belong equally to
them all; as much to Neoah's sons as to
- Noah himself, and not to his sons with a
: subordination, or in succession. The fear of you,
and the dread of you, says God, shall be upon
every beast, &c. Will any body but our au-
thor say, that the creatures feared and stood
in awe of Noah only, and not of his sons
without his leave, or till after his death? And
the following words, into your hands they are
delivered, are they to be understood as our
author says, if your father please, or they
shall be delivered into your hands hereafter ?
If this be to argue from scripture, I know
not what may not be proved by it ; and I
can scarce see how much this differs from
that fiftion and fansie, or how much a su-
rer foundation it will prove, than the opi-
nions of philosophers and poets, which our au-
> thor so much condemns in his preface.

4 F. 35. But our author goes on to prove,
that z may best be understood with a subordina-
ion, or a benediction in succession ; for, says he,
it is not probable that the private dominion which
God gave to Adam, and by his donation, afsig-
nation, or cession to his children, was abroga-
ted, and a community of all things instituted be-
tween Noah and his sons-----Noah was left
the sole heir of the world; why should it be thought


D 4 that


Lone ao RR en od Find 1 üuv⅛ Be RIS. = Hd hg A.


40 OH GOVERNMENT.
that God would disinberit him of his birth-right,


and make him of all men in the world the only
tenant in common with his children? Observations,
211.

$. 36. The prejudices of our own ill-ground-
ed opinions, however by uscalled probable, can-
not authorise us to understand fcripture con-
trary to the direct and plain meaning of. the
words. I grant, it is not probable, that Adam's
private dominion was here abrogated : because
it is more than improbable, (for it will never
be proved) that ever {dam had any such pri-
vate dominion: and since parallel places of
scripture are most probable to make us know
how they may be bet understood, there needs
but the comparing this blessing here to Noah
and his sons after the flood, with that to Adam
after the creation, i. Gen. 28, to assure any
one that God gave Adam no such private do-
minion. It is probable, I confess, that Noah
should have the same title, the same property
and dominion after the flood, that Adam had
before it: but since private dominion cannot
consist with the blessing and grant God gave
to him and his sons in common, it is a suffi-
cient reason to conclude, that Adam had none,
especially since in the donation made to him,
there are no words that express it, or do in
the least favour it ; and then let my reader
judge whether it may best be undersioad, when
in the one Place there is not one word for it,
not to say what has been above proved, that


the


2 3 SZ
at a


3


4


Or GOVERNMENT. 41


0 the text itself proves the contrary; and in


J
4A


the other, the words and sense are directly


IJ
T7


against it.
But our author says, Noah was the


* fole beir of the world; why should it be thought


that God would dift nberit Lin of bis birth-right?
Heir, indeed, in England, fignifies the eldest
son, whois by the law of England to have all his
father's land ; but where God ever appointed
any such heir of the world, our author would
have done well to have shewed us ; and how
God disinberited him of his birth-right, or what
harm was done him if God gave his sons
a right to make use of a part of the earth for
the support of themselves and families, when
the whole was not only more than Noah him-
self, but infinitely more than they all could
make use of, and the possessions of one could
not at all prejudice, or, as to any use, streigh-
ten that of the other.

F. 38. Our author probably foreseeing he
might not be very successful in persuading
prope out of their senses, and, fay what

e could, men would be apt to believe
the plain words of scripture, and think,
as they saw, that the grant was spoken to
Neab and his sons jointly ; he endeavours
to insinuate, as if this grant to Noah con-

ed no property, no dominion ; because,


Ae the earth and dominton over the crea-


tures are therem omitted, nor the earth once na-
med. And therefore, says he, there is a con-


fiderable


Nobert's appointment, during their father's


42 Or GOVERNMENT.


federable difference between these two texts ; the
firft blessing gave Adam a dominion over the _ |
earth and all creatures ; the latter allows Noah 4 ;
liberty to use the living creatures for food : here
ic no alteration or diminishing of his title to a
property of all thmgs, but an enlargement only of
his commons, Observations, 211. So that in
our author's senfe, all that was said here to Noah
and his sons, gave them no dominion, no pro-
perty, but only enlarged the commons; their
commons, I should say, since God says, to you
ere they given, though our author says bz ;
for as for Noah's sons, they, it seems, by Sir


life-time, were to keep fasting days.
§. 39. Any one but our author would be
mightily suspected to be blinded with pre-
judice, that in all this blessing to Noah and
his sons, could see nothing but only an e-
largement of commons: for as to dominion,
which our author thinks omitted, the fear of
you, and the dread of you, says God, shall be up
on every beast, which J suppose expresses the
dominion, or superiority was designed man over
the living creatures, as fully as may be;
for in that fear and dread seems chiefly to
consist what was given to Adam over the in-
serior animals; who, as absolute a monarch
as he Was, could not make bold with a lark
or rabbet to satisfy his hunger, and had
ihe herbs but in common with the beasts,
as is plain from i Gen. 2, 9, and 30. In the
next


Or GOVERNMENT. 43


next place, it is manifest that in this bless-
ing to Noah and his sons, property is not


0 only given in clear words, but in a larger ex-


tent than it was to Adam. Into your hands


they are given, says God to Noah and his sons;
which words, if they give not property,
nay, property in possession, it will be hard
to find words that can; since there is not a
way to express a man's being possessed of any
thing more natural, nor more certain, than
to say, it is delivered into his hands. And ver.
3. to shew, that they had then given them


the utmost Phe man is capable of, which


is to have a right to destroy any thing by
using it ; Every moving thing that livetbh, saith
God, shall be meat for you ; which was not al-
lowed to Adam in his charter. This our au-
thor calls, 4 liberty of using them for food, and


only an enlargement of commons, but no altera-


tion of property, Observations, 211. What other
property man can have in the creatures, but
the liberty of w/ing them, is hard to be under-


Mood : so that if the first blessing, as our au-


thor says, gave Adam dominton over the crea-


tures, and the blessing to Noah and his sons,


gave them such a liberty to use them, as Adam
had not; it must needs give them something
that Adam with all his sovereignty wanted,


something that one would be apt to take for a


greater property ; for certainly he has no


absolute dominion over even the brutal part


of the creatures ; and the property he has in
| 3 them


44 OF GOVERNMENT.


them is very narrow and scanty, who can-
not make that use of them, which is permit-
ted to another. Should any one who is abso-
lute lord of a country, have bidden our au-
thor subdue the earth, and given him domi-
nion over the creatures in it, but not have
permitted him to have taken a kid or a lamb
out of the flock, to satisfy his hunger, I
guess, he would scarce have thought him-
ielf lord or proprietor of that land, or the
cattle on it ; but would have found the dif-
ference between having dominion, which a
shepherd may have, and having full property
as an owner. So that, had it been his own
case, Sir Robert, I believe, would have thought
here was an alteration, nay, an enlarging of
preperty ; and that Noah ang his children had
by this Fur. not only property given them,
but such a property given them in the crea-
tures, as Adam had not: For however, in
respect of one another, men may be allowed
to have propriety in their distinct portions of
the creatures; yet in respect of God the
maker of heaven and earth, who is sole lord
and proprietor of the whole world, man's
propriety in the creatures is nothing but that
liberty to use them, which God has permitted;
and so man's property may be altered and
enlarged, as we ice it was here, after the
food, when other uses of them are allowed,
which before were. not. From all which I
suppose it is clear, that neither Adam, nor

2 Noah,


*
*


„


Or GOVERNMENT. 45
Noab, had any private dominion, any property


in the creatures, exclusive of his posterity,
as they should successively grow up into need


of them, and come to be able to make use
of them.

8 40. Thus we have examined our author's
argument for Adam's monarchy, founded on
the blessing pronounced, i. Gen. 28. Where-
in I think it is impossible for any sober rea-


der, to find any other but the setting of


mankind above the other kinds of creatures,
in this habitable earth of ours. It is nothing
but the giving to man, the whole species of
man, as the chief inhabitant, who is the
image of his Maker, the dominion over the


other creatures. This lies so obvious in the


plain words, that any one, but our author,
would have thought it necessary to have
shewn, how these words, that seemed to say
the quite contrary, gave Adam monarchical
absolute power over other men, or the ole
property in all the creatures; and methinks.
in a business of this moment, and that where-
on he builds all that follows, he should have
done something more than barely cite words,
which apparently make against him; for L
confess, I cannot see any thing in them, tend-
ing to Adam's monarchy, or private dominion,
but quite the contrary. And I the less de-
PIE dulness of my apprehension herein,

nce I find the apostle seems to have as little


notion of any such private dominion of Adam


As *


46 Or GOVERNMENT.

as I, when he says, God gives us all things
richly to enjoy, which he could not do, if
it were all given away already, to Monarch
Adam, and the monarchs his heirs and suc-
cessors. To conclude, this text is so far
from proving Adam sole proprietor, that, on
the contrary, it is a confirmation of the ori-
ginal Pays of all things amongst the
sons of men, which . from this do-
nation of God, as well as other places of
scripture, the sovereignty of Adam, built up-
on is private dominion, must fall, not having
any foundation to support it.

F. 41. But yet, if after all, any one will
needs have it so, that by this donation of
God, Adam was made sole proprietor of the
whole earth, what will this be to his sove-
reignty? and how will it appear, that pro-
- preety in land gives a man power over the life
of another? or how will the possession even
of the whole earth, give any one a sovereign
arbitrary authority over the persons of men ?
The most specious thing to be said, is, that he
that is proprietor of the whole world, may
deny all the rest of mankind food, and so at
his pleasure starve them, if they will not
acknowledge his sovereignty, and obey his
will. If this were true, it would be a good
argument to prove, that there never was
any such property, that God never gave
any such private dominion; since it is more
reasonable to think, that God, who bid man-

kind


SE
4


*
*


<>
*
*


-


Or GOVERNMENT. 47


kind increase and multiply, should rather
himself give them all a right to make use of
the food and raiment, and other conveniences


of life, the materials whereof he had so plen-


tifully provided for them; than to make them
. depend upon the will of a man for their sub-
+ listence, who should have power to destroy
them all when he pleased, and who, being
no better than other men, was in succession
| likelier, by want and the dependence of a scanty
| fortune, to tie them to hard service, than by
liberal allowance of the conveniences of life


and see what becomes of the conveniences of
life, and the multitudes of people.
$. 42. But we know God hath not left one
man so to the mercy of another, that he ma
starve him if he please : God the Lord and
Father of all has given no one of his chil-
dren such} a property in his peculiar portion
of the things of this world, but that he has
given his needy brother a right to the sur-
plusage of his goods ; so that it cannot justly
be denied him, when his pressing wants call
for it : and therefore no man could ever
Have a just power over the life -of another
by right of property in land or possessions ;
fince it would always be a fin, in any man of
estate, to let his brother perish for want of


= affording him relief out of his plenty. As
=. justice


48 OF GOVERNMENT.


Justice gives every man a title to the product
of his honest industry, and the fair acqui-


fitions of his ancestors descended to him;


so charity gives every man a title to so much
out of another's plenty, as will keep him


from extreme want, where he has no means


to subsist otherwise : and a man can. no more


justly make use of another's necessity, to force
him to become his vassal, by with-holding i
that relief, God requires him to afford to the
wants of his brother, than he that has more


strength can seize upon a weaker, master him


to his obedience, and with a dagger e hie


throat offer him death or slavery.

F. 43. Should any one make so perverse an
use of God's blessings poured on him with a
liberal hand; should any one be cruel and
uncharitable to that extremity, yet all this
would not prove that propriety in land, even
in this case, - gave any authority over the per-
fons of men, but only that compact might;
since the authority of the rich proprietor, and
the subjection of the needy beggar, began not
from the possession of the Lord, but the con-
sent of the poor man, who preferred being
his subject to starving. And the man he thus
submits to, can pretend to no more power


over him, than he has consented to, upon com-
pact. Upon this ground a man's having his
stores filled in a time of scarcity, having mo-
ney in his pocket, being in a vessel at sea,


being able to swim, Cc. may as well be
2 „„


Or GovEeRNMENT. 49


the foundation of rule and dominion, as being
pPossessor of all the land in the world; any of
These being sufficient to enable me to save a
man's life, who would perish if such affistance
were denied him; and any thing, by this rule,
that may be an occasion of working upon
another's necessity, to save his life, or
any thing dear to him, at the rate of his
freedom, may be made a foundation of sove-


freignty, as well as property. From all which
it is clear, that though God should have given


Adam private dominion, yet that private domi-
3-7 could give him no sovereignty ; but we
have already sufficiently proved, that God
gave him no private dominion.


tn A. * . TY 1 ts. pt rt


.


5 l Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty by the Subjection
1 of Eve.


. 44. TH next place of scripture we
I᷑I find our author builds his mo-
2 natchy of Adam on, is iii. Gen. 26. And thy
= 4efire shall be to thy busband, and be shall rule
over tbee. Here we have (says he) the origi-
nal grant of government, from whence he con-
cludes, in the following part of the page,
Observations, 244. That the supreme power is


All im the fatherhood, and limited to one kind


4 government, that is, to monarchy. For let
is premises be what they will, this is al-
ways the conclusion; let rule, in any text, be
but once named, and presently ab/o/ure. mo-

— narchy


50 Or GoveRNMENT.


narchy is by divine right established. + If any
one will but carefully read our author's own n
reasoning from these words, Observations, 244.
and confider, among other things, the line and
pofterity of Adam, as he there brings them in,
he will find some difficulty to make sense of
what he says ; but we will allow this at pre-
sent to his peculiar way of writing, and con-
sider the force of the text in hand. The
words are the curse of God upon the Wo-
man, for having been the first and forwardest
in the disobedience; and if we will confider
the occasion of what God says here to our
first parents, that he was denouncing judg-
ment, and declaring his wrath against them
both, for their disobedience, we cannot sup-
pose that this was the time, wherein God was
granting Adam prerogatives and privileges, in-
vesting him with dignity and authority, eleva-
ting him to dominion and monarchy : for
though, as a helper in the temptation, Eve was
laid below him, and so he had accidentally a
superiority. over her, for her greater punish-
ment; yet he too had his share in the fall, as
well as the fin, and was laid lower, as may be
seen in the following verses ;- and it would
be hard to imagine, that God, in the sume
breath, should make him universal monarch
cover all mankind; and a day-labourer for his
life; turn him out of, ard ifl vg fils ground,
ver. 23. and at the lame! time advance him
to a throne, and all the privileges and ease of
absolute power. WET IS INT EE.


15
1

2 þ 3
F.
n
2


— — =
re ee ile OS


mig =_


—


— — — —
— - — — =
— — —— — — — — —
— —— — — — : 1 — —_


[
!
, t
” 8
4
| 4g
<7" ;
1
4


1
} »
-
.
1


9.45.


3 On GoveRNAENT. 51
1 Fes, This Was not a time, when Adam
n could expect any favours, any grant of pri-
.. uvileges, from his offended Maker. If. this
be the original grant f government, as our au-
), fthor tells us, and Adam was now made mo-
Ef if narch, whatever Sir Robert would have him, it
js plain, God made him but a very poor mo-
- &# aarch,. such an one, as our author himself
would have; counted it no great privilege to
be. God sets; him to work for his living,
and seems rather. to give him a spade into his
Hand, to subdue. the earth, than a sceptre to
rule over its inhabitants. In the sweat of thy
face thou shalt eat thy bread, says God to him,
ver. 19. This, was unavoidable, may it per-
haps be answered, because he was yet with-

= subjects, and had nobody to work, for
bim; bat- afterwards, living as he did above
goo years, he might have people enough,
whom he might command, to work for him;
no, says God, not only whilst thou art with-

out hey help, save thy wife, but as long
as thou livest, shalt thou live by thy labour,
In the sweat. of thy face, shalt thou eat thy
bread, till thou — tho unta the ground, for out
| of it nwast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto
dust shalt thou. return, v. 19. It will perhaps
be answered again in favour of our author,
that these words are not spoken personally
to Adam, but in him, as their representative,
to all mankind, this being a curse upon man-
kind, because of the fall.


"A Wie 0 id . (D a>


1


§. 46. God, I believe, speaks differently


» from men, because he speaks with more truth,
E 2 more


_— - — — —
8 I -

r ET. a = tne =

— — 5 — — ——x — — -

- — 2 — o - - ——_— — 4 — — — =

— — — =
— — — — * *
— —
*


-


— ——
—


— —
— — —


—


> — > ———
— - — — —— ——
— 8 —


p_ — . <— ̃⁵—˙ͥm— — cw ⏑⏑ͥ³? re
n * K _—

— == —

— 1———


52 Or GOVERNMENT.


more : but when he vouchsafes to
speak to men, 1 do not think he


erently from them, in erossing the rules of 3
language in use amongst them: this would


not be to condescend to thei


lose his design in speaking what, thus


for by the ordinary rules of language, it
= very hard to understand hat God


will
says, if — he speaks here, in the
number, to Adam, must be understood to be


ular


spoken to all mankind, and what he says


in the plural number, i. Gen. 26, and 28.
must be understood of Adam alone, exclusive


of all others, and what he says to Noah and


his sons jointly, must be understood w. an
meant to Noab alone, Gen. ix.


47. Farther it is to be noted, chat Bs
words here of ii Gen. 16. Which our author
calls ibe original grant of government, were
not spoken to Adam, neither indeed was there
any grant in them made to Adam, but a
punishment laid upon Eve: and if we will
take them as they were directed in particular


to her, or in her, as their representative, to
all other women, they will at most concern


the female sex only, and import no more,


but that subjeRion they souls? ordinarily be


in


. 1 r > *
r n
— — 2 me — _ NN

as — .

has Wn = —


ties, When
he humbles himself to speak to them, but to
spoken, 7

could not understand. + And yet thus
must we think of God, if the interpretations J
of | scripture, necessary to maintain our au-
2 must be received for good:


— ye *
*


8


1 Or GoOvERNMENT, 53


" in to cheir husbands: but there is here no more
law to oblige! a woman to such a subjection,
23 if the cirtumstances either-of her condition,
or contract with her husband, should. exempt
her from it, than there is, that she should
7 bred forth her children in sorrow and pain,
if there could be 2 a remedy for —
| which is also a part of the same curse 5
i her: for the whole verse runs thus,
| the 200man_ be you I vill greatly multiply =
. sorrow and tf tron ; in sorraw thou shalt
1 — 2 defire shall be to thy
iy fant,


—
T
|
4
FE
Þ
3
|


and he shall rule over thee. It would,
Ethink, have been a bard matter for any
body, but our author, to have found out a
grant of manarcbical government. to Adam in
these words, which were neither spoke to,
nor of him: neither will any one, I suppose,
by these words, think the — sex, as by
a law, so subjected to the curse contained in
them, that it jis their duty not to endeavour
to avoid it. And will any one say, that Eve,
or any other woman, sinned, if she were
brought to bed without those multiplied pains
| God threatens her here with ? or that either
of our queens, Mary or Ekzabeth, had they
married any of their subjects, had been by
this text put into a political subjection to |
him! or that he thereby should have had
monarchical rule over her ; God, in this text,
gives not, that I see, any authority to Adam
over Eve, or to men over their wives, but

E 3 only


foretold what


— —— — —
— — > —
—_—— 0 oe A
—— — * — - 4 — —
— =


-

— —_— 2 OOPS
= —

* —


dure hical Poꝛver; there will be äs many mo-


thefe words
be only a co Wagal power; not political the
power that every husband hath to order the
things of private concernment-in his family,
as proprietor of the goods and land there,
and tb have his will — place before that
of his wife in all things of their common |
concernment; but not a political power of
life and death over _ much less over any


- — - =


tr, 2 This 1 am saver if our author avill
Rave r to be a grant, the original grant


54 OF GOVERNMENT.


only foretels what should be the ' woman's i
lot, ' How by his providence he would order
it o, that the should be subject to her hus-
band, as we see that generally the laws of
mankind and customs of nations have ordered 'F
it so; and there. is, 1 . a nn in %


nature for itt. 1 a Ne


; he younger,


y made


ould de facto come to pals.
But if these words herè spoke to Eve must


needs de understood as a law to bind her and


allsgther women io suhjection, it can be no


other sabjecłion than What every wife owes
her wulband Hand then if this be the original


gramme government and the foundation of: mo-


narehs- as there dare! husbands; if therefore
any power ito Adam, it can


else. Jar 1 1 1 i . ar. 45 e


of


8. 48. Thus when God says of Fach and
Neu, that the'elder should 1
Xxv. Gen. 230 no body supposes that God
acob - Esau' s sovereign, but


288


A Net) Go VE RN ME Nr. 55
3 2 ment, political government, he ought-
43 o have proved: it by some better arguments
chan by barely saying, that fy dere, shall be


-

f anto:thy busband, was a law whereby Eve, and
d ail that should come of her, were subjected to
n the absolute monarehical power of Adam and


his heirs. 7% defire' shall be to thy husband, |
is too doubtful an 9 of whose signi-
cation interpreters' are not agreed, ito build
ory confidently on, and in a aster: of such
moment, and so great and general concern-
ment: but bur author, aceording to his way
t of writing; Having once named the text,
1 Wy concludes presentiy without any more ado,
o that the meaning is as he would have it.

sGswz˖et the words rule and subject be but found
in the text or mafgent, atid- it immediately
szgnifies the duty of a subject to his prince;
ce relation is changed, and though God says
1 Sir Robert will have it ing; Adam
1 Havpresently absolute ' monarehncal poter over
Hoe, and not only over Eve, but all that
ould c come of ber, though the scripture-says
, net a word/of it, nor our author; a ord- to
„prove it. But Adam must for all that be an
tabsolute monarch, and so down to the end
|
}


of the chapter. And here I leave my reader
to consider, whether my bare saying, without
offering any reasons to evince it, that this
text give: not Adam that absolute mimarthical
pier, our author supposes,” be! not as suf-
eee 0 defito}) that power, as his bare as-
3 sertion


36 OF-GovenrnwmenNntrT. 7
sertion is te establist it, since the text man-
tions neither Lam prople, fpeaks nothing
of absolute or monatchical Pour, but the
fubjeQion' of Eur to Adam, à wife to her


hofband. And he that would trace our au-


thor so all through, would make à short and
sufficient why to the greatest part of the
grounds he proceeds on, and abundantly |?
confute them by barely denying ; it being a
' sufficient answer to assertions without proof, 1
to deny them without giving a reason. And
therefore should I have faid nothing but
barely denied, that by this text the supreme
power was. settled and. — .by Ge 2 227
in tbe fatherhood, limited to monarchy, aud

to Adam's. person and heirs, all which _
author notably concludes from these. words,
as may be — in the fame page, Ohser uationt,
244. it had been a sufficient answer: should:
I have defixed: any sober man anly to have
read the text, 420 considered to whom, and
on what eceasion it was spoken, he would
no doubt have wondered how our author
found out monarchical absolute power in it,
had he not had an exceeding good faculty“
to find it hinaself, where he — not shewi
it others. And thus we have examined the
two places of scripture, all that I remember
our author brings to prove Adam s fsavereignty,
that fapromacy,. — he says, ib was God
ordinance sbonld be unkmited in Adam, and as:
2 a all the * of bis will, Observations,


254.


OY GOYN NAZI. 57


— I 254. viz. 11 Gon 28. and iii Gen. 16 one
g wWhereof fignifies only the subjection of the
© inferior ranks-of creatures to mankind, and
Tr the other the fob; that is due from a
- Wife 10 ber husband, both far enough from
4 that which subhjects owe the re a
e J political societies: +2 > * 255
y ©
4
1
t
E |
|
7


100. DA! 21 >. 20525010 da na
+4135, 31 St Theory 1 nn 2tutnad


e250 22 H 0 P. v. * r
4 x Of A Pn 5 Title to Sovereignty by Pb
. 50.


RN wy,


HERE is one thing more, and
then A think I have giren yo

of Adam's
sovereignty; and that is a fition of a
natural right of dominion over his children,
their father: and this title of fa-
pleased with, that you will


find it brought in almast in every page; pat-
tieularly he says, not amy Adam, but t.


W /cceedmg 'patriarchs had by right of fatherhood
royal authority over theer clmkiremcp. 12: And
in the same. page, hrs ' childnen
Lag ibe fountam of all regal aut c.
This being, as one would think by bis so-
frequent mentioning. it, the main bafis af all


4 all thatiour-author brings for


by: being th
tbemband he is fo


his frame, we may well elear and
evident reason for it, since he lays it down as
a position necessary to his pu that vr
mam that ir bora in sa fur frum —


N be becomes @ saayaci \ —
egets


38 On GO ERNN NEN.


begets bum Observations; 1 56. so that Adam


being the only man created, and all ever
since bein


free.. 5065 we ask how Adam comes by this


rr


can naturally: arise from nothing else. | .= +


voy. 51% Gratius tells us not. here how far
this jus in libero, this power of patents oV rr
their — 4M 58 but our author, al-


ways very alear in the point, assures us, it
is supreme porter, and like that of abiolute


monarchs cer their flaves, absolute power


of life and death. He that shogld demand


. of: him, hn or sor what. reasom ãt i that


begetting 2 child gives the father suchwan
absalute power over him, will find him an-
wer nothing: vr are to take his word for


that the laws of nature and the constitutions
of government must stand: or fall. Had he


been an absolute monarch, this way of talk


ing might have suited well enough; pre
ratione uolunta: might have been of force in
his mouth; but in the way of proof or ar-
3 is very 2 and will little


advantage


5M
4
be


* 28 —
* They —
0 „
4
uk |


ag begotten, no body has heen horn |


power over his children, he tells us here it is


z begnig them: and pain, ,


"generations Jus' Ed, 7
— i= liberds. And indeed the act of *
begetting being that which makes a man a

father, his right of a father over his children 1


this, as well as several other things; and by |


OY GOVERNMENT. 59


ange his plea for absolute monarchy.
Sir Robert has too much lessened a subjed's
authority to leave himself the hopes of esta-
bliching any thing by his bare saying it; one
7 flave's opinion without proof is not of weight
— to dispose of the liberty and for-
| cunks of all mankind. If all men are not,
as I think they are, naturally equal, I am
sure all slaves are; and then I, may without
Y bpresumpfan oppose my single opinion to his;
and be confident that my saying, that begetting
7 of children males them not flaves to their fas
5 vx bert, 4 certainly sets all mankind free, as
his affirming the contrary makes them all
slaves. But that this position, yhich is the
foundation of all their doctrine, who would
| have monarchy to be jure divino, anay have
all fair play, let us hear what feasons others
give sor it, since our author offers none.
S. 5e. The argument, L have heard others
= — of, to prove that fathers, by be-
getting them, come. by an absolute powet
auer their children, is this; that fathers baue
E over the lives of their children, because
= then give them life and being, which is the only
proof it is capable of: since there can be no
reason, why naturally one man should have
any claim or pretence of right over that an
another, which was never his, which he be-
stowed: not, but was received from the hounty
of another. 1. L answer, that every one Who
Þ Cans another any thing, has not always
thereby


60 Or GOVERNMEN T.
thereby a right to take it away again. But,
2. They who fay the father gives life to his


children, are so dazzled with rhe thoughts of Wo
monarchy,” that they do not, as they ought, Wc


remember God, who is the autbor' and giver


bee our being. How can he be thought to


lives and studies fpent in dissections, and
diligent examining the bodies of men, con-
foss their ignorance in the structure and use
of many parts of man's body, and in that
operation wherein life consists in the whole.
And doth the rude plough- man, or the more
ignorant voluptuary, frame or fashion such an
adrnirable engine as this is, and then put
life and sense into it? Can any man say, he


formed the parts that are necesfary to the


give life to another, that knows not wherein
his own life confists? Philosophers are at a b
loss about it after their most diligent en- h
quiries; and anatomists, after their whole


'
*
1
— 71
1


|


of life it is in bim alone me live, movies undd Bi


life of: his child or can he suppose himself |


to give the life, and yet not know what


subject is fit to receive it, nor what actions 7
or organs are necesfary for its reception or


preservation? 48 5 F 13.2. Bols *
F. 53. To give life to that which has yet
no bei
Creature fashion the


parts, and mould and


them a living soul. He that could do this,
l might


*


6
. * L 1
4 * =
za
= k * 0 Fr
I 1k ee ö | 4 WLY ; , NR” ww
» | v4 | "at
. g 0 ” 1
*
B 1


suit them ta their uses, and having propor-


8 = 4
1
5 : 4,
: 1 1

9

N *


tbe Lord our Maker. And therefore


M Or GovERNMENT. 61
4 2 indeed have some pretence to destroy

[ is own workmanship. But is there any one
o bold, that dares thus far arrogate to him-
elf the incomprehensible works of the al-
4 ighty? Who alone did: at first, and con-
indes Kill to make a living soul, he alone
an breathe in the breath of life. If any one
binde himself an artist at this, let him num
up the parts of his child's body which
e bath made, tell me their uses and opera-
tions, and when the living and rational soul
pdegan to. inhabit. this curious structure, when
sense began, and how this engine, which he
has framed, thinks and reasons: if he made
Tit let him, when it is out of order, mend it,
at least tell wherein the defects lie. Shall be
l e mad the eye not see ? says the Psalmist,
Palm xciv. g. See these men's vanities! the


Jo . g


structure of that one part is sufficient to


convince us of an all-wise contriver, and he


1 chip, that 0 one of the ordinary: / appellations
of G0d in seripture is, God our Maker, n


| our author, for the magnifying his fatherhood, -


; be pleased to say, Observations, 159. D

* even the power which God bimsels exarcisetb ouer

= mankind it by right. of fatberbood, yet this

fatherhood is such an one as utterly excludes

1 all pretence of title in earthly parents; for
We is yy nou: bes is n A COIN *

1 f 7 12


make their children, it ĩs not so fliglit a piece |


could make them without designing itz What


of mankind, which he doth most —_—y
without the intention, and often against the


deed those who desire and design children, *


their children, gave them life and being, and
This would give the father but a joint do- 3 |
an equal share, if not the greater, as nourish- 4
ing the child a long time in her on body


shioned, and from her it receives the ma-
terial and principles of its constitution: and


62 OF — a'H.
all, which no parents can pretend to be of |
their children. on wes

F. 54. But had men fleilboand- power! to


of worktnanship, that it can be 4magiried, ey


father of a thousand, when he begets a child,
thinks farther than the satisfying his present
appetite? God in his infinite wisdom has F
put strong desires of copulation into the con-
stitution of men, thereby to continue the race h


consent and will of the begetter. And in- :


are but the occasions of their being, and
when they defign and with to beget them,
do little more towards their making, than 4
Deucalion and his wife in the fable did to-
wards the making of mankind, by ps &
pebbles over their heads. 1114
F. 55. But grant that the parents made


that hence there followed an absolute power. *
minion with the mother over them: for 5 50
no body can deny but that the woman'hath *#


out of her on substance :, there it is fa- 8


1 9
aq.
: 15 va)
* *
® Mc,
4
ON + 14
2
*


7 Or GovEtERNMDNT:) 63
1 it is so hard; to imagine the., rational. foul
could presently inhabit the yet unformed
embrio, as soon as the father has done his


:e part in the act of generation, that if it must
be supposed to derive any thing from the
1 parents, | it mult certainly .OWe: most to the
mother. But be that as it will, the mother
cannot be denied an equal share in begetting
s * of the child, and fo the absolute authority
* of the father. will not arise from hence. Our
2X author, indeed is of another mind; for he
says, Mi know: that God at the creation gave
"JF the | sovereignty to. the man over the woman, as
= being.» the  nobler and principal agent in gene-
ration, Observations, 172. I remember not
1 this in my Bible; and when the place is
brought where God at the creation gave the
sovereignty to man over the woman, and
that for this reason, because: be is the nobler
and principal agent in generation, it will be
time enough to consider, and answer it. But
it is no new thing for our author to tell us his
= own fancies for certain and divine truths, tho
there be often a great deal of difference be-
tween his and divine revelations; for God in
the seripture says, his father and bis mother
"i thatibegot him. 114416 eib #ItQoY 20; was;
98.56. They who alledge the practice of
IF mankind, for expoing or selling their children,
as ea proof of their power over them, „are
with Sir Robert happy arguers s, and cannot
but recommend their opinion, by founding
| | 1 ; | r 2. hae


«


—


— -
— —


—— —
7 2


T S —— = 2 =
* — - - - — —
E — K mg. —— > —— * . i
N %


8


——


. — Eos Oo


— ̃ r—' —— cn
- — — — — . —


—


— —


_—_ —
—


Vf —
—_— —
— — —— —
c


— — —
= — ——_—_——


. PP — —2—


-
I
— —


— — —


— — —
- —


wild and most untamed


of any


64 Or GovenNnMeNrT.
it on the most shameful action, and most


unnatural murder, human nature is capable e


of. The dens of lions and nurseries of


wolves know no such cruelty
savage inhabitants of the desert obey God
and nature in being tender and careful of
their off-spring: they will hunt, watch, fight,


and almoi starve for the preservation of their


oung; never part with them; never forsake
Nat they" 4
selves. And is it the privilege of man alone
to act more contrary to nature than the
part of the creation?
doth God- forbid us under the severest 3
nalty, that of death, to take away the life

man, a stranger, and upon — WT
cation? and does he permit us to


of; and by the dictates of nature and rea-
son, as well as his revealed command, re-

quires us to preserve? He has in all the parts
of the creation taken a liar care to
pagate and continue the several species of
creatures, and makes the individuals act fo. ®


strongly to this end, that they sometimes


negle& their own private good fot it, and
seem to forget that general rule, which na-


ture- teaches all things, of self-preservation ;
ang the © preservation of their young, as


the in them, over- rules


principle


the conftitution of their particular natures.
| Thus we fee, when their young stand in
need of it, the timorous become valiant,


the


as this: these 0


are able to shift for them-


eltroß
those, he has given us the charge and care A |


Or GORE 65


he fierce and duege Kianannd the ane

, Filer and Perl 4 So
F. 5. But if the example of whde hath
Knee, be the rule of what ought/-to

„ history would have furnished our author

| a of this ab/alute fatherly power
Ma its height and perfection, and he might
Save shewed. us in Peru, people that begot
Fhildren on purpose to fatten and eat them.
he tory is so remarkable, that I cannot bat
irdows in the author's words. In some
provinces, a be, they were so liquorish

* after manꝭs flesh, that x Git would not have
the patience to stay till the breath was
ZE. out. * the body, —4 would suck the blood
+*© as. it ran from the wounds of the dying
man; they had public shambles of man's
X* flesh, and their madness herein was to
that degree, that they spared not their


1. own children, which they had begot on


74 strangers taken in war: for they made
their captives their mistresses, and ee, c
naourished the children they had by them,
'£.,till about thirteen years old they e
„ andieat them; and they NT the mo-
4 . Len after the same. fashion, when. t
4 gem past child bearing, and crased to-
bring them any more roasters,” Garcilasb.
9 dela V Ha hig. des Yncas de Peru, l. i. c. 18.
J 88. Tha far can the busy mind f man.
Carry bim to. a brutality below :the:levet of
peasts, When he quits is: reaspn,: which.
F | 5 places


; =
66 Or GOVERNMENT.


aces him almost equal to angels. Nor can
it be otherwise in a creature, whose thoughts
are more than the sands, and wider than the
ocean, where fancy and passion must needs
fs if reason, which


run him into strange cou


1s his only star and compass, be not that he a;


steers by. The imagination is always rest-
less, and suggests variety of thoughts, and the
will, reason being laid aside, is ready for every 7
extravagant project; and in this state, he
that goes farthest out of the way, is thought
fittest to lead, and is sure of most followers : k
and when fashion hath once established what
folly or craft ps custom makes it sacred,

ought impudence, or mad- |


and it will be
ness, to contradict or question it. He that


will impartially survey the nations of the |


world, will find so much of their religions,


governments and manners, brought in and |


continued amongst them by these means, that
he will have but little reverence for the prac-
tices which are in use and credit amongst
men ; and will have reason to think, that
the woods and forests, where the irrational
untaught inhabitants keep right by following
nature, are fitter to give us rules, than cities
and palaces, where those that call themselves
civil and rational, go out of their way, by
the authority of example. If precedents are
sufficient to establish a rule in this case, our
author might have found in holy writ chil-
dren sacrificed by their parents, and this
85 95 5 amongst


® OY GOVERNMENT. 67
amongst the people of God themselves : the
1 Palmist tells us, P/al. cvi. 38. They shed in-
nocent bloed, even the blood of their. sons and of
tbeir daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols
e Canaan; But God judged not of this by
our author's rule, nor allowed of the autho-
I rity of practice against his righteous law; but
as it follows there, The land was polluted with
= blood; therefore was the wrath of the Lord
= #indled against his people, insomuch that he
abborred his own inheritance. The killing of
their children, though it were fashionable,
vas charged on them as innocent blood, and
so had in the account of God the guilt of
murder, as the offering them to idols had
the guilt of idolatry. 2

FS. 59. Be it then, as Sir Robert says, that
anciently it was usual for men 7o /ell and
castrate their children, Observations, 15 5. Let
it be, that they exposed them; add to it, if
you please, for this is still greater power, that
they begat them for their tables, to fat and
eat them: if this proves a right to do fo,
we may, by the same argument, justify adul-
tery, incest and sodomy, for there are ex-
amples of these too, both ancient and mo-
dern; fins, which I suppose have their prin-
cipal aggravation from this, that they cross
the main intention of nature, which willeth
the increase of mankind, and the conti-
nuation of the species in the highest per-
fection, and the distinction of families, **
1 1 e 8


—— "OF OP * WW — 032


—
n


*


*
*


b8 Or GovERrNMENT. J


1


.


the security of the marriage bed, as necessary z


thereunto. _ 10
$. 60. In confirmation of this natural au-


thority of the father, our author brings a
lame proof from the positive command of
God in scripture : his words are, To confirm i
the natural right of regal power, wwe find in
the Decalogue, that the * which enjoms obe-
dience to kings, is delivered in the terms, Honour
thy father, p. 23. Whereas many confess, that
government only in the abstract, is the ordinance
of God, they are not able to prove any fuch
ordinance in the scripture, but only in the fa-
therly power ; and therefore we find the com-
mandment, that enjoins obedience to superiors, i
given in the terms, Honour thy father; fo that
not only the power and right of government,
but the form of the power governing, and the
person having the power, are all the ordinances
, God. The first father had not only fimply
power, but power monarchical, as he was father
immediately fram God, Observations, 254. Tok
the same purpose, the same law is cited by

our author in several other places, and just}
"after the same fashion ; that is, and mother,
as apochryphal words, are always left out; a
"great argument of our author's ingenuity, |
and the goodness of his cause, which required
in its defender zeal to a degree of warmth, |


—
4


*
1
7
8


able to warp the sucred rule of the word of Ml.
God, to make it comply with his present
occasion; 'a way of proceeding not unufual


—


te
tr
tt
0!
Ju
1
fi
1
*


0
r
\


N


4 OF GOVERNMENT. 69
1 to those, who embrace not truths because
\. Freason and revelation offer them, but espouse
2 tenets and parties for ends different from
if truth, and then resolve at any rate to defend
„ them; and { do with the words and sense
„ of authors, they would fit to their purpose,
just as Procrustes did with his guests, lop or
stretch them, as may best fit them to the
„ ige of their notions: and they always prove
like those so ferved, deformed, lame, and
© ulecle(s.
8. 61. For had our author set down this

command without garbling, as God gave it,
and joined ather to father, every reader


h = would have seen, that it had made directly
„ against him; and that it was so far from
„ establishing the monarchical power of the fa-


ther, that it set up the mather equal with
him, and enjoined nothing but what was due
in common, to both father and mother : for
that is the constant tenor of the scripture,
Honour thy father and thy mother, Exod. xx. He
that smiteth bis father or mother, shall surely
be put to death, xxi. 15. He that curseth tus
father or mother, shall surely be put ta death,
wer. 17. Repeated Lev. xx. g. and by our
Saviour, Matth. xv. 4. Ye shall fear every
man his mother and his fatber, Lev. xix. 3.
Fa man have a rebellious fon, which quill not
obey the voice of his father, or the woice

bis mother; then shall his father and his mother
lay hold on bim, and say, This our son is flub-
* 5 F 3 | born


c on Hs, ore a."
6: 8 , 9 : | DIP


—


— — —


70 Or GOVERNME MT.


born and rebellious, he will not obey our voice,
Deut. xxi. 18, 19, 20, 21. Cursed be he that i
setteth light by hrs father or his mot her, xxviii. 16. i} —
My son, hear the instructions of thy father, and
Forsake not the law of thy mother, are the
words of Solomon, a king who was not ig-
norant of what belonged to him as a father
or a king; and yet he joins father and no-
ther together, in all the instructions he gives
children quite thro' his book of Proverbs. i
Moe unto him, that sayeth unto his father, What
begettest thou, or to the woman, What hast thou |
brought forth? Ia. xi. ver. 10. In thee have
they set I:ght by father or mother, Ezek. xxviii.
2. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall
yet prophesy, then his father and his mother
that begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shalt
not live, and his father and his mother that |
begat bim, shall thrust him through when he |
propbefieth, Zech. xiii. 3. Here not the father |
only, but the father and mother jointly, had
power in this case of life and death. Thus
ran the law of the Old Testament, and in
the New they are likewise joined, in the
obedience of their children, Eph. vi. 1. The
rule is, Children, obey your parents; and I do
not remember, that I any where read, Chi/-
dren, obey your father, and no more: the scrip-
ture joins mother too in that homage, which
is due from children; and had there been
any text, where the honour or obedience of
children had been directed to the father alone,
a It


Or GOVERNMENT. 71
it is not likely that our author, who pretends


to build all upon scripture, would have omit-


ted it: nay, the scripture makes the autho-


2X rity of father and mother, in respect of those
they have begot, so equal, that in some


places it neglects even the priority of order,


which is thought due to the father, and the
© mother is put first, as Lev, xix. 3. from which


so constantly joining father and mother to-
gether, as is found quite through the scrip-
ture, we may conclude that the honour they
have a title to from their children, is one
common right belonging so equally to them
both, that neither can claim it wholly, nei-
ther can be excluded. |

8. 62. One would wonder then how our
author infers from the 5th commandment,
that all power was originally in the father ;
how he finds monarchical power of govern-
ment settled and fixed by the commandment,
Honour thy father and thy mother. If all the
honour due by the commandment, be it what
it will, be the only right of the father, be-
cause he, as our author says, has the sovereignty
over the woman, as being the nobler and prin-
cipler agent in generation, why did God after-
wards all along join the mother with him, to
share in his honour? can the father, by this
sovereignty of his, discharge the child from
paying this honour to his mother? The scrip-
ture gave no such licence to the Jews, and
yet there were often breaches wide enough
Fg F 4 bdetwixt


72 Or GOVERNMENT. 1
betwixt husband and wife, even to divorce
and separation: and, I think, no body Will
say a child may with-hold honour from his
mother, Or, 48 the seripture terms tt, set light 2 |
by her, though his father should command 7
him to do fo; no more than the mother
could dispense with him for negleQing to
Bonour his father: whereby it is plain, that
this command of God gives the father no
sovereignty, no supremacy. 4
§. 63. I agree with our author that the
title to this honour is vested in the parents
by nature, and is a right which accrues to
them by their having begotten their chil-
dren, and God by many positive declarations
has confirmed it to them: I also allow our
author's rule, that in grants and gifts, that |
have their original from God and nature, as the
powver of the father, (let me add and mother,
for whom God hath joined together, let. no
man put asunder) n inferior power 'of men can
mit, nor make any law of prescription against |
then, Observations, 158. so that the mother
having, by this law of God, a right te honour
from her children, which is not subject to
the will of her husband, we see this ab/olute
monarchical power of the father can neither
be founded on it, nor consist with it; and
he has a power very far from monarchical,
very far trom that absoluteness our author
contends for, when another has over his sub-
jects the fame power he hath, and by the


same


Or GOVERNMENT. 73


same title: and therefore he cannot forbear
saying himself that he cannot see bow @
man's children can be free from subjection to
3 their parents, p. 12. which, in common speech,
I think, signifies other as well as father, or
jf parents here signifies only father, it is the
2X first time I ever yet knew it to do so, and
by such an use of words one may say any
thing. |

85 64. By our author's doctrine, the fa-
ther having absolute jurisdiction over his
children, has also the same over their issue;
and the consequence is good, were it true,
that the father had such a power: and yet I
ask our author whether the grandfather, by
his sovereignty, could discharge the grand- 1
child from paying to his father the honour
due. to him by the 5th commandment. If
the grandfather hath, by right of fatherhood,
fole sovereign power in him, and that obe-
dience which is due to the supreme magi-
strate, be commanded in these words, Honour
thy father, it is certain the grandfather might
dispense with the grandson's honouring his
father, which fince it is evident in common
sense he cannot, it follows from hence, that
Honour thy father and mother, cannot mean an
absolute subjection to a sovereign power, but
something else. The right therefore which
parents have by nature, and which is con-
firmed to them by the 5th commandment,
cannot be that political dominion, which our


author


74 Or GovrRN MEN.


author would derive from it: for that being
in every civil society supreme somewhere, can
discharge any subject from any political obe-
dience to any one of his fellow subjects. But
what law of the magistrate can give a child
liberty, not to honour his father and mother?
It is an eternal law, annexed purely to the
relation of parents and children, and fo con-
tains nothing of the magistrate's power in it,
nor is subjected to it.

$. 65. Our author fays, God hath given
to a father a right or liberty to alien his power
ever his children to any other, Observations,
155. I doubt whether he can alien wholly
the right of Honour that is due from them:
but be that as it will, this I am sure, he
cannot alzen, and retain the same power. If
therefore the magistrate's sovereignty be, as
our author would have it, nothing but the
authority of a supreme father, p. 23. it is
unavoidable, that if the magistrate . all
this paternal right, as he must have if father-
hood be the fountain of all authority; then


the subjects, though fathers, can have no


power over their children, no right to ho-
nour from them: for it cannot be all in
another's hands, and a part remain with the
parents. So that, according to our author's
own doctrine, Honour thy father and mother
cannot possibly be understood of political sub-
jection and obedience ; since the laws both
in the Old and New Testament, that com-
"rt manded


.
of
K.
*
-
7 ”
*
\
y r
"x
4 * ö
3;
4 |
wy. 5
4 CE
* 1 [
D . *
13K
” o
71 '
FM
4 *
TY
% Y
">
pes
2
-


Fi


.
.
_ ——-
* 0 4 5


Or GOVERNMENT. 75


manded children to honour and obey their
parents, were given to such, whose fathers


were under civil government, and fellow
subjects with them in political societies; and
to have bid them honour and obey their pa-
rents, in our author's sense, had been to bid
them be subjects to those who had no title
to it; the right to obedience from subjects,
being all vested in another; and' instead of
teaching obedience, this had been to foment
fedition, by setting up powers that were not.
If therefore this command, Honour thy fa-
ther and mother, concern political dominion,
it directly overthrows our author's monarchy ;
since it being to be paid by every child to
his father, even in society, every father must
necessarily have political dominion, and there
will be as many sovereigns as there are fa-
thers : besides that the mother too hath her
title, which destroys the sovereignty of one
supreme monarch. But if Honour thy father
and mother mean something distin& from
political power, as necessarily it must, it is
besides our author's business, - and serves
nothing to his purpose. nog
F. 66. The law that enjoins obedience to kings
7s delrvered, says our author, in the terms,
Honour thy father, as if all power were ori-
ginally in the father, Observations, 254 : and
that law is also delivered, say I, in the terms,
Honour thy mother, as if all power were ori-
ginally in the mother. I appeal whether
1 the


76 Or GOVTRNMTNTr.
the argument be not as good on one side as
the other, father and mother being joined
all along in the Old and New Testament


where-ever honour or obedience is injoined


children. Again our author tells us, Obser-
vations, 254. that this command, Honour thy
her, gives the right to govern, and makes the
of government monarchical. To which I
answer, that if by Honour thy father be meant
_ obedience to the political power of the ma-
giftrate, it concerns not any duty we owe to
our natural fathers, who are subjects ; be-
cause they, by our author's doctrine, are
divested of all that power, it being placed
wholly in the prince, and so being equally
fubjects and flaves with their children, can
have no right, by that title, to any such honour
er obedience, as contains in it political sub-
jection: if Honour thy father and mother
fignifies the duty we owe our natural parents,
as by our Saviour's interpretation, Marth, xv.
4. and all the other mentioned places, it is
plain it does, then it cannot concern poli-
tical obedience, but a duty that is owing to
persons, who have no title to sovereignty,
nor any political authority as magistrates
over subjects. For the person of a private
father, and a title to obedience, due to the
supreme magistrate, are things inconsistent ;
and therefore this command, which must
necesfarily comprehend the persons of our
natural fathers, must mean a duty we owe
wr 3 .. - $hem


.
®


"RF
3
.


% :
2 8
N 4
» +.
=
0
LT
l 13.2
*


Or GOvERNMENT. 77
them distinct from our obedience to the
magistrate, and from which the most absolute
power of princes cannot absolve us. What
this duty is, we shall in its due place examine.

$. 67. And thus we have at last got thro'
all, that in our author looks hke an argument
for that absolute unlimited sovereignty described,
sect. 8. which he supposes in Adam; fo that
mankind ever since have been all born flaves,
without any title to freedom. But if crea-
tion, which gave nothing but a being, made
not Adam prince of his posterity : iF Adam,
Gen. i. 28. was not constituted lord of man-
kind, nor had a privete dominion given him
exclusive of his children, but only a right
and power over the earth, and anferiour crea-
tures in common with the children of men;
if also Gen. iii. 16. God gave not any poli-
tical power to Adam over his wife and chil-
dren, but only subjected Eve to Adam, as a
punishment, or foretold the subjection of the
weaker sex, in the ordering the common
concernments of their families, but gave not
thereby to Adam, as to the husband, power
of life and death, which neceflarily belongs
to the magistrate : if fathers by begettigg


their children acquire no such power ove


them; and if the command, Honour thy fe-
ther and mother, give it not, but only en-


joins a duty owing to parents equally, whe-


ther subjects or not, and to the ar9ther. as
well as the father; if all this be fo, as: J
think,


78 Or GOVERNMENT.


think, by what has been said, is very evi-
dent; then man has a natural freedom, not-
withstanding all our author confidently says
to the contrary; since all that share in the
same common nature, faculties and powers,
are in nature equal, and ought to partake in
the same common rights and privileges, till
the manifest appointment of God, who is
Lord over all, blessed for ever, can be pro-
duced to shew any particular person's su-
8 or a man's own consent subjects

im to a superiour. This is so plain, that
our author confesses, that Sir Jobn Hayward,


Blackwood and Barclay, the great vindicators of


the right of kings, could not deny it, but admit
with one consent the natural liberty and equality
of mankind, for a truth unquestionable. And
our author hath been so far from producing


any thing, that may make good his great


position, that Adam was absolute monarch, and
so men are not naturally free, that even his


own proofs make against him; fo that to


use his own way of arguing, the firft erroneous
principle failing, the whole fabric of this vast
engine of absolute power and tyranny drops
down of Hself, and there needs no more to
be faid in answer to all that he builds upon
so false and frail a foundation.

8. 68. But to save others the pains, were
there any need, he is not sparing himself to
shew, by his own-contradictions, the weak-


ness of his own doctrine. Adam's absolute
EE and


Or GovERNMENT. 79


and sole dominion is that, which he is every
where full of, and all along builds on, and
yet he tells us, p. 12. that as Adam was lord
of his children, þ his children under him had à
command and power over their own children.
The unlimited and undivided sovereignty of
Adam's fatherhood, by our author's computa-
tion, stood but a little while, only during
the first generation, but as soon as he had
grand-children, Sir Robert could give but a
very ill account of it. Adam, as father of

his children, faith he, hath an absolute, un-
limited royal power over them, and by virtue
thereof” over those that they begot, and jo to all
generations; and yet hs children, viz.' Cam
and Seth, have a paternal power over their
children at the same time ; so that they are


at the same time absolute lords, and yet vassals


and /laves; Adam has all the authority, as
grand-father of the people, and they have a
part of it as fathers of a part of them : he


1s absolute over them and their posterity, by


having begotten them, and yet they are ab-
solute over their children by the same title.
No, says our author, Adam's children under


him had power over their own children, but
fill with subordination to the first parent. A


good distinction that sounds well, and it is
pity it signifies nothing, nor can be reconciled
with our author's words. I readily grant,
that supposing Adam's absolute power over his
posterity, any of his children might have

I trom


80 Oz: GOVERNMENT,
der tia: acdelegathh, inntln founghahealinnrs
power over-a part, or all. the resta but that


Cannot be the power our author speaks of


here ; it is not à power by gtant and nome
mission, but the natural paternal power he
supposes a father to have over his children.
For 1. he says, A, Adam wes ird of bis
children, so his children amaar lim had a power
over their own children they were then lords
over their own children after the dame: man-
ner, and by the same title, that Adam was,
i. bysrighit of generation, by! right of -
cher hood. R. It is plain he means the natural
power of fathers, because he limits it to he
only oder their own abildren; A. delegated:
power has no such limitation, as only over
their own children, it might be over others,
as well as their own children. 3. If it were
a delegated power, it must appear in sorip-
tare ; but there is no ground in seripture to
affirm, that Adam's children had any other
power over theirs, than what they naturally.
R as fen ba) bo
F. 69. But that he means here paternal
power, and no other, is past doubt, fromthe-
inferẽnde he makes in these words imme
diately following, I sce not then how th x
dren of Adam, or of any man else, can be fu,
from subjefionto their parents. Whereby it“
appears that the power on one: side and the
ict jection on the other, our author here speaks”
of, is that natura], power and siabjection he
* tween


O_o


od


* a tht


Or GOVERNMENT. 81


tween parents and children: for that which
every man's children owed, could be no
other; and that our author always affirms to
be absolute and unlimited. This natural pomer
of parents over their children, Adam had
over his posterity, says our author; and this
power of parents over their children, his chil-
dren had over theirs in his life-time, says our
author also ; so that Adam, by a natural right
of father, had an absolute unlimited power
over all his posterity, and at the same time
his children: had by the same right absolute
unlimited power over theirs. Here then are
two absolute unlimited powers existing to-
gether, which I would have any body re-
concile one to another, or to common sense.
For the /a/vo he has put in of fubordznation,
makes it more absurd : to have one a4b/o/ute,
unlimited, nay; unlimitable power in subordi-
nation to another, is so manifest a contra-
diction, that nothing can be more. Adam
it absolute prince with the unlimited authority
of fatherhood over all his posterity ; all his
posterity are then absolutely his subjects; and,
as our author says, his slaves, children, and
grand-children, are equally in this state of
subjection and flavery; and yet, says our
author, the children 7 Adam have pater nal,
i. e. absolute unlimited power over their own
children : Which in plain Engi/þ is, they
are flayes and absolute princes at the same


time, and in the same government ; and one
Ore apt part


82 Or GOVERNMENT.


part of the subjects have an absolute unlimited
power over the other by the natural right
of parentage. | ;
8. 70. If any one will suppose, in favour |
of our author, that he here meant, that
parents, who are in subjection themselves to
the absolute authority of their father, have
yet some power over their children; I confess |
be ts fomething nearer the , truth : but he ;


.


will not at all hereby help our author: for |
he no where speaking of the paternal power,
hut as an absolute unlimited authority, can-
not be supposed to understand. any thing else Þ
here, unless he himself had limited it, and
shewed how far it reached. And that he
means here paternal authority in that. large
extent, is plain from the immediate follow-
ing words; This subjection of 'children being,
says he, the foundation of all regal authority, |
p. T2. the subjeion then that in the former |
line, he says, every man is in lo bis parents,
and consequently what Adam's grand-children |
were in to their parents, was that which was
the fountain of all rega/ authority, i. e. ac-
cording to our author, absolute unlimitable
nut hority. And thus Adam's children had regal
authority over their children, whilst they
themselves were subjects to their father, and
felow-subje&s with their children. But let
him mean as he pleases, it is plain he allows
Adam's children to have paternal power, p. 12.
as also all other fathers to have paternal power


od IST Is a a ̃ A Sos bo ae hon I


Ver


Or GOVERNMENT. 83


over their children, Observations, 156. From
whence one of these two things will necessarily
follow, that either Adam's children, even in
his life-time, had, and so all other fathers
have, as be phrases it, p. 12. by right of


fatherhood, royal authority over their children,


or else, that Adam, by right of fatherhood,
had not royal aui bority. For it cannot be but
that paternal power does, or does not, give


royal authority to them that have it: if it


does not, then Adam could not be sovereign
by this title, nor any body else; and then
there is an end of all our author's politics at
once: if it does give royal authority, then
every one that has paternal power has royal
authority; and then, by our author's patriarchal
government, there will be as many kings as
there are fathers. 55 |

F. 71. And thus what a monarchy he hath
set up, let him and his disciples consider.
Princes certainly will have great reason to
thank him for these new politics, which set
up as many absolute kings in every country


as there are fathers of children. And yet


who can blame our author for it, it lying
unavoidably in the way of one discoursing
upon our author's principles? For having


placed an absolute power in fathers by right of


begetting, he could not easily refolve how
much of this power belonged to a fon over the
children he had begotten ; and so it fell out
tobe a very hard matter to give all the power,

G 2 RR as


84 Or GovennMent.


as he does, to Adam, and yet allow a part
in his life-time to his children, hen they

were parents, and which he knew not well
how to deny them. This makes him so
doubtful in his expressions, and so uncertain


where to place this absolute natural power,


which he calls fatherhood.” Sometimes Adam


alone has it A, as p. 13. Hee. nga 2445


208, & Pref.”


metimes parents have it, "which" word :


scarce fi ighifies ou father Mone; P. 1 2, 19.


Sometimes children ring their fathety
lifetime, ag p. . 2 ien ./ 25
Sometimes fathers of font, a p. 78,


and 79.


Sometimes /athers indefinitely, "Obie. :


Hons, 155.

Sometimes the Heir to * Observations,
234.
Sometimes be posterity of Adam, 244, 246.
Sometimes prime fathers, all sons or ere


chiluren f N oah;: Observations,: 244. 1 N 4


Sometimes the elde parents, p. 12.
Sometimes all Kings, p. 19.


Sometimes all that have supatmie Per.


Ob rvations, 245.


Sometimes heirs 10 e


abo were oat first the natural. ee LE -the


bee People, P. 19>: q JEL OL |
Sometimes an cleive: ng p.23. 1 ar


Sometimes those, whether a few or ates
titude, that govern the common-wealth, p. 23.
Sometimes


1 ; . 7 * * + - a lit. A % g


a an uu a0


- GOVERNMENT: 85:


EE he that can catch it, We |
Ly | p- 238. Observations, I- 99715-3211 nick | |
872. Thus this ew nor h, that, is to carry...

with it all power, authority, and government; :

this. fatherhood; which. is to design the person, |

and establisi the throne of monarchs, whom.
the people are to obey, may, according to Sir
Robert, come into any hands, any how, and
so by his politics give to democracy royal
anthority, and make an usurper a lawful |
Poe. And if it will do all these fine feats, a
h good do our author and all his follow-

rap with their omnipotent fatherhood, which

can-serye for nothing but to unsettle and de-

stroy all the lawful governments in the world,

and to establish in their room disorder, t (yrane

"Fs and My; 8


_ 4
.
— —


H A B. VII.


of Fatherhood and Property ronstdeved rogethe
as Fountain, 97 eur bn. cabl 1909?

9.73. 1 foregoing: chapters we 2 *
seen what Adam's monarchy was,

in gur author's opinion, and upon hat
titles he founded it. The foundations which
he lays the chief stress on, as those from which.
he thinks he may best derive. monarchical


10 to Kaen 28. f are Nene, vigi Bather-
ö 2 g 8 88 22390 1a 2


,
- ry j
| £+ , Fn © 7 2
— * * 5 * -


g 4
— — w |


86 OF GOVERNMENT.

hood and property: and therefore the way he
proposes to remove the absurdities and incon-
veniencies of the doctrine of natural freedom, is,
to maintain the natural and private dominion 0
Adam, Observations, 222. Conformable here-
unto, he tells us, the grounds and principles of


government necessarily depend upon the original of |
property, Observations, 108, The subbjection of Þ
children to their par ents 15 the fountain of all regal 4


authority, p. 12. And all power on earth is ei-
ther derived or usurped from the fatherly power,


there being no other original to be found of |


any power whatsoever, Observations, 158.

will not stand here to examine how it can be
said without a contradiction, that the j#r/
grounds and principles of government necessarily
depend upon the original of property, and yet, that
there is no other original of any power whatsoever,
but that of the father : it being hard to under-
stand how there can be 10 ether original but
fatherhood, a and yet that the grounds and prin-
ciples of government depend upon the original
of property 3 property and fatherbood being as
far different as lord of a'manor and father
of children. Nor do I see how they will ei-
ther of them agree with what our auchor says,
Ovservatins, 244. of God's sentence against
Eve, Gen. iii. 16. That it is the original grant
of government: so that if that were the original,
government had not its ona, by our author's
own confession, either from property or fa-


therhbood ;


75
4
.


s


w


OF GOVERNMENT. 87


ther bosd; and this text, which he brings as a
proof of Adam's power over Eve, necessarily
contradicts what he says of the fatherhood,
that it is the sole fountain of all power : for if
Adam had any such regal power over Eve, as
our author contends for, it must be by some
other title than that of begetting.

$. 74. But I leave him to reconcile these
contradictions, as well as many others, which
may plentifully be found in him by any one,

who will but read him with a little attention;
and shall come now to consider, how these
two originals of government, Adam's natural
and private dominion, will consist, and serve to
make out and establish the titles of succeeding
monarchs, who, as our author obliges them,
must all derive their power from these foun-
tains, Let us then suppose Adam made, y
God's donation, lord and sole proprietor of the
whole earth, in as large and ample a manner.
as Sir Robert could wish; let us suppose him
also, by right of "fatherhood, absolute ruler over
his children with an unlimited supremacy ; 31
ask then, upon Adam's death what becomes of
both his Ks ae and private dominion ? and I
doubt not it will be answered, that they de-


scended to his next heir, as our author tells us


in several places. But this way, it is plain,
cannot possibly convey both his atural and


private dominion to the same person: for


should we allow, that all the property, all
the estate of the father, ought to descend to
G 4 the


88 Or GoveRrnMt NMT.
the eldest: son; (which will: need some proof
to establisn it) and so he has by that title
all the pridate domi nion of the father, yet the
father's natural dominion, the paternal power
cannot descend to him by inheritance: for
it being a right that accrues to a man only by
begetting, no man can have this natural do-
minion over any one he does not beget; un-
less'it can be supposed, that a man can have
a right to any thing, without doing that upon
which that right is solely founded: for if a
father by begelting, and no other title, has na-
rural dominion over his children, he that does
not beget them cannot have this natural
dominion over them; and therefore be it true
or false, that our author says, OZ/ervations,1 56.
That every man that is born, by bis very birth
becomes a subjett to him that begets bim, this ne-
ceflarily follows, viz. That a man by his birth
cannot become a subject to his brother, who
did not beget him; unless it ean be supposed
that a man by the very same title can come
to be under the natural and absolute dominion
of two different men at once; or it be sense
to say, that a man by birth is under the h.

adbmi nion of his father, only because he
begat him, and a man by birth also is under
the natural dominion of his eldest brother,
though he did not beget him.
8. 75. If then the private dominion of Adam;
ie. his property in the creatures, defcend-
ed at his death all entirely to his eldest son,
G „ . "0 5 | _ . : ; his


a a


D
F.-Y


A een E


Oν GOR NNME Nx. 89


his heir; (for, if it did not, there is pxesently
an end of all Sir Robert's monarchy) and his
natural dominion, the dominion a father has
over his children hy begetting them, belonged
immediately, upon Adam's decease, equally
to all his sons who had children, by the
same title their father had it, the faves
reignty founded upon property, and the so-
vereignty founded upon fatbenbond. come
to be divided; since Cain, as heir, had
that of property alone; Seth, and the other
sons, that of father bond equally with him. This
is the best can be made of out author's
doctrine, and of the two titles of sovereignty
he sets up in Adam one of them will either
signify nothing; or, if they both must stand,
they can serve only to confound the rights
of princes, and disorder government in his
posterity: for by building upon two titles to
dominion, which cannot descend together,
and which he allows may be separated, (fos
her yields that Adam's children had their. distinti
territories by right. of private dominian, Ob-
servations, 2 10. p.40.) he makes it perpetually
a doubt upon his principles where the {oves
reignty is, or to whom we owe our abe
dience, since fatherhood and property: ares di-
stinct titles, and began presently, upon {dans
death to be in distinct persons. And which
then Was ito give Way to the other? 8

8. 76. Let us take the account of it, as he
himself gives it us. IIe tells us out of Gyotius,
n | That


_ . 4 _
— K 4 . — — =


90 OF GOVERNMENT.


That Adam's children by donation, assignation, ;
or some kind of cession before he was dead, bad
their distinct territories by right of private domi- |


nion; Abel had his flocks and pastures for them :
Ouin had bis fields for corn, and the land of Nod,
where he built him a city, Observations, 210.
Here it is obvious to demand, which of these
two after Adam's death was sovereign ? Cain,
says our author, p. 19. By what title? As
herr ; for heirs to progenitors, who were natural
parents of their people, are not only lords of their
own children, but also of their brethren, says
our author, p. 19. What was Cam heir to ?
Not the entire possessions, not all that which
Adam had private dommion in; for our author
allows that Abe/, by a title derived from his
father, had his distin? territory for pasture
by right of private dominion. © What then Abel
had by private dominion, was exempt from
Cains deminion : for he could not have
private dominion over that which was under
the private dominion of another ; and there-
fore his sovereignty over his brother is gone
with this private dominion, and so there are
presently two sovereigns, and his imaginary
title of fatherhood is out of doors, and Cain is
no prince over his brother: or elle, if Cain
wre his sovereignty over Abel, not withstand-
his private dominion, it will follow, that

the first grounds and principles of government
have nothing to do with property, whatever


3 our


5
;


Or GOVERNMENT. 91


our author says to the contrary. It is true,
Abel did not outlive his father Adam; but that
makes nothing to the argument, which
will hold good against Sir Robert in Abel's
issue, or in Seth, or any of the posterity of
Adam, not descended from Cain.
8.77. The same inconvenience he runs in-

to about e three” sons of Noah, who, as he
says, p. 13. had the whole world divided among ft
them by their father. 1 ask then, in which
of the three shall we find the establishment of
regal power after Noah's death? If in all three,
as our author there seems to say; then it will
follow, that regal power is founded in property
of land, and follows private dominion, and not
in paternal power, or natural dominion; and fo
there 1s an end of paternal power as the foun-
tain of regal authority, and the so-much-mag-
nified fatherhood quite vanishes. If the regal
power descended to Shem as eldest, and heir
to his father, then Noah's diuision of the world
by tot to his sons, or his ten years sailing about
the Mediterranean to appoint each fon his part,
which our author tells of, p. 15. was labour
lost; his division of the world to them, was
to mY or to no purpose : for his grant to
Cham and Japhet was little worth, if Shem,
notwithstanding this grant, as soon as Noah
Was dead, was to be lord over them. Or, if
this grant of private dominion to them, over
their assigned territories, were good, here were
set up two distinct sorts of power, not subordi-


nate


*


92 OF GOVERNMENT.


nate one to the other, with all those ineonre-
niences which he musters up against the
Herbe people, Observations, 158. which I shall
po 3 in his own words, only changing

for people. All power an earth is either
pk or 1 FAY; rom the fatherly power, there
being no other original to be found of any power
. ; for if there should: be: granted twa
forts of powers. aitbout any subordination of one
to the other, they would be in perpetual strife
which should be supreme, for two supremes can-
not agree: if the fatherly power be supreme, then
the power grounded on private daminion must
be subordinate, and depend on it; and if the
power grounded on property be supreme, then
the fatherly power must submit to it, and cannot
so exercised without the licence of the proprietors,
which must quite deseroy the frame and course of
nature. This is his own arguing against two
distinct independent powers, which I have
set down in his, own words, only putting
power rising from property, for pomer f th
people; and when he has answered what he
himself has urged here against two distin.
powers, we shall be better able to see how,
with any tolerable sense, he can derive all re-
gal authority from the natural and private do»
mimion f Adam, from fatherhood and .
together, which are distinct titles, that do not
always meet in the same person; and it is
Plain, by.\ ag own e presently se-
8 hs x lt parateg |


81


10


Or GOVERNMENT. 94
7 panated/as soon both as Adam's and Moab's
ö death made way for succession: though our

7 alithor frequently in his writings jumbles
tbem together, and omits not to make use of
either, where he thinks it will sound best to
his purpose: But the absurdities of this with
more fully appear in the next chapter, where
| weishall: examine the ways of conveyance of


the sovereignty of Adam, to princes that were
ö to ren after him.
4 9 ' a


— —


—


CHA P. VIII.
of {or Conveyance of Adam's fovereign M-
of: narchical Power. .
» 8. AIR Robert, having not Con V
. 8 happy in any — he brings for
the- sovereignty of Adam, is not much more
fortunate in conveying it to future princes, |
who, if his politics be true, mutt all derive -
their titles from that firft monarch. The
ways he has assigned, as they lie scattered up
and down in his writings, I will set down in
his on words: in his preface he tells us,
That Adam being monarch of the whole: uorid,
name of his posterity had any right to possess any
thing, but by his grant or permission, or by
succession from him. Here he makes. two ways
of conveyance of any thing Adam stood pos-


sessed of; and those are grants or succęssian.
Again he says, All kings either are, or are to


be


94 OF GOVERNMENT.


be reputed, the next beirs to those first progenitors,
who were at first the natural parents of the
whole people, p. 19. There cannot be any mul-
titude of men whatsoever, but that in it, con-
sidered by self, there is one man amongst
them, that in nature hath a right to be the
king of all the rest, as being the next heir to
Adam, Observations, 253. Here in these
places inberitance is the only way he allows
of conveying monarchical power to princes.
In other places he tells us, O&/ervations,
15 5. All power on earth is either derived or
usurped from the fatherly power, Observations,
158. AU kings that now are, or ever were, are
er were either fathers of their people, or heirs 0
such fathers, or usurpers of the right of such
fathers, Observations, 253. And here he
makes mmheritance or usurpation the only ways
whercby kings come by this original power :
but yet he tells us, This fatherly empire, as
it was of itself bereditary, so it was alienable
by patent, and seizable by an usurper, Obser-
vations, 190. So then here inheritance, grant,
or usurpation, will convey it. And last of
all, which is most admirable, he tells us,
p. 100. It shills not which way kings come
by their power, whether by eleciton, donation,
succession, or ty any other means; for it is fill
the manner of the government by supreme power,
that makes them properly kings, and not the
means of obtaining. their crowns, Which I


"nk | is a full answer to all his whole po-
thesis


Or GOVERNMENT. 95


thglis and discourse about Adam's royal au-
! thority, as the fountain from which all
| 3 were to derive theirs: and he might
have spared the trouble of speaking so monk
as he does, up and down, of heirs and inheri-
! tance, if to make any one properly a king,
needs no more but governing by supreme power,
and it matters not by what means he came
it.
9 §. 79. By this notable way, our author
may make Oliver as properly king, as any one
else he could think of: and had he had the.
happiness to live under Massanella's govern-
ment, he could not by this his own rule have
forborn to have done homage to him, with
O king live for ever, since the manner of his
government by supreme power, made him
properly king, who was but the day before
properly a filherman. And if Don Quixote
had taught his squire to govern with supreme
authority, our author no doubt could have
made a molt loyal subje& in Sancho Pancha's
land; and he must needs have deserved some
preferment in such governments, since I think
he is the first politician, who, pretending to
settle government upon its true baiis, and to
establish the thrones of lawful princes, ever
told the world, That he was properly a king,
whose manner of government was by supreme
power, by what means soever be obtained it;
which in plain Exglisb is to say, that regal
and supreme power is properly and truly his,
who


96 OF GoveRNMENT.


who can by any means seize upon it; and
if this be to be properly à king, I wonder
how he came to think of, or where he will
find, an usurper. RY |

§. 80. This is fo strange a doctrine, that
the surprise of it hath made me pass by,
without their due reflection, the contra-
ditions he runs into, by making sometimes
mberitance alone, sometimes only grant or
inberitance, sometimes only inberitance or
usurpation, sometimes all these three, and at
last e/ectian, or any other means, added to them,
the ways whereby Adam's royal authority, that
is, his right to supreme rule, could be con-
veyed down to future kings and governors,
so as to give them a title to the obedience
and subjection of the people. But these con-
tradictions lie so open, that the very reading


of our author's own words will discover


them to any ordinary understanding; and
though what I have quoted out of him (with
abundance more of the same strain and
coherence, which might be found in him)


might well excuse me from any farther.
trouble in this argument, yet having pro-
posed to myself, to examine the main parts


of his doctrine, 1 (ball a little more parti-
cularly consider how 7nheritance, grant, usur-


- pation or election, can any way make out


government in the world upon his principles z
or derive to any one a right of empire, from


this regal authority of Adam, had it been


* never |


ach, and lord of the | whole.
* x a 3 f ' "eo; 4
— 1 82 * - Tz; 1 9
nk 2 1 * „ 1 5 8 2
0 r en To wen


_ Of Monarchy, I Inheritance from Adam
$81. H Hough it be never so plain, that
I chere ought to be government
in the world, hay, should all men be of dur
author's mind, that divine appointment had
ordained ĩt to be monarchical; yet, since men


cannot obey any thing, that cannot com- |
mand; and ideas of government in the |
fancy, though never fo. perfect, though never |
so right, cannot give laws, nor prescribe |


rules to the actions of men; it would be of
no behoof for the settling of order, and |
establishment of government in its exercise |
and use amongst men, unlefs there were a Y
way also taught how to know the person, to
womit belonged to have this power, and
ex8efcife-this dominion over others. It is an.
vain then to talk of subjection and obedience *
without telling us whom we are to obeß:
for were I never fo fully persuaded that there
dughe tobe magistracy and rule in the
world; yet I am never the less at liberty
sti, till it appears who is the person that
hath right tomy obedience; since, if thete
be #8 marks to know him by, and distin-
guish kim that hath right to rule from

H __ other


98 Or GovrRrNMENT:


other men, it may be myself, as well as
any other. And therefore, though submission
to government be every one's duty, yet since


that signifies nothing but submitting to the


direction and laws of such men as have
authority to command, it is not enough to
make a man a subject, to convince him that
there is regal power in the world; but there
must be ways of designing, and knowing the
person to whom this regal power of right
belongs : and a man can never be obliged
in conscietice to submit to any power, unless
he can be satisfied who is the person who
has a right to exercise that power over him.
If this were not so, there would be no di-
stinction between pirates and lawful princes;
he that has force is without any more ado to
be obeyed, and crowns and scepters would
| become the inheritance only of violence and
rapine. Men too might as often and as in-
nocently change their governors, as they do
_ their physicians, if the person cannot be
known who has a right to direct me, and
whose prescriptions I am bound to follow.
To settle therefore men's consciences, under
an obligation to obedience, it is necessa
that Tory know not only, that there is a
power somewhere in the world, but the
person who by right is vested with this power
Ge? ew. DOTS AUF (k& Oe


EY .


FA Dernier 2101.

F. 82. How successful our author has
"been in his attempts, to set up a monarcbical
+ absolute poteer in Adam, the reader may judge


by


to rule over them. 3 |
FS. 84. Our author, having fancied; an ab-
solute sovereignty in Adam, mentions seyeral
Ways of its conyeyance to princes, that were
to be his successors;
MORT ͤ -- insiste


Or GovERNM RENT. : 99
by what has been already said; but were that


absolute monarchy as clear as our author would


defire it, as I presume it is the contrary, yet
it could be of no use to the government of
mankind now in the world, unless he also


make out these two things.


First, That this power of Adam was not to


end with him, but was upon his decease con-
veyed intire to some other person, and so on
to posterity. | |

© Secondly, That the princes and rulers now


on earth are possessed of this power of Adam,
by a right way of conveyance derived to


them. 5
S8. 83. If the first of these fail, the power
of Adam, were it never so great, never so
certain, will signify nothing to the present
government and societies in the world; but


we must seek out some other original of


power for the government of politys than
this of Adam, or else there will be none at
all in the world. If the latter fail, it will
destroy the authority of the present gover-
nors, and absolve the people f

to them, fince they, having no better a claim
than others to that power, which is alone the
fountain of all authority, can have no title


om subjection


9


-


ut that which he chiefly


100 Or GOVERNMENT.


insists on, is that of inberitance, which occurs
so often in his several discourses; and I having
in the foregoing chapter quoted several of
these passages, I shall not need here again
to repeat them. This sovereignty he erects,
as has been said, upon a double foundation,
0:2. that of property, and that of fatherhood.
One was the right he was fupposed to have p
in all creatures, a right to possess the earth e
with the beasts, and other inferior ranks of -

1

|


things in it, for his private use, exclufive of
all other men. The other was the right he
was supposed to have, to rule and govern
men, all the rest of mankind. 11

§. 85. In both these rights, there being
supposed an exclusion of all other men, it
must be upon some reason peculiar to Adam,
that they must both be founded.

That of his property our author supposes
to ar ise from God's immediate donation, Gen.
1. 28. and that of fatherhood from the act of
begetting : now in all inheritance, if the heir
succeed not to the reason upon which his
father's right was founded, he cannot fucceed
to the right which followeth from it. For
example, Adam had a right of property in
the creatures upon the donation and grant of
God almighty, who was lord and proprietor
of then all: let this be fo as aur author tells
us, yet upon his death his heir can have na
title to them, no such right of property in
them, unless the same reason, via. God's

5 3 *Þ donation,


FAYY ©


——


OF GOVERNMENT. 101


donation, vested a right in the heir too: for
if Adam could have had no property in, nor
use of the creatures, without this positive
donation from God, and this donation were
only personally to Adam, his heir could have
no right by it ; but upon his death it must


| revert to God, the lord and owner again; for
positive grants give no title farther than the
| express words convey it, and by which only
it is held. And thus, if as our author him-


felf contends, that donation, Gen. i. 28. were
made only to Adam personally, his heir could
not succeed to his property in the creatures;
and if it were a donation to any but Adam,
let it be shewn, that it was to his heir in
our author's sense, z. e. to one of his children,
exclusive of all the rest,

8. 86. But not to follow our author too
far out of the way, the plain of the case is
this. God having made man, and planted
in him, as in all other animals, a strong desire
of self- preservation; and furnished the world
with things fit for food and raiment, and
other necessaries of life, subservient to his
defign, that man should live and abide for
some time upon the face of the earth, and not
that so curious and wonderful a piece of
workmanship, by his own negligence, or


want of necessaries, should perish again, pre-


sently after a few moments continuance
God, I say, having made man and the world
thus, spoke to him, (that is) directed him
| H 3 by


-- a — — — a =; a
Fa . > ny — wo
=» 42 A : *


102 Or GOVERNMENT.

by his senses and reason, as he did the in-
ferior animals by their sense and instinct,
which were serviceable for his subsistence,
and given him as the means of his preser-
vation. And therefore I doubt not, but be-
fore these words were pronounced, i. Gen.
28, 29. (if they must be understood literally
to have been spoken) and without any such
verbal donation, man had a right to an use of
the creatures, by the will and grant of God:
for, the desire, strong desire of preserving his
life and being, having been planted in him
as a principle of action by God himself, rea-
son, which was the voice of God in bim, could
not but teach him and assure him, that pur-
suing that natural inclination he had to
preserve his being, he followed the will. of
his maker, and,therefore had a right to make
use; of. thote creatures, which by his reason
or senses he could discover would be ser-
viceable thereunto. And thus man's property
in the creatures was founded upon the right
he had to make use of those things that
were necessary or useful to his being.
8.87. This being the reason and founda-
tion of Adam's property, gave the same title,
on the same ground, to all his children, not
only after his death, but in his life-time so
that here was no privilege of his beir above
his other children, which could exclude them
from an equal right to the use of the inferior
creatures, for the comfortable prefaryayen
d £515 1 5; 0


Or GovERNMENT. 103


of their beings, which is all the property man
hath in them; and so Adam's sovereignty
built on property, or, as our author calls it,
priuate dominion, comes to nothing. Every
man had a right to the creatures, by the
same title Adam had, viz. by the right every
one had to take care of, and provide for the ir
subsistence: and thus men had a right in
common, Adam's children in common with
him. But if any one had began, and made
himself a property in any particular thing,
(which how .he, or any one else, could do,
shall be shewn in another place) that thing,
that possession, if he disposed not otherwise
of it by his positive grant, descended natu-
rally to his children, and they had a right to
succeed to it, and posless it. 1
S8. 88. It might reasonably be asked here,
how come children by this right of possessing,
before any other, the properties of their pa-
rents upon their decease? for it being per-
sonally the parents, when they die, without
actually transferring their right to another,
why does it not return again to the common
stock of mankind ? It will perhaps be an-
swered, that common consent hath disposed
of it to their children. Common practice,
vue see indeed, does so dispose of it; but we
cannot say, that it is the common consent
of mankind; for that hath never been asked,
nor actually given; and if common tacit
consent hath established it, it would make
1. H 4 but


104 Or - GOVERNMENT.
but a positive, and not a natural right of
children to inherit the goods of their pa-
rents: but where the practice is universal,
it is reasonable to think the cause is natural.
The ground then I think to be this. The
first and strongest desire God planted in men,
and wrought into the very principles of their
nature, being that of self- preservation, that
is the foundation of a right to the ureatures
for the particular support and use of each
individual person himself. But, next to this,
God planted in men a strong desire also of
propagating their kind, and continuing them-
selves in their posterity; and this gives chil -
dren a title to share in the property of their
parents, and a right to inherit their pos-
sessions. Men are not proprietors of what
they have, meerly for themselves; their chil-
dren have a title to part of it, and have their
kind of right joined with their parents, in
the possession which comes to be wholly
their's, when death, having put an end to
their parents use of it, hath taken them from
their possessions; and this we call inheri-
tance: men being by a like obligation bound


to preserve what they have begotten, as to
preserve themselves, their issue come to have


.a right in the goods they are possessed of.
That children haye such à right, is plain
from the laws of God; and that men are
. convinced that children have such a right,
Is evident from the law of the ag
F — Wiel


Or GovERNMENT. 105


which laws require parents to provide for
their children. |
-$:'89. For children being by the course of
nature, born weak, and unable to provide for
themselves, they have by the appointment of
God himself, who hath thus ordered the
course of nature, a right to be nourished
and maintained by their parents ; nay, a right
not only to a bare subsistence, but to the
conveniencies and comforts of life, as far as
the conditions of their parents can afford it.
Hence it comes, that when their parents leave
the world, and so the care due to their chil-
dren ceases, the effects of it are to extend
as far as possibly they can, and the pro-
visions they have made in their life-time,
are understood to be intended, as nature
requires they should, for their children, whom,
- after. themselves, they are bound to provide
for: though the dying parents, by express
words, declare nothing about them, nature
appoints the descent of their property to their
children, who thus come to Rate a title, and
natural right of inheritance to their fathers


goods, which the rest of mankind cannot


pretend to. WIR EY
i §. 90. Were it not for this right of being
nourished and maintained by their parents,
which God and nature has given to children,
and obliged parents to as a duty, it would
be reasonable, that the father should inherit
the estate ef his son, and be preferred in the


inheritance


1s
4
A

6
*

9

a

*

*

=


> — ates,


—


er


* _ 1 £
1 IE "_ _ 1 . TY : ©, .
— —— — — — —— A — —


— 2 * = *
4 C3
— > 9 14 8
* - — 2 _— - og EA
222 . — > — N : . 9


88


106 Oy GOVERNMENTr.


inheritance before his grand- child: for to the
grand- father there is due a long score of care
and expences laid out upon the breeding and
education of his son, which one would think
in justice ought to be paid. But that having
been done in obedience to the same law,
whereby he received nourishment and edu-
cation from his own parents; this score of
education, received from a man's father, 1s
paid by taking care, and providing for his
own children; is paid, I fay, as much as is
required of payment by alteration of pro-
perty, unless present necessity of the parents
require a return of goods for their necessary
support and subsistence: for we are not now
speaking of that reverence, acknowledgment,
respe& and honour, that is always due from
children to their parents; but of possessions
and commodities of life valuable by. money.
But though it be incumbent on parents to
bring up and provide for their children, yet
this debt to their children does not quite
cancel the score due to their parents; but
only is made by nature preferable to it: for
the debt a man owes his father takes place,
and gives the father a right to inherit the
son's goods, where, for want of issue, the
right of children doth not exclude that title.
And therefore a man having a right to be
maintained by his children, where he needs
it; and tog enjoy also the comforts of life
from them, when the necessary provision due
i te


hk d *


Or GOVERNMENT. 107


to them and their children will afford it; if
his son die without issue, the father has a
right in nature to possess his goods, and in-
herit his estate, (whatever the municipal laws
of some countries may absurdly direct other-
wise;) and so again his children and their issue
from him; or, for want of such, his father and
his issue. But where no such are to be found,
i. e. no kindred, there we sec the possessions
of a private man revert to the community,


and so in politic societies come into the


hands of the public magistrate; but in the


state of nature become again perfectly com-


mon, no body having a right to inherit them:
nor can any one have a property in them,
otherwise than in other things common by
nature; of which I shall Tm: in its due


*


F. 91. J have been the larger, in shewing


upon what ground children have a right to


succeed to the possession of their fathers


properties, not only because by it, it will


appear, that if Adam had a property (a titular,


insignificant, useless property; for it could be


no better, for he was bound to nourish and
maintain his children and posterity out of


it) in the whole earth and its product, yet


all his children coming to have, by the law


of nature, and right of inheritance, a joint
title, and right of property in it after his


death, it could convey no right of sovereignty
to any one of his posterity. over the ret :


since


—


108 Or GovERNMENT.

fince every one having a right of inheritance
to his portion, they might enjoy their inhe-
ritance, or any part of it in common, or
share it, or some parts of it, by division, as it
best liked them. But no one could pretend
to the whole inheritance, or any sovereignty
3 to accompany it; since a right of
inheritance gave every one of the rest, as
well as any one, a title to share in the goods
of his father. Not only upon this account,
I say, have I been fo particular in examining
the reason of children's inheriting the pro-
perty of their fathers, but also because it
will give us farther light in the inheritance
of rule and power, which in countries where
their particular municipal laws give the
whole possession of land entirely to the first
born, and descent of power has gone fo to
men by this custom, some have been apt to
be deceived into an opinion, that there was a
natural or divine right of primogeniture, to
both eftate and ' power ; and that the inheri-
tance of both rule over men, and property in
things, sprang from the same original, and
were to descend by the same rule.

F. 92. Property, whose original is from the
right a man has to use any of the inferior
creatures, for the subsistence and comfort of
his life, is for the benefit and sole advantage
of the proprietor, so that he may even destroy
the thing, that he has property in by his use
of it, where need requires: but government
orte 5 | being


Or GovBRNMENT. 109
being for the preservation of every man's
right and property, by preserving him from
the violence or injury of others, is for the
good of the governed: for the magistrate's
{word being for a terror to evil doers, and by
that terror to inforce men to observe the
positive laws of the society, made confor-
mable to the laws of nature, for the public
good, 1. e. the good of every particular
member of that society, as far as by common
rules it can be provided for; the sword is
not given the magistrate for his own good
alone.

$. 93. Children therefore, as has been
3 by the dependance they have on
their parents for subsistence, have a right of
Inheritance to their fathers property, as that
which belongs to them for their proper good
and behoof, and therefore are fitly termed
goods, wherein the first-born has not a fole
or peculiar right by any law of God and
nature, the younger children having an equal
title with him, founded on that right they all
have to maintenance, support, and comfort
from their parents, and on nothing else.
But government being for the benefit of the
governed, and not the sole advantage of the
governors, (but only for their's with the rest,
as they make a part of that politic body,
each of whose parts and members are taken
care of, and directed in its peculiar functions
for the good of the whole, by the laws of
910 society)


110 Or GOVERNMENT.


society) cannot be inherited by the same
title, that children have to the goods of their
father. The right a son has to be maintained
and. provided with the necessaries and con-
veniences of life out of his father's stock, gives
him a right to succeed to his father's- Pro-
perty for his own good; but this can give
him no right to succeed also to the rule,
which his father had over other men. All
that a child has right to claim from his fa-
ther is nourishment and education, and the
things nature furnishes for the support of life:
but he has no right to demand rule or donti-
nion from him: he can subsist and receive
from him the portion of good things, and
advantages of education naturally due to him,
without empire and dominion. That (if his
father hath any) was vested in him, for the
good and behoof of others: and therefore
"the son cannot claim or inherit it by a title,
which is founded wholly on his own private
good and advantage. |

&. 94. We must know how the first ruler,
from whom any one claims, came by his
authority, upon what ground any one has
empire, what his title is to it, before we
can know who has a right to succeed him in
it, and inherit it from him: if the agree-
ment and consent of men. first gave a scepter
into any one's hand, or put a crown on his
N head, that alsp must direct its descent and
Kverencg 1. for the same authority, that
We, made


5
-


Or GovEeRNMENT. 111
made the first a lawful ruler, must make the
second too, and so give right of succession :
in this, case inheritance, or primogeniture, can
in its self haye no right, no pretence to it,


any farther than that consent, which esta-


blished the form of the government, hath fo
settled the succession. And thus we see, the
succession of crowns, in several countries, places


it on different heads, and he comes by right


of succession to be a prince in one place,
who would be a subject in another.

8. 95. If God, by his positive grant and re-
vealed declaration, first gave rule and dominion
to any man, he that will claim by that title,
must have the same positive grant of God


for his succession : for if that has not direct-
ed the course of its descent and conveyance


down. to others, no body can succeed to this
title of the first ruler. Children have no right


of inheritance to this; and primogeniture can


lay no claim to it, unless God, the author of


this constitution, hath so ordained it. Thus
we see, the pretensions of Saul's family, who


received his crown from the immediate ap-
pointment of God, ended with his reign;
and David, by the fame title that Saul reign-
ed, viz. God's appointment, succeeded in


his throne, to the exclusion of Fonathan, and


all pretensions of paternal inheritance: and
if Solomon had a right to succeed his father, it
must be by some other title, than that of pri-
mogeniture. A cadet, or sister's son,


. T 5
ww A. £©*


must
have


112 Or GovERNMENT.


have the preference in succession, if he has
the same title the first lawful prince had:
and in dominion that has its foundation on
in the positive appointment of God himfelf,
Benjamin, the youngest, must have the inheri-
tance of the crown, if God so direct, as well
as one of that tribe had the first posseffion.

§. 96. If paternal rigbt, the act of begetting,
give a man rulè and domimon, inheritance or
primogeniture can give no title: for he that
cannot succeed to his father's title, which was
begetting, cannot succeed to that power over
his brethren, which his father had by pater-
nal right over them. But of this I hall
have occasion to say more in another place.
This is plain in the mean time, that any
vernment, whether supposed to be at first


founded in paternal right, consent of the people,
or the pofitrve appointment of God himself, which


can supersede either of the other, and fo begin
a new government upon a new foundation; I
say, any government began upon either of


only, who have the title of him they suc-
ceed to: power founded on contract can de-


scend only to him, who has right by that


contract: power founded on begetting, he
only can have that begets ; and power found-
ed on the positive grant or donation of God,
he only can have by right of succession, to
whom that grant direQs it, 1 1 185


these, can by right of succession come to those


*
9.97.


Or GOVERNMENT. 113


$.97. From what I have said, I think this is


clear that a right to the use of the creatures,
being founded originally .in the right a man
has to subsist and enjoy the conveniencies of


life; and the natural right children have to


inherit the goods of their parents, being found-


ed in the right they have to the same subsist-


ence and commodities of life, out of the stock
of their parents, who are therefore taught by


natural love and tenderness to provide for


them, as a part of themselves; and all this
being only for the good of the proprietor, or
heir; it can be no reason for children's inhe-
riting of rule and dominion, which has ano-


ther original and a different end. Nor can.
primogeniture have any pretence to a right


of solely. inheriting either property or power,


as we shall, in its due place, see more fully.


It is enough to have shewed here, that Adam's


property, or private dominion, could not convey


any sovereignty or rule to his heir, who not
having a right to inherit all his father's pos-
sessions, could not thereby come to have any
sovereignty over his brethren: and therefore,


if any sovereignty on account of his property


had been vested in Adam, which in truth there
was not, yet it would have died with him,
8.98. As Adam's sovereignty, if, by vir-


tue gf being proprietor of the world, he had
any authority over men, could not have been
inherited by any of his children over the rest,


because they had the same title to divide the
inheritance, and every one had a right to a
1 portion


114 OH GOVERNMENT.
portion of his father's possessions; fo nei-
ther could Adam's sovereignty by right of fa-
therhood, if any such he had, descend to any
one of his children : for it being, in our au-
thor's account, a right acquired by begetting
to rule over those he had begotten, it was
not a power possible to be inherited, because
the right being consequent to, and built on,
an act perfectly personal, made that power so
too, and impossible to be inherited: for
paternal power, being a natural right rising
only from the relation of father and son, is
as impossible to be inherited as the relation
itself; and a man may pretend as well to in-
herit the conjugal power the husband, whose
heir he is, had over his wife, as he can to
inherit the paternal power of a father over
his children: for the power of the husband
being founded on contract, and the power
of the father on begetting, he may as well
inherit the power obtained by the conjugal
contract, which was only personal, as he
may the power obtained by begetting, which
could reach no farther than the person of the
begetter, unless begetting can be a title to
power in him that does not beget. e
S. 99. Which makes it a reasonable question.
to ask, whether Adam, dying before Toe, his
heir, (uppose Cain or Seth} should have by
right of inheriting Adam's fatherhood, sovereign
| ang over Eve his mother: for Adam's father-
ood being nothing but a right he had to govern
| his children, because he begot them, he that
"MP UE”! ; inherits


OF GOVERNME Nx. 115


inherits Adam's - fatherhood, inherits nothing,
even in our author's sense, but the right Adam
had to govern his children, because he begot
them: so that the monarchy of the heir would
not have taken in Eve; or if it did, it being
nothing but the fatherhood of Adam descended
by inheritance, the heir must have right. to
govern Eve, because Adam begot her; for

fatherhood is nothing else.

K F. 100. Perhaps it will be said with our
author, that a man can alien his power over
his child; and what may be transferred by
compact, may be possessed by inheritance.
I answer, a father cannot alien the power he
has over his child : he may perhaps to some
degrees forfeit it, but cannot transfer it ; and
if any other man acquire it, it is not by the
father's grant, but by some act of his own.
For example, a father, unnaturally careless
of his child, sells or gives him to another
man ; and he again exposes him ; a third
man finding him, breeds up, cherishes, and
provides for him as his own: I think in this
case, no body will doubt, but that the great-
est part of filial duty and subjection was here
owing, and to be paid to this foster-father ;
and if any thing could be demanded from
the child, by either of the other, it could be
only due to his natural father, who perhaps

might have forfeited his right to much of
that duty comprehended in the command,
Honour your parents, but could transfer none
of it to another. He that purchased, and
"rf I 2 neglected


Leo ,, AS a JJ


—


116 Or GOVERNMENT.


neglected the child, got by his purchase and
grant of the father, no title to duty or ho-
nour from the child; but only he acquired it,
who by his own authority, performing the
office and care of a father, to the forlorn and
perishing infant, made himself, by paternal
care, a title to proportionable degrees of pater-
nal power. This will be more easily admit-
ted upon consideration of the nature of pater-
nal power, for which I refer my reader to
the second book.

F. 101. To return to the argument in
hand; this is evident, That paternal power
arising only from begetting, for in that our
author places it alone, can neither be trans-
ferred nor inherited : and he that does not
beget, can no more have paternal power,
which arises from thence, than he can have
a right to any thing, who performs not the
condition, to which only it is annexed. If
one should ask, by what law has a father
power over his children? it will be an-
swered, no doubt, by the law of nature,
which gives such a power over them, to
him that begets them. If one should ask
likewise, by what law does our author's
heir come by a right to inherit ? I think it
would be answered, by the law of nature too :
for I find not that our author brings one
word of {scripture to prove the right of such _
an heir he speaks of. Why then the law of
nature gives fathers paternal power over their
children, because they did | ra them; *

| ©


|


Or GovERNMENT. 117


the same law of nature gives the same paternal

ower to the heir over his brethren, who
did not beget them: whence it follows, that
either the father has not his paternal power
by begetting, or else that the heir has it not
at all; for it is hard to understand how the
law of nature, which is the law of reason,
can ts the paternal power to the father over
his children, for the only reason of begetting ;


and to the first-born over his brethren with-


out this only reason, 1. e. for no reason at all:


and if the eldest, by the law of nature, can
inherit this paternal power, without the only
reason that gives a title to it, so may the
youngest as well as he, and a stranger as
well as either ; for where there is no reason
for any one, as there is not, but for him that
begets, all have an equal title. I am sure
our author offers no reason ; and when any
body does, we shall see whether it will hold


or NO.


$.102. In the mean time it is as good sense


to say, that by the law of nature a man has
right to inherit the property of another, be-
cause he 1s of kin to him, and is known to
be of his blood; and therefore, by the same
law of nature, an utter stranger to his blood
has right to inherit his estate ; as to say. that,
by the law of nature, he that begets them
has paternal power over his children, and
therefore, by the law of nature, the heir that
begets them not, has this paterns powar
oyer them; or supposing the law of the land

3 3%%»ͤ 222


— A _ —- =
— —— 22 — — — TT. ce -


118 OF GOVERNMENT.
gave absolute power over their children, to
such only who nursed them, and fed their
children themselves, could any body pretend,
that this law gave any one, who did no such
thing, absolute power over thofe, who were
not his children? |
8. 103. When therefore it can be shewed,
that conjugal power can belong to him that
is not an husband, it will also I believe be
proved, that our author's paternal power, ac-
quired by begetting, may be inherited by a
son ; and that a brother, as heir to his fa-
ther's power, may have paternal power over
his brethren, and by the same rule conjugal
power too : but till then, I think we may
rest satisfied, that the paternal power of Adam,
this sovereign authority of fatherhood, were
there any such, could not descend to, nor be
inherited by, his next heir. Fatherly power, I
easily grant our author, if it will do him an
ood, can never be lost, because it will be as
bas in the world as there are fathers : but
none of them will have Adam's paternal power,
or derive their's from him ; but every one will
have his own, by the same title Adam had
his, vig. by begetting, but not by inheritance,
or succession, no more than husbands have
their conjugal power by inheritance from
Adam. And thus we see, as Adam had no
such property, no such paternal power, as gave
him sovereign jurisdiction over mankind ; f6
likewise his sovereignty built upon either of
_ these titles, if he had any such, could Roh
f fy ; ave


6


OF GOVERNMENT. 119
have descended to his heir, but must have


ended with him. Adam therefore, as has


been proved, being neither monarch, nor
his Imaginary monarchy hereditable, the


power. which is now in the world, is not


that which was Adam's, fince all that Adam
cou'd have upon our author's grounds, either
of property or fatherhood, neceslarily died
witi, him, and could not be conveyed to
posterity by inheritance. In the next place
we will consider, whether Adam had any
such heir, to inherit his power, as our au-


thor talks of.


—


.


Of the Heir to Adam's Monarc bical Power. -


F. 104. UR author tells us, Obser-
vations, 253. That it is a truth


undeniable, that there cannot be any multitude


of men whatsoever, either great or small, tho
gathered together from the several corners and
remotest regions of the world, but that in the
fame multitude, considered by its felf, there ts
one man amongst them, that in nature hath a
right to be king of all the rest, as being the next
heir to Adam, and all the other subjects to him:

man by nature is a king or a subject.
And again, p. 20. Adam himself were fill
living, and now ready to die, it is certain that
there is one man, and but one in the world, who


is next beir. Let this multitude of men be, if


I 4 our


120 Or GovERNMEN T.


our author pleases, all the princes upon the
earth, there will then be, by our author's
rule, one amongst them, that in nature hath a
right to be king of all the rest, as being the
right heir to Adam; an excellent way to
establish the thrones of princes, and settle
the obedience of their subjects, by setting
up an hundred, or perhaps a thousand titles
(if there be so many princes in the world)
against any king now reigning, each as good,
upon our author's grounds, as his who wears
the crown. If this right of heir carry any
weight with it, if it be the ordinance of God, as
our author seems to tells us, Observations, 244.
mult not all be subject to it, from the highest
to the lowest? Can those who wear the name
of princes, without having the right of being
heirs to Adam, demand obedience from their
subjects by this title, and not be bound to
pay it by the same law? Either governments
in the world are not to be claimed, and held
by this title of Adam's heir; and then the
starting of it is to no purpose, the being or not
being Adam's heir signifies nothing as to the
title of dominion : or if it really be, as our
author says, the true title to government and
sovereignty, the first thing to be done, is to
find out this true heir of Adam, seat him in
his throne, and then all the kings and princes
of the world ought to come and resign up
their crouns and scepters to him, as things
that belong no more to them, than to any
of their subjects. 75 8


$. 105.


;
4
4
|


Or GOVERNMENT. 121


8 105. For either this right in nature, of
Adam's heir, to be king over all the race of
men, (for all together they make one mul-
titude) is a right not necessary to the making
of a law ful king, and fo there may be lawful
kings without it, and then kings titles and
power depend not on it; or else all the kings
in the world but one are not lawful kings,
and so have no right to obedience: either
this title of heir to Adam is that whereby
kings hold their crowns, and have a right
to subjection from their subjects, and then
one only can have it, and the rest being
subjects can require no obedience from other
men, who are but their fellow subjects; or
else it is not the title whereby kings rule,
and have a right to obedience from their
subjects, and then kings are kings without
it, and this dream of the natural sovereignty
of Adam's heir is of no use to obedience and
government : for if kings have a right to
dominion, and the obedience of their sub-


jects, who are not, nor can possibly be, heirs


to Adam, what use is there of such a title,
when we are obliged to obey without it? If


kings, who are not heirs to Adam, have no


right to sovereignty, we are all free, till our
author, or any body for him, will shew us
Adam's right heir. If there be but one heir
of Adam, there can be but one lawful king
in the world, and no body in conscience can
be obliged to obedience till it be *

We


122 Or GOVERNMENT.


who that is; for it may be any one, who is
not known to be of a younger house, and
all others have equal titles. If there be
more than one heir of Adam, every one is
his heir, and so every one has regal power:
for if two sons can be heirs together, then
all the sons are equally heirs, and so all are
heirs, being all sons, or sons sons of Adam.
Betwixt these two the right of heir can-
not stand; for by it either but one only
man, or all men are kings. Take which
you please, it dissolves the bonds of govern-
ment and obedience; fince, if all men are
heirs, they can owe obedience to no body;
if only one, no body can be obliged to pay


obedience to him, till he be known, and his
title made out.


„ &-B;-M0;
Who HEIR?


8. 106. HE great question which in

all ages has disturbed man-
kind, and brought on them the greatest part
of those mischiefs which have ruined cities,
depopulated countries, and disordered the
peace of the world, has been, not whether
there be power in the world, nor whence it
came, but who should have it. The settling
of this point being of no smaller moment
than the security of princes, and the prac
ERS an


»


Or GOVERNMENT. 123


and welfare of their estates and kingdoms, a
reformer of politics, one would think, should
lay this sure, and be very clear in it : for if
this remain disputable, all the rest will be to
very little purpose ; and the skill used in
dressing. up power with all the splendor and
temptation absoluteness can add to it, without
shewing who has a right to have it, will
serve only to give a greater edge to man's
natural ambition, which of its self is but too
keen. What can this do but set men on
the more eagerly to scramble, and so lay a
sure and lasting foundation of endless con-
tention and disorder, instead of that peace
and tranquillity, which is the business of go-


vernment, and the end of human society


5 107. This designation of the person our
author is more than ordinary obliged to take
care of, because he, affirming that he 2


fignment of civil power is by divine institution,


hath made the conveyance as well as the
power itself sacred : so that no consideration,
no act or art of man, can divert it from that
person, to whom, by this divine right, it is
assigned; no necessity or contrivance can
substitute another person in his room: for
if the affignment of civil power be by divine
institution, and Adam's heir be he to»whom


it is thus affigned, as in the foregoing chapter


our author tells us, it would be as much sa-
crilege for any one to be king, who was not
Adam's heir, as it would have been W

. | the


124 OF GOVERNMENT.


the Jews, for any one to have been priest, who
had not been of Aaron's posterity: for not
only the priesthood in general being by divine in-
ftitution, but the assignment of it to the sole line
and posterity of Aaron, made it impossible to
be enjoyed or exercised by any one, but those
persons who were the off-spring of Aaron :
whose succession therefore was carefully ob-
served, and by that the persons who had a
right to the priesthood certainly known.
$. 108. Let us see then what care our
author has taken, to make us know who is
this heir, who by divine institution has a right
to be king over all men. The first account of
him we meet with is, p. 12. in these words :
This subjection of children, being the fountain
of all regal authority, by the ordination of God
himself”; it follows, that civil power, not only in
general, is by drvine institution, but even the
assignment of it, specifically to the eldest parents.
Matters of such consequence as this is, should
be in plain words, as little liable, as might
be, to doubt or equivocation ; and I think,
if language be capable of expressing any thing
distinctly and clearly, that of kindred, and
the several degrees of nearness of blood, is
one. It were therefore to be wished, that
our author had used a little more intelligible
expressions here, that we might have better
known, who it is, to whom the afignment of
civil power is made by drvme institution ; or at
least would have told us what he meant by
| eldest


Or GoveEeRNM ENT. 12 5


eldeft parents: for I believe, if land had been
assigned or granted to him, and the 4e
arents of his family, he would have thought
it had needed an interpreter; and it would
scarce have been known to whom next it

belonged.
§. 109. In propriety of speech, (and cer-
tainly propriety of speech 1s necesfary in a
discourse of this nature) eldest parents signifies
either the eldest men and women that have
had children, or those who have longest had
issue; and then our author's assertion will
be, that those fathers and mothers, who have
been longest in the world, or longest fruitful,
have by divine institution a right to civil power.
If there be any absurdity in this, our author
must answer for it: and if his meaning be
different from my explication, he is to be
blamed, that he would not speak it plainly.
This I am sure, parents cannot signify heirs
male, nor eldest parents an infant child: who
yet may sometimes be the true heir, if there
can be but one. And we are hereby still as
much at a loss, who civil power belongs to,
notwithstanding this a/ignment by divine in-
fiitution, as if there had been no such afign-
ment at all, or our author had said nothing
of it. This of eldest parents leaving us more
in the dark, who by divine institution has a
right to civil power, than those who never
heard any thing at all of Heir, or descent, of
which our author is so full. And though the
| chief


126 Or GOVERNMENT.


chief matter of his writing be to teach obe-
dience to those, who have a right to it, which
he tells us is conveyed by descent, yet who
those are, to whom this right by descent
belongs, he leaves, like the philosophers stone
in politics, out of the reach of any one to
discover from his writings.

§. 110. This obscurity cannot be imputed
to want of language in so great a-master of
style as Sir Robert is, when he is resolved
with himself what he would say : and there-
fore, I fear, finding how hard it would be to
settle rules of descent by divine institution,
and how little it would be to his purpose, or
conduce to the clearing and establishing the
titles of princes, if such rules of descent were
settled, he chose rather to content himself
with doubtful and general terms, which
might make no ill sound in mens ears, Who
were willing to be pleased with them, rather
than offer any clear rules of descent of this
fatherhood of Adam, by which men's con-
sciences might be satisfied to whom it de-
scended, and know the persons who had a
right to regal power, and with it to their
obedience. _ SIS

$. 111. How else is it possible, that laying
so much stress, as he does, upon descent, and
Adam's heir, next heir, true heir, he should.
never tell us what heir means, nor the way
to know who the next or true heir is? This,
I do. not. remember, he does any where ex-


pressy


| Or GoveRNMENT. 127
presly handle ; but, where it comes in his
way, very  warily and doubtfully touches;
though it be fo necessary, that without it all
discourses of government and obedience upon
his principles would be to no purpose, and
fatherly power, never so well made out, will
be of no use to any body. Hence he tells
us, Observations, 244. That not only the con-
ftitution of power in general, but the limitation
of it to one kind, (i. e.) monarchy, and the
determination of it to the individual person and
line of Adam, are all three ordinances of God ;
neither Eve nor her children could either limit
Adam's power, or join others with him; and what
was given unto Adam was given in his person to
his posterity. Here again our-author informs
us, that the divine ordinance hath limited the
descent of Adam's monarchical power. To
whom? To Adam's line and posterity, says our
author. A notable imitation, a limithtion to
all mankind : for if our author can find any
one amongst mankind, that is not of the
line and posterity of Adam, he may perhaps
tell him, who this next heir of Adam is:
but for us, I despair how this /mrtation of
Adam's empire to his line and Laer will
help us to find out one heir. This limitation
indeed of our author will save those the
labour, who would look for him amongst
the race of brutes, if any such there were;
but will very little contribute to the discovery
of one next beir amongst men, though it make
a short and easy determination of the question
\ about


_ _ 2 4
+ * — _ nd 2 f 8 — 2 3
bo . erg end oor add
> 9 4 2 2 - & 5
"RS 4 bh” LS, * * 1 *


ner


1
*
#


*
kl
1
42
AX RS
q e 4
oh
1
15
+Þ 1
" 5
bo
*; 4
WR.
}
ns
4 1
bay
- :
. n [
!
we
-
= 4
N
7
4 4
$ | |
1 9
I.
.
4
# -
1 {
q


128 Or GOVERNMENT.


about the descent of Adam's regal power, by
telling us, that the line and posterity of Adam
is to haye it, that is, in plain Englisb, any
one may have it, since there is no per-
son living that hath not the title of being
of the line and posterity of Adam; and while
it keeps there, it keeps within our author's
limitation by God's ordinance. Indeed,
p- 19. he tells us, that such berrs are not only
lords of their own children, but of tbeir brethren;
whereby, and by the words following, which
we shall consider anon, he seems to insinuate,
that the eldest son is Heir; but he no where,
that I know, says it in direct words, but by
the instances of Cain and Jacob, that there
follow, we may allow this to be so far his
opinion concerning heirs, that where there
are divers children, the eldest son has the right
to be heir. That primogeniture cannot give
any title to paternal power, we have already
shewed. That a father may have a natural
right to some kind of power over his chil-
dren, is easily granted; but that an elder
brother has so over his brethren, remains to
be proved: God or nature has not any where,
that I know, placed such jurisdiction in the
first-born ; nor can reason find any such, na-
tural superiority amongst brethren. The
law of Moses gave a double portion of the
goods and possessions to the eldest; but we
nd not any where that naturally, or by
God's institution, superiority or dominion be-
longed to him, and the instances there brought


by


Or GOVERNMENT. 129


by our author are but slender proofs of a

right to civil power and dominion in the

first-born, and do rather shew the contrary.
$. 112. His words are in the forecited


place : And therefore we find God told Cain of


bis brother Abel; his defire shall be subject unto
thee, and thou shalt rule over him. To which
I answer, : .
1. These words of God to Cain, are by
many interpreters, with great reason, under-
stood in a quite different sense than what
our author uses them in.

2. Whatever was meant by them, it could
not be, that Cain, as elder, had a natural
dominion over Abel; for the words are con-
ditional, If thou dost well: and fo personal to
Cain: and whatever was signified by them,
did depend on his carriage, and not follow his
birth-right ; and therefore could by no
means be an' eftablishment of dominion in
the first-born in general : for before this
Abel had his -diftin#t territories by right of
private dominion, as our author himself con-
fesses, Observations, 210. which he could not
have had to the prejudice of the heirs title,


if by drome” institution, Cain as heir were to


interit all his father's dominion. |

3. If this were intended by God as the
charter of primogeniture, and the grant of
dominion to elder brothers in general as such,
by right of inheritance, we might expect it


should have included all his brethren": for


K we


j —ↄ—ᷣ—ᷣ— —ͤAàÄ—
— A, a a3 AS — — ue rr * . on > | mY
\ g - : 8 * - ox of 2 2 6of


2
4 co


>
at 84
— — — 8 =
— —


130 OF GoveRNMENT.


we may well suppose, Adam, from whom the
world was to be peopled, had by this time,
that these were grown up to be men, more
sons than these two: whereas Abel himself is
not so much as named; and the words in
the original can scarce, with any good con-


struction, be applied to him.
4. It is too much to build a doctrine of
so mighty consequence upon so doubtful and
obscure a place of scripture, which may be
well, nay better, understood in a quite dif-
ferent sense, and fo can be but an ill proof,
being as doubtful as the thing to be proved
by it; especially when there is nothing else
in scripture or reason to be found, that fa-

vours or supports it. „
F. 113. It follows, p. 19. Accordingly when
Jacob bought his brother's birth-right, Isaac
blessed him, thus ; Be lord over thy brethren, and
let the sons of thy mother bow. before thee.
Another instance, I take it, brought by our
author to evince dominion due to birth-right,
and an admirable one it is: for it must be
no ordinary way of reasoning in a man, that
is pleading for the natural power of kings,
and against all compact, to bring for proof
of it, an example, where his own account of
it founds all the right upon compact, and
| settles empire in the younger brother, unless
buying and selling be no compact; for he
tells us, when Jacob bought his brother's birth-
right, But pasling by that, let us 8
ER 9


Or GovERnNMENT. 131
the history itself, with what use our author
makes of A and we shall find these following
eh about it.

1. That our author reports this, as if Isaac
* given Jacob this bleffing, immediately
upon his purchasing the 4irth-right ; for he
says, when Facob bought, Tfaac blessed bim; which
is plainly otherwise in the scripture: : for it
appears, there was a distance of time be-
tween, and if we will take the story in the
order it lies, it must be no small aeg ;
all Thaac's sojourning in Gerar, and trans-
actions with Abimelech, Gen. xxvi. coming
between; Rebecca being then beautiful, and
consequently young; but Isaac, when he
blessed fo acob,. was old and decrepit : and
A al complains of Jacob, Gen. xxvii.
. 36. that wa. times he had supplanted him;
2 took away my birth-right, says he, and be-
hold now he hath taken away my blessing ; words,
that I think signify distance of time and dif-
ference of action.

2. Another mistake of our author” J is, that
he sa} poses 1saac gave Jacob the blessing, and
bil An be lord over his brethren, because he
530 the birth-ri ght; for our author brin gs
this example 5 prove, that he that has —
birth-right, has thereby a right to be lord
over his brethren. But it is also manifest, by
the text, that Jaac had no consideration of
Jacob's having, bought the birth-right ; for
when he blessed him, he considered him not
K 2 ag


Jent them away from Isaac his fon, while" be
yet- lived. That is, Abraham having given


132 Or. GOVERNMEN r.


as Jacob, but took him for Esau, Nor did
Esau understand any such connection between
birth-right and the hlesing; for he says, He
hath supplanted me these two times, he took away
my birib-right, and bebold now be hath taken
away my blessing : whereas had the blessing,

which was to be lord over his brethren, be-
longed to the b:rth-right, Esau could not
have complained of this second, as a cheat,
Jacob having got nothing but what Esau had
fold him, when he fold him his b:rth-right ;

so that it is plain, dominion, if these de
fignify it, was not understood to = to


the birth right.


F. 114. And that in those days of the
patriarchs, dominion was not 1 to
be the right of the heir, but only a greater
ꝑortion of goods, is plain from Gen. xxi. 10.
for Sarah, taking Isaac to be heir, says, Caf
out this bondwoman and her son, for the : son
of this bondwoman shall not be heir. with my


fon : whereby could be meant nothing, but


that he should not have a pretence to an
equal share of his father's estate after his
death, but should have his portion presently,
and be gone. Accordingly we read, Gen.

XXv, 5, 6. That Abraham gave all that he had
unto Tsaar, but unto the fons of the concubines
which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and


phage to all his ot her sons,” and sent them
L | | away,


OF GoveR NMENT. 133


away, that which he had reserved, being the
greatest part of his substance, /aac as heir
possessed after his death: but by being heir,
he had no right to be lord over his brethren;
for if he had, why should Sarah endeavour
to rob him of one of his /ubjeFs; or lessen
the number of his //aves, by desiring to have
N sent away? Os
Thus, as under the law, the pri-
Wege of birth-right was nothing but a double
portion : : so we lee that before Mo/es, in the
patriarchs time, from whence our author
pretends to take his model, there was no
knowledge, no thought, that birth-right gave
rule or empire, 3 or kingly authority,
to any one over his brethren. If this be not
lain enough in the story of 1/azc and IHimael,
he that will look into 1 Chron. v. 12. may
there read these words: Reuben was the first-
born ; but forasmuch as be defiled his father
bed, his birth-right was given unto the sons of
Foseph, the son of Israel: and the genealogy 1s
not to be reckoned after the birth-right ; for
Fudah prevailed above his brethren, and of him
came the chief ruler ; but the birth-right was
Jose oeph's. What this birth-right was, Jacob
blessing Jesepb, Gen. xlviii. 22. telleth us in
these words, Moreover 1 have given thee one
portion above thy brethren, which I took out of
the band of the Amorite, with my sivord and
with my bow. Whereby it is not only plain,
that the birth-right was nothing but a double
1 portion,


134 Or GOVERNMENT.
portion; but the text in Chronicles is express
against our author's doctrine, and shews that
dominion was no part of the birth-right ;
for it tells us, that 7% had the birth- right,
but Judah the dominion. One would think
our author were very fond of the very name
of birib-right, when he brings this instance
of Jacob and Esau, to prove that dominion
belongs to the heir over his brethren.
§. 116. 1. Because it will be but an ill
example to prove, that dominion by God's.
ordination belonged to the eldest son, be-
cinse Jacob the youngest here had it, let
him come by it how he would: for if it
prove any thing, it can only prove, against
our author, that the af/ignment of dominion to
the eldest is not by divine institution, which
would then be unalterable : for if by the
law of God, or nature, absolute power and
empire belongs to the eldest son and his
heirs, so that they are supreme monarchs,


and all the rest of their brethren slaves, our


author gives us reason to doubt whether the
eldest son has a power to part with it, to the
- prejudice of his posterity, since he tells us,
Observations, 158. That in grants and gifts
tbat have their original from God or nature,
no inferior power of man can limit, or make any
law of prescription against them.  _
F. 117. 2. Because this place, Ger. xxvii.
29. brought by our author, concerns not at
all the dominion of one brother over the
1 710 5 other,


for it is plain in the history, that Esau was
never subject to Jacob, but lived apart in
mount Serr, where he founded a distin
-people and government, and was himself
r them, as much as Jacob was in
his own family. This text, if considered, can
never be understood of Esau himself, or the
personal dominion of Jacob over him: for
the words brethren and sons of thy mother,
could not be used literally by 7/aac, who
| knew Jacob had only one brother; and these


words are so far from being true in a literal
sense, or establishing any dominion in Jacob


over Esau, that in the story we find the quite


contrary, for Gen. xxxii. Jacob several times
calls Esau lord, and himself his servant; and
Gen. xxxiii. he bowed himself seven times to the
ground ta Esau. Whether E/au then were a
' subje& and vassal (nay, as our author tells us,
all subjects are slaves) to Jacob, and Jacob
*- his sovereign prince by birth-right, I leave
- the reader to judge; and to believe if he
can, that these words of E. Be lord over
thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down
to thee, confirmed Jacob in a sovereignty over
Esau, upon the account of the #irth-right
he had got from him. BYE

§. 118. He that reads the story of Jacob
and Esau, will find there was never any juris-

diction or authority, that either of them had


ever the other after their father's death : they


K 4 lived


Or GovERNMENT. 135
other, nor the subjection of Esau to Jacob:


—
ns Ae ta 4


"= 4
=
<6

,

*

*
1
*
f


2 —— — —


2 — — a = rem =
” _ ” .
” FIR PRES -5 "8 > So ow hw. © * "4
OL. LY — i 4a +
— 2 2 => . G YT 2 Fe = *


136 Or GOVERNMENT.


lived with the friendship and equality of bre-
thren, neither lord, neither slave to his bro-
ther; but independent each of other, were
both heads of their distinct families, where
they received no laws from one another, but
lived separately, and were the roots out of
which sprang two distinct people under two
distin governments. This blessing then of
Jsaac, whereon our author would build the
dominion of the elder brother, signifies no
more, but what Rebecca had been told from
God, Gen. xxv. 23. Tuo nations are in thy
womb, and two manner of people shall be se-
parated from thy bowels, and the one people shall
be stronger than the other people, and the elder
shall serve the younger 3 and so Jacob blessed
Fudah, Gen. xlix. and gave him the scepter
and dominion, from whence our author might
have argued as well, that jurisdiction and
dominion belongs to the third fon over
his brethren, as well as from this blessing
of 1/aac, that it belonged to Jacob: bòth
these places contain only predictions of what
should long after happen to their posterities,
and not any declaration of the right of in-
heritance to dominion in either. And thus
we have our author's two- great and only
arguments to prove, that heirs are lords over
their, brethren.

1. Because God tells Cain, Gen, iv. that
however fin might set upon him, he ought
or might be matter of it: for the most learned


interpreters


RX


Or GOVERNMENT. 137
interpteters uniderstood the words of sin, and
not of Abel, and give so strong reasons for
it, that nothing can convincingly be in-
ferred, from so doubtful a text, to our au-
thor' s purpose.

2. Because in this of Gen. xxvii. ' tage
foretels that the Maelites, the posterity of
Facob, {bould' have dominion over the Edom-
ites, the posterity of Esau; therefore says
our author, heirs are lords of their brethren :
J leave any one to judge of the conclusion.”

F. 119. And now we fee how our author
has viorided: for the descending, and con-
veyance down of Adam's monarchical power,
or paternal dominion to posterity, by the
inheritance of his Heir, succeeding to all his
father's authority, and becoming upon his
death as much lord as his father was, 79 oh
over his own children, but over his brethren,
and all descended from his father, and fo
in infinitum. But yet who this heir is, he
does not once tell us; and all the light we
have from him in this so fundamental a point,
is only, that in his instance of Jacob, by
using the word b:irth-right, as that which
passed from Esau to Jacob, he leaves us to |
guess, that by heir, he means the eldest son;
though I do not remember he any Where
mentions ex presly the title of the first- born,
but all along keeps himself under the shelter | |
of the indefinite term Heir. But taking it to


bo eng "that the eldeft fon Fl heir, ©


oY


138 Or GOVERNMENT.
(sor if the eldest be not, there will be no
pretence why the sons should not be all heirs
alike) and so by right of primogeniture has
dominion over his brethren ; this is but one
| step towards the settlement of succession, and
the difficulties remain stil] as much as ever,
till he can shew us who is meant by right
heir, in all those cafes which may happen
where the present possessor hath no son. This
he filently passes over, and perhaps wisely
too: for what can be wiser, after one has
affirmed, that the person having that power,
a "well as the power and form of government,
is the ordinance of God, and by divine institu-
tion, vid. Observations, 254. p. 12. than to
be careful, not to start any question con-
cerning the person, the refolution whereof
will certainly lead him into a confession, that
God and nature hath determined nothing
about him? And if our author cannot shew
who by right of nature, or a clear positive
law of God, has the next right to inherit the
dominion of this natural monarch he has
been at such pains about, when he died
without a son, he might have spared his
pains in all the rest, it being more necessary
for the settling men's consciences, and deter-
mining their subjection and allegiance, to
shew them who by original right, superior
and antecedent to the will, or any act of
men, hath a title to this paternal jurisdiction,
than it is to shew that by nature there es
e uc


Or GovERNMENT. 139


such a jurisdiction; it being to no purpose for
me to know there is such a paternal power,
-which I ought, and am disposed to obey,
unless, where there are many pretenders, I also
Know the person that is rightfully invested
and endowed with it.

F. 120. For the main matter in question
: being concerning the duty of my obedience,
and the obligation of conscience I am un-
der to pay it to him that is of right my
lord 12 ruler, 1 must know the person that
this right of paternal power resides in, and
so impowers him to claim obedience from
me : for let it be true what he says, p. 12.
That civil power not only in general is by divine
instilution, but even the assignment of it spe-
cially to the eldefl parents; and Observations,


254. That not only the power or right of go-


vernment, but the $ 5 of” the power of go-
verning, and the person baving that power, are
all the ordinance of God; yet unless he shew


us in all cases who is this person, ordained by


God, who is this elde est parent ; all his ab-
stra& notions of monarchical power will fig-
nify just nothing, when they are to be re-
duced to practice, and men are conscientiously
to pay their obedience : for paternal juris-
dition being not the thing to be obeyed, be-
cause it cannot command, but is only that


which gives one man a right which another
hath not, and if it come by inheritance,


another man cannot have, to commznd and
be


— — 0
— — _ .


*
2 = = 4
IO IE ES AM EA I",


-
” — —
D ox -


. - - — —— - — 7 w 2 - +
5 * * * * — 7 b 292 rH 6 > on * * — » =
** — — ” —_ 4 + 4 — — — n
P IE 1 _ L * Lo 4 — 2 ke - # — — od -


PP
*» FE, v3... > > +=


|
,

44
”y
;
j 9
| bo
irs
, 1
*
=.
ow

1

4 1
e.
\ 1
|

0


—= a—— 2 — :
a OTE > 1 2
—— ä—


1 *
— — — —


——


140 Or GOVERNMENT.
be obeyed; it is ridiculous to say, I pay obe-
diene to the paternal power, when I obey
him, to whom paternal power gives no right
to my obedience: for he can have no divine
right to my obedience, who cannot shew his
divine right to the power of ruling over me,
as well as that by divine right thete is such
a power in the world.

F. 121. And hence not being able to make
out any prince's title to government, as heir


to Adam, which therefore is of no use, and


had been better let alone, he is fain to resolve


all into present possession, and makes civil


obedience as due to an zsurper, as to a lawful
king; and thereby.the zhsurper's title as good.
His words are, Observations, 253. and they
deserve to be remembered: If an usurper d:/-

offess the true. heir, the subjects obedience to


the fatherly power must go along, and wait upon


God's providence. But I shall leave his title
of usurpers to be examined in its due place,


and desire my sober reader to consider what
thanks princes owe such politics as this, which
can suppose paternal power (i. e.) a right! to
government in the hands of a Cade, or a
Cromwell ; and fo all obedience being due to
paternal power, the obedience of subjects
will be due to them, by the same right, and
upon as good grounds, as it is to lawful


princes ; and yet this, as dangerous a doctrine


as it is, must necessarily follow from making


all political power to be nothing else, but


Adam's


e A


Or GOVERNMENT. 141


Adam's paternal power by right and divine |


inflitution, descending from him without be-
ing able to shew to whom it descended, or
who is heir to it.

8. 122. To settle government in the world,
and to lay obligations to obedience on any
man's conscience, it is as necessary (supposing
with our author that all power be nothin


but the being possessed of Adam's fatherhood)
to fatisfy him, who has a right to this


power, this ' fatherhood, when the possessor


dies without sons to succeed immediately to
it, as it was to tell him, that upon the
death of the father, the eldest son had a


right to it: for it is still to be remembered,
that the great question is, (and that which


our author would be thought to contend for,
if he did not sometimes forget it) what per-


sons. have à right to be obeyed, and not
whether there be a power in the world, which


is to be called paternal, without knowing in
whom it resides : for so it be a power, 7. e.


right to govern, it matters not, whether it
be termed paternal or regal, natural or ar-


guired ; whether you call it supreme fathers


hood, or supreme brotherhood, will be all one,


provided we know who has it.


$. 123. I go on then to atk, whether in the
3 A this paternal power, this supreme
fatherhood, the grandson by a daughter hath:
a right before a nephew: by a brother? Whe-
thet the grandson by the eldest son, being an


infant,


— —
1 _ - —
meats DJ res — 2 Go 1
. 222 2 2 . F -
— — 1 — — — -


* =
—
ms


——


—


= = a... —_ 2 2 * Py -
" 5 r 3
_ — .


142 Or GOVERNMENT.
infant, before the younger son, a man and
able? Whether the daughter before the
uncle? or any other man, descended by a
male line? Whether a grandson by a younger
daughter, before a grand- daughter by an
elder daughter? Whether the elder son by
2 concubine, before a younger son by a wife ?
From whence alfo will arise many questions
of legitimation, and what in nature is the
difference betwixt a wife and a concubine ?
for as to the municipal or positive laws of
men, they can fignify nothing here. It may
farther be asked, Whether the eldest son,
heing a fool, shall inherit this paternal power,
before the younger, a wise man? and what
degree of folly it must be that shall ex-
clude him? and who shall be judge of it?
Whether the son of a fool, excluded for his
folly, before the son of his wise brother who
reigned ? Who has the paternal power whillt
the widow-queen is with child by the de-
ceased king, and no body knows whether it
will be a son or a daughter? Which fhall be
heir of the two male-twins, who by the
dissection of the mother were laid open to
the world? Whether a sister by the half
blood, before a brother's daughter by the
whole blood ? | 5

F. 124. These, and many more such doubts,
might be proposed about the titles of suc-
cession, and the right of inheritance; and
that not as idle speculations, but such as in


Or GOVERNMENT. 143


history we shall find have concerned the
Inheritance of crowns and kingdoms ; and
if our's want them, we need not go farther
for famous examples of it, than the other
kingdom in this very island, which having
been fully related by the ingenious and learned
author of Patriarcha non Monarcha, I need say
no more of. Till our author hath resolved

all the doubts that may arise ahout the next
| heir, and shewed that they are plainly deter-
mined by the law of nature, or the revealed
law of God, all his suppositions of a mo-
narchical, absolute, supreme, paternal power in
Adam, and the descent of that power to his
heirs, would not be of the least use to esta-
blish the authority, or make out the title, of
any one prince now on earth; but would
rather unsettle and bring all into question:
for let our author tell us as long as he pleases,
and let all men believe it too, that Adam had
a paternal, and thereby a monarchical power;
that this (the only power in the world) de-
scended to his heirs ; and that there is no other
power in the world but this: let this be all
as clear demonstration, as it is manifest error,
yet if it be not past doubt, to whom this
| paternal power descends, and whose now it is,


no body can be under any obligation of obe-


dience, unless any one will say, that I am
bound to pay obedience to paternal fower in
a man who has no more paternal power than
I myself; which is all one as to say, I obey
a man, because he has a right to govern ;


and


U


=
„
474
Mg
—
*
ad
o
i -
N
1
*
4
F
1
v5
i #\
qt
4
*
wa
of)
* 4
of
.
1 7
1
4
VL
.


|


"3x . } oy 2 *
——  —


—


2
n


N CI iS
Go —
<< === xv


=>
wa — + ©
= _
—
— — ——


144 Or GOVERNMENT.
and if I be asked, how I know he has a
right to govern, I should answer, it cannot
be known, that he has any at all: for that
cannot be the reason of my obedience, which
I know not to be fo ; much less can that be
a reason of my obedience, which no body at
all can know to be fo.
§. 125. And therefore all this ado about
Adam's fatherhood, the greatness of its power,
and the necessity of its supposal, helps no-
thing to establish the power of those that
govern, or to determine the obedience of
subjects who are to obey, if they cannot
tell whom they are to obey, or it cannot
be known who are to govern, and who to
obey. In the state the world is now, it is irre-
coverably ignorant, who is Adam's heir. This
father hood, this monarchical power of Adam,
descending to his heirs, would be of no more
use to the government of mankind, than it
would be to the quieting of mens consciences,
or securing their healths, if our author had
assured them, that Adam had a power to for-
give fins, or cure diseases, which by divine
institution descended to his Heir, whilst this
heir is impossible to be known. And should
not he do as rationally, who upon this as-
surance of our author went and confessed his
fins, and expected a good absolution; or
took physic with e of health, from
any one who had taken on himself the name
of priest or physician, or thrust himself into
those employments, saying, I acquiesce 0
| I Cc


Or GOVERNMENT. 14%


the absolving power descending from Adam,
or I shall be cured by the medicinal power
descending from Adam; as he who says, I
submit to and obey the paternal power de-
scending from Adam, when it is confessed all
these powers descend only to his fingle heir,
and that heir is unknown ? | |
§. 126. It is true, the civil lawyers have
pretended to determine some of thele cases
concerning the succession of princes ; but by
our author's principles, they have meddled in
a matter that belongs not to them: for if all
political power be derived only from Adam,
and be to descend ouly to his successive heirs,
by the ordinance of God and divine institution,
this is a right antecedent and paramount to all
government ; and therefore the positive laws
of men cannot determine that, which is itself
the foundation of all law and government, and
is to receive its rule only from the law of God
and nature. And that being silent in the
case, I am apt to think there is no such right
to be conveyed this way : I am sure it'would
be to no purpole if there were, and men would
e more at a loss concerning government,
and obedience to governors, than if there
were no such right; since by positive laws


and compact, which divine institution (if there
be any) shuts out, all these endless inextricable
doubts can be safely provided against : but it
can never be understood, how a divine natu-
ral right, and that of such moment as 1s all
order and peace in the world, should be con-

1E > eT


— vLLK—— eo + + n_ —
%
——


*
>. 1


— Fs
— ——
—— 2 — -— — - —


= = I :
—
- EE. —


= = 2-==p


— *


CEC”  ” YT
. —L ut,


3


ä ——


|


4
1
of |
4
11


146 OF GOVERNMENT.


veyed down to posterity, without any plain
natural or divine rule concerning it. And
there would be an end of all civil govern-
ment, if the afignment of civil power were
by divine institution to the heir, and yet by that
divine institution the person of the heir could
not be known. This paternal regal power
being by divine right only his, it leaves no
room for human prudence, or consent, to
place it any where else ; for if only one man
hath adivine right to the obedience of man-
kind, no body can claim that obedience, but
he that can shew that right; nor can men's
Consciences by any other pretence be obliged
toit. And thus this doctrine cuts up all go-
vernment by the roots.

8. 127. Thus we see how our author, laying
it for a sure foundation, that the very person
that is to rule, is the ordinance of God, and
by dive institution, tells us at large, only that
this person is the heir, but who this heir is,
he leaves us to guess; and fo this divine insli-
tution, which assigns it to a person whom we
have no rule to know, is just as good as an
assignment to no body at all. But whatever
our author does, divine institution makes no such
ridiculous assignments: nor can God be sup-
posed to make it a sacred law, that one cer-
tain person should have a right to something,
and yet not givę rules to mark out, and know
that person by, or give an heir a divine right
to power, and yet not point out who that
Dew i is. It is rather to be thought, *

eir


Or GovERNMENT. I47


heir had no such right by divine institution,
than that God should give such a right to
the heir, but yet leave it doubtful and unde-
terminable who such heir 1s.

§. 128. If God had given the land of Ca-
naan to Abraham, and in general terms to some
body after him, without naming his feed,
whereby it might be known who that some-
body was, it would have been as good and
useful an assignment, to determine the right
to the land of Canaan, as it would be the
determining the right of crowns, to give
empire to Adam and his successive heirs after
him, without telling who his heir is: for
the word heir, without a rule to know who
it is, signifies no more than some body, I
know not whom. God making it a ine
institution, that men should not marry those
who were near of kin, thinks it not enough
to say, None of you shall approach fo any that
7s near of kin to him, to uncover their naked-
ness ; but morcover, gives rules to know who
are those near of bin, forbidden by divine in-
siitution ; or else that law would have been of
no use, it being to no purpose to lay re-
straint, or give privileges to men, in such
general terms, as the particular person con-
cerned cannot be known by. But God not
having any where said, the next heir shall
inherit all his father's estate or dominion, we
are not to wonder, that he hath no where
appointed who that heir should be ; for never


having intended any such thing, never de-
L 2 signed


4
: :
L:
50
1
14
iy
4 d
t
by
F 4
1
i
h 1
41
4
\
: *
1
4
|
i
|
|
q
"
l
7
Il
N


n * * —
— —


— c Ea
206 ⁵ ꝗĩÄ ]ðVünꝛ . FR


— —


— —— — —· w —— —ů — — —
— 8 r * ** —
—
1 . -


148 Or GOVERNMENT.


signed any heir in that sense, we cannot ex-
pect he should any where nominate, or ap-
point any person to it, as we might, had it
been otherwise. And therefore in scripture,
though the word Heir occur, yet there is no
such thing as heir in our author's sense, one
that was by right of nature to inherit all that
his father had, exclusive of his brethren.
Hence Sarab supposes, that if I/hmael staid in
the house, to share in Abraham's estate after
his death, this son of a bond-woman might
be heir with Jaac; ard therefore, says she,
cast out this bond-woman and her fon, for the
fon of this bond-woman shall not be heir with
my son: but this cannot excuse our author,
who telling us there is, in every number of
men, one who is right and next Heir to
Adam, ought to have told us what the laws
of descent are: but he having been fo
sparing to instruct us by rules, how to know
who is Heir, let us see in the next place, what
his history out of scripture, on which he
pretends wholly to build his government,
gives us in this necessary and fundamental
point.

S. 129. Our author, to make good the title
of his book, p. 13. begins his history of the
descent of Adam's regal power, p. 13. in
these words: This lordship which Adam 6
command bad over the whole world, and by
right descending from him, the patriarchs did
enjoy, was a large, &c. How does he prove
that the patriarchs by descent did enjoy it ?

| for


Or GovERNMEN T. 149


for dominion of life and death, says he, we find
Judah he father pronounced sentence of death
againsi Thamar his daughter in law for playing
the harlot, p. 13. How does this prove that
Judah had absolute and sovereign authority:
be pronounced sentence of death. The pronoun-
cing of sentence of death is not a certain
mark of sovereignty, but usually the office of
inferior magistrates. The power of making
laws of life and death is indeed a mark of
sovereignty, but pronouncing the sentence
according to those laws may be done by
others, and therefore this will but ill prove
that he had sovereign authority: as if one
should say, Judge Fefferies pronounced sen-
tence of death in the late times, therefore
Judge Jefferies had sovereign authority, But
it will be said, Judah did it not by com-
mission from another, and therefore did it in
his own right. Who knows whether he had
any right at all ? Heat of passion might carry
him to do that which he had no authority
to do. Tudah had dominion of life and death :
how does that appear? He exercised it, he
pronounced sentence of death against Thamar :
our author thinks it is very good proof, that
because he did it, therefore he had a right
to do it : he lay with her also: by the same
way of proof, he had a right to do that
too, If the consequence be good. from do-
ing to a right of doing, Absalom too may
be reckoned amongst our author's soye-

34 nee HF


*
1
12
: 1
1
. oo
| 4
1
117
11
7
=
—
+ ns
1,
*#
3
ng
14
4.4
1
.
i
7
:
"
+ wp
8}
1
© 2
Y
| hl
=
ö .
11
1
;
*8
14
. 4
4
9
wy.
\
9
y
oe |
|
*
4 m
1
1
'Y


DEED CE IS


— — £— —


.
— — —


——
_ =
—


"_
\ — ——ͤ— —;
E
SOX — 8
. . — + -


—


150 Or GOVERNMENT.


reigns, for he pronounced such a sentence of
death against his brother Amnon, and much
upon a like occasion, and had it executed
too, if that be sufficient to prove a dominion
of life and death.

But allowing this all to be clear demon-
stration of sovereign power, who was it that
had this /ord/hip by right descending to him from
Adam, as large and ample as the absolutest do-
minion of any monarch £ Judah, says our au—
thor, Judah a younger son of Jacob, his
father and elder brethren living; so that if
our author's own proof be to be taken, a
younger brother may, in the life of his father
and elder brothers, by right of descent, enjoy
Adam's monarchical power ; and if one so
qualified may be monarch by descent, why
may not every man? if Judah, his father
and elder brother living, were one of Adam's
heirs, I know not who can be excluded from
this inheritance ; all men by inheritance may
be monarchs as well as Judah.

§. 130. Touching war, we see that Abraham
commanded an army of 318 soldiers of his own
family, and Esau met his brother Jacob with
400 men at arms : for matter of peace, Abra-
ham made à league with Abimelech, Cc.
P- 13. Is it not possible for a man to have
318 men in his family, without bein
heir to Adam? A planter in the West Indies
has more, and might, if he pleased, (who
doubts?) muster them up and lead them out


guns


Or GOVERNMENT. 151


against the Indians, to seek reparation upon
any injury received from them; and all this
without the absolute dominion of a monarch,
descending to him from Adam. Would it not
be an admirable argument to prove, that all
power by God's institution descended from
Adam by inheritance, and that the very per-
son and power of this planter were the ordi-
nance of God, because he had power in his
family over servants, born in his house, and
bought with his money? For this was just
Abraham's case; those who were rich in the
patriarch's days, as in the West Indies now,
bought men and maid servants, and by their
increase, as well as purchasing of new, came
to have large and numerous families, which
though they made use of in war or peace,
can it be thought the power they had over
them was an inheritance descended from
Adam, when it was the purchase of their
money? A man's riding in an expedition
against an enemy, his horse bought in a fair
would be as good a proof that the owner
enjoyed the lordship which Adam by command
had over the whole world, by right descending
to him, as Abraham's leading out the servants
of his family is, that the patriarchs enjoyed
this lordship by descent from Adam since
the title to the power, the master had in
both cases, whether over slaves or horses,
was only from his purchase ; and the getting
a dominion over any thing by bargain and
1 e Hh | RO


- 1 —
=o — — ae.
—


— —
2 —
— — —


— a.


CE ———


— — —
—


—
OBI tot = =o PTS


152 Or GOVERNMENT.


money, is a new way of proving one had it
by descent and inheritance.

8. 131. But making war and peace are marks
of sovereignty. Let it be so in politic so-
cities: may not therefore a man in the West
Indies, who hath with him sons of his own,
friends, or companions, soldiers under Pay
or slaves bought with money, or perhaps a
band made up of all these, make war 'and
peace, if there should be occasion, and ratify
the articles too with an oath, without being a
sovereign, an absolute king over those WhO
went with him? He that says he cannot,
mult then allow many masters of ships, many
private planters, to be absolute monarchs, for
as much as this they have done. War and
peace cannot be made for politic societies,
but by the supreme power of such societies;


because war and peace, giving a different


motion to the force of such a politic body,
none can make war or peace, but that which
has the direction of the force of the whole
body, and that in politic societies is only
the supreme power. In voluntary societies
for the time, he that has such a power by
consent, may make war and peace, and fo
may a single man for himself, the state of
war not consisting in the number of parti-
Jans, but the enmity of the parties, where
they have no superior to appeal to.

$. 132. The actual making of war or peace
is no proof of any other power, but only


of.


Or GOVERNMENT. 153


of dispofing those to exercise or cease acts of
enmity for whom he makes it; and this
power in many cases any one may have
without any politic supremacy : and therefore
the making of war or peace will not prove
that every one that does so is a politic ruler,


much less a king; for then common-wealths


must be kings too, for they do as certainly


make war and peace as monarchical govern-


ment. ED
8. 133. But granting this a mar of sove-
reignty in Abraham, is it a proof of the descent
to him of Adam's sovereignty over the whole
world ? If it be, it will surely be as good a
proof of the descent of Adam's lordship to
others too. And then common-wealths, as
well as Abraham, will be heirs of Adam, for
they make war and peace, as well as he. If
24 say, that the lord/hip of Adam doth not
y right descend to common-wealths, though
they make war and peace, the same say I of
Abraham, and then there is an end of your
argument : if you stand to your argument,
and say those that do make war and peace, as
common-wealths do without doubt, do inherit
Adam's /ord/hip, there is an end of your mo-
narchy, unless you will say, that common-
wealths by descent enjoying Adam's lordship are


monarchies; and that indeed would be a new


way of making all the governments in the
world monarchical.


8. I 34+


154 Or GOVERNMENT.


§. 134. To give our author the honour of
this new vention: for I confess it is not I
have first found it out by tracing his prin-
ciples, and so charged it on him, it is fit my
readers know that (as absurd as it may leem)
he teaches it himself, p. 23. wnere he in-
genuously says, Ii all kingdoms and common-
wwealths in the world, whether the prince be the
supreme father of the people, or but the irue heir
to such a father, or come to the crown by usur-
pation or election, or whether fome few or a
multitude govern the conmou-wealth ; yet Hill
the authority that is in any one, or in many, or
an all theje, is the only right, and natural au-
tbority of a supreme father; which right of
fatherhood, he often tells us, is regal and royal
authority; as particularly, p. 12. the page
immediately preceding this instance of Abra-
ham. This regal authority, he says, those
that govern common-wealths Wen and if
it be true, that regal and royal authority be
in those that govern common-wealths, it is
as true that common-wealths are governed
by kings; for if regal authority be in him
that governs, he that governs must needs be
a king, and fo all common-wealths are no-
thing but down- right monarchies; and then
what need any more ado about the matter ?
The governments of the world are as they
should be, there is nothing but monarchy in
it. This, without doubt, was the surest way
our author could have found, to turn all


other


Or GOVERNMENT. 1 5 5


other governments, but monarchical, out of
the world.
$. 135. But all this scarce proves Abra-
ham to have been a king as heir to Adam.
If by inheritance he had been king, Lot, who
was of the same family, must needs have been
his subject, by that title, before the servants
in his family; but we sec they lived as friends
and equals, and when their herdsmen could
not agree, there was no pretence of juris-
diction or superiority between them, but they
parted by consent, Gen. xiii. hence he is
called both by Abrabam, and by the text,
Abraham's brother, the name of friendship
and equality, and not of jurisdiction and
authority, though he were really but his ne-
phew. And if our author knows that Abra-
ham was Adam's heir, and a king, it was
more, it seems, than Abraham himself knew,
or his servant whom he sent a wooing for his
fon ; for when he sets out the advantages of
the match, xxiv. Ger. 35. thereby to pre-
vail with the young woman and her friends,
he says, I am Abraham's servant, and the lord
hath blessed my master greatly, and he 1s become
great; and he hath given him flocks and herds,
and silver and gold, and men-servants and maid-
servants, and camels and asses; and Sarah, my
master's wife, bare a son to my master when
she was old, and unto him hath he given all he
hath. Can one think that a discreet servant,
that was thus particular to set out his master's
e greatness,


— — _—_—
— ——_— CEE — .
— —


- _ —


— — —


—
*——


1 56 Or GOVERNMENT.


greatness, would have omitted the crown
Jaac was to have, if he had known of any
such? Can it be imagined he should have
neglected to have told them on such an oc-
casion as this, that Abraham was a king, a
name well known at that time, for he had
nine of them his neighbours, if he or his
master had thought any such thing, the
likeliest matter of all the rest, to make his
errand successful *?
§. 136. But this discovery it seems was
reserved for our author to make 2 or 3000
years after, and let him enjoy the credit of
it ; only he should have taken care that some
of Adam's land should have descended to this
his herr, as well as all Adam's lordship : for
though this lordship which Abraham, (it we
may believe our author) as well as the other
patriarchs, by right descending to him, did enjoy,
was as large and ample as the absolutest doini-
nion of any monarch which hath been since the
creation ; yet his estate, his territories, his
dominions were very narrow and scanty, for
he had not the possession of a foot of land,
till he bought a field and a cave of the sons
of Heth to bury Sarah 1n.
§. 137. The instance of Esau joined with
this of Abraham, to prove that the /ord/hip
which Adam had over the whole world, by right
descending from him, the patriarchs did enjoy,
is yet more pleasant than the former. Esau
met bis brother Jacob with 400 men at arms; he
I therefore


Or GovrRNMENT. 197
therefore was a king by right of heir to Adam.
Four hundred armed men then, however got
together, are enough to prove him that leads
them, to be a king and Adam's heir. There
have been tories in Jreland, (whatever there
are in other countries) who would have
thanked our author for fo honourable an
opinion of them, especially if there had been
no body near with a better title of oo armed
men, to question their royal authority of 400.
It is a shame for men to trifle so, to say no
worse of it, in so serious an argument. Here
Esau is brought as a proof that Adam's lord- |
ship, Adam's absolute dominion, as large as that |
of any monarch, descended by right to the pa-
triarchs, and in this very chap. p. 19. Jacob |
is brought as an instance of one, that by
birth-right was lord over his brethren. So we |
have here two brothers absolute monarchs by |
the same title, and at the same time heirs to |
Adam ; the eldest, heir to Adam, because he [
met his brother with 400 men; and the |
youngest, heir to Adam by birth-right : Esau |
enjoyed the lordship which Adam had over the þ
whole world by right descending to him, in as
large and ample manner, as the absolutest do-
minion of any monarch ; and at the same time,
Jacob lord over him, by the right heigs have to
be lords over their bretbren. Risum teneatis ?
I never, I confess, met with any man of
parts so dexterous as Sir Robert at this way
of arguing: but it was his misfortune to


light


Ont —— oo TA.


1

1
0
1
yi
|
l

U

j |
:


158 OF GOVERNMENT.
light upon an hypothesis, that could not be


accommodated to the nature of things, and
human affairs; his principles could not be
made to agree with that constitution. and
order, which God had settled in the world,
and therefore must needs often clash with
common sense and experience.

§. 138. In the next section, he tells us,
This patriarchal power continued not only till
the flood, but after it, as the name patriarch
doth in part prove. The word patriarch doth
more than in part prove, that patriarchal
power continued in the world as long as there
were patriarchs, for it is necessary that pa-
triarchal power should be whilst there are
patriarchs ; as it is necessary there should be
paternal or conjugal power whilst there are
fathers or husbands ; but this is but playing
with names. 'That which he would falla-
ciously insinuate is the thing in question to be
proved, vi. that the /ord/hip which Adam
had over the world, the supposed absolute
universal dominion of Adam by right descend-
ing from him, the patriarchs did enjoy. If he
affirms such an absolute monarchy continued
to the flood, in the world, I would be glad
to know what records he has it from; for I
confess I cannot find a word of it in my
Bible: if by patriarchal power he means any
thing else, it is nothing to the matter in hand.
And how the name patriarch in some part
proves, that those, who are called by that
name,


Or GOVERNMENT. 159


name, had absolute monarchical power, I
confess, I do not see, and therefore I think
needs no answer till the argument from it be
made out a little clearer.
§. 139. The three sons of Noah had the
world, says our author, divided amongst them by
their father, for of them was the whole world
overspread, p. 14. The world might be over-
spread by the offspring of Noab's fons, though
he never divided the world amongst them; for
the earth might be replenished without being
divided: so that all our author's argument here
proves no such division. However, I allow it
to him, and then ask, the world being di-
vided amongst them, which of the three was |
Adam's heir? If Adam's lordship, Adam's mo.
narchy, by right descended only to the eldest, |
then the other two could be but his siabsects, his |
flaves if by right it descended to all three |
brothers, by the same right, it will descend |
to all mankind ; and then it will be impossible |
what he says, p. 19. that heirs are lords of
their brethren, should be true; but all bro-
thers, and consequeatly all men, will be equal
and independent, all heirs to Adam's mo- _
narchy, and consequently all monarchs toe, |
one as much as another. But it will be said, |
Noah their father divided the world amongst =
them; so that our author will allow more to
Noah, than he will to God almighty, for
Observations, 211. he thought it hard, that
God himself should give the world to Noab
and his sons, to the prejudice of Noa/'s birth-


2 right:


160 Or GOVERNMENT.


right: his words are, Noah was left sole heir
to the world : why should it be thought that God
would difinherit him of his birth-right, and make
him, of all men in the world, the only tenant in
common with his children ? and yet here he
thinks it fit that Noah should difinherit Sem
of his birth-right, and divide the world be-
twixt him and his brethren ; so that this b:rth-
right, when our author pleases, must, and
when he pleases must not, be sacred and in-
violable.

$. 140. If Noah did divide the world be-
tween his sons, and his assignment of domi-
nions to them were good, there is an end of
divine institution ; all our author's discourse
of Adam's heir, with whatfoever he builds
on it, is quite out of doors; the natural
power of kings falls to the ground ; and then -
the form of the power governing, and the person
having that power, will not be (as he says they
are, Observations, 254.) the ordinance of God,
but they. will be ordmances of man: for if
the right of the heir be the ordinance of
God, a divine right, no man, father or not
father, can alter it: if it be not a divine
right, it is only human, depending on the
will of man: and so where human institution
gives it not, the first- born has no right at all
above his brethren; and men may put go-
vernment into what hands, and under what
form, they please.

§. 141. He goes on, Me of the civilest na-
tions of the earth labour to fetch their original


from


Or GOVERNMENT. 161


from some of tbe sons, or nephews of Noah,
p- 14. How many do molt of the civilest
nations amount to? and who are they? I
fear the Chinefes, a very great and civil people,
as well as several other people of the Ez,
West, North and South, trouble not them-
selves much about this matter. All that
believe the Bible, which I beheve are our
author's most of the civilest nations, must ne-
cessarily derive themselves from Na; but
for the rest of the world, they think little
of his sons or nephews. But if the heralds
and antiquaries of all nations, for it is these
men generally that labour to find out the
originals of nations, or all the nations them-
selves, should labour to fetch their original from
fome of the sons or nephews of Noah, what
would this be to prove, that the /ord/hip which
Adam had over the whole world, by right de-
scended to the patriarchs * Whoever, nations,
or races of men, labour to fetch their original
from, may be concluded to be thought by
them, men of renown, famous to posterity,
for the greatness of their virtues and actions;
but beyond these they look not, nor consider
who they were heirs to, but look on them as
such as raised themselves, by their owp virtue,
to a degree that would give a lustre to those
who in future ages could pretend to derive
themselves from them. But if it were Ogyges,
Hercules, Brama, Tamberlain, Pharamond ;
nay, if Jupiter and Saturn were the names,

8 M from


—


162 Or GOVERNMENT.


from whence divers races of men, both an-
cient and modern, have laboured to derive
their original; will that prove, that those
men enjoyed the lordship of Adam, by right
descending to them? It not, this is but a
flourish of our author's to mislead his reader,
that in itself signifies nothing.

§. 142, To as much purpose is what he
tells us, p. 15. concerning this division of
the world, That some say it was by Lot, and
others that Noah sailed round the Mediter-
reanean in ten years, and divided the world into
Asia, Afric and Europe, portions for his
three sons. America then, it seems, was left
to be his that could catch it. Why our au-
thor takes such pains to prove the division of
the world by Noah to his sons, and will not
leave out an imagination, though no better
than a dream, that he can find any where to
favour it, is hard to guess, fince such a di-
von, if it prove any thing, must necessarily
take away the title of Adam's heir; unless
three brothers can all together be heirs of
Adam; and therefore the following words,
Howsoever the manner of this division be un-
certain, yet it is most certain the division itself
was by families from Noah and his children,
over which the parents were heads and princes,
p-. I5. if allowed him to be true, and of
any force to prove, that all the power 1n the
world is nothing but the lordship of Adam's
descending by right, they will only prove, that


the


Or GO PY ERNME NT. 163


the fathers of the children are all heirs to
this lordship of Adam - for if in those days
Cham and Fapbet, and other parents, besides
the eldest fon, were heads and princes over
their families, and had a right to divide the
earth by families, what hinders younger bro-
thers, being fathers of families, from having
the same right? If Cham and Japhet were
princes by right descending to them, not-
withstanding any title of heir in their eldest
brother, younger brothers by the same right
descending to them are princes now; and fo
all our author's natural power of kings will
reach no farther than their own children, and
no kingdom, by this natural right, can be
bigger than a family: for either this /ord-
ship of Adam over the whole world, by right
descends only to the eldest fon, and then there
can be but one heir, as our author says, p. 19.
or else, it by right descends to all the sons
equally, and then every father of a family
will have it, as well as the three sons of
Noah : take which you will, it destroys the
present governments and kingdoms, that are
now in the world, fince whoever has this
natural power of a king, by right descending
to him, must have it, either as our, author
tells us Cain had it, and be lord' over his
brethren, and fo be alone king of the whole
world; or else, as he tells us here, Shem,
Cham and Japbet had it, three brothers, and
so be only prince of his own family, and all
ä M 2 families


164 Or GOVERNMENT.


families independent one of another: all the
world must be only one empire by the right
of the next heir, or else ever nity be a
distin& government of itself, by the hrd/bip
of Adam's descending to parents of families.
And to this only tend all the proofs he here
gives us of the descent of Adam's lordship :
for continuing his story of this descent, he
says,

5. 143. In the disper ion of Babel, we must
certainly find the establishment of royal power,
throughout the kingdoms of the world, p. 14.
If you must find it, pray do, and you will
help us to a new piece of history : but you
mult shew eit us before we shall be bound to
believe, that regal power was established in
the world upon your principles: for, that

regal power was established in the kingdoms
of the world, I think no body will dispute
but that there should be kingdoms in the
world, whose several kings enjoyed their

crowns, by right descending to them from Adam,
that we think not only apocryphal, but also
utterly impossible, If our author has no
better foundation for his monarchy than a
89 of what was done at the dispersion
of Babel, the monarchy he erects thereon,
whose top is to reach to heaven to unite
mankind, will serve only to divide and scatter
them as that tower did ; and, instead of esta-
blishing civil government and order in the
world, will produce nothing but confusion.


9. 144.


Or GOVERNMENT. 165


8. 144. For he tells us, the nations they
were divided into, were distinct families, which
had fathers for rulers over them ; whereby it
appears, that even in the confusion, God was
eareful to preserve the fatherly authority, by
distributing the diversity of languages according iq
fo the diver/ity of families, p. 14. It would 0
have been a hard matter for any one but our
author to have found out so plainly, in the 1
text he here brings, that all the nations in f.
that dispersion were governed by fathers, and |
that God was careful to preserve the fatherly 1
authority. The words of the text are; These 1
are the sons of Shem after their families, after :
their tongues in their lands, after their nations; |
and the same thing is said of Cham and 8

 Taphet, after an enumeration of their po- 1
sterities; in all which there is not one word
said of their governors, or forms of govern-
ment ; of fathers, or fatherly authority. But
our author, who is very quick sighted to spy
out fatherhood, where no body else could see
any the least glimpses of it, tells us positively
their rulers were fathers, and God was careful
to preserve the fatherly authority; and why?
Because those of the same family spoke the
same language, and fo of necessity in the
division kept together. Just as if one should,
argue thus: Hanival in his army, consisting
of divers nations, kept those of the same
language together ; therefore fathers were


captains of each band, and Hanibal was careful
M 3 of


|
|
|
|
j
|


pleased.


166 OF GOVERNMENT.

of the fatherly authority: or in peopling of
Carolina, the Enghsh, French, Scotch and
Welch that are there, plant themselves toge-
ther, and by them the country is divided 7:
their lands after their tongues, after their fa-
milies, after their nations; therefore care was
taken of the fatherly authority or because,
in many parts of America, every little tribe
was a distin people, with a different lan-
guage, one should infer, that therefore God
was careful to preserve the fatherly authority,
or that therefore their rulers enjoyed Adam's
lordsbip by right descending to them, though


we know not who were their governors, nor


what their form of government, but only


that they were divided into little independent
societies, speaking different languages.

8. 145. The scripture says not a word of
their rulers or forms of government, but only
gives an account, how mankind came to be
divided into distin& languages and nations;
and therefore it is not to argue from the
authority of scripture, to tell us positively,


fathers were their rulers, when the scripture


says no such thing; but to set up fancies of
one's own brain, when we confidently aver
matter of fact, where records are utterly
filent. Upon a like ground, i. e. none at all,
he says, That they were not confused multitudes
without heads and governors, and at liberty
to choose what governors or governments they


9. 146,


OF GOVERNMENT. 167


§. 146. For I demand, when mankind were
all yet of one language, all congregated in
the plain of Shinar, were they then all under
one monarch, who enjoyed the lordship of Adam
by right descending to him? If they were not,
there were then no thoughts, it is plain, of
Adam's heir, no right to government known
then upon that title; no care taken, by God
or man, of Adam's fatherly authority, If
when mankind were but one people, dwelt
all together, and were of one language, and
were upon building a city together ; and
when it was plain, they could not but know
the right heir, for Sm lived till 1/aac's time,
a long while after the division at Babel; if
then, I say, they were not under the mo-
narchical government of Adam's fatherhood,
by right descending to the heir, it is plain
there was no regard had to the fatherhood,
no monarchy acknowledged due to Adam's
heir, no empire of Shem's in Afia, and con-
sequently no such division of the world by
Noah, as our author has talked of. As far
as we can conclude any thing from scripture
in this matter, it seems from this place, that
if they had any government, it was rather a
common-wealth than an absolute monarchy :
for the scripture tells us, Gen. xi.» They said :
it was not a prince commanded the building
of this city and tower, it was not by the
command of one monarch, but by the con-
sultation of many, a free people; let us build


M 4 15


168 OF GOVERNMENT.


us a city: they built it for themselves as
free-men, not as slaves for their lord and
master: that we be not scattered abroad; having
a city once built, and fixed habitations to settle
our abodes and families. This was the con-
sultation and design of a people, that were
at liberty to part asunder, but defired to keep
in one body, and could not have been either
necessary or likely in men tied together under
the government of one monarch, who if they
had been, as our author tells us, all faves
under the absolute dominion of a monarch,
needed not have taken such care to hinder
themselves from wandering out of the reach
of his dominion. I demand whether this
be not plainer in scripture than any thing

of Adam's heir or fatherly authority?
$. 147. But if being, as God says, Gen.
xi. 6. one people, they had one ruler, one
king by natural right, absolute and supreme
over them, what care had God to preserve the
paternal _— of the supreme fatherhood, if on
a sudden he sufter 72 (for so many our author
talks of) di/tin& nations to be erected out of
it, under distin& governors, and at once to
withdraw themselves from the obedience of
their sovereign ? This is to intitle God's care
how, and to what we please. Can it be sense
to say, that God was careful to preserve the
fatherly authority in those who had it not?
for if these were subjects under a supreme
prince, what authority had they ? Was it an
instance


Or GOVERNMENT. 169


instance of God's care to preserve the fa-
therly authority, when he took away the true
supreme fatherhood of the natural monarch ?
Can it be reason to say, that God, for the
preservation of fatherly authority, lets several
new governments with their governors start
up, who could not all have fatherly autho-
rity? And is it not as much reason to say,
that God is careful to destroy fatherly autho-
rity, when he suffers one, who is in possession
of it, to have his government torn in pieces,
and shared by several of his subjects? Would
it not be an argument just like this, for mo-
narchical government, to say, when any mo-
narchy was shattered to pieces, and divided
amongst revolted subjects, that God was care-
ful to preserve monarchical power, by rending
a settled empire into a multitude of little
governments? If any one will say, that what
happens in providence to be preserved, God
is careful to preserve as a thing therefore to
be esteemed by men as necessary or useful, it
is a peculiar propriety of speech, which eve

one will not think fit to imitate : but this Iam
sure is impossible to be either proper, or true


speaking, that Shem, for example, (for he was


then alive,) should have fartherly authority, or
sovereignty by right of fatherhood, over that
one people at Babel, and that the next mo-
ment, Shem yet living, 72 others should have
fatherly authority, or sovereignty by right of
fatherhood, over the same people, divided


into


5


—


KKK: ˙ ͤ ˙
= — 4


5


— —
— 2 2 ry


170 OF GOVERNMENT.


into so many distinct governments: either
these 72 fathers actually were rulers, just
before the confusion, and then they were not
one people, but that God himself says they
were; or else they were a common- wealth,
and then where was monarchy ? or else these
72 fathers had fatherly authority, but knew it
not. Strange! that fatherly authority should
be the only original of government amongst
men, and yet all mankind not know it ; and
stranger yet, that the confusion of tongues
should reveal it to them all of a sudden, that
in an instant these 72 thould know that they
had fatherly power, and all others know that
they were to obey it in them, and every one
know that particular fatherly authority to
which he was a subject. He that can think
this arguing from scripture, may from thence
make out what model of an Eutopia will
best suit with his fancy or interest ; and this
fatherhood, thus disposed of, will justify both
a prince who claims an universal monarchy,
and his subjets, who, being fathers of fa-
milies, shall quit all subjection to him, and
canton his empire into less governments for
themselves ; for it will always remain a doubt
in which of these the fatherly authority re-
fided, till our author resolves us, whether
Sbem, who was then alive, or these 72 new

rinces, beginning so many new empires in
his dominions, and over his subjects, had
right to govern, since our author tells us,


that


Or GOVERNMENT. 171
that both one and the other had fathberly,


which is supreme authority, and are brought
in by him as instances of those who did
enjoy . the lordsbips of Adam by right descending
to them, which was as large and ample as the
absolutest dominion of any monarch. This at
least is unavoidable, that if God was careful to
preserve the fatherly authority, in the 72 neu-
erected nations, it necessarily follows, that he
was as careful to destroy all pretences of
Adam's heir; fince he took care, and there-
fore did preserve the fatherly authority in so
many, at least 71, that could not possibly be
Adam's heirs, when the right heir (if God
had ever ordained any such inheritance) could
not but be known, Shem then living, and they
being all one people. |
8 148. Nimrod is his next instance of
enjoying this patriarchal power, p. 16. but
I know not for what reason our author seems
a little unkind to him, and says, that he
against right enlarged his empire, by seizing
violently on the rights of other lords of families.
These lords of families here were called fa-
thers of families, in his account of the dis-
persion at Babel: but it matters not how
they were called, so we know who they are;
for this fatherly authority must be in them,
either as heirs to Adam, and so there could
not be 72; nor above one at once; or else
as natural parents over their children, and so
every father will have paternal authority over


his


172 Or GOVERNMENT.


his children by the same right, and in as
large extent as those 72 had, and so be in-
dependent princes over their own offspring.
Taking his hrds of families in this later
sense, (as it is hard to give those words any
other sense in this place) he gives us a very
pretty account of the original of monarchy,
in these following words, p. 16. And in this
sense he may be said to be the author and founder
of monarchy, wiz. As against right seizing
violently on the rights of fathers over their
children; which paternal authority, if it be
in them, by right of nature, (for else how
could those 72 come by it?) no body can
take from them without their own consents ;
and then I desire our author and his friends
to consider, how far this will concern other
princes, and whether it will not, according
to his conclusion of that paragraph, resolve
all regal power of those, whose dominions
extend beyond their families, either into
tyranny and usurpation, or election and con-
sent of fathers of families, which will differ

very little from consent of the people.
8. 149. All his instances, in the next
seckion, p. 17. of the 12 dukes of Edom, the
nine kings in a little corner of Aja in Abra-
ham's days, the 31 kings in Canaan destroyed
by Joshua, and the care he takes to prove
that these were all sovereign princes, and that
every town in those days had a king, are fo
many direct proofs against him, that it was
5 not


Or GOVERNMENT. 173


not the lordship of Adam by right descending
to them, that made kings : for if they had


held their royalties by that title, either there
must have been but one sovereign over them
all, or else every father of a family had
been as good a prince, and had as good
a claim to royalty, as these: for if all
the sons of Esau had each of them, the
younger as well as the eldest, the right of
fatherhood, and so were sovereign princes after
their fathers death, the fame right had their
sons after them, and so on to all posterity ;
which will limit all the natural power of
fatherhood, only to be over the issue of their
own bodies, and their descendents; which
power of fatherhood dies with the head: of
each family, and makes way for the like power
of fatherhood to take place in each of his
sons over their respective posterities : whereby
the power of fatherhood will be preserved
indeed, and is intelligible, but will not be
at all to our author's purpose. None of the
instances he brings are proofs of any power
they had, as heirs of Adam's paternal autho-
rity by the title of his fatherhood descending
to them ; no, nor of any power they had b

virtue of their own : for Adam's fatherhood
being over all mankind, it could descend but
to one at once, and from him to his right
heir only, and so there could by that title
be but one king in the world at a time:
and by right of fatherhood, not descending
from Adam, it must be only as they them-


selves


174 Or GOVERNMENT.
selves were fathers, and so could be over none
but their on posterity. So that if those 12
dukes of Edom; if Abraham and the nine kings
his neighbours ; if Jacob and Esau, and the
31 kings in Canaan, the 72 kings mutilated
by Adonibesecł, the 32 kings that came to
Benhadad, the 70 kings of Greece making
war at Troy, were, as our author contends,
all of them sovereign princes; it is evident
that kings derived their power from some
other original than fatherhood, since some of.
these had power over more than their own
| Posterity; and it is demonstration, they could
not be all heirs to Adam: for I challenge any
man to make any pretence to power by right
of fatherhood, either intelligible or possible in
any one, otherwise, than either as Adam's
heir, or as progenitor over his own descend-
ents, naturally sprung from him. And if
our author could shew that any one of these
princes, of which he gives us here so large a
catalogue, had his authority by either of these
titles, I think I might yield him the cause ;
though it is manifest they are all impertinent,
and directly contrary to what he brings them
to prove, viz. That the rdship which Adam
had over the world by right descended to the
patriarchs.
§. 150. Having told us, p. 16, That %e
patriarchal government continued in Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, until the Egyptian bondage,
p- 17. he tells us, By manifest footsteps we
may trace this paternal government unto the
3 : Israclites


OH GOVERNMENT. 175


Israelites coming into Egypt, where the exercise
of supreme patriarchal government was inter-
mitted, because they were in subjettion to a
stronger prince. What these footsteps are of
paternal government, in our author's fense,
i. e. of absolute monarchical power descending
from Adam, and exercised by right of fa-
therhsod, we have seen, that is for 2290 years
no footsteps at all; since in all that time he
cannot produce any one example of any per-
son who claimed or exercised regal authority
by right of fatherhood; or shew any one who
being a king was Adam's heir: all that his
proofs amount to, is only this, that there
were fathers, patriarchs and kings, in that
age of the world; but that the fathers and
patriarchs had any absolute arbitrary power,


or by what titles those kings had their's, and


of what extent it was, the scripture is wholly
filent ; it is manifest by right of fatherhood
they neither did, nor could claim any title
to dominion and empire.

§. 151. To say, that the exercise of supreme
patriarchal government was ntermitted, because
they were in subjeftion to a stronger prince, proves
nothing but what I before suspected, wrz.
That patriarchal jurisdiction or government is a
fallacious expression, and does ngt in our au-
thor signify (what he would yet infinuate by
it) paternal and regal power, such an absolute
sovereignty as he supposes was in Adam.


SY 152.


ä —— ͤ—ôuiuv— — — 22


176 Or GOVERNMENT.
§. 152. For how can he say that patriarchal
jurisclictiam was intermitted in Egypt, where
there was a king, under whose regal go-
vernment the Maelites were, if patriarchal
were absolute: monarchical jurisdiftion ? And if
it were not, but something else, why does
he make fuch ado about a power not in ques-
tion, and nothing to the purpose ? The exer-
cise of patriarchal jurisdiction, if patriarchal
be regal, was net intermitted whilst the V
raelites were in Egypt. It is true, the exer-
| cise of regal power was not then in the hands
= of any of the promised seed of Abraham, nor
before neither that I know ; but what is
that to the intermission of regal authority, as
descending from Adam, unless our author will
have it, that this chosen line of Abraham had
the right of inheritance to Adam's lordship ?
and then to what purpose are his instances of
the 72 rulers, in whom the fatherly authority
was preserved in the confusion at Babel? Why
does he bring the 12 princes sons of 1/mael ;
and the dukes of Edom, and join them with
Abraham, 1Jaac, and Jacob, as examples of the
exercise of true patriarchal government, if the
exercise of patriarchal jurisdiction were inter-
mitted in the world, whenever the heirs of
Jacob had not supreme power ? I fear, su-
preme - patriarchal jurisdiction was not only in-
texmitted, but from the time of the Egyptian
bondage quite lost in the world, fince it will
. be


|
|


»


Or GoveERNMENT. 177


be hard to find, from that time downwards,
any one who exercised it as an inheritance
_ descending to him from the patriarchs Abra-
ham, Isaac, and Jacob. I imagined monar-
chical government would have served his
turn in the hands of Pharaoh, or any body.
But one cannot easily discover in all places
what his discourse tends to, as particularly in
this place it is not obvious to guess what he
drives at, when he says, the exercise of su-
preme patriarchal jurisdiction in Egypt, or how
this serves to make out the descent of Adam's
lordship to the patriarchs, or any body else.
8. 153. For I thought he had been giving
us out of - scripture, - proofs and examples of
monarchical government, founded on pater-
nal authority, descending from Adam ; and
not an history of the Jews,: amongst whom
yet we find no kings, till many years after
they were a people : and when kings were
their rulers, there is not the least mention or
room for a pretence that they were heirs to
Adam, or kings by paternal authority. Iex-
pected, talking so much as he does of scrip-
ture, that he would have produced thenge a
series of monarchs, whole titles were clear
to Adam's fatherhood; and who, as heirs to


him, owned and exercised - patepnal jurif-


diction over their subjects, and that this was
the - true patriarchical government; whereas
he neither proves, that the patriarchs were


ings; nor that either kings or patriarchs
ena Race he =


178 Or Government.
Were heirs'to Adam, or so much as pretended
to it: and one may as well prove, that the
patriarchs were all absolute monarchs; that the
power both of patriarchs and kings was only
paternal; and that this power descended to
them from Adam : I say all these proposittons
may be as well proved by a confused account
of a multitude of little kings in the Weft-
Indies, out of Ferdinando Soto, or any of our
late histories of the Northern America, or by
our author's 70 kings of Greece, out of Ho-
mer, as by any thing he brings out of scrip-
ture, in that multitude of kings he has
:veckoned up. 0-17 et. nn
F. 154. And methinks he should have let
Homer and his wars of Troy alone, fince his.
great zeal to truth or monarchy carried him
to such a pitch of transport against pu-
ꝓpbers and poets, that he tells us in his pre-
face, that there are too many in thess days, who
please tbemselues in running after the opinions
of. phrlosophers and poets, to find out such an
original of government, as might promise them
. "Jeme title to liberty, to the great scandal of
Cybristianity, and bringing in of atheism. And
yet these heathens, philosopher Aristotle, and
poet Homer, are not rejected by our zealous
Christian politician, whenever they offer any
thing that seems to serve his turn; whether
la the great feandal of Christianĩty and bringing
in of atheism, let him look. This I cannot
but observe, in authors who it is visible Write
8210721 3 not


OF GOVERNMENT. 179


not for truth, how ready zeal for interest and
party is to entitle Christianity to their de-
ligns, and to charge atheism on those who
vil not without examining submit to their
doctrines, and blindly swallow their non-
sensce.
+. But to return to his scripture N our
author farther tells us, p. 18. that after the
return of the Israelites aut of bondage, God, out
of a special care of them, chose Moses and
Joshua successively to govern as princes in the
place and flead of the supreme fathers. If it
be true, that they returned out of bondage, it
must be into a state of freedom, and must
imply, that both before and after this bandage
they were free, unless our author will say,
that changing af masters is returning out of
bondage ; or that a slave returns out of bondage,
when he is removed from one gally to ano-
ther. If then they returned out of bondage,
it is plain that in those days, whatever our
author in his preface says to the contrary,
there were difference between a /on, a subject,
and a save; and that neither the patriarchs
before, nor their rulers after this Egyptian
bondage, numbered their sons or subhjects among ft
heir se Nans, and disposed of them with, as
i Ablatute: a menen as ney did their other


ene 155. This is aden in Faves, to whom
50 Aae offered his two sons as pledges; and
3 was at last HA for Benjamin's safe


return


180 .. Or GOVERNMENT.

return out of Egypt: which all had been
vain, superfluous, and but a fort of mockery,
if Jacob had had the same power over every
one of. his family, as he had over his ox or
his ass, as an owner over his 1 ; and
the offers that Reuben or Judab made had
been such a security for returning of Benja-
min, as if a man should take two lambs out


o


of his lord's flock, and offer one as security,
that he will safely restore the other
8. 156. When they were out of this Son-
dage, what then? God out of a special care of
them, the Israelites, It is well that once in his
book he will allow God to have any care ©
the people; for in other places he speaks Of
mankind, as if God had no care of any part
af them, but only of their. monarchs, and
that the rest of the people, the societies of
men, were made as so many herds of cattle,
only for the service, use, ad pfeil of their
.
9.167. Chese Moses and Joshua successtuely
4 govern as princes ; a shrewd argument our
author has found out to prove God's care of
the fatherly authority, wy Adam's heirs, that |
here, as an expression of his care of his own
people, he chooses those, for princes over
5M that had not the least pretence to either.
The persons chosen were, Moses of the 'tfibe
of; Levi, and Joshua of the tribs of Epbram,
neither of which had any title of fatherh92d.
But. says our author, they were in the place
; * and


*


Or GoveERNMENT. 181


and stead of the supreme fathers. If God
had any where as plainly declared his choice
of such fathers to be rulers, as he did
of Moses and Toshua, we might believe
Moses and Jasbua were in their place and
stead: but that being the question in debate,
till that be better proved, Moses being chosen
by God to be ruler of his people, will no
more prove that government belonged to
Adam's heir, or to the fatherhood, than God's
choosing Aaron of the tribe of Levi to be
priest, will prove that the priesthood belonged
to Adam's heir, or the prime "ith fince
God would choose Aaron to be priest, and
Moses ruler in I ael, though neither of those
offices were settled on Adam's heir, or the
Fatherhood.
F. 158. Our author goes on, and after them
li ewe for a time he raised up judges, to defend ;
his people in time of peril, P- 18. This proyes f
fatherly authority to be the original of go-
vernment, and that it descended from Adam
to his heirs, just as well as what went be-
fore: only here our author seems to confess,
that these judges, who were all the 2 et
they then had, were only men of valo
hom they made their generals to defend |
them in time of. peril ; and cannot God |
A up such men, unless fatherhood have's |
fe to government? 7 9 of |
But hb a) our author, when God: Fave ALY |
ates & gi, he fe- nd, th the ann" tag |


3 pri


| #


182 al Or GO VrRNMEN r.


prime ri gbr of lineal succession to paternal ou
vernment, p. 18.

| $. 160. How did God re-eftablish it? by
a law, a positive command? We find no such
thing. Our author means then, that when
God gave them a king, in giving them a
king, he re-eflablisbed the right, &c. To re-
establish de facto the right X lineal succession
to. paternal government, is to put a man in
possession of that government Which his
fathers. did enjoy, and he by lineal succession
had a right to: for, first, if it were another
government than what his ancestors had, it
was not succeeding to an ancient right, but
beginning a new one: for if a prince should
give a man, besides his antient patrimony,
which for. some ages his family had been
difleized of, an additional estate, never before
in the possession of his ancestors, he could
not be said to re-establish the right of lineal suc-
cefsien to any more than what had been
formerly enjoyed by his ancestors. If there-
fore the power the kings of 1/-ael had, were
any thing more than 1/aac or Jacob had, it
Was not the re-e/iablishing in them the right
of succession to a power, but giving them a
new power, howeyer you please to call it,
\paternal or not: and whether 1/aac and Jacob
Had the same power that the kings of Israel
Had, I defire any one, by what e above


a to consider; and I do bin think they
| D 'will


Or GOVERNMENT. 183


will find, that either Abraham, Tac, or
Facob, had any regal power at, all.
F. 161, Next, there can be no re-eftablish=
ment of the prime and ancient right of lineal
11 800 on to any thing, unless he, that is put
ossession of it, has the right to succeed,
be the true and next heir to him he
83 to. Can that be a re-establishment,
which begins in a new family? or that the
re-establishment of an ancient right of Imeal suc-
cession, when. a crown is given to one, who
has no right of succession to it, and who, if
the lineal succession had gone on, had been
out of all poffibility of pretence to it? Saul,
the first king God gave the Israelites, n
of the tribe of Benjamin. Was the ancient and
prime right of lineal succesjion re-eftablished in
him ? The next was David, the youngest fon
of Jesse, of the posterity of Judab, Jacob's
third son. Was the ancient and prime right
of lineal {i fuccefion to paternal government re-
established in him ? or in Solomon, his younger
son and successor in the throne ? or in Fere-
boam over the ten tribes ? or in Athalah,-a
woman who reigned fix years an utter stranger
to the royal blood ? I the ancient and prime
right of lineal succession to paternal government
were 7e-eftablished in any of these or their
posterity, the ancient and prime right of lineal
succession fo paternal government belongs to
ounger brothers as well as elder, and may
de re-established in any man living; for what-
4. ever


182 Or GOVERNMENT.
prime right of lineal succęssion to paternal go-
vernment, p. 18. |
F. 160. How did God re-efabhsh it? by
a law, a positive command? We find no such
thing. Our author means then, that when
God gave them a king, in giving them a
king, he re-established the right, &c. To re-
establish de facto the right of lineal succession
to paternal government, is to put a man in
possession of that government which his
fathers did enjoy, and he by lineal succession
had a right to: for, first, if it were another
government than what his ancestors had, it
was not succeeding to an ancient right, but
beginning a new one: for if a prince should
give a man, besides his antient patrimony,
which for some ages his family had been
disseized of, an additional estate, never before
in the possession of his ancestors, he could
not be said to re-eftablish the right of lineal suc-
cefsion to any more than what had been
formerly enjoyed by his ancestors. If there-
fore the power the kings of Mael had, were
any thing more than 1/aac or Jacob had, it
was not the re-e/iablishing in them the right
of succession to a power, but giving them a
new power, however you please to call it,
"paternal or not: and whether 1/aac and Jacob
had the same power that the kings of 1/rae/
Had, I defire any one, by what has been above
aid, to consider ; and I do not think they
EIT 'will


OF GOVERNMENT. 183


will find, that either Abraham, Jac, or
Jacob, had any regal power at all.
§. 161, Next, there can be no re-œHabëlisb-
ment of the prime and ancient right of lineal
15 gate to any thing, unless he, that is put
ossession of it, has the right to succeed,
and be the true and next heir to him he
8 to. Can that be a re-establishment,
which begins in a new family? or that the
re-establishment of an ancient right of lineal suc-
geen, when a crown is given to one, who
has no right of succession to it, and who, if
the lineal succession had gone on, had been
out of all poilibility of pretence to it? Saul,
the first king God gave the Isfraelites, nl
of the tribe of Benjamin. Was the ancient and
prime right of lineal succession re-established in
him ? The next was David, the youngest son
of Tefse, of the posterity of Judah, Jacob's
third son. Was the ancient and prime right
of lineal succes n to paternal government re-
established in him ? or in Solomon, his younger
son and successor in the throne ? or in FJere-
boam over the ten tribes? or in Athahahb,-a
woman who reigned fix years an utter stranger
to the royal blood? If the ancient and prime
right of lineal succession to paternal government
were 7e-eftablished in any of these or their
posterity, the ancient and prime Yight of lineal
succession to paternal government belongs to
ounger brot! ers as well as elder, and may
be re-established in any man living; for what-
N 4 ever


184 Or GovrrnmMeENT:'


ever younger brothers, by ancient and prime
right of lineal succession, may have as well as
the elder, that rg man living may have a
right to, by lineal succession, and Sir Robert
as well as any other. And so what a brave
right of lineal succession; to his paternal» or
regal government; our author has re-efta-
blished, for the securing the rights and inhe-
ritance of crowns, where e ee wo
it, let the world consider.
8. 162. But says our author however, p. 19.
1 hensoever God made choice of any special person
to be king, he intended that the 2/jue also should
have benefit thereof, as being comprebended suf-
fictently in the person of: the father, altho the
father was only named in tbe grant. This yet
will not help out succession ; for if, as our
author says, the benefit of the grant be in-
tended to the i, of the grantee, this will
not direct the succession; fince, if God give
any thing to a man and his ue in general,
the claim cannot be to any one of that z/ue
in particular; every one that is of his race
will have an equal right. If it be said, our
author meant Heir, I believe our author was
as willing as any body to have ufed that
word, if it would have served his turn: but
Solomon, who succeeded David in the throne;
being no more his heir than Feroboham, who
sueceeded him in the government of the ten
tribes, was his issue, our author had reason
to avoid saying, That God intended it »
21113 tne


Or GOVERNMENT. 185


che beirt, when that would not hold, ima
succession, which our author could not ex-
cept against ; and so he has left his succession


as undetermined, as if he had said nothing


about it: for if the regal power be given by
God to a man and his ius, as the land of
Canoan was to Abraham and his seed, must
they not all have a title to it, all share init?
And one may as well say, that by God's grant
to Abrabam and his seed, the land of Canaan
was to belong only to one of his feed ex-
clufive of all others, as by God's grant bf
dominion to a man and his sue, this domi-
nion was to belong in peculiar to one of has
Nee exclusive of all others. ay
Fg.. 163. But how will our hors prove: that


whensoever God made choice of any special


person to be a king, he intended that 74e:(E
fuppose he means his) 7//ze. also should haue
| benefit theregf? has he so soon forgot Mofes
and Joshua, whom in this very. sectiau, he
says, God out of a special care chose to govern
as princes, and the judges that God raised
up? Had not these princes, having the au-
thority of the supreme fatherhood, the same
power that the kings had; and being spe-
cially chosen by God himself, should not
their ue have the benefit of that choice; as


well as David's or Salomons If these had the


paternal authority put into their hands im
mediately by God, why had not their u


the 2 this Jordi in a suecession ta


ib this


; IE


186 Or GOVERNNMTITNTr.


this power ? or if they had it as Adam's heirs,
why did not their heirs enjoy it. after them
by right descending to them? for they could,
not be heirs to one another. Was the power.
the sanic, and from me original, in.
Mases, Josbua and the Jude es, as it was in
David and the Kings; and was it inheritable
im one, and not in the other? If it was not
paternal authority, then God's own people
were governed by those that had not paternal
authority, and those governors did well
enough without it: if it were paternal au-
thority, and God chose the persons that were
to exercise it, our author's rule fails, that
whensoever God makes choice sf any person to be
supreme ruler (for I suppose the name king
has no spell in it, it is not the title, but the
power makes the difference). be intends that
the fue also should have the benefit of it, since
from their coming out of Egypt to David's
time, 400 years, the ue was never so fuf-
ficiently comprebended in the person of the ja-
ther, as that any fon, after the death of his
father, succeeded to the government amongst
all those judges that judged 1/rael. If, to
avoid this, it be said, God always chose the
person of the successor, and so, transferring
the fatherly authority to him, excluded his 1
issue from succeeding to it, that is manifestly
not so. in the story of Jephi ha, where he ar-

ticled with the people, and they made him

Judge over them, as is plain, Judg. 11.


$. 164.


OF GOVERNMENT. 187
F. 164. Tt is in vain then to fay, that when-
for ver God chooses any special person to have the
exercise of paternal authority, (for if that be
not to be king, I desire to know the dif-
ference between a king and one having the
exercise of paternal authority} he intends the
Mie also sbould have the benefit of it, since we
find the authority, the judges had, ended
with them, and descended not to their zue;
and if the judges had not paternal authority,
I fear it will trouble our author, or any of the
friends to his principles, to tell who had then
the paternal authority, that is, the government
and supreme power amongft the 1/raclites 3
and I suspect they must confess that the
chosen people of God continued a people
several hundreds of years, without any know-
ledge or thought of this paternal authority,
or any appearance of monarchical govern-
ment at all.
§. 165. To be satisfied of this, he need
but read the story of the Levite, and the war
thereupon with the Benjamites, in the three
Taft chapters of Judges; and when he finds, that
the Levite appeals to the people for justice
that it was the tribes and the congregation,
that debated, refolved, and directed all that
was done on that occasion; he must con-
ciude, either that God was nor careful to pre-
serve the fatherly authority amongst his own
chosen people; or else that the fatherly au-
thority may be preserved, where there is no
monarchical


188 Or GOVERNMENT.


monarchical government: if the latter, then
it will follow, that though fatherly authority
be never so well proved, yet it will not infer
a necessity of monarchical government; if
the former, it will seem very strange and
improbable, that God should ordain fatherly.
authority to be so sacred amongst the sons of
men, that there could be no. power, or go-
vernment without it, and yet that amongst
his own people, even whilst he is providing
à government for them, and therein prescribes
rules to the several states and relations of
men, this great and fundamental one, this
most material and necessary of all the rest,
should be concealed, and lie neglected for
400 years after. EE


8. 166. Before I leave this, I must ask how
our author knows that when/oever God makes
chaice of any special person to be kmg, he intends
that the ijjue fhould have the benefit thereof?
Does God by the law of nature. or revelation
say so? By the fame, law also he must say,
which of his u' must enjoy the crown in
succession, and so point out the heir, or else.
leave his ue to divide or scramble for the
government: both alike absurd, and such as
will destroy the benefit of such grant to the
Me. When, any such declaration. of God's.
intention is produced, it, will be our duty. to
belieye God intends it soz but till that be
done, our author must shew us some better
warrant, before we shall be obliged to re-
: cewe


Or ' GoveRNMEN Tx. 189
ceive him as the authentic revealer of God's
intens... 3 3 ante
F. 167. The isue, says our author, is com-
prebended sufficiently in the person of the fa-
ther, although the father only was named in the
grant : and yet God, when he gave the land
of Canaan to Abraham, Gen. xiii. 15. thought
fit to put his seed into the grant too: so the
priefthood was given to Aaron and his seed;
and the crown God gave not only to David,
but his seed also: and however our author
assures us that God intends, that the issue should
have the benefit of it, when he chooses any person
to be king, yet we see that the kingdom
which he gave to Saul, without mentioning
his seed after him, never came to any of his
sue and why, when God chose a person to
be king, he should intend, that his ac
should have the benefit of it, more than when
he chose one to be judge in 1/rae/, I would
fain know a reason; or why does a grant of

 fatherly authority to a king more comprehend
the 75 than when a like grant is made to
a judge? Is paternal authority by right to
descend” to the ue of one, and not of the
other? There will need some reason to be 1
Y snewn of this difference, more than the i
1 name, when the thing given is the same fa-
1 therly authority, and the manner of giving it,
1 God's choice of the person, the fame too;
wc for I suppose our author, when he says, G
1 oy" D% 1140 d 1:5 D 1018504 raised |


P


* _ _ © * ” „1 *
* —_—
„ 2


* 1 {4 ,
e


190 Or GOVERNMENT.
raised up pudges, will by no means allow, they
were chosen by the people. |
$. 168. But since our author has so con-
fidently assured us of the care of God to pre-
serve the father hood, and pretends to build
all he says upon the authority of the serip-
ture, we may well expect that that people,
whose law, constitution and history is chiefly
contained in the scripture, should furnish him
with the clearest instances of God's care of
preserving the fatherly authority, in that
people who it is agreed he had a most pecu-
4iar care of. Let us fee then what state this
paternal authority or government was in
amongst the Jews, from their beginning to
be a people. It was omitted, by our author's
confession, from their coming into Egypt, till
their return out of that bondage, above 200
years: from thence till God gave the 7/-
raelites a king, about 400 years more, our
author gives but a very slender account of it;
nor indeed all that time are there the least
footsteps of paternal or regal government
amongst them. But then says our author,
God re-establisbed the ancient and prime right
of lineal succession to paternal government.
§. 169. What a /neal succession to paternal
government was then eltablished, we have
already seen. I only now consider how long *
this lasted, and that was to their captivity, *%
about 500 years: from thence to their de- =
struction by the Romans, above 650 years
4 after,


Or GovEeRNMENT. 191


after, the ancient and prime right of lineal
succession to paternal government was again
lost, and they continued a people in the pro-
mised land without it. So that of 1750
years that they were God's peculiar people,
they had hereditary kingly government
amongst them not one third of the time;
and of that time there is not the least footstep
of one moment of paternal government, nor
the re-establisbment of the ancient and prime
right of lineal succession to it, whether we
suppose it to be derived, as from its fountain,
from David, Saul, Abraham, or, which upon


our author's principles is the only true, from
Adam. |


*


OF CIVIL- GOVERNMENT
BOOK 11


Chap. I. F. 1. It having been shewn in the
foregoing discourse,

I. That Adam had not, either by natural
right of fatherhood, or by positive donation
from God, any such authority over his
children, or dominion over the world, as is
pretended : 5

2. That if he had, his heirs, yet, had no
right to it:

3. That if his heirs had, there being no
law of nature nor positive law of God that
determines which 1s the right heir in all
cases that may arise, the right of succession,
and consequently of bearing rule, could not
have been certainly determined :

4. That if even that had been determined,


yet the knowledge of which is the eldest *
O *


194 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


of Adam's posterity, being so long since utterly
lost, that in the races of mankind and fa-
milies of the world, there remains not to one
above another, the least pretence to be the
eldest house, and to have the right of inhe-
ritance:

All these premises having, as I think, been
clearly made out, it is impossible that the
rulers now on earth should make any be-
nefit, or derive any the least shadow of au-
thority from that, which is held to be the
fountain of all power, Adam's private dominion
and paternal jurisdiction; so that he that will
not give just occasion to think that all go-


vernment in the world is the product only of


force and violence, and that men live together
by no other rules but that of beasts, where the
strongest carries it, and so lay a foundation
for perpetual disorder and mischief, tumult,
sedition and rebellion, (things that the fol-
lowers of that hypothesis so loudly cry out
against) must of necessity find out another
rise of governwent, another original of poli-
tical power, and another way of designing
and knowing the persons that have it, than
what Sir Robert Filmer hath taught us.

F. 2. To this purpose, I think it may not
be amiss, to set down what I take to be poli-
tical power; that the power of a magistrate
over a subject may be distinguished from


that of a father over his children, a master


over his servant, a 4»/band over his wife, and


Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT. 195


a lord over his flave. All which distin&
powers happening sometimes together in the
same man, if he be considered under these
different relations, it may help us to distin-
guish these powers one from another, and
shew the difference betwixt a ruler of a
common-wealth, a father of a family, and a
captain of a galley.

§. 3. Political power, then, I take to be a
right of making laws with penalties of death,
and consequently all less penalties, for the
regulating and preserving of property, and of
employing the force of the community, in
the execution of such laws, and in the de-
fence of the common-wealth from foreign
injury ; and all this only for the public good.


—
6 * 1


NKF. I.
Of the State of Nature.


8. 4. T O understand political power


right, and derive it from its
original, we _ consider, what state all
men are naturally in, and that is, a fate of
perfect freedom to order their actions, and
dispose of their possessions and persons, as
they think fit, within the bounds of the law
of nature, without aiking leave, or. depending
upon the will of any other man.
A slate alio of equality, wherein all the
power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one
O 2 having


8


196 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


having more than another; there being no-
thing more evident, than that creatures of


the same species and rank, promiscuously born


to all the same advantages of nature, and


the use of the same faculties, should also be
equal one amongst another without subor-


dination or subjection, unless the lord and


master of them all should, by any manifest
declaration of his will, set one above another,
and confer dn him, by an evident and clear


appointment, an undoubted right to dominion


and sovereignt
F. 5. This equality of men by nature, the


judicious Hooker looks upon as so evident in


itself, and beyond all goed estion, that he makes
it the foundation of


at. obligation to mu-
tual love amongst men, on which he builds
the duties they owe one another, and from
whence he derives the great maxims of justice
and charity. His words are, |

The like natural inducement hath brought
men to know that it is no less their duty, to
eve others than themselves ; for seeing those
things which are equal, must needs all have one
measure ; if I cannot but wish to receive good,
even as much at every man's hands, as any man
can wish unto his own foul, how should I look
to have any part of my defire herein satisfied,
unless myself be careful to atisfy the hike desire,
which is undoubtedly in other men, being of one
and the same nature? To have any thing offered

them Tug, to this defire, must needs in all


respects


*
—— 9, —
a1 - *


Or CTVILI- GOVERNMENT. 197


respects grieve them as much as me; so that if
T do harm, I must look to suffer, there being


no reason that others should shew greater mea-


sure of love to me, than they have by me shewed


unto them : my defire therefore to be loved of
my equals in nature, as much as possible may
be, imposeth upon me a natural duty of bearing
to them-ward fully the hike affeftion ; from


which relation of equality betwe'n ourselves and


them that are as ourseFves, what weral rules
and canons natural reason hath: drawn, for
direction of life, no man is ignorant. Eccl. Pol.
LID I

F. 6. But though this be a fate of liberty,
yet it is not a state of licence: though man in
that state have an uncontroulable liberty to
dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has
not liberty to deftroy himself, or so much as


any creature in his possession, but where


some nobler use than its bare pon
calls for it. The fate of nature has a law of


nature to govern it, which obliges every one:


and reason, which is that law, teaches all
mankind, who will but consult it; that heing
all equal and independent, no one ou#ht, to
harm another in his life, health, liberty, or
possessions : for men being all the workman-


ship of one omnipotent, and infinitely wise


maker all the servants of one soverei
mastei sent into the world by his order, and


about his business; they are his property,
Whose workmanship they are, made co last


D 3 during


<
- * *


*
*


198 OF CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


during his, not one another's pleasure: and
being furnished with like faculties, sharing all
in one community of nature, there cannot
be supposed any such subordination among us,
that may authorize us to destroy one another,
as if we were made for one another's uses, as
the inferior ranks of creatures are for our's.
Every one, as he is bound to preserve himself,


and not to quit his station wilfully, so by the


like reason, when his own preservation comes
not in competition, ought he, as-much as he
can, 70 preserve the rest of mankind, and may
not, unless it be to do justice on an offender,
take away, or impair the life, or what tends
to the preservation of the life, the liberty,

health, limb, or goods of another.
§. 7. And that all men may be restrained
from invading others rights, and from doing
hurt to one another, and the law of nature
be observed, which willeth the peace and
preservation of all mankind, the execution of
the law of nature is, in that state, put into
every man's hands, whereby every one has a
right to punish the transgressors of that law
to such a degree, as may hinder its violation :
for the /aw of nature would, as all other laws
that concern men in this world, be in vain,
if there were no body that in the state of
nature had a power to execute that law, and
thereby preserve the innocent and restrain
oftenders. And if any one in the state of na-
ture may punish another for any evil he has
& done,


Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 199


done, every one may do so; for in that fate
of perfect equality, where naturally there is
no superiority or jurisdiction of one over
another, what any may do in prosecution of
that law, every one must needs have a right
to do.

8 8. And thus, in the state of nature, one
man comes by a power over another ; but yet
no absolute or arbitrary power, to use a
criminal, when he has got him in his hands,
according to the passionate heats, or boundless
extravagancy of his own will; but only to
retribute to him, so far as calm reason and
conscience dictate, what 1s proportionate to
his transgression, which is so much as may
serve for reparation and restraint : for these
two are the only reasons, why one man may
lawfully do harm to another, which is that
we call punishment. In transgressing the law
of nature, the offender declares himself to
live by another rule than that of reason
and common equity, which is that measure
God has set to the actions of men, for their
mutual security ; and fo he becomes dan-
gerous to mankind, the tye, which is to
secure them from injury and violence, being
slighted and broken by him. Which being
a trespass against the whole species, and the
peace and safety of it, provided for by the
law of nature, every man upon this score,
by the right he hath to preserve mankind in
general, may restrain, or where it is neces-

O 4 sary,


— — a
„ 2


200 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


sary, destroy things noxious to them, and so
may bring such evil on any one, who hath
transgressed that law, as may make him re-
pent the doing of it, and thereby deter him,
and by his example others, from doing the
like mischief. And in this case, and upon
this ground, every man hath a right to punish
the offender, and be executioner of the law of
nature.


8. 9. I doubt not but this will seem a very


strange doctrine to some men: but before


they condemn it, I defire them to resolve
me, by what right any prince or state can
put to death, or punish an alien, for any crime
he commits in their country. It is certain
their laws, by virtue of any sanction the
receive from the promulgated will of the
legislative, reach not a stranger: they speak
not to him, nor, if they did, is he bound to
Hearken to them. The legislative authority,
by which they are in force over the subjects
of that common-wealth, hath no power over
Him. Those who have the supreme power
of making laws in England, France or Holland,
are to an Indian, but like the rest of the
world, men without authority : and there-


fore, if by the law of nature every man
Hath not a power to punish offences against


it, as he soberly judges the case to require,
I see not how the magistrates of any com-


munity can punish an alien of another coun-


try; since, in reference to him, they can have
| no


aß \, N
* 4 '

* *

* 1

9 1


Or CIVI- GOVERNMENT. 201


no more power than what every man na-
turally may have over another.


$. 10. Besides he crime which consists in


violating the law, and varying from the right
rule of reason, whereby a man so far be-
comes degenerate, and declares himself to
quit the principles or human nature, and to be
a noxious creature, there is commonly jury
done to some person or other, and some other
man receives damage by his transgression: in
which case he who hath received any damage,
has, beside: the right of punishment common
to him with other men, a particular right to
seek reparatun from him that has done it :
and any other person, who finds it just, ma
also join with him that is injured, and assist
him in recovering from the offender so much
as may make satꝭ faction for the harm he has
Calfereds:

$. II. From these wo distinf rights, the
one of punishing the crime for restraint, and
preventing the like ofence, which right of
punishing 1s in every body ; the other of
taking reparation, which belongs only to the
injured party, comes 1: to pass that the ma-
gistrate, who by being magistrate hath the
eommon right of punishing put into his


hands, can often, wheie the public good


demands not the execution of the law, remit
the punishment of criminal offences by his


own authority, but yet camot remit the sa-
tisfaction due to any pryate man for the


damage


202 Or CTIVII-GOVENNME NT.


damage he has received. That, he who has
suffered the damage has a right to demand


in his own name, and he 4lone can remit :


the damnified person has this power of ap-
propriating to himself the goods or service
of the oftender, by right of felf-preservation,
as every man has a power to punith the
crime, to prevent its being committed again,
by the right he has of preserving all mankind, and
doing all reasonable things he car in order


to that end: and thus it is, that cvery man,


in the state of nature, has a power to kill a
murderer, both ro deter others from doing
the like injury, which no reparation can
compensate, by the example of the punish-
ment that attends it from ewry body, and
also to secure men from the attempts of a
criminal, who having renoanced reason, the
common rule and measure God: hath given
to mankind, hath, by the unjust violence and
slaughter he hath committed upon one, de-
clared war against all mankind, and there-
fore may be destroyed as a lion or a tyger,
one of those wild fawge beasts, with whom
men can have no sœiety nor security : and
upon this is grounded that great law of na-


ture, V. 50% sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
bis blood be shed. And Cain was fo fully con-


vinced, that every one had a right to destroy


such a criminal, that after the murder of


his brother, he cries out, Every one that findeth
me,


* hy
UE OO RTE WY.


_ . -
1


Or CIVIILI- GOVERNMENT. 203


me, shall flay me; so plain was it writ in the
hearts of all mankind.

$. 12. By the same reason may a man in
the state of nature punish the lesser breaches
of that law. It will perhaps be demanded,
with death? I answer, each transgression may
be punished to that degree, and with so much
severity, as will suffice to make it an ill
bargain to the offender, give him cause to
repent, and terrify others from doing the
like. Every offence, that can be committed
in the state of nature, may in the state of
nature be also punished equally, and as far
forth as it may, in a common-wealth : for
though it would be besides my present pur-
pose, to enter here into the particulars of the
law of nature, or its measures of punishment
yet, it is certain there is such a law, and that
too, as intelligible and plain to a rational
creature, and a studier of that law, as the
positive laws of common-wealths ; nay, pos-
sibly plainer ; as much as reason is easier to
be understood, than the fancies and intricate
contrivances of men, following contrary and
hidden interests put into words ; for so truly
are a great part of the municipal laws of coun-
tries, which are only so far right, as they are
founded on the law of nature, by which they
are to be regulated and. interpreted.

$. 13. To this strange doctrine, vis. That
in the state of nature every one has the executive
power of the law of nature, I doubt not but it


will


204 Or CTIVII-GOVPRNMENT.


will be objected, that it is unreasonable for men
to be judges in their own cases, that self-love
will make men partial to themselves and their
friends : and on the other fide, that ill na-
ture, passion and revenge will carry them too
far in punishing others; and hence nothin

but confusion and disorder will follow, and
that therefore God hath certainly appointed
government to restrain the partiality and
violence of men. I eafily grant, that civil
government is the proper remedy for the in-


conveniencies of the state of nature, which
must certainly be great, where men may be


judges in their own case, fince it 1s easy to
be imagined, that he who was so unjust as


to do his brother an injury, will scarce be fo
Just as to condemn himself for it: but I shall


defire those who make this objection, to re-
member, that absolute monarchs are but men;
and if government is to be the remedy of
those evils, which necessarily follow from
men's being judges in their own cases, and
the state of nature is therefore not to be
endured, I defire to know what kind of
government that is, and how much better


it is than the state of nature, where one man,
commanding a multitude, has the libè tye to
be judge in his own case, and may dodto all


his subjects whatever he pleases, without the
least liberty to any one to question or controul
those who execute his pleasure ? and in what-
soever he doth, whether led by reason, mistake
or passion, must be submitted to? much better

it


Or CiviL-GOvERNMENT. 20g


it is in the state of nature, wherein men are not
bound to submit to the unjust will of ano-
ther : and if he that judges, judges amiss in
his own, or any other case, he is answerable
for it to the rest of mankind.


8. 14. It is often asked as a mighty ob-
jection, where are, or ever were there any
men in such a state of nature? To which it
may suffice as an answer at present, that
fince all princes and rulers of independent
governments all through the world, are in a
state of nature, it is plain the world never
was, nor ever vill be, without numbers of
men in that state. I have named all go-
vernors of independent communities, whether
they are, or are not, in league with others :
for it 1s not every compact that puts an end
to the state of nature between men, but only


this one of agreeing together mutually to


enter. into one community, and make one


body politic ; other promises, and compacts,
men may make one with another, and yet
still be in the state of nature. The promises
and bargains for truck, Sc. between the two
men in the desert island, mentioned by Gar-
cilasso de la Vega, in his history of ru; or
between a Swiss and an Indian, in the woods
of America, are binding to tem, though
they are perfectly in a state of nature, in


reference to one another: for truth and


keeping of faith belongs to men, as men,
and not as members of society, f


§. 15.


——— — — —


205 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


$. 15. To those that say, there were never
any men in the state of nature, I will not
only oppose the authority of the judicious
— Eccl. Pol. hh. 1. sed. 10. where he
says, The laws which have been hitherto men-
tioned, i. e. the laws of nature, do bind men
absolutely, even as they are men, although they
have never any settled fellowship, never any


folemn agreement amongst themselves what to do,


or not to do: but forasmuch as we are not


by ourseFves sufficient to furnish ourselves with


competent store of things, needful for such a
hife as our nature doth desire, a life fit for the


dignity of man ; therefore to supply those defects


and imperfectians which are in us, as living


+ single and solely by ourselves, we are naturally


induced to seek communion and Jello w/hip with
others : this was the cause of men's uniting them-


selves at first in politic societies. But I more-


over affirm, that all men are naturally in
that state, and remain so, till by their own
consents they' make themselves members of
some politic society ; and I doubt not in the
sequel of this discourse, to make it very clear.


_—_
—


CHAP. III.
Of the State of War.


$ 16. HE tate of war is a state of
enmity and dęstruction and


therefore declaring by word or action, not
a


1


Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT. 207


a passionate and hasty, but a sedate settled
design upon another man's life, puts him in
a flate of war with him against whom he
has declared such an intention, and so has
exposed his life to the other's power to be
taken away by him, or any one that joins
with him in his defence, and espouses his
quarrel ; it being reasonable and just, I should
have a right to destroy that which threatens
me with destruction : for, by the fundamental
law of nature, man being to be preserved as
much as possible, when all cannot be pre-
served, the safety of the innocent is to be
preferred : and one may destroy a man who
makes war upon him, or has discovered an
enmity to his being, for the same reason that
he may kill a wolf or a lion; because such
men are not under the ties of the common-
law of reason, have no other rule, but that
of force and violence, and so may be treated
as beasts of prey, those dangerous and noxious
creatures, that will be ture to destroy him
whenever he falls into their power.

8. 17. And hence it is, that he who at-
tempts to get another man into his absolute
power, does thereby put himself into à flate
of war with him ; it being to be understood
as a declaration of a defign upon his life :
for I have reason to conclude, that he who
would get me into his power without my
consent, would use me as he pleased when
he had got me there, and destroy me too


when


208 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


when he had a fancy to it; for no body can
desire to have me in his absolute power, unless
it be to compel me by force to that which
is against the right of my freedom, i. e.
make me a slave. To be free from such


force 1s the only security of my preservation ;


and reason bids me look on him, as an enemy
to my preservation, who would take away
that freedom which is the fence to it; (6
that he who makes an attempt to enslave me,
thereby puts himself into a state of war with
me. He that, in the state of nature, would
take away the freedom that belongs to any
one in that state, must necessarily be supposed
to have a design to take away every thing
else, that freedom being the foundation of all


the rest; as he that, in the state of society,


would take away the freedom belonging to
those of that society or common-wealth, must
be supposed to design to take away from
them every thing else, and so be looked on
as in a state of war.

8. 18. This makes it lawful for a man to
kill a thief, who has not in the least hurt


him, nor declared any design upon his life,


any farther than, by the use of force, fo to
get him in his power, as to take away his
money, or what he pleases, from him; be-
cause using force, where he has no right, to
get me into his power, let his pretence be
what it will, I have no reason to suppose,
that he, who would take away my liberty, would

not,


Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT. 209


not, when he had me in his power, take
away every thing else. And therefore it is
lawful for me to treat him as one who has
put himself into a slate of war with me, . e.
kill him if I can; for to that hazard does
he justly expose himself, whoever introduces
a state of war, and is aggressor in it.

§. 19. And here we have the plain dif
ference between the slate of nature and the
ate of war, which however some men have
confounded, are as far distant, as a state of
peace, good will, mutual assistance and pre-
servation, and a state of enmity, malice,
violence and mutual destruction, are one from
another. Men living together according to
reason, without a common superior on earth,
with authority to judge between them, is
Properly the state of nature. But force, or a
declared design of force, upon the person of
another, where there is no common superior


on earth to appeal to for relief, is the tate of


War and it is the want of such an appeal
gives a man the right of war even againit an
aggressor, tho' he be in society and a fellow
subject. Thus a 7hizf, whom I cannot harm,
but by appeal to the law, for having stolen
all that I am worth, I may kill, when he sets
on me to rob me but of my horse or coat;
because the law, which was made for my
preservation, where it cannot interpose to se-
cure my life from present force, which, if
lost, is capable of no reparation, permits me

P my


210 Or CrIVII- GOVERNMENT.


my own defence, and the right of war, a
liberty to kill the aggressor, because the ag-
gressor allows not time to appeal to our com-
mon judge, nor the decision of the law, for
remedy in a case where the mischief may
be irreparable. Want of a common judge
with authority, puts all men in a state of
nature: force without right, upon a man's
person, makes a state of war, both where
there is, and is not, a common judge.
FSi. 20. But when the actual force is over,
the flate of war ceases between those that
are in society, and are equally on both sides
subjected to the fair determination of the
law ; because then there lies open the remedy
of appeal for the past injury, and to prevent
future harm : but where no such appeal is,
as in the state of nature, for want of positive
laws, and judges with authority to appeal to,
the state of war once begun, continues, with
a right to the innocent party to destroy the
other whenever he can, until the aggressor
offers peace, and desires reconciliation on such
terms as may repair any wrongs he has al-
ready done, and secure the innocent for the
future ; nay, where an appeal to the law, and
constituted judges, lies open, but the remedy
1s denied by a manifest perverting of justice,
and a barefaced wresting of the laws to pro-
tect or indemnify the violence or injuries of
some men, or party of men, here it is hard
to imagine any thing but @ fate of _
or


OF CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 211


for where- ever violence is used, and injury
done, though by hands appointed to admi-
nister justice, it is still violence and injury,
however coloured with the name, pretences,
or forms of law, the end whereof being to

rotect and redress the innocent, by an un-
biassed application of it, to all who are under
it; where-ever that is not bona fide done,
war is made upon the sufferers, who having
no appeal on earth to right them, they are
left to the only remedy in such cafes, an
appeal to heaven.

8. 21. To avoid this fate of war (wherein
there is no appeal but to heaven, and wherein
every the least difference is apt to end, where
there is no authority to decide between the
contenders) is one great reason of men's putting
themselves into society, and quitting the state


of nature: for where there is an authority,
a power on earth, from which relief can be
had by appeal, there the continuance of the
tate of war is excluded, and the controversy


is decided by that power. Had there been


any such court, any superior jurisdiction on
earth, to determine the right between Jephtba
and the Ammonites, they had never come to
a slate of war : but we see he was forced to
appeal to heaven. The Lord the Judge (says


he) be judge this day, between the children of


Israel and the children of Ammon, Judg. xi.


27. and then prosecuting, and 1 on his
t


appeal, he leads out his army to battle: and
P 2 therefore


- — — — — —  _ — 5 —


.
2 — % ——ñĩr˙ͥ ꝗè“ͥA»aut .


212 Or CrvrI- GOVERNMENT.


therefore in such controversies, where the
question is put, who shall be judge? It cannot
be meant, who shall decide the controversy ;
every one knows what Tephtha here tells us,


that the Lord the Fudge shall judge. Where


there is no judge on earth, the appeal lies .


to God in heaven. That question then can-


Not mean, who shall judge, whether another


hath put himself in a /tate of war with me,
and whether I may, as Tephtha did, appeal to
heaven in it? of that I myself can only be
judge in my own conscience, as I will an-


swer it, at the great day, to the supreme judge


of all men.


CHAP. IV.
Of SLAVERY.


5 22. T HE natural liberty of man is to


be free from any superior power


on earth, and not to be under the will or


legislative authority of man, but to have only
the law of nature for his rule. The /berty
of man, in society, is to be under no other


legislative power, but that established, by


consent, in the common-wealth ; nor under


the dominion of any will, or restraint of any


law, but what that legislative shall enact,
according to. the trust put in it. Freedom
then is not what Sir Robert Filmer tells us,
Observations, A. 55. a liberty for every one


4 is


Or CIVILI- GOVERNMENT. 213


1 | to do what he lists, to live as he pleases, and
| ' not to be tied by any laws : but Jreedom of men
| under government is, to have a standing rule

to live by, common to every one of that

society, and made by the legislative power

erected in it; a liberty to follow my own will
in all things, where the rule prescribes not;

and not to be subject to the inconstant, un-
certain, unknown, arbitrary will of another
man: as freedom of nature is, to be under no
other restraint but the law of nature.

§. 23. This freedom from absolute, arbi-

trary power, is so necessary to, and closely
Joined with a man's preservation, that he

cannot part with it, but by what forfeits his

preservation and life together: for a man,

not having the power of his own life, cannot,

by compact, or his own consent, enflave Him-

elf to any one, nor put himself under the

absolute, arbitrary power of another, to take

away his life, when he pleases. No body can

give more power than he has himself; and

he that cannot take away his own life, cannot
give another power over it. Indeed, having
by his fault forfeited his own life, by some

act that deserves death; he, to whom he

has forfeited it, may (when he has him in

his power) delay to take it, and make use

of him to his own service, and he does him

+ no injury by it: for, whenever he finds the

JS: hardship of his slavery outweigh the value of
1 his life, it is in his power, by resisting the

| | 5 4 will


” * ” Ll
. - * 0 8 * off 5
0 c * 1
o * . 2. > — 2 3
n „ „„ 4 .
- A


—— — .
4


— — it —yU— —U — —— —u— *


214 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


will of his master, to draw on himself the
death he desires.

$. 24. This is the perfect condition of
flavery, which is nothing else, but the Rate
of war continued, between a lawful conqueror
and a captive : for, if once compact enter
between them, and make an agreement for a
limited power on the one fide, and obedience
on the other, the fate of war and slavery
ceases, as long as the compact endures : for,
as has been said, no man can, by agreement,
pass over to another that which he hath not
in himself, a power over his own life. |

I confess, we find among the Jeus, as
well as other nations, that men did sell
themselves ; but, it is plain, this was only
to drudgery, not to slavery : for, it is evident,
the person fold was not under an absolute,
arbitrary, despotical power : for the master
could not have power to kill him, at any
time, whom, at a certain time, he was ob-
liged to let go free out of his service; and
the master of such a servant was so far from
having an arbitrary power over his life, that
he could not, at pleasure, so much as maim
him, but the loss of an eye, or tooth, set
him free, Exod. xxi.


MVSEVM


[BRITANNICVM] CHAP.


Or CrVvII- GOVERNMENT. 215


CH AF: V3 |
&  PRUPERTTI.


§. 25. Wa we consider natural reg-
| son, which tells us, that men,
being once born, have a right to their pre-
servation, and consequently to meat and
drink, and such other things as nature af-
fords for their subsistence : or revelation,
which gives us an account of those grants
God made of the world to Adam, and to
Noah, and his sons, it is very clear, that
God, as king David says, P/al. cxv. 16. has
given the earth to the children ef men; given
it to mankind in common. But this being
supposed, it seems to some a very great dif-
ficulty, how any one should ever come to
have a property in any thing: I will not con-
tent myself to answer, that if it be difficult
to make out property, upon a supposition that
God gave the world to Adam, and his po-
sterity in common, it is impossible that any
man, but one universal monarch, should have
any property upon a supposition, that God
gave the world to Adam, and his heirs in
succession, exclusive of all the rest of his po-
sterity. But I shall endeavour to shew, how
men might come to have a property in several
parts of that which God gave to mankind in
common, and that without any express com-
pact of all the commoners. F
| 1 §. 26.


2 — 1m


216 Or CIVII-GOVERNME Nr.


8. 26. God, who hath given the world to
men in common, hath also given them reason
to make use of it to the best advantage of
life, and convenience. The earth, and all
that is therein, is given to men for the sup-
port and comfort of their being. And tho'
all the fruits it naturally produces, and beasts
it feeds, belong to mankind in common, as
they are produced by the spontaneous hand
of nature; and no body has originally a
private dominion, exclusive of the rest of
mankind, in any of them, as they are thus
in their natural state : yet being given for
the use of men, there must of necessity be a
means to appropriate them some way or other,
before they can be-of any use, or at all be-
neficial to any particular man. The fruit,
or venison, which nourishes the wild Indian,
who knows no inclosure, and is still a tenant
in common, mult be his, and so his, 2. e. a
part of him, that another can no longer
have any right to it, before it can do him
any good for the support of his life.
F. 27. Though the earth, and all inferior
creatures, be common to all men, yet every
man has a property in his own per/on : this
no body has any right to but himself. The
labour of his body, and the work of his hands,
we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever
then he removes out of the state that nature
hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed
his /abeur with, and joined to it something.

that


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 217


that is his own, and thereby makes it his
property. It being by him removed from
the common state nature hath placed it in,
it hath by this labour something annexed to
it, that excludes the common right of other
men: for this /abour being the unquestionable
property of the labourer, no man but he can
have a right to what that is once joined to,
at least where there is enough, and as good,
left in common for others.

$. 28. He that is nourished by the acorns
he picked up under an oak, or the apples he
gathered from the trees in the wood, has
certainly appropriated them to himself. No
body can deny but the nourishment is his.
I ask then, when did they begin to be his?
when he digested ? or when he eat? or when
he boiled? or when he brought them home ?
or when he picked them up? and it is plain,
if the first gathering made them not his,
nothing else could. That /2bour put a di-
stinction between them and common: that
added something to them more than nature,
the common mother of all, had done; and
so they became his private right. And will
any one say, he had no right to those acorns
or apples, he thus appropriated,” because he
had not the consent of all mankind to make
them his? Was it a robbery thus to assume
to himself what belonged to all in common?
If such a consent as that was necessary, man
had starved, notwithstanding the plenty God
had


218 Or C1vir-GovERNMENT.


had given him. We see in commons, which
remain so by compact, that it is the taking
any part of what is common, and removing
it out of the state nature leaves it in, which
begins the Property without which the com-
mon is of no ule. And the taking of this
or that part, does not depend on the express
consent 'of all the commoners. Thus the

rass my horse has bit; the turfs my servant
— cut; and the ore I: have digged in any
place, where I have a right to them in
common with others, become my property.
without the assignation or consent of any


7


body. The labour that was mine, removing
them out of that common state they were
in, hath fixed my property in them, _ -. ..

Y. 29. By making an explicit consent of,
every commoner, necessary to any one's ap-
propriating to himself any part of what 18
given in common, children or servants could
not cut the meat, which their father or
master had provided for them in common,
without assigning to every one his peculiar
part. Though the water running in the
fountain be every one's, yet who can doubt,
but that in the pitcher is his only who
drew it out? His labour hath taken it out
of the hands of nature, where it was com-
mon, and belonged equally to all her chil-
dren, and hath thereby appropriated it to
- BL i Y. 30.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 219


$. 30. Thus this law of reason makes the
deer that Indians who hath killed it; it is
allowed to be his goods, who hath bestowed
his labour upon it, though before it was the
common right of every one. And amongst
those who are counted the civilized part of
mankind, who have made and multiplied
positive laws to determine property, this ori-
ginal law of nature, for the beginning of pro-
perty, in what was before common, still takes
place; and by virtue thereof, what fish any
one catches in the ocean, that great and still
remaining common of mankind ; or what
ambergrise any one takes up here, is by the
labour that removes it out of that common
state nature left it in, made his property, who
takes that pains about it. And even amongst
us, the hare that any one is hunting, is
thought his who pursues her during the chase:
for being a beast that is still looked upon as
common, and no man's private ' possession ;
whoever has employed so much labour about
any of that kind, as to find and pursue her,
has thereby removed her from the state of
23 wherein she was common, and hath
gun à pr . | e
5 3 1. E will perhaps be objected to this,
that if gathering the acorns, or other fruits
of the earth, Cc. makes a right to them,
then any one may 7ngro/5 as much as he will.
To which I answer, Not so. The same law
of nature, that does by this means give us


property,


2932 ñÜm＋ù-ͤ — — — —— ů


220 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


pr . does also bound that property too.
has given us all things richly, 1 Tim. vi.

12. is the voice of reason confirmed by in-
spiration. But how far has he given it us?
To enjoy. As much as any one can make use
of to any advantage of life before it spoils,
so much he may by his labour fix a property
in : whatever is beyond this, is more than
his share, and belongs to others. Nothing
was made by God for man to spoil or de-
stroy. And thus, considering the plenty of
natural provisions there was a long time in
the world, and the few spenders ; and to how
small a part of that provision the industry of
one man could extend itself, and ingross it
to the prejudice of others; especially keeping
within the hounds, set by reason, of what
might serve for his use; there could be then
little room for quarrels or contentions about
property so established.

8. 32. But the chief matter of property be-
ing now not the fruits of the earth, and the
beasts that subsist on it, but he earth itself ;
as that which takes in and carries with it all
the rest ; I think it is plain, that property in
that too is acquired as the former. As much
land as a man tills, plants, improves, culti-
vates, and can use the product of, so much
is his property. He by his labour does, as it
were, inclose it from 4 common. Nor will
it invalidate his right, to say every body else
has an equal title to it; and therefore he

cannot


—


Or CIVIILI- GOVERNMENT. 221


cannot appropriate, he cannot inclose, with-
out the consent of all his fellow-commoners,
all mankind. God, when he gave the world
in common to all mankind, commanded man
also to labour, and the penury of his con-
dition required it of him. God and his rea-
fon commanded him to subdue the earth,
z. e. improve it for the benefit of life, and
therein lay out something upon it that was
his own, his labour. He that in obedience
to this command of God, subdued, tilled
and sowed any part of it, thereby annexed to
it something that was his property, which
another had no title to, nor could without
injury take from him.

§. 33. Nor was this appropriation of any
parcel of land, by improving it, any pre-
judice to any other man, since there was
still enough, and as good left; and more
than the yet unprovided could use. So that, in
effect, there was never the less left for others
because of his inclosure for himself : for he
that leaves as much as another can make
use of, does as good as take nothing at all.
No body could think himself injured by the
drinking of another man, though he took a
good draught, who had a whole river of
the same water left him to quench his
thirst: and the case of land and: water,
where there is enough of both, is perfectly
the same.
2 9. 34.


222 Or CIVILI- GOVERNMENT. i


YZ F. 34. God gave the world to men in
| | common ; but since he gave it them for their
Z benefit, and the greatest conveniencies of
life they were capable to draw from it, it
cannot be supposed he meant it should al-
ways remain common and uncultivated: He
gave it to the use of the industrious and ra-
tional, (and labour was to be his title to it;)
not to the fancy or covetousness of the quar-
relsome and contentious. He that had as
good left for his improvement, as was already
taken up, needed not complain, ought not
to meddle with what was already improved
by another's labour: if he did, it is plain
| he desired the benefit of another's pains,
| which he had no right to, and not the ground
| which God had given him in common with
| others to labour on, and whereof there was
| as good left, as that already possessed, and
| more than he knew what to do with, or his

| induftry could reach to.
| §. 35. It is true, in land that is common in
England, or any other country, where there
is plenty of people under government, who
Have money and commerce, no one can in-
close or appropriate any part, without the
gonsent of all his fellow-commoners; because:
| cis is left common by compact, i. e. by the
| law of the land, which is not to be violated.
| And though it be common, in respe&t of
some men, it is not so to all mankind; but
| is the joint property of this country, or this
parish.


— a —-
— —ͤ —ʃ—[—Uäũ . — —-


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 223
parisn. Besides, the remainder, after such
inelosure, would not be as good to the rest
of the commoners, as the whole was when
they could all make use of the whole; whereas
in the beginning and first peopling of the
great common of the world, it was quite
otherwise. The law man was under, was
rather for appropriating. God commanded,
and his wants forced him to /abour. That
was his property which could not be taken
from him where-ever he had fixed it. And
hence subduing or cultivating the earth, and
having dominion, we see are joined together.
The one gave title to the other. So that
God, by commanding to subdue, gave au-
thority so far to appropriate: and the con-
dition of human life, which requires labour
and materials to work on, necessarily intro-
duces private possessions.
§. 36. The measure of property nature has
well set by the extent of men's /abour and the
conventencies of life: no man's labour could
subdue, or appropriate all; nor could his
enjoyment consume more than a small part ;
so that it was impossible for any man, this
way, to intrench upon the right of another,
or acquire to himself a property, to the pre-
judice of his neighbour, who would still have
room for as good, and as large a possession
(after the other had taken out his) as before
it was appropriated: This measure did confine
- every man's Possession to a very moderate pro-
2 5 portion,


224 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


portion, and such as he might appropriate
to himself, without injury to any body, in
the first ages of the world, when men were
more in danger to be lost, by wandering from
their company, in the then vast wilderness
of the earth, than to be straitened for want
of room to plant in. And the same measure
may be allowed still without prejudice to any
body, as full as the world seems: for sup-
posing a man, or family, in the state they
were at first peopling of the world by the
children of Adam, or Noah ; let him plant in
some in-land, vacant places of America, we
shall find that the posefrons he could make
himself, upon the measures we have given,
would not be very large, nor, even to this
day, prejudice the rest of mankind, or give
them reason to complain, -or think them-
selves injured by this man's incroachment,
though the race of men have now spread
themselves to all the corners of the world,
and do infinitely exceed the small number


was at the beginning. Nay, the extent of
ground is of so little value, without labour,


that I have heard it affirmed, that in Spain


itself a man may be permitted to plough,


sow and reap, without being disturbed, upon
land he has no other title to, but only his
making use of it. But, on the contrary, the
inhabitants think themselves beholden to
him, who, by his industry on neglected, and
consequently waste land, has W
OC


Or Ctvir-GovERNMENT. 225
stock of corn, which they wanted. But be
this as it will, which J lay no stress on; this


I dare boldly affirm, that the same rule of


2 (viz.) that every man should have
as much as he could make use of, would hold
{till in the world, without straitening any
body ; since there is land enough in the
world to suffice double the e had
not the invention of money, and the tacit agree-
ment of men to put a value on it, intrpddced
(by consent) larger possessions, and a right to
them; which, how it has done, I shall by
and by shew more at large. |

F. 37. This is certain, that in the begin-
ning, before the desire of having more than
man needed had altered the intrinsic value
of things, which depends only on their use-
fulness to the life of man; or had agreed,
that a little piece of yellow metal, which would
keep without wasting or decay, should be
worth a great piece of flesh, or a whole heap
of corn; though men had a right to appro-
priate, by their labour, each one to himself,
as much of the things of nature, as he could


use : yet this could not be much, nor to the


prejudice of others, where the same plenty


was still left to those who would use the


same industry. To which let me add, that
he who appropriates land to himself by his
labour does not lessen, but increase the com-
mon stock of mankind: for the provisions |


serving to the support of human life, pro-


. duced


226 Or CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

duced by dne ere of imclosed and culti-
vated land, are (to fpeak much within com-
pass): ten times more than those which are
yielded by an acre of land of un equal rich-


ness lying waste in common. And therefore
he that intloses land, and has a greater plenty
of the ednveniencies of life from ten acres,
than ke could have from an hundred left to
nature, may truly be said to give ninety
2cres to mankind : for his labour now sup-
plies him with provisions out of ten acres,
which were but the product of an hundred


ring in common. I have here rated the-


proved land very low, in making its pro-


duct but as ten to one, when it is much
nearer an hundred to one: for I ask, whether
in the wild woods and uncultivated waste of


America, left to nature, without any improve-
ment; tillage or husbandry, a thousand ACTes


yield the needy : and wretched inhabitants as


many conveniencies of life, as ten acres of
equally fertile land do in Dee where
they are well cultivated? _

d Before the appropriation of land, ke: who
gathered as much of the wild fruit, killed,


_catight, or tamed, as many of the beasts, as
Be could; he that so imployed his pains
abetit any of the spontaneous products of


nature, as any way to alter them from the


state Which nature put them in, by: placing
any of his /abour on them, did thereby ac-


quire a propriety in them : but if they perished,”


In


Or Civir-GoyEtR NMENT; 229.


in his possession, without their due use; if
the fruits rotted, or the venison putrified,
before he could spend it, he offended-ag ainst
the common law FA, nature, and Was siable
to be punished; he invaded his.neighbour's
share, for he had no rights farther. Than his
se called for any of them, and they might
serve to afford 9 conyeniencies of life.
F. 38. The same measures: governed che
posse ian of land too: whatsoever he tilled and
reaped, laid up and made use of, before it
spoiled, that was his peculiar right; what»
soever he enclosed, and could feed, and make
use of, the cattle and product was also his.
But if either the grass of his inclosure rotted
on the ground, or the fruit of his planting
perished without gathering, and laying up,
this part of the earth, notwithstanding his
inclosure, was still to be locked on as waste,
and might be the possession of any other.
Thus, at the beginning, Cain might take
as much ground as he could till, and make
it his own land, and yet leave enough to
Abel's sheep to feed on; a few acres would
serve for both their possessions. But as fa-
milies' increased, and industry inlarged their
stocks, their possestons inlarged with The need
of them; but yet it was —_— without

roperty in the gro made
W uf they incorporated, settled them
selves together, and built cities; and then,


by consent, they came in time, to set out


Q 2 the


— -


228 Or Civicr-GovERkNMENT.

the bounds of their distinct territories, and agree
on limits between them and their neigh-
bours; and by laws within themselves, set-
tled the properties of those of the same so-
ciety: for we see, that in that part of the
world which was first inhabited, and there-
fore like to be best peopled, even as low
down as Abraham's time, they wandered with
their flocks, and their herds, which was their
fubstance, freely up and down; and this


Abrabam did, in a country where he was a


stranger. Whence it is plain, that at least
a great part of the /and lay in common ; that
the inhabitants valued it not, nor claimed


property in any more than they made use of.
But when there was not room enough in the


same place, for their herds to feed together,
they by consent, as Abrabam and Loet did,


Gen. xiii. 5. separated and inlarged their
pasture, where it best liked them. And for
the same reason Eau went from his father,
and his brother, and Fade in mount Sein,
Gen. xxxvi. 6.

© ̃. 39. And thus, without bees any
private dominion, and property in Adam, over
"all the world, exclusive of all other men,
which can no way be proved, nor any one's
property be made out from it; but supposing
the world given, as it was, to the children of
men in conimon, we fee how labour could make
men Anltiner nul to several en of it, for


ii 3 13 \ * 1741 their


g


Or CIVII-GOVERXMENT. 229


their private uses; wherein there could be no
doubt of right, no room for quarrel: _

F. 40. Nor is it fo strange, as perhaps
before contideration it may appear, that the
property of labour should be able to aver-
balance the community of land: for it is
labour indeed that puts the difference of value
on every thing; and let any one consider what
the difference is between an acre of land
planted with tobacco or sugar, sown with
wheat or barley, and an acre of the same
land lying in common, without any hus-
bandry upon it, and he will find, that the
improvement of labour mates the far greater
part of the value. I think it will be but a
very modest computation to say, that of the


produdts of the earth useful to the life of


man nine tenths are the effects of labour : nay,
if we will rightly estimate things as they come
to our use, and cast up the several expences


about them, what in them is purely owing


to nature, and what to labour, we shall find,
that in most of them ninety-nine hundredths
are wholly to be put on the account of
labour. |

F. 41. There cannot be a clearer demon-
stration of any thing, than several nations of the
Americans are of this, who are rich in land, and

or in all the comforts of life; whom nature


havin g furnishedasliberally as any other people,


with the materials of plenty, f. e. a fruitful.


Oil, apt to produce in abundance, what might


2 3 {cr Ve


;
|
|


— k KK ²˙ —ͤĩ 4 2. ˙ 2m 2 — — 5


— 2
— re er PIER


230 Or CIvII-GOVIRX MINT.

serve for food, raiment, and delight; yet for
want of improving it by labour, have not one
hundredth fart of the conveniencies we en-
joy: and a king of a large and fruitful ter-
ritory there, feeds, lodges, and is clad worse


than a day-labourer in England. |
F. 42. To make this a little clearer, let us
but trace some of the ordinary provisions of
life, through their several progresses, before
they come to our use, and see how much
they receive of their value from human 2
Bread, wine and cloth, are things of daily
use, and great plenty; yet notwithstanding,
acorns, water and leaves, or skins, must be
our bread, drink and cloathing, did not la-
bour furnish us with these more useful com-
modities : for whatever bread is more worth


than acorns, wine khan water, and c/th or


ilk, .than leaves, skins or moss, that is wholly
owing | to labour and indiftry ; the one of
these being the food” and raiment which
unassisted nature furnishes us with; the other,
provisions which our industry and pains pre-
pare for us, which how much they exceed
the other in value, when any one hath com-
puted, he will then fee how much labour
makes the far greatest part of the value of
things we enjoy in this world: and the
Feng which produces the materials, is
icarce to be reckoned in, as any, or at most,
but a very, Jypal 15 of it; 10 little, that
even amongst us, land that is left wholly to


WEN 9
nature,


Or. Civ1L-GOXERNMEN TT. 231,


fature, that hath no improvement of pastu-
rage, 7 or e is called, as indeed


it is, weste ; and we shall find the benefit of
it amount to little more than nothing.

This shews how much numbers of men' .
are to be preferred to largeness of dominions;
and that the inętease of lands, and the right
employing of them, is the great art of govern=,
ment: and that prince, who shall be so wise,
and godlike, as by established laws of liberty
to secure. protection and _Encouragement to
the honest industry of mankind, against the
feen of power and narrowness of party,
will quickly be too hard for his neighbours :
but this by the by. To return to the arga-
Ment ike i |

8.43. An acre of land, that bears here
twenty bushels of wheat, and another in
America, which, with the same husbandry,
would do; the like, are, without doubt, of
the same natural intrinsic value: but yet the
benefit mankind receives from the one in a
year, is worth 5/. and from the other
possibly not worth a penny, if all the Sill
an Indian received from it were to be valued,
and sold here; at least, I may truly say, not
one thousandth. It is labour then which Pats
the greatest. part of value upon land, without
which. it would. scarcely be worth any thing :
it is to that, we owe the greatest part of all
its useful products; for at, that the ftraw,
| bran, bread, of that acrs of ; Fhelt, "is Wire
180 „ Woͤrch


—— —L—ũ. 4 Ad


2 — .
ͤ—
— — — *


11 e on labour of it, had fell a himsel toe


232 Or CIVII-GOVERNMEN x.


worth than the product of an acre of as good
land, which lies waste, is all the effect of
labour: for it is not barely the plough- man's
pains, the reaper's and thresher's toil, and


the baker's sweat, is to be counted into the


bread we eat; the labour of those who broke
the oxen, who digged and wrought the iron
and stones, who felled and framed the timber
employed about the plough, mill, oven, or
any other utensils, which are a vast number,
requisite to this corn, from its being seed to
be sown to its being made bread, must all be
charged on the account of labour, and re-
ceived as an effect of that: nature and the
earth furnished only the almost worthless
materials, as in themselves. It would be a
strange catalogue of things, that industry Vro-
vided and made use of, about every loaf of bread,
before it came to our use, if we could tface
them; iron, wood, leather, bark, timber,


stone, bricks, coals, Ae cloth, dying drugs,
pitch, tar, masts, ropes, and all the materials


made use of in the ship, that brought any of


--the- commodities made use of by any of the
Ie workmen, to any part of the work ; all which
it would be almost On PRO, at least too


long, to reckon up.
F. 44. From all which it is evident, that


though the things of nature are given in
common, yet man, by being master of him-


-felf,, and-proprietor of his own person, and the


great


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 233


great foundation of property; and that, Which
made up the great part of what he applied
to the support or comfort of his being, when
invention and arts had improved the conve-
niencies of life, was perfectly his own, and
did not belong in cammon to others.
S8. 45. Thus /aboxr, in the beginning, gave
| a right of property, wherever any. one was
| pleated to employ it upon What was com-
mon, which remained a long while the far
greater part, and is yet more than mankind
makes use of. Men, at first, for the most
part, contented themselves with what un-
assisted nature offered to their necessities :
and though afterwards, in some parts of the
world, (where the increase of people and
stock, with the use of money, had made land
scarce, and so of some value) the several
communities settled the bounds of their distinct
territories, and by laws within themselves
regulated the properties of the private. men
of their society, and so, / compact and
agreement, settled the property which labour
and industry began; and the leagues that
have been made between several states and
kingdoms, either expresly or tacitly difowning
all claim and right to the land in the others
possession, have, by common consent, given up
their pretences to their natural common right,
which originally they had to those countries,
and so have, by po/itive' agreement, settled a
property amongst themselves, in distinct parts
and parcels of the earth ; yet there are still
| great


|
|
}


—
-
P — ae —
2 A _ 8 of * — - w *
= — » . _ — - — — *
_ . — 2


234 Or CIVIt- GOVERNMENT.


reat trat of ground to be found, which
(the inhabitants thereof not having joined
with the rest of mankind, in the consent of
the use of their common money) lie wafte,.
and are more than the people who dwell
on it do, or can make use of, and so still
he in common; tho this can scarce happen
amongst that part of mankind that have
consented to the use of money.

F. 46. The greatest part of things really
ngseful to the life of man, and such as the


necessity of subsisting made the first com-


moners of the world look after, as it doth
the Americans now, are generally things of

duration; such as, if they are not con-
sumed by use, will decay and perish of them-
selves : gold, filver and diamonds, are things
that fancy or agreement hath put the value
on, more than real use, and the necessary
support of life. Now of those good things
which nature hath provided in common,
every one had a right (as hath been said) to as


mur as he could use, and property in all that


N cbuld effect with his labour; all that his
industry could extend to, to alter from the
state nature had put it in, was his. He that
gathered a hundred bushels of acorns or ap-
-ples, had thereby a property in them, they
were his goods as soon as gathered. He was
only to look that h& used them before they
spoiled, else he-taok more than his share, and
robbed others. And indeed it was à foolish
«thing, as well as -dithonest,. to hoard up more


hn I than


OF CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 235


than he could make use of. If he gave away
a part to any body else,” so that it perished
not uselesly in his possession, these he also
made use of. And if he also bartered away
plums, that would have rotted in a week,
for nuts that would last good for his eating
a whole year, he did no injury; he wasted
not the common stock; destroyed no part of
the portion of goods that belonged to others,
so long as nothing perished uselesly in his
hands. Again, if he would give his nuts
for a piece of metal, pleased with its co-
lour ; or exchange his sheep for shells, or
wool for a sparkling pebble or a diamond, and
keep those by him all his hfe, he invaded
not the right of others, he might heap up
as much of these durable things as he pleased ;
the exceeding of the bounds of his just property
not lying in the largeness of his possession,
but the perishing of any thing uselesly in it.
8. 47. And thus came in the use of money,
some lasting thing that men might keep with-
out spoiling, and that by mutual consent men
would take in exchange for the truly useful,
but perishable supports of life. 5
§. 48. And as ehre industry
were apt to give men possessions in different


proportions, so this invention of money gave
them the opportunity to continue and en-
large them: for supposing an island, feparate
from all possible commerce with the rest of
the world, wherein there were but an hun-
dred families, but there were sheep, horses


and


z: T'!T' ĩ 0äb⁰ . TERS oo


Mm tit et. es —


FR =


236 Or Civit-GoveRnMENT.
atid cows, with | other usesul animals, whol-
fome fruits, and land enough for corn for a
hundred thousand times as many, but no-
thing in the ifland, either because of its com-
monness, or perishableness, fit to supply the
lace of nen; what reason could any one
— there to enlarge his possessions beyond
the use of his family, and a plentiful fuppty
to its consumption, either in what their ovn
mdustry produced, or they could barter for
ke perishable, useful commodities, with
others? Where there is not fome thing, both
lafting and fcarce, and so valuable to be


| hoarded up, there men will be apt to enlazge


their passessions of land, were it never fo rich,
never so free for them to take: for I afk,
what would a man value ten thousand, or an
hundred thousand acres of excellent Jand,
ready cultivated, and well stocked too with
cattle, in the middle of the inland parts of
America, where he had no hopes of com-


merce with other parts of the world, to draw


money. to him by the sale of the product? It


would not be worth the inclofing, and we
should fee him give up again to the wild


common of nature, whatever was more than
would supply the conveniencies of life to be
had there for him and his family.

F. 49. Thus in the beginning all the world
was America, and more fo than that is now;
For no such thing as money was any where
known, Find out fomething tliat hath the


OF CIVII-GOVERNII ENT. 237
wit and value of money amongst his neighbours,
you shall fee the {ame man will begin pre-
ently to enlarge his possesssonnns.
F. 50. But fance gold and silver, bein
little useful to the life of man in proportion
to food, raiment, and carriage, has its value
only from the consent of men, whereof
sahour yet makes, in great part, / megsie, it
is plain, that men have agreed to a dispro-
portionate and unequal glesion of the earth,
they having. by a tacit and voluntary con-
sent, found out a way how a man may fairly
possess more land than he himself can ute
the product of, by receiving in exchange for
the overplus gold and filver, which may
be hoarded up without injury to any ene;
these metals not spoiling or decaying in the
hands of the possessor. This partage of
things in an inequality of private possessions,
men have made practicable out of the hounds
of society, and without compact, only by put-
ting a value on gold and silver, and tacitly
agreeing in the use of money: for in go-
vernments, the laws regulate the right of
property, and the possession of land is deter-
mined by positive constitutions. F


§. 51. And thus, I think, it is very. eafy


to conceive, without any difficulty, bow /abour
"could at firsi begin à title of property in the
.common things of nature, and how the spend-
ing it upon our uses bounded it. So that
there could then be no reason of quarrelling
FN 5 about


238 Or Crvit-GovernMenrT.


about title, nor any doubt about the large
ness of possession it gave. Right and con-
veniency went together; for as a man had a
right to all he could employ his labour upon;
so he had no temptation to labour for more
than he could make use of. This left no room
for controversy about the title, nor for incroach+
ment on the right of others; what portion a
man carved to himself, was easily seen; and
it was useless, as well as dishonest, to carve
himself too much, or take more than he
needed. e e e fog bit


— — 8 2
—— 2 a * ä
— —
S . > ”


CHAP. VI.
Of Paternal Power.


F. 52. IT may perhaps be censured as an \
I impertinent criticism, in a discourse ll
of this nature, to find fault with words and Pl
names, that have obtained in the world ; |
and yet possibly it may not be amiss to offer \
new ones, when the old are apt to lead men N
into mistakes, as this of paternal power pro- 1
bably has done, which seems so to place the =
power of parents over their children wholly i
in the Father, as if the mother had no share. |
in it; whereas, if we consult reason or reve- =_
lation, we shall find, she hath an equal title. bl.
This may give one reason to ask, whether
this might not be more properly called pa-
rental power ? for whatever obligation __
7,190; an


—


Or CftVI EGON NM ENT. 239
and the right. of gentratiom lays on children,
the concurrent caufes ;ob id: And:accordingly
we see the: pofitive law: of God evtry where
joins them together, without. distinction, when
it commands the obedtence-at-children,' Ho-
nour thy father and thy mnother,- Exod: xx. 12.
Whosoever, curfeth his fatheror hit mother, Lev.
XX. 9. Te shall fear every man his mother and
his father, Lev. Xix. 3. Children, obey your
parents, '&c; Eph. vi. 1. is the stile of the
Old and New Testament. bse.

$. 53. Had but this one thing been well
considered, without looking any deeper into
the matter, it might perhaps have kept men
from running into those gross mistakes, they
have made, about this power of parents ;
which, however it might, without any great
harshness, bear the. name of absolute domi-
nion, and regal authority, when under the
title of paternal power it seemed appropriated
to the father, would yet haye founded but
oddly, and in the very name shewn the ab-


surdity, if this supposed absolute power over


children had been called parental; and thereby ;
have discovered, that it belonged to the 20
ther too: for it will but very ill serve. the
turn of those men, ho contend so much for
the absolute power.and authority of the. aber.
hood, as they call it, that the mother hond
have any share in it; and it would have but,


4


ill supported the monarchy. they contend K
| when


240 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


when by the very name it appeared, that that
fundamental authority, from whence they
would derive their government of a single
person only, was not placed in one, but two
persons jointly. But to. let this of names
als. |
1 §. 54. Though I have said above, Chap. II.
That all men. by nature are equal, I cannot be
supposed to underitand all forts of equality :
age or virtue may give men a just precedency :
excellency of parts and merit may place others ,
above the common level: Birth may subject
fome, and alliance or benefits others, to pay
an observance to those to whom nature, gra-
titude, or other respects, may have made it
due: and yet all this consists with the egua-
lity, which all men are in, in respect of
jurisdiction or dominion one over another;
which was the equality I there spoke of, as
proper to the business in hand, being that
equal right, that every man hath, 70 Hi natural
freedom, without being subjected to the will
.or authority of any other man.
FS. 55. Children, I confess, are not born in
| this full state of equality, though they are
born to it. Their parents have a sort of
rule and jurisdiction over them, when they
| come into the world, and for some time
| after; but it is but a temporary one. The
| bonds of this subjection are like the swaddling
| clothes they art wrapt up in, and supported |
by, in the weakness of their infancy : age and
| ; | reason |


* *
Sine ad; _— F ad


. * Y , L *.
- OG


Or Civit-GovERNMENT. 241


reason as they grow up, loosen them, till. at
length they drop quite off, and leave a man
at his own free disposal.

$. 56. Adam was created a perfect man,
his body and mind in full possession of their
strength and reason, and so was capable,
from the first instant of his being to provide
for his own support and preservation, and
govern his actions according to the dictates
of the law of reason which God had im-
planted in him. From him the world is
peopled with his descendants, who are all


born infants, weak and helpless, without


knowledge or understanding : but to supply
the defects of this imperfect state, till the
improvement of growth and age hath removed
them, Adam and Eve, and after them all
parents were, by the law of nature, under an
obligation to preserve, nourish, and educate the
children they had begotten; not as their own.


| workmanship, but the workmanship of their


own maker, the Almighty, to whom they
were to be accountable for them. BA
$. 57. The law, that was to govern Adam,


was the same that was to govern all his


posterity, the law of reason. But his off-
spring having another way of entrance. into
the world, different from him, by a natural
birth, that produced them ignorant and
without the use of reason, they were not
presently under that law; for no body can
be under a law, which is not promulgated

R to


242 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


to him; and this law being promulgated or


made known by reason only, he that is not
come to the use of his reason, cannot be said
to be under this law; and Adam's children,
being not presently as soon as born under this
law of reason, were not presently free : for
law, in its true notion, zs not so much the
limitation as he direction of a free and in-
telligent agent to his proper interest, and pre-
scribes no farther than is for the general good
of those under that law : could they be hap-
pier without it, the law, as an useless thing,
would of itself vanish; and that ill deserves


the name of confinement which hedges us


in only from bogs and precipices. 9o that,
however it may be mistaken, the end of lau
is not to abolish or restrain, but 70 preserve
and enlarge freedom : for in all the states of
created beings capable of laws, where there


is no law, there is no freedom : for liberty is, to


be free from restraint and violence from
others ; which cannot be, where there is no
law : but freedom 1s not, as we are told, 2
liberty for every man to do what he lists : (for
who could be free, when every other man's
humour might domineer over him?) but a
liberty to dispose, and order as he lists, his


person, actions, possessions, and his whole


property, within the allowance of those laws
under which he is, and therein not to be
subje& to the arbitrary will of another, but
freely follow his own.


§. 58,


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 243
8 58. The power, then, that parents have


over their children, arises from that duty


which is incumbent on them, to take care


of their off-spring, during the imperfect state
of childhood. To inform the mind, and


govern the actions of their yet ignorant non-
age, till reason shall take its place, and ease
them of that trouble, is what the children
want, and the parents are bound to: for God
having given man an understanding to direct
his actions, has allowed him a freedom of
will, and liberty of acting, as properly be-
longing thereunto, within the bounds of that
law he is under. But whilst he is in an
estate, wherein he has not understanding of
his own to direct his w//, he is not to have
any will of his own to follow: he that un-
der lands for him, must u for him too; he
must prescribe to his will, and regulate his
actions; but when he comes to the estate
that made his father à freeman, the son is a


freeman too.


§. 59. This holds in all the laws a man is
under, whether natural or civil. Is a man
under the law of nature? Mat made him free
of that law ? what gave him a free disposing
of his property, according to his own will,
within the compass of that law? I answer,
a state of maturity wherein he might be sup-
posed capable to know that law, that so he
might keep his actions within the bounds of
it. When he has acquired that state, he is
R 2 presumed


U UU—— — — — ———ö —— s on: ooo Ro - - — — — — — —ͤ—ͤ— not
-


244 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


presumed to know how far that law is to
be his guide, and how far he may make use
of his freedom, and so comes to have it ;
till then, some body else must guide him,
who 1s presumed to know how far the law
allows a liberty. If fuch a state of reason,
such an age of discretion made him free, the
same shall make his son free too. Is a'man
under the law of England? What made him


free of that law? that is, to have the liberty


to dispose of his actions and possessions ac-
cording to his own will, within the permission
of that law? A capacity of knowing that
law; which is supposed 5 that law, at the
age of one and twenty years, and in some
cases sooner. If this made the father free,
it shall make the fon free too. Till then we
see the law allows the son to have no will,
but he 1s to be guided by the will of his
father or guardian, who is to understand for
him. And ifthe father die, and fail to sub-
stitute a deputy in his trust ; if he hath not
provided a tutor, to govern his son, during
his minority, during his want of understand-


ing, the law takes care to do it; some other


mult govern him, and be a will to him, till
he hath attained to a state of freedom, and
his understanding be fit to take the govern-
ment of his will. But after that, the father
and son are equally free as much as tutor
and pupil after nonage ; equally subje&s of
the same law together, without any dominion


left


Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT. 245


eft in the father over the life, liberty, or
estate of his son, whether they be only in
the state and under the law of nature, or
under the positive laws of an established
government.

§. 60. But if, through defects that may
happen out of the ordinary course of nature,
any one comes not to such a degree of rea-
son, wherein he might be supposed capable
of knowing the law, and so living within
the rules of it, he is never capable of being a
free man, he is never let loose to the disposure
of his own will (because he knows no bounds
to it, has not understanding, its proper guide)
but is continued under the tuition and go-
vernment of others, all the time his own
understanding is uncapable of that charge.
And so /unaiics and zdeots are never let free
from the government of their parents; ch:/-
dren, who are not as yet come unto those years
whereat they may have ; and innocents which
are excluded by a natural defect from ever
baving ; thirdly, madmen, which for the pre-
sent cannot possibly have the use of right reason
to guide themselves, have for their guide, the
reason that guideth other men which are tutors
over them, to seek and procure their good for
them, says Hooker, Eccl. Pol. 4b. i. sed. 7.
All which seems no more than that duty,
which God and natyre has laid on man, as
well as other creatures, to preserve their oft-
{pring, till they can be able to shift for them-
| R 3 selves,


246 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


selves, and will scarce amount to an instance
or proof of parents regal authority.

§. 61. Thus we are born free, as we are
born rational ; not that we have actually the
exercise of either: age, that brings one, brings
with it the other too. And thus we see how
natural freedom and subjeftion to parents may
consist together, and are both founded on the
same principle. A child is free by his fa-
ther's title, by his father's understanding,
which 1s to govern him till he hath it of
his own. The freedom of a man at years of.
discretion, and the siibjection of a child fo his
parents, whillt yet short of that age, are so
consistent, and so distinguishable, that the
most blinded contenders for monarchy, by
right of fatherhood, cannot miss this difference
the most obstinate cannot but allow their
confistency : for were their doctrine all true,
were the right heir of Adam now known,
and by that title settled a monarch in his
throne, invested with all the absolute unli-
mited power Sir Robert Filmer talks of; if
he should die as soon as his heir were born,
mult not the child, notwithstanding he were
never so free, never so much sovereign, be
in subjection to his mother and nurse, to
tutors and governors, till age and education
brought him reason and ability to govern
himself and others? The necessities of his
life, the health of his body, and the infor-
mation of his mind, would require him to be


directed


Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT. 247


directed by the will of others, and not his
own; and yet will any one think, that this
restraint and subjection were inconsistent with,
or spoiled him of that liberty or sovercignty
he had a right to, or gave away his empire
to those who had the government of his
nonage ? This government over him only
prepared him the better and sooner for it.
If any body should ask me, when my son is
of age to be free? I shall answer, just when
his monarch is of age to govern. But at
what time, says the judicious Hooker, Eccl.
Pol. I. 1. sect. 6. a man may be said to have
attained so far forth the use of reason, as suf-
ficeth to make him capable of those laws whereby
he is then bound to guide his actions: this is a
great deal more easy for sense to discern, than
Tor any one by seill and learning to determine.

§. 62. Common-wealths themselves take
notice of, and allow, that there is a Fine when
men are to begin to att hike free men, and
therefore till that time require not oaths of
fealty, or allegiance, or other public owning
of, or submission to the government of their
countries.

$. 63. The freedom then of man, and li-
berty of acting according to his own will, is
grounded on his having reason, which is able
to instru him in that law he is to govern
himself by, and make him know how far he
is left to the freedom of his own will. To
turn him loose to an unrestrained liberty,

R 4 before


248 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


before he has reason to guide him, is not the
allowing him the privilege of his nature to
be free; but to thrust him out amongst brutes,
and abandon him to a state as wretched, and
as much beneath that of a men, as their's.
This is that which puts the authority into
the parents hands to govern the minority of
their children. God hath made it their
business to employ this care on their off-
spring, and hath placed in them suitable
inclinations of tenderness and concern to
temper this power, to apply it, as his wisdom
designed it, to the children's good, as long as
they should need to be under it.

8. 64. But what reason can hence advance
this care of the parents due to their off-spring
into an absolute arbitrary dommion of the fa-
ther, whose power reaches no farther, than
by such a discipline, as he finds most ef-
fectual, to give such strength and health to
their bodies, such vigour and rectitude to their
minds, as may best fit his children to be most
useful to themselves and others; and, if it
be necessary to his condition, to make them
work, when they are able, for their own
subsistence. But in this power the mother
too has her share with the father.

§. 65. Nay, this power so little belongs to
the /ather by any peculiar right of nature,


but only as he is guardian of his children,


that when he quits his care of them, he loses
his power over them, which goes along with
theix


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 249


their nourishment and education, to which
it is inseparably annexed; and it belongs as
much to the fofter-father of an exposed child,
as to the natural father of another. So little
power does the bare ac of begetiing give a
man over his issue ; if all his care ends there,
and this be all the title he hath to the name
and authority of a father. And what will
become of this paternal power in that part of
the world, where one woman hath more than

one husband at a time? or in those parts of
America, where, when the husband and wife

part, which happens frequently, the children

are all left to the mother, follow her, and

are wholly under her care and provision ? If
the father die whilst the children are young,

do they not naturally every where owe the

same obedience to their mother, during their
minority, as to their father were he alive ?
and will any one say, that the mother hath
a legislative power over her children? that she
can make standing rules, which shall be of
perpetual obligation, by which they ought to
regulate all the concerns of their property,
and bound their liberty all the course of their
lives ? or can she inforce the observation of
them with capital punishments? for this is
the proper power of the magistrate, of which
the father hath not so much as the shadow.
His command over his children is but tem-
porary, and reaches not their life or pro-
perty : it is but a help to the weakness and
: imperfection


250 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


imperfection of their nonage, a discipline
necessary to their education: and though a
father may dispose of his own possessions as
he pleases, when his children are out of
danger of perishing for want, yet His power
extends not to the lives or goods, which
either their own industry, or another's bounty
has made their's; nor to their liberty neither,
when they are once arrived to the infranchise-
ment of the years of discretion. The father's
empire then ceases, and he can from thence
forwards no more dispose of the liberty of his
fon, than that of any other man: and it must
be far from an absolute or perpetual juris-
diction, from which a man may withdraw
himself, having licence from divine autho-
rity to leave father and mother, and cleave to
bis vf.
$. 66. But though there be a time when
a child comes to be as free from subjection to
the will and command of his father, as the
father himself is free from subjection to the
will of any body else, and they are each
under no other restraint, but that which is
common to them both, whether it be the
law of nature, or municipal law of their coun-
try; yet this freedom exempts not a son from
that honour which he ought, by the law of
God and nature, 70 pay his parents. God
having made the parents instruments in his
great design of continuing the race of man-
kind, and the occasions of life to their chil-
dren ;


Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 251


dren; as he hath laid on them an obligation
to nourish, preserve, and bring up their off-
spring; so he has laid on the children a per-
petual obligation of honouring their parents,
which containing in it an inward esteem and
reverence. to be shewn by all outward ex-
pressions, ties up the child from any thing
that may ever injure or affront, disturb or
endanger, the happiness or life of those from
whom he received his; and engages him in
all actions of defence, relief, assistance and
comfort of those, by whose means he entered
into being, and has been made capable of
any enjoyments of life: from this obligation
no state, no freedom can absolve children.
But this is very far from giving parents a
power of command over their children, or
an authority to make laws and disposs as they
please of their lives or liberties. It is one
thing to owe honour, respect, gratitude and
assistance ; another to require an absolute
obedience and submission. The honour due
to parents, a monarch in his throne owes his
mother ; and yet this lessens not his autho-
rity, nor subjects him to her government.

$. 67. The subjection of a minor places in
the father a temporary government, which
terminates with the minority of the child :
and the honour due from a child, places in the
parents a perpetual, right to respect, reve-
rence, support and compliance too, more or
less, as the father's care, cost, and kindness


In


252 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


in his education, has been more or less. This
ends not with minority, but holds in all parts
and conditions of a man's life. The want
of distinguishing these two powers, viz. that
which the father hath in the right of fuition,
during minority, and the right of honour all
his life, may perhaps have caused a great
part of the mistakes about this matter : for
to speak properly of them, the first of these
is rather the privilege of children, and duty
of parents, than any prerogative of paternal

wer. The nourishment and education of
their children is a charge so incumbent on
parents for their children's good, that nothing
can absolve them from taking care of it : and
though the power of commanding and chastising
them go along with it, yet God hath woven
into the principles of human nature such a
tenderness for their off- spring, that there is
little fear that parents should use their power
with too much rigour ; the excess is seldom
on the severe fide, the strong byass of nature
drawing the other way. And therefore God
almighty when he would express his gentle
dealing with the /rae/ites, he tells them,
that though he chastened them, he chastened
them as a man chastens his son, Deut. vin. 5.
i. e. with tenderness and affection, and kept
them under no severer discipline than what
was absolutely best for them, and had been
less kindness to have slackened. This is that
power to which children are commanded cbę-
dience, |


Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 253
dience, that the pains and care of their pa-
rents may not be increased, or ill rewarded.

$. 68. On the other fide, Honour and sup-
port, all that which gratitude requires to re-
turn for the benefits received by and from
them, is the indispensible duty of the child,
and the proper privilege of the parents. This
is intended for the parents advantage, as the
other is for the child's; though education,
the parents duty, seems to have most power,
because the ignorance and infirmities of child-
hood stand in need of restraint and correction;
which is a visible exercise of rule, and a kind
of dominion. And that duty which is com-
prehended in the word honour, requires less
obedience, though the obligation be stronger
on grown, than younger children: for who
can think the command, Children obey your
parents, requires in a man, that has children
of his own, the same submission to his father,
as it does in his yet young children to him;
and that by this precept he were bound to
obey all his father's commands, if, out of a
concelt of authority, he should have the in-

discretion to treat him {till as a boy?
S8. 69. The first part then of paternal power,
or rather duty, which is education, belongs fo
to the father, that it terminates at a certain
season ; when the business of education is
over, it ceases of itself, and is also alienable
before: for a man may put the tuition of
his son in other hands; and he that has made
his


264 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
his son an apprentice to another, has discharged
him, during that time, of a great part of his
obedience both to himself and to his mother.
But all the duty of honour, the other part;
remains never the less entire to them; no-
thing can cancel that: it is so inseparable
from them both, that the father's authority
cannot dispossess the mother of this right,
nor can any man discharge his fon from Bo-
nouring her that bore him. But both these
are very far from a power to make laws,
and inforcing them with penalties, that may
reach estate, liberty, limbs and life. The
wer of commanding ends with nonage ;
and though, after that, honour and respect;
support and defence, and whatsoever gra-
titude can oblige a man to, for the highest
benefits he is naturally capable of, be always
due from a son to his parents ; yet all this
puts no scepter into 1 father's hand, no
sovereign power of commanding. He has
no dominion over his son's property, or
actions; nor any right, that his will should
prescribe to his son's in all things; however
it may become his son in many things, not
very inconvenient to him and his family, to
pay a deference to it.
8. 70. A man may owe Honour and respect
to an ancient, or wise man; defence to his
child or friend; relief and support to the
distressed; and gratitude to a benefactor, to
such a degree, that all he has, all he can do,
| cannot


Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT. 25 5


cannot sufficiently pay it: but all these give
no authority, no right to any one, of making
laws over him from whom they are owing.
And it is plain, all this is due not only to
the bare title of father; not only because,
as has been said, it is owing to the mother
too; but because these obligations to parents,
and the degrees of what is required of chil-
dren, may be varied by the different care
and kindness, trouble and expence, which is
often employed upon one child more than
another.

$. 71. This shews the reason how it comes
to pass, that parents in societies, where they
themselves are subjects, retain a power over
their children, and have as much right to
their subjection, as those who are in the state
of nature. Which could not possibly be, if
all political power were only paternal, and
that in truth they were one and the same
thing : for then, all paternal power being in
the prince, the subject could naturally have
none of it. But these two powers, political
and paternal, are so perfectly distinct and
separate ; are built upon so different foun-
dations, and given to so different ends, that
every subject that is a father, has as much
a paternal power over his children, as the
prunes has over his: and every prince, that

as parents, owes them as much filial duty
and obedience, as the meanest of his subjects
doto their's; and can therefore contain not any


3 part


256 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


part or degree of that kind of dominion;
which a prince or magistrate has over his
subject.

$. 72. Though the obligation on the pa-
rents to bring up their children, and the ob-
ligation on children to honour their parents;
contain all the power on the one hand, and
submission on the other, which are proper to
this relation, yet there is another power ordi-
narily in the father, whereby he has a tie on
the obedience of his children; which tho'
it be common to him with other men, yet
the occasions of shewing it, almost constantly
happening to fathers in their private families;
and the instances of it elsewhere being rare,
and less taken notice of, it passes in the world
for a part of paternal jurisaittion. And this
is the power men generally have to be/tow
their estates on those who please them belt ;
the possession of the father being the ex-
pectation and inheritance of the children,
ordinarily in certain . eee according
to the law and custom of each country; yet
it is commonly in the father's power to
bestow it with a more sparing or liberal
hand, according as the behaviour of this or
that child hath comported with his will and
humour.

F. 73. This is no small tie on the obe-
dience of children : and there being always
annexed to the enjoyment of land, a sub-


mission to the government of the country,
of


ne £


r
_


Or CTVIL- GOVERNMENT. 257


of which that land is a part; it has been
commonly supposed, that a father could oblige
his posterity to that government, of which he
himself was a subject, and that his compact
held them; whereas, it being only a neces-
sary condition annexed to the land, and the
inheritance of an estate which is under that
government, reaches only those who will take
it on that condition, and so is no natural tie
or engagement, but a voluntary submission:
for every man's children being by nature as
free as himself, or any of his ancestors ever
were, may, whilst they are in that freedom,
choose what society they will join themselves
to, what common-wealth they will put
themselves under. But if they will enjoy
the inberitance of their ancestors, they must
take it on the same terms their ancestors had
it, and submit to all the conditions annexed
to such a poslession. By this power indeed
fathers oblige their children to obedience to
themselves, even when they are past minority,
and most commonly too subject them to this
or that political power: but neither of these
by any peculiar right of fatherhood, but by
the reward they have in their hands to in-
force and recompence such a compliance ;
and is no more power than what a French
man has over an Enghsh man, who by the
hopes of an estate he will leave him, will
certainly have a strong tie on his obedience :
and if, when it 1s left him, he will enjoy 1
8 e


258 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


he must certainly take it upon the conditions
annexed to the possession of land in that
country where it lies, whether it be France
or England.

F. 74. To conclude then, tho the father's
power of commanding extends no farther
than the minority of his children, and to a
degree only fit for the discipline and go-
vernment of that age; and tho' that honour
and respect, and all that which the Latin,
called piety, which they indispensibly owe to


their parents all their life-time, and in all


estates, with all that support and defence is
due to them, gives the father no power of

governing, 7. e. making laws and enactin
enalties on his children ; though by all this
bis has no dominion over the property or
actions of his son: yet it is obvious to con-
ceive how easy it was, in the first ages of
the world, and in places still, where the
thinness of people gives families leave to
separate into unpossessed quarters, and they
have room to remove or plant themselves in
yet vacant habitations, for the father of the
family to become the prince of * it; he had
been


„ — _— ih. *
—


—


* It is no improbable opinion therefore, which the arch-
philosopher was of, that the chief person in every houshold
was always, as it were, a king: so when numbers of hous-
holds joined themselves in civil societies together, kings
were the first kind of governors amongst them, which 1s
also, as it seemeth, the reason why the name of fathers con-
tinued still in them, who, of fathers, were made rulers ; as


alse *


31 1 Os OPER" ; G 2 *
— — — — — — 9


* 2 & of


* m -#
„ ul er ee


. — a a OR. rote
— Er RS <_


Or Crivir-GovERNMENT, 259


been a ruler from the beginning of the in-
fancy of his children: and since without
some government it would be hard for them
to live together, it was likeliest it should, by
the express or tacit consent of the children
when they were grown up, be in the father,
where it seemed without any change barely
to continue ; when indeed nothing more was
required to it, than the permitting the father
to exercise alone, in his family, that executive
power of the law of nature, which every
free man naturally hath, and by that per-
mission resigning up to him a monarchical
power, whilst they remained in it. But that
this was not by any paternal right, but only
by the consent of his children, is evident from
hence, that no body doubts, but if a stranger,
whom chance or business had brought to his
family, had there killed any of his children,

or committed any other fact, he might con-

demn and put him to death, or otherwise

have punished him, as well as any of his

8 2 children;


—— K —


also the ancient custom of governors to do as Melchixedec,
and being kings, to exercise the office of priests, which
fathers did at the first, grew perhaps by the same occasion.
Howbeit, this is not the only kind of regiment that has been
received in the world. The inconveniences of one kind have
caused sundry others to be devised ; so that in a word, all

ublic regiment, of what kind soeyer, seemeth evidently to
E risen from the deliberatè advice, consultation and com-
position between men, judging it convenient and behoveful;
there being no imposlibility. in nature considered by itfelf, but
that man might have lived without any public regipent,
Hoclr s Eccl. P. lib. i. secb. 10.


— ͤĩ—r —¾viͥ — — — — — 4
— — ron WR — ones 1 9 eo ᷑ ᷑w̃ U —


— — — = I B — à —U5 4


260 Or CITIVII- GOVERNMENT.


children; which it was impossible he should
do by virtue of any paternal authority over
one who was not his child, but by virtue of
that executive power of the law of nature,
which, as a man, he had a right to: and
he alone could punish him in his family,
where the respect of his children had laid
by the exercise of such a power, to give way
to the dignity and authority they were willing
should remain in him, above the rest of his
family.

5. Thus it was easy, and almost na-
tural for children, by a tacit, and scarce avoid-
able consent, to make way for the father's
authority and government. They had been
accustomed in their childhood to follow his
direction, and to refer their little differences
to him; and when they were men, who fitter
to rule them ? Their little properties, and less
covetousness, seldom afforded greater con-
troversies ; and when any should arise, where
could they have a fitter umpire than he, by
whose care they had every one been sustained
and brought up, and who had a tenderness
for them all? It is no wonder that they


made no distinction betwixt minority and full


age ; nor looked after one and twenty, or
any other age that might make them the free
disposers of themselves and fortunes, when
they could have no desire to be out of their
pupilage: the government they had been
under, during it, continued {till to be 875

their


PI 188 " 4
& "uk ra at 22
* — * 1


224 ol . .
3 . #55" WP -


Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT. 261


their protection than restraint; and they could
no where find a greater security to their
peace, liberties, and fortunes, than in the
rule of” a father.

$. 76. Thus the natural fathers of families,
by an insensible change, became the politic
monarchs of them too: and as they chanced
to live long, and leave able and worthy heirs,
for several successions, or otherwise ; so they
laid the foundations of hereditary, or elective
kingdoms, under several constitutions and
mannors, according as chance, contrivance,
or occasions happened to mould them. But
if princes have their titles in their fathers
right, and it be a sufficient proof of the na-
tural right of fathers to political authority,
because they commonly were those in whole
hands we find, de facto, the exercise of go-
vernment : I say, if this argument be good,
it will as strongly prove, that all princes, nay
princes only, ought to be priests, since it is
as certain, that in the beginning, the father


of the family was priest, as that he was ruler
a his own houshold.


— " 2 —_— —


RAF. V.
Of Political or Civil Society.


§. 77. (32? having made man such a
creature, that in his own judg-
ment, it was not good for him to be alone,


9 3 put


— — — — ͤ æwÜ ÿ4p —


\


262 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


put him under strong obligations of necessity,
convenience, and inclination to drive him
into society, as well as fitted him with un-
derstanding and language to continue and
enjoy it. The first society was between man
and wife, which gave beginning to that be-
tween parents and children; to which, in
time, that between master and servant came
to be added: and though all these might,
and commonly did meet together, and make
up but one family, wherein the master or
mistress of it had some sort of rule proper to
a family; each of these, or all together,
came short of political society, as we shall see,
if we consider the different ends, ties, and
bounds of each of these.

§. 78. Conjugal society is made by a volun-
tary compact between man and woman; and
tho' it consist chiefly in such a communion
and right in one another's bodies as is neces-
sary to its chief end, procreation ; yet it
draws with it mutual support and affistance,


and a communion of interests too, as neces-


sary not only to unite their care and affection,
but also necessary to their common off-spring,
who have a right to be nourished, and main-
tained by them, till they are able to provide

for themselves.
§. 79. For the end of conjunction, between
male and female, being not barely procreation,
but the continuation of the species ; this con-
junction betwixt male and female a »
alt,


1 5 3 * "£5 * 12 * 1 ”
. PF Se ves”. 4 n
nn. A Ao CSIR Cs ee. "


Or CrVII- GOVERNMENT. 263


last, even after procreation, so long as is
necessary to the nourishment and support of
the young ones, who are to be sustained by
those that got them, till they are able to
shift and provide for themselves. This rule,
which the infinite wise maker hath set to
the works of his hands, we find the inferior
creatures steadily obey. In those viviparous
animals which feed on grass, the conjunction
between male and female lasts no longer than
the very act of copulation ; because the teat
of the dam being sufficient to nourish the
young, till it be able to feed on grass, the male
only begets, but concerns not himself for the
female or young, to whose sustenance he can
contribute nothing. But in beasts of prey
the conjunction lasts longer: because the dam
not being able well to subsist herself, and
nourish her numerous off-spring by her own
prey alone, a more laborious, as well as more
dangerous way of living, than by feeding on
grass, the assistance of the male is necessary
to the maintenance of their common family,
which cannot subsist till they are able to prey
for themselves, but by the joint care of male
and female. The same is to be observed in
all birds, (except some domestic ones, where
plenty of food excuses the cock from feeding,
and taking care of the young brood) whole
young needing food in the neft, the cock and
hen continue mates, till the young are able
; 84 to


— — — i
—— GET IRS


f
4
:
.
o
+
3
|
1s |
:
|
|
N
l


—— — — — DD


264 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


to use their wing, and provide for them-

selves.
§. 80. And herein I think lies the chief,
if not the only reason, why the male and fe-
male in mankind are tied to a longer conjunction
than other creatures, vi. becaule the female
is capable of conceiving, and de facto is
commonly with child again, and brings forth
too a new birth, long before the former is
out of a dependency for support on his pa-
rents help, and able to shift for himself, and
has all the assistance is due to him from his
parents: whereby the father, who is bound
to take care for those he hath begot, is under
an obligation to continue in conjugal society
with the same woman longer than other
creatures, whose young being able to subsist
of themselves, before the time of procreation
returns again, the conjugal bond dissolves of
itself, and they are at liberty, till Hymen at
his usual anniversary season summons them
again to chuse new mates. Wherein one
cannot but admire the wisdom of the great
Creator, who having given to man fore-
sight, and an ability to lay up for the future,
as well as to supply the present neceslity,
hath made it neceffary, that society of man
and wife should be more lasting, than of male
and female amongst other creatures ; that so
their industry might be encouraged, and their
interest better united, to make provision and
lay up goods for their common issue, which
uncertain


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 265


uncertain mixture, or easy and frequent so-
lutions of conjugal society would mightily
disturb.

F. 81. But tho' these are ties upon man-
kind, which make the conjugal bands more
firm and lasting in man, than the other
species of animals; yet it would give one
reason to enquire, why this cempact, where
procreation and education are jecured, and
inheritance taken care for, may not be made
determinable, either by consent, or at a cer-
tain time, or upon certain conditions, as well
as any other voluntary compacts, there being
no necessity in the nature of the thing, nor
to the ends of it, that it should always be
for life; I mean, to such as are under no
restraint of any positive law, which ordains all
such contracts to be perpetual.

$. 82. But the husband and wife, though
they have but one common concern, yet
having different understandings, will un-
avoidably sometimes have different wills too ;
it therefore being necessary that the last de-
termination, 2. e. the rule, should be placed
somewhere ; it naturally falls to the man's
share, as the abler and the stronger. But
this reaching but to the things of their com-
mon interest and property, leaves the wife in
the full and free possession of what by con-
tract is her peculiar right, and gives the hus-
band no more power over her life than she
has over his ; the power of the husband being

4 so


——
9 II


— — — —— — — — — — —


— ——


_ — — — — — — — o —_ —
— —— —— — U⅛ü— «ÆI? — ⁊ 2x ñĩ— u . J
— — — — —
— —


266 Or Cryrr- GOVERNMENT.


so far from that of an absolute monarch, that
the wife has in many cases a liberty to se-
parate from him, where natural right, or
their contract allows it; whether that contract
be made by themselves in the state of nature,
or by the customs or laws of the country
they live in; and the children upon such
separation fall to the father or mother's lot,
as such contract does determine.

§. 83. For all the ends of marriage being
to be obtained under politic government, as
well as in the state of nature, the civil ma-


gistrate doth not abridge the right or power of


either naturally necessary to those ends, viz.
procreation and mutual support and assistance
whilst they are together ; but only decides
any controversy that may arise between man


and wife about them. If it were otherwise,


and that absolute soverezgnty and power of
life and death naturally belonged to the hus-
band, and were necessary to the society between
man and wife, there could be no matrimony
in any of those countries where the husband is
allowed no such absolute authority. But the
ends of matrimony requiring no such power
in the husband, the condition of conjugal
society put it not in him, it being not at all
necessary to that state. Conjugal society could
subsist and attain its ends without it; nay,
community of goods, and the power over
them, mutual assistance and maintenance, and
other things belonging to conjugal society,

might


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 267


might be varied and regulated by that con-
tract which unites man and wife in that
society, as far as may consist with procreation
and the bringing up ef children till they
could shift for themselves; nothing being
necessary to any society, that is not necessary
to the ends for which it is made.

8. 84. The society betwwixt parents and chil-
dren, and the distin rights and powers be-
longing respectively to them, I have treated
of so largely, in the foregoing chapter, that

I shall not here need to say any thing of it.
And I think it 1s plain, that it is far different
from a politic society.

$. 85. Master and servant are names as
old as history, but given to those of far dif-
ferent condition ; for a freeman makes himself
a servant to another, by selling him, for a
certain time, the service he undertakes to
do, in exchange for wages he 1s to receive :
and though this commonly puts him into the
family of his master, and under the ordinary

discipline thereof ; yet it gives the master but
a temporary power over him, and no greater
than what is contained in the contract be-
tween them. But there is another sort of
servants, which by a peculiar name we call
flaves, who being captives. taken in a just
war, are by the right of nature subjected to
the absolute dominion and arbitrary power
5 of their masters. These men having, as I
| say, forfeited their lives, and with it their

5 liberties,


268 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. |


liberties, and lost their estates ; and being in
the fate of flavery, not capable of any pro-
perty, cannot in that state be considered as
any part of civil society; the chief end whereof
is the preservation of property.

. 86. Let us therefore consider a master
of a family with all these subordinate rela-
tions of une, children, servants, and flaves,
united under the domestic rule of a family ;
which, what resemblance soever it may have
in its order, offices, and number too, with a
little common-wealth, yet is very far from
It, both in its constitution, power and end :
or if it must be thought a monarchy, and
the paterfamilins the absolute monarch in it,
absoluts monarchy will have but a very
shattered and short power, when it 1s plain,
by what has been said before, that the master
ef the family has a very distinct and differently
limited power, both as to time and extent,
over those several persons that are in it; for
earn % the slave (and the family is as
much a family, and his power as pater familias
as great, whether there be any slaves in his
family or no) he has no legislative power of
life and death over any of them, and none
too but what a m!/trefs of a family may have as
well as he. And he certainly can have no
absolute power over the whole family, who has
but a very limited one over every individual
in it. But how a family, or any other so-
ciety of men, differ from that which is pro-


perly


* 8 * * *
n . . 4 apart 1
. — 3 _ o
+ _ *. 8 6 9
*
* - AY whe *


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 269


perly political society, we shall best see, by
considering wherein political society itself
consists.

$. 87. Man being born, as has been proved,
with a title to perfect freedom, and an un-
controuled enjoyment of all the rights and
privileges of the law of nature, equally with
any other man, or number of men in the
world, hath by nature a power, not only to
preserve his property, that is, his life, liberty
and estate, against the injuries and attempts
of other men ; but to judge of, and punish
the breaches of that law in others, as he is
persuaded the oftence deserves, even with
death itself, in crimes where the heinousness
of the fact, in his opinion, requires it. But
because no political society can be, nor subsist,
without having in itself the power to pre-
serve the property, and in order thereunto,
punish the offences of all those of that fo-
ciety; there, and there only is political fo»
ciety, where every one of the members hath
quitted this natiral power, resigned it up
into the hands vi the community in all cases
that exclude him not from appealing for pro-
tection to the law established by it. And
thus all private judgment of every particular
member being, excluded, the community
comes to be umpire, by settled standing rules,
indifferent, and the fame to all parties; and
by men having authority from the commu-


nity,


270 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


nity, for the execution of those rules, decides
all the differences that may happen between
any members of that society concerning any
matter of right; and punishes those offences
which any member hath committed against
the society, with such penalties as the law
has established : whereby it is easy to discern,
who are, and who are not, in political society
together. Those who are united into one
body, and have a common established law
| and judicature to appeal to, with authority
to decide controversies between them, and
punish offenders, are in civil society one with
another: but those who have no such com-
mon people, I mean on earth, are still in
Wl the state of nature, each being, where there


äößꝑp— — ͤ ꝓGœ — — ——-—-——. — —


is no other, judge for himself, and execu-
i! tioner; which is, as I have before shewed
100 it, the perfect state of nature.

$. 88. And thus the common-wealth comes
| by a power to set down what punishment
9 shall belong to the several transgressions which
ll they think worthy of it, committed amongst
| the members of that society, (which is the
| power of making laws} as well as it has the
| power to punish any injury done unto any of
| its members, by any one that is not of it,
| (which is the power of war and peace z) and
all this for the preservation of the property
of all the members of that society, as far as |
is possible. But though every man who has |
|

|

|

|


entered 5


4
<
3


;


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 271


entered into civil society, and is become a
member of any common-wealth, has thereby
quitted his power to punish offences, against
the law of nature, in prosecution of his own
private judgment, yet with the judgment of
offences, which he has given up to the legis-
lative in all cases, where he can appeal to
the magistrate, he has given a right to the
common-wealth to employ his force, for the
execution of the judgments of the common-
wealth, whenever he shall be called to it;
which indeed are his own judgments, they
being made by himself, or his representative.
And herein we have the original of the g
lative and executive power of civil society, which
is to judge by standing laws, how far offences
are to be punished, when committed within
the common-wealth ; and also to determine,
by occasional judgments founded on the pre-
sent circumstances of the fact, how far in-


juries from without are to be vindicated; and


in both these to employ all the force of all

the members, when there shall be need.
$. 89. Where-ever therefore any number
of men are so united into one society, as to
quit every one his executive power of the
law of nature, and to resign it to the public,
there and there only is a political, or civil
society. And this is done, where-ever any
number of men, in the state of nature, enter
into society to make one people, one body
4 politic,


—
—
—


272 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


politic, under one supreme government; or
else when any one joins himself to, and in-
corporates with any government already made:


for hereby he authorizes the society, or which


is all one, the legislative thereof, to make
laws for him, as the public good of the
society shall require; to the execution where-
of, his own assistance (as to his own decrees)
is due. And this puts men out of a state of
nature zuto that of a common-wealth, by setting
up a judge on earth, with authority to de-
termine all the controversies, and redress the
injuries that may happen to any member
of the common-wealth ; which judge is the


legislative, or magistrates appointed by it.


And where-ever there are any number of
men, however aflociated, that have no such
decifive power to appeal to, there they are
{till in zhe fate of nature. b 221

§. 90. Hence it is evident, that ab/olute
monarchy, which by some men is counted
the only government in the world, 1s indeed
inconsistent with civil society, and so can be
no form of civil-government at all : for the
end of civil society, being to avoid, and remedy
those inconveniencies of the state of nature,


which necessarily follow from every man's


being judge in his own case, by setting up


a known authority, to which every one of


that saciety may appeal upon any injury re-
ceived, or controversy that may arise, and


which


ET e
. 2 8 * ay 4 *
* * b


4 --
F < 4 8
n N ="


c


y _ - 7 — 4 4
oa . P . ond PSs
„ BE: ä 2 * $i


Or Civit-GavaRnmMeENT. 273
which every one of the * society ought to
obey ; where- ever any persotis are, who have
not such an authority to appeal to, for the
decision of any difference between them,
there those persons are {till in the state of na-
ture; and fo is every absolute prince, in respect
of those who are under his dominion.

FS. 91. For he being supposed to have all,
both legillative and executive power in him-
{elf alone, there is no judge to be found, no
appeal lies open to any one, who may fairly,
and indifferently, and with authority decide,
and from whose decision relief and redress
may be expected of any injury or incon-
viency, that may be suffered from the prince,
or by his order: so that such a man, however
intitled, Czar, or Grand Seignior, or how you
please, is as much in the state of nature, with
all under his dominion, as he is with the rest
of mankind : for where-ever any two men


are, who have no standing rule, and common


judge to appeal to on earth, for the de-
termination of controversies of right be-
twixt them, there they are till zz the fate


T of


— Dhl. — —


*The public power of all society is above every soul
contained in the same society; and the principal use of that
power is, to give laws unto all that are under it, which laws
in such cases we must obey, unless there be reason shewed
which may necessarily inforce, that the law of reason, or
of God, doth enjoin the contrary, Hook. Fccl. Pel. l. i.


ft &. 16,


N


274 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.

nature, and under all the inconveniencies
of it, with only this woful difference to the
subject, or rather slave of an absolute prince:
that whereas, in the ordinary state of nature,
he has a liberty to judge of his right, and
according to the best of his power, to main-
tain it; now, whenever his property is in-
vaded by the will and order of his monarch,
he has not only no appeal, as those in society
ought to have, but as if he were degraded


from the common state of rational creatures,”


is denied a liberty to judge of, or to defend
his right; and fo is exposed to all the misery
and inconveniencies, that a man can fear from


One,


-
* * „ 8 ab a —


»„— —_


* To take away all such mutual grievances, injuries and
wrongs, 1. e. such as atteyd men in the state of nature,
there was no way but only by growing into composition
and agreement amongst themselves, by ordaining some kind
of government public, and by yielding themselves subject
thereunto, that unto whom they granted authority to rule
and govern, by them the peace, tranquillity and happy
estate of the rest might be procured. Men always knew
that where force and injury was offered, they might be de-
_ fenders of themselves; they knew that however men may
seek their own commodity, yet if this were done with in-
jury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all men,
- and all good means to be withstood. Finally, they knew
that no man might in reason take upon him to determine
his own'right,' and agrees. to his own determination pro-
| in as much as every man is

towards himself, and them whom he greatly affects, partial;
and therefore that strises and troubles would be endless,
except they gave their common consent, all to be ordered by
some, . whom they should agree upon, without which consent
there would be no reason that one man should take upon


Ceed in maintenance thereo


him to be lord or judge over another, Hooler's Eccl. Pol. J. i.
; fect. 10.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 275
one, who being in the unrestrained state of
nature, is yet corrupted. with flattery, and
armed with power. | |

F. 92. For he that thinks absolute power
purifies men's blood, and corrects the baseness
of human nature, need read but the history
of this, or any other age, to be convinced of
the contrary. He that would have been in-
solent and injurious in the woods of America,
would not probably be much better in a
throne; where perhaps learning and religion
shall be found out to justify all that he

i hall do to his subjects, and the sword pre-
lently silence all those that dare question it :


*


„for what the protection of absolute monarchy is,
What kind of fathers of their countries it
1 I makes princes to be, and to what a degree
„ of happiness and security it carries civil so-
”  -Ciety, where this sort of government is grown
| ?

& do perfection, he that will look into the late
le relation of Ceylon, may easily see. |

PY 8. 93. In absolute monarchies indeed, as well
de- as other governments of the world, the sub-
Nay


Th Jects have an appeal to the law, and judges


cn, — to decide any controversies, and restrain an

ew violence that may happen betwixt the subjects
o. themselves, one amongst another. This every
a is one thinks necessary, and believes he deserves
leb. t be thought a declared enemy to society and
11 mankind, Who should go about to take it
— away. Bat whether this be from a true love


33
. V+
l 1.
: 4
T7)
*
*
*
5


| of mankind and society, and such a charity as
T 2 we


276 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


we owe all one to another, there is reason to
doubt: for this is no more than what every
man, who loves his own power, profit, or
greatness, may and naturally must do, keep
those animals from hurting, or deftroying one
another, who labour and drudge only for his
pleasure and advantage; and fo are taken care
of, not out of any love the master has for
them, but love of himself, and the profit they
bring him: for if. it be asked, what security,
wheat fence is there, in such a tate, against the
violence and oppression of this absolute ruler ?
the very question can scarce be borne. The
are ready to tell you, that it deserves deat
only to ask after safety. Betwixt subje& and
subje&, they will grant, there must be mea-
sures, laws and judges, for their mutual peace
-and' security : but as for the ruler, he ought
to be absolute, and is above all fuch circum-
stances; because he has power to do more
hurt and wrong, it is right when he does it.
To ask how you may be guarded from harm,
or injury, on that fide where the strongest hand
is to do it, is presently the voice of faction and
rebellion : as if when men quitting the state
of nature entered, into society, they agreed
that all of them but one, should be under the
restraint of laws, but that he should still re-
tain all the liberty of the state of nature, in-
creased with power, and made licentious by
impunity. This is to think, that men are so
foolish, that they take care to avoid what mis-
3 chiefs


2
4. 5 Re ©
-


* 0 *
K . . * 1
Su ; — 8 =— *
r 7 Los = EF
> + UA,
* . TY


wine S


Or CIVIIL- GOVERNMENT. 277


chiefs may be done them by pole-cats, or foxes;
but are content, nay, think it safety, to be de-
voured by lions.
§. 94. But whatever flatterers may talk to
amuse people's understandings, it hinders not
men from feeling; and when they perceive,
that any man, in what station soever, is out of
the bounds of the civil society which they are
of, and that they have no appeal on earth
against any harm, they may receive from him,
they are apt to think themselves in the state of
nature, in respect of him whom they find to
be . and to take care, as soon as they can,
to have that /afety and security in civil society,
for which 1 0 ul ttt, and for hich
only they entered into it. And therefore,
though perhaps at first, (as shall be shewed
more at large hereafter in the following part
of this discourse) some one good and excellent
man having got a pre-eminency amongst the
rest, had Bis deference paid to his goodness
and virtue, as to a kind of natural authority,
that the chief rule, with arbitration of their
differences, by a tacit consent devolved into
his hands, without any other caution, but the
assurance they had of his uprightness and wis-
dom; yet when time, giving authority, and
(as some men would persuade us) sacredness of
customs, which the negligent, and unfore-
seeing innocence of the first ages began, had
brought in successors of another stamp, the
people finding their properties not secure under
eee ee ede


1 *
* 4 .


.
K a 1 . * %.. % 1 1 * Os + 2
— Se ·˖˙² « arts FO


3 2


r


7
1
þ
my


258 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


the government, as then it was, (whereas
government has no other end but the preser-


vation of * property). could never be safe nor


at rest, nor think themselves in evil society, till
the legislature” was placed in collective bodies
of men, call them senate,” parliament, or


what you please. .. By which means every
single person became subje&, equally with
other the meanest men, to those laws, which
he himself, as part of the legislative; had efta-
blished ; nor could any one, by his own au-
thority, avoid the force of the [ach when once
made; nor by any pretence of superiority plead
exemption, thereby to license his own, or the
miscarriages of any of his dependents. + N
mam in civil fociety tan be exetnpred from the laws
of it : for if any man may do what he thinks
fit, and there be no appeal on earth, for re-
dress or security againft any harm He shall do;
Jask, whether he be not perfectly still in the


* *


122 — — — —


Ld hd


* At the first, when! Þme certain kind of, regiment was
once appointed, it may be that nothing was then farther
thought upon for the manner. of governing, but all permitted
unto their wisdom and discretion, which were to rule, till-by
experience they found this for all parts very inconvenient, {

as the thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed
das Resch the sore, which it should have cured. They saw,
that to live by one man's will, became the cause of all men's misery,
This conftrained them to come unto laws, wherein all men
might fee their duty beforehand, and know the penalties of
transgressing them. Heoker's Ecel. Pol. I. i. fe. 1c.
12 Givil law being the act of the whole, body pantie, doth
F 400-3 over-rule each several part of the fame body; Hooker,
F/ 4. 5 ; = | E 8 ©. 2


« Nera. * * —


* 85 2 3535 4


4
*
oy
*
%
4
F
0
*
*
.
*
*
4


Or, CIVIT- GOVERNMENT. 279


state of nature, and so can be no part or mem-
ber of that civil society; unless any one will
say, the state of nature and civil society are
one and the same thing, which I have never
yet found any one so great a patron, of anarchy
as to affirm.


\ i F — oh


* * ”


C H A P. VIII. |
Of the Beginning of Political 8 ocieties.


J 9 5. M being g, as * been 11 by


nature, all free, equal, and in-
dependent, no one can be put out of this
estate, and subjected to the political power of
another, without his own consent. The onl
way whereby any one divests himself of his
natural liberty, and puts on the Sd, of civil


feciety, is by agreeing with other men to join


and unite into a community, for their com-
fortable, safe, and peaceable living one
amongst another, in a secure enjoyment of
their properties, and a greater security against
any, that are not of it. This any number of
men may do, because it injures not the free-
dom of the rest; they are left as they were
in the liberty of the state of nature. When
any number of men have so consented to make
one community or government, they are thereby
presently incorporated, and make one body pa-
litic, wherein the majority have a right to act
and conclude the rest.


de pas 5


280 Or Civ I- GOVERNMENT.

§. 96. For when any number of men have,
by the consent of every individual, made a
community, they have thereby made that com-
munity one body, with a power to act as one
body, which is only by the will and determi-
nation of the majority; for that which acts
any community, being only the consent of
the individuals of it, and it being necessary
to that which is one body to move one way;
it is neceflary the body should move that way
whither the greater force carries it, which is
the consent of the majority; or else it is im-
possible it should act or continue one body,
one community, which the consent of every in-
dividual that united into it, agreed that it
should ; and fo every one is bound by that
consent to be concluded by the majority. And
therefore we see, that in afsemblies, im-
powered to act by positive laws, where no
number 1s set by that positive law which im-
powers them, the act of the majority passes for
the act of the whole, and of course determines,
as having, by the law of nature and reason, the
power of the whole. : bai: a 0h 0g
' &.97. And thus every man, by consenting
with others to make one body politic under
one government, puts himself under an obli-
pation, to every one of that society, to submit
to the determination of the majority, and to
be concluded by it; or else this original com-
pact, whereby he with others incorporates
into one society, would signify nothing, and
* g - by be


*


. 1808.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 281


be no eompact, if he be left free, and under
no other ties than he was in before in the
state of nature. For what appearance would
there be of any compact? what new eng
ment if he were no farther tied by any decrees
of the society, than he himself thought fit,
and did actually consent to? This would be
still as great a liberty, as he himself had be-
fore his compact, or any one else in the state
of nature hath, who may submit himself, and
consent to any acts of it if he thinks fit.

§. 98. For if the consent of the majority shall
not, in reason, be received as the af of the
whole, and conclude every individual ; nothing
but the consent of every individual can make
any thing to be the a& of the whole : but
fuch a consent is next to impossible ever to be
had, if we consider the infirmities of health,
and avocations of bufiness, which in a num-
ber, though much less than that of a com-
mon-wealth, will necessarily keep many away
from the public afsembly. To which if we
add the variety of opinions, and contrariety
of interests, which unavoidably happen in all
collections of men, the coming into society
upon such terms would be only like Cato's
coming into the theatre, only to go out again.
Such a constitution as this would make the
mighty Leviathan of a shorter duration, than


the feeblest creatures, and not let it outlast


the day it was born in: which cannot be
supposed, till we can think, that rational crea-
tures


282 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


tures should defire and conftitute societies only
to be dissolved : for where the majority can-
not conclude the rest, there they cannot act
as one body, and consequently will be im-
mediately dissolved again.

8. 99. Whosoever therefore out of a state
of nature unite into a community, must be un-
derstood to give up all the power, necessary
to the ends for which they-unite into society,
to the majority of the community, unless they


expresly agreed in any number greater than


the majority. And this is done by barely
agreeing to unite into one political fecrety, which
is all the compact that is, or needs be, between
the individuals, that enter into, or make up
a common-wealth. And thus that, which be-
gins and actually conflitutes any political seciety,


is nothing but the consent pf any number of


freemen capable of a majority to unite and
incorporate into such a society. And this is
that, and that only, which did, or could give
beginning to any /awful government in the
world.


& 100. To this I find two objections made.


First, That there are no instances to be found
in story, of a company of men independent, and
equal one among st another, that met together, and
in this way began and set up a government.

Secondly, I zs impesjivle of right, that men
should do so, because all men being born under
government, they. are to submit to that, and are
not at PRry to begin a new one,- .
244201 §. 101.


Or CTIVIIL- GOVERNMENT. 283


F. 101. To the first there is this to answer,
That it is not at all to be wondered, that
hiftory gives us but a very little account of
men, that lived together in the fiate of nature.
The inconveniences of that condition, and
the love and want of society, no sooner brought
any number of them together, but they pre-
sently united and incorporated, if they de-
signed to continue together. And if we may
not suppose men ever to have been in the flate
of- nature, because we hear not much of them
in such a state, we may as well suppose the
armies of Salmanasser or Xerxes were never
children, because we hear little of them, till
they were men, and imbodied in armies.
Government is every where antecedent to re-
cords," and letters seldom come in amongst a
people: till a long continuation. of civil so-
ciety has, by other more necessary arts, pro-
vided for their safety, ease, and plenty: and
then they begin to look after the history of
their founders, and search into their original.
when they have outlived the memory of it:
for it is with common-wealths as with parti-
cular persons, they are commonly ignorant of
their own births and infancies: and if the
know-any thing of their original, they are be-
holden for it, to the accidental records that
others have kept of it. And those that we have,
of the beginning, of any polities in the world,
excepting that of the Jews, where God him-
jak immediately interposed, and which fa-


VOUTS


284 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


vours not at all paternal dominion, are all
either plain instances of such a beginning as


I have mentioned, or at least have manifest


footsteps of it.
$. 102. He must shew a strange inclination
to deny evident matter of fact, when it agrees
not with his hypothesis, who will not allow,
that the beginning of Rome and Venice were
by the uniting, together of several men free
and Es one of another, amongst
whom there was no natural superiority. or
subjection. And if Fosephus Acofta's word
may be taken, he tells us, that in many parts
of America there was no government at all.
There are great and apparent conjectures, lays
he, that these men, speaking of those of Peru,
for a long time bad neither kings nor common
wealth, but lived in troops, as they da this day
in Florida, the Cheriquanas, thess of Brasil,
and many other nations, which have no certain
kings, but as occasion is offered, in peace or war,
they choose their captains as they please, I. i.
c. 25. If it be said, that every man there
was born subje& to his father, or the head
of his family; that the subjection due from
a child to a father took not away his free-
dom of uniting into what political society he
thought fit, has been already proved. But
be that as it will, these men, it is evident,
were actually Free ; and whatever superiority
some politicians now would. place in any of
them, they themselves claimed it not, but by
| consent


.
. 2 =
ON af * 5 8 EE. * 1 *
4 3 2 = Se : 1 5 2 * 1
l 3 er A tg ELL A 2299


1


r
2 r — 7 E.


Or Civit-GoveRNMENT. 285
consent were all equal, till by the same con-
sent they set rulers over themselves. So that
their politic societies all began from a voluntary
union, and the mutual agreement of men
freely acting in the choice of their governors,
and forms of government.

§. 103. And I hope those who went away
from Sparta with Palantus, mentioned b
Justin, 1. iii. c. 4. will be allowed to have
been freemen independent one of another, and
to have set up a government over themselves,
by their own consent. Thus I have given
several examples, out of history, of people Free
and in the state of nature, that being met to-
gether incorporated and began a common-
wealth. And if the want of such instances


be an argument to prove that government were


not, nor could not be so begun, I suppose the
contenders for paternal empire were better


Tet it alone, than urge it against natural li-
berty: for if they can give fo 3 instances,


out of history, of governments begun upon
paternal right, I think (though at best an


argument from what has been, to what


should of right be, has no great force) one
might, without any great danger, yield them


the cause. ' But if I might advise them in the
case, they would do well not to search too


much into the original of governments, as th
have begun de facto, lest they should: End


the foundation of most of them, something
I a,


— x — — — — = — —


—N?T— —


286


very little favourable to the design they pro-
mote, and such a power as they contend for.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


Y. 104. But to conclude, reason being plain


on our fide, that men are naturally free; and


the examples of history shewing, that the


governments of the world, that were 'begun


in peace, had their beginning laid on that
foundation, and were made by the consent of
the people; there can be little room for doubt,


either where the right is, or what has been
the opinion, or practice of mankind, about
the fr/t erecting of governments.

§. 105. I will not deny, that if we look


back as far as history will direct us, towards


the original of common-wealths, we shall ge-
nerally find them under the government and


administration of one man. And I am also
apt to believe, that where a family was
numerous enough to subsist by itself, and


continued entire together, without mixing


with others, as it often happens, where there


is much land, and few people, the govern-


ment commonly began in the father: for
the father having, by the law of nature, the
same power with every man else to punish,
as he thought fit, any offences against that
law, might thereby punish his transgressing


children, even when they were men, and


out of their pupilage; and they were very
likely to submit to his punishment, and all
join with him against the offender, in their
turns, giving him thereby power to execute


his


* — 3 ä 88 _ ; | E
. FP


*
Eo © « ©
je; I * . 8


OY CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 287


his sentence against any transgression, and so


in effect make him the law- maker, and go-


vernor over all that remained in conjunction
with his family. He was fittest to be trusted;


paternal affection secured their property and


interest under his care; and the custom of


obeying him, in their childhood, made it
easier to submit to him, rather than to any
other. If therefore they must have one to
rule them, as government is hardly to be
avoided amongst men that live together; who
so likely to be the man as he that was their
common father; unless negligence, cruelty,


or any other defect of mind or body made


him unfit for it? But when either the father
died, and left his next heir, for want of


age, wisdom, courage, or any other quali-


ties, less fit for rule; or where several fa-
milies met, and consented to continue to-
gether ; there, it is not to be doubted, but


they used their natural freedom, to set up


him, whom they judged the ablest, and most
likely, to rule well over them. Conformable
hereunto we find the people of America, who
(living out of the reach of the conquering
{words, and spreading domination of the two


great empires of Peru and Mexico enjoyed
their own natural freedom, though; cæteris
- paribus, they commonly prefer the heir of
their deceased king; yet if they find him
ahy way weak, or uncapable, they pass him


by,


288 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
by, and set up the stoutest and bravest man
for their ruler.

§. 106. Thus, though looking back as far
as records give us any account of peopling
the world, and the history of nations, we
commonly find the government to be in one
hand; yet it destroys not that which I affirm,
vix. that the beginning of politic society depends
upon the consent of the individuals, to join
into, and make one society; who, when
they are thus incorporated, might set up
what form of government they thought fit.
But this having given occasion to men to
mistake, and think, that by nature govern-
ment was monarchical, and belonged to the
father, it may not be amiss here to consider,
why people in the beginning generally pitched
upon this form, which though perhaps the
father's pre- eminency might, in the first in-
stitution of some common-wealths, give a
rise to, and place in the beginning, the power
in one hand; yet it is plain that the reason,
that continued the form of government in 4
Angle person, was not any regard, or respect


to paternal authority; since all petty #0-


narchies, that is, almost all monarchies, near
their original, have been commonly, at least
upon occasion, elective.

§. 107, First then, in the beginning of
things, the father's government of the child-


hood of those sprung from bim, having ac-


customed them to the rule of one man, and
taught


OF CTIVII- GOVERNMENT. 289


taught them that where it was exercised with
care and skill, with affection and love to those
under it, it was sufficient to procure and
preserve to men all the political happiness
they sought for in society. It was no wonder
that they should pitch upon, and naturally
run into that form of government, which from
their infancy they had been all accustomed
to; and which, by experience, they had
found both easy and safe. To which, if we
add, that monarchy being simple, and most
obvious to men, whom neither experience
had instructed in forms of government, nor
the ambition or insolence of empire had
taught to beware of the encroachments of
prerogative, or the inconveniencies of ab-
solute power, which monarchy in succession
was apt to lay claim to, and bring upon
them; it was not at all strange, that they should
not much trouble themselves to think of
methods of restraining any exorbitances of
those to whom they had given the authority
over them, and of balancing the power of
government, by placing several parts of it in
different hands. They had neither felt the
oppression of tyrannical dominion, nor did
the fashion of the age, nor their possessions,
or way of living, (which aftorded little matter
for covetousness or ambition) give them any
reason to apprehend or provide against it;
and therefore it is no wonder they put them-
selves into such a frame of government, as was

od IT GIST ns, Fe


290 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


not only, as I said, most obvious and simple,
but also best suited to their present state and


condition; which stood more in need of de-
fence against foreign invasions and injuries,


than of multiplicity of laws. The equality


of a simple poor way of living, confining their
defires within the narrow bounds of each
man's small property, made few controversies,
and so no need of many laws to decide them,
or variety of officers to superintend the pro-
cess, or look after the execution of justice,
where there were but few trespasses, and few
offenders. Since then those, who liked one


another so well as to join into society, cannot


but be supposed to have some acquaintance
and friendship together, and some trust one
in another; they could not but have greater
apprehensions of others, than of one another:
and therefore their first care and thought can-
not but be supposed to be, how to secure


themselves against foreign force. It was na-


tural for them to put themselves under a
frame of government which might best serve
to that end, and chuse the wisest and bravest
man to conduct them in their wars, and lead
them out against their enemies, and in this
chiefly be their ruler. |

F. 108. Thus we see, that the Aings of the
Indians in America, which is still a pattern


of the first ages in Asia and Europe, whilst


the inhabitants were too few for the country,


and want of people and money gave men no
temptation


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 297


temptation to enlarge their possessions of land,
or contest for wider extent of ground, are
little more than generals of their armies; and
though they command absolutely in war, yet
at home and in time of peace they exercise
very little dominion, and have but a very
moderate sovereignty, the resolutions of peace
and war being ordinarily either in the people,
or in a council. Tho' the war itself, which
admits not of plurality of governors, naturally
devolves the command into the &ing's /o/e

authority. | |
$. 109. And thus in Mael itself, the chief
business of their judges, and first kings, seems to
have been fo be captains in war, and leaders
of their armies; which (besides what is
signified by going out and in before the people,
which was, to march forth to war, and home
again in the heads of their forces) appears
plainly in the story of Fephtba. The Ammonites
making war upon rael, the Gileadites in fear
send to Fephtha, a bastard of their family
whom they had cast off, and article with him,
if he will assist them against the Ammonites,
to make him their ruler ; which they do in
these words, And the people made him bead
and captain over them, Judg. xi. 14 which
was, as it seems, all one as to be judge. And
he judged Israel, Judg. xii. 7. that is, was
eir captain- general fix years. So when Jo-
tham upbraids the Shechemites with the obli-
gation they had to Gideon, who had been
U 2 their


292 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


| their judge and ruler, he tells them, Hz
| fought for you, and adventured his life far, and
| delivered you out of the hands of Midian, Judg.
ix. 17. Nothing mentioned of him, but
1 what he did as a general: and indeed that
| 1s all is found in his history, or in any of the
rest of the judges. And Abimelech parti-
cularly is called &ng, though at most he was
but their general. And when, being weary
of the ill conduct of Samuel's sons, the chil-
dren of Vrael defired a king, like all the
nations to judge them, and to go out before
| them, and to fight their battles, 1 Sam. viii.
1 20. God granting their desire, says to Sa-
| muel, I will fend thee a man, and thou shalt
| anoint him to be captain over my people Ijracl,
l| that he may save my people out of the hands
| ' of' the Philisiines, ix. 16. As if the only
' business of a king had been to lead out their
' armies, and fight in their defence; and ac-
| cordingly at his inauguration pouring a vial
| of oil upon him, declares to Saul, that the
Lord had anointed him to be captain over
is inheritance, x. 1. And therefore those,
who after Saul's being solemnly chosen and
saluted ing by the fribes at Mispab, were
unwilling to have him their king, made no


— — . - — —
0


other objection but this, How shall this man
save us? v. 27. as if they should have said,
| this man is unfit to be our &mg, not having
© {kill and conduct enough in war, to be able
to defend us. And when God resolved to
transfer


_ - — l IS
-


Or CIVII-GOVERNMEN I. 93


transfer the government to David, it is in
these words, But now thy kingdom shall not
continue : the Lord hath sought him a man
after his own heart, and the Lord hath com-
manded him to be captain over his people, xiii.
14. As if the whole &kingly authority were
nothing else but to be their general: and
therefore the tribes who had stuck to Saul's
family, and opposed David's reign, when they
came to Hebron with terms of submission to
him, they tell him, amongst other arguments
they had to submit to him as to their king,
that he was in effect their ing in Saul's time,
and therefore they had no reason but to re-
ceive him as their 4»g now. Also (say they)
in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou
wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel,
and the Lord said unto thee, Thou shalt feed my
people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over
Was. 2
$. 110. Thus, whether a family by degrees
grew up into a common=-wealth, and the fatherly
authority being continued on to the elder fon,
every one in his turn growing up under it,
tacitly submitted to it, and the easiness and
equality of it not offending any one, every one
acquiesced, till time seemed to have con-
firmed it, and settled a right of succession by
prescription: or whether several families, or
the descendants of several families, whom
chance, neighbourhood, or business. brought
together, uniting into society, the need of a
e general,


294 Or Crvirt-GovERNMENT.


general, whose conduct might defend them


against their enemies in war, and the great
confidence the innocence and fincerity of that
poor but virtuous age, (such as are almost all
those which begin governments, that ever
come to last in the world) gave men one of
another, made the first beginners of common-
wealths generally put the rule into one man's
hand, without any other express limitation or
restraint, but what the nature of the thing,
and the end of government required : which
ever of those it was that at first put the rule
into the hands of a single person, certain it
is no body was intrusted with it but for the
public good and fafety, and to those ends, in
the infancies of common-wealths, those who
had it commonly used it. And unless they
had done so, young societies could not have
subsisted ; without such nursing fathers tender
and careful of the public weal, all govern-
ments would have sunk under the weakness
and infirmities of theit infancy, and the prince
and the people had soon perished together.


& 111. But though the golden age (before


vain ambition, and amor sceleratus habendi,
evil concupiscence, had corrupted men's minds
into a mistake of true power and honour)
had more virtue, and consequently better
governors, as well as Jess vicious subjects ;
and there was then no ftretching prerogative
on the one fide, to oppress the people; nor
confequently on the other, any dispute about


1 =
on OE ET OA *
, = "Sr. apart. — . y as &@ -
4 « » . - , — =


Sd >


"=
5
A
4
£4
4
4 p
4 o
42
.
1
8
1
|
by
of
7
FX
*%


*.
.
1
Dn
F
a
"Ws
7
# *
.
*


Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 295


privilege, to lessen ar restrain the power of the
magistrate, and so no contest betwixt rulers
and people about governors or government :
yet, when ambition and luxury in future
ages * would retain and increase the power,
without doing the business for which it was
given; and aided by flattery, taught princes
to have distinct and separate interests from
their people, men found it necessary to exa-
mine more carefully the original and rights
of government ; and to find out ways to re-
ftrain the exorbitances, and prevent the abuses
of that power, which they having intrusted
in another's hands only for their own good,
they found was made use of to hurt them.

$. 112. Thus we may see how probable it
is, that people that were naturally free, and
by their own consent either submitted to the
government of their father, or united together
out of different families to make a govern-
ment, should generally put the rule into one
man's hands, and chuse to be under the con-


U 4 duct


— * L:


— —


* At first, when some certain kind of regiment was once


approved. it may be nothing was then farther thought upon
0


r the manner of governing, but all permitted unto their
wisdom and discretion which were to rule, till by experience
they found this for all parts very inconvenient, so as the
thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed but
increase the sore which it should have cured. They saw,
that to live by one man's will, became the cause of all men's
misery. This constrained them to come unto laws wherein
all men might see their duty before hand, and know the
penalties of transgressing them. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. J. i.
ea » IQ f - ; | y


296 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


duct of a ingle person, without so much as
by express conditions limiting or regulating
his power, which they thought safe enough
in his honesty and prudence; though they
never dreamed of monarchy being Jure Di-
vino, which we never heard of among man-
kind, till it was revealed to us by the divinity
of this last age ; nor ever allowed paternal
power to have a right to dominion, or to be
the foundation of all government. And thus
much may suffice to shew, that as far as we
have any light from history, we have reason
to conclude, that all peaceful beginnings of
government have been feid i in the consent of the
people. I say peaceful, because I shall have
occasion in another place to speak of con-
quest, which some esteem a way of beginning
of governments.

The other objeftion I find urged against the
beginning of polities, in the way I have men-
tioned, is this, viz.

$. 113. That all men being born under g0-
vernment, some or other, it is impossible any of
them should ever be - free, and at hberty to unite
together, and begin a new one, or ever be able
to erect a lawful government.

If this argument be good; I ask, how
came so many lawful monarchies into the
world ? for if any body, upon this suppo-
sition, can shew me any one man in any age
of the world 77ee to begin a lawful monarchy,
I will be bound to shew him ten other free


men


Or CIVIIL- GOVERNMENT. 297


men at liberty, at the same time to unite and
begin a new government under a regal, or
any other form; it being demonstration, that
if any one, born under the dominion of ano»
ther, may be so free as to have a right to
command others in a new and distinct em-
pire, every one that is born under the dominion
of another may be so free too, and may be-
come a ruler, or subject, of a distin separate
government. And so by this their own prin-
ciple, either all men, however 4orn, are free,
or else there is but one lawful prince, one
lawful government in the world. And then
they have nothing to do, but barely to shew
us which that is; which when they have
done, I doubt not but all mankind will easily
agree to pay obedience to him.

8 114. Though it be a sufficient answer
to their objection, to shew that it involves
them in the same difficulties that it doth
those they use it against ; yet I shall endea-
vour to discover the weakness of this argu-
ment a little farther.

All men, say they, are born under govern-
ment, and therefore they cannot be at liberty to
begin a new one. Every one is born a subject
to his father, or his prince, and is therefore
under the perpetual tie of subjection and alle-
giance. It is plain mankind never owned nor
considered any such natural saibjection that they
were born in, to one or to the other that tied


them,


*


298 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


them, without their own consents, to a sub-
jection to them and their heirs.

FS. 115. For there are no examples so fre-
quent in history, both sacred and profane,
as those of men withdrawing themselves, and
their obedience, from the jurisdiction they
were born under, and the family or com-
munity they were bred up in, and setting up
zew governments in other places; from whence
sprang all that number of petty common-
wealths in the beginning of ages, and which
always multiplied, as long as there was room
enough, till the stronger, or more fortunate,
swallowed the weaker; and those great ones
again breaking to pieces, dissolved into lesser
dominions. All which are so many testi-
monies against paternal sovereignty, and
plainly prove, that it was not the 'natural
right of the father descending to his heirs,
that made governments in the beginning,
since it was impossible, upon that ground,
there should have been so many little king-
doms; all must have been but only one uni-
versal monarchy, if men had not been at
liberty to separate themselves from their fa-
milies, and the government, be it what it
will, that was set up in it, and go and make
distin common-wealths and other govern-

ments, as they thought fit
8 116. This has been the practice of the
world from its first beginning to this day ;
nor is it now any more hindrance to the
„„


7
*
=
11

' 8
.
kx
1
.


x o ;
2 5 5 8 2 . 2 * * wp * 4 2— 1 2 * * G 2 * 2 —
Nee


_—


2


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 299


freedom of mankind, that they are horn under
constituted and ancient polities, that have esta-
blished laws, and set forms of government,
than if they were born in the woods, amongst
the unconfined inhabitants, that run loose in
them : for those, who would persuade us,
that by being born under any government, We
are naturally subjects to it, and have no more
any title or pretence to the freedom of the
state of nature, have no other reason (bating
that of paternal power, which we -have al-
ready answered) to produce for it, but only,
because our fathers or progenitors passed away
their natural liberty, and thereby bound up
themselves and their posterity to a perpetual
subjection to the government, which they
themselyes submitted to. It is true, that
whatever engagements or promises any one
has made for himself, he is under the obli-
gation of them, but cannot, by any compact
whatsoever, bind his children or posterity : for
his son, when a man, being altogether as
free as the father, any act of the father can
no more give away the liberty of the son, than
it can of any body else : he may indeed annex
such conditions to the land, he enjoyed as a
subject of any common-wealth, as may oblige
his son to be of that community, if he will
enjoy those possessions which were this fa-
ther's ; because that estate being his father's
property, he may dispose, or settle it, as he
r


5. 117.


300 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
8. 117. And this has generally given the


occasion to mistake in this matter; because -
common-wealths not permitting any part of
their dominions to be dismembered, nor to
be enjoyed by any but those of their com-
munity, the son cannot ordinarily enjoy the
possessions of his father, but under the same
terms his father did, by becoming a member
of the society; whereby he puts himself
presently under the government he finds there
established, as much as any other subject of
that common- wealth. And thus he consent
of freemen, born under government, which only
makes them members of it, being given separately:
in their turns, as each comes to be of age,
and not in a multitude together ; people take.
no notice of it, and thinking it not done at
all, or not necessary, conclude they are na-
turally subjects as they are men. h
8 118. But, it is plain, governments them-'
selves understand it otherwise. ; they claim
no power over the fon, because of that they had
over the father ; nor look on children as being
their subjects, by their fathers being so. If
a subject of England have a child, by an English
woman in France, whose subje& is he ? Not
the king of England's; for he must have
leave to be admitted to the privileges of it :
nor the king of France's ; Re how then has
his father a liberty to bring him away, and
breed him as he pleases ? and who ever was


judged as a fraytor or de eserter, if he left, or
mat


8


Or CIVIIL- GOVERNMENT. 301


warred against a country, for being barely
born in it of parents that were aliens there?
It is plain then, by the practice of govern-
ments themselves, as well as by the law of
right reason, that. a child is born a subjeft of
no country or government. He is under his
father's tuition and authority, till he comes
to age of discretion ; and then he is a free-


man, at liberty what government he will put


himself under, what body politic he will
unite himself to: for if an Englisbman's son,


born in France, be at liberty, and may do


so, it is evident there is no tie upon him by
his father's being a subject of this kingdom ;


Nor is he bound up by any compact of his an-


cestors. And why then hath not his son, by


the same reason, the same liberty, though he
be born any where else? Since the power


that a father hath naturally over his children,
is the same, where-ever they be born, and
the ties of natural obligations, are not bounded
by the positive limits of kingdoms and com-
mon-wealths.


§. 119. Every man being, as has been


-shewed, naturally free, and nothing being
able to put him into subjection to any earthly
power, but only his own consent ; it is to be
- considered, what shall be understood to be a
Sufficient declaration of a man's conseyt, to make


him subje# to the laws of any government.
There is a common distinction of an express
and a tacit consent, which will concern our


present


\


302 Or Crvit-GoveRnMENT.
present case. No body doubts but an express


consent, of any man entering into any so-
ciety, makes him a perfect member of that
society, a subject of that government. The
difficulty is, what ought to be looked upon
as a facit consent, and how far it binds, 7. e.
how far any one shall be looked on to have
consented, and thereby submitted to any go-
vernment, where he has made no expressions
of it at all. And to this I fay, that every
man, that hath any possessions, or enjoyment,
of any part of the dominions of any govern-
ment, doth thereby give his racit consent, and
is as far forth obliged to obedience to the
laws of that government, during such enjoy-
ment, as any one under it ; whether this his
possession be of land, to him and his heirs
for ever, or a lodging only for a week; dr
whether it be barely travelling freely on the
highway; and in effect, it reaches as far as
the very being of any one within the terri-
tories of that government.

8. 120. To understand this the better, it is
fit to consider, that every man, when he at
first incorporates himself into any common-
wealth, he, by his uniting himself thereunto,


annexed also, and submits to the community,


those possessions, which he has, or shall ac-
quire, that do not already belong to any
other government: for it would be a direct
contradiction, for any one to enter into so-
ciety with others for the securing and re-

gulating


*
, >
AS wo"
12 — OI 2 5 2 FAS, . * , *
. —— — 3 .
hb ugh : 3 Ss 7 oe *
N TY :


g y Ws 8 — .
r S eadknPYftim +... — 2


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 303
gulating of property; and yet to suppose his
land, whose property is to be regulated by
the laws of the society, should be exempt
from the jurisdiction of that government, to
which he himself, the proprietor of the land,
is a subject. By the same act therefore,
whereby any one unites his person, which
was before free, to any common-wealth ; by
the same he unites his possessions, which were
before free, to it also; and they become,
both of them, person and possession, subject
to the government and dominion of that
common-wealth, as long as it hath a being.
Whoever therefore, from thenceforth, by
inheritance, purchase, permiflion, or other-
ways, enjoys any part of the land, so annexed
to, and under the government of that com-
mon-wealth, must take it with the condition it
is under; that is, of submitting to the govern-
ment of the common-wealth, under whole juris-
diction it is, as far forth as any subject of it.

F. 121. But since the government has a
direct jurisdiction only over the land, and
reaches the possessor of it, (before he has
actually incorporated himself in the society)
only as he dwells upon, and enjoys that; the
obligation any one is under, by virtue of such
enjoyment, to submit to the government, begins
and ends with the enjoyment ; so that whenever
the owner, who has given nothing but such
a tacit consent to the government, will, by


304 Or Civisz-GoverRnMENT:


donation, sale, or otherwise, quit the faid

ssession, he 1s at liberty to go and incor-
porate himself into any other common-
wealth; or to agree with others to begin a
new one, in vacuis locis, in any part of the


world, they can find free and unpossessed:


whereas he, that has once, by actual agree-
ment, and any express declaration, given his


consent to be of any common- wealth, is per-


petually and indispensibly obliged to be, and
remain unalterably a subject to it, and can


never be again in the liberty of the state of
nature; unless, by any calamity, the govern-
ment he was under comes to be dissolved;
or else by some public act cuts him off from


being any longer a member of it.

$. 122. But submitting to the laws of any
country, living quietly, and enjoying privi-
leges and protection under them, makes not


a man a member of that society : this is only


a local protection and homage due to and
from all those, who, -not being in a state of
war, come within the territories belonging
to any government, to all parts whereof the
force of its laws extends. But this no more
makes a man a member of that society, a per-
petual subje& of that common-wealth, than


it would make a man a subject to another, in
- whose family he found it convenient to abide
for some time; though, whilst he continued


in it, he were obliged to comply with the


laws, and submit to the government he


found


*4
8 4
£
9
3
N
4
-#]
+
2
=y
5
=
,”
4
-
—


Or CryrrI- GOVERNMENT. 305


found there. And thus we see, that #o-
reigners, by living all their lives under another
government, and enjoying the privileges and
protection of it, though they are bound, even
in conscience, to submit to its administration,
as far forth as any denison; yet do not thereby
come to be subjefts or members of that com-
mon-wealth, Nothing can make any man so,
but his actually entering into it by positive
engagement, and express promise and compact.
This is that, which I think, concerning the
beginning of political societies, and that con-


Sent which makes any one a member of any


common-wealth,
S
Of the Ends of Political Society and Govern-


ment.


8. 123. JF man in the state of nature be
so free, as has been said; if he


be absolute lord of his own person and pos-
sessions, equal to the greatest, and subject to
no body, . 4 will he part with his freedom ?
why will he give up this empire, and subject
himself to the dominion and controul of any
other power? To which it is obvious to an-
swer, that though in the state of nature he


hath such a right, yet the enjoyments of it


-
.
3
*
%, 21
Kd
.
*
"=
:


is very uncertain, and constantly exposed to


the invasion of others : for all being kings as


X much


305 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
much as he, every man his equal, and the
greater part no strict observers of equity and
Justice, the enjoyment of the property he has


! in this state is very unsafe, very unsecure.
| This makes him willing to quit a con-
;


r


dition, which, however free, is full of fears
and continual dangers: and it is not without
reason, that he seeks out, and is willing to
join in society with others, who are already
united, or have a mind to unite, for the mutual
preservation of their lives, liberties and estates,
which I call by the general name, property.
8. 124. The great and chef end, therefore,
of men's uniting into common-wealths, and
putting themselves under government, 7s the
preservation of their property. To which in
the state of nature there are many things
wanting. |
First, There wants an established, settled,
known lau, received and allowed by common
consent to be the standard of right and wrong,
and the common measure to decide all con-
troversies between them: for though the law
of nature be plain and intelligible to all ra-
tional creatures; yet men being biassed by
their interest, as well as ignorant for want of
| Rudy of it, are not apt to allow of it as a
law binding to them in the application of it
to their particular cases. „


-


— —


2 ET - py
- —_
— — — — — —
— — — ñ — — —uê — —
- —— — — _ — _ — =


————C — — — — — —
——— 1 , ˙—⁰— !! ⁵ Ä


WT
y


F. 125. Secondly, In the state of nature

there wants a Anon and indifferent judge, with

* authority to determine all differences ac-
FE”), f = cording


1


*


1
122
*
.
„
15 8
2


1 ⏑«Ü—ͤ ße ————
— —


©"
6


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 307


cording to the established law : for every one
in that state being both judge and executioner
of the law of nature, men being partial to
themselves, passion and revenge is very apt
to carry them too far, and with too much
heat, in their own cases; as well as negli-
gence, and unconcernedness, to make them
too remiss in other men's.

8. 126. Thirdly, In the state of nature there
often wants power to back and support the
sentence when right, and to give it due exe-
cution. They who by any injustice offended,
will seldom fail, where they are able, by force
to make good their injustice ; such resistance
many times makes the punishment dangerous,
and frequently destructive, to those who at-
tempt it.

§. 127. Thus mankind, notwithstanding
all the privileges of the state of nature, being
but in an ill condition, while they remain
in it, are quickly driven into society. Hence


it comes to pass, that we seldom find any


number of men live any time together in this
state. The inconveniencies that they are
therein exposed to, by the irregular and un-
certain exercise of the power every man has
of punishing the transgressions of others,
make them take sanctuary under the esta-
blished laws of government, and «herein
seek the preservation of their property. It is
this makes them so willingly give up every
one his single power of punishing, to be

X 2 exercited


208 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.


exercised by such alone, as shall be ap-
pointed to it amongst them; and by such
rules as the community, or those authorized
by them to that purpose, shall agree on. And


in this we have the original right and rise of


both the legislatrve and executive power, as well
as of the governments and societies them-
selves. ;

8. 128. For in the state of nature, to omit
the liberty he has of innocent delights, a man
has two. powers. |

The first is to do whatsoever he thinks fit
for the preservation of himself, and others
within the permission of the lau of nature:
by which law, common to them all, he and
all the reit of mankind are one community,
make up one society, distinct from all other
creatures. And were it not for the corrup-
tion and vitiousness of degenerate men, there
would be no need of any other; no necessity
that men should separate from this great and
natural community, and by positive agree-
ments combine into smaller and divided
associations.

The other power a man has in the state
of nature, is the power to punish the crimes
committed against that law. Both these he
gives up, when he joins in a private, if I may
so call it, or particular politic society, and 1n-
corporates into any common-wealth, separate
from the rest of mankind.


§. 129.


1 IN tt 8 4 2 ng f
WF. 4 — — "2% . 33 4 1 1 3 "hes " —
IE Ie nap bf weed


'F Or C1vit-GovERNMENT. 309
% 8. 129. The first power, viz. of doing what-
* foever he thought for the preservation of bim-
self, and the rest of mankind, he gives up to
be regulated by laws made by the society,
so far forth as the preservation of himself,
and the rest of that society shall require;
which laws of the society in many things
confine the liberty he had by the law of
nature.
FS. 130. Secondly, The power of punishing be
wholly gives up, and engages his natural force,
(which he might before employ in the exe-
cution of the law of nature, by his own single
authority, as he thought fit) to assist the
executive power of the society, as the law
thereof shall require : for being now in a new
state, wherein he is to enjoy many conve-
niencies, from the labour, assistance, and so-
ciety of others in the same community, as
well as protection from its whole strength ;
he is to part also with as much of his natural
liberty, in providing for himself, as the good,
© prosperity, and safety of the society shall re-
= quire; which is not only necessary, but just,
since the other members of the society do
the like. :

98. 131. But though men, when they enter
into society, give up the equality, liberty,
and executive power they had in the state of

nature, into the hands of the society; to be
so far disposed of by the legislative, as the
: good of the society shall require; yet it being
” =: X 3 only


310 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


only with an intention in every one the better
to preserve himself, his liberty and property;
(for no rational creature can be supposed to
change his condition with an intention to be
worse) the power of the society, or legislative
constituted by them, can never be supposed to
extend farther, than the common good; but is
obliged to secure every one's property, by
providing against those three defects above
mentioned, that made the state of nature so
unsafe and uneasy. And fo whoever has the
legislative or supreme power of any common-
wealth, is bound to govern by established
ftlanding laws, promulgated and known to the
people, and not by extemporary decrees; by
mdifferent and upright judges, who are to
decide controversies by those laws; and to
employ the force of the community at home,
only in the execution of such laws, or abroad
to prevent or redress foreign injuries, and
secure the community from inroads and in-
vasion. And all this to be directed to no
other end, but the peace, safety, and public
good of the people.


g .
Of the Forms of a Common-wealth.
§. 132. 1 E majority having, as has been


8 i shewed, upon men's first uniting
into society, the whole power of the com-


munity


N -
9 Fr En ad 6D ; n
— — n 3 ven. — * n


=


7,
*
af
*
1 9
«
£4
*
, 1
8
4
00
3
0 1 y
4


7 a cd
- 4 _
o $
w - P » * ——
4 4 WE | 4


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 311


munity naturally in them, may employ all
that power in making laws for the commu-
nity from time to time, and executing those
laws by officers of their own appointing ;
and then the form of the government is a
perfect democracy: or else may put the power
of making laws into the hands of a few select


men, and their heirs or successors; and then
it is an o/zgarchy: or else into the hands of


one man, and then it is a monarchy : if to
him and his heirs, it is an Bereditary mo-
narchy : if to him only for life, but upon
his death the power only of nominating a
successor to return to them; an elective mo-
narchy. And so accordingly of these the
community may make compounded and
mixed forms of government, as they think
good. And if the legislative power be at
first given by the majority to one or more
persons only for their lives, or any limited
time, and then the supreme power to revert
to them again; when it is so reverted, the
community may dispose of it again anew
into what hands they please, and fo constitute
a new form of government : for the form of
government depending upon the placing the su-
preme power, which is the legislative, it being
impossible to conceive that an inferior power
should prescribe to a superior, or any but the
supreme make laws, according as the power
of making laws is placed, such is the form
of the common« wealth.


R 4 F. 133.


312 Or CiIVILI- GOVERNMENT.


§. 133. By common- wealth, I must be un-
derstood all along to mean, not a democracy,
or any form of government, but - inde-
pendent community, which the Latines signified
by the word civitas, to which the word
which best answers in our language, is com-
mon- wealth, and most properly expresses such
a society of men, which community or city
in Englisb does not; for there may be sub-
ordinate communities in a government ; and
city amongst us has a quite different notion
from common-wealth : and therefore, to avoid
ambiguity, I crave leave to use the word
common-wealth in that sense, in which I find
it used by king James the first; and I take
it to be its genuine signification; which if


any body dislike, I consent with him to
change it for a better,


—


— ——


C-H:AP.. KI:
Of the Extent of the Legislative Power.


§. 134. T HE great end of men's entering
into society, being the enjoy-
ment of their properties in peace and safety,
and the great instrument and means of that
being the laws established in that society ; the
first and fundamental pasitive law of all com-
mon-wealths zs the establishing of the legi/lative
power; as the ft and fundamental re

aw,


* © os, 1 * a Af 4 5 8 4 ; 25 VL.
. ͤ K riots, ea 3 7 Yo OO Lo ONT s
NOSE FO. RE, * 1 4 N Ln «
. XS * "4 L
1 Pp 5 Ie 7 4 x 7. ar


4 « *
d 8 r 8 2 5 5 .
s 3 1 * 4 „ 3 44 * 4 —_— oo *
N wy oe _ . a7 = has * ut 5 >; 7 "C2 2 C
is g . 1 *. x rn BE 4 - . wt _ ö
N oe 4 RIFE. 23
4


a = 8 2 2 *a ”
o AW A " > + 2 - *
„ r
— - * „ 5 py -E 2 - -
» FS __ 6


OF C1vilr-GovERNMENT. 313


Jaw, which is to govern even the legislative
itself, 7s the preservation of the society, and
(as far as will consist with the public good)
of every person in it. This Agiislati ve is not
only the supreme power of the common-wealth,
but sacred and unalterable in the hands where
the community have once placed it; nor can
any edict of any body else, in what form soever
conceived, or by what power soever backed,
have the force and obligation of a /aw, which
has not its Hanction from that legislative which
the public has chosen and appointed : for
without this the law could not have that,
which is absolutely necessary to its being a
law, * the consent of the society, over whom
no body can have a power to make laws, but
by their own consent, and by authority re-

ceived


— —


2 —


The lawful power of making laws to command whole

olitic societics-of men, belonging so properly unto the same
intire societies, that for any prince or potentate of what kind
soever upon earth, to exercise * same of himself, and not
by express commission immediately and personally received


from God, or else by authority derived at the first from' their


consent, upon whose persons they impose laws, it is no better
than mere tyranny. Laws they are not therefore which public
approbation hath not made so. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. JI. i. set.
10. Of this point therefore we are to note, that fith men
naturally have no full and perfect power to command whole
politic multitudes of men, therefore utterly without our con-
sent, we could in such fort be at no man's commandment
living. And to be commanded we do consent, when that
society, whereof we be a part, hath at any time before con-
sented, without revoking the same after by the like universal
agreement.

Laws therefore human, of what kind so ever, are available
by consent. Ibid.


314 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.


ceived from them; and therefore all the
obedience, which by the most folemn ties any
one can be obliged zo pay, ultimately termi-
nates in this supreme power, and is directed
by those laws which it enacts: nor can any
oaths to any foreign power whatsoever, or
any domestic subordinate power, discharge
any member of the society from his obedience
to the legislati ve, acting pursuant to their trust ;
nor oblige him to any obedience contrary to
the laws so enacted, or farther than they do
allow; it being ridiculous to imagine one
can be tied ultimately to obey any power in

the society, which is not the supreme.
§. 135. Though the Iegislative, whether
placed in one or more, whether it be always
in being, or only by intervals, though it be
the supreme power in every common- wealth;

et,

: Fir/?, It is not, nor can possibly be abso-
lately arbitrary over the lives and fortunes of
the people: for it being but the joint power
of every member of the society given up to
that person, or assembly, which is legislator ;
it can be no more than those persons had in
a state of nature before they entered into so-
ciety, and gave up to the community : for
no body can transfer to another more power
than he has in himfelf; and no body has an
absolute arbitrary power over himself, or over
any other, to destroy his own life, or take
away the life or property of another. A man,
as


— TTIS -


Or Civji-GOYERNMENT. 315


as has been proved, cannot subject himself
to the arbitrary power of another; and having
in the state of nature no arbitrary power over
the life, liberty, or possession of another, but
only so much as the law of nature gave him
for the preservation of himself, and tne rest
of mankind; this is all he doth, or can
give up to the common-wealth, and by it
to the /egi/lative power, so that the legislative
can have no more than this. Their power,
in the utmost bounds of it, is limited to the


public good of the society. It is a power,


that hath no other end but preservation, and
therefore can never * have a right to destroy,
enslave, or designedly to impoverish the sub-
jeas. The obligations of the law of nature
cease not in society, but only in many cases
are drawn closer, and have by human laws


known


N .


mn —


Two foundations there are which bear up public fo-
cieties; the one a natural inclination, whereby all men defire
sociable life and fellowship ; the other an order, expresly or
secretly agreed upon, touching the manner of their union
in living together: the latter is that which we call the law -
of a common-weal, the very soul of a politic body, the
parts whereof are by law animated, held together, and set
on work in such actions as the common good requireth.
Laws pou, ordained for external order and regiment
amongst men, are never framed as they should be, unless
1 the will of man to be inwardly obstinate, rebellious,
and averse from all obedience to the sacred laws of his
nature; in a word, unless presuming man to be, in regard
of his depraved mind, little better than a wild beaft, they
do accordingly provide, notwithstanding, so to frame his out-
ward actions, that they be no hindrance unto the common
good, for which focieties are instituted. Unless they do this,
they are not perfect. Hookers Eccl. Pol. I. i. sed. 10.


216 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


known penalties annexed to them, to inforce
their observation. Thus the law of nature
stands as an eternal rule to all men, /egi/-
lators as well as others. The rules that they
make for other men's actions, must, as well
as their own and other men's actions, be
conformable to the law of nature, 7z. e. to
the will of God, of which that is a decla-
ration, and the fundamental law of nature being
the preservation of mankind, no human sanction
can be good, or valid against it.

8. 136. Secondly, The legislative, or su-
preme authority, cannot assume to its self a
power to rule by extemporary arbitrary de-
crees, but ic bound to dispense justice, and decide
the rights of the subject by promulgated standing
laws, and known authorized judges : for the
law of nature being unwritten, and fo no
where to be found but in the minds of men,


they who through passion or interest shall


miscite, or misapply it, cannot so easily be
convinced of their mistake where there is no
established judge: and so it serves not, as it
ought, to determine the rights, and fence the

properties


—


Human laws are measures in res of men whose actions
they must direct, howbeit such measures they are as have also


their higher rules to be measured by, wbich rules are two,
the law of God, and the law of nature; so that laws human
must be made according to the general laws of nature, and
without contradiction to any positive law of scripture, other-


wise they are ill made. Hookers Eccl. Pol. I. iii. see. g.


To constrain men to any thing inconvenient doth seem


unreasonable. 137d. I. i. sect. Io.


ay * N een E 1 .
nnen * | -
...r
WP" 0 TAE * i.» 7 » het. "4 .
WW . . * — = 1


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 317
properties of those that live under it, espe-
cially where every one 1s judge, interpreter,
and executioner of it too, and that in his
own case : and he that has right on his fide,
having ordinarily but his own single strength,
hath not force enough to defend himself from
injuries, or to punish delinquents. To avoid
these inconvemencies, which disorder men's
properties in the state of nature, men unite
into societies, that they may have the united
strength of the whole society to secure ' and
defend their properties, and may have „landing
rules to bound it, by which every one may
know what is his. To this end it is that
men give up all their natural power to the
society which they enter into, and the com-
munity put the legislative power into such
hands as they think fit, with this trust, that
they shall be governed by declared laws, or
else their peace, quiet, and property will
{till be at the same uncertainty, as it was in
the state of nature.

$. 137. Absolute arbitrary power, or go-
verning without settled flanding laws, can nei-
ther of them consist with the ends of society
and government, which men would not quit
the freedom of the state of nature for, and
tie themselves up under, were it not to pre-
serve their lives, liberties and fortunes, and
by flated rules of right and property to secure
their peace and quiet. It cannot be supposed


that they should intend, had they a power
so


318 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


so to do, to give to any one, or more, an
ebsolnte arbitrary power over their persons and
estates, and put a force into the magistrate's
hand to execute his unlimited will arbitrarily
upon them. This were to put themselves
into a worse condition than the state of na-
tare, wherein they had a liberty to defend
their right against the injuries of others,
and were upon equal terms of force to main-
tain it, whether invaded by a fingle man,
or many in combination. Whereas by sup

poling they have given up themselves to the
absolute arbitrary power and will of a legis-
lator, they have difarmed themselves, and
armed him, to make a prey of them when
he pleases; he being in a much worse con-
dition, who 1s exposed to the arbitrary power
of one man, who has the command of
100,000, than he that is exposed to the arbi-
trary power of 100,000 fingle men ; no body
being secure, that his will, who has such a
command, is better than that of other men,
though his force be 100,000 times stronger.
And therefore, whatever form the common-
wealth is under, the ruling power ought to
govern by declared and recerved laws, and not
by extemporary dictates and undetermined
resolutions : for then mankind will be in a
far worse condition than in the state of
nature, if they shall have armed one, or a
few men with the joint power of a multitude,
to force them to obey at pleasure the exor-


4 p bitant


"7
a


2 * eg >
E og,» 1


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 319
bitant and unlimited decrees of their sudden


thoughts, or unrestrained, and till that mo-


ment unknown wills, without having any
measures set down which may guide and
justify their actions: for all the power the
government has, being only for the good of
the society, as it ought not to be arbitrary and
at pleasure, so it ought to be exercised by a-
blished and promulgated laws; that both the
people may know their duty, and be safe and
secure within the limits of the law ; and the
rulers too kept within their bounds, and not
be tempted, by the power they have in their
hands, to employ it to such purposes, and
by such measures, as they would not have
known, and own not willingly. |

8. 138. Thirdly, The supreme power cannot take
from any man any part of his property without
his own consent : for the preservation of pro-
perty being the end of government, and that
for which men enter into society, it necessarily
supposes and requires, that the people should
have property, without which they must be
supposed to lose that, by entering into so-
ciety, which was the end for which they
entered into it; too gross an absurdity for
any man to own. Men therefore in society
having property, they have such a right to


the goods, which by the law of the com-


munity are their's, that no body hath a right
to take their substance or any part of it from


them, without their own consent : without
this


n 2 — —


320 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


this they have no property at all; for I have
truly no property in that, which another can
by right take from me, when he pleases,
against my consent. Hence it is a mistake to
think, that the supreme or legislative power of
any common-wealth, can do what it wall,
and dispose of the estates of the subject arbi-
trarily, or take any part of them at pleasure.
This is not much to be feared in govern-
ments where the /egi//atrve consists, wholly or
in part, in assemblies which are variable,
whose members, upon the dissolution of the
assembly, are subjects under the common
laws of their country, equally with the rest.
But in governments, where the Iegislative is in
one lasting assembly always in being, or in
one man, as in absolute monarchies, there
is danger still, that they will think them-
selves to have a distinct interest from the
rest of the community ; and so will be apt
to increase their own riches and power, by
taking what they think fit from the people :
for a man's property is not at all secure, tho'
there be good and equitable laws to set the
bounds of it between him and his fellow
subjects, if he who commands those subjects
have power to take from any private man,
what part he pleases of his property, and ule
and dispose of it as he thinks good.
F. 139. But government, into whatsoever
hands it is put, being, as I have before shewed,
intrusted with this condition, and for this


5


end,


4 or dispute the most dangerous or unreasonable


6


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT 321
end, that men might have and secure their
properties; the prince, or senate, however it
may have power to make laws, for the re-
gulating of property between the subjects one
amongst another, yet can never have a power
to take to themselves the whole, or any part
of the subjects property, without their own
consent :' fot this would be in effect to leave
them no propert at all. And to let us see,
that even ab/elute power, whete it is necessary,
is not arbitrary by being absolute, but is still
limited by that reason, and confined to those
ends, which required it in some cases to be
absolute, we need look no farther than the
common practice of martial discipline : for
the preservation of the army, and in it of
the whole common- wealth, requires an ab-
flute obedience to the command of every su-
perior officer, and it is justly death to disobey


of them; but yet we see, that neither the
Lberjeant, that could command a soldier to


[ march up to the mouth of a cannon, or stand


in a breach, where he is almost sure to perish,


*
i 1


4 I
\ *
$; "#.
>
N 8
* ©%
1
"1"


2 can command that soldier to give him one


benny of his money; nor the general, that
can condemn him to death for deserting his
I pot, or for not obeying the most desperate
Irrer can yet, with all his absolute power of
life and death, dispose of one farthing of that
soldier s estate, or seize one jot of his goods;


1 Y wow yet he can command any thing, and


Y hang


\


* Wo
9 , 4 N -
* 7 0


322 Or CrVII- GOVERNMENT.


hang for the least disobedience; because such
a blind obedience is necessary to that end,

for which the commander has his power, viz.
the preservation of the rest; but the disposing
of his goods has nothing to do with it.

8. 140. It is true, governments cannot be
supported without great charge, and it is fit
every one who enjoys his share of the pro-
tection, should pay out of his estate his pro-
portion for the maintenance of it. But still
it must be with his own consent, 1. e. the
consent of the majority, giving it either by
themselves, or their representatives chosen by
them: for if any one shall claim a power 7o
lay and levy taxes on the people, by his own
authority, and without such consent of the |
people, he thereby . invades . the. fundamental |
law of ee and subverts the end of go-
vernment: for what property have in that,
Which another may TIE _— e when he


3 form of the . 8
which is by constituting. the le gislative, and 4
appointing in whole hands that all be. And
hen the people have said, We will submit to
rules, and be governed by las made by suen
Ann 190: in. such forms, no body else can 0


*
-


: ay 8


— 5 2 7
” " R 2
x b - . .
— » 2 — * -
Þ " — as.
- —
. " P n..
2 W . -
7 2 g N 2 —
24G, 5 : a be. Io,
3 D « 3 —


Wo 9 *
* at * > * 4
4 . ”
5 . _—_ * * 4 4 £ k 1 v.
a © 7 — . 3 x — e
: _ Op ©. i go FD end no ne Cadena. Cote” = + =.
je * 2 ® 4 of MN _ To - 4 p by p — : F | | 1
; n — . 3 CORTE on Ad 23 5 N r a * . *
2 — ety . 2 = EE een of © — OS >. = 3 b N 3 * — *
> R 8 * « "= » — 0
A 8 | EMS
"0..." I *


Or CtVII- GOVERNMENT. 323


say other men shall make /aws for them; nor
can the people be bound by any laus, but
such as are enacted by those whom they have
chosen, and authorized to make /aws for
them. The. power of the /epr/latrve, being
derived from the people by a positive volun-
tary grant and institution, can be no other
than what that positive grant conveyed, which
being only to make /aws, and not to make
legislators, the legislative can have no power
to transfer their authority of making laws,
and place it in other hands. =
F. 142. These are the bounds which the
trust, that is put in them by the society, and
the law of God and nature, have et to the
legislative power of every common-wealth, in
all forms of government. |

First, They are to govern by promulgated
eftabhshed laws, not to be varied in particular
cases, but to have one rule for rich and
poor, for the favourite at court, and the
country man at plough. e
Secondly, These /aws also ought to be


$ designed for no other end ultimately, but he


good of the people. 3
Thirdly, They must ot raise taxes on the


N J property of the people, without' the consent of the
* people, given by themselves, or their deputies.


And this properly concerns only such go-


2 vernments where the /egilative. is always in
being, or at least where the people have
not reserved any part of the legislative to


1 2 deputies,


324 Or CTvII-GOoVERN MEN.
deputies, to be from time to time chosen by
themselves.

Fourthly, The legislative neither must nor
can transfer the power of making laws to any


body else, or place it any where, but where
the people have.


CHAP. XII.
Of the Legislative, Executive, and Federative
Power of the Common-ealth.


8. 143. HE legissative power is that,
which has a right 70 direct
how the force of the common-wealth shall be
employed for preserving the community and
the members of it. But because those laws
which are constantly to be executed, and
- Whose force is always to continue, may be
made in a little time; therefore there is no
need, that the legislative should be always in
being, not having always business to do.
And because it may be too great a temptation
to human frailty, apt to grasp at power, for
the same persons, who have the power of
making laws, to have also in their hands the
power to execute them, whereby they may
exempt themselves from obedience to the
laws they make, and suit the law, both in
its making, and execution, to their own
private advantage, and thereby come to have
a distinct interest from the rest of the com-

2 6 munity,


%


-
=, iY
f
*s
A
- =
5
oe
5
ef


ä


8 i } 3 : 8 4 X *
2


* .


c


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 92g


munity, contrary to the end of society and
government: therefore in well- ordered com-
mon- wealths, where the good of the whole
is so considered, as it ought, the legislati ve
power is put into the hands of divers persons,
who duly assembled, have by themselves, or
jointly with others, a power to make laws,
which when they have done, being separated
again, they are themselves subject to the laws
they have made; which is a new and near tie
upon them, to take care, that they make
them for the public good.

§. 144. But because the laws, that are at.
once, and in a short time made, have a con-
stant and lasting force, and need a perpetual
execution, Or an attendance thereunto ; there-
fore it is necessary there should be a power


always in being, which should see to the
execution of the laws that are made, and
remain in force. And thus the /egi/lative and
executive power come often to be separated.


§. 145. There is another power in every


2 common-wealth, which one may call na-
2 Zural, because it is that which answers to the
power every man naturally had before he
entered into society: for though in a com-
mon- wealth the members of it are distinct
persons {till in reference to one another, and
as such are governed by the laws of the so-
cCiety; yet in reference to the rest of man-
= kind, they make one body, which is, as every
member of it before was, {till in the state of


4 nature


326 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


nature with the rest of mankind. Hence it
is, that the controversies that happen between
any man of the society with those that are
out of it, are managed by the public; and
an injury done to a member of their body,
engages the whole in the reparation of it.
So that under this consideration, the whole
community is one body in the state of nature,
in respect of all other states or persons out of
its community.

F. 146. This therefore contains the power
of war and peace, leagues and alliances, and
all the transactions, with all persons and com-
munities without the common-wealth, and
may be called federative, if any one pleases.
So the thing be understood, I am indifferent
as to the name. |
FS. 147. These two powers, executive and
Federative, though they be really distin& in
themselves, yet one comprehending the exe-
cution of the municipal laws of the society
within its self, upon all that are parts of it ;
the other the management of the security and
 Intereft of the public without, with all those
that it may receive benefit or damage from,
yet they are always almost united. And
though this sederative power in the well or
ill management of it be of great moment to
the common-wealth, yet it is much less ca-


pable to be directed by antecedent, standing, | q
positive laws, than the executive; and so must
N be left to the W and wisdom


* *
. 38 ?
TT 1 3
a
2 1 -
.
14
2
. 9 * N
9 5
„ *
5 1 "
FOI A
2
VP -
.
0


1
LA
*
**
71
5
oF
. is
4
Fg
9
' if
* .
— oy -
» &*
1
— 4
8 M5
7 *
V
„
5 i
2 4
* \
=
7 ys
g 7 nd
r wo
5 YL
, N
&
to
' *
= ws |
1- 5
1
8 7 7
7 *
o g *
\ © +


*
7 „ *
* "RE i 83
+» bo — —
A .


Or CiviL-GOvERNMENT. 327


of those, whose hands it is in, to be managed
for the public good : for the /aws that con-
cern subjects one amongst another, being to
direct their actions, may well enough precede
them. But what is to be done in reference
to foreigners, depending much upon their
actions, and the variation of deligns and
interests, must be /zf# in great part 7 the


prudence of those, who have this pawer com-


mitted to them, to be managed. by. the best
of their skill, for the advantage of the com-
mon-wealth.

$. 148. Though, as I said, the executive
and federative power of every community be


really distin& in themselves, yet they are


hardly to be separated, and placed at the
same time, in the hands of distin& persons :
for both of them requiring the force of the
society for their exercise, it is almost im-
practicable to place the force of the com-
mon- wealth in distinct, and not subordinate
hands; or that the executive and federative


power should be © Alec: in persons, that might


act separately, whereby the force of the —


— be under different commands ; which


would be apt some time or other to cause
Gularder nh Fe ad WET


328 Or CIVII-GOVERXNMENT.


CHAP. XIII.


Of the Subordination of the Powers of the
Common=wealth,” a


§. 149. 12 in a constituted com-

mon- wealth, standing upon
its own basis, and acting according to its own
nature, that is, acting for the preservation of
the community, there can be but ane supreme
power, which is the legislative, to which all
the rest are and must be subordinate, yet tage
legislative being only a fiduciary power to at
for certain ends, there remains still in the V
people a supreme power to remove or alter the
legislative, when they find the /egrflative act :
contrary to the trust reposed in them : for all |
power given with trust for the attaining an |
end, being limited by that end, whenever
that end is manifestly neglected, or opposed,


— .
x P


* 4 —
CE, - 4 .
„ See ie


þ
the 7ru/t must necessarily be forfeited, and the \
power devolve into the hands of those that
gave it, who may place it anew where they *
all think best for their safety and security.
And thus the community perpetually retains a
supreme power of saving themselves from the q
attempts and defigns of any body, even of
their legislators, whenever they shall be fa


foolish, or so wicked, as to lay and carry on
defigns against the liberties and properties of
the subject : for no man or society of men,
| having a power to deliver up their preser-

valion,


— 4 v4 « 4 _
NE RN


2 4 a
" . : * 1
N 4 * - es I, , — x 22
4 \ « a - * * . — * 4 my
r . „ „ 2 $4
r 1 = e 5 R 1
Sale on BE Y a .


» 6


.
r


*


* 1
' 1 — p
, "
9 —" $7
«> 4 . * 4 Ln S 5% Ons
r r
= — 5 oY . .


1


: *
OE. . 4 * .


Or CrVII- GOVERNMENT. 329


vation, or consequently the means of it, to
the absolute will and arbitrary dominion of
another; when ever any one shall go about
to bring them into such a slavish condition,
they will always have a right to preserve,
what they have not a power to part with;
and to rid themselves of those, who invade
this fundamental, sacred, and unalterable law
of self-preservation, for which they entered
into society. And thus the community may
be said in this respec to be always the supreme
power, but not as considered under any form
of government, because this power of the


people can never take place till. the govern-


ment be dissolved.


8. 150. In all cases, whilst the government
subsists, the legislative is the supreme power:
for what can give laws to another, must needs
be superior to him; and since the legislative
is no otherwise legislative of the society, but
by the right it has to make laws for all the
parts, and for every member of the society,
prescribing rules to their actions, and giving

ower of execution, where they are trans-
gressed, the legislatiue must needs be the sa-
preme, and all other powers, in any members
or parts of the society, derived from and
subordinate to it.

8.151. In some common-wealths, where
the legislative is not always in being, and the
executive 1s vested in a fingle person, who has
also a share in the legislative ; there that single


person


330 Or CIVYII- GOVERNMENT.


person in a very tolerable sense may also be
called /upreme : not that he has in himself all
the supreme power, which is that of law-
making ; but because he has in him the /u-
preme execution, from whom all inferior ma-
gistrates derive all their several subordinate
powers, or at least the greatest part of them :
having also no legislative superior to him,
there being no law to be made without his
consent, which cannot be expected should
ever subject him to the other part of the
legislative, he is properly enough in this sense
supreme.” But yet it is to be. observed, that
tho" oaths of allegiance and fealty are taken
to him, it is not to him as supreme legislator,
but as supreme executor of the law, made by
a joint power of him with others; allegiance
being nothing but an ebedrence according 10
{aw, which when he violates, he has no right
to obedience, nor can claim it otherwise than
as the public . person vested with the power


of the law, and so is to be considered as the


image, phantom, or representative of the
common- wealth, acted by the will of the
society, declared in its laws; and thus he has


no will, no power, but that of the law. But


when he quits this representation, this public


will, and acts by his own private will, he


degrades himself, and is but a single private


2 without power, and without will, that


24


as any right to obedience; the members
163155: ieee e | owing


* [
.
*


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 331


owing no obedience but to the public will of
the society.
FS. 152. The executive power, placed any
* where but in a person that has also a share
in the legislative, is visibly subordinate and
* accountable to it, and may be at pleasure
changed and displaced ; so that it is not the
supreme executive power, that 1s exempt from
subordination, but the supreme executive power
vested in one, who having a share in the
legislative, has no distin& superior legislative
to be subordinate and accountable to, farther
than he himself shall join and consent ; fo
that he is no more subordinate than he himself
shall think fit, which one may certainly con-
clude will be but very little. Of other mi-
nisterial and subordinate powers in a common-
Wealth, we need not speak, they being so
multiplied with infinite variety, in the dif-
ferent customs and constitutions of distinct
 common-wealths, that it is impossible to give
a particular account of them all. Only thus
much, which is necessary to our present pur-
pose, we may take notice of concerning them,
that they have no manner of authority, any of
them, beyond what is by - positive grant and
commission delegated to them, and are all
of them accountable to some other power in
the common- wealth. | ob


6517 C61 20/6 Jul It is not necessary, no, nor so much
as convenient, that the /zg;/atzive should be
always in being; but absolutely necessary that
E the


FR 0
4 | - «24 * 1
- x o {wang Tay. =
”" 8 * „ .
P
1


330 Or Civit-GoveRNMENT.


person in a very tolerable sense may also be
called /upreme : not that he has in himself all
the supreme power, which is that of law-
making; but because he has in him the /u-
preme execution, from whom all inferior ma-
gistrates derive all their several subordinate
powers, or at least the greatest part of them :
having also no legislative superior to him,
there being no law to be made without his
consent, which cannot be expected should
ever subject him to the other part of the
legislative, he is properly enough in this sense
supreme. But yet it is to be. observed, that
tho' oaths of allegiance and fealty are taken
to him, it is not to him as supreme legislator,
but as supreme executor of the law, made by
a joint power of him with others; allegiance
being nothing but an cbedience according to
law, which when he violates, he has no right
to obedience, nor can claim it otherwise than
as the public person vested with the power
of the law, and so is to be considered as the
image, phantom, or representative of the
common-wealth, acted by the will of the
society, declared in its laws; and thus he has
no will, no power, but that of the law. But
when he quits this representation, this public
will, and acts by his own private will, he
degrades himself, and is but a single private
rson without power, and without will, that
as any right to obedience; the members

#3931594 Ong


*
9 %


VV 7% T7;


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 337


owing no obedience but to the public will of
the society.

F. 152. The executive power, placed any
where but in a person that has also a share
in the legislative, is visibly subordinate and
accountable to it, and may be at pleasure
changed and displaced ; so that it is not the


supreme executive power, that is exempt from
subordination, but the supreme executive power


vested in one, who having a share in the


legislative, has no distin& superior legislative


to be subordinate and accountable to, farther
than he himself shall join and consent ; to
that he is no more subordinate than he himself
shall think fit, which one may certainly con-
clude will be but very little. Of other mi-
nifterial and subordinate powers in a common-


Wealth, we need not speak, they being to


multiplied with infinite variety, in the dif-
ferent customs and constitutions of 2
common-wealths, that it is impossible to

a particular account of them all. Only *
much, which is necessary to our present pur-
pose, we may take notice of concerning them,
that they have no manner of authority, any of


them, beyond what is by positive grant and


commission delegated to them, and are all
of them accountable to some other power in
the common- wealth.

$. 153. It is not necessary, no, nor fo much
as convenient, that the gi should be
ahways in being; but absolutely neceiiary that


3 the


332 Or CITIVII-GOVIERNMENT.


the executive power should, because there is
not always need of new laws to be made, but
always need of execution of the laws that
are made. When the /eg;//ative hath put the
execution of the laws, they make, into other
hands, they have a power still to resume it
out of those hands, when they find cause,
and to punish for any mal-administration |
against the laws. The same holds also in 1
regard of the federative power, that and the N
executive being both inisterial and subordinate |
to the legiflative, which, as has been shewed,
in a constituted common-wealth is the su-
preme. The /egi/sative allo in this case being
supposed to consist of several persons, (for if
it be a fingle person, it cannot but be always
in being, and fo will, as supreme, naturally
have the supreme executive power, together
with the legislative) may assemble, and exercise
their legislature, at the times that either their
original constitution, or their own adjourn-
ment, appoints, or when they please ; if nei-
ther of these hath appointed any time, or
there be no other way prescribed to convoke
them : for the supreme power being placed
in them by the people, it is always in them,
and they may exercise it when they please,
unless by their original constitution they are


"4 % 4 » 4 * wy FY _ »
* F * c 2 9 Wat 3 * 1
A * 1 E * or gb [ls
CA 2 1 7. © bITY * r


*
*
% [4
77
*
"x"
3.
=
8
LY
2
«x
* 9
1
*
„
os
LY *
1
* 4
by
15 o
5
7 3
"i
£ th
1
8
3
1
Ig *
4 *
.
2 *
44
* 2
9
”
4
9
-
22
i
_ -
v7
3
N *
3 6
+ 2
”
—*
4
*
4 4
Ay
.
—


limited to certain seasons, or by an act of $
their supreme power they have adjourned ta 4
a certain time; and when that time comes, 7


they have a right to afemble and act again. 3
455 + §. 154. '$


Or CTVII-GOVERN MINT. 333
8. 154. If the segislative, or any part of it,
be made up of representatives chosen for that
time by the people, which afterwards return
into the ordinary state of subjects, and have
no share in the legislature but upon a new
choice, this power of chusing must also be
exercised by the people, either at certain ap-
pointed seasons, or else when they are sum-
moned to it; and in this latter case, the
power of convoking the legislative is ordi-
narily placed in the executive, and has one
of these two limitations in respe& of time :
that either the original constitution requires
their assembling and acting at certain intervals,
and then the executive power does nothing
but ministerially issue directions for their
electing and assembling, according to due
forms; or else it is left to his prudence to
call them by new elections, when the oc- .
casions or exigencies of the public require
the amendment of old, or making of new
laws, or the redress or prevention of an
inconveniencies, that lie on, or threaten the
people. ———
$. 155. It may be demanded here, What if
the executive power, being possessed of the
force of the common-wealth, shall make use
of that force to hinder the meeting and acting
of” the legisiative, when the original consti-
tution, or the public exigencies require it ?
I fay, using force upon the people without
authority, and contrary to the trust put in


him


334 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
him that does so, is a state of war with the


people, who have a right to reinstate their


legislative in the exercise of their power: for
having erected a legislative, with an intent
they should exercise the power of making
laws, either at certain set times, or when
there is need of it, when they are hindered
by any force from what is so necessary to the
fociety, and wherein the safety and preser-
vation of the people consists, the people have
a right to remove it by force. In all states
and conditions, the true remedy of force with-
out authority, is to oppose force to it. The
use of force without authority, always puts
him that uses it into a fate of war, as the
aggressor, and renders him liable to be treated
accordingly.


F. 156. The power of assembling and 2


missing the legislative, placed in the executive,
gives not the executive a superiority over it,
but is a fiduciary trust placed in him, for the
fafety of the people, in a case where the un-
certainty and variableness of human affairs
could not bear a steady fixed rule: for it not
being possible, that the first framers of the
government should, by any forefight, be fo
much masters of future events, as to be able
to prefix so just periods of return and du-
ration to the af/emblies of the legislative, in all
times to come, that might exactly answer all
the exigencies of the commou- wealth; the
best remedy could be found for this defect,
Was


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 335


was to trust this to the prudence of one who
was always to be present, and whose business
it was to watch over the public good. Con-
stant frequent meetings f the legislative, and
long continuations of their assemblies, without
necessary occasion, could not but be burden-
4 some to the people, and must necesfarily in
4 time produce more dangerous inconveniencies,
4 and yet the quick turn of affairs might be
| sometimes such as to need their present help:
any delay of their convening might endanger
the public; and sometimes too their business
might be so great, that the limited time of
their fitting might be too short for their
work, and rob the public of that benefit which
could be had only from their mature deli-
beration. What then could be done in this
3 Ccale to prevent. the community from being
'* exposed some time or other to eminent ha-
ard, on one side or the other, by fixed in-
tervals and periods, set to the meeting and
acting of the legislative, but to intrust it to
the prudence of some, who being present,
and acquainted with the state of public af-
fairs, might make use of this prerogative for
the public good? and where else could this
be so well placed as in his hands, who was
intrusted with the execution of the laws for


the same end? Thus supposing the regulation
of times for the assembling and fitting of the
Il eͥũegislative, not settled by the original consti-
6 4 tation, it naturally fell into the hands of the


executive,


336 Or Crvrt-GOVTRNMENT! I
executive, not as an arbitrary power depend.
ing on his good pleasure, but with this trast x
always to have it exercifed only for the public
weal, as the occurrences of times and change
of affairs might require. Whether er
period: of their convening, or a liberty left to
the prince for con va the legislatibe, or
perhaps a mixture of both, hath the least
inconvenience attending it, it is not m7
bufinels here to inquire, but only to shew; |
that though the executive power may have
the prerogative of conooting and diffobving such
conventions of the lexiflative, yet it is not 3
theteby superior to it, 017-6 [3 2441: x
F. 1 e th this world are in so 4
conftant'a flux, that nothing remains long in 2
the same state. Thus Popfe, kiehes, trade,
power, chan e their stations,” flourishing 1
mighty cities come to ruin, and prove in
times neglected desolate corners, whilst other
unfrequefited places grow into populous coun-
tries, filled with wealth and inhabitants. But
Nom, Abit always changing equally; and
private interest often keeping up customs and
privileges, when the reasons of them are
ceased, it often comes to pass, that in govern-
ments, where part of the legislive' consists
of re resehtatives chosen by the people; that
in tract of time this representation becomes
very wnegual and disproportionate to the rea-
sons it was at first established upon. To what
gross absurdities the following of custom,
| | when


: ”
2 0 2 "2" 006, OF 3 4 «of
4 q RT 211 1 * 82 * a we » 7 hy 0
* e N n 1 8 24 . * D 1 5
3 N = ” 2 — 3 N . Fir 4 Sons 2 wg Age 4 + . g "IP IS. : * 1
: Sr oa | a : PW 3 * N K

_ K . — e a 2 2. * —_— 4 n Lay 2

* + 8 WY * 1

a a


* 2 —
-—2< © $00 2


2 FIN *
x, -
- 02 * Aa"
ll. 2


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 337


when reason has left it, may lead, we may
be satisfied, when we see the bare name of
a town, of which there remains not so much
as the ruins, where scarce so much housing
as a sheepcote, or more inhabitants than a
shepherd is to be found, sends as many re-
presentatives to the grand assembly of law-
makers, as a whole county numerous in
people, and powerful in riches. This stran-
gers stand amazed at, and every one must
confess needs a remedy; tho' most think
it hard to find one, because the constitution
of the legislative being the original and su-
preme act of the society, antecedent to all
positive laws in it, and depending wholly on
the people, no inferior power can alter it.


And therefore the people, when the legissati ve
is once constituted, Having, in such a govern -
ment as we have been speaking of, 20 power
to act as long as the government stands ; this
inconvenience is thought incapable of a re-
medy.


: §. 158. Salus populi suprema lex, is certainly


jt


so just and fundamental a rule, that he, who


sincerely follows it, cannot dangerously err.


If therefore the executive, who has the


power of convoking the legitlative, observing
rather the true proportion, than fashion of
representation, regulates, not by old custom,


but true reason, the number of members, in all
places that have a right to be distinctly re-


1 which no part of the people how-
4 N ever


bes
Js
. 95 \
7 kN
WF
*
*


o
i
%
bl

4
L


—


R . - = * - =
m _ — — * — = .
* —— — — — .
—— _ — — — — rððMü r — — _


— . "IF
— * — *
2 — .


— — — ‚ ⏑


— 0 = —_ —
-
- © - © N
— —— — — — = — — — — . — * *
— — —— n —ę¾ — — — * * — — —
- — —— —— — ” »
* — 2 — — =


— — —


338 OF CIVIIL- GOVERNMENT.


ever incorporated can pretend to, but in pro-
portion to the assistance which it affords to


the public, it cannot be judged to have set


up a new legislative, but to have restored the
old and true one, and to have rectified the
disorders which succession of time had in-
sensibly, as well as inevitably introduced :


For it being the interest as well as intention


of the people, to have a fair and equal repre-


sentatrve; whoever brings it nearest to that,


is an undoubted friend to, and establisher of
the government, and cannot miss the consent
and approbation of the community ; prero-
gative being nothing but a power, in the hands
of the prince, to provide for the public good,
in such cases, which depending upon unfore-
seen and uncertain occurrences, certain and
unalterable laws could not safely direct;
whatsoever shall be done manifestly for the


good of the peeple, and the establishing the =


government upon its true foundations, is, and
always will be, just prerogative. The power
of erecting new corporations, and therewith


new representatives, carries with it a supposi-
tion, that in time the measures of representation ®
might vary, and those places have a just right
to be represented which before had none; and
by the same reason, those cease to have a
right, and be too inconsiderable for such a a
privilege, which before had it. *Tis not a
change from the present state, which perhaps


"3


corruption or decay has introduced, that makes


2 n * 7 v1
: x 0k
88


Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT. 339


an inroad upon the government, but the ten-
dency of it to injure or oppress the people,
and to set up one part or party, with a distinc-
tion from, and an unequal subjection of the
rest. Whatsoever cannot but be acknow-
Z ledged to be of advantage to the society, and
people in general, upon just and lasting mea-
sures, will always, when done, justify itself ;
and whenever the people shall chuse their re-
presentatives upon just and undeniably equal
measures, faitable to the original frame of the
government, it cannot be doubted to be the
will and a& of the society, whoever permitted


| 4 or caused them so to do.

d c HA p. XIV.

4 Z Of PREROGATIFVE.

* 3 8. 159. HERE the legislative and
d A executive power are in distinct
er hands, (as they are in all moderated monar-
1 chies, and well-framed governments) there
12


the good of the society requires, that several
things should be left to the discretion of him
that has the executive power: for the legis-
lators not being able to foresee, and provide by
laws, for all that may be useful to the com-
munity, the executor of the laws, having the
power in his hands, has by the common law
of nature a right to make use of it for the good
of the society, in many cases, where the mu-

Z 2 nicipal


340 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


nicipal law has given no direction, till the
legislative can conveniently be assembled to
provide for it. Many things there ate, which
the law can by no means provide for; and
those must necessarily be left to the discretion
of him that has the executive power in his
hands, to be ordered by him as the public
good and advantage shall require: nay, it is
fit that the laws thetnselves should in some
cafes give way to the executive power, or
rather to this fundamental law of nature and
government, viz. That as much as may be,
all the members of the society are to be pre-
served : for since many accidents may happen,
wherein a stri& and rigid observation of the
laws may do harm ; (as not to pull down an
innocent man's house to stop the fire, when the
next to 1t is burning) and a man may come
somtimes within the reach of the law, which
makes no distinction of persons, by an action
that may deserve reward and pardon; tis fit the
ruler should have a power, in many cases, to
mitigate the my of the law, and pardon
some offenders: for the end uf” government
being the preservation of all, as much as may
be, even the guilty are to be spared, where
it can prove no prejudice to the innocent.
§. 160. This power to act according to
discretion, for the public good, without the
prescription of the law, and sometimes even
against it, 7s that which is called prerogati ve:
for since in some governments the Jaw-


making


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 341


making power is not always in being, and is
usually too numerous, and so too slow, for
the dispatch requisite to execution; and be-
cause also it is impossible to foresee, and so
by laws to provide Pr, all accidents and neces-
sities that may concern the public, or to
make such laws as will do no harm, if they

are executed with an inflexible rigour, on all
occasions, and upon all persons that may come
in their way; therefore there is a latitude
left to the executive power, to do many things
of choice which the laws do not prescribe.

F. 161. This power, whilst employed for
the benefit of the community, and suitably to
the trust and ends of the government, is un-
daubted prerogative, and never is questioned :
for. the people are very seldom or never scru-
pulous or nice in the point; they are far from
examining ; prerogative, whillt it is in any
tolerable degree employed for the use it was
meant, that is, for the good of the people,
and not manifestly against it: but if there
comes to be a question between the executive
power and. the people, about a thing claimed
as a preragative; the tendency of the exercise
of sach freregative to the good or hurt of the
people, will easily decide that question.

F. 162. It is casy to conceive, that in the
infancy 0 governments, when common-
wealths differed: little from families in number
of. people, they differed from them too but
lite in number of laws: and the governors,

L 3 being


O


342 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


being as the fathers of them, watching over
them for their good, the government was
almost all prerogative. A few established laws
served the turn, and the discretion and care of
the ruler supplied the rest. But when mistake
or flattery prevailed with weak princes to make
use of this power for private ends of their
own, and not for the public good, the people
were fain by express laws to get prerogative
determined in those points wherein they found
disadvantage from it: and thus declared /m-
tations of prerogative were by the people'tound
necessary in cases which they and their ance-
stors had left, in the utmost latitude, to the
wisdom of those princes who made no other
but a right use of it, that is, for the good of
their people.

§. 163. And therefore they have a very
wrong notion of government, who fay, that
the people have incroached upon the prerogative,
when they have got any part of it to be de-


fined by positive laws: for in so doing they


have not pulled from the prince any thing that
of right belonged to him, but only declared,
that that power which they indefinitely left in
his or his ancestors hands, to be exercised for
their good, was not a thing which they in-
tended him when he used it otherwise : for
the end of government being the good of the
community, whatsoever alterations are made
in it, tending to that end, cannot be an in-
croachment upon any body, since no body in


5 | 8g”


2 2 " 1 — * 3
r


OF CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 343


government can have a right tending to any
other end: and those only are incroachments
which prejudice or hinder the public good.
Those who say otherwise, speak as if the
prince had a distin and separate interest from
the good of the community, and was not
made for it ; the root and source from which
spring almost all those evils and disorders
which happen in kingly governments. And
indeed, if that be so, the people under his go-
vernment are not a society of rational crea-
tures, entered into a community for their
mutual good; they are not such as have set
rulers over themselves, . to guard, and promote
that good ; but are to be looked on as an herd
of interior creatures under the dominion of a
master, who keeps them and works them for
his own pleasure or profit. If men were fo
void of reason, and brutith, as to enter into
society upon such terms, prerogative might
indeed be, what some men would have it,
an arbitrary power to do things hurtful to
the people.

$. 164. But since a rational creature cannot
be supposed, when free, to put himself into
subjection to another, for his own harm;
(though, where he finds a good and wile ruler,
he may not perhaps think it either necessary
or useful to set precise bounds to his power
in all things) prerogative can be nothing but.
the people's permitting their rulers to do seve-
ral things, of their own free choice, where


2 4. the


344 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


the law. was silent, and sometimes: too against
the direct letter of the law, for the public
good; and their acquiescing in it when so
done: for as a good prince, who is mindful
of the trust put into his hands, and careful
the good of his people, cannot have too much
prerogative, that is, power to do good; so. 2
weak and ill prince, who would claim that
power which his predecessors exercised with-
out the direction of the law, as a prerogative
belonging to him by right of his office, which
he may exercise at his pleasure, to make or
promote an interest distinct from that of the
public, gives the people an occasion to claim
their right, and limit that power, which,
whilst it was exercised for their good, they
were content should be tacitly allowed.
8. 165. And therefore he that will look
into the HHery of England, will find, that pre-
rogative was always largest in the hands of
our wisest and best princes; because the people,
observing the 49 tendency of their actions
to be the public good, contested not what
was done without law to that end: or, if any
human frailty or mistake (for princes are but
men, made as others) appeared in some small
declinations from that end; yet 'twas visible,
the main of. their conduct tended to nothing
but the care of the public. The people there-
fore, finding reason. to be satisfied with these
princes, whenever they acted without, or con-
trary to the letter of the law, nn |
185 5 what


\


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 345
what they did, and, without the least com-
plaint, let them inlarge their prerogative as
they pleased, judging rightly, that they did
nothing herein to the prejudice of their om,
fince they acted conformable to the foundation
and end of all laws, the public good.

§. 166. Such god-like princes indeed had
some title to arbitrary power by that argu-
ment, that would prove absolute work bo
the ' best government, as that which God
himself governs the universe by; because such
kings partake of his wisdom and goodness.
Upon this is founded that faying, 'That the
reigns of good princes have been always most
dangerous to the liberties of their people :. for
when their successors, managing the govern-
ment with different thoughts, would draw
the actions of those good rulers into precedent,
and make them the standard of their prero-
gative, as if what had been done only 05 r the
good of the people was a right in them to
do, for the harm of the people, if they o
pleased; it has often occasioned contest, and
sometimes public disorders, before the Pete
could recover their original right, So: pet
that to be declared not to be prerogative,
which truly was never so; fince it im
poffible that any body in the toc veiety fhowld: +
ever have a right to do the Ppeop le ba by
though it be very possible," and F reason ble,
that the people should not go about to fer
— bounds to'the/prorogative of 'tholt Kings,
or


— —— —— —


246 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


or rulers, who themselves transgressed not
the bounds of the public good: for prero-
gative is nothing but the power of doing public
good without a rule.

§. 167. The power of calling parliaments in
England, as to precise time, place, and du-
ration, is certainly a prerogatrve of the king,
but still with this trust, that it shall be made
use of for the good of the nation, as the
exigencies of the times, and variety of oc-
casions, shall require; for it being impossible
to foresee which should always be the fittest
place for them to assemble in, and what the
best season ; the choice of these was left with
the executive power, as might be most sub-


servient to the public good, and best suit the


ends of parliaments.

§. 168. The old question will be asked in
this matter of prerogative, But who shall be
judge when this power is made a right use of?
I answer: between an executive power in
being, with such a prerogative, and a legis-
lative that depends upon his will for their
convening, there can be no judge on earth ;
as there can be none between the legislative
and the people, should either the executive,
or the legislative, when they have got the


power in their hands, design, or go about


to enslave or destroy them. The people have
no other remedy in this, as in all other cases
where they have no judge on earth, but to
appeal to heaven: for the rulers, in such at-

tempts,


* © —
| a pa es. Ao
* " 4 4 5 2 ad * N - YT ; — ta td Pre. 7 Cx” ©
A Oui ao. og 3 "a Ad


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 347


tempts, exercising a power the people never
put into their hands, (who can never be sup-
posed to consent that any body should rule
over them for their harm) do that which
they have not a right to do. And where
the body of the people, or any fingle man, is
deprived of their right, or is under the exer-
cise of a power without right, and have no
appeal on earth, then they have a liberty to
appeal to heaven, whenever they judge the
cause of sufficient moment. And therefore,
though the people cannot be judge, lo as to
have, by the constitution of that society, any
superior power, to determine and give ef-
fective sentence in the case; yet they have,
by a law antecedent and paramount to all
politive laws of men, reserved that ultimate
determination to themselves which belongs
to all mankind, where there lies no appeal
on earth, vig. to judge, whether they have


just cause to make their appeal to heaven.


And this judgment they cannot part with, it
being out of a man's power so to submit
himself to another, as to give him a liberty
to destroy him; God and nature never al-
lowing a man so to abandon himself, as to
neglect his own preservation : and since he
cannot take away his own life, neither can
he give another power to take it. Nor let
any one think, this lays a perpetual foun-
dation for disorder ; for this operates not, till
the inconveniency is so great, that the majority


feel


348 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


feel it, and are weary of it, and find a ne-
cessity to have it amended. But this the
executive power, or wise rinces, never need
come in the danger of: and it is the
thing, of all others, they 00h most need to
avoid, as of all others he most perilous.


*** 2 4 . "0 25 — * 3 * 4 n


CHAP. XV.


Of Paternal, Political, and Despotical Power,
het ee Pogetber. |


P 169. Hoc 1 have had occasion

to speak of these separately be-
fore, yet the great mistakes of late about go-
vernment, having, as I suppose, arisen from
confounding these distinct powers one with


another, it may not, perhaps, be amiss to


consider them here together.

$170. First, then, Paternal or parental
pawer is nothing but that which parents have
over their children, to govern them for the
children's good, till they come to the use of
reason, or a state of knowledge, wherein they
may - be supposed capable to understand that


rule, whether it be the law of nature, or the
municipal law of their country, they are to


govern: themselves by: capable, I say, to
know it, as well as sonenak -otbers, who. live
as:Fteemen under that law:-. The affection


and tenderness which God hath planted in


the breast of parents towards their children,


makes


n


3-6: i 2
ky


5 bt a
aa at 4... + ai ir i


=
FP 2 . A. % 8 8
F


= 4
8 *.


2


Or Civir-GoveERNMENT. 349
makes it evident, that this is not intended to
be a severe arbitraty government, but only for
the help, instruction, and preservation of their
offspring. But happen it as it will, there is,
as I have proved, no reason why it should be
thought to extend to life and death, at any
time, over their children, more than over any
body else; neither can there be any pretence
. why this parenta/ power should keep the child,
when grown to 4 man, in subjection to the
will of his parents, any farther than having
received life and education from his parents,
obliges him to respe&, honour,” gratitude,
assistance and support, all his life, to both fa-
ther and mother. And thus, tis true, the
paternal is a natural government, but not at all
extending itself to the ends and jurifdiftions of
that which is political. The power of the
father doth not reach at all to the property of
the child, which is only in his own disposing.

S. 171. Serondly, Political power is that
power, which every man having in the state
of nature, has given up into the hands of the
society, and therein to the governors, whom
the society hath set over itlelf, with this ex-
press or tacit trust, that it shall be employed
for their good, and the preservation of their
property: now this power, which every man
has in the state of nature, and which he parts
with to the society in all such cases where
the society can secure him, is to use such
means, for the preserving of his on pro-

4 py


— — - — — — — —
— — — — —


— —


350 Or Civil-GovERNMENT.


Ridge he thinks good, and nature allows
im; and to punish the breach of the law of
nature in others, fo as (according to the best
of his reason) may most conduce to the pre-
servation of himself, and the rest of mankind.
So that the end and measure of this power,
when in every man's hands in the state of
nature, being the preservation of all of his
society, that 1s, all mankind in general, it
can have no other end or measure, when in the
hands of the magistrate, but to preserve the
members of that society in their lives, li-
berties, and possessions; and so cannot be an
absolute, arbitrary power over their lives and
fortunes, which are as much as possible to
be preserved ; but a power to make laws, and
annex such penalties to them, as may tend to
the preservation of the whole, by cutting off
those parts, and those only, which are so
corrupt, that they threaten the sound and
healthy, without*which no severity is lawful.
And this power has its original only from com-
fpact and agreement, and the mutual consent
of those who make up the community.

8. 172. Thirdly, Despotical power is an ab-
solute, arbitrary power one man has over
another, to take away his life, whenever he
pleases. This is a power, which neither na-
ture gives, for it has made no such distinction
between one man and another ; nor compact
can convey : for man not having such an ar-
bitrary power over his own life, cannot give
another man such a power over it; but it is


the


— —— —


>
ft
C


Or Civir-GovERNMENT. 351
the effect only of forfeiture, which the ag-


gressor makes of his own life, when he puts
himself into the state of war with another :
for having quitted reason, which God hath
given to be the rule betwixt man and man,
and the common bond whereby human kind


is united into one fellowship and society; and


having renounced the way of peace which


that teaches, and made use of the force of


war, to compass his unjust ends upon ano-
ther, where he has no right ; and so revolt-
ing from his own kind to that of beasts, by
making force, which is their's, to be his rule of
right, he renders himself liable to be destroyed
by the injured person, and the reit of man-
kind, that will join with him in the exe-
cution of justice, as any other wild beast, or
noxious brute, with whom mankind can have
neither society nor security*. And thus cap-


li ves, taken in a just and lawful war, and


such only, are subjeff to a despotical power,
which, as it arises not from compact, to nei-


ther is it capable of any, but is the state of


war continued : for what compact can be


made with a man that is not master of his
own life? what condition can he perform ?
and if he be once allowed to be master of
his own life, the despotical, arbitrary power
of his master ceases. He that is master of
himself, and his own life, has a right too to
the means of preserving it; so that as soon as


compact


Another copy corrected by Mr. Locke, has it thus, Nexious
brute that is destructive to their being. |


252 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


compact enters, flavery ceases, and he fo fat
quits his absolute power, and puts an end to
the state of war, who enters into conditions
with his captive. _
§. 173. Nature gives the first of these, vis.
paternal power to parents for the benefit of
their children during their minority, to supply
their want of ability, and understanding how
to manage their property. (By property I
must be understood here, as in other places,
to mean that property which men have in
their persons as well as goods.) Voluntary agree-
ment gives the second, vis. political power ts
governors for the benefit of their subjeRs, to
fecure them in the possession and ule of their
properties. And forfeiture gives the third
despotical power to lords for their own benefit,
over those who are stripped of all property.
F. 174. He, that shall consider the distinct
rise and extent, and the different ends of
these several powers, will plainly see, that
paternal power comes as far short 'of that of
the magistrate, as despotical exceeds it; and
that ab/olute dominion, however placed, is fo
far from being one kind of civil society, that
it is as inconsistent with it, as slavery is with
property. Paternal power is only where mi-
nority makes the child incapable to manage
his property; political, where men have pro-
perty in their own disposal; and desþerical,
over such as have no property at all. 755


CHAP.


Or: CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 353


7 8 # * N Ld

* * 4 w „ . ts 5 * %
* 3 k 7 8 8 ; * a 2 n
* 2 Jo Ea a 2a [£4 H A P. FO X \ I.
” » & * * . a” — . 0

%. 4% 1 2 a Y o .

* x | ® * <& * Of ; C 0 N E* U E |

8 7 *


F. 175. F Hough governments can ori-
I ginally have no other rife than
that before mentioned, nor polities be founded
en any thing but the consent of the people; yet
such have been the disorders ambition has
filled the world with, that in the noise of
war, which makes so great a part of the
history, of mankind, this consent is little taken
notice of: and therefore many have mistaken
the force of arms for the consent of the
people, and reckon conquest as one of the
originals of government. But conguest is as
far from setting up any government, as de-
molishing an house is from building a new
one in the place. Indeed, it often makes
way for a new frame of a common- wealth,
by destroying the former; but, without the
consent of the people, can never erect a
new one. .

$. 176. That the aggressor, who puts him-
self into the state of war with another, and
unjustly invades another man's right, can, by
such an unjust war, never come to have @
rigbt over the conquered, will be easily agreed
by all men, who will not think, that robbers
and pyrates have a right of empire over
whomsoever they have force enough to ma-
ster; or that men are bound by promises,

1A 43 which


— >


354 Or Civir-GovERNMENT.


which unlawful force extorts from them,
Should a robber break into my house, and
with a dagger at my throat make me seal
deeds to convey my estate to him, would
this give him any title ? Just such a title, by
his sword, has an unjust conqueror, who forces
me into submission. The injury and the
crime is equal, whether committed by the
wearer of a crown, or some petty villain.
The title of the offender, and the number
of his followers, make no difference in the
offence, unless it be to aggravate it. The
only difference is, great robbers punish little
ones, to keep them in their obedience; but
the great ones are rewarded with laurels and
triumphs, because they are too big for the
weak hands of justice in this world, and]
have the power in their oπ¼n possession, which |:
should punish offenders. What is my re-
medy against a robber, that so broke into


my house? Appeal to the law for justice. |:
But perhaps justice is denied, or I am crippled |


and cannot stir, robbed and have not the
means to do it. If God has taken away all |?


means of seeking remedy, there is nothing
left but patience. But my son, when able,
may seek the relief of the law, which Jam
denied: he or his son may renew his appeal,
till he recover his right. But the conquered,


or their children, have no court, no arbitrator 1
on earth to appeal to. Then they may ap- |
. »peal, as Fephtha did, to heaven, and repeat |?


their


;
5


Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT. 355


their appeal till they have recovered the native
right of their ancestors, which was, to have
such a legislative over them, as the majority
should approve, and freely acquiesce in. If it
be objected, This would cause endless trouble;


I eanswer, no more than justice does, where


she lies open to all that appeal to her. He
that troubles his neighbeur without a cause,
is punished for it by the justice of the court
he appeals to: and he that appeals to heaven
must be sure he has right on his fide; and a
right too that is worth the trouble and cost
of the appeal, as he will answer at a tribunal
that cannot be deceived, and will be sure to
retribute to every one according to the mis-
chiefs he hath created to his fellow subjects ;


that is, any part of mankind : from whence


it is plain, that he that conguers in an unjust
war can thereby have no title to the subjettion
and obedience of the conquered. |
8. 177. But supposing victory favours the
right fide, let us consider a conqueror in a
lawful war, and see what power he gets,
and over whom.
_ First, It is plain he gets no power by bis
conquest over those that conquered with him.
They that fought on his fide cannot suffer by
the conquest, but must at least be as much
freemen as they were before. And most


commonly they serve upon terms, and on
condition to share with their leader, and
enjoy a part of the spoil, and other advantages
A a 2


that


356 Or CtfyII- GOVERNMENT.


that attend the conquering sword ; or at leaft
have a part of the fubdued country bestowed
upon them. And the conquering people are
not, I hope, to be slaves by conquest, and wear
their laurels only to shew they are sacrifices
to their leaders triumph. They that found
absolute monarchy upon the title of the
{word, make their heroes, who are the founders
of such monarchies, arrant Draw-can-/irs, and
forget they had any officers and soldiers that
fought on their fide in the battles they won,
or assisted them in the subduing, or shared
in poslefling, the countries they mastered.
We are told by some, that the Exglisb mo-
narchy is founded in the Norman conquest,
and that our princes have thereby a title to
absolute dominion : which if it were true,
(as by the history it appears otherwise) and
that William had a right to make war on this
island ; yet his. dominion by conquest could
reach no farther than to the Saxons and Bri-
'fons, that were then inhabitants of this coun-
try. The Normans that came with him, and
helped to conquer, and all descended from
them, are freemen, and no subjects by con-
quest; let that give what dominion it will.
And if I, or any body elle, shall claim free-
dom, as derived from them, it will be very
hard to prove the contrary : and it is plain,
the law, that has made no distinction between


the one and the other, intends not there
should


—— —


. .
. - ; * N 8
* . N π . . „1


eee


2 * . 8 e


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 357


should be any difference in their freedom or
privileges.

$. 178. But supposing, which seldom hap-
pens, that the conquerors and conquered
never incorporate into one people, under the
same laws and freedom; let us see next
what power a lawful conqueror has over the


subdued: and that I say is purely despotical.


He has an absolute power over the lives of
those who by an unjust war have forfeited
them ; but not over the lives or fortunes of
those who engaged not in the war, nor over
the possessions even of those who were actually
engaged in it.

F. 179. Secondly, I say then the congueror
gets no power but only over those who have
actually assisted, concurred, or consented to
that unjust force that is used against him:
for the people having given to their e
nors no power to do an unjust thing, such as
is ta make an unjust war, (for they never
had such a power in themselves) they ought
not to be charged as guilty of the violence
and unjustice that is committed in an unjust
war, any farther than they actually abet it; no
more than they are to be thought guilty of any
violence or oppression their governors should
use upon the people themselves, or any part
of their fellow subjects, they having im-
powered, them no mare to the one than to
the other. Conquerors, it is true, seldom
trouble themselves to make the distinction,
. 1 but


@


358 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


but they willingly permit the confusion of
war to sweep all together: but yet this alters
not the right; for the conquerors power
over the lives of the conquered, being only
because they have used force to do, or main-
tain an injustice, he can have that power
only over those who have concurred in that
force; all the rest are innocent; and he has
no more title over the people of that country,
who have done him no injury, and so have
made no forfeiture of their lives, than he has
over any other, who, without any injuries or
1 have lived upon fair terms with
him.

8. 180. Thirdly, The power a conqueror gets
over those he overcomes in a just war, 1s
perfealy despotical: he has an absolute power
over the lives of those, who, by putting them-
selves in a state of war, have forfeited them ;
but he has not thereby a right and title to
their possessions. ' This I doubt not, but at
first fight will seem a strange doctrine, it
being so quite contrary to the practice of the
world ; there being nothing more familiar in
speaking of the dominion of countries, than
to say such an one conquered it; as if
conquest, without any more ado, conveyed


a right of possession, But when we con-


sider, that the practice of the strong and
powerful, how universal soever it may be,
is seldom the rule of right, however it be

one part of the subjection of the conquered,
| | not


S


2
:
BY
;
:
5


PPP


e A . 8 NF


14


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 359


not to argue against the conditions cut out
to them by the conquering sword.

§. 181. Though in all war there be usually
a complication of force and damage, and the
aggressor seldom fails to harm the estate,
when he uses force against the persons of


| those he makes war upon; yet it is the use


of force only that puts a man into the state of
war : for whether by force he begins the
injury, or else having quietly, and by fraud,
done the injury, he refuses to make repa-
ration, and by force maintains it, (which 1s
the same thing, as at first to have done it by
force) it is the unjust use of force that makes
the war: for he that breaks open my house,
and violently turns me out of doors; or
having peaceably got in, by force keeps me
out, does in effect the same thing ; supposing
we are in such a state, that we have no com-
mon judge on earth, whom I may appeal to,
and to whom we are both obliged to submit :
for of such I am now speaking. It is the
unjust use of force then, that puts a man into
the fiate of war with another; and thereby
he that is guilty of it makes a forfeiture of
his life : for quitting reason, which is the
rule given between man and man, and using
force, the way of beasts, he becomes liable
to be deitroyed by him he uses force against,
as any savage ravenous beast, that is dan-
gerous to his being. |


A a 4 F. 182,


93 4


360 Or CIVIL- GOVERNMENT.


§. 182. But because the miscarriages of
the father are no faults of the children, and
they may be rational and peaceable, not-
withstanding the brutishness and injustice of
the father; the father, by his miscarriages
and violence, can forfeit but his own life,
but involves not his children in his guilt or
destruction, His goods, which nature, that
willeth the preservation of all mankind as
much as is possible, hath made to belong to
the children to keep them from perishing, do
still continue to belong to his children : for
| supposing them not to have joined in the
war, either thro' infancy, absence, or choice,
they have done nothing to forfeit them: nor
has the conquerer any right to take them away,
by the bare title of having subdued him that
by force attempted his destruction ; though
perhaps he may have some right to them, to
repair the damages he has sustained by the
war, and the defence of his own right ;
which how far it reaches to the possessions
of the conguered, we shall ' fee by and by.
So that he that % conguest has a right over a
man's person to destroy him if he pleases, has
not thereby a right over His gate to possess
and enjoy it: for it is the brutal force the
aggressor has used, that gives his adversary
a right to take away his life, and destroy
him if he pleases, as a noxious creature; but
it is damage sustained that alone gives him
title to another man's goods: for though I
| may


**. NN N, n — — — — my —— N — — —
ö 7 $ 2 95 E D * * is p * 5 SAS ET”. be 3 0
7 8 | D * we: : 1 oh. 1 n * 18 5
p n TI, 7” 4 . 99 "= . F
A . fy l ; 2 2


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 361


may kill a thief that sets on me in the high-
way, yet I may not (which seems less) take
away his money, and let him go: this would
be robbery on my side. His force, and the
state of war he put himself in, made him
forfeit his life, but gave me no title to his


goods. The right then of conquest extends


only to the lives of those who joined in the
war, not to their estates, but only in order to
make reparation for the damages received,
and the charges of the war, and that too


with reservation of the right of the innocent


wife and children.

§. 183. Let the congueror have as much
justice on his fide, as could be supposed, he
has no right to seize more than the vanquished
could forfeit : his life is at the victor's mercy ;
and his service and goods he may appro-
priate, to make himself reparation ; but he
cannot take the goods of his wife and chil-
dren ; they too had a title to the goods he
enjoyed, and their shares in the estate he
possessed: for example, I in the state of na-
ture (and all common-wealths are in the
state of nature one with another) have in-


jured another man, and refusing to give satis-
faction, it comes to a state of war, wherein
my defending by force what I had gotten
unjustly, makes me the aggressor. I am


conquered : my life, it is true, as forfeit, is
at mercy, but not my wife's and children's.
They made not the war, nor assisted in it.
FRE | I could


DTCC... LED — —— — ig —


262 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


J could not forfeit their lives; they were not
mine to forfeit, My wife had a share in
my estate ; that neither could I forfeit. And
my children also, being born of me, had a
right to be maintained out of my labour or
substance. Here then is the case : the con-
queror has a title to reparation for damages
received, and the children have a title to
their father's estate for their sublistence : for
as to the wife's share, whether her own la-
bour, or compact, gave her a title to it, it is
plain, her husband could not forfeit what
was her's. What must be done in the case ?
I answer; the 3 law of nature
being, that all, as much as may be, should
be preserved, it follows, that if there be not
enough fully to satzsfy both, vis. for the
conqueror s lasses, and Children's maintenance,
he that hath, and to spare, must remit some-
thing of his full satisfaction, and give way to
the pressing and preferable title of those who
are in danger to perish without it.

§. 184. But supposing the charge and da-
mages of the war are to be made up to the
conqueror, to the utmost farthing ; and that
the children of the vanquished, spoiled of
all their father's goods, are to be left to starve
and perish ; yet the satisfying of what shall,
on this score, be due to the conqueror, will
scarce give him a title to any country he sball
conquer : for the damages of war can scarce
amount to the value of any considerable tract


PP r 4


bs
*
*
2
*
Y
4
#
7
1
*
”
1
7
1


—


of


?


4
x
G

4


rr


— ne


rr n 1 . "="
n r rern E 7 = "I 3 * n N - e 5 5
5 Mg” N 5 4 1 - % » «7 LC **
n .
.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 363


of land, in any part of the world, where
all the land is possessed, and none lies waste.


And if 1 have not taken away the con-


queror's land, which, being vanquished, it 1s


impossible 1 should; scarce any other spoil I


have done him can amount to the value of
mine, supposing it equally cultivated, and of
an extent any way coming near what I had


over-run of his. The destruction of a year's


product or two (for it seldom reaches four
or five) is the utmost spoil that usually can
be done: for as to money, and such riches
and treasure taken away, these are none of
nature's goods, they have but a fantastical
imaginary value: nature has put no such
upon them : they are of no more account
by her standard, than the wampompeke of
the Americans to an European prince, or the
filver money of Europe would have been
formerly to an American. And five years
product is not worth the perpetual inheritance
of land, where all is possessed, and none re-
mains waste, to be taken up by him that is
disseized: which will be eafily granted, if
one do but take away the imaginary value
of money, the disproportion being more than
between five and five hundred; though, at
the same time, half a year's product is more
worth than the inheritance, where there being
more land than the inhabitants possess and
make use of, any one has liberty to make
use of the waste ; but there conquerors 1255
hs : | ittle


204 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


little care to possess themselves of the lande of the
vanquished. No damage therefore, that men
in the state of nature (as all princes and go-
vernments are in reference to one another)
suffer from one another, can give a conqueror
power to dispossess the posterity of the van-
quished, and turn them out of that inhe-
ritance, which ought to be the possession of
them and their descendants to all generations.
The conqueror indeed will be apt to think
himself master : and it is the very condition
of the subdued not to be able to dispute their


right. But if that be all, it gives no other


title than what bare force gives to the stronger
over the weaker : and, by this reason, he
that is strongest will have a right to whatever
he pleases to seize on.


F. 185. Over those then that joined with


him in the war, and over those of the subdued
country that opposed him not, and the po-
sterity even of those that did, the conqueror,
even in a just war, hath, by his conquest, no


right of deminton : they are free from any.


subjection to him, and if their former go-
vernment be dissolved, they are at liberty to
begin and erect another to themselves.

* 186. The conqueror, it is true, usually,


the force he has over them, compels


Ba with a sword at their breasts, to stoop -
to his conditions, and submit to such a go.
vernment as he pleases to afford them; but


the. yRquIry: 18,” what right he has to do so'?
$1321 If


2
It
x

2

.
*
*

x
£
38
* *;
* 1
33
by
5 *
IS
*
;
4
p
N *


0

2
*
N
os

»
A
$.
£
1


1
1
38.)
LE '
*
9
<>;
*
bY.
*
A
1
1
"fl
.
3
E
.
.
q
40"

5

*
= 4

1
*
2
*
D
&-,
Ws


| Oo TW 0 3 a
Labs ** N Fr 0» —— - . ere


. by , K * POV - * ; 2 Fo $ l rh
= * - * 5 o . yy * 1 - * 4 6%
HIST +: « n =
FL 2 1 # ; Ev ö ws 1 . 8 —— 0 = * r .
. N ® - hd n


e e


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 365


If it be said, they submit by their own con-
sent, then this allows their own consent to be
necessary to give the conqueror a title to rule
over them. It remains only to be considered,
whether promises extorted by force, without
right, can be thought consent, and how far
they bind. To which I shall fay, they 414
not at all; because whatsoever another gets
from me by force, I still retain the right of,
and he is obliged presently to restore. He
that forces my horse from me, ought pre-
sently to restore him, and I have still a right
to retake him. By the fame reason, he that
forced a promise from me, ought presently to
restore it, 1. e. quit me of the obligation of
it; or I may resume it myself, 7. e. chuse
whether I will perform it: for the law of
nature laying an obligation on me only by
the rules she prescribes, cannot oblige me
by the violation of her rules: such is the ex-
torting any thing from me by force. Nor
does it at all alter the case to say, I gave my
promise, no more than it excules the force,
and passes the right, when I put my hand in
my pocket, and deliver my purse myself to
a thief, who demands it with a pistol at my


breast. 9


8. 187, From all which it follows, that
the government of a conqueror, imposed by force
on the subdued, against whom he had no
right of war, or who joined not in the war

against


2


266 Or Civit-GovERNMENT.


against him, where he had right, has no obli-
gation upon them.

§. 188. But let us suppose, that all the
men of that community, being all members
of the same body politic, may be taken to
have joined in that unjust war wherein they


are subdued, and fo their lives are at the
mercy of the conqueror.


$. 189. I say, this concerns not their
children who are in their minority: for
fince a father hath not, in himself, a power
over the life or liberty of his child, no act
of his can possibly forfeit it. So that the
children, whatever may have happened to the
fathers, are freemen, and the absolute power
of the conqueror reaches no farther than the
persons of the men that were subdued by
him, and dies with them: and should he
govern them as slaves, subjected to his ab-


folute arbitrary power, he has no such right of


dominion over their children. He can have
No power over them but by their own con-
sent, whatever he may drive them to say or do;


and he has no lawfull authority, whilst force,


and not choice, compels them to submis-
fon. NE


& 190. Every man is born with a double
right: fut, a right of freedom to his person,


which no other man has a power over, but the


free disposal of it lies in himself. Secondly,


a rigbt, before any other man, 10 inherit with
this brethren his father's goods. Og


§. 191.


2
3
*
r
75
Y N
&


* c
«> ASS AT EO


8 ä [ of 8 a * I. "Es - If © O64 . - e,,


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 367


: §. 191. By the first of these, a man is na- |
: turally free from subjection to any govern- if
ment, tho' he be born in a place under its |
jurisdiction ; but if he disclaim the lawful
government of the country he was born in, |
he must also quit the right that belonged to
him by the laws of it, and the possessions |
there descending to him from his ancestors, l
if it were a government made by their con-
sent.
§. 192. By the second, the inhabitants of
any country, who are Fe and derive
a title to their estates from those who are
subdued, and had a government forced upon
them against their free consents, retain a
right to the possession of their ancestors, though
they consent not freely to the government,
whose hard conditions were by force im-
posed on the possessors of that country: for
the first congueror never having had a title to
the land of that country, the people who are
the descendants of, or claim under those who
were forced to submit to the yoke of a,go-
vernment by constraint, have always a right
to shake it off, and free themselves from the
usurpation or tyranny which the sword hath |
brought in upon them, till their rulers put
them under such a frame of government. as
they willingly and of choice consent to.
Who doubts but the Grecian christians, de-
scendants of the ancient possessors of that
country, may justly cast off the Turkish
yoke


* 3 ks ” 7 A age
9 "SS : LN TED


* 9 nn 4 A We — — A F — wh e Gnu gt woe ae 1 EY


368 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


yoke, which they have so long groaned under,
whenever they haye an opportunity to do it?
For no government can have a right to
obedience from a people who have not freely
consented to it; which they can never be
supposed to do, till either they are put in a
full state of liberty to chuse their govern-
ment and governors, or at least till they
have such standing laws, to which they have
by themselves or their representatives given
their free consent, and also till they are
allowed their due property, which is so to
be proprietors of what they have, that no
body can take away any part of it without
their own consent, without which, men
under any government are not in the state of
freemen, but are direct slaves under the force
of war.

SF. 193. But granting that the congueror in


a just war has a right to the estates, as well


as power over the persons, of the conquered;
which, it is plain, he hath not: nothing of


absolute power will follow from hence, in the


continuance of the government; because the
descendants of these being all freemen, if
he grants them estates and possessions to in-
habit his country, (without which it would
be worth nothing) whatsoever he grants
them, they have, so far as it is granted, pro-
perty in. The nature whereof is, that wirh-
out a man's own consent it cannot be taken from
him. e, nn 7 ES de -


| 8 194.


Me


LB
*
=
+
F
HY


Th 1 SEE ah . #..-# * * 2 * N * 9
Fr ˙———— —A—— . .


x
:
:
Ws
—
*
1
+
T;
1
|.
1
4 N
7
1
9


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 369


§. 194. Their persons are free by a native
right, and their properties, be they more or


less, are their own, and at their own dispose,


and not at his; or else it is no property.
Supposing the conqueror gives to one man
a thousand acres, to him and his heirs for
ever; to another he lets a thousand acres for
his life, under the rent of gol. or 5o00l. per
ann. has not the one of these a right to
his thousand acres for ever, and the other,
during his life, paying the said rent? and
hath not the tenant for life a property in all
that he gets over and above his rent, by his
labour and industry during the said term,
supposing it be double the rent? Can any
one say, the king, or conqueror, after his
grant, may by his power of conqueror take
away all, or part of the land from the heirs
of one, or from the other during his life,


he paying the rent? or can he take away


from either the goods or money they have
got upon the faid land, at his pleasure? If
he can, then all free and voluntary contracts
cease, and are void in the world ;- there needs
nothing to dissolve them at any time, but
power enough: and all the grants and pro-
mises of men in power are but mockery and


collusion: for can there be any thing more


ridiculous than to say, I give you and your's


this for ever, and that in the surest and most


solemn way of conveyance can be devised;
and yet it is to be understood, that I have-
7 B b right,


370 Or CIVII-GOVITRNMENTr.


right, if I please, to take it away from you
again to morrow? _

8 195. I will not dispute now whether
princes are exempt from the laws of their
country; but this I am sure, they owe sub-
jection to the laws of God and nature. No
body, no power, can exempt them from the
obligations of that eternal law. Those are
so great, and so strong, in the case of pro-
mises, that omnipotency itself can be tied by
them. Grants, promises, and oaths, are
bonds that hold the Almighty : whatever some
flatterers say to princes of the world, who
all together, with all their people joined to
them, are, in comparison of the great God,
but as a drop of the -bucket, or a dust on
the balance, inconsiderable, nothing!

$. 196. The short of the case in conquest
1s this: the conqueror, if he have a just
cause, has a despotical right over the persons
of all, that actually aided, and concurred in
the war against him, and a right to make up
his damage and cost out of their labour and
estates, so he injure not the right of any
other, Over the rest of the people, if there
were any that consented not to - war, and
over the children of the captives themselves,
or the possessions of either, = has no power;
and so can have, by virtue of conquest, no laws
ful title himself 10 dominion over them, or
derive it to his posterity ; but is an aggressor,
if he attempts upon their properties, and

N thereby


Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT. 371


thereby puts himself in a state of war against
them, and has no better a right of princi-
pality, he, nor any of his successors, than
Hingar, or Hubba, the Danes, had here in
England; or Spartacus, had he conquered
Ttaly, would have had; which is to have
their yoke cast off, as soon as God shall give
those under their subjection courage and
opportunity to do it. Thus, notwithstand-
ing whatever title the kings of A//yria had
over Judab, by the sword, God assisted He-
zekiah to throw off the dominion of that
conquering empire. And the lord was with


Hezekiah, and he prospered ; wherefore he went
forth, and he rebelled against the king of Af-


| fyria, and served him not, 2 Kings xviii. 7.


Whence it is plain, that shaking off a power,
which force, and not right, hath set over any
one, though it hath the name of rebellion,
yet 1s no offence before God, but is that
which he allows and countenances, though
even promises and covenants, when obtained
by force, have intervened : for it is very
probable, to any one that reads the story
of Ahaz and Hezekiah attentively, that the
Assyrians subdued Ahaz, and deposed him,
and made Hezekiah king in his father's life-
time; and that Hezekiah by agreement had
done him homage, and paid him tribute all
this time.


Bb2 - 'CH'AP:


372 Oyr_Civit-GovERNMENT,


CHAP. XVII.
Of USURPATION.
g. 197. 8 conquest may be called a fo-


reign usurpation, so usurpation
is a kind of domestic conquest, with this
difference, that an usurper can never have
right on his fide, it being no w/urpation, but
where one is got into the posses/ion of what
another has right to. This, so far as it is
e&surpation, is a change only of persons, but
not of the forms and rules of the govern-
ment: for if the usurper extend his power
beyond what of right belonged to the lawful
- princes, or governors of the commonyealth,
it is Zyranny added to usurpation.

8. 198. In all lawtul governments, the
h of the persons, who are to bear
rule, is as natural and necessary a part as the
form of the government itlelf, and is that
which had its establishment originally from
the people; the anarchy being much alike,
to have no form of government at all; or to
agree, that it shall be monarchical, but to
appoint no way to design the person that shall
have the power, and be the. monarch.
Hence all commonwealths, with the form
of government established, have rules also
of appointing those who are to have any
share in the public authority, and settled
| methods of conveying the right to Fn;
for


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 373
for the anarchy is much alike, to have no
form of government at all; or to agree that
it shall be monarchical, but to appoint no
way to know or design the person that shall
have the power, and be the monarch;
Whoever gets into the exercise of any part
of the power, by other ways than what the
laws of the community have prescribed, hath
no right to be obeyed, though the form of
the commonwealth be still preserved ; since
he is not the person the laws have appointed,


and consequently not the person the people


have consented to. Nor can such an usurper
or any deriving from him, ever have a title,
till the people are both at liberty to consent,
and have actually consented to allow, and
confirm in him the power he hath till then
usurped. |


”
* ates. Ss


— — —_


CHAP. XVIII.
COR EONNC
5. 199. A usurpation | is the exercise of
| P


ower, which another hath : a
right to; so tyranny is the wacky = of © power
beyond right, which no body can have a right
to. And this is making, use of the power
any one has in his hands, not for the good
of those who are under it, but for his own
private separate advantage. When the go-


vernor, however intitled, makes not the
law, but his will, the rule; and his com-


B b 3 mands


.
— — an A OA CCC , r


374 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


mands and actions are not directed to the
preservation of the properties of his people,
but the satisfaction of his own ambition,
revenge, covetousness, or any other irregular

passion. |
$. 200. If one can doubt this to be truth,
or reason, because it comes from the obscure
hand of a subject, I hope the authority of
a king will make it pass with him. King
James the first, in his speech to the parlia-
ment, 1603, tells them thus, I vil ever
prefer the weal of the public, and of the whole
commonwealth, in making of good laws and
constitutions, to any particular and private ends
of mine; thinking ever the wealth and weal
of the commonwealth to be my greatest weal and
worldly felicity; a Point wherein a lawful king
do!hb directly differ from a tyrant : for I do ac-
knowledge, that the special and greatest point of
difference that 1s between a rightful king and
an usurping tyrant, is this, that whereas the
proud and ambitions tyrant doth think his king-
dom and people are only ordained for satigfaction
of his defires and unreasonable appetites, the
righteous and just king doth by the contrary ac-
knowledge himself to be ordained for the pro-
curing of the wealth and property of bis A
And again, in his speech to the parliament,
1609, he hath these words, The Ling binds
himself by a double cath, to 2 observation of
the fundamental laws of his kingdom; tacitly,
as by being a king, and so bound to protect as
well


Or CTVII“ GOVERNMENT. 375
well the people, as the laws of his kingdom; and
expresly, by his oath at his coronatian; so as
every just king, in a settled kingdom, is bound
to observe that paction made to his people, by
his laws, in framing his government agreeable
thereunto, according to that pattion which
God made with Noah after the deluge. Here-
after, sced-time and harvest, and cold and heat,
and summer and winter, and day and night,
shall not cease while the earth remaineth. And
therefore a king governing in a settled kingdom,
leaves to be a king, and degenerates into a ty-
rant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according
to his laws. And a little after, Therefore all
kings that are not tyrants, or perjured, will
be glad to bound themselves within the limits of
their laws; and they that persuade them the
contrary, are Vipers, and pests both against
them and the commonwealth. Thus that
learned king, who well understood the
notion of things, makes the difference be-
twixt a Ling and a Zyrant to confist only in
this, that one makes the laws the bounds of
his power, and the good of the public, the
end of his government ; the other makes all
give way to his own will and appetite.

8. 201. It is a mistake, to think this fault
is proper only to monarcbies; other forms
of government are liable to at, as well as
that: for wherever the power, that is put
in any hands for the government of the
people, and the preservation of their pro-

Bb4 perties,


376 Or CTIVII- GOVERNMENT.


perties, is applied to other ends, and made use
of to impoverish, harass, or subdue them to
the arbitrary and irregular commands of those
that have it; there it presently becomes
tyranny, whether those that thus use it are one
or many. Thus we read of the thirty tyrants
at Athens, as well as one at Syracuse; and the
intolerable dominion of the Decemviri at
Rome was nothing better.

FS. 202. I bere- ever law ends, tyranny begins,
if the law be transgressed to another's harm;
and whosoever in authority exceeds the power
given him by the law, and makes use of the
force he has under his command, to com-
pass that upon the subject, which the law
allows not, ceases in that to be a magistrate;
and, acting without authority, may be op-
posed, as any other man, who by force in-
vades the right of another. This is acknow-
ledged in subordinate magistrates. He that
hath authority to seize my person in the
street, may be opposed as a thief and a
robber, if he endeavours to break into m
house to execute a writ, notwithstanding
that I know he has such a warrant, and
such a legal authority, as will impower him
to arrest me abroad. And why this should
not hold in the highest, as well as in the
most inferior magistrate, I would. gladly
be informed. Is it reasonable, that the
eldest brother, because he has the greatest
part of his father's estate, should thereby


have


Or Cie Oben unn. 377


have a right to take away any of his younger
brothers portions ? or that a rich man, who
possessed a whole country, should from thence
have a right to seize, when he pleased, the
cottage and garden of his poor neighbour ?
The being rightfully possessed of great power
and riches, exceedingly beyond the greatest
part of the sons of Adam, is fo far from
being an excuse, much less a reason, for
rapine and oppression, which the endamaging
another without authority is, that it is a great
aggravation of it: for the exceeding the
bounds of authority is no more a right in
a great, than in a petty officer; no more ju-
stifiable in a king than a constable ; but is so
much the worse in him, in that he has more
trust put in him, has already a much greater
share than the rest of his brethren, and 1s
supposed, from the advantages of his edu-
cation, employment, and counsellors, to be
more knowing in the measures of right and

Wrong.

$. 203. May the commands then of a prince
be opposed ? may he be resisted as often as
any one shall find himself aggrieved, and but
imagine he has not right done him? This
will unhinge and overturn all polities, and,
instead of government and order, leave no-
thing but anarchy and confusion.

8. 204. To this I answer, that force is to
be opposed to nothing, but to unjust and un-
lawful force; whoever makes any opposition


il


378 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


in any other case, draws on himself a just
condemnation both from God and man; and
so no such danger or confusion will follow,
as is often suggested: for,

8. 205. First, As, in some countries, the
person of the prince by the law is sacred;
and fo, whatever he commands or does, his
2 is still free from all question or vio-

nce, not liable to force, or any judicial
censure or condemnation. But yet opposition
may be made to the illegal acts of any in-
serior officer, or other commissioned by him;
unless he will, by actually putting himself into
a state of war with his people, dissolve the
government, and leave them to that defence
which belongs to every one in the state of
nature: for of such things who can tell what
the end will be? and a neighbour kingdom
has shewed the world an odd example. In all
other cases the sacrednesi of the person exempts
bim from all inconveniencies, whereby he is
secure, whilst the government stands, from
all violence and harm whatsoever; than which
there cannot be a wiser constitution: for the
harm he can do in bis own person not bei
likely to happen often, nor to extend itself
far; nor being able by his single strength to
subvert the laws, nor oppress the body of
the people, should any prince have so much
weakness, and ill nature as to be willing to
do it, the inconveniency of some particular
mischiefs, that may happen sometimes, when


a


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 379


a heady prince comes to the throne, are well
recompensed by the peace of the public,
and security of the government, in the person
of the chief magistrate, thus set out of the
reach of danger: it being safer for the body,
that some few private men should be some-
times in danger to suffer, than that the head
of the republic should be easily, and upon
{light occasions, exposed. | 1
§. 206. Secondly, But this privilege, be-
longing only to the king's person, hinders
not, but they may be questioned, opposed,
and resisted, who use unjust force, though
they pretend a commission from him, which
the law authorizes not; as 1s plain in the
case of him that has the king's writ to arrest
a man, which is a full commission from the
king; and yet he that has it cannot break
open a man's house to do it, nor execute
this command of the king upon certain days,
nor in certain places, though this commission
have no such exception in it; but they are
the limitations of the law, which if any one
transgress, the king's commission excuses him
not: for the king's authority being given
him only by the law, he cannot impower
any one to act against the law, or justify
him, by his commission, in fo doing; the
commission, or command of any magistrate, where
he has no authority, being as void and infig-
nificant, as that of any private man ; the
difference between the one and the other,
4 being


380 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


being that the magistrate has some authority
so far, and to such ends, and the private
man has none at all: for it is not the com-
mission, but the authority, that gives the right
of acting; and against the laws there can be
no authority. But, notwithstanding such re-
sistance, the king's person and authority are
still both secured, and fo mo danger to go-
vernor or government.

g. 207. Thirdly, Supposing 2 government
wherein the person of the chief magistrate is
not thus sacred ; yet this do#r:ine of the law-
fulness of re/sting all unlawful exercifes of
his power, will not upon every slight oc-
casion indanger him, or inbroil the. govern-
ment : for where the injured party may be
relieved, and his damages repaired by appeal
to the law, there can be no pretence for
force, which is only to be used where a man
is intercepted from appealing to the law :
For nothing is to be accounted hostile force,
but where it leaves not the remedy of such
an appeal; and it is such force alone, that
puts him that uses it into a flate of war, and
makes it lawful to resist him. A man with
a sword in his hand demands my purse in the
high-way, when perhaps I have. not twelve
pence in my pocket: this man I may law-
fully kill. To another I deliver 1001. to
hold only whilst I alight, which he refuses
to restore me, when I am got up again, but
draws his sword to defend the possession of it


by


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 387


by force, if I endeavour to retake it. The
mischief this man does me is a hundred,
or possibly a thousand times more than the
other perhaps intended me (whom I killed be-
fore he really did me any); and yet I might
lawfully kill the one, and cannot so much
as hurt the other lawfully. The reason
whereof is plain; because the one using
force, which threatened my life, I could not
have time to appeal to the law to secure it:
and when 1t was gone, it was too late to
appeal. The law could not restore life to
my dead carcass; the loss was irreparable ;
which to prevent, the law of nature gave
me a right to rey him, who had put him-
{elf into a state of war with me, and threatened
my destruction. But in the other case, my
lite not being in danger, I may -have the
benefit of appealing to the law, and have re-
paration for my 1901. that way,
$. 208. Fourthly, But if the unlawful acts
done by the magistrate be maintained (by
the power he has got), and the remedy which
is due by law, be by the same power ob-
structed ; yet the right of resisting, even in
such manifest acts of tyranny, u not sud-
denly, or on flight occasions, di/turb the go-
vernment : for if it reach no farther than some
rivate men's cases, though they have a right
to defend themselves, and to recover by force
what by unlawful force is taken from them;
yet the right to do so will not easily engage
them


382 Or CrvyrrI- GOVERNMENT.


them in a contest, wherein they are sure to
perish; it being as impossible for one, or a
few oppressed men to difturb the government,
where the body of the people do not think
themselves concerned in it, as for a raving
mad-man, or heady mal-content' to overturn
a well-settled state; the people being as little
apt to follow the one, as the other.

$. 209. But if either these illegal acts have
extended to the majority' of the people ; or
if the mischief and oppression has lighted only
on some few, but in such cases, as the pre-
cedent, and consequences feem to threaten
all; and they are persuaded in their con-
sciences, that their laws, and with them their
estates, liberties, and lives are in danger, and
perhaps their religion too; how they will be
hindered from resisting illegal force, used
against them, I cannot tell. This is an in-
convenience, I confess, that attends all govern-
ments whatsoever, when the governors have
brought it to this pass, to be generally su-
speed of their people; the most dangerous
state which they can possibly put themselves
in; wherein they are the less to be pitied,
because it is so casy to be avoided; it being
as impossible for a governor, if he really
means the good of his people, and the pte-
servation of them, and their'laws' together,
not to make them see and feel it, as it is for
the father of a family, not to let his children
see he loves, and takes care of then.
5 * PL 28,2910,


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 383.


8. 210. But if all the world shall observe
pretences of one kind, and actions of ano-
ther; arts used to elude the law, and the
trust of prerogative (which is an arbitrary
power in some things left in the prince's hand
to do good, not harm to the people) employ-
ed contrary to the end for which it was
given: if the people shall find the ministers
and subordinate magistrates chosen suitable
to such ends, and favoured, or laid by, pro-
portionably as they promote or oppose them:
if they see several experiments made of arbi-
trary power, and that religion underhand
favoured, (tho publicly proclaimed against):
which is readiest to introduce it; and the
operators in it supported, as much as may
be; and when that cannot be done, yet ap-
proved still, and liked the better: if a long
train of actions sbeu the councils all tending
that way; how can a man any more hinder
himself from being persuaded in his own
mind, which way things are going; or from
casting about how to save himself, than he
could from believing the captain of the ship
he was in, was carrying him, and the rest
of the company, to Algiers, when he found
him always steering that course, though cross
winds, leaks in his ship, and want of men
and provisions did often force him to turn his
course another way for some time, which he
steadily returned to again, as soon as the
wind, weather, and other circumstanceg
would let him? |


CHAP.


384 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.


CH A P. XIX.
of the Dissolution of Government.


8. 211. HE that will with any clearness
He speak of the disolution of govern-
ment, ought in the first place to distinguish
between the disolution of the society aad the
dissolution of the government. That which
makes the community, and brings men out
of the loose state of nature, into one politic
society, is the agreement which every one has
with the rest to incorporate, and act as one
body, and fo be one distin common-wealth,
The usual, and almost only way whereby
this union is dissolved, is the inroad of foreign
force making a conquest upon them: for in
that case, (not being able to maintain and
support themselves, as one intire and i nde-
pendent body) the union belonging to that
body which consisted therein, must neces-
farily cease, and so every one return to the
state he was in before, with a liberty to shift
for himself, and provide for his own safety,
as he thinks fit, in some other society. When-
ever the soczety is dissolved, it is certain the
government of that society cannot remain.
Thus conquerors swords often cut up go-
vernments by the roots, and mangle societies
to pieces, separating the subdued or scattered
multitude from the protection of, and de-
pendence on, that society which mew to
| have


Or CTVIt- GOVERNMENT. 248g


have preserved them from violence. The
world is too well instructed in, and too for-


ward to allow of, this way of dissolving of
governments, to need any more to be said of
it; and there wants not much argument to
prove, that where the /actety. is dissalued, the


government cannot remain; that being as


imposlible, as for the frame of an house to


subsist when the materials of it are scat»


tered and dissipated by a whirl-wind, or


jumbled into a confused heap by an earth-

quake. 2 8540 H of. 6
F. 212. Besides this over- turning from

without, governments are dissolved from within,


First, When the legislative is altered. Civil


society being a state of peace, amongst those
who are of it, from whom the state of war
is excluded by the umpirage, which they
have provided in their legislative, for the


ending all differences that may arise amongst
any of them, it is in their /eg:z//atzve, that the


members of a common-wealth are united,
and combined together into one coherent
living, body. This zs tbe foul that gives form,
life, and unity, to the common-wealth: from


hence the several members have their mutual
influence, sympathy, and connexion: and
therefore, when the, /eg:/fative is broken, or


dissolued, dissolution and death follows: for


the gsance and union of. the society consisting in


*


having one will, the legislative, When once
established by the majority, has the Las”


and as it were keeping of that will. T
e con-


*


yY?
* %
*


386 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


constitution of the legislative is the first and
fundamental act of society, whereby pro-
vision: is made for the continuation of their
union, under the direction of persons, and
bonds of laws, made by persons authorized
thereunto, by the consent and appointment
of the people, without which no one man,
or number of men, amongst them, can have
authority of making laws that shall be bind-
ing to the rest, When any one, or more,
shall take upon them to make laws, whom
the people have not appointed so to do,
they make laws without authority, which
the people are not therefore bound to obey ;
by which means they come again to be out
of subjection, and may constitute to them-
selves a new legislative, as they think best,
being in full liberty to refist the force of
those, who without authority would impose
any thing upon them. Every one is at the
disposure of his own will, when those who
had, by the delegation of the society, the
_ declaring of the public will, are excluded
From it, and others usurp the place, who
have no such authority or delegation.
8. 213. This being usually brought about
by such in the common-wealth who misuse
the power they have; it is hard to consider
it aright, and know at whose door to lay it,
without knowing the form of government in
which it happens. Let us suppose then the


legislative placed in the concurrence of three
- distin persons.


1. A


——


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 387
I. A single hereditary person, having the
constant, supreme, executive power, and with
it the power of convoking and dissolving the


other two within certain periods of time.


2. An assembly of hereditary nobility.

3. An assembly of representatives chosen,
pro tempore, by the people. Such a form of
government supposed, it is evident,

F. 214. Frr/t, That when such a single
person, or prince, sets up his own arbitrary
will in place of the laws, which are the will
of the society, declared by the legislative,
then the legillative is changed: for that being
in effect the legislative, whose rules and laws
are put in execution, and required to be
obeyed ; when other laws are set up, and
other rules pretended, and inforced, than


what the legislative, constituted by the so-
ciety, have enacted, it is plain that the Je-


gislatrve is changed. Whoever introduces new
laws, not being thereunto authorized by the
fundamental appointment of the society, or
subverts the old, disowns and overturns the


power by which they were made, and fo
sets up a new legistative. |


8. 215. Secondly, When the prince hinders
the legislative from assembling in its due


time, or from acting freely, pursuant to those


ends for which it was constituted, the g


latsve is altered: for it is not a certain number
of men, no, nor their meeting, unless they
have also freedom of debating, and leifure

C-c-2 nr


2 2


— , | — — — - ” _ — — — - — —
— — — r
. — Pre —— —„—„— ———— — : +a


388 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
of perfecting, what is for the good of the
society, wherein the legislative consists: when
these are taken away or altered, so as to de-
prive the society of the due exercise of their
power, the legillative is truly altered; for it
18 not names that constitute governments,
but the use and exercise of those powers that
were intended to accompany them ; so that
hs, who takes away the freedom, or hinders
the acting of the legislative in its due seasons,
in effect takes away the legislative, and puts
an end to the government. |

$: 216. Thirdly, When, by the arbitrary
power of the prince, the electors, or ways
of election, are altered, without the consent,
and contrary to the common interest of the
people, there also the /eg;/latrve is altered: for,
if others than those whom the society hath
authorized thereunto, do chuse, or in another
way than what the society hath prescribed,
those chosen are not the legislative appointed
by the people.

$. 217. Fourthly, The delivery also of the
people into the subjection of a foreign power,
either by-the prince, or by the legislative, is
certainly a change of the legislative, and fo a
dissolutian of the government: for the end why
people entered into society being to be pre-
served one intire, free, independent society,
to be governed by its own laws ; this is lost,
whenever they are given up into the power
of another. OE


&. 218.


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 389


§. 218. Why, in such a constitution as this,
the dissolution of the government in these cases
is to be imputed to the prince, is evident;
because he, having the force, treafure am
offices of the state to employ, and often per-
suading himself, or being flattered by others,
that as supreme magistrate he is uncapable of
controul ; he alone is in a condition to make
great adyances toward such changes, under
1 of lawful authority, and has it in
is hands to terrify or suppress opposers, as
factious, seditious, and enemies to the go-
vernment: whereas no other part of the
legislative, or people, is capable by themselves
to attempt any alteration of the legislative,
without open and visible rebellion, apt enough
to be taken notice of, which, when it pre-
vails, produces effects very little different
from foreign conquest. Besides, the prince
in such a form of government, having the
ower of diffolving the other parts of the
e and thereby rendering them private
persons, they can never in opposition to him,
or without his concurrence, alter the legis-
lative by a law, his consent being necessary
to give any of their decrees that sanction.
But yet, so far as the other parts of the le-
gislative any way contribute to any attempt
upon the government, and do either pro-
mote, or not, what lies in them, hindern such


designs, they are guilty, and partake in this,
C 3 which


390 Or Ci1ivir-GovERNMENT. |


which is certainly the greatest crime men can
be guilty of one towards another.
§. 219. There is one way more whereby
such a government may be dissolved, and that
is, when he who has the supreme executive
power, neglects and abandons that charge,
so that the laws already made can no longer
be put in execution. This 1s demonstratively
to reduce all to anarchy, and so effectually 73
dissolve the government : for laws not being
made for themselves, but to be, by their exe-
cution, the bonds of the society, to keep every
part of the body politic in its due- place and
function; when that totally ceases, the ge-
vernment visibly ceafes, and the people be-
come a confused multitude, without order
or connexion. Where there is no longer the
administration of justice, for the securing of
men's rights, nor any remaining power
within the community to direct the force, or
provide for the necessities of the public,
there certainly is 0 government left. Where
the laws cannot be executed, it is all one as
if there were no laws; and a government
without laws is, I suppose, a mystery in
politics, unconceivable to human capacity,
and inconsistent with human society.
§. 220. In these and the like cases, ben
the government is dissolved, the people are at
liberty to provide for themselves, by erecting
a new legislative, differing from the other,
by the change of persons, or form, or both,
ay


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 391


as they shall find it most for their safety and
good: for the soczety can never, by the fault
of another, lose the native and original right
it has to preserve itself, which can only be
done by a settled legislative, and a fair and
impartial execution of the laws made by it.
But the state of mankind is not so miserable
that they are not capable of using this re-
medy, till it be too late to look for any.
To tell people they may provide for themselves,
by erecting a new legislative, when by op-
pression, artifice, or being delivered over to a
foreign power, their old one is gone, is only
to tell them, they may expect relief when
it is too late, and the evil is past cure. This
is in effect no more than to bid them first
be slaves, and then to take care of their li-
berty; and when their chains are on, tell
them, they may act like freemen. This, if
barely so, is rather mockery than relief; and
men can never be secure from tyranny, if
there be no means to escape it till they are
perfectly under it: and therefore it is, that
they have not only a right to get out of it,
but to prevent it. 12

$. 221: There is therefore, secondly, another
way whereby governments are dissolued, and
that is, when the legislative, or the prince,
either of them, act contrary to their trust.

First, The legislative ads against the trust
reposed in them, when they endeavour to
invade the property of the subject, and to
J Cc 4 make


2.9 Or: zCivti>GOvVERNMENT:
make themselves, or any part of the com-
munity, masters, or arbitrary disposers of the
ves, liberties, or fortunes of the people.
_ "S222.- The: reason why men enter into
society, is the preservation of their property;
and the end why they chuse and authorize a
legislative, is, that there may be laws made,
and rules set, as guards and fences to the
properties of all the members of the society,
to limit the power, and moderate the do-
minion, of every part and member of the so-
ciety : for since it can never be supposed to
be the, wall of the society, that the legislative
mould have a power to destroy that which
every one designs to fecure, by entering into
society, and for which the people submitted
themselves to legislators of their own making;
whenever the /egi/lators endeavour to take away,
and destroy the property of the people, or to
reduce-them to slavery under arbitrary power,
they put themselves into a state of war with
the people, who are thereupon absolved from
any farther obedience, and are left to the
common refuge, which God hath provided
for all men, against force and violence,
Whensoever therefore the /egislarive shall
transgress this fundamental rule of society ;
and either by, ambition, fear, folly or cor-


ruption, endeavour ta grasp themselves, or Put
into i he hands , any other , \an» absolute power
over the lives, liberties, and estutes of the
People; by this breach of trust they Nuk
vod! ; fs the


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 393
the ou the people had put into their
hands for quite contrary ends, and it devolves


to the people, who have a right to resume
their original liberty, and, by the establish-


ment of a new legiflative, (such as they shall


think fit) provide for their own safety and
security, which is the end for which they are
in society. What I have said here, concern-


ing the legislative in general, holds true also


concerning the supreme executor, who having
a double trust put in him, both to have a
part in the legislative, and the supreme exe-
eution of the law, acts against both, when
he goes about to set up his own arbitrary
will as the law of the society. He acts also
eontrary to his trust, when he either employs
the force, treasure, and offices of the society,
to corrupt the representatives, and gain them
to his purposes; or openly pre-engages the
electors, and prescribes to their choice, such,
whom he has, by sollicitations, threats, pro-
mises, or otherwise, won to his designs; and
employs them to bring in such, who have
promised before-hand what to vote, and
what to enact. Thus to regulate candidates
and electors, and new-model the ways of
election, what is it but to cut up the go-
vernment by the roots, and poison the very
fountain of public security? for the people
having reserved to themselves the choice of
their representatives, as the fence to their
properties, could do it for no other end, but
l 4 | that


« fo NA nec


294 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.
that they might always be freely chosen, and
so chosen, freely act, and advise, as the ne-
cessity of the common- wealth, and the public
good should, upon examination, and mature
ebate, be judged to require. This, those
who give their votes before they hear the
2 and have weighed the reasons on all
ides, are not capable of doing. To prepare
such an assembly as this, and endeavour to
set up the declared abettors of his own will,


for the true representatives of the people, and
the law-makers of the society, is certainly as


great a breach of trust, and as perfect a de-


claration of a defign to subvert the govern-
ment, as 1s possible to be met with. To
which, if one shall add rewards and punish-
ments visibly employed to the same end, and


all the arts of perverted law made use of,
to take off and destroy all that stand in the


way of such a design, and will not comply
and consent to betray the liberties of their
country, it will be past doubt what is doing.
What power they ought to have in the so-


ciety, who thus employ it contrary to the
trust went along with it in its first institution,


15 easy to determine; and one cannot but


see, that he, who. has once attempted any
fuch thing as this, cannot any longer be


trusted.


1 F. 223. To this perhaps it will be said,
that the people being ignorant, and always


—


*


i
*


discontented, to lay the foundation of go-
N | vernment


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 395


vernment in the unsteady opinion and un-
certain humour of the people, is to expose x
to certain ruin; and 0 government will be
able long to subhist, if the people may set up
a new legislative, whenever they take offence
at the old one. To this I answer, Quite the
contrary, People are not so eafily got out
of their old forms, as some are apt to suggest.
They are hardly to be prevailed with to amend
the acknowledged faults in the frame they
have been accustomed to. And if there be
any original defects, or adventitious ones in-
troduced by time, or corruption; it is not an
easy thing to get them changed, even when
all the world sees there is an opportunity for
it. This slowness and aversion in the people
to quit their old constitutions, has, in the
many revolutions which have been seen in
this kingdom, in this and former ages, still
kept us to, or, after some interval of fruitless
attempts, still brought us back again to our
old legislative of king, lords and commons:
and whatever provocations have made the
crown be taken, from some of our princes
heads, they never carried the people so far as
to place it in another line. wy
F. 224. But it will be said, this hypotbefis
lays a ferment for frequent rebellian. To
which I answer, | 1
Fir, No more than any other hypothesis :
for when the people are made miserable, and
find themselves exposed to the ill usage of ar-
95 trary


396 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


bitrary power, cry up their governors, as much
as you will, for sons of Jupiter; let them be
sacred and divine, descended, or authorized
from heaven; give them out for whom or
what you please, the same will happen. The
feople generally ill treated, and contrary to
right, will be ready upon any occasion to
ease themselves of a burden that fits heavy
upon them. They will wish, and seek for
the opportunity, which in the change, weak-
ness and accidents of human affairs, seldom
delays long to offer itself. He must have
lived but a little while in the world, who
has not seen examples of this in his time;
and he must have read very little, who cannot
produce examples of it in all forts of govern-
ments in the world. VS
§. 225. Secondly, J answer, fuch revolutions
happen not upon every little mismanagement
In public affairs. Great mistakes in the ruling
part, many wrong and inconvenient laws, and
all the lips of human frailty, will be born by
the people without mutiny or murmur. But
if a long train of abuses, prevarications and
artifices, all tending the same way, make the
design visible to the people, and they cannot
but feel what they lie under, and fee whi-
ther they are going; it is not to be won-
dered, that they should then rouze them-
selves, and endeavour to put the rule into
such hands which may secure to them the
ends for which government was at first erect-
ed; and without which, ancient names, and
specious


Or Civit-GoverRnMenT. 397


specious forms, are so far from being better,
that they are much worse, than the state of
nature, or pure anarchy ; the inconveniencies
being all as great and as near, but the remedy
farther off and more difficult. |
$. 226. Thirdly, 1 answer, that this deetrine” |
of a power in the people of providing for |
their safety a-new, by a new legislative, when
their legislators have acted contrary to their 1
trust, by invading their property, 1s 2bͤ best if
Fence against rebellion, and the probablest means q:
to hinder it: for rebellion being an opposition, :
not to persons, but authority, which is founded |
only in the constitutions and laws of the [!
government; those, whoever they be, who by '
force break through, and by force justify ;
their violation of them, are truly and pro- 0
perly rebels : for when men, by entering into $
society and civil-government, have excluded 1
force, and introduced laws for the preser- 3
vation of property, peace, and unity amongst
themselves, those who set up force again in
opposition to the laws, do rebellare, that is,
bring back again the state of war, and are
properly rebels: which they who are in
power, (by the pretence they have to autho-
rity, the temptation of force they have in
their hands, and the flattery of those about
them) being likeliest to do; the properęst way ;
to prevent the evil, is to shew them the 1
danger and injustice of it, who are under the 0
greatest temptation to run neo nee 1


8. 225 |


398 Or Civitr-GovernMENT:
F. 227. In both the fore- mentioned cases,
when either the legislative is changed, or the
legislators act contrary to the end for which
they were — those who are guilty
are guilty of rebellion : for if any one by force
takes away the established legiflative of any
society, and the Jaws by them made, put-
saant to their ' trust, he thereby takes away
the umpirage, which every one had consented
to, for a peaceable decifion of all their con-
troversies, and a bar to the state of war amongst
them. They, who remove, or change the
legislative, take away this decifive power,
which no body can have, but by the appoint-
ment and consent of the people; and so de-
stroying the authority which the people did,
and no body else can set up, and introducing a
power which the people hath not authorized,
they actually introduce a flate of war, which
is that of force without authority: and thus,
by removing the legislative established by the
society, (in whose decisions the people ac-
quiesced and united, as to that of their own
will) they untie the knot, and expose . the
people a-new to the flate of war. And if those,
who by force take away the legislative, are
rebels, the legislators themselves, as has been
shewn, can be no less esteemed so; when
they, who were set up for the protection,
and preservation of the people, their liberties
and properties, shall by force invade and
endeayour to take them away; and fo they


putting


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 399


putting themselves into a state of war with
those who made them the protectors and
guardians of their peace, are properly, and
with the greatest aggravation, rebellantes, re-
bels. W ö
8. 228. But if they, who say it lays a foun-
dation for rebellion, mean that it may occasion
civil wars, or intestine broils, to tell the people
they are absolved from obedience when il-
legal attempts are made upon. their liberties
or properties, and may oppose the unlawful
violence of those who were their magistrates,
when they invade their properties contrary
to the trust put in them ; and that therefore
this doctrine is not to be allowed, being fo
destructive to the peace of the world : they
may as well say, upon the same ground, that
honest men may not oppose robbers or pirates,
because this may occasion disorder or blood-
shed. If any mi/chref come in such cases, it
1s not to be charged upon him who defends
his own right, but o him that invades his
neighbours. If the innocent honest man
must quietly quit all he has, for peace sake,
to him who will lay violent hands upon it,
I defire it may be conlidered, what a kind of
peace there will be in the world, which con-
fists only in violence and rapine ; and which
is to be maintained only for the benefit of
robbers and oppressors. Who would not
think it an admirable peace betwixt the
mighty and the mean, when the lamb,
without


A

460 Op Civir-GovterRnMEeNnt.
without resistance, yielded his throat to be
torn by the imperious wolf? Polyphemus's den
gives us a perfect pattern 'of such a peace,
and such a government, wherein Uly/es and
his companions had nothing to do, but quietly
to suffer themselves to be devoured. And
no doubt Ulysses, who was a prudent man,
preached up passive obedience, and exhorted
them to a quiet submission, by representing
to them of what concernment peace was to
mankind; and by shewing the inconveniences
might happen, if they should offer to resist
Polyphemus, who had now the power over
them.
§. 229. The end of government is the
good of mankind; and which is % fer
mankind, that the people should be always
exposed to the boundless will of tyranny, or
that the rulers should be sometimes liable to
be opposed, when they grow exorbitant in
the use of their power, and employ it for
the destruction, and not the preservation of
the properties of their people

8. 230. Nor let any one fay, that mischief
can arise from hence, as often as it shall
please a busy head, or turbulent spirit, to
desire the alteratÞn of the government. It
is true, such men may stir, whenever they
please ; but it will be only to their own jul
ruin and perdition: for till the mischief be
grown general, and the ill designs of the


rulers become visible, or their attempts ek
| 1 sible


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 401


sible to the greater part, the people, who are
more disposed to suffer than right themselves
by resistance, are not apt to stir. The ex-
amples of particular injustice, or oppression
of here and there an unfortunate man, moves
them not. But if they universally have a
persuasion, grounded upon manifest evidence,
that designs are carrying on against their li-
berties, and the general course and tendency
of things cannot but give them strong su-
{picions of the evil intention of their go-
vernors, who is to be blamed for it? Who
can help it, if they, who might avoid it,
bring themselves into this suspicion ? Are
the people to be blamed, if they have the
sense of rational creatures, and can think of
things no otherwise than as they find and
feel them? And is it not rather heir fault,
who put things into such a posture, that they
would not have them thought to be as they
are? I grant, that the pride, ambition, and
turbulency of private men have sometimes
caused great disorders in common-wealths,
and factions have been fatal to states and
kingdoms. But whether the mischief hath
oftener begun in the peoples wantonness, and a
desire to cast off the lawful authority of
their rulers, or in the rulers insolence, and
endeavours to get and exercise an arbitrary
power over their people; whether oppression,
or disobedience, gave the first rise to the dis-
order, I leaye it to impartial history to de-

| D d termine.


402 OF CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


termine. This I am sure, whoever, either
ruler or subject, by force goes about to in-
vade the rights of either prince or people,
and lays the foundation for overturning the
constitution and frame of any just government,
is highly guilty of the greatest crime, I think,
a man is capable of, being to answer for all
those mischiefs of blood, rapine, and deso-
lation, which the breaking to pieces of go-
vernments bring on a country. And he who
does it, is justly to be esteemed the common
enemy and pest of mankind, and is to be
treated according]y. |
§. 231. That 22 or foreigners, attempt-
ing by force on the properties of any people,
may be re/;/ted with force, is agreed on all
hands. But that magiftrates, doing the same
thing, may be re/i/ted, hath of late been
denied: as if those who had the greatest pri-
vileges and advantages by the law, had thereby
a power to break those laws, by which alone
they were set in a better place than their
brethren : whereas their offence is thereby
the greater, both as being ungrateful for
the greater share they have by the law, and
breaking also that trust, which is put into
their hands by their brethren. | bis
$. 232. Whosoever uses force without right,
as every one does in society, who does it
without law, puts himself into a fate of war
with those against whom he so uses it; and
in that state all former ties are cancelled, ba
Other


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 403


other riglits cease, and every one has a right
to defend himself, and 2 resist the aggressor.
This is so evident, that Barclay himself, that
great assertor of the power and sacredness of
kings, is forced to confess, That it is lawful
for the people, in some cases, to resist their
king ; and that too in a chapter, wherein he
pretends to shew, that the divine law shuts
up the people from all manner of rebellion,
Whereby it is evident, even by his own
doctrine, that, since they may in some cases
refit, all resisting of princes is not rebellion.
His words are these. Quod siquis dicat, Ergone
populus tyrannice crudelitati & furori jugulum
emper prebebit? Ergone multitudo civitates suas
Jame, ferro, & flamma vastari, seque, conjuges, &
liberos fortune Iudibrio & tyranni libidini ex-
boni, ingue omnia vitæ pericula omnesque miserias
& molestias d rege deduci patientur? Num illis
quod mmi animantium generi eft a naturd tribu-
tum, denegari debet, ut sc. vim vi repellant,
Seseq; ab mjuria tueantur ? Huic breviter re-
sponsum fit, Populo universo negari dęfensionem,
gut juris naturalis est, neque ultionem prater
naturam eft adversus regem concedi debere. Qua-
propter px rex non in singulares tantum personas
aliquot privatum odium exerceat, fed corpus
etiam reipublice, cujus ipse caput eft, i. e. totum
populum, vel insignem aliquam ejus partem im-
tiani & intolerandd sœvitid seu tyrannide di-
Vexet; populo, quidem hoc casu ręsistendi ac
tnendj fe ab injurid potestas competit, fed tuendi


2: /e


404 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.

fe tantum, non enim in principem invadendi: &
restituendæ injuriæ illatæ, non recedendi d debita
reverentid propter acceptam injuriam. Præ-
sentem denique impetum propulsandi non vim
prateritam ulciscenti jus habet. Horum enim
alterum a naturd est, ut vitam seilicet corpusque
tueamur. Alterum vero contra naturam, ut
inferior de superiori supplicium sumat. Quod
itaque populus malum, antequam factum sit,
impedire potest, ne fiat, id postquam factum est,
in regem authorem sceleris vindicare non potest :
populus igitur hoc amplius quam privatus quis=
piam habet: quod huic, vel ipsis adversariis
judicibus, excepto Buchanano, nullum nisi in pa-
tientia remedium superest. Cum ille si into-
lerabilis tyrannus est {modicum enim ferre am-


nino debet ) resistere cum reverentid possit, Bar-
clay contra Monarchom. I. iii. c. 8.


In Englisb thus.


&. 233. But if any one should ask, Must the
people then always lay themselves open to the
cruelty and rage of tyranny ? Must they see
. their cities pillaged, and laid in ashes, their
orves and children exposed to the tyrants lust
and fury, and themselves and families reduced
by their king to ruin, and all the miseries of
want and oppression, and yet fit still? Must
men alone be debarred the common privilege of
opposing force with force, which nature allows
fo freely to all other creatures for their pre-
is servation


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 4035


servation from injury? I answer : Self-defence
7s a part of the law of nature; nor can it be
denied the community, even against the king
himself: but to revenge them _—_ upon him,
must by no means be allowed them ; it being not
agreeable to that law. Wherefore if the king
shall shew an hatred, not only to some particular
persons, but sets himself against the body of the
common- wealth, whereof he is the head, and
shall, with intolerable ill usage, cruelly tyrannize
over the whole, or a considerable part of the
people, in this case the people have a right to
refit and defend themselves from injury: but
it must be with this caution, that they only de-
fend themselves, but do not attack their prince
they may repair the damages recerved, but mu


not for any provocation exceed the bounds of


due reverence and respect. They may repulse
ihe present attempt, but must not revenge past
vꝛolences: for it is natural for us to defend hfe
and limb, but that an inferior should punish a
Superior, 1s against nature. The mischief which
zs defigned. them, the people may prevent before
it be done; but when it is done, they must not
revenge it on the king, though author of the
_ villany. This therefore is the privilege of the
people in general, above what any private per-
fon hath ; that particular men are allowed by
our adversaries themselves (Buchanan ogy ex-
cepted) to have no other remedy but patience ;
but the body of the ons may with respect resist


3 intolerable


-


: — — 3 .
5 -- 8 — — a - —
8


2 +
Pr


406 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.


intolerable tyranny; for when it is but Mon
aerate, they ought to endure it.

§. 234. Thus far that great advocate of
monarchical power allows of resistance.

Y. 235. It is true, he has annexed two
limitations to it, to no purpole :

First, He says, it must be with reverence.

Secondly, It must be without retribution, or
punishment ; and the reason he gives is, be-
cause an inferior cannot punish a superior.

First, How to ret force without striking
again, or how to strike with reverence, will
need some {skill to make intelligible. He
that shall oppose an assault only with a shield
to receive the blows, or in any more respect-
ful posture, without a sword in his hand, to
abate the confidence and force of the as-
sailant, will quickly be at an end of his re-
 fihance, and will find such a defence serve
only to draw on himself the worse usage.
This is as ridiculous a way of re/i/t:ng, as
Juvenal thought it of fighting; ub: tu pulsas,
ego vapulo tantum. And the success of the


combat will be unavoidably the same he there
describes it :


[Iibertas pauperis hac est :
Pulsatus rogat, & pugnis concisus, adorat,
Ut liceat paucis cum dentibus inde reverti.


This


OF CIVIILI- GOVERNMENT. 407


This will always be the event of such an
Imaginary re///tance, where men may not
strike again. He therefore who may rest,
must be allowed to strike, And then let our


author, or any body else, join a knock on the


head, or a cut on the face, with as much
reverence and respect as he thinks fit. He that
can reconcile blows and reverence, may, for
aught I know, desire for his pains, a civil,
respectful cudgeling where- ever he can meet
with it.


Secondly, As to his second, An inferior.
cannot punish a superior ; that is true, gene-


rally speaking, whilst he is his superior. But


to resist force with force, being the ftate of


war that /evels the parties, cancels all former
relation of reverence, respect, and /upertority :
and then the odds that remains, is, that he,
who opposes the unjust aggressor, has this
superiority over him, that he has a right, when
he prevails, to punish the offender, both for
the breach of the peace, and all the evils that
followed upon it. Barclay therefore, in an-
other place, more coherently to himself, de-
nies it to be lawful to re//# a king in any
case. But he there assigns two cases, where-
by a king may un-king himself. His words
are,

Quid ergo, nulline casus incidere possunt qui-
bus populo sese erigere atque in regem impòtentius
dominantem arma capere & invadere jure suo
sudque authoritate liceat ? Nulli certe quamdiu


Dd4 rex


408 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.

rex manet. Semper enim ex divinis id obstat,
Regem honorificato ; & qui potestati resistit,
Del ordinationi refistit : non aligs igitur in


eum populo 1 eft quam si id committat


propter quod ipso jure rex esse definat, Tunc
enim se ipse principatu exuit atque in privatis
constituit liber: hoc modo populus & superior
Heitur, reverso ad eum sc. jure lo quod ante
regem inauguratum in interregno habuit. At
sunt paucorum generum commissa ejusmodi que
hunc effectum pariunt. At ego cum plurima
ani mo Pperlustrem, duo tantum invenio, duos, in-
quam, casus quibus rex ipso facto ex rege non
regem fe facit & omni honore & dignitate re-
gali atque in subditos potesiate destituit; quorum
etiam meminit Winzerus. Horum unus est, Si
regnum disperdat, quemadmodum de Nerone fer-
tur, quod is nempe senatum populumque wot of
num, atque adeo urbem ipsam ferro flamma
vastare, ac novas sibi sedes querere decrevi, be,
Et de Caligula, quod palam denunciarit fe neque
crvem neque principem senatui amplius fore, in-
que animo habuerit interempto utriusque ordinis
electissimo quoque Alexandriam commi grare, ac
ut populum uno ict interimeret, unam ei cer-
vicem optavit. Talia cum rex aliquis meditatur
& molitur serio, omnem regnandi curam &
animum ilico abjicit, ac proinde imperium in
JSubditos amittit, ut dominus servi pro derelicto
habitt dominium.
8. 236. Alter casus est, Si rex in alicujus
clientelam fe contulit, ac regnum quod liberum
a majoribus


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 409


2 majoribus & populo traditum accepit, alienæ
ditioni mancipavit. Nam tunc quamvis forte
non ed mente id agit populo plane ut incommoadet :
tamen quia quod præcipuum est regiæ dignitatis
amisit, ut summus scilicet in regno secundum
Deum fit, & solo Deo inferior, atque populum
etiam totum ignorantem vel invitum, cujus li-
bertatem sartam & tectam conservare debuit, in
alterius gentis dittonem & potestatem dedidtt ;
hac velut quadam regni ab alienatione effect, ut
nec quod ipse in regno imperium habutt retmeat,
nec in eum cut collatum voluit, juris quicquam
transferat ; atque ita eo fatto liberum jam &
sue potestatis populum relinguit, cujus rei exem-
plum unum annales Scotici suppeditant. Barclay
contra Monarchom. I. iii. c. 16.


Which in Englisb runs thus.


8. 237. What then, can there no case happen
wherein the people may of right, and by their
own authority, help themseFves, take arms, and
set upon their king, imperiousiy domineering over
them? None at all, whilst he remains a king.
Honour the king, and he that refists the
power, resists the ordinance of God; are
drvine oracles that will never permit it. The people
therefore can never come by a power over bim,
_ unless be does something that makes him cease
to be a ting © for then he arvesis himself of his
crown and aignity, and returns to the state of
à private man, and the people become free and


superior,


410 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


superior, the power which they had in the in-
terregnum, before they crowned him king, de-
volving to them again. But there are but few
miscarriages which bring the matter to this
flate. After considering it well on all sides, I
can find but two. Two cases there are, I say,
whereby a king, ipso facto, becomes no king,
and loses all power and regal authority over his
people; whichrare also taken notice of by Win-
zerus.

The first 1s, If he endeavour to overturn the
government, that is, if he have à purpose and
design to ruin the kingdom and common-wealth,
as it ts recorded of Nero, that he resolved to
cut off the senate and people of Rome, lay the
city waste with fire and sword, and then re-
move to some other place. And of Caligula,
that he openly declared, that he would be no
longer à head to the people or senate, and that
He had it in his thoughts to cut off the worthieft
men of both ranks, and then retire to Alexan-
dria: and he wisht that the people had but one
neck, that he might dispatch them all at a blow.
Such designs as these, when any king harbours
in his thoughts, and seriously promotes, be im-
' mediately gives up all care and thought of the
' Common-wealth ; and consequently forfeits the
power of governing his subjects, as a mailer
dees the dominion over his slaves whom be bath
abandoned. |

8. 238. The other case is, When a king makes
himself the dependent of anather, and subjects Bis

kingdom


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 411


kingdom which his ancestors left him, and the
people put free into his hands, to the dominion
of another : for however perhaps it may not be
his intention to prejudice the people ; yet because
he has hereby last the principal part of regal
dignity, viz. to be next and immediately under
God, supreme in his kingdom ; and also because
he betrayed or forced bis people, whose liberty
he ought to have carefully preserved, into the
power and dominion of a foreign nation. By
this, as it were, alienation of his kmgdom, be
himself loses the power he had in it before,
without transferring any the least right to those
on whom he would have bestowed it; and fo by
this aft sets the people free, and leaves them at
their own disposal. One example of this 1s to

be found m the Scotch Annals. |
8. 239. In these cases Barclay, the great
champion of absolute monarchy, is forced
to allow, that a king may be refed, and
ceases to be a king. That is, in short, not
to multiply cafes, in whatsoever he has no
authority, there he is no king, and may be
resisted : for wheresoever the authority ceases,
the king ceases too, and becomes like other
men who have no authority. And these two
cases he instances in, differ little from those
above mentioned, to be destructive to go-
vernments, only that he has omitted the
principle from which his doctrine flows; and
that is, the breach of trust, in not preserving
the form of government agreed on, and in
I not


412 Or CTVII- GOVERNMENT.


not intending the end of government itself,
which is the public good and preservation of
property. When a king has dethroned him-
self, and put himself in a state of war with
his people, what shall hinder them from
prosecuting him who is no king, as they
would any other man, who has put himself
into a state of war with them; Barclay, and
those of his opinion, would do well to tell
us. This farther I defire may be taken no-
tice of out of Barclay, that he says, The mij-
chief that is designed them, the people may pre-
vent before it be done: whereby he allows re-
fiftance when tyranny is but in defign. Such
defigns as these (says he) when any king har-
bours in bis thoughts and seriously promotes, he
immediately gives up all care and thought of the
common-wealth ; so that, according to him, the
neglect of the public good is to be taken as
an evidence of such de/ign, or at least for a
sufficient cause of resstance. And the reason
of all, he gives in these words, Because he
betrayed or forced his people, whose liberty he
ought carefully to have preserved. What he adds,
into the power and dominion of a foreign nation,
signifies nothing, the fault and forfeiture ly-
ing in the loss of their liberty, which he
ought to have preserved, and not in any di-
stinction of the persons to whose dominion
they were subjected. The peoples right is
equally invaded, and their liberty lost, whe-
ther they are made slaves to any of their
own,


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 413


own, or a foreign nation; and in this lies the
injury, and against this only have they the
right of defence. And there are instances
to be found in all countries, which shew, that
it is not the change of nations in the persons
of their governors, but the change of go-
vernment, that gives the offence. Bisson, a
bishop of our church, and a great stickler for
the power and prerogative of princes, does,
if J mistake not, in his. treatise of Christian
subjeftion, acknowledge, that princes may for-
eit their power, Wee title to the obe-
dience of their subjects; and if there needed
authority in a case where reason is so plain,
I could send my reader to Bra&on, 4 och
and the author of the Mirrour, and others,
writers that cannot be suspected to be igno-
rant of our government, or enemies to it.
But I thought Hooker alone might be enough
to satisfy those men, who relying on him
for their ecclesiastical polity, are by a strange
fate carried to deny those principles upon
which he builds it. Whether they are herein
made the tools of cunninger workmen, to
po down their own fabric, they were best
ook. This I am sure, their civil policy is
so new, so dangerous, and so destructive to
both rulers and people, that as former ages
never could bear the broaching of it; so it
may be hoped, those to come, redeemed from
the impolitions of these Egyptian under-task- |

masters, will abhor the memory of such ser- "
vile


414 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


vile flatterers, who, whilst it seemed to serve
their turn, resolved all government into ab-
solute tyranny, and would have all men born
to, what their mean souls fitted them for,
slavery.
. 240. Here, it is like, the common que-
stion will be made, No shall be judge, whe-
ther the prince or legislative act contrary to
their trust? This, perhaps, ill- affected and
factious men may spread amongst the people,
when the prince only makes use of his due
prerogative, To this I reply, The people
fall be judge; for who shall be judge whe-
ther his trustee or deputy acts well, and ac-
cording to the trust reposed in him, but he
who deputes him, and must, by having de-

uted him, have still a power to discard him,
when he fails in his trust ? If this be rea-
sonable in particular cases of private men,
why should it be otherwise in that of the
greatest moment, where the welfare of mil-
lions is concerned, and alfo where the evil,
if not prevented, is greater, and the redress
very n dear, and dangerous?

But farther, this question, /F#/ho
shall be pre cannot mean, that there is
no judge at all: for where there is no ju-
dicature on earth, to decide controversies
amongst men, God in heaven is udge. He
alone, it is true, is Judge of the right. But
every man is judge for himself, as in all other


GT so in this, whether another hath put
himself


Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT. 415


himself into a state of war with him, and
whether he should appeal to the Supreme
Judge, as Feptha did. e
$. 242. If a controversy arise betwixt a
prince and some of the people, in a matter
where the law is silent, or doubtful, and the
thing be of great consequence, I should think
the proper umpire, in such a case, should be
the body of the people : for in cases where
the prince hath a trust reposed in him, and
is dispensed from the common ordinary rules
of the law; there, if any men find them-
selves aggrieved, and think the prince acts
contrary to, or beyond that trust, who fo
proper to judge as the body of the people,
(who, at first, lodged that trust in him) how
far they meant it should extend? But if the
prince, or whoever they be in the admini-
stration, decline that way of determination,
the appeal then lies no where but to heaven;
force between either persons, who have no
known superior on earth, or which permits
no appeal to a judge on earth, being pro-
perly a state of war, wherein the appeal lies
only to heaven; and in that state the 2xjared
party . must judge for himself, when he will
think fit to make use of that appeal, and put

himself upon it.
§. 243. To conclude, The power that every.
individual gave the society, when he entered
into it, can never revert to the individuals
again, as long as the society lasts, but wall
always


2 — —„-— p — . 2 v1


416 Or CIVII- GOVERNMENT.


always remain in the community; because
without this there can be no community, no
common-wealth, which is contrary to the
original agreement: so also when the society
hath placed the legislative in any assembly
of men, to continue in them and their suc-
cessors, with direction and authority for pro-
viding such successors, the legislative can never
revert to the people whilst that government
lasts; because having provided a legislative
with power to continue for ever, they have
given up their political power to the legis-
lative, and cannot resume it. But if they
have set limits to the duration of their legis-
lative, and made this supreme power in any
person, or assembly, only temporary ; or else,
when by the miscarriages of those in autho-
rity, it is forfeited ; upon the forfeiture, or
at the determination of the time set, it re-
verts to the society, and the people have a
right to act as supreme, and continue the
legislative in themselves; or erect a new form,
or under the old form place it in new hands,
as they think good.
