Modern Views of Electricity (Oliver Lodge, 1892)
================================================
Oliver Lodge — Modern Views of Electricity (London: Macmillan, 1892). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (modernviewselect00lodgrich).

LIBRARY 

OF   THE 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA. 

APR  13  1R93    '  l89 

^Accessions  No.&  °Q  ^*3  .  Class  No. 


MODERN    VIEWS 


OF 


ELECTRICITY 


NATURE  SERIES 


MODERN    VIEWS 


OF 


ELECTRICITY 


HY 

OLIVER    J.    LODGE,    D.Sc.,    LL.D,    F.R.S. 

Professor  of  Physics  in  University  College,  Liverpool 


WITH  ILL  USTRA  TIONS 


MACMILLAN     AND     CO. 

AND      NEW      YORK 
1892 

The  Right  of  Translation  and  Reproduction  is  Resen>cd 


G  o~t  8 


Engineering 
Library 


RICHARD  CLAY  AND  SONS,  LIMITED, 

LONDON   AND   BUNG  AY. 


First  Edition  printed  1889.     Second  1 892. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

I  AM  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  friends  for 
several  corrections  and  emendations  made  in  this 
edition.  A  new  chapter  on  Recent  Progress  has 
been  added,  and  has  been  revised  by  Professor 
Fitzgerald;  on  the  subject  of  gaseous  conduction 
Mr.  A.  P.  Chattock  has  been  kind  enough  to  write 
for  me  several  sections,  65  A,  B,  C,  D.  The  old 
numbering  of  the  sections  has  been  retained,  so  that 
all  additional  sections  are  distinguished  by  letters. 

O.  J.    L. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

THE  doctrine  expounded  in  this  book  is  the  ethereal 
theory  of  electricity.  Crudely  one  may  say  that  as 
heat  is  a  form  of  energy,  or  a  mode  of  motion,  so 
electricity  is  a  form  of  ether,  or  a  mode  of  ethereal 
manifestation. 

This  doctrine  is  led  up  to  by  gradual  stages,  and 
the  explanations  in  Part  I.  do  not  aim  at  the  same 
fulness  of  detail  as  those  in  Part  III.  or  IV.  Since 
the  book  is  intended  to  be  useful  to  the  higher  class 
of  students  it  seemed  very  permissible  to  adopt  a 
method  which  I  always  use  in  teaching, — viz.  to 
begin  by  giving  some  ideas  at  first,  and  to  gradually 
polish  them  up  later,  rather  than  by  attempting  a  too 
highly  finished  statement  ab  initio  to  overburden  and 
depress,  and  possibly  to  confuse,  a  student.  Because 
of  this  progressive  arrangement  I  may  be  permitted 


viii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

to  urge  students  to  read  the  book  through  before 
proceeding  to  dip  into  it  by  help  of  the  index 
and  before  taking  notice  of  references  forward,  which 
subsequently  it  is  hoped  will  prove  useful. 

Persons  who  are  occupied  with  other  branches  of 
science  or  philosophy,  or  with  literature,  and  who  have 
therefore  not  kept  quite  abreast  of  physical  science, 
may  possibly  be  surprised  to  see  the  intimate  way 
in  which  the  ether  is  now  spoken  of  by  physicists, 
and  the  assuredness  with  which  it  is  experimented 
on.  They  may  be  inclined  to  imagine  that  it  is  still 
a  hypothetical  medium  whose  existence  is  a  matter 
of  opinion.  Such  is  not  the  case.  The  existence  of 
an  ether  can  legitimately  be  denied  in  the  same 
terms  as  the  existence  of  matter  can  be  denied,  but 
only  so.  The  evidence  of  its  existence  can  be 
doubted  or  explained  away  in  the  one  case  as  in 
the  other,  but  the  evidence  for  ether  is  as  strong 
and  direct  as  the  evidence  for  air.  The  eye  may 
indeed  be  called  an  ethereal  sense-organ,  in  the  same 
sense  as  the  ear  can  be  called  an  aerial  one,  and 
somewhat  in  the  same  sense  as  the  hand  and  muscles 
may  be  called  a  sense-organ  for  the  appreciation  of 
ordinary  matter. 

Some  of  the  details  of  my  explanations  may  be 
wrong  (though  I  hope  not),  and  all  must  be  capable 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  ix 

of  ultimate  improvement,  but  as  to  the  main  doctrine 
concerning  the  nature  of  electricity,  though  I  call  it  a 
"  view,"  it  is  to  me  no  view  but  a  conviction.  Few 
things  in  physical  science  appear  to  me  more  certain 
than  that  what  has  so  long  been  called  electricity  is  a 
form,  or  rather  a  mode  of  manifestation,  of  the  ether. 
Such  words  as  "  electrification,"  "  electric,"  may  re- 
main ;  "  electricity  "  may  gradually  have  to  go.  It  can 
be  noticed  that  whereas  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  book 
the  word  electricity  occurs  frequently  and  the  word 
ether  seldom,  in  the  later  portion  this  order  of 
frequency  is  inverted. 

A  rough  and  crude  statement  adapted  for  popular 
use  is  that  electricity  and  ether  are  identical ;  but  that 
is  not  all  that  has  to  be  said,  for  there  are  two  opposite 
kinds  of  electricity,  and  there  are  not  two  ethers.  But 
there  may  be  two  aspects  of  one  ether,  just  as  there 
are  two  sides  to  a  sheet  of  paper,  or  two  aspects  of  a 
transparent  clock  face  ;  and  similarly  may  positive  and 
negative  electricity  be  two  aspects,  or,  as  I  have  some- 
times called  them  by  chemical  analogy,  "  components," 
of  the  ether.  Anything  which  can  be  sheared  (and 
ether  is  sheared  by  every  electromotive  force  applied 
to  it)  must  consist  of  two  parts  sufficiently  different  to 
travel  or  to  be  displaced  in  opposite  directions. 

If  this  statement  is  vague,  it  is  because  our  present 


x  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  ether  is  vague  ;  not 
because  the  relationship  of  electricity  to  ether  is  un- 
certain, or  will  be  anything  but  definite  so  soon  as  we 
know  the  constitution  of  the  ether  more  precisely. 
Vague  at  present  our  knowledge  of  the  ether  is,  but 
not  so  vague  as  these  lines  may  suggest. 

That  which  has  now  to  be  investigated  is  not  the 
nature  of  electricity,  but  the  nature  of  the  ether.  Ex- 
planation always  progresses  by  stages  ;  no  explanation 
is  ultimate  ;  every  explanation  is  a  step  up,  a  removal 
of  a  thing  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  category.  Thus 
comets  at  one  time  might  have  been  anything  ;  they 
have  been  shown  to  be  a  form  (or  swarm)  of  meteo- 
rites. Meteorites,  again,  have  been  shown  to  be  lumps 
of  common  matter — usually  iron  or  rock.  There 
remains  the  question,  What  is  iron  or  rock,  or  any 
form  of  matter  ?  Heat  was  once  thought  to  be  a 
form  of  matter ;  it  is  now  known  to  be  a  form  of 
energy.  There  remains  the  question,  What  is  energy  ? 
Electricity  has  been  thought  to  be  a  form  of  energy  ; 
it  has  been  shown  to  be  a  form  of  ether.  There 
remains  the  question.  What  is  ether  ? 

And  a  question  it  is  indeed  :  the  question  of  the 
physical  world  at  the  present  time.  But  it  is  not  un- 
answerable :  it  is,  in  my  belief,  not  far  from  being 
answered.  And  it  is  probably  a  simpler  question  than 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  xi 

the  supplementary  and  next  subsequent  question,  What 
is  matter  ?  It  is  simpler,  partly  because  ether  is  one, 
while  matter  is  apparently  many  ;  partly  because  the 
presence  of  matter  so  modifies  the  ether  that  no  com- 
plete theory  of  the  properties  of  matter  can  possibly 
be  given  without  a  preliminary  and  fairly  complete 
knowledge  of  the  properties  and  constitution  of  un- 
disturbed ether  in  free  space.  When  this  has  been 
attained,  the  resultant  and  combined  effect  we  call 
matter  may  begin  to  be  understood. 

If  a  continuous  incompressible  perfect  fluid  filling 
all  space  can  be  imagined  in  such  a  state  of  motion 
that  it  will  do  all  that  ether  is  known  to  do ;  if, 
simply  by  reason  of  its  state  of  motion,  it  can  be 
proved  capable  of  conveying  light  and  of  manifesting 
all  electric  and  magnetic  phenomena  which  do  not 
depend  on  the  presence  of  matter  ;  and  if  the  state 
of  motion  so  imagined  can  be  proved  stable  and 
such  as  can  readily  exist,  the  theory  of  free  ether 
is  complete. 

The  latest  contribution  towards  such  a  theory  appears  while  I 
write  in  a  letter  to  Nature  by  G.  F.  Fitzgerald  (May  Qth,  1889). 
The  fluid  structure  there  imagined,  a  liquid  in  turbulent  or 
vortex  motion  consisting  of  interlaced  vortex  filaments  like  a 
sponge,  is  proved  to  be  capable  of  doing  all  that  is  required  of 
free  ether  ;  and  the  motion  is  believed  with  great  probability 
to  be  a  stable  and  possible  state.  The  Fitzgerald  ether  may 


xii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

consist,  for  instance,  of  an  assemblage  of  columnar  vortices 
threading  each  other  in  three  cardinal  directions  in  square  (or 
cubical)  order  ;  adjacent  vortices  rotating  opposite  ways  like  the 
cells  in  my  sectional  diagrams,  Figs.  37  and  46,  in  which  the 
clockwise  whirls  are  positive  electricity  and  the  counter-clockwise 
are  negative  electricity.  Until  we  come  into  the  neighbourhood 
of  matter  no  further  distinction  but  exact  opposition  of  proper- 
ties is  existent.  A  somewhat  similar  idea  concerning  the  ether 
has  been  worked  at  by  Mr.  Hicks,  see  §  156  ;  and  Sir  William 
Thomson  proved  in  a  paper  at  the  British  Association  in  1887, 
that  a  laminar  arrangement  of  vortices  could  transmit  transverse 
vibrations  (i.e.  light),  though  with  some  absorption  and  therefore 
partial  opacity  (Phil.  Mag.  October  1887).  Fitzgerald  has  now 
gone  a  step  further  and  devised  a  fibrous  ether  which  is  not  only 
optically,  but  also  electrically,  sufficient.  If  no  flaw  appears,  if 
it  stand  the  test  of  criticism  and  further  development,  the 
theory  of  free  ether  is  far  more  than  begun. 

The  theory  of  bound  ether  and  of  matter  must  next 
follow,  and  thereby,  in  addition  to  all  optical  and 
electrical  phenomena,  gravitation  and  cohesion  must 
be  explained  too.  Then  must  be  attacked  the  specific 
differences  between  various  kinds  of  matter,  and  the 
nature  of  what  we  call  their  "  combinations."  When 
this  is  accomplished  the  complex  facts  of  chemistry 
will  have  been  brought  under  a  comprehensive  law. 

The  next  fifty  years  may  witness  these  tremendous 
victories  in  great  part  won. 

UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  LIVERPOOL. 
May  I3///,  1889. 


CONTENTS 


PART  I 


INTRODUCTION  AND  ELECTROSTATICS 


CHAPTER  I. 

I'AGE 

FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS 3 


CHAPTER  II. 
THE  DIELECTRIC 


CHAPTER  III. 
CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION 35 


xiv  CONTENTS 

PART  II. 

CONDUCTION. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

I'AGF 

METALLIC  AND  ELECTROLYTIC  CONDUCTION 71 


CHAPTER  V. 
CURRENT  PHENOMENA 95 


CHAPTER  VI. 

CHEMICAL  AND  THERMAL  METHODS  OF  PRODUCING  CURRENTS. 

CONDUCTION  IN  GASES 115 


PART   III. 
MAGNETISM. 

CHAPTER  VII. 
RELATION  OF  MAGNETISM  TO  ELECTRICITY      155 


CHAPTER  VIII 
NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM , 171 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  IX. 

PAGE 

STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD 193 


CHAPTER  X. 
MECHANICAL  MODELS  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD  .  202 


CHAPTER  XI. 
MECHANICAL  MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION 219 


PART  IV. 
RADIATION. 

CHAPTER  XII. 
RELATION  OF  ETHER  TO  ELECTRICITY 245. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER  260 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT 273 


xvi  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  XV. 

PAGE 

ELECTRO- MAGNETIC  AND  ELECTROSTATIC  EFFECTS  ON  LIGHT      .  306 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
RECENT  PROGRESS 337 


APPENDED  LECTURES 

LECTURE  I. 
THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT- 369 


LECTURE  II. 
THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS 385 

LECTURE  III. 
THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR 417 

APPENDIX 445 

INDEX 467 


PART    I 

INTRODUCTION  AND  ELECTROSTATICS 


UNIVERSITY 


CHAPTER  I 

FUNDAMENTAL   NOTIONS 

I.  IT  is  often  said  that  we  do  not  know  what  elec- 
tricity is,  and  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  truth 
in  the  statement.  It  is  not  so  true,  however,  as  it 
was  some  twenty  years  ago.  Some  things  are  begin- 
ning to  be  known  about  it  ;  and  though  modern  views 
are  tentative,  and  may  well  require  modification, 
nevertheless  some  progress  has  been  made.  I  shall 
endeavour  in  this  essay  to  set  forth  as  best  I  may  the 
position  of  thinkers  on  electrical  subjects  at  the 
present  time. 

I  begin  by  saying  that  the  whole  subject  of  elec- 
tricity is  divisible  for  purposes  of  classification  into 
four  great  branches. 

(i)  Electricity  at  rest,  or  static  electricity  :  wherein 
are  studied  all  the  phenomena  belonging  to  stresses 
and  strains  in  insulating  or  dielectric  media  brought 

B  2 


4  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP,  i 

about  by  the  neighbourhood  of  electric  charges  or 
electrified  bodies  at  rest  immersed  therein  ;  together 
with  the  modes  of  exciting  such  electric  charges  and 
the  laws  of  their  interactions. 

(2)  Electricity  in  locomotion,  or  current  electricity  : 
wherein  are  discussed  all  the  phenomena  set  up  in 
metallic  conductors,  in  chemical  compounds,  and  in 
dielectric  media,  by  the  passage  of  electricity  through 
them  ;  together  with  the  modes  of  setting  electricity 
in  continuous  motion  and  the  laws  of  its  flow. 

(3)  Electricity  in  rotation,  or  magnetism  :  wherein 
are  discussed  the  phenomena  belonging  to  electricity 
in  whirling  or  vortex  motion,  the  modes  of  exciting 
such   whirls,   the   stresses   and    strains   produced    by 
them,  and  the  laws  of  their  interaction. 

(4)  Electricity  in  vibration,  or  radiation  :  wherein 
are  discussed  the  propagation   of  periodic  or  undu- 
latory  disturbances  through  various  kinds  of  media, 
the  laws  regulating  wave  velocity,  wave-length,  re- 
flection, interference,  dispersion,  polarization,  and    a 
multitude   of  phenomena    studied    for   a   long   time 
under  the  heading   "Light."      Although  this  is  the 
most    abstruse    and    difficult    portion     of    electrical 
science,   a    certain    fraction   of    it    has    been    known 
to  us  longer  than  any  other  branch,  and  has   been 
studied    under    special    advantages,   because    of  our 
happening  to  possess  a  special  sense-organ    for  its 
appreciation. 


§  2  PIONEERS  5 

Now  in  order  to  be  able  to  get  through  a  survey 
of  these  four  great  and  comprehensive  groups  in 
moderate  compass,  it  will  be  necessary  for  me  to 
assume  acquaintance  with  all  the  elementary  facts 
and  proceed  at  once  to  their  elucidation. 

2.  The  great  British  names  in  connection  with  our 
progress  in  knowledge  as  to  the  real  nature  of  elec- 
tricity, irrespective  of  a  mere  study  and  extension  of 
its  known  facts,  are 

FRANKLIN,  CAVENDISH,  FARADAY,  MAXWELL. 

To  these,  indeed,  you  may  feel  impelled  to  add  the 
name  of  THOMSON  ;  but  one  has  some  delicacy  in 
attempting  to  estimate  the  work  of  living  philo- 
sophers, and  as  Maxwell  has  been  very  explicit  in 
acknowledging  his  indebtedness  to  his  illustrious 
contemporary,  whose  work  will  in  the  course  of 
nature  have  to  be  criticized  and  appraised  by  far 
abler  hands  than  mine  and  by  the  philosophers  of 
generations  yet  unborn,  we  may  well  afford  to  abstain 
from  minute  considerations,  and  may  accept  for  the 
present  the  name  of  Maxwell  as  representative  of  the 
great  English  school  of  mathematical  physicists  ; 
under  whose  influence,  Cambridge,  in  the  pride  of 
having  reared  them,  is  awakening  to  new  and  Jener- 
getic  scientific  life,  and  whose  splendid  achievements 


6  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP,  i 

will    shine    out    in    the    future   as   the  glory   of   this 
century. 

The  views  concerning  electrification  which  I  shall 
try  to  explain  are  in  some  sense  a  development  of 
those  originally  propounded  by  that  remarkable  man, 
Benjamin  Franklin.  The  accurate  and  acute  experi- 
menting of  Cavendish  laid  the  foundation  for  the 
modern  theory  of  electricity  ;  but,  as  he  worked  for 
himself  rather  than  for  the  race,  and  as  moreover  he 
was  in  this  matter  far  in  advance  of  his  time,  Faraday 
had  to  go  over  the  same  ground  again,  with  exten- 
sions and  additions  peculiar  to  himself  and  corre- 
sponding to  the  greater  field  of  information  at  his 
disposal  three-quarters  of  a  century  later.  Both  these 
men,  and  especially  Faraday,  so  lived  among  phe- 
nomena that  they  yielded  up  their  hidden  secrets  to 
them  in  a  way  unintelligible  to  ordinary  workers  ;  but 
while  they  themselves  arrived  at  truth  by  processes 
that  savour  of  intuition,  they  were  unable  always  to 
express  themselves  intelligibly  to  their  contemporaries, 
and  to  make  the  inner  meaning  of  their  facts  and 
speculations  understood.  Then  comes  Maxwell,  with 
his  keen  penetration  and  great  grasp  of  thought  com- 
bined with  mathematical  subtlety  and  power  of  ex- 
pression ;  he  assimilates  the  facts,  sympathizes  with 
the  philosophic  but  untutored  modes  of  expression 
invented  by  Faraday,  links  the  theorems  of  Green 
and  Stokes  and  Thomson  to  the  facts  of  Faraday, 


§  3  ELECTRICITY  LIKE  A  SUBSTANCE  7 

and  from  the  union  there  arises  the  young  modern 
science  of  electricity,  whose  infancy  at  the  present 
time  is  so  vigorous  and  so  promising  that  we  are  all 
looking  forward  to  the  near  future  in  eager  hope  and 
expectation  of  some  greater  and  still  more  magnificent 
generalization. 

3.  You  know  well  that  there  have  been  fluid  or 
material  theories  of  electricity  for  the  past  century  : 
you  know,  moreover,  that  there  has  been  a  reaction 
against  them.  There  was  even  a  tendency  a  few 
years  back  to  deny  the  material  nature  of  electricity 
and  assert  its  position  as  a  form  of  energy.  This  was 
doubtless  due  to  an  analogical  and  natural,  though 
unjustifiable,  feeling,  that  just  as  sound  and  heat  and 
light  had  shown  themselves  to  be  forms  of  energy,  so 
in  due  time  would  electricity  also.  If  such  were  the 
expectation,  it  has  not  been  justified  by  the  event. 
Electricity  may  possibly  be  a  form  of  matter — it  is 
not  a  form  of  energy.  It  is  quite  true  that  electricity 
under  pressure  or  in  motion  represents  energy,  but  the 
same  thing  is  true  of  water  or  air,  and  we  do  not 
therefore  deny  them  to  be  forms  of  matter.  Under- 
stand the  sense  in  which  I  use  the  word  electricity. 
Electrification  is  a  result  of  work  done,  and  is  most 
certainly  a  form  of  energy  ;  it  can  be  created  and 
destroyed  by  an  act  of  work.  But  electricity — none 
is  ever  created  or  destroyed  ;  it  is  simply  moved  and 
strained,  like  matter.  No  one  ever  exhibited  a  trace 


'UNIVERSITY 

/>,  OJT          „» 


8  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP,  i 

of  positive  electricity  without  there  being  somewhere 
facing  it,  an  equal  quantity  of  negative. 

The  simplest  proof  of  this  statement  consists  in 
making  experiments  inside  a  closed  conducting  in- 
sulated room  or  shell  ;  it  may  be  the  size  of  a  living- 
room,  or  the  size  of  a  beer-tankard,  whichever  is  most 
convenient.  All  known  electrical  experiments  being 
performed  inside  such  a  room,  bodies  electrified 
strongly,  moved  about,  sparks  taken,  &c.,  &c.,  a 
sensitive  electroscope  connected  to  the  room  shall  not 
show  the  slightest  permanent  effect.  In  other  words 
the  room  will  not  become  in  the  slightest  degree 
charged.  I  say  no  permanent  effect,  because  it  is  just 
possible  that  small  transitory  effects  may  occur  during 
the  rapid  rearrangement  of  internal  changes.  I  do 
not  feel  sure  whether  such  transitory  effects  are  or 
are  not  really  possible  ;  but,  whether  they  are  or  not, 
they  have  nothing  to  do  with  our  present  argument. 
All  the  electrifications  that  have  been  going  on  will 
not  have  resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  minutest 
quantity  of  electricity  ;  the  only  way  to  charge  the 
room  is  to  pass  a  charge  in  from  some  other  body 
outside. 

This  is  the  first  great  law,  expressible  in  a  variety 
of  ways  :  as,  for  instance,  by  saying  that  total 
algebraic  production  of  electricity  is  always  zero  ;  that 
you  cannot  produce  positive  electrification  without 
an  equal  quantity  of  negative  also  ;  that  what  one 


§  4        INCOMPRESSIBILITY  OF  ELECTRICITY  9 

body  gains  of  electricity  some  other  body  must 
lose. 

Now,  whenever  we  perceive  that  a  thing  is  produced 
in  precisely  equal  and  opposite  amounts,  so  that  what 
one  body  gains  another  loses,  it  is  convenient  and 
most  simple  to  consider  the  thing  not  as  generated  in 
the  one  body  and  destroyed  in  the  other,  but  as  simply 
transferred.  Electricity  in  this  respect  behaves  just  like 
a  substance.  This  is  what  Franklin  perceived. 

4.  The  second  great  law  is  that  electricity  always, 
under  all  circumstances,  flows  in  a  closed  circuit,  the 
same  quantity  crossing  every  section  of  that  circuit,  so 
that  it  is  not  possible  to  exhaust  it  from  one  region  of 
space  and  condense  it  in  another. 

Another  way  of  expressing  this  fact  is  to  say  that 
no  charge  resides  in  the  interior  of  a  hollow  conductor, 
but  that  every  trace  of  charge  is  on  the  outer  surface 
and  penetrates  to  no  appreciable  depth. 

Another  is  to  say  that  total  induced  charge  is  always 
equal  and  opposite  to  inducing  charge.1 

This  second  law  can  also  be  illustrated  by  the  in- 
sulated room  or  conducting  cavity  already  mentioned. 
Having  found  that  internal  electrification  produces  no 
effect  on  an  outside  electroscope  connected  to  the  walls, 
proceed  to  pass  a  charge  into  the  cavity  through  a 

1  To  explain  how  it  is  that  these  statements  are  equivalent,  and 
generally  to  emphasize  this  fundamental  part  of  the  subject,  is  the 
object  of  §  14  A  at  end  of  the  next  chaoter. 


io  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP.  I 

temporarily  opened  window  or  lid.  Instantly  the 
chamber  has  become  charged  by  a  definite  amount, 
viz.  by  the  precise  amount  which  has  then  been  intro- 
duced into  its  cavity.  The  charge  need  not  be  in  any 
way  communicated  to  the  chamber,  all  that  is  necessary 
is  that  it  shall  be  wholly  inside.  Moving  the  charge 
about,  or  letting  it  spark  to  the  walls  of  the  chamber, 
makes  not  the  slightest  difference  to  the  electroscope 
outside.  It  may  be  watched  through  a  microscope  at 
the  instant  the  spark  occurs,  and  it  will  not  show  the 
slightest  twinkle.  Both  these  experiments  of  the  hollow 
chamber  were  made  by  Faraday,  and  the  latter  is  well 
known  and  often  quoted  as  his  "  ice-pail  "  experiment, 
because  he  happened  to  use  an  ice-pail  sometimes  as 
his  insulated  chamber. 

Another  mode  of  illustrating  the  same  series  of  facts 
is  afforded  by  an  insulated  parrot  cage  with  an  electro- 
scope inside  it  connected  by  a  wire  to  the  bars  of  the 
cage.  The  cage  may  now  be  charged  strongly :  its 
potential  may  be  changed  from  a  million  volts  positive 
to  a  million  volts  negative  :  sparks  of  any  length  may 
be  taken  from  it  ;  but,  provided  the  meshes  are  close 
enough  for  it  to  be  regarded  as  a  really  closed  vessel, 
the  electroscope  inside  is  wholly  unaffected.  In  mak- 
ing this  experiment  the  electroscope  must  be  connected 
with  the  bars  of  the  cage  ;  for,  if  it  be  detached,  it  can 
be  affected  by  charged  air  blown  through  the  meshes. 
Directly  a  charge  gets  inside  the  cage  it  can  affect  the 


§4  CAVENDISH  EXPERIMENT  II 

electroscope  easily  enough,  unless  there  is  a  wall- 
connexion,  and  then  it  is  powerless. 

The  open-work  of  a  cage  is  objectionable  on  this 
account,  that  it  allows  the  permeation  of  electrified  air, 
just  as  it  might  allow  an  electrified  pith  ball  to  be 
thrown  in.  Making  the  meshes  close  is  no  guarantee 
against  this  source  of  disturbance :  I  have  blown 
electrified  air  from  a  point  through  very  fine  earth- 
connected  copper  gauze  and  affected  strongly  an 
electroscope  on  the  other  side. 

No  doubt  a  solid  metal-walled  room  is  secure  against 
this  Cause  of  disturbance,  but  then  it  is  difficult  to-  see 
the  electroscope.  Faraday  however  constructed  a  room 
for  the  purpose,  big  enough  to  get  into  himself,  and 
thus  performed  the  experiment  quite  satisfactorily. 

But  perhaps  the  most  rigorous  mode  of  examining 
the  precise  truth  of  the  property  of  electricity  which 
lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  these  experiments  is  that 
adopted  in  the  famous  Cavendish  experiment :  some- 
times referred  to  in  French  books  by  the  name  of  Biot. 
This  consists  in  charging  strongly  an  insulated  sphere 
provided  with  a^couple  of  hemispherical  caps  which 
can  afterwards  be  taken  off  mechanically,  and  connect- 
ing a  delicate  electroscope  immediately  after  to  the 
disclosed  ball.  Not  the  faintest  trace  of  charge  is 
found  upon  it.  This  experiment  has  been  repeated 
by  Clerk  Maxwell  and  Donald  McAlister  in  the 
Cavendish  Laboratory,  Cambridge,  using  a  Thomson 


12  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP.  I 

Quadrant  Electrometer  and  all  modern  appliances, 
with  absolutely  negative  result.1 

This  series  of  experiments  is  most  vital,  and 
gives  us  fundamental  information  regarding  elec- 
tricity :  let  us  consider  how  we  can  best  express  their 
teaching. 

5.  When  we  thus  findj:hat  it  is  impossible  to  charge 
a  body  absolutely  with  electricity,  that  though  you  can 
move  it  from  place  to  place  it  always  and  instantly 
refills  the  body  from  which  you  take  it,  so  that  no 
portion  of  space  can  be  more  or  less  filled  with  it  than 
it  already  is,  that  it  is  impossible  by  any  rise  of 
potential  to  squeeze  a  trace  of  electricity  into  the  in- 
terior of  a  cavity,  and  that  if  a  charge  be  introduced 
a  precisely  equal  quantity  at  once  passes  through  the 
walls  to  the  outside  ;  it  is  natural  to  express  the  phe- 
nomenon by  saying  that  electricity  behaves  itself  like 
a  perfectly  incompressible  substance  or  fluid,  of  which 
all  space  is  completely  full.  That  is  to  say,  it  behaves 
like  a  perfect  and  all-permeating  liquid.  Understand 
I  by  no  means  assert  that  electricity  is  such  a  fluid  or 
liquid  ;  I  only  assert  the  undoubted  fact  that  it  behaves 
like  one,  i.e.  it  obeys  the  same  laws.  (§14  A.) 

1  See  Maxwell's  "Electrical  Researches  of  Cavendish,"  pp.  104 
and  41 7.  An  interesting  little  experiment  'with  soap  bubbles,  made 
by  Mr.  Vernon  Boys,  illustrates  the  fact  that  the  depth  to  which  a 
charge  penetrates  is  less  than  the  diameter  of  a  few  molecules,  for  one 
soap  bubble  inside  another  is  entirely  screened  from  such  electrostatic 
forces  as  can  be  applied. 


§  s  ELECTRICITY  LIKE  A  LIQUID  13 

It  may  be  advisable  carefully  to  guard  one's  self 
against  becoming  too  strongly  imbued  with  the  notion 
that  because  electricity  obeys  the  laws  of  a  liquid 
therefore  it  is  one.  One  must  always  be  keenly  on  the 
look-out  for  any  discrepancy  between  the  behaviour  of 
the  two  things,  and  a  single  contradictory  discrepancy 
— not  a  mere  difference  but  a  real  opposition  of 
properties — will  be  sufficient  to  overthrow  the  fancy 
that  they  may  perhaps  be  really  identical.  Till  such 
a  discrepancy  turns  up,  however,  we  are  justified  in 
pursuing  the  analogy — more  than  justified,  we  are 
impelled.  And  if  we  resist  the  help  of  an  analogy 
like  this  there  are  only  two  courses  open  to  us  :  either 
we  must  become  first-rate  mathematicians,  able  to  live 
wholly  among  symbols,  dispensing  with  pictorial 
images  and  such  adventitious  aid  ;  or  we  must  remain 
in  hazy  ignorance  of  the  stages  which  have  been 
reached,  and  of  the  present  knowledge  of  electricity 
so  far  as  it  goes.  I  need  hardly  say  that  by  "  modern 
views  "  I  do  not  mean  ultimate  views  ;  nor  do  I  mean 
that  I  can  give  an  account  of  all  the  speculations 
and  ideas  floating  in  the  minds  of  some  two  or  three 
of  our  most  advanced  thinkers.  All  I  attempt  is  to 
give  an  account  of  the  stage  which  has  certainly  been 
attained,  to  indicate  the  directions  in  which  immediate 
progress  is  probable,  and  to  ask  you  to  take  for  granted 
that  the  next  guarter  of  a  century  will  see  as  great 
advances  made  upon  these  views  as  they  are  superior 


14  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP.  I 

to  the  doctrines  inculcated  by  the  ordinary  run    of 
text-books. 

6.  Imagine  now  that  we  live  immersed  in  an  infinite 
ocean  of  incompressible  and  inexpansible  all-permeat- 
ing perfect  liquid,  as  fish  live  in  the  sea  :  how  can  we 
become  cognizant  of  its  existence  ?  Not  by  its  weight, 
for  we  can  remove  it  from  no  portion  of  space  in  order 
to  try  whether  it  has  weight. 

We  can  weigh  air,  truly,  but  that  is  simply  because 
we  can  compress  it  and  rarefy  it.  An  exhausting  or 
condensing  pump  of  some  kind  was  needed  before 
even  air  could  be  weighed,  or  its  pressure  estimated. 

But  if  air  had  been  incompressible  and  inexpansible, 
if  it  had  been  a  vacuum-less  perfect  liquid,  pumps 
would  have  been  useless  for  the  purpose,  and  we  should 
necessarily  be  completely  ignorant  of  the  weight  and 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere. 

How  then  should  we  become  cognizant  of  its 
existence  ?  In  four  ways  : — 

(i)  By  being  able  to  pump  it  out  of  one  elastic 
bag  into  another  [not  out  of  one  bucket  into  another : 
if  you  lived  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  you  would 
never  think  about  filling  or  emptying  buckets — the 
idea  would  be  absurd  ;  but  you  could  fill  or  empty 
elastic  bags],  and  by  noticing  the  strain  phenomena 
exhibited  by  the  bags,  and  their  tendency  to  burst 
when  over  full.  [Water  (or  air)  may  be  pumped  out 
of  one  elastic  bag  into  another,  and  the  analogy  with 


§6  FOUR-FOLD  CLASSIFICATION  15 

an  electrical  machine  charging  two  conductors  oppo- 
sitely, i.e.  pumping  electricity  from  one  into  the  other, 
may  be  perceived.] 

(2)  By  winds  or  currents  ;  by  watching  the  effect 
of  moving  masses  of  the  fluid  as  it  flows  along  pipes 
or  through  spongy  bodies,  and   by  the  effects  of  its 
inertia  and  momentum.     [A  hanging  vane  arranged 
in  a  tube  so  as  to  be  deflected  by  a  stream  of  water 
may  be  likened  roughly  to  a  galvanometer  ;  also  the 
effect  of  suddenly  stopping  a  stream  of  water,  as  in  a 
water  ram,  is  somewhat  analogous  to  self-induction.] 

(3)  By  making  vortices  and  whirls  in  the  fluid,  and 
by  observing  the  mutual  action  of  these  vortices,  their 
attractions  and  repulsions.    [Whirlwinds,  sand-storms, 
waterspouts,    cyclones,   whirlpools  ;    and  an    electro- 
magnet.] 

(4)  By    setting    up    undulations    in    the    medium  : 
i.e.  by  the  phenomena  which  in  ordinary  media  excite 
in  us  through  our  ears  the  sensation  called  "  sound." 

In  all  these  ways  we  have  become  acquainted  with 
electricity,  and  in  no  others  that  I  am  aware  of. 
They  correspond  to  the  four  great  divisions  of  the 
subject  which  I  made  above  (§  i). 

7.  But  there  are  differences,  at  first  sight  important 
differences,  between  the  behaviour  of  a  material  liquid 
ocean  such  as  we  have  contemplated  and  the  be- 
haviour of  electricity.  First  it  is  doubtful  whether 
electricity  by  itself  and  disconnected  from  matter  has 


16  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP.  I 

any  inertia.  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  it  has 
not :  the  experiments  made  by  Maxwell  with  a  nega- 
tive result  (§  39)  need  only  prove  either  that  its  speed 
of  flow  is  very  small,  or  that  an  electric  current  con- 
sists of  equal  opposite  streams  of  equal  momentum. 
The  laws  of  electric  flow  in  conductors  are  such  as 
indicate  no  inertia  (§  48),  and  this  fact  would  be  con- 
clusive were  it  not  that  a  recent  brilliant  paper  by 
Prof.  Poynting  explains  the  reason  of  it  completely 
otherwise,  and  leaves  the  question  of  inertia  quite 
open  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  facts  of  magnetism  seem 
definitely  to  require  inertia,  or  something  correspond- 
ing to  it.  Leaving  this  for  the  present  as  an  open 
question,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  when  in  con- 
nection with  insulating  or  dielectric  matter  the  combina- 
tion most  certainly  possesses  inertia  (§§  38  and  39). 

8.  A  more  serious  and  certain  difference  between 
the  behaviour  of  electricity  and  that  of  an  ordinary 
incompressible  fluid  comes  out  in  the  fourth  category 
— that  concerned  with  wave-motion.  In  an  incom- 
pressible fluid  the  velocity  and  length  of  waves  would 
both  be  infinite,  and  none  of  the  phenomena  connected 
with  the  gradual  propagation  of  waves  through  it  could 
exist.  Such  a  medium  therefore  would  be  incapable 
of  sound-vibrations  in  any  ordinary  sense.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  disturbances 
concerned  in  light-radiation  take  place  at  right  angles 
to  the  direction  of  propagation — they  are  transverse 


§  8  RIGIDITY  CAUSED  BY  MOTION  17 

disturbances, — and  such  disturbances  as  these  no 
body  with  the  simple  properties  of  an  ordinary  fluid 
can  possibly  transmit.  Such  vibrations  can  only  be 
transmitted  by  a  medium  having  something  akin  to 
the  rigidity  of  a  solid.  We  are  bound  to  admit  that 
ether,  though  fluid  in  the  sense  of  enabling  masses  to 
move  freely  through  it,  has  a  certain  amount  of  rigidity, 
at  least  for  enormously  rapid  and  minute  oscillatory 
disturbances.  Is  there  any  way  of  conferring  upon  a 
fluid  such  rigidity  without  solidifying  it  ?  This  is  the 
great  and  difficult  question  hinted  at  in  the  preface,  and 
referred  to  again  in  Chapter  XII. ;  it  can  be  shown  that 
although  a  fluid  at  rest  has  no  quasi-solid  properties, 
a  fluid  in  motion  acquires  them.  Drive  water  rapidly 
through  a  flexible  tangle  of  india-rubber  pipe  with  both 
ends  fixed,  and  it  at  once  becomes  semi-rigid  :  imagine 
every  particle  of  a  mass  of  fluid  as  in  a  state  of  violent 
motion,  not  locomotion,  but  motion  in  minute  closed 
curves — vortex  motion  as  it  is  called — and  it  too 
becomes  rigid  or  quasi-solid  :  it  acquires  the  property 
of  transmitting  transverse  waves.  The  gross  analogy 
of  a  jelly  is  occasionally  useful.  A  jelly  is  composed 
almost  wholly  of  fluid,  and  yet  it  is  rigid.  It  is  rigid 
because  of  an  elastic  skin  to  each  particle  of  water  : 
it  is  like  a  multitude  of  little  elastic  bags  of  fluid.  Dis- 
tend a  thin  india-rubber  bag  with  water,  and  put  it  on 
a  plate — it  looks  and  behaves  very  like  a  jelly,  until 
collapsed  by  a  needle-prick.  Well,  now,  the  effect  of 


i8  FUNDAMENTAL  NOTIONS  CHAP,  i 

an  elastic  skin,  which  can  thus  in  a  manner  rigidify 
stagnant  water,  can  be  imitated,  much  more  perfectly 
though  not  so  easily,  by  setting  the  water  into  a  state 
of  fine-grained  vortex  motion.  All  kinds  of  elasticity 
are  to  be  explained,  as  Sir  W.  Thomson  has  shown 
us,  by  simple  motion.  Not  a  simple  fluid,  but  a  fluid 
in  a  violent  state  of  minute  spin — a  vortex-sponge  as 
it  has  been  called — is  what  the  ether  is  going  to  turn 
out  to  be.  But  as  this  conception  is  difficult  at  present, 
we  can  vaguely  say  that  ether  contains  electricity  as  a 
jelly  contains  water,  and  that  the  rigidity  concerned  in 
its  transverse  vibrations  belongs  not  to  the  water  in 
the  jelly  but  to  the  mode  in  which  it  is  entangled  in 
its  meshes. 

Provisionally  we  will  adopt  as  a  temporary  working 
hypothesis  the  idea  of  the  ether  consisting  of  elec- 
tricity in  a  state  of  entanglement  similar  to  that  of 
water  in  jelly  ;  and  we  are  driven  to  this  view  likewise 
by  the  exigencies  of  mode  I  (§§  I  and  6),  the  electro- 
static or  strain  method  of  examining  the  properties  of 
electricity,  because  without  a  rigidity  able  to  stand  a 
certain  amount  of  shearing  stress  the  properties  of 
insulators  are  hard  to  conceive.  If  it  turn  out  that 
space  is  a  conductor,  which  seems  to  me  absurdly  im- 
possible, then  we  must  fall  back  upon  the  vague  and 
empirical  statement  that,  like  a  glorified  kind  of 
pitch,  the  ether  of  free  space  is  rigid  for  rapid  vibra- 
tions, and  fluid  for  steady  forces. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE     DIELECTRIC 

9.  RETURN  now  to  the  consideration  of  electro- 
statics. We  are  to  regard  ourselves  as  living  im- 
mersed in  an  infinite  all-permeating  ocean  of  perfect 
incompressible  fluid  (or  liquid),  as  fish  live  in  the  sea  ; 
but  this  is  not  all,  for  if  that  were  our  actual  state  we 
should  have  no  more  notion  of  the  existence  of  the 
liquid  than  deep-sea  fish  have  of  the  medium  they 
swim  in.  If  matter  were  all  perfectly  conducting, 
such  would  be  our  state  :  in  a  perfectly  free  ocean 
there  is  no  insulation — no  obstruction  to  flow  of 
liquid :  it  is  the  fact  of  insulation  that  renders 
electrostatics  possible.  We  could  obstruct  the  flow 
and  store  up  definite  quantities  of  a  fluid  in  which  we 
were  totally  submerged  by  the  use  of  closed  vessels  of 
course.  But  how  could  we  pump  liquid  from  one 
into  another  so  as  to  charge  one  positively  and 
another  negatively  ?  Only  by  having  the  walls 

C  2 


20  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP,  n 

elastic :  by  the  use  of  elastic  bags,  and  elastic  parti- 
tions across  pipes.  And  so  we  can  represent  a  con- 
tinuous insulating  medium  (like  the  atmosphere  or 
space)  by  the  analogy  of  a  jelly,  through  which  liquid 
can  flow  only  by  reason  of  cracks  and  channels  and 
cavities. 

Modify  the  idea  of  an  infinite  ocean  of  liquid  into 
that  of  an  infinite  jelly  or  elastic  substance  in  which 
the  liquid  is  entangled,  and  through  which  it  cannot 
penetrate  without  violence  and  disruption  ;  and  you 
have  a  crude  model  of  the  general  insulating  atmo- 
sphere. Our  ocean  of  fluid  is  not  free  and  mobile  like 
water,  it  is  stiff*  and  entangled  like  jelly. 

Nevertheless  bodies  can  move  through  it  freely. 
Yes,  bodies  can,  it  is  the  liquid  itself  only  which  is 
entangled.  It  is  not  easy  to  picture  freely  and  natu- 
rally the  motion  of  ordinary  matter  through  the  insu- 
lating medium  of  space,  unless  we  step  beyond  our 
jelly  analogy  to  the  more  refined  and  truer  theory  of 
the  vortex-sponge  of  perfect  liquid  ;  but  it  is  charac- 
teristic of  analogies  to  break  down  when  pressed  too 
far,  though  they  are  useful  up  to  a  certain  point. 

Insulators  being  like  elastic  partitions  or  impervious 
but  yielding  masses,  conductors  are  like  cavities,  or 
rather  like  porous  or  spongy  bodies,  perfectly  pervious, 
though  with  more  or  less  frictional  resistance,  to  the 
flow  of  liquids  through  them.  Thus,  whereas  bodies 
easily  penetrable  by  matter  are  impervious  to  elec- 


§  9  LIQUID  ANALOGY  21 

tricity,  bodies  like  metals,  which  resist  entirely  the 
passage  of  matter,  are  quite  permeable  to  electricity. 
It  is  this  inversion  of  ordinary  ideas  of  penetrability 
that  constitutes  a  small  difficulty  at  the  beginning  of 
the  subject. 

However,  supposing  it  overcome,  let  us  think  of 
the  ordinary  lecture-table  assemblage  of  insulated 
spheres  and  cylinders  connected  by  copper  wire  as  so 
many  cavities  and  tubes  in  an  otherwise  continuous 
elastic  impervious  medium  which  surrounds  them  and 
us,  and  extends  throughout  space  wherever  conductors 
are  not.  All,  however,  cavities  as  well  as  the  rest  of 
the  medium,  are  completely  full  of  the  universal  fluid. 
The  fluid  which  is  entangled  in  insulators  is  free  to 
move  in  conductors  ;  whence  it  follows  that  its  pres- 
sure or  potential  is  the  same  in  every  part  of  a 
conductor,  in  which  it  is  not  flowing  along.  For  if 
there  were  any  excess  of  pressure  at  any  point,  a  flow 
would  immediately  occur  until  it  was  equalised.  In 
an  insulator  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  Differences 
of  pressure  are  exceedingly  common  in  insulators, 
and  are  naturally  accompanied  by  a  strain  of  the 
medium. 

It  is  instructive  now  to  think  over  a  number  of 
ordinary  electrical  experiments  from  this  point  of 
view :  to  think  of  the  fluid  as  flowing  freely  through 
conductors  and  settling  down  to  a  state  of  equilibrium 
or  uniform  pressure  in  them,  but  straining  insulators 


22  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP,  n 

as  high-pressure  water  might  strain  elastic  walls  or 
boundaries,  straining  them  even  to  bursting  if  the 
partitions  be  made  too  thin. 

10.  There  have  been,  as  you  know,  two  ancient 
fluid  theories  of  electricity — the  one-fluid  theory  of 
Franklin,  and  the  two-fluid  theory  of  Symmer  and 
others.  A  great  deal  is  to  be  said  for  both  of  them 
within  a  certain  range.  There  are  certainly  points, 
many  points,  on  which  they  are  hopelessly  wrong  and- 
misleading,  but  it  is  their  foundation  upon  ideas  of 
action  at  a  distance  that  condemns  them,  it  is  not  the 
fluidity.  They  concentrate  attention  upon  the  con- 
ductors ;  whereas  Faraday  taught  us  to  concentrate 
attention  on  the  insulating  medium  surrounding  the 
conductors — the  "dielectric"  as  he  termed  it.  This  is 
the  seat  of  all  the  phenomena  :  conductors  are  mere 
breaks  in  it — interrupters  of  its  continuity. 

To  Faraday  the  space  round  conductors  was  full  of 
what  he  called  lines  of  force ;  and  it  is  his  main 
achievement  in  electrostatics  to  have  diverted  our 
attention  from  the  obvious  and  apparent  to  the  in- 
trinsic and  essential  phenomena.  Let  us  try  and 
seize  his  point  of  view  before  going  further.  It  is 
certainly  true  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  is  devoid  of 
hypothesis. 

Take  the  old  fundamental  electric  experiment  of 
rubbing  two  bodies  together,  separating  them,  and 
exhibiting  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  a  pith  ball, 


§  io  CONDITION  OF  THE  DIELECTRIC  23 

say  ;  and  how  should  we  now  describe  it  ?     Something- 
this  way  : — 

Take  two  insulated  disks  01  different,  material,  one 
metal,  say,  and  one  silk  ;  touch  them  together  ;  the 
contact  effects  a  transfer  of  electricity  from  the  metal 
to  the  silk  ;  rub  slightly  to  assist  the  transfer,  since  silk 
is  a  non-conductor,  then  separate.  As  you  separate 
the  disks  the  medium  between  them  is  thrown  into  a 
state  of  strain,  the  direction  of  which  is  mapped  out 
by  drawing  a  set  of  lines,  called  lines  of  force,  from 
one  disk  to  the  other,  coincident  with  the  direction  of 


FIG.   i. — Rough  diagram  of  the  state  of  the  medium  near  two  oppositely  charge 
disks  when  close  together. 

strain  at  every  point.  As  Faraday  remarked,  the 
strain  is  as  if  these  lines  were  stretched  elastic  threads 
endowed  with  the  property  of  repelling  each  other  as 
well  as  of  shortening  themselves  ;  in  other»words,  there 
is  a  tension  along  the  lines  of  force  and  a  pressure  at 
right  angles  to  them.  When  the  disks  are  near,  and 
the  lines  short,  they  are  nearly  straight  (Fig.  i),  but  as 
the  distance  increases  they  become  curved,  bulging 
away  from  the  common  axis  of  the  two  disks  and  some 
even  curling  round  to  the  back  of  the  disk  (Fig.  2), 
until  when  the  disks  are  infinitely  distant  as  many 


THE  DIELECTRIC 


CHAP.  If 


lines  spring  from  the  back  of  each  as  from  its  face  ; 
and  we  have  a  charged  body  to  all  intents  existing  in 
space  by  itself. 

The  state  of  tension  existing  in  the  medium  between 
the  disks  results  in  a  tendency  to  bring  them  together 
again,  just  as  if  they  were  connected  by  so  many 
elastic  threads  of  no  length  when  unstretched.  The 


FIG.  2. — Rough  diagram  of  the  state  of  the  medium  near  two  oppositely  charged 
disks  when  separated. 


ends  of  the  lines  are  the  so-called  "electrifications"  or 
"  charges,"  and  the  lines  perpetually  try  to  shorten  and 
shut  up,  so  that  their  ends  may  coincide  and  the  strain 
be  relieved.  If  one  of  the  disks  touch  another  con- 
ducting body,  some  of  its  lines  instantly  leave  it  and 
go  to  the  body  ;  in  other  words,  the  charge  is  capable 
of  transference,  and  the  new  body  is  urged  towards 
the  other  disk,  just  as  the  disk  was  from  which  it 


§11 


LINES  OF  FORCE  METHOD 


received  the  lines.  If  this  new  body  completely  sur- 
rounds the  disk,  it  receives  the  whole  of  its  lines,  and 
the  disk  can  be  withdrawn  perfectly  free  and  inert. 
[Faraday's  "  ice  pail  "  experiment  (§  4).] 

ii.  Now  take  the  two  charged  disks,  facing  one 
another,  and  let,  say,  a  suspended  gilt  pith  ball  hang 
between  them.  Being  a  conductor  there  is  no  strain 


FIG.  3. — Rough  diagram  of  the  medium  between  two  disks  disturbed  by  the 
presence  of  an  uncharged  metal  sphere.  The  two  halves  of  the  sphere  are 
oppositely  charged  "  by  induction." 


inside  it,  and  so  it  acts  partially  as  a  bridge,  and 
several  of  the  lines  pass  through  it — or,  rather,  they 
end  at  one  side  of  it  and  begin  at  the  other  :  thus  it 
has  opposite  charges  on  its  two  faces  —  it  is  under 
induction  (Fig.  3).  Let  it  now  be  moved  so  as  to 
touch  one  of  the  disks,  the  lines  between  it  and  the 


26 


THE  DIELECTRIC 


CHAP.   II 


disk  on  that  side  have  shut  up,  and  it  remains  with 
those  only  which  go  to  the  other  disk.  In  other 
words,  it  has  received,  unbalanced,  some  of  the  lines 
which  previously  belonged  to  the  touched  disk. 
These  will  pull  it  over  to  the  far  disk  and  there  shut 


FIG.  4. — Rough  diagram  of  the  medium  near  two  oppositely  charged  disks  between 
which  a  metal  carrier  ball  is  oscillating,  having  just  touched  the  right-hand  disk. 
(Discharge  by  "alternate  contact.") 


themselves  up.  From  that  disk  it  receives  more  ;  and 
it  travels  with  their  ends  back  to  the  first  disk,  and  so 
on  (Fig.  4),  perpetually  receiving  lines  and  shutting 
them  up,  until  they  are  all  gone  and  the  disks  are 


§  12  FLUID  THEORIES  27 

discharged.  The  experiment  is  easily  performed  and 
illustrates  "  discharge  by  alternate  contact." 

This  mode  of  stating  the  facts  involves  no  hypo- 
thesis whatever — it  is  the  simple  truth.  But  it  may 
at  once  be  admitted  that  "  lines  of  force "  have 
no  more  and  no  less  existence  than  have  "  rays  of 
light."  Both  are  convenient  modes  of  expression. 

12.  But  so  long  as  we  adhere  to  this  mode  of 
expression  we  cannot  form  a  complete  mental  picture 
of  the  actually  occurring  operations.  In  optics  it  is 
usual  to  abandon  rays  at  a  certain  stage  and  attend 
to  the  waves,  which  we  know  are  of  the  essence  of 
the  phenomenon  though  we  do  not  yet  know  very 
much  about  their  true  nature. 

Similarly  in  electricity,  at  a  certain  point  we  are 
led  to  abandon  lines  of  force  and  potential  theories, 
and  to  try  to  conceive  the  actual  stuff  undergoing  its 
strains  and  motions.  It  is  then  that  we  get  urged 
towards  ideas  similar  to  those  which  are  useful  in 
treating  of  the  behaviour  of  an  incompressible  fluid. 

In  an  utterly  modified  sense,  we  have  still  a  fluid 
theory  of  electricity,  and  a  portion  of  the  ideas  of  the 
old  theories  belong  to  the  new  theory  also. 

Thus  Franklin's  view  that  positive  charge  was 
excess,  and  negative  charge  was  a  deficit,  in  a  cer- 
tain standard  quantity  of  the  fluid  which  all  bodies 
naturally  possessed  in  their  neutral  state,  remains 
practically  true.  His  view  that  the  fluid  was  never 


28  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP,  n 

manufactured,  but  was  taken  from  one  body  to  give 
to  another,  so  that  one  gained  what  the  other  lost — 
no  more  and  no  less — remains  practically  true.  Part 
also — a  less  part — of  the  two-fluid  theory  likewise 
remains  true,  in  my  present  opinion  (§  90) ;  but  this 
is  not  a  branch  of  the  subject  on  which  I  shall  enter 
in  the  present  part.  It  will  suffice  for  the  present  to 
fix  our  attention  on  one  fluid  only. 

You  are  to  think  of  an  electric  machine  as  a  pump 
which,  being  attached  to  two  bodies  respectively, 
drives  some  electricity  from  the  one  into  the  other, 
conferring  upon  one  a  positive  and  upon  the  other 
a  precisely  equal  negative  charge.  One  of  the  two 
bodies  may  be  the  earth,  in  which  case  the  charge 
naakes  little  or  no  difference  to  it. 

13.  But,  as  has  been  objected  before,  if  electricity 
is  like  an  incompressible  and  inextensible  fluid,  how 
is  it  possible  to  withdraw  any  of  it  from  one  body 
and  give  it  to  another  ?  With  rigid  bodies  it  is  not 
possible,  but  with  elastic  bodies  it  is  easy. 

The  act  of  charging  a  sphere  is  therefore  analogous 
to  pumping  water  into  an  elastic  bag,  or  rather  into 
a  cavity  in  the  midst  of  an  elastic  medium,  whose 
thick  walls,  extending  in  all  directions  and  needing  a 
great  pressure  to  strain  them,  better  represent  the  true 
state  of  the  case  than  does  the  thin  boundary  of  a 
mere  bag. 

Draw  a  couple  of  such   cavities   and   consider  fluid 


§  13  ANALOGY  OF  A  JELLY  29 

pumped  from  one  into  the  other,  and  you  will  see 
that  the  charge  (i.e.  the  excess  or  defect  of  fluid) 
resides  on  the  outside. 

If  the  fluid  is  exactly  incompressible,  not  the  least 
extra  quantity  will  be  squeezed  by  the  pressure  into 
the  space  originally  occupied  by  the  cavity.  This  is 
the  moral  of  the  Cavendish  experiment  (§  4)  :  it 
proves  that  electricity  is  precisely  incompressible 
(see  also  §  14  A). 

You  may  also  show  that  when  both  cavities  are 
similarly  charged  the  medium  is  so  strained  that 
they  tend  to  be  forced  apart ;  whereas  when  one  is 
distended  and  the  other  contracted  they  tend  to 
approach. 

Further  you  may  consider  two  cavities  side  by  side** 
pump  fluid  into  (or  out  of)  one  only,  and  watch  the 
effect  on  the  other.  You  will  thus  see  the  phenomena  of 
induction,  the  near  side  of  the  second  cavity  becoming 
oppositely  charged  (i.e.  the  walls  encroaching  on  the 
cavity),  the  far  side  similarly  charged  (the  cavity 
encroaching  on  the  walls),  and  the  pressure  on  the 
fluid  in  the  cavity  being  increased  or  diminished  in 
correspondence  with  the  rise  or  fall  of  pressure  in  the 
charged  or  inducing  cavity.  In  other  words,  con- 
ductors rise  in  potential  when  brought  near  a 
positively  charged  body  ;  and  their  charge,  if  any, 
though  not  altered  in  quantity  becomes  redistributed. 

The   actual   changes    in    volume  necessary   to  the 


30  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP,  n 

strain  of  these  cavities  are  a  defect  in  the  analogy. 
To  avoid  this  objection,  one  will  have  to  accept  a  dual 
view  of  electricity — a  sort  of  two-fluid  theory,  which 
many  phenomena  urge  one  to  contemplate  ;  for  the 
two  constituents  of  ether  may  then  be  sheared  past 
each  other,  one  increasing  as  the  other  decreases  in 
the  charged  cavity,  setting  up  a  strain  which  involves 
no  expansion  or  contraction  in  volume,  and  leaving 
the  total  quantity  of  ether  everywhere  unchanged 
(cf.  §  1 8). 

14.  Return  Circuit. — Sometimes  a  difficulty  is  felt 
about  electricity  flowing  in  a  closed  circuit — as,  for 
instance,  in  signalling  to  America  and  using  the  earth 
as  a  return  circuit :  the  question  arises,  How  does  the 
electricity  find  its  way  back  ? 

The  difficulty  is  no  more  real  than  if  a  tube  were 
laid  to  America  with  its  two  ends  connected  to  the 
sea  and  already  quite  full.  If  now  a  little  more  sea- 
water  were  pumped  in  at  one  end,  an  equal  quantity 
would  leave  the  other  end,  and  the  disturbed  level 
of  the  ocean  would  readjust  itself.  Not  the  same 
identical  water  would  return,  but  an  equal  quantity 
would  return.  That  is  all  one  says  of  electricity. 
One  cannot  label  and  identify  electricity. 

To  imitate  the  inductive  retardation  of  cables,  the 
tube  should  have  slightly  elastic  walls  ;  to  imitate  the 
speed  of  signalling,  the  water  must  be  supposed  quite 
incompressible,  not  elastic  as  it  really  is,  or  each 


§  14  A  FUNDAMENTAL  EXPERIMENTS  3' 

pulse  would  take  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  go  : 
even  through  a  perfectly  rigid  pipe. 

14  A.  Incompressibility  of  Electricity. — The  equiva- 
lence of  the  different  modes  of  expression  at  the 
beginning  of  §  4  is,  I  find,  not  obvious.  It  seems 
worth  while  to  explain  these  fundamental  matters 
at  greater  length.  One  of  the  fundamental  experi- 
mental facts  concerning  electricity  is  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  charge  an  insulated  chamber  by  performing 
electrical  experiments  in  its  interior.  Electrical 
machines  inside  a  conducting  chamber  and  electro- 
scope outside,  or  vice  versa,  are  perfectly  independent 
of  each  other.  This  may  be  expressed  by  saying  that 
the  field  of  force  outside  a  conductor,  and  the  field 
of  force  inside,  are  quite  independent  ;  that  there  is 
entire  dislocation  of  every  line  of  force  at  the  con- 
ductor ;  that  a  closed  conductor  acts  as  a  perfect 
electrostatic  screen.  A  second  fundamental  expe- 
rimental fact  is  that  if  a  charge  be  in  any  way 
communicated  to  or  even  passed  into  the  interior  of 
a  hollow  conductor,  the  same  precise  quantity  at  once 
appears  on  the  outside  ;  and  that  if  the  outside  skin 
of  the  conductor  be  peeled  off,  all  the  charge  is  removed 
with  that  outer  skin  :  no  trace  remaining  below  it. 

These  two  facts  lead  us  to  say  that  electricity 
behaves  like  an  incompressible  fluid  of  which  all 
space  is  precisely  full ;  a  fluid  moreover  which  cannot 
be  manufactured  but  only  moved  about.  For  think  of 


32  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP,  n 

a  closed  chamber  in  the  sea  with  pumps  inside  it. 
So  long  as  there  is  no  communication  through  the 
walls,  all  that  the  pumps  could  do  would  result  in  not  a 
trace  more  liquid  in  the  vessel  than  there  was  at  first. 
The  vessel  cannot  be  thus  charged.  But  now  suppose 
some  water  to  be  pumped  from  the  outside  into  the 
interior,  through  a  suitable  opening ;  how  could  it  be 
done  ?  The  vessel  being  already  by  hypothesis  quite 
full,  either  the  water  must  be  compressible,  in  which 
case  the  extra  charge  would  exist  uniformly  through- 
out the  enclosed  space  ;  or  the  vessel  must  be  expan- 
sible or  porous,  in  which  case  the  extra  charge  is  not 
found  in  the  original  space  at  all,  but  outside  it. 
Whatever  extra  quantity  was  pumped  into  the  original 
space,  that  same  amount  precisely  would  instantly 
appear  outside  it  ;  and  this  is  what  happens  with 
electricity  (§  4). 

In  order  to  examine  whether  water  is  incompressible 
or  not  we  might  perform  this  experiment : — Inside  a 
metal  cavity  provided  with  a  pressure-gauge  introduce 
a  strong  elastic  bag,  and  distend  it  by  pumping  water 
into  it.  As  the  bag  swells,  the  pressure  in  the  outer 
vessel  will  rise,  unless  it  is  continually  relieved  (by 
connexion  to  " earth").  Having  finished  pumping 
into  the  bag,  close  any  leak  the  outer  vessel  may  have 
had,  examine  the  gauge  carefully,  and  then  puncture 
the  bag  inside.  The  water  in  the  bag  suddenly  escapes 
from  pressure,  and,  if  the  slightest  degree  elastic,  will 


§  HA          INCOMPRESSIBILITY  OF  ETHER  33 

increase  the  pressure  in  the  outer  rigid  vessel  and  thus 
will  cause  a  sudden  small  rise  of  the  gauge.  If  it  be 
incompressible  the  gauge  will  indicate  nothing.  This 
is  precisely  Faraday's  ice-pail  experiment  ;  and  the 
result  teaches  us  that  electricity  is  perfectly  incom- 
pressible. The  Cavendish  experiment,  where  the  skin 
is  removed  from  a  charged  conductor  which  is  then 
tested  and  found  exactly  uncharged,  is  another  more 
stringent  but  more  difficult  mode  of  doing  the  same 
thing.  If  a  real  positive  result  could  be  got  by  either 
of  these  experiments,  it  would  constitute  a  measure 
of  the  compressibility  or  volume-elasticity  of  the 
ether.  It  would  show  that  longitudinal  thrusts  (such 
as  those  of  gravitation  may  be)  do  not  exist  instant- 
aneously throughout  space,  but  are  propagated  in 
time  at  a  certain  velocity. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  facts  related  above  carry 
with  them  such  mere  technical  expressions  as  that 
total  "  induced  charge  "  is  always  equal  and  opposite 
to  "  inducing  charge  "  ;  because  "  induced  charge  " 
merely  represents  the  condition  of  the  interior  surface 
of  a  chamber  into  which  an  inducing  charge  has 
been  introduced  :  and,  an  equal  quantity  having  been 
thereby  extruded,  the  inner  surface  of  the  wall  must 
have  been  left  negatively  charged  by  that  precise 
amount. 

Furthermore,  with  regard  to  the  flowing  in  a  closed 
circuit ;  in  many  cases  it  is  obvious,  but  take  a  case 

D 


3.4  THE  DIELECTRIC  CHAP.  11 

where  it  is  not  obvious.  When  a  charge  of  electricity 
is  moved  from  place  to  place,  as  for  instance  from 
outside  to  inside  a  room,  it  is  not  thereby  piled  up  in 
the  room  and  withdrawn  from  elsewhere  ;  for  an 
equal  quantity  instantly  appears  outside.  It  has  not 
been  exhausted  from  one  part  of  space  and  con- 
densed in  another  :  it  has  even  in  this  case  moved 
in  a  closed  circuit,  and  has  behaved  precisely  as  an 
incompressible  fluid  filling  all  space  must  behave. 
So  it  does  always. 

Thus  the  equivalence  of  the  statements  at  beginning 
of  §  4  are  clear. 


CHAPTER  III 

CHARGE   AND   INDUCTION 

15.  Condensers. — Returning  to  the  subject  of  charg- 
ing bodies  electrically,  how  is  one  to  consider  the 
fact  that  bringing  an  earth-plate  near  a  conductor 
increases  its  capacity  so  greatly,  enabling  the  same 
pressure  to  force  in  a  much  larger  quantity  of  fluid  ? 
how  is  one  to  think  of  a  condenser,  or  Leyden  jar  ? 

In  the  easiest  possible  way,  by  observing  that  the 
bringing  near  an  earth-connected  conductor  is  really 
thinning  down  the  dielectric  on  all  sides  of  the  body. 

The  thin-walled  elastic  medium  of  course  takes 
less  force  to  distend  it  a  given  amount  than  a  thick 
mass  of  the  same  stuff  took  ;  in  other  words,  a  cavity 
enclosed  by  thin  walls  has  much  more  capacity 
than  if  its  walls  were  thick.  Remember  that  capacity 
of  elastic  cavities  cannot  satisfactorily  be  measured 
as  the  capacity  of  buckets  is  measured,  by  the  maxi- 
mum quantity  they  will  hold  when  full  :  they  are 
never  "  full,"  till  they  burst  ;  and  the  amount  required 

D  2 


36  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION          CHAP,  in 

to  burst  them  measures  rather  their  strength  than  their 
capacity.  The  only  reasonable  definition  of  capacity 
in  such  cases  is  the  ratio  which  any  addition  to  their 
contents  bears  to  the  extra  pressure  required  to  force 
it  in  :  and  this  is  exactly  the  way  electrical  "  capacity  " 
is  defined.  A  Leyden  jar  is  like  a  cavity  with  quite 
thin  walls — in  other  words,  it  is  like  an  elastic  bag. 

But  if  you  thin  it  too  far,  or  strain  it  too  much,  the 
elastic  membrane  may  burst :  exactly,  and  this  is  the 
disruptive  discharge  of  a  jar,  and  is  accompanied  by 
-a  spark.  Sometimes  it  is  the  solid  dielectric  which 
breaks  down  permanently.  Ordinarily  it  is  merely 
the  air ;  and,  since  a  fluid  insulator  constitutes  a 
self-mending  partition,  it  is  instantaneously  as  good 
as  new  again. 

There  are  many  things  of  interest  and  importance 
to  study  about  a  Leyden  jar.  There  is  the  fact  that 
if  insulated  it  will  not  charge :  the  potential  of  both 
inner  and  outer  coatings  rises  equally  ;  that,  in  order 
to  charge  it,  for  every  positive  spark  you  give  to  the 
interior  an  equal  positive  spark  must  be  taken  from 
the  exterior.  There  is  the  charging  and  the  discharg- 
ing of  it  by  alternate  contacts,  as  by  an  oscillating 
ball  ;  and  there  are  the  phenomena  of  the  spark- 
discharge  itself. 

But,  as  you  know,  all  charging  is  really  a  case  of  a 
Leyden  jar.  The  outer  coat  must  always  be  some- 
where— the  walls  of  the  room,  or  the  earth,  or 


§  16 


METALLIC  CIRCUIT 


37 


something — you  always  have  a  layer  of  dielectric 
between  two  charges — the  so-called  induced  and 
the  inducing  charge.  You  cannot  charge  one  body 
alone  (§  5). 

1 6.  To  illustrate  the  phenomena  of  charge,  I  will 
now   call  your  attention  to  these  diagrams — which, 


FIG.  5. — Mechanical  analogy  ol  a  metallic  circuit. 

less  completely  but  more  simply  than  hydraulic  illus- 
trations, serve  to  make  the  nature  of  the  phenomena 
manifest. 

First  you  have  an  inextensible  endless  cord  circu- 
lating over  pulleys  ;  this  is  to  represent  electricity 
flowing  in  a  closed  circuit.  Electromotive  forces  are 


38  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

forces  capable  of  moving  the  cord,  and  you  may 
consider  them  applied  either  by  a  winch,  or  by  a 
weight  on  the  hook  w.  A  battery  cell  corresponds  to 
a  small  weight  ;  an  electric  machine  to  a  slow  but 
powerful  winch.  Clamping  the  cord  with  the  screw  S 
corresponds  to  making  the  resistance  of  the  circuit 
infinite.  Instead  of  the  cord,  clamp,  and  driving 
pulley,  one  might  consider  an  endless  pipe  full  of 
liquid  with  a  stop-cock  and  a  pump  on  it,  but  for 
many  purposes  the  cord  is  sufficient  and  more  simple. 
In  Fig.  5,  the  only  resistance  to  the  motion  is  friction, 
and  there  is  no  tendency  to  spring  back.  Fixed 
beads  are  shown  on  the  cord  to  typify  atorr^  of 
matter ;  and  they  may  be  more  or  less  rough,  to 
represent  different  specific  resistances.  If  the  cord  be 
moved,  heat  is  the  only  result. 

Now  pass  to  Fig.  6.  Here  the  cord  is  the  same  as 
before,  but  the  beads  arc  firmly  attached  to  it,  so  that 
if  it  moves  they  must  move  with  it.  They  represent, 
therefore,  the  particles  of  an  insulating  substance. 
Nevertheless,  their  supports  are  not  rigid — they  do 
not  prevent  the  cord  moving  at  all ;  they  allow  what 
is  called  electric  "  displacement^ "  not  conduction  ; 
they  can  be  displaced  a  little  from  their  natural 
position,  but  they  spring  back  again  when  the 
disturbing  E.M.F.  is  removed.  The  beads  in  this 
figure  are  supposed  to  be  supported  by  elastic 
threads  :  if  the  cord  were  replaced  by  a  closed  pipe 


MODEL  OF  DIELECTRIC 


39 


full  of  water  the  beads  and  threads  would  be  replaced 
by  elastic  partitions.  The  specific  inductive  capacity 
of  the  dielectric  is  represented  by  the  stretchability,  or 
inverse  elastic  resilience  of  the  elastic  threads.  The 
stiffer  the  threads  are  to  pull  out,  the  less  is  the  in- 
ductive capacity  of  the  medium  ;  because  evidently  a 


FIG.  6. — Mechanical   analogy  of  a  circuit   partly   dielectric  :    for  instance,   of  n 
charged  condenser.     A  is  its  positive  coat,  B  its  negative. 

greater  E.M.F.  is  needed  to  cause   a  given  displace- 
ment. 

Apply  a  given  E.M.F.  to  this  cord,  as  for  instance 
the  weight  W,  and  a  definite  displacement  is  produced. 
One  side,  A,  gets  more  cord  than  usual — it  is 
positively  charged  ;  the  other  side,  B,  gets  less — it  is 
negatively  charged.  If  the  applied  E.M.F.  exceeds  a 
certain  limit  the  strain  is  too  great ;  the  elastics  break, 


40  CHARGE  ANt)  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

and  you  have  disruptive  discharge  with  a  spark.  But 
even  when  the  strain  is  only  moderate  some  of  the 
supports  may  yield  viscously,  or  be  imperfectly  elastic 
and  permit  a  gradual  extra  displacement  of  the  cord, 
known  to  telegraphists  as  "  soaking  in." 

When  discharge  is  now  allowed,  it  will  not  at  once 
be  complete  ;  a  large  portion  of  the  displacement  will 
be  at  once  recovered,  but  the  rest  will  gradually  "  soak 
out "  and  cause  residual  discharges. 

If  the  dielectric  is  at  all  stratified  in  structure,  so 
that  some  of  the  beads  allow  cord  to  slip  through 
them — or  yield  more  than  others — then  this  residual 
charge  effect  will  become  very  prominent.1 

17.  These  are  matters  which  it  is  easy  to  thoroughly 
understand,  and  Fig.  7  illustrates  different  stages 
sufficiently.  In  Diagram  I.  are  represented  8  strata, 
each  displaced  from  its  normal  position  by  an  amount 
3.  The  restoring  force  being  proportional  to  the  dis- 
placement, the  total  restoring  force  can  be  called  24. 
The  diagram  represents,  therefore,  a  Leyden  jar  or 
other  dielectric  strained  by  an  applied  E.M.F.  of  24 
units.  If  every  stratum  insulates  perfectly — that  is,  if 
every  bead  is  quite  firmly  attached  to  the  cord — nothing 
further  happens  so  long  as  this  force  is  kept  applied. 
This  state  of  things  may  be  maintained  in  two  ways  : 

1  For  the  original  details  of  these  cord  models  as  illustrative  of 
Maxwell's  theory  of  electrostatic  induction,  &c. ,  see  Lodge,  Phil.  Mag. 
November,  1876. 


§  i;  SOAKING  IN  OF  CHARGE  41 

cither  by  keeping  on  the  weight  W — that  is,  by  keeping 
the  condenser  permanently  connected  to  the  battery  ; 
or  by  clamping  the  cord  and  thus  making  the  resistance 
infinite — that  is,  by  insulating  the  terminals  of  the 
condenser. 

But  now  suppose  that  some  of  the  strata  are  not 
perfectly  insulating  ;  let  some  of  the  beads  slowly  slide 
back  along  the  cord  towards  their  zero  position.  Then 
we  shall  witness  different  phenomena  according  to 
whether  the  weight  has  been  left  on  or  the  cord  has 
been  clamped. 

Take  first  the  case  of  leaving  the  weight  on — that 
is,  keeping  the  battery  connected.  If  every  bead 
slide  equally,  all  we  get  is  a  continuance  of  the  state 
represented  in  Diagram  I.,  combined  with  a  slow  oozing 
forward  of  the  cord — that  is,  a  slow  and  steady  leak 
through  the  condenser.  But  suppose  every  bead  does 
not  slide  equally,  suppose  some  do  not  slide  at  all  ; 
then  the  slipping  of  some  throws  extra  strain  on  the 
others,  and  the  cord  moves  forward,  but  more  and  more 
slowly,  until  the  insulating  strata  ultimately  have  to 
bear  all  the  strain,  and  the  cord  asymptotically  comes 
to  rest. 

This  process  is  observed  in  Atlantic  cables  and 
Leyden  jars  ;  all  condensers  are  liable  to  it  except  air 
condensers,  and  it  is  called  "  soaking  in "  ;  it  is 
accompanied  by  the  development  of  internal  charges, 
because  plainly  the  original  normal  length  of  cord 


42  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAT,  in 

between  the  beads  is  no  longer  maintained  ;  some 
layers  have  acquired  an  extra  length — that  is,  arc 
positively  charged — others  are  negatively  charged. 

The  strain  is  distributed  very  unequally,  but  its 
total  amount,  in  this  case,  continues  constant. 

Remove  the  electromotive  force  now,  keeping  the 
circuit  still  closed  :  i.e.  short-circuit  the  condenser : 
we  get  first  a  quick  discharge,  and  then  a  slow  leaking 
out  or  reverse  motion  of  the  cord  as  it  is  propelled  by 
the  still  displaced  insulating  strata  through  the  no\\ 
oppositely  displaced  badly  conducting  ones ;  the 
time  of  " soaking  out"  being  comparable  with  that 
permitted  to  the  soaking  in. 

It  is  important  to  see  how  these  phenomena  are 
entirely  reconcilable  with  the  incompressible  character 
of  electricity — that  is,  the  unyielding  character  of 
the  cord.  The  ordinary  notion  of  the  positive  and 
negative  charges  of  a  Ley  den  jar  crawling  into  the 
glass  to  meet  each  other,  and  then  crawling  out  again, 
is  quite  erroneous ;  and  the  actual  process  which 
simulates  the  effect  of  this  impossible  process  is 
perfectly  clear. 

So  much  for  the  case  when  the  battery  is  left 
connected  ;  now  attend  to  the  case  when  the  terminals 
arc  insulated. 

Having  got  the  dielectric  into  the  state  represented 
by  I.,  screw  down  the  clamp  and  wait.  If  some  of 
the  beads  slide,  while  some  do  not,  we  shall  shortly 


§17 


RESIDUAL  CHARGE 


43 


arrive  at  the  state  represented  by   II.     Beads  Nos.  3, 
5,  and  6  have  slid   partially  back,  and  the  total  stress 


*    \5  \G  7  8 


FIG.  7. — Stages  in  the  discharge  of  a  stratified  condenser,  with  some  of  its  layers  01 
imperfect   insulating   power ;    showing   one   way   in   which    the   phenomena   of 
"residual  charge,"  "internal  charge,"  and  "soaking  out"  are -produced. 
I.  represents  a  recent  charge,  of  E.M.F.  24. 

II.  represents   the  same  after  lapse  of  time,   reduced  to  17  by   partial  internal 
leakage,  and  shows  internal  charge.     The  circuit  itself  is  supposed  to  have 
been  perfectly  insulating   all    the    time  ;  the   charge  on  the  plates  therefore 
remains  constant. 
III.  shows  the  first  discharge. 

IIII.  shows  the  state  attained  after  again  waiting,  viz.  a  residual  charge  with  an 
E.M.F.  3  in  the  old  direction. 

on  the  cord  has  been   reduced  to    17.     The  jar  will 
appear  to  have  partially  discharged  itself  by  internal 


44  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

leakage,  and  yet  not  the  slightest  motion  of  the  cord 
has  been  permitted.  Internal  charges  have  appeared  : 
positive  between  Nos.  3  and  4,  and  between  5  and  6, 
negative  between  2  and  3,  and  between  4  and  5.  The 
charges  on  the  coatings  at  A  and  B  have  remained 
constant  ;  the  jar  has  apparently  increased  in  capacity, 
because  the  same  charge  is  maintained  by  a  less 
electromotive  force.  All  these  effects  may  present 
themselves  at  first  sight  as  irreconcilable  with  the 
behaviour  of  an  incompressible  fluid  ;  but  the  dia- 
gram clearly  says  otherwise. 

Now  unclamp  the  cord  momentarily,  i.e.  discharge 
the  condenser  and  insulate  again.  At  the  instant  of 
discharge  a  rush  of  electricity  takes  place,  and  the 
force  falls  to  zero.  The  state  of  the  discharged  jar 
at  the  first  instant  after  discharge  is  represented  in 
Diagram  III.  The  surface  charges  have  not  wholly 
disappeared  ;  the  internal  charges  have  been  un- 
affected ;  the  displacement  of  none  of  the  strata  is 
zero.  The  insulating  ones  remain  with  some  of  their 
original  displacement,  the  leaking  ones  have  been 
forced  into  a  position  of  inverse  displacement,  so  as 
just  to  reduce  the  resultant  force  on  the  cord  to  zero. 
The  most  slippery  one,  No.  5,  has  been  most  dis- 
placed in  the  inverse  direction.  .  But  not  long  do  they 
thus  remain.  They  at  once  begin  to  slowly  ooze 
back,  and  before  long  they  will  have  got  into  the 
state  represented  by  IV.,  where  the  now  almost  un- 


§  IS  RESIDUAL  DISCHARGE  45 

balanced  stress  of  the  insulating  strata  exerts  on 
the  cord  a  force  3  in  the  original  direction.  This  is 
known  as  the  "  residual  charge,"  and  on  unclamping 
the  cord,  the  first  residual  discharge  can  be  obtained. 
Not  even  yet,  however,  is  the  jar  wholly  discharged. 
Waiting  again,  another  but  feebler  residual  charge 
makes  its  appearance  ;  and  so  on,  almost  without  limit, 
until  the  sum  of  all  the  residual  discharges  plus  the 
original  discharge  make  up  exactly  the  charge  origin- 
ally imparted  to  the  jar — make  it  up  exactly  if  any  one 
of  the  strata  has  declined  to  leak.  If  all  leaked  more 
or  less,  then  of  course  there  will  be  some  deficiency. 


FIG.  7A.  Cf.  also  Fig.   46. 

1 8.  The  only  thing  needful  to  guard  against  in 
following  out  this  mechanical  analogy  is  the  idea 
that  there  need  be  any  mechanical  displacement  of 
the  atoms  of  matter  accompanying  the  electric  dis- 
placement. Manifestly  a  model  containing  fixed 
beams  for  the  attachment  of  the  beads  cannot  really 
correspond  very  closely  to  electrical  facts.  To  make 
the  model  more  closely  imitative  of  facts  we  should 
have  to  take  a  number  of  rows  of  beads,  each  row 


46  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

threaded  on  its  cord  and  attached  crosswise  by  elastic 
threads,  as  in  Fig.  /A. 

.If  these  cords  are  simultaneously  displaced  alter- 
nately in  opposite  directions,  and  if  they  be  con- 
sidered as  representing  positive  and  negative  elec- 
tricity alternately,  while  the  beads  represent  the 
electro-positive  and  the  electro-negative  elements  of 
the  material  substance,  then  perhaps  something 
more  like  the  actual  state  of  things  may  be  imagined. 
There  is  here  no  displacement  of  the  molecule  as 
a  whole,  but  there  is  a  displacement  of  its  con- 
stituent atoms  ;  there  is  a  shearing  stress  applied  to 
each  molecule,  which,  if  strong  enough,  may  result  in 
electrolytic  disruption.  I  certainly  regard  disruptive 
discharge  as  being  of  this  electrolytic  character 
(§§  112  and  65  A  ;  see  also  §  13). 

19.  Return,  however,  to  the  simple  discharge,  and 
see  how  it  occurs.  Will  it  take  place  as  a  simple 
sliding  back  of  the  beads  to  their  old  position  ?  Yes, 
if  the  resistance  of  the  circuit  is  great,  but  not  other- 
wise. If  the  cord  is  fairly  free  the  beads  will  fly 
past  their  mean  position,  overshooting  their  mark, 
then  rebound,  and  so,  after  many  quick  oscillations, 
will  finally  settle  down  in  .their  natural  position. 
Thus  is  represented  the  fact  that  the  discharge  of  a 
Leyden  jar  is  in  general  oscillatory  ;  the  apparently 
single  and  momentary  spark,  when  analysed  in  a  very 
rapidly  rotating  mirror,  turning  out  to  really  consist 


§  19  OSCILLATORY  DISCHARGE  47 

of  a  series  of  alternating  flashes  rapidly  succeeding 
one  another,  and  all  over  in  the  hundred-thousandth 
of  a  second  or  thereabouts.  These  oscillatory  cur- 
rents were  predicted  and  calculated  beforehand  by  Sir 
William  Thomson  ;  they  were  first  observed  experi- 
mentally by  Feddersen.1  The  oscillations  continue 
until  the  energy  stored  up  in  the  strained  medium 
has  all  rubbed  itself  down  into  heat.  The  existence 
of  these  oscillations  proves  distinctly  that  electricity 
in  conjunction  with  matter  possesses  inertia.  The 
rapidity  of  these  oscillations  is  something  tremendous  : 
it  may  reach  as  high  as  a  hundred  million  per  second, 
or  it  may  be  as  slow  as  ten  thousand  per  second, 
according  to  the  capacity  and  inertia  of  the  circuit. 
The  rapidity  of  oscillation,  and  its  rate  of  dying 
away,  as  well  as  the  circumstances  which  change  the 
recovery  from  an  oscillatory  one  into  a  simple  one- 
directioned  leak,  are  precisely  analogous  to  those 
which  regulate  the  recovery  of  a  bent  spring  suddenly 
let  go.  If  the  spring  is  in  a  very  viscous  medium,  or 
if  it  has  but  small  inertia,  it  will  not  oscillate,  but 
will  merely  return  to  its  normal  position.  Under 
ordinary  circumstances,  however,  it  will  make  many 
oscillations  before  its  energy  is  all  rubbed  into  heat 


Fig.  8  shows  part  of  an  actual  model  of  the  kind. 

1  We  now  find  that  they  were  experimentally  discovered  with  con- 
siderable clearness  by  Joseph  Henry  of  Washington.     (See  Lect.  III.) 


. 

Vv 


UNIVERSITY 


48  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  ill 

20.  To  make  the  model  represent  charge  by  induc- 
tion all  that  has  to  be  done  is  to  immerse  a  conductor 
into  the  polarised  dielectric — in  other  words,  to  make 
one  or  more  of  the  beads  of  the  fixed  and  slippery 


FIG.  8.— Partial  model  of  a  dielectric. 


conducting  kind,  the  other  beads  on  the  cord  being  of 
the  elastic  and  adhesive  or  insulating  kind.  Then, 
when  displacement  occurs,  it  is  plain  that  a  defi- 
ciency of  cord  will  exist  on  one  side  of  the  metallic 


FIG.  9. — Metallic  layer  in  the  midst  of  a  polarized  dielectric,  showing  opposite 
charges  "  induced  "  on  its  surfaces.     (Compare  Fig.  3.) 

layer  and  a  surplus  on  the  other,  as  shown  in  Fig.  9. 
This  state  of  things  corresponds  exactly  to  the  equal 
opposite  induced  charges  on  a  conductor  under  in- 
duction, as  in  Fig.  3. 


§21  TROCESS  OF  INDUCTION  49 

If  the  strain  on  one  side  be  relieved  by  letting  the 
beads  on  that  side  slip  back  on  the  cord,  that  corre- 
sponds to  touching  the  conductor  to  earth,  as  in  Fig. 
4.  The  other  side  has  now  to  withstand  the  whole 
E.M.F.,  consequently  the  strain  there  and  the  charge 
there  will  have  increased.  Remove  now  the  applied 
E.M.F.,  and  the  negative  charge  appears  on  both 
sides  of  the  metal  partition,  either  equally,  or  more 
markedly  on  that  side  which  has  fewest  beads,  i.e. 
which  is  nearest  to  other  conductors. 

21.  This  being  a  matter  which  it  is  desirable 
thoroughly  to  understand,  a  series  of  figures  illus- 
trating the  various  stages  of  the  process  are  appended 
in  Fig.  QA. 

I.  represents  an  ordinary  polarized  dielectric,  say 
air,  between  two  oppositely  charged  bodies,  A  and  B 
maintained  at  constant  difference  of  potential.  For 
simplicity  the  field  is  taken  of  uniform  strength,  i.e. 
with  its  lines  of  force  parallel  straight  lines,  so  that  A 
may  be  considered  as  a  large  positively  charged  plate, 
and  B  an  earth-plate  facing  it.  The  difference  of 
potential  between  A  and  B  is  called  60,  and  is  dis- 
tributed among  8  strata  or  units  of  thickness,  each  of 
which  therefore  bears  the  strain  7^,  and  is  displaced 
J  of  the  width  of  a  square  from  its  normal  position. 
The  charges  on  A  and  B  we  may  call  +  3  respectively. 

An  insulated  metal  plate,  c,  two  units  in  thickness, 
is  now  introduced,  replacing  a  couple  of  the  dielectric 

E 


CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION 


CHAP.  Ill 


60 


60 


\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

A 

\ 

V 

\ 

\ 

•i 

B 

IIP 

\ 

\ 

V 

\ 

60 

+ 

6 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/6 

t 

< 

i 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

I 

| 

| 

| 

i 

/ 

1 

TV 

A 

— 

\ 

|l~ 

|r 

i 

/ 

i 

B 

[ 

\ 

1 

rr 

I 

1 

L  \ 

+ 

2 

1 

if 

/ 

/ 

-2 

-4 

\ 

± 

4 

—it 

I/ 

/ 

\ 

| 

[ 

\ 

\ 

1 

f 

1 

Fin.  QA. — Stages  during  the  charge  of  a  metal  by  induction  and  contact.  Numbers 
preceded  by  +  or  —  represent  charges ;  numbers  affixed  to  an  arrow-head 
represent  E.M.F.  In  this  series  the  E.M.F.  applied  is  supposed  constant.  To 
represent  the  other  case  when  the  charge  on  the  A  plate  is  kept  constant,  the 
cord  must  not  be  allowed  to  move  ;  but  the  force  on  it  will  decrease,  from  60  in 
I.  to  45  in  II.,  and  to  30  in  III 

strata.  The  remaining  6  have  therefore  more  strain 
thrown  upon  them,  viz.  10  on  each,  and  accordingly 
each  is  now  displaced  a  whole  square-width  from  its 


§  2i  CHARGE  BY  INDUCTION  51 

normal  position,  the  charge  of  the  plates  A  and  B  has 
risen  to  +  4,  and  the  effect  is  the  same  as  if  the  thickness 
of  dielectric  had  been  reduced  in  the  ratio  of  8  to  6. 
The  metal  partition  introduced  has  also  a  charge  on 
the  surface,  viz.  —  4  on  the  side  facing  A,  and  -f  4  on 
the  side  facing  B.  See  Diagram  II. 

The  next  stage  is  to  connect  the  metal  momentarily 
to  earth.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  entirely  relieve  the 
strain  on  the  B  side  by  replacing  the  dielectric  with 
metal,  which  allows  the  cord  to  freely  slip  through.  The 
cord  makes  another  bound  forward,  and  all  the  strain  is 
now  thrown  upon  4  strata,  which  each  have  to  bear  15, 
and  are  displaced  ij  from  their  natural  position.  Re- 
storing the  dielectric  (i.e.  removing  the  temporary  earth 
connection)  makes  no  further  change,  but  leaves  every- 
thing as  shown  in  Diagram  III.  The  charge  on  one  side 
of  the  metal  partition  is  now  —  6,  and  on  the  other  side 
is  nothing. 

Finally  remove  the  constant  E.M.F.  which  has  been 
acting  all  this  time.  The  cord  makes  a  bound  back, 
the  resultant  force  on  it  becomes  nothing  ;  the  2  strata 
on  the  right  have  to  balance  the  4  strata  on  the  left, 
and  accordingly  their  displacements  are  I  and  J 
respectively.  The  charges  on  the  faces  of  the  partition 
are  —  2  and  —  4  ;  both  negative.  The  charges  on  A 
and  B  are  +  2  and  +  4  respectively,  although  they  are 
at  the  same  potential.  The  state  of  things  is  shown  in 
IV., and  the  metal  partition  has  been  charged  negatively 


52  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

by  means  of  induction.  Of  course  it  may  have  been 
charged  equally  on  its  two  faces,  but  not  necessarily  ; 
.that  is  a  mere  matter  of  the  relative  proximity  of 
adjacent  objects,  A  and  B. 

If  instead  of  maintaining  A  at  constant  potential 
it  possessed  a  constant  charge,  the  series  of  operations 
would  differ  in  a  slight  and  easily  appreciated  manner. 
The  resultant  tension  on  the  cord  would  then  decrease, 
both  when  the  thick  metal  layer  was  introduced,  and 
when  it  was  touched  to  earth  ;  but  we  may  now  regard 
the  series  of  operations  as  practically  the  electrophorus 
series,  such  as  go  on  rapidly  and  continuously  in  all 
inductive  machines  and  replenishers.  It  will  be  worth 
while  to  sketch  this  electrophorus  series  more  par- 
ticularly ;  the  process  of  working  out  what  is  happening 
in  any  given  case  will  then  be  sufficiently  illustrated. 

Electrophorus, 

22.  Diagram  I.,  Fig.  96,  shows  the  cake  excited 
negatively,  resting  on  its  sole.  The  negative  charge 
on  surface  of  cake  is  called  13  units;  of  these,  12 
are  what  is  sometimes  called  "bound5  by  the  sole, 
and  I  is  free.  In  other  words,  the  strain  due  to  12 
units  of  charge  is  thrown  on  the  layers  of  the  cake, 
the  remaining  small  strain  is  thrown  on  the  atmo- 
sphere above.  The  strain  in  the  atmosphere  is  small 
because  it  is  ,so  much  thicker  than  the  cake — there 


§22 


ELECTROPHORUS 


53 


are  so  many  layers  in  it  that  a  very  small  displace- 
ment  of  each   suffices  to  balance   the  stress  in   the 


(Ceiling) 


Atmosphere 


Lowest  position  1 
of  Cover  j 


Air  film 


Cakex 


Sole 


^13. 


+  10 


II 


\ 


M 


III 


M 


/\ 


y\ 


IV 


FIG.  96. — The  electrophorus  series  of  operations.  Double  lines  mean  rigid  rods 
supporting  smooth  beads,  and  represent  metal.  Gripping  beads  supported  by 
elastics  represent  dielectric.  Numbers  preceded  by  +  or  —  represent  charges. 
The  charge  excited  on  the  surface  of  the  electrophorus  cake  remains  constant  all 
the  time.  The  sole  is  supposed  connected  with  the  floor  and  walls  of  the  room. 
Numbers  in  parentheses  at  the  top  represent  the  charge  induced  on  ceiling  and 
walls.  The  whole  thickness  of  atmosphere  does  not  pretend  to  be  represented. 
It  must  be  thick  enough  in  I.  precisely  to  balance  the  stress  in  the  cake.  The 
resultant  stress  in  the  cord  is  in  each  case  zero. 

I.  shows  the  charged  cake,  with  cover  either  offer  in  position  but  insulated. 
II.  shows  effect  of  connecting  cover  and  sole. 
III.  and  IV.  show  effect  of  gradually  raising  cover. 

I.  again  shows  effect  of  having  removed  cover  completely  and  discharged  it. 


cord.     One  unit  of  charge  is  induced  on  the  ceiling 
and  walls  of  the  room  by  the  electrified  cake.     We 


54  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

now  bring  down  the  insulated  metal  cover  of  the 
electrophorus.  If  it  is  any  appreciable  thickness  it 
displaces  a  few  of  the  strained  layers,  and  thus  there 
is  a  little  extra  strain  on  the  others  ;  but  this  effect  is 
extremely  small,  and  it  is  quite  unessential.  We 
may  therefore  take  the  cover  as  of  no  thickness,  and 
bring  it  down  into  what  is  marked  in  the  diagram  as  its 
lowest  position  ;  the  stress  passes  through  it,  and  nothing 
is  affected  except  the  one  layer  whose  place  it  takes. 
Diagram  I.  will  serve  to  represent  the  cover  thus  put 
on,  so  long  as  it  is  insulated.  The  dotted  lines  show  it 
in  position.  It  does  not  make  intimate  contact  with 
the  cake  ;  a  film,  either  of  air  or  of  the  substance  of  the 
cake  itself,  intervenes  between  it  and  the  negatively 
charged  surface,  and  this  is  exhibited  in  the  diagram. 

The  next  thing  is  to  connect  the  cover  and  the 
sole  together.  This  immediately  brings  about  the 
state  of  things  represented  by  Diagram  II. 

A  charge  of  9  units  has  rushed  round  from  sole  to 
cover,  making  with  the  charge  I  which  previously 
existed  on  the  walls  of  the  room  a  total  of  lo.1  The 
strain  above  the  cover  is  entirely  relieved,  and  the 
whole  excitement  is  now  internal,  between  cover 
and  sole.  The  strain  in  the  cake  is  considerably 
relieved,  but  the  work  of  balancing  what  remains 

1  If  the  sole  had  been  insulated,  and  connection  between  it  and  cover 
also  made  in  an  insulated  manner,  then  this  unit  on  the  walls  of  the 
room  would  stay  there  ;  the  cover  would  only  acquire  a  charge  9,  and 
the  slight  strain  above  it  shown  in  I.  would  continue  to  exist  unaltered. 


,      ELECTROPHORUS  OPERATIONS  55 

is  thrown  on  the  very  thin  film  between  cover  and 
top  of  cake.  This,  therefore,  is  highly  strained. 

We  now  raise  the  again  insulated  cover.  As  it  as- 
cends, fresh  layers  of  dielectric  intervene  between  it  and 
the  cake,  and  receive  some  of  the  strain.  The  effect 
of  this  is  threefold.  First  they  partially  relieve  the 
strain  in  the  original  very  thin  layer ;  next,  they 
increase  the  strain  in  the  cake ;  and  thirdly,  they 
put  a  little  strain  on  the  air  above  the  raised  cover. 
The  sole  therefore  receives  5  units  instead  of  3  ;  the 
cover  retains  its  charge  10,  but  part  of  this  is  on  its 
upper  surface  ;  an  induced  charge  --  2  makes  its 
appearance  on  the  walls  of  the  room.  This  state  of 
things  is  shown  in  Diagram' 1 1 1. 

Diagram  IV.  continues  the  process  of  raising, 
until  ultimately  when  the  plate  is  removed  to 
infinity,  its  charge  above  and  below  is  equal, 
being  5  on  each,  and  the  cake  and  cover  have 
returned  to  their  original  state  I.,  ready  to  begin 
again.  The  cover  having  now  a  charge  10,  the 
walls  of  the  room,  wherever  the  cover  is,  will  have  a 
charge- i o,  and  it  may  be  discharged  whenever  we 
please  without  affecting  the  cake  at  all.  Having  dis- 
charged it,  we  can  put  it  on,  as  in  I.,  and  perform  the 
cycle  again. 

If  one  chooses  to  put  the  cover  on  before  discharging 
it,  the  cycle  of  operations  is  just  reversed,  from  IV.  to 
II. 


56  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION          CHAP,  in 

It  is  instructive  to  mount  an  electrophorus  on  an 
insulating  stand,  and  connect  its  sole  to  earth  through 
a  delicate  galvanometer  ;  then  the  rush  out  of  it  when 
the  cover  is  touched,  and  the  flow  back  again  as  the 
cover  is  raised,  can  be  easily  watched. 

23.  There  is  one  more  thing  which  is  so  important 
to  see  clearly  that  an  illustration  of  it  is  desirable  ; 
and  that  is  the  effect  of  inserting  not  a  metal  but 
a  slice  of  some  other  perfectly  insulating  dielectric, 
with  a  different  inductive  capacity,  in  the  midst  of  a 
polarized  medium.  Thus,  for  instance,  between  the 
plates  of  a  charged  condenser  insert  a  thick  slab  of 
glass.  The  effects  will  differ  according  as  the  con- 
denser plates  are  charged  each  with  a  given  quan- 
tity, or  are  maintained  at  a  constant  difference  of 
potential. 

Refer  to  Fig.  90 ;  the  8  similar  strata  are  sup- 
posed to  be  displaced  with  a  total  E.M.F.  24;  the 
tension  in  the  cord  (negative  electric  potential)  ac- 
cordingly rises  by  a  step  3  at  each  layer.  Diagram 
I.  shows  this  initial  state.  Clamp  the  cord,  to  repre- 
sent a  constant  charge  on  the  plates  A  and  E,  and 
now  introduce  a  slab  of  glass — that  is,  replace  the  4 
middle  layers  by  elastics  only  half  as  stiff  (see  II.). 
The  stress  in  the  cord  steps  up  now  by  only  ij  at 
each  of  these  layers,  and  the  total  difference  of  poten- 
tial, instead  of  being  24,  is  now  only  18.  Meanwhile 
the  charges  remain  the  same,  and  there  is  no  charge 


§23  REAL  AND  SPURIOUS  SURFACE-CHARGES      57 


T 

+ 

3 

\ 

X 

X 
\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

\ 

X 

\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

\ 

X 
\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

X 
\ 

\ 

\ 

-3 

1 

L 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

] 

3 

\ 

XI 

XI 

\ 

\ 

N^ 

x 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

V 

N\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

II 

-f 

3 

\ 

\ 

\ 

xx 

\ 

Xv 

\ 

\ 

-3 

. 

18 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

[ 

/ 

. 

/ 

/ 

/ 

^ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

'' 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

' 

/ 

x 

in 

+ 

3 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

\ 

\ 

-3 

18 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

1 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

A 

^ 
/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

IV 


4 

\ 

N 

\ 
X 

X 

\ 

\ 

x 

V: 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

x 

\ 

\ 

X 

\ 
^ 

^ 

X- 

-4 

o  /I 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

-2 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

*•? 

FIG.  gc.—  Real  and  apparent  effects  of  introducing  a  glass  slab  between  the  plates 
of  an  air-condenser. 


I.  shows  the  original  condenser,  of  capacity  \. 
II.  shows  the  effect  of  inserting  a  slab  of  half  the  w 


g  a  sa     o      a     te  whole  thickness,,  and  oi 

specific  inductive  capacity  2,  the  charge  being  kept  constant.     The 
capacity  has  risen  to  £. 

III.  shows  a  spurious  imitative  mode  of  obtaining  the  same  effect,  without  any 

change  of  inductive  capacity,  by  help  of  surface  charges. 

IV.  shows  the  effect  of  introducing  the  slab  into  the  condenser  when  it  is 

supplied  with  a  constant  E.M.F.     The  capacity  has  again  become  l. 
V.  shows  a  spurious  imitation  of  this  effect  by  help  of  surface  charges. 


58  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

on  the  surface  of  the  glass ;  the  capacity  of  the 
whole  condenser  has  increased  in  the  ratio  of  4 
to  3. 

There  is  no  charge  on  the  surface  of  the  glass  ; 
but  the  resultant  effect  is  very  much  the  same  as  if 
there  were.  The  effect  on  the  cord  will  be  precisely 
the  same  as  if  the  replaced  elastics  were  still  of  the 
same  strength,  but  as  if  their  beads  had  slid  half-way 
back,  into  the  positions  shown  in  III.,  where  surface 
charges  exist  as  indicated  by  numbers.  This,  I 
repeat,  is  not  the  state  of  things  caused  by  the  glass, 
but  it  is  so  like  it  in  effect  as  to  be  difficultly  dis- 
tinguishable from  it  ;  and  one  sometimes  speaks  of 
the  spurious  or  virtual  charges  set  up  on  the  glass 
surface,  meaning  the  charges  in  Diagram  III.,  which 
so  exactly  imitates  the  resultant  effect  of  II. 

So  much  for  the  effect  of  constant  charge  ;  now  take 
the  case  of  constant  potential. 

Diagram  IV.  shows  the  effect  of  replacing  some  of 
the  elastics  by  weaker  ones  in  this  case.  The  E.M.F. 
is  kept  constant,  so  the  strong  elastics  have  more 
strain  thrown  on  them  than  before ;  no  internal 
charge  is  possible  so  long  as  the  substances  insulate 
perfectly,  so  all  the  beads  are  pulled  forward  equally. 
The  step  of  potential  is  now  4  at  all  the  stiffer  (or 
air)  strata,  and  2  at  all  the  weaker  (or  glass)  strata, 
making  up  the  total  E.M.F.,  24.  The  charge  on  the 
plates  A  and  B  has  increased  from  ±  3  to  +  4  in 


§  24  HYDRAULIC  MODEL  59 

accordance  with  the  increase  of  capacity  ;  the 
ratio  of  increase  of  which  is  still  4 :  3.  Here  again 
the  real  effect  shown  in  IV.  may  be  simulated  by 
spurious  surface  charges  without  any  change  of  induc- 
tive capacity,  as  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  Diagram 
V.,  wherein  all  the  elastics  are  supposed  of  the  same 
strength. 

24.  Hydraulic  Model  of  a  Leyden  Jar. — So  much 
for  the  cord  model,  but  I  will  now  describe  and  ex- 
plain an  hydraulic  model  which  illustrates  the  same 
sort  of  facts  ;  some  of  them  more  plainly  and  directly 
than  the  cord  model.  Moreover,  since  all  charging  is 
essentially  analogous  to  that  of  a  Leyden  jar,  let  us 
take  a  Leyden  jar  and  make  its  hydrostatic  analogue 
at  once. 

The  form  of  jar  most  convenient  to  think  of  is  one 


IG.  91 


supported  horizontally  on  an  insulating  stand  with 
pith  ball  electroscopes  supplied  to  both  inner  and 
outer  coatings.  Or  one  may  use,  as  I  commonly  do, 


6o 


CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION 


CHAP.  Ill 


in  conjunction  with  the  hydraulic  model,  a  vertical 
coated  pane,  with  a  pith  ball  connected  to  each  coat- 
ing ;  but  if  the  electroscopes  were  of  such  a  kind  as 
to  show  a  difference  between  positive  and  negative 
potential,  they  would  do  better. 

To  construct  its  hydraulic  model,  procure  a  thin 
india-rubber  bag,  such  as  are  distended  with  gas  at 
toy-shops  ;  tie  it  over  the  mouth  of  a  tube  with  a 


FIG.  10. — Skeleton  diagram  of  hydraulic  model  of  a  Leyden  jar. 

stop-cock  A,  and  insert  the  tube  by  means  of  a  cork 
into  a  three-necked  globular  glass  vessel  or  "  receiver ' 
as  shown  in  the  diagram,  Fig.  10. 

One  of  the  other  openings  is  to  have  another  stop- 
cock tube,  B  ;  and  the  third  opening  is  to  be  plugged 
with  a  cork,  as  soon  as  the  whole  vessel,  both  inside 
and  outside  the  bag,  is  completely  full  of  water 
without  air-bubbles. 


§24  MODEL  OF  LEY  DEN  JAR  61 

This  is  the  insulated  Leyden  jar  :  the  bag  repre- 
sents the  dielectric,  and  its  inner  and  outer  coatings 
are  the  spaces  full  of  water. 

Open  gauge-tubes,  a  and  b,  must  now  be  inserted 
in  tubes  A  and  B,  to  correspond  to  the  electroscopes 
supplied  to  the  jar  ;  and  a  third  bent  tube,  C,  con- 
necting the  inner  and  outer  coatings,  will  correspond 
to  a  discharger.  Ordinarily,  however,  of  course  C  will 
be  shut. 

A  water-pump  screwed  on  to  A  will  represent  an 
electric  machine  connected  to  inner  coating ;  and  the 
outer  coating,  B,  should  open  into  a  tank,  to  represent 
the  earth.  The  pump  will  naturally  draw  its  supply 
of  water  from  the  same  tank. 

The  bag  being  undistended,  and  the  whole  filled 
with  water  free  from  air,  the  level  of  the  water  in  the 
two  gauge-tubes  will  correspond  with  that  in  the 
tank ;  and  this  means  that  everything  is  at  zero 
potential,  i.e.  the  potential  of  the  earth. 
..  Now,  C  being  shut,  shut  also  B,  open  A,  and  work 
the  pump.  Instantly  the  level  in  the  two  gauges  rises 
greatly  and  equally  :  you  are  trying  to  charge  an 
insulated  jar.  Turn  an  electric  machine  connected  to 
a  real  jar,  and  its  two  pith  balls  will  similarly  and 
equally  rise. 

Now  open  B  for  an  instant — the  pressure  is  relieved, 
and  both  gauges  at  once  fall,  apparently  both  to  zero. 
Repeat  the  whole  operation  several  times  however, 


62  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

and  it  will  be  found  that,  whereas  b  always  falls  to 
zero,  a  falls  short  of  zero  each  time  by  a  larger  amount 
and  the  bag  is  gradually  becoming  distended.  This 
is  charge  by  alternate  contact.  It  may  be  repeated 
exactly  with  the  real  jar :  a  spark  put  into  the  inner 
coating,  and  an  equal  spark  withdrawn  from  the 
outer  coating  each  time  ;  and  unless  this  outer  spark 
is  so  withdrawn,  .the  jar  declines  to  charge  :  water 
(and  electricity)  being  incompressible  (§  14  A). 

If  B  is  left  permanently  open,  the  pump  can  be 
steadily  worked,  so  as  to  distend  the  bag  and  raise 
the  gauge  a  to  its  full  height,  b  remaining  at  zero  all 
the  time,  save  for  oscillatory  disturbances. 

Having  got  the  jar  charged,  shut  A,  and  remove 
the  pump,  connecting  the  end  of  A  with  the  tank 
directly. 

Now  of  course  by  means  of  the  discharger  c  the 
fluid  can  be  transferred  from  inner  to  outer  coat,  the 
strain  relieved,  and  the  gauges  equalized.  But  if  this 
operation  be  performed  while  the  jar  is  insulated, 
i.e.  while  A  and  B  are  both  shut,  the  common  level  of 
the  gauges  after  discharge  is  not  zero,  but  a  half- 
way level  ;  and  the  effect  of  this  is  noticeable  if 
you  charge  a  Ley  den  jar  ordinarily,  then  insulate 
it,  discharge  it,  and  touch  it. 

Instead  of  using  the  discharger  C,  however,  we  can 
proceed  to  discharge  by  alternate  contact,  and  the 
operation  is  very  instructive. 


§  24  HYDRAULIC  MODEL  OF  JAR  63 

Start  with  the  gauge  b  at  zero,  and  the  gauge  a 
at  high  pressure.  Open  stop-cock  A  ;  some  water  is 
squeezed  out  of  inner  coating,  and  the  a  gauge  falls  to 
zero,  but  the  suck  of  the  contracting  bag  on  the  outer 
coat  pulls  down  the  gauge  b  below  zero,  the  descent 
of  the  two  gauges  being  nearly  equal. 

Next  shut  A  and  open  B  ;  a  little  water  flows  in 
from  the  tank  to  still  further  relieve  the  strain  of  the 
bag,  and  both  gauges  rise  ;  b  to  zero,  a  to  something 
just  short  of  its  old  position. 

Now  shut  B  and  open  A  again  :  again  the  two  gauges 
descend.  Reverse  the  taps,  and  again  they  both  rise  ; 
and  so  on  until  the  bag  has  recovered  its  normal  size. 
This  is  discharge  by  alternate  contact,  and  exactly 
imitates  the  behaviour  of  an  insulated  charged  Leyden 
jar  whose  inner  and  outer  coats  are  alternately  touched 
to  earth.  Its  pith  balls  alternately  rise  with  positive 
and  with  negative  electricity,  indicating  potentials 
above  and  below  zero. 

Figs.  1 1  and  1 2  are  taken  from  photographs  of 
apparatus  I  have  made  to  use  as  just  described.  The 
glass  globe  with  the  partially  distended  bag  inside  it, 
the  pump,  the  tank,  the  gauges  a  and  b,  the  stop-cocks 
ABC,  will  be  easily  recognized.  Two  extra  stop-cocks 
A'  and  B',  leading  direct  to  tank,  are  extra,  and  are  to 
save  having  to  disconnect  pump  and  connect  A  direct, 
when  exhibiting  the  effect  of  "  discharge  by  alternate 
contact."  But  the  tank  is  not  sufficientlv  tall  in 


64 


CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION 


CHAP.  Ill 


Fig.  12  ;   I   have  doubled  its  height  since.     The  full 
height  of  the  gauge-tubes  is  barely  shown. 

In  any  form  of  apparatus  it  is  essential   to   fill  the 
whole   with   water — pipes,  globe,  everything — before 


FIG.  ii. — First  actually  constructed  model  Leyden  jar,  with  mercury  gauges  as 
electrometers  ;  the  whole  rigged  up  with  things  purchasable  at  a  plumber's, 
except  the  pump.  The  glass  globe  contains  an  elastic  bag,  which  swells  as 
water  is  pumped  into  it.  The  tank  is  kept  full  of  water,  and  its  level  represents 
the  potential  of  the  earth.  Flexible  tubes  full  of  water  effect  the  desired 
earth-connections  when  wished.  The  gauges  a  and  b  represent  electroscopes 
connected  to  inner  and  outer  coats  of  the  jar  respectively. 


commencing  to  draw  any  moral  from  its  behaviour. 
It  is  rather  difficult  to  get  rid  of  a  large  bubble  of  air 
from  the  top  of  the  globe  of  Fig.  11,  and  though 
it  is  not  of  very  much  consequence  in  this  place,  the 


§  24 


MODEL  OF  LEYDEN  JAR 


stop-cock  in   Fig.  12  is   added   to   make  its  removal 
easy.     The  gauges  in   Fig.    II    may  be   replaced  by 


FIG.  12. — Latest  form  of  hydraulic  model  of  a  Leyden  jar  with  water  gauges ;  the 
whole  arranged  vertically  to  be  more  conspicuous.  The  pump  is  a  force-pump 
with  a  communication  between  top  of  barrel  and  tank  to  get  rid  of  stray  water. 
The  parts  are  labelled  to  correspond  with  the  skeleton  diagram,  Fig.  10,  as  well 
as  with  Fig.  n. 


others  arranged  as  a  lantern-slide,  and  connected 


flexible  tubing  full  of  air. 


66  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION  CHAP,  in 

25.  I  have  explained  thus  fully  the  hydraulic  illus- 
tration of  Ley  den  jar  phenomena,  because  these 
constitute  the  key  to  a  great  part  of  electrostatics. 
The  illustration  is  not  indeed  a  complete  one,  but  by 
combining  with  it  a  consideration  of  the  endless  cord 
models,  and  of  what  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain 
concerning  conduction  and  insulation  in  general,  a 
distinct  step  may  be  gained. 

Think  of  electrical  phenomena  as  produced  by  an 
all-permeating  liquid  embedded  in  a  jelly  ;  think  of 
conductors  as  holes  and  pipes  in  this  jelly,  of  an 
electrical  machine  as  a  pump,  of  charge  as  excess  or 
defect,  of  attraction  as  due  to  strain,  of  discharge  as 
bursting,  of  the  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar  as  a 
springing  back  or  recoil,  oscillating  till  its  energy  has 
gone. 

By  thus  thinking  you  will  get  a  more  real  grasp  of 
the  subject,  and  insight  into  the  actual  processes 
occurring  in  Nature — unknown  though  these  may  still 
strictly  be — than  if  you  employed  the  old  ideas  of 
action  at  a  distance,  or  contented  yourselves  with  no 
theory  at  all  on  which  to  link  the  facts.  You  will 
have  made  a  step  in  the  direction  of  the  truth,  but 
I  must  beg  you  to  understand  that  it  is  only  a  step  ; 
that  what  modifications  and  additions  will  have  to  be 
made  to  it  before  it  becomes  a  complete  theory  of 
electricity  I  am  "unable  fully  to  tell  you.  I  am  con- 
vinced they  will  be  many,  but  I  am  also  convinced 


§  25  USE  OF  ANALOGIES  67 

that  it  is  unwise  to  drift  along  among  a  host  of 
complicated  phenomena  without  guide  other  than 
that  afforded  by  hard  and  rigid  mathematical 
equations. 

The  mathematical  theory  of  potential  and  the  like 
has  insured  safe  and  certain  progress,  and  enables 
mathematicians  to  dispense  for  the  time  being  with 
theories  of  electricity  and  with  mental  imagery.  Few, 
however,  are  the  minds  strong  enough  thus  to  dispense 
with  all  but  the  most  formal  and  severe  of  mental  aids  ; 
and  none,  I  believe,  to  whom  some  mental  picture  of 
the  actual  processes  would  not  be  a  help  if  it  were 
safely  available. 

Such  a  representation  I  have  endeavoured  par- 
tially to  lay  before  you  ;  and  I  hope,  if  I  have 
succeeded  in  making  myself  at  all  intelligible,  that 
students  of  electricity  will  find  it  of  some  use  and 
service. 

NOTE. — Prof.  Fitzgerald  has  called  my  attention 
to  a  rather  subtle  error  on  page  62,  which,  as  it 
occurred  in  the  first  edition,  and  may  have  misled 
students,  I  prefer  to  correct  prominently  ;  it  is  about 
the  discharge  of  an  insulated  jar.  The  high  potential 
of  a  discharged  jar  there  noticed  depends  entirely  on 
the  free  capacity  of  its  knob  and  projecting  portions. 
If  the  outer  coating  entirely  enclosed  the  inner,  no 
rush  of  electricity  from  one  to  the  other  could  alter 
the  potential  of  the  outer  coat ;  else  would  the  result 

F  2 


68  CHARGE  AND  INDUCTION          CHAP.  in. 

of  the  "  ice-pail  experiment  "  be  falsified.  It  might 
be  plausibly  argued  that  when  one  coat  was  at  V  and 
the  other  at  o,  the  average  potential  was  £V,  and 
would  remain  so  after  discharge.  But  potential  is 
not  a  quantity  that  gets  to  an  average :  the  common 
potential  after  discharge,  when  the  inside  has  no  free 
capacity,  is  o. 


PART    II 

CONDUCTION 


CHAPTER  IV 

METALLIC  AND  ELECTROLYTIC  CONDUCTION 

26.  WE  have  now  glanced  through  electrostatic 
phenomena,  and  seen  that  they  could  be  all  compre- 
hended and  partially  explained  by  supposing  electri- 
city to  be  a  fluid  of  perfect  incompressibility — in  other 
words,  a  liquid — permeating  everywhere  and  every- 
thing ;  and  by  further  supposing  that  in  conducting 
matter  this  liquid  was  capable  of  free  locomotion,  but 
that  in  insulators  and  general  space  it  was  as  it  were 
entangled  in  some  elastic  medium  or  jelly,  to  strains 
in  which  electrostatic  actions  are  due.  This  medium 
might  be  burst,  in  a  disruptive  discharge,  but  easy  flow 
could  go  on  only  through  channels  or  holes  in  it, 
which  therefore  were  taken  to  represent  conductors  ; 
and  it  was  obvious  that  all  flow  must  take  place  in 
closed  circuits. 

I  now  want  to  consider  the  circumstances  of  this 
flow  more  particularly :  to  study,  in  fact,  the  second 


72  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

division  of  our  subject  (see  classification,  on  page  4), 
viz.,  Electricity  in  locomotion. 

I  use  the  term  "  locomotion  "  in  order  to  eliminate 
rotation  and  vibration  :  it  is  translation  only  with 
which  we  intend  now  to  concern  ourselves. 

Consider  the  modes  in  which  water  may  be  made  to 
move  from  place  to  place  ;  there  are  only  two  :  it  may 
be  pumped  along  pipes,  or  it  may  be  carried  about  in 
jugs.  In  other  words,  it  may  travel  through  matter, 
or  it  may  travel  with  matter.  Just  so  it  is  with  heat 
also  ;  heat  can  travel  in  two  ways  ;  it  can  flow  through 
matter,  by  what  is  called  "  conduction,"  and  it  can 
travel  with  matter,  by  what  is  called  "  convection." 
There  is  no  other  mode  of  conveyance  of  heat.  You 
frequently  find  it  stated  that  there  is  a  third  method, 
viz.,  "  radiation  "  ;  but  this  is  not  truly  a  conveyance 
of  heat  at  all.  Heat  generates  radiation  at  one  place, 
and  radiation  reproduces  heat  at  another  ;  but  it  is 
radiation  which  travels,  and  not  heat.  Heat  only 
naturally  flows  from  hot  bodies  to  cold,  just  as  water 
only  naturally  flows  down  hill ;  but  radiation  spreads 
in  all  directions,  without  the  least  attention  to  where 
it  is  going.  Heat  can  only  flow  one  way  at  any  given 
point,  but  radiation  travels  all  ways  at  once.  If  water 
were  dissociated  on  one  planet  into  its  constituent 
gases,  and  if  these  recombined  on  another  planet,  it 
would  not  be  water  which  travelled  from  one  to  the 
other,  neither  would  the  substance  obey  the  laws  of 


§  27  METALLIC  CONDUCTION  73 

motion  of  water — water  would  be  destroyed  in  one 
place,  and  reproduced  in  another  ;  just  so  is  it  with  the 
relation  between  radiation  and  heat. 

Heat,  then,  like  water,  has  but  two  direct  modes  of 
conveyance  from  place  to  place.  For  electricity  the 
same  is  true.  Electricity  can  travel  with  matter,  or 
it  can  travel  through  matter  ;  by  convection  or  by 
conduction,  but  in  no  other  known  way. 


Conduction  in  Metals 

27.  Consider,  first,  conduction.  Connect  the  poles  of 
a  voltaic  battery  to  the  two  ends  of  a  copper  wire,  and 
think  of  what  we  call  the  "  current."  It  is  a  true  flow 
of  electricity  among  the  molecules  of  the  wire.  If 
electricity  were  a  fluid,  then  it  would  be  a  transport  of 
that  fluid  ;  if  electricity  is  nothing  material,  then  a 
current  is  no  material  transfer  ;  but  it  is  certainly  a 
transfer  of  electricity,  whatever  electricity  may  be. 
Permitting  ourselves  again  the  analogy  of  a  liquid,  we 
can  picture  it  flowing  through,  or  among,  the  mole- 
cules of  the  metal.  Does  it  flow  through  or  between 
them  ?  Or  does  it  get  handed  on  from  one  to  the 
next  continually  ?  We  do  not  quite  know  ;  but  the 
last  supposition  is  often  believed  to  most  nearly  repre- 
sent the  probable  truth.  The  flow  may  be  thought  of 
as  a  perpetual  attempt  to  set  up  a  strain  like  that  in  a 


74  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

dielectric,  combined  with  an  equally  perpetual  breaking 
down  of  every  trace  of  that  strain.  If  the  atoms  be 
conceived  as  little  conductors  vibrating  about  and 
knocking  each  other,  so  as  to  %be  easily  and  com- 
pletely able  to  pass  on  any  electric  charge  they  may 
possess,  then,  through  a  medium  so  constituted,  electric 
conduction  could  go  on  much  as  it  does  go  on  in  a 
metal.  Each  atom  would  receive  a  charge  from  those 
behind  it,  and  hand  it  on  to  those  in  front  of  it ;  and  thus 
might  electricity  get  conveyed  along  the  wire.  Do  not, 
however,  accept  this  picture  as  anything  better  than 
a  possible  mode  of  reducing  conduction  to  a  kind 
of  electrostatics — an  interchange  of  electric  charges 
among  a  series  of  conductors.  If  such  a  series  of 
vibrating  and  colliding  particles  existed,  then  certainly 
a  charge  given  to  any  point  would  rapidly  distribute 
itself  over  the  whole,  and  the  potential  would  quickly 
become  uniform  ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the 
actual  process  of  conduction  is  anything  like  this. 
Certainly  it  is  not  the  simplest  mode  of  picturing  it 
for  ordinary  purposes.  The  easiest  and  crudest  idea 
is  to  liken  a  wire  conveying  electricity  to  a  pipe  full 
of  marbles  or  sand  conveying  water  ;  and  for  many 
purposes,  though  not  for  all,  this  crude  idea  suffices. 

Leaving  the  actual  mode  of  conveyance  as  un- 
known, let  us  review  how  much  is  certainly  known 
of  the  process  called  conduction  in  homogeneous 
metals. 


§  28  OHM'S  LAW  75 

This  much  is  certainly  known  : — 

(1)  That  the  wire  gets  heated  by  the  passage  of  a 
current. 

(2)  That  no  trace  of  a  tendency  to  reverse  discharge 
or  spring  back  exists. 

(3)  That  the  electricity  meets  with  a  certain  amount 
of  resistance  or  friction-like  obstruction. 

(4)  That  ffiis    force    of   obstruction    is   accurately 
proportional  to  the  speed  with  which  the  electricity 
travels  through  the  metal — that  is,  to  the  intensity  of 
the  current  per  unit  area. 

28.  About  this  last  fact  a  word  or  two  must  be  said. 
The  amount  of  electricity  conveyed  per  second  across 
a  unit  area  is  called  intensity  of  current ;  :  and 
experiment  proves,  what  Ohm  originally  guessed  as 
probable  from  the  analogy  of  heat  conduction,  that 
this  intensity  is  accurately  proportional  to  the  slope 
of  potential  which  causes  the  flow  ;  or,  in  other  words 
(since  action  and  reaction  are  equal  and  opposite), 
that  a  current  in  a  conductor  meets  with  an  obstruc- 
tive electromotive  force  exactly  proportional  to  itself, 
Or,  quite  briefly,  a  current  through  a  given  conductor 
is  proportional  to  the  E.M.F.  which  drives  it.  The 
particular  ratio  between  slope  of  potential  and  cor- 
responding intensity  of  current  depends  upon  the 
particular  material  of  which  the  conductor  is  composed, 

1  Often  called  "density"  of  current,  but  "intensity"  is  the  natural 
and  proper  expression  for  the  purpose. 


76  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

and  is  one  of  the  constants  of  the  material,  to  be  de- 
termined by  direct  measurement.  It  is  called  its 
"  specific  conductivity  "  or  its  "  specific  resistance  " 
according  to  the  way  it  is  regarded. 

The  law  here  stated  is  called  Ohm's  law,  and  is  one 
of  the  most  accurately  known  laws  there  are.  Never- 
theless it  is  an  empirical  relation  ;  in  other  words,  it 
has  not  yet  been  accounted  for — it  must  be  accepted  as 
an  experimental  fact.  Undoubtedly,  it  is  one  of  vast 
and  far-reaching  importance :  it  asserts  a  connection 
between  electricity  and  ordinary  matter  of  a  definite 
and  simple  kind.  Using  the  language  of  hydraulic 
analogy,  it  asserts  that  when  electricity  flows  through 
matter  the  friction  between  them  is  accurately  as  the 
first  power  of  the  velocity,  for  all  speeds. 

29.  Now,  if  we  think  of  this  opposing  electromotive 
force  as  analogous  to  friction,  it  is  very  easy  to  think 
of  heat  being  generated  by  the  passage  of  a  current, 
and  to  suppose  that  the  rate  of  heat-production  will 
be  directly  proportional  to  the  opposing  force  and 
to  the  current  driven  against  it — as,  in  fact,  Joule 
experimentally  proved  it  to  be. 

But  if  we  are  not  satisfied  with  this  vague  analogy, 
and  wish  to  penetrate  into  the  ultimate  nature  of  heat 
and  the  mode  in  which  it  can  be  generated,  then  we  can 
return  to  the  consideration  of  a  multitude  of  oscil- 
lating and  colliding  particles,  moving  with  a  certain 
average  energy  which  determines  what  we  call  the 


§  29  PRODUCTION  OF  HEAT  77 

"temperature"  of  the  body.  If  now  one  or  more  of 
these  bodies  receives  a  knock,  the  energy  of  the  blow 
is  speedily  shared  among  all  the  others,  and  they  all 
begin  to  move  rather  more  energetically  than  before  : 
the  body  which  the  assemblage  of  particles  constitutes 
is  said  to  have  "  risen  in  temperature."  This  illustrates 
the  production  of  heat  by  a  blow  or  other  mechanical 
means.  But  now,  instead  of  striking  one  of  the  balls 
give  it  an  electric  charge  ;  or,  better  still,  put  within  its 
reach  a  constant  reservoir  of  electricity  from  which  it 
can  receive  a  charge  every  time  it  strikes  it,  and  at 
the  same  time  put  within  the  reach  of  some  other  of 
the  assemblage  of  particles  another  reservoir  of  infi- 
nite capacity  which  shall  be  able  to  drain  away  all  the 
electricity  it  may  receive.  In  practice  there  is  no 
need  of  infinite  reservoirs  :  all  that  is  wanted  is  to 
connect  two  finite  reservoirs,  or  "  electrodes  "  as  one 
might  now  call  them,  with  some  constant  means  of 
propelling  electricity  from  one  to  the  other,  i.e.,  with 
the  poles  of  a  voltaic  battery  or  a  Holtz  machine. 

What  will  be  the  result  of  thus  passing  a  series  of 
electric  charges  through  the  assemblage  of  particles  ? 
Plainly  the  act  of  receiving  a  charge  and  passing  it  on 
will  tend  to  increase  the  original  motion  of  each  par- 
ticle ;  it  will  tend  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  body. 
In  this  way,  therefore,  it  is  possible  to  picture  the  mode 
in  which  an  electric  current  generates  heat. 

But  although  this  process  may  be  used  as  a  possible 


78  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

analogy,  it  cannot  be  a  true  and  complete  statement 
of  what  occurs  ;  for  it  is  essentially  the  mode  of  propa- 
gation of  sound.  Sound  travels  at  a  definite  and  known 
velocity,  being  a  mechanical  disturbance  handed  on 
from  particle  to  particle  in  the  manner  described. 
But  heat,  being  some  mode  of  motion,  must  also  be 
handed  on  after  some  analogous  fashion,  so  that  when 
heat  is  supplied  to  one  point  of  a  mass  it  spreads  or 
diffuses  through  it.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  the  con- 
duction of  heat  to  be  other  than  the  handing  on  of 
molecular  quiverings  from  one  particle  to  another,  and 
yet  it  takes  place  according  to  laws  altogether  different 
from  those  of  the  propagation  of  the  gross  disturbance 
called  sound.  The  exact  mode  of  conduction  of  heat 
is  unknown,  but,  whatever  it  is,  it  can  hardly  be 
doubted  that  the  conduction  of  electricity  through 
metals  is  not  very  unlike  it,  for  the  two  processes  obey 
the  same  laws  of  propagation  :  they  are  both  of  the 
nature  of  a  diffusion,  they  both  obey  Ohm's  law  and 
a  metal  which  conducts  heat  well  conducts  electricity 
well  also. 


Conduction  in  Liquids 

30.  Leaving  the  obscure  subject  of  conduction  in 
metals  for  the  present,  let  us  pass  to  the  consideration 
of  the  way  in  which  electricity  flows  through  liquids. 
By  "  liquids,"  in  the  present  connection,  one  more  par- 


§  3i  ELECTROLYTIC  CONDUCTION  79 

ticularly  means  definite  chemical  compounds,  such  as 
acids,  alkalies,  salt  and  water,  and  saline  solutions 
generally.  Some  liquids  there  are,  like  alcohol,  tur- 
pentine, bisulphide  of  carbon,  and  water,  which,  when 
quite  pure,  either  wholly  or  very  nearly  decline  to  con- 
duct electricity  at  all.  Such  liquids  as  these  may  be 
classed  along  with  air  and  gases  as  more  or  less  perfect  ' 
dielectrics.  'Other  liquids  there  are,  like  mercury  and 
molten  metals  generally,  which  conduct  after  pre- 
cisely the  same  fashion  as  they  do  when  solid.  These, 
therefore,  are  properly  classed  among  metallic  con- 
ductors. 

But  most  chemical  compounds,  when  liquefied 
either  by  heat  or  by  solution,  conduct  in  a  way 
peculiarly  their  own  ;  and  these  are  called  "  electro- 
lytes." 

31.  The  present  state  of  knowledge  enables  us  to 
make  the  following  assertions  with  considerable  con- 
fidence of  their  truth  : — 

(1)  Electrolytic    conduction    is    invariably    accom- 
panied by  chemical  decomposition,  and  in  fact  only 
occurs  by  means  of  it. 

(2)  The  electricity  does  not  flow  through,  but  with, 
the  atoms  of  matter,  which  travel  along  and   convey 
their  charges  something  after  the  manner  of  pith  balls 
between  two  oppositely  charged  plates. 

(3)  The  electric  charge  belonging  to  each  atom  of 
matter  is  a  simple  multiple  of  a  definite  quantity  of 


8o  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

electricity,  which  quantity  is  an  absolute  constant 
quite  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  particular  sub- 
stance to  which  the  atoms  belong. 

(4)  Positive  electricity  is  conveyed  through  a  liquid 
by  something  equivalent  to  a  procession  of  the  electro- 
positive atoms  of  the  compound,  in  the  direction  called 
the  direction  of  the  current ;  and  at  the  same  time 
negative   electricity     is     conveyed     in    the    opposite 
direction    by   a   similar   procession    of    the    electro- 
negative atoms. 

(5)  On  any  atom  reaching  an  electrode  it  may  be 
forced  to  get  rid  of  its  electric  charge,  and,  combining 
with  others  of  the  same  kind,  escape  in  the  free  state  ; 
in  which  case  visible  decomposition  results.     Or  it  may 
find  something  else  handy  with  which  to  combine — say 
on  the  electrode  or  in  the  solution  ;  and  in  that  case 
the  decomposition,  though  real,  is  masked,  and  not 
apparent. 

(6)  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  atom  may  cling  to 
its  electric  charge  with  such  tenacity  as  to  stop  the 
current :  the  opposition  force  exerted  by  these  atoms 
upon  the  current  being  called  polarization. 

(7)  No  such  opposition  force,  or  tendency  to  spring 
back,  is  experienced  in  the  interior  of  a  mass  of  fluid  : 
it  occurs  only  at  the  electrodes. 

32.  The  three  first  of  these  statements  constitute  a 
summary  of  Faraday's  laws  of  electrolysis.  These 
laws  are  of  far-reaching  importance,  and  appear  to  be 


§  32  LAWS  OF  ELECTROLYSIS  81 

accurately  true.  The  first  is  called  the  "  voltametric 
law/'  and  asserts  that  the  amount  of  chemical  action 
electrolytically  produced  in  any  given  substance  is 
exactly  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  electricity  that 
has  passed  through  it.  The  vague  phrase  "  chemical 
action  "  is  purposely  used  here  to  include  decomposi- 
tion or  recomposition  or  liberation  or  deposition  or 
dissolution,  or  any  other  effect  that  can  be  brought 
about  in  either  elements  or  compounds  by  the  pas- 
sage of  an  electric  current.  The  weight  of  substance 
acted  on  measures  the  quantity  of  electricity  which 
has  passed  ;  hence  a  decomposition  cell  can  act  as  a 
voltameter,  and  the  law  is  called  the  voltametric  law. 
Its  truth  enables  us  to  make  the  first  of  the  above 
statements  ;  which  many  qualitative  facts  concerning 
the  details  of  electrolysis  modify  into  statement  No.  2. 
The  second  of  Faraday's  laws  is  called  the  law  of 
electro-chemical  equivalence,  and  asserts  that,  if  the 
same  current  be  passed  through  a  series  of  voltameters 
for  the  same  time,  the  amount  of  chemical  action  in 
each  substance  acted  on  is  exactly  proportional  to  its 
ordinary  chemical  equivalent  ;  not  to  its  atomic 
weight  merely,  but  to  its  atomic  weight  divided  by 
what  is  called  its  valency,  or  atomicity,  or  quanti- 
valence  ;  this  being  its  real  chemical  equivalent.  Thus 
an  atom  of  oxygen  weighs  sixteen  times  as  much  as 
an  atom  of  hydrogen,  and  is  equivalent  to  two  such 
atoms  in  combining  power  ;  hence  the  law  asserts 

G 


82  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

that  8  grammes  of  oxygen  are  liberated  for  every 
gramme  of  hydrogen.  Again,  an  atom  of  silver  is  108 
times  as  heavy  as  an  atom  of  hydrogen,  and  is  equal 
to  it  in  combining  power  ;  hence  108  grammes  of 
silver  are  deposited  in  a  silver  voltameter  while  one 
gramme  of  hydrogen  is  being  liberated  by  the  same 
current  in  a  gas  voltameter.  Once  again,  an  atom  of 
gold  weighs  as  much  as  197  atoms  of  hydrogen,  and  is 
able  to  replace  three  of  them  in  combination  ;  hence 
657  grammes  of  gold  are  deposited  by  the  same 
current  in  the  same  time,  and  so  on. 

Now  this  law  plainly  means  that  the  same  number 
of  monad  atoms  is  liberated  by  the  same  quantity  of 
electricity  no  matter  what  their  nature  may  be  ;  half 
that  number  of  dyad  atoms  ;  one  third  that  number  of 
triad  atoms.  Hence,  assuming  statement  (2),  that  the 
current  flows  purely  by  convection — each  atom  con- 
veying electricity — it  follows  that  every  monad  atom 
carries  the  same  quantity,  whether  it  be  an  atom  of 
hydrogen  or  of  silver,  or  of  chlorine,  or  a  complex 
radicle  like  NO3  ;  that  each  dyad  atom  carries  twice 
as  much,  whether  it  be  an  atom  of  oxygen  or  of  zinc 
or  of  copper,  or  a  complex  dyad  radicle  like  SO4 ; 
that  each  triad  atom  carries  three  times  as  much,  and 
so  on.  And  this  is  what  is  laid  down  in  the  third  of 
the  above  statements. 

True,  it  is  possible  that  every  atom  may  have  a 
specific  charge  of  its  own  with  which  it  never  parts  ; 


§  32  NATURAL  UNIT  OF  ELECTRICITY  83 

but  about  such  nothing  is  known  ;  we  can  only  make 
experiments  on  the  charge  it  is  willing  to  part  with 
at  an  electrode,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  is 
accurately  the  same  for  all  substances  up  to  a  simple 
multiple.  And  this  quantity,  the  charge  of  one  monad 
atom,  -constitutes  the  smallest  known  portion  of 
electricity  and  is  a  real  natural  unit.  Obviously  this 
is  a  most  vital  fact.  This  unit  below  which  nothing 
is  known  has  even  been  styled  an  "  atom  "  of  electricity  ; 
and  perhaps  the  phrase  may  have  some  meaning. 
I  have  ventured  to  suggest  one  or  two  effects  which 
would  result  from  the  hypothesis  that  this  unit  quantity 
of  electricity  were  really  in  fact  an  absolute  minimum, 
and  as  indivisible  as  an  atom  of  matter.1  This  natural 
unit  of  electricity  is  exceedingly  small,  being  about 
the  hundred-thousand-millionth  part  of  the  ordinary 
electrostatic  unit  ;  or  less  than  the  hundred-trillionth 
of  a  coulomb. 

The  charge  of  each  atom  being  so  small,  its  poten- 
tial is  not  high.  Something  between  I  and  3 
volts  is  a  probable  difference  of  potential  for  two 
oppositely  charged  atoms.  But  they  are  so  near 
together  that  even  this  small  difference  of  potential 
causes  a  strong  electrostatic  attraction  or  "  chemical 
affinity  "  between  the  oppositely  charged  atoms. 

This  electrical   force   between    two   atoms    at   any 

1  See  paper  on  "  Electrolysis  "  at  Aberdeen  (Reports  of  the  British 
Association  for  1885,  p.  763). 

G   2 


84  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

distance  is  ten  thousand  million  billion  billion  times 
greater  than  their  gravitative  attraction  at  the  same 
distance.  The  force  has  an  intensity  per  unit  mass 
(and  therefore  is  able  to  produce  an  acceleration) 
nearly  a  trillion  times  greater  than  that  of  terrestrial 
gravity  near  the  earth's  surface. 

These  are  undoubtedly  the  forces  with  which 
chemists  have  to  do,  and  which  they  have  long  called 
chemical  affinity. 

33.  But   it  may  be  asked,    If  the  atoms    in   each 
molecule  cling  together  by  their  electrostatic  attrac- 
tions, and  if  there  are  an  enormous  number  of  atoms 
between  two  electrodes,  how  comes   it  that  a  feeble 
E.M.F.  can  pull  them  apart  and  effect  decomposition  ; 
moreover,  how  can  the  E.M.F.  needed  to  effect  de- 
composition   help   varying   directly  with   the    thick- 
ness of  fluid  between  the  plates  ?     It  does  not  depend 
on  anything  of  the  kind  ;  the  length  of  liquid  between 
the   electrodes   is    absolutely   immaterial.     This    fact 
proves  that  throughout  the  main  thickness  of  liquid 
no  atoms  are  torn    asunder   at   all.     Probably   they 
frequently   change  partners,    one  pair   of  atoms  not 
always  remaining   united    but    occasionally    getting 
separated   and    recombined    with    other    individuals. 
During  these  interchanges  there  must  be  moments  of 
semi-freedom  during  which  the  atoms  are  amenable 
to  the  slightest  directive  tendency,  and   it  is  probably 
these  moments  that  the  applied  E.M.F.  makes  use  of. 


§  33  POTENTIAL  DISSOCIATION  85 

The  reality  of  such  a  state  of  continual  interchange 
between  molecules  has  been  forced  upon  chemists  by 
the  facts  of  double-decomposition — such  facts  as  the 
interchange  of  atoms  between  strongly  combined  salts 
when  their  solutions  are  mixed  so  as  to  form  very 
much  weaker  compounds  ;  the  proof  that  such  com- 
pounds are  formed  being  very  clear  in  the  case  when 
they  happen  to  be  insoluble.  The  fact  that  if  a 
precipitate  is  insoluble  enough  it  is  bound  to  form, 
really  proves  that  some  small  quantity  of  the  corre- 
sponding compound  is  always  formed  in  every  case, 
whether  it  happens  to  be  insoluble  or  not. 

The  state  of  continual  interchange  results  in  a 
perfect  sensibility  to  the  migratory  power  of  extremely 
weak  forces,  so  that  even  the  faintest  trace  of  an 
electromotive  force  is  able  to  effect  the  charged 
atoms,  on  the  average  assisting  the  positive  atoms 
down  the  slope  of  potential,  and  the  negative  atoms  up 
the  slope.  The  fact  that  the  most  infinitesimal  force 
is  sufficient  to  effect  its  due  quota  of  decomposition 
has  been  proved  most  clearly  and  decisively  by  the 
experiments  of  Helmholtz. 

Sometimes  the  term  "  dissociation  "  is  used  to  signify 
this  practical  freedom  of  atoms  to  locomotion  ;  and, 
as  stated  originally  by  Prof.  Clausius,  the  idea  of 
dissociation  was  certainly  involved.  It  was  thought 
that  a  certain  percentage  of  atoms  existed  in  the 
liquid  in  an  uncombined  state,  wandering  about 


86  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

seeking  partners  ;  that  it  was  these  loose  atoms  on 
which  the  electromotive  forces  acted,  and  that  the 
procession  of  these  conveyed  the  current.  But  we  now 
see  that  the  addition  of  the  idea  of  double-decom- 
position or  interchange  of  partners  to  the  original 
hypothesis  of  Grotthus  explains  all  that  is  required 
by  the  facts,  viz.  a  virtual  or  potential  dissociation,  a 
momentary  state  of  hovering  and  indecision,  without 
the  need  for  any  continuous  and  actual  dissociation. 

A  certain  average  number  of  the  atoms  are  virtually 
free,  and  amenable  to  any  directive  force,  without 
necessarily  remaining  free  for  more  than  a  brief  though 
finite  time.  The  more  of  these  virtually  dissociated 
atoms  there  are  the  better  is  the  liquid  likely  to 
conduct.  The  process  of  conduction  is  probably 
very  much  as  Grotthus  imagined  it,  a  passing  on  of  a 
charge  through  a  chain  of  decomposing  and  recom- 
posing  molecules  ;  but  the  molecular  decomposition  is 
automatic,  i.e.  is  not  caused  but  only  directed  by  the 
applied  electrical  force.  The  result  is  as  if  a  double 
procession  of  free  charged  atoms  migrated  through 
the  liquid  between  the  electrodes,  and  it  is  often 
simplest  so  to  think  of  the  process. 

34.  I  will  now  try  and  make  the  process  of 
electrolytic  conduction  clearer  by  reverting  to  our 
mechanical  analogies  and  models. 

Looking  back  to  Figs.  5  and  6,  we"  see  illustrations 
of  metallic  conduction  and  of  dielectric  induction.  In 


§  34  ELECTROLYTIC  CONDUCTION  87 

each  case  an  applied  electromotive  force  causes  some 
movement  of  electricity  ;  but,  whereas  in  the  first  case 
it  is  a  continuous  almost  unresisted  movement  or 
steady  flow  through  or  among  the  atoms  of  matter,  in 
the  second  case  it  is  a  momentary  shift  or  displace- 
ment only,  carrying  the  atoms  of  matter  with  it,  and 
highly  resisted  in  consequence  : — resisted,  not  with  a 
mere  frictional  rub,  which  retards  but  does  not  check 
the  motion,  but  by  an  active  spring-back  force,  which 
immediately  checks  all  further  current,  produces  what 
we  call  "  insulation,"  and  ultimately,  when  the  propel- 
ling force  is  removed,  causes  a  quick  reverse  motion 
or  discharge.  But  the  model  is  plainly  an  incomplete 
one  ;  for  what  is  it  that  the  atoms  are  clinging  to  ? 
What  is  it  ought  to  take  the  place  of  the  beam  in  the 
crude  mechanical  contrivance  ?  Obviously  another 
set  of  atoms,  which  are  either  kept  still  or  urged  in  the 
opposite  direction  by  a  simultaneous  opposite  displace- 
ment of  negative  electricity  ;  as  in  Fig.  /A,  p.  46.  We 
are  to  picture  two  or  any  number  of  rows  of  beads, 
each  row  threaded  on  its  appropriate  cord  ;  the  cords 
alternately  representing  positive  and  negative  elec- 
tricity respectively,  and  being  simultaneously  displaced 
in  opposite  directions  by  any  applied  E.M.F.  The 
beads  threaded  on  any  one  cord  have,  in  a  dielectric, 
elastic  attachments  to  those  on  some  parallel  and 
oppositely  moving  cord,  and  thus  continuous  motion 
of  the  cords  in  opposite  directions  is  prevented  :  only 


88  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

a  slight  displacement  is  permitted,  followed  by  a 
spring  back  and  oscillation  after  the  fashion  already 
described. 

Very  well  ;  now  picture  the  elastic  connections  be- 
tween the  beads  all  dissolved,  and  once  more  apply  a 
force  to  each  cord,  moving  half  of  them  one  way  and  the 
alternate  half  the  other  way,  and  you  have  a  model 
illustrating  an  electrolyte  and  the  simplest  view  of 
electrolytic  conduction.  The  atoms  are  no  longer 
attached  to  each  other,  but  they  are  attached  to  the 
cord.  In  the  first  respect,  an  electrolyte  differs  from 
a  dielectric  ;  in  the  second,  it  differs  from  a  metal. 

Moreover,  electrolytic  conduction  is  perceived  to 
be  scarcely  of  the  nature  of  true  conduction :  the 
electricity  does  not  slip  through  or  among  the 
molecules,  it  goes  with  them.  The  constituents  of 
each  molecule  are  free  of  each  other,  and  while  one 
set  of  atoms  conveys  positive  electricity,  the  other 
set  carries  negative  electricity  in  the  opposite  direction  ; 
and  so  it  is  by  a  procession  of  free  atoms  that  the 
current  is  transmitted.  The  process  is  of  the  nature 
of  convection  :  the  atoms  act  as  carriers.  Free  loco- 
motion of  charged  atoms  is  essential  to  electrolysis. 

35.  In  order  to  compare  with  Figs.  5  and  6,  so  as  to 
bring  out  the  points  of  difference,  Fig.  13  is  drawn. 
The  beads  representing  one  set  of  atoms  of  matter 
are  tightly  attached  to  the  cord,  no  trace  of  slip  between 
beads  and  cord  being  permitted,  but  otherwise  they 


§35 


ELECTROLYTIC  CONDUCTION 


89 


are  free,  and  so  are  represented  as  supported  merely 
by  rings  sliding  freely  on  glass  rods.  The  only 
resistance  to  the  motion,  beside  the  slight  friction, 
is  offered  at  the  electrode,  which  is  typified  by  the 
spring-backed  knife-edge,  z.  This  is  supposed  to  be 


FIG.   13.— Crude  mechanical  analogy,   illustrating  a  few  points  in  a  circuit  partly 
electrolytic. 

able  to  release  the  beads  from  the  cord  when  they  are 
pressed  against  it  with  sufficient  force.  The  cling 
between  the  bead  and  cord  (i.e.  between  each  atom 
and  its  charge)  is  great  enough  to  cause  a  perceptible 
compression  of  the  springs,  and  accordingly  to  bring 
out  a  recoil  force  in  imitation  of  polarisation. 


90  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

The  piece  of  cord  accompanying  each  bead  on  its 
journey  (i.e.  the  length  between  it  and  the  next  bead) 
represents  the  atomic  charge,  and  is  a  perfectly  con- 
stant quantity  :  the  only  variation  permissible  in  it  is 
that  some  kinds  of  atoms  have  twice  as  much,  or  are 
twice  as  far  apart  on  their  cord,  and  these  are  called 
by  chemists  dyad  atoms  ;  another  kind  has  three  times 
as  much,  another  four,  and  so  on  ;  these  being  called 
triad,  tetrad,  &c. 

If  the  cord  be  taken  to  represent  positive  electricity 
the  beads  on  it  may  represent  atoms  of  hydrogen,  or 
other  monad  cation,  travelling  down  stream  to  the 
cathode.  Another  cord  representing  negative  electri- 
city may  be  ranged  alongside  it,  with  its  beads  twice 
as  far  apart,  to  represent  the  atoms  of  a  dyad  anion, 
like  oxygen.  If  the  cords  are  so  mechanically  con- 
nected that  they  must  move  with  equal  pace  in 
opposite  directions,  we  have  a  model  illustrating 
several  important  facts.  The  number  of  oxygen 
atoms  liberated  in  a  given  time  will  then  obviously 
be  half  the  number  of  hydrogen  atoms  set  free  in  the 
same  time,  and  will  therefore  in  the  gaseous  state 
occupy  but  half  the  volume.  Moreover,  for  any 
element  whatever,  the  number  of  atoms  liberated  in 
any  time  is  equal  to  the  number  of  atoms  of  hydrogen 
liberated  in  the  same  time,  divided  by  the  "  valency '' 
of  the  element  as  compared  with  hydrogen.  This 
law  was  discovered  by  Faraday,  and  appears  to  be 


§  36  IONIC  PROCESSIONS  91 

precisely  true  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  relative  weight  of 
every  element  is  known  with  fair  accuracy,  it  is  easy 
to  calculate  what  weight  of  substance  any  given 
current  will  deposit  or  set  free  in  an  hour,  if  we  once 
determine  it  experimentally  for  any  one  substance. 


Summary 

We  may  summarise  thus  : — 

If  we  apply  E.M.F.  to  a  metal  we  get  a  continuous 
flow,  and  the  result  is  heat. 

If  we  apply  it  to  a  dielectric  we  get  a  momentary 
flow  or  displacement,  and  the  result  is  the  potential 
energy  of  u  charge." 

If  we  apply  it  to  an  electrolyte  we  again  get  a 
continuous  flow,  and  the  result  is  chemical  decom- 
position. 

36.  There  are  a  large  number  of  important  points 
to  which  I  might  direct  your  attention  in  the  mode  by 
which  an  electric  current  is  conveyed  through  liquids, 
but  I  will  specially  select  one  for  further  emphasis, 
viz.,  that  it  is  effected  by  a  procession  of  positively 
charged  atoms  travelling  one  way,  and  a  correspond- 
ing procession  of  negatively  charged  atoms  the 
other  way. 

Whatever  we  understand  by  a  positive  charge  and 
a  negative  charge,  it  is  certain  that  the  atoms  of,  say, 


92  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

a  water  molecule,  are  charged,  the  hydrogen  positively, 
the  oxygen  negatively ;  and  it  is  almost  certain  that 
they  hang  together  by  reason  of  the  attraction  between 
their  opposite  charges.  It  is  also  certain  that  when 
an  electromotive  force — i.e.  any  force  capable  of 
propelling  electricity — is  brought  to  bear  on  the 
liquid,  the  hydrogen  atoms  travel  on  the  whole  in  one 
direction,  viz.,  down  hill,  and  the  oxygen  atoms  travel 
in  the  other  direction,  viz.,  up  hill  ;  using  the  idea  of 
level  as  our  analogue  for  electric  potential  in  this  case. 
The  atoms  may  be  said  to  be  driven  along  by  their 
electric  charges  just  as  charged  pith  balls  would  be 
driven  along  ;  and  they  thus  act  as  conveyers  of 
electricity,  which  otherwise  would  be  unable  to  move 
through  the  liquid. 

Each  of  this  pair  of  opposite  processions  goes  on 
until  it  meets  with  some  discontinuity — either  some 
change  of  liquid,  or  some  solid  conductor.  At  a 
change  of  liquid  another  set  of  atoms  continues 
the  convection,  and  nothing  very  particular  need  be 
noticed  at  the  junction  ;  but  at  a  solid  conductor  the 
stream  of  atoms  must  stop  :  you  cannot  have  loco- 
motion of  the  atoms  of  a  solid.  The  obstruction  so 
produced  may  stop  the  procession,  and  therefore  the 
current,  altogether ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  force 
driving  the  charges  forward  may  be  so  great  as  to 
wrench  them  free,  to  give  the  charges  up  to  the  elec- 
trode, which  conveys  it  away  by  common  conduction, 


§  36  SPEED  OF  THE  IONS  93 

and  to  crowd  the  atoms  together  in  such  a  way  that 
they  are  glad  to  combine  with  each  other  and 
escape. 

Now  notice  the  fact  of  the  two  opposite  processions. 
It  is  impossible  to  get  one  kind  of  ion  liberated  at 
one  electrode  without  having  a  precisely  equivalent 
quantity  of  the  opposite  ion  liberated  or  deposited 
or  otherwise  appearing  at  the  other  electrode  ;  and 
this  fact  may  be  expressed  by  saying  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  have  a  procession  of  positive  atoms 
through  a  liquid  without  a  corresponding  procession 
of  negative  ones.  In  other  words,  an  electric  current 
in  a  liquid  necessarily  consists  of  a  flow  of  positive 
•electricity  in  one  direction,  combined  with  a  flow  of 
negative  electricity  in  the  opposite  direction.  And  if 
this  is  thus  proved  to  occur  in  a  liquid,  why  should  it 
not  occur  everywhere  ?  It  is  at  least  well  to  bear  the 
possibility  in  mind. 

Another  case  is  known  where  an  electric  current 
certainly  consists  of  two  opposite  streams  of  electricity, 
viz.,  the  case  of  the  Holtz  machine.  While  the 
machine  is  being  turned,  with  its  terminals  somehow 
connected,  the  glass  plate  acts  as  a  carrier  conveying 
a  charge  from  one  collecting  comb  to  the  other  at 
every  half  revolution  ;  but,  whereas  it  carries  positive 
electricity  for  one  half  of  its  rotation,  it  carries  nega- 
tive for  the  other  half.  The  top  of  the  Holtz  disk  is 
always,  say,  positively  charged,  and  is  travelling 


94  CONDUCTION  CHAP,  iv 

forward,  while  the  bottom  half,  which  is  travelling 
backward  at  an  equal  rate,  is  negatively  charged. 

In  the  Holtz  case  the  speeds  are  necessarily  equal, 
but  the  charges  are  not.  In  the  electrolytic  case  the 
charges  are  necessarily  equal,  but  the  speeds  are  not. 
Each  atom  has  its  own  rate  of  motion  in  a  given  liquid, 
independently  of  what  it  may  happen  to  have  been 
combined  with.  This  is  a  law  discovered  by  Kohl- 
rausch.  Hydrogen  travels  faster  than  any  other  kind 
of  atom  ;  and  on  the  sum  of  the  speeds  of  the  two 
opposite  atoms  in  a  compound  the  conductivity  of  the 
liquid  depends.  Acids,  therefore,  in  general  conduct 
better  than  their  salts. 

37.  The  following  table  gives  the  rates  at  which 
atoms  of  various  kinds  can  make  their  way  through 
nearly  pure  water,  when  urged  by  a  slope  of  potential 
of  I  volt  per  linear  centimetre l : — 

H  .         .  ro8  centimetre  per  hour. 

K     .  0-205 

Na  .  '.         .  0*126 

Li    .  .         .  0*094 

Ag  .  .         .  0-166 

Cl    .  .  0-213 

I      ...  0*216 

No3  .  0-174 

1  Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  1886,  p.  393. 


CHAPTER  V 

CURRENT   PHENOMENA 

Electrical  Inertia 

38.  RETURNING  now  to  the  general  case  of  conduc- 
tion, without  regard  to  the  special  manner  of  it,  we 
must  notice  that,  if  a  current  of  electricity  were  any- 
thing of  the  nature  of  a  material  flow,  there  would 
probably  be  a  certain  amount  of  inertia  connected 
with  it,  so  that  to  start  a  current  with  a  finite  force 
would  take  a  little  time  ;  and  the  stoppage  of  a 
current  would  also  have  either  to  be  gradual  or  else 
violent.  It  is  well  known  that  if  water  is  stagnant  in 
a  pipe  it  cannot  be  quite  suddenly  set  in  motion  ; 
and  again,  if  it  be  in  motion,  it  can  only  be  sud- 
denly stopped  by  the  exercise  of  very  consider- 
able force,  which  jars  and  sometimes  bursts  the 
pipe.  The  impetus  of  running  water  is  utilised  in 
the  water-ram.  It  must  naturally  occur,  therefore,  to 
ask  whether  any  analogous  phenomena  are  experi- 


96  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAI>.  v 

enced  with  electricity  ;  and  the  answer  is  that  analo- 
gous phenomena  are  very  conspicuous.  A  current 
does  not  start  instantaneously  :  it  takes  a  certain 
time — though  usually  a  very  short  time — to  rise  to  its 
full  strength  ;  and  when  started  it  tends  to  persist,  so 
that  if  its  circuit  be  suddenly  broken,  it  refuses  to 
stop  quite  suddenly,  and  bursts  through  the  intro- 
duced insulating  partition  with  violence  and  heat.  It 
is  this  ram  or  impetus  of  the  electric  current  which 
causes  the  spark  seen  on  breaking  a  circuit  ;  and  the 
more  sudden  the  breakage  the  more  violent  is  the 
spark  apt  to  be. 

The  two  effects — the  delay  at  making  circuit,  and 
the  momentum  at  breaking  circuit — used  to  be  called 
"extra-current"  effects,  but  they  are  now  more 
commonly  spoken  of  as  manifestations  of  "  self- 
induction." 

We  shall  understand  them  better  directly ;  mean- 
while they  appear  to  be  direct  consequences  of  the 
inertia  of  electricity ;  and  certainly  if  electricity 
were  a  fluid  possessing  inertia  it  would  behave  to  a 
superficial  observer  just  in  this  way. 

39.  But  if  an  electric  current  really  possessed  inertia, 
as  a  stream  of  water  does,  it  would  exhibit  itself  not 
only  by  these  effects  but  also  mechanically.  A  con- 
ducting coil  delicately  suspended  might  experience  a 
rotary  kick  every  time  a  current  was  started  or  stopped 
in  it ;  and  a  coil  in  which  a  steady  current  is  main- 


§  39  ELECTRICAL  MOMENTUM  97 

tained  should  behave  like  a  top  or  gyrostat,  and 
resist  any  force  tending  to  deflect  its  plane. 

Clerk  Maxwell  has  carefully  looked  for  this  latter 
form  of  momentum  effect,  and  found  none.  He  took 
a  bar  electro-magnet,  mounted  it  on  gimbals  so  that  it 
was  free  to  rotate  if  it  wished,  and  then  spun  it  rapidly 
about  an  axis  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  axis.  If 
there  had  been  the  slightest  gyrostatic  action,  the 
magnet  would  have  rotated  about  the  third  perpen- 
dicular axis.  But  it  did  nothing  of  the  kind.  One  may 
say,  in  fact,  that  nothing  like  momentum  has  yet  been 
observed  in  an  electric  current  by  any  mechanical  mode 
of  examination.  A  coil  or  whirl  of  electricity  does  not 
behave  in  the  least  like  a  top  (§  185). 

I  have  looked  for  the  effect  in  another  way  sug- 
gested by  Maxwell,  viz.,  by  starting  and  stopping  a 
current  in  a  freely  suspended  coil  [also  in  a  suspended 
electrolytic  tube,1  and  in  a  small  mica  condenser],  and 
watching  for  recoil  kicks  at  the  instants  of  varying 
current  strength.  Terrestrial  magnetism  and  the 
reaction  between  fixed  and  movable  parts  of  the 
circuit  cause  spurious  effects  ;  but  when  these  are 
reduced  to  a  minimum,  by  the  thick  soft-iron  case  of 
a  "  marine  galvanometer "  and  other  suitable  pre- 
cautions, no  certain  residual  effect  due  to  change  of 
momentum  could  be  perceived.  The  experiments 

1  For  discussion  of  a  probable  electrolytic  momentum,  by  reason  of  the 
different  mass  of  the  opposite  ions,  see  Lodge,  Phil.  Mag.,  Nov.  1876. 

H 


98  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

were  by  no  means  final,  but  they  were  sufficient  to 
show  that  to  detect  any  possibly  existent  effect  of  the 
kind  considerable  refinement  must  be  employed. 

Suppose,  however,  that  highly  refined  experiments 
directed  to  the  same  object  still  gave  a  negative 
result,  would  that  prove  that  a  current  has  no 
momentum  ?  By  no  means  necessarily  so.  It  might 
be  taken  as  suggesting  that  an  electric  current  con- 
sists really  of  two  equal  flows  in  contrary  directions, 
so  that  mechanically  they  neutralize  one  another 
completely,  while  electrically — i.e.  in  the  phenomena 
of  self-induction  or  extra-current — they  add  their 
effects  (§  89).  Or  it  might  mean  merely  that  the 
momentum  was  too  minute  to  be  so  observed.  Or, 
again,  the  whole  thing — the  appearance  of  inertia  in 
some  experiments  and  the  absence  of  it  in  others — 
may  have  to  be  explained  in  some  altogether  less 
simple  manner,  to  which  we  will  proceed  to  lead  up. 


Condition  of  the  Medium  near  a  Current. 

40.  So  far  we  have  considered  the  flow  of  electricity 
as  a  phenomenon  occurring  solely  inside  conductors  ; 
just  as  a  flow  of  water  through  pipes  is  a  phenomenon 
occurring  solely  inside  them.  But  a  number  of  re- 
markable facts  are  known  which  completely  negative 
this  view  of  the  matter.  Something  is  no  doubt  pass- 


§  40  EFFECTS  NEAR  A  CURRENT  99 

ing  along  conductors  when  a  current  flows,  but  the 
disturbance  is  not  confined  to  the  conductor  ;  on  the 
contrary,  it  spreads  more  or  less  throughout  surround- 
ing space. 

The  facts  which  prove  this  have  necessarily  no 
hydraulic  analogue,  but  must  be  treated  suorum 
generum,  and  they  are  as  follows  : — 

(1)  A  compass   needle  anywhere  near  an  electric 
current    is    permanently   deflected    so    long    as    the 
current  lasts. 

(2)  Two   electric    currents    attract  or  repel    one 
another,    according    as    they   are    in    the    same  or 
opposite  directions. 

(3)  A  circuit  in  which  a  current  is  flowing  tends  to 
enlarge   itself  so   as   to  inclose  the  greatest  possible 
area. 

(4)  A  circuit  conveying  a  current  in   a  magnetic 
field  tends  either  to  enlarge  or  to  shrink  or  to   turn 
part  way  round  according  to  the  aspect  it  presents  to 
the  field. 

(5)  Conductors  in  the  neighbourhood  of  an  electric 
circuit  experience   momentary   electric   disturbances 
every  time  a  current  in   it  is  started  or  stopped   or 
varied  in  strength. 

(6)  The   same  thing  happens  even  with  a  circuit 
conveying  a  steady  current  if  the  distance  between  it 
and  a  conductor  is  made  to  vary. 

(7)  The    inertia-like   effects    of    self-induction,    or 

H  2 


ioo  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

extra-currents,  can  be  almost  abolished  in  a  covered 
wire  by  doubling  it  closely  on  itself,  or  better  by 
laying  a  direct  and  return  ribbon  face  to  face ; 
whereas  they  may  be  intensified  by  making  the 
circuit  inclose  a  large  area,  more  by  coiling  it  up 
tightly  into  a  close  coil,  and  still  more  by  putting  a 
piece  of  iron  inside  the  coil  so  formed. 

Nothing  like  any  of  these  effects  is  observable  with 
currents  of  water  ;  and  they  prove  that  the  pheno- 
mena connected  with  the  current,  so  far  from  being 
confined  to  the  wire,  spread  out  into  space  and  affect 
bodies  at  a  considerable  distance. 

41.  Nearly  all  this  class  of  phenomena  were  dis- 
covered by  Ampere  and  by  Faraday,  and  were  called 
by  the  latter  "  current-induction."  According  to  his 
view,  the  dielectric  medium  round  a  conducting  circuit 
is  strained,  and  subject  to  stresses,  just  as  is  the  same 
medium  round  an  electrically  charged  body.  The 
one  is  called  an  electrostatic  strain,  the  other  an 
electro-magnetic  or  electro-kinetic  strain. 

But  whereas  electrostatic  phenomena  occur  solely 
in  the  medium — conductors  being  mere  breaks  in  it, 
interrupters  of  its  continuity,  at  whose  surface  charge- 
effects  occur,  but  whose  substance  is  completely 
screened  from  disturbance, — that  is  not  the  case  with 
electro-kinetic  phenomena.  It  would  be  just  as 
erroneous  to  conceive  electrorkinetic  phenomena  as 
occurring  solely  in  the  insulating  medium  as  it  would 


§  4i  CURRENT  INERTIA  101 

be  to  think  of  them  as  occurring  solely  in  the  conduct- 
ing wires.  The  fact  is,  they  occur  in  both — not  only 
at  the  surface  of  the  wires,  like  electrostatic  effects, 
but  all  through  their  substance.  This  is  proved  by  the 
fact  that  conductivity  increases  in  simple  proportion 
with  sectional  area  ;  it  is  also  proved  by  every  part  of 
a  conductor  getting  hot ;  and  it  is  further  proved  in 
the  case  of  liquids  by  their  decomposition. 

But  the  equally  manifest  facts  of  current  attraction 
and  current  induction  prove  that  the  effect  of  the 
current  is  felt  throughout  the  surrounding  medium  as 
well,  and  that  its  intensity  depends  on  the  nature  of 
that  medium  ;  we  are  thus  wholly  prevented  from 
ascribing  the  phenomenon  of  self-induction  or  extra- 
current  to  simple  and  straightforward  inertia  of 
electricity  in  a  wire  like  that  of  water  in  a  pipe. 

We  are  brought  face  to  face  with  another  suggestion 
to  account  for  these  effects,  viz.  this :  Since  the 
molecules  of  a  dielectric  are  inseparably  connected 
with  electricity,  and  move  with  it,  it  is  possible  that 
electricity  itself  has  no  inertia  at  all,  but  that  the 
inertia  of  the  atoms  of  the  displaced  dielectric  confer 
upon  it  the  appearance  of  inertia.  Certainly  they  do 
sometimes  confer  upon  it  this  appearance,  as  we  see 
in  the  oscillatory  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar.  For  a 
displaced  thing  to  overshoot  its  mean  position  and 
oscillate  till  it  has  expended  all  its  energy  is  a  pro- 
ceeding eminently  characteristic  of  inertia  ;  and  so, 


102  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

perhaps,  the   phenomena  of   self- induction   may   be 
explicable  (§  98). 

Further  consideration  of  this  difficult  part  of  the 
subject  is,  however,  best  postponed  to  Part  III. 
(§§  48  and  88). 


Energy  of  the  Current. 

42.  I  have  now  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
whole  region  surrounding  a  circuit  is  a  field  of  force 
in  which  many  of  the  most  important  properties  of  the 
current  (the  magnetic,  to  wit)  manifest  themselves. 
But  directly  we  begin  thus  to  attend  to  the  whole 
space,  and  not  only  to  the  wires  and  battery,  a  very 
curious  question  arises.  Are  we  to  regard  the  current 
in  a  conductor  as  propelled  by  some  sort  of  end-thrust, 
like  water  or  air  driven  through  a  pipe  by  a  piston  or 
a  fan,  or  are  we  to  think  of  it  as  propelled  by  side 
forces,  a  sort  of  lateral  drag,  like  water  driven  along  a 
trough  by  a  blast  of  air  or  by  the  vanes  of  paddle- 
wheels  dipping  into  it  ?  Or,  again,  referring  to  the 
cord  models,  'Figs.  5,  6,  and  13,  were  we  right  in 
picturing  the  driving  force  of  the  battery  as  located 
and  applied  where  shown  in  the  diagrams,  or  ought 
we  to  have  schemed  some  method  for  communicating 
the  power  of  the  battery  by  means  of  belts  or  other 
mechanism  to  a  great  number  of  points  of  the  circuit  ? 


§  42  FLOW  OF  ENERGY  103 

Is  a  propelling  force  applied  to  electricity  at  one 
point,  or  is  it  transmitted  though  the  dielectric  to 
every  part  of  the  boundary  of  the  conducting  circuit  ? 

Prof.  Poynting  has  shown  that,  on  the  principles 
developed  by  Maxwell,  the  latter  of  these  alternatives, 
though  apparently  the  more  complicated,  is  the  true 
one  ;  and  he  has  calculated  the  actual  paths  by  which 
the  energy  is  transmitted  from  the  battery  to  the 
various  points  of  a  circuit,  for  certain  cases. 

We  must  learn,  then,  to  distinguish  between  the 
flow  of  electricity  and  the  flow  of  electric  energy ;  they 
do  not  occur  along  the  same  paths.  Hydraulic  ana- 
logies, at  least  hydraulic  analogies  of  a  simple  kind, 
break  down  here.  When  hydraulic  power  or  steam 
power  is  conveyed  along  pipes,  the  fluid  and  its 
energy  travel  together.  WTork  is  done  at  one  end  of 
the  tube  in  forcing  in  more  water,  and  this  is  pro- 
pagated along  the  tube  and  reappears  at  the  distant 
end  as  the  work  of  the  piston.  But  in  electricity  it  is 
not  so.  Electric  energy  is  not  to  be  regarded  as 
pumped  in  at  one  end  of  a  conducting  wire,  and  as 
exuding  in  equal  quantities  at  the  other.  The  elec- 
tricity does  indeed  travel  thus — whatever  the  travel  of 
electricity  may  ultimately  be  found  to  mean, — but  the 
energy  does  not.  The  battery  emits  its  energy,  not 
to  the  wire  direct,  but  to  the  surrounding  medium  ; 
the  surrounding  medium  is  disturbed  and  strained, 
and  propagates  the  strain  on  from  point  to  point  till 


104  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP. 

it  reaches  the  wire  and  is  dissipated.  This,  Prof. 
Poynting  would  say,  is  the  function  of  the  wire :  it  is 
to  dissipate  the  energy  crowding  into  it  from  the 
medium,  which  else  would  take  up  a  static  state  of 
strain  and  cease  to  transmit  any  more.  It  is  by  the 
continuous  dissipation  of  the  medium's  energy  into 
heat  that  continuous  propagation  of  electricity  is 
rendered  possible  (§  107). 

The  energy  of  a  dynamo,  for  instance,  does  not 
travel  to  a  distant  motor  through  the  wires,  but 
through  the  air.  The  energy  of  an  Atlantic  cable 
battery  does  not  travel  to  America  through  the  wire 
strands,  but  through  the  insulating  sheath.  This  is  a 
singular  and  apparently  paradoxical  view,  yet  it  is 
well  founded. 

Think  of  a  tram-car  drawn  by  an  underground 
rope,  like  those  in  the  streets  of  Chicago  or  Highgate 
Hill.  A  contact  piece  of  iron  protrudes  from  the 
bottom  of  the  car  and  grips  the  moving  rope,  which  is 
thus  enabled  to  propel  the  car.  How  does  the  energy 
of  the  distant  stationary  engine  reach  the  car  ?  Via 
the  rope  and  the  iron  connector,  undoubtedly.  They 
both  have  to  be  strong,  and  are  liable  to  be  broken 
by  the  transmitted  stress. 

Next,  think  of  an  electric  tram-car  driven  by  means 
of  a  current  taken  up  from  an  underground  conductor, 
as  in  several  electric  railways.  A  contact  piece  of 
wire  rope  protrudes  from  the  bottom  of  the  car  and 


§42  TRANSFER  OF  ENERGY  105 

drags  a  little  truck  or  other  sliding  contact  piece 
along  the  conductor,  which  is  thus  enabled  to  supply 
electricity  to  the  electro-magnetic  motor  geared  to 
the  wheels.  How  does  the  energy  of  the  distant 
dynamo  reach  the  car  in  this  case  ?  Not  via  the  wire 
connector ;  not  even  via  the  underground  conductor. 
There  is  no  strain  on  either.  It  travels  from  the 
distant  dynamo  through  the  general  insulating 
medium  between  cable  and  earth,  some  little  enters 
the  conductor  and  is  dissipated,  but  the  great  bulk 
flows  on  and  converges  upon  the  motor  in  the  car, 
which  is  thus  propelled.  All  the  energy  of  the  con- 
ducting wire  is  dissipated  and  lost  as  heat :  it  is  the 
energy  of  the  insulating  medium  which  is  really 
transmitted  and  utilized. 

When  the  attempt  is  made  to  transmit  too  much 
energy  by  a  wire  rope,  the  rope  is  liable  to  snap : 
showing  what  was  the  medium  of  transmission.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  the  attempt  is  made  to  transmit 
too  much  energy  by  an  electric  cable,  it  is  not  the 
copper  wire  that  gives  way,  but  the  insulation  which 
breaks  down.  It  is  the  gutta-percha  which  is  trans- 
mitting the  energy,  and  so  it  is  the  gutta-percha 
which  is  liable  to  suffer  from  over  stress.  True  the 
wire  might  be  melted  by  having  to  dissipate  too 
much  energy,  just  as  the  bearings  of  a  rapidly 
travelling  wire  rope  might  be  made  red  hot  if  in- 
sufficiently lubricated  ;  but  the  energy  thus  converted 


io6  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

into  heat  is  manifestly  not  transmitted  :  it  is  simply 
being  wasted  on  the  way. 

The  paths  by  which  energy  travels  in  ordinary 
machinery  are  worth  attention.  In  belting,  energy 
travels  with  the  moving  matter  via  the  taut  half  of 
the  belt ;  in  shafts,  it  travels  along  the  axis  of 
rotation,  not  in  the  direction  of  the  moving  matter  ; 
in  mill-gearing  or  cog  wheels,  it  travels  neither  axially 
nor  tangentially  but  approximately  radially,  the  exact 
paths  being  studied  in  treatises  on  the  theory  of 
machinery  (such  as  that  of  Reuleaux). 

The  manner  in  which  the  transmission  of  electric 
energy  goes  on  we  will  attend  to  further  in  Part  III. 
(§  105  et  seq.). 


Phenomena  Peculiar  to  a   Starting,  or   Stopping,    or 
Varying  Current. 

43.  There  is  a  remarkable  fact  concerning  electric 
currents  of  varying  strength,  which  has  been  lately 
brought  into  prominence  by  the  experimental  skill 
of  Prof.  Hughes,  viz.,  that  a  current  does  not  start  or 
stop  equally  and  simultaneously  at  all  points  in  the 
section  of  a  conductor,  but  starts  at  the  outside  first. 
This  fact  is  naturally  more  noticeable  with  thick  wires 
than  with  thin,  and  it  is  especially  marked  with  iron 
wires,  for  reasons  which  in  Part  III.  will  become 


§  44  PROPULSION  OF  CURRENT  107 

apparent ;  but  the  general  cause  of  it  in  ordinary 
copper  wires  can  very  easily  be  perceived  in  the  light 
of  the  views  of  Prof.  Poynting  just  mentioned. 

For,  remember  that  a  current  in  a  wire  is  not 
pushed  along  by  a  force  applied  at  its  end,  so  as  to  be 
driven  over  obstacles  by  its  own  momentum  combined 
with  a  vis  a  tergo ;  but  it  is  urged  along  at  every  point 
of  its  course  by  a  force  just  sufficient  to  make  it  over- 
come the  resistance  there,  and  no  more,  the  force 
being  applied  to  it  through  the  medium  of  the  di- 
electric in  which  the  wire  is  immersed.  A  lateral  force 
it  is  which  propels  the  electricity  ;  and  it  naturally 
acts  first  on  the  outer  layers  of  the  wire  or  rod,  only 
acting  on  the  interior  portions  through  the  medium 
of  the  outside  (§  102). 

44,  To  illustrate  this  matter  further,  rotate  a 
common  tumbler  of  liquid  steadily  for  some  time  and 
watch  the  liquid  ;  dusting  powder  perhaps  over  it  to 
make  it  more  visible.  You  will  see  first  the  outer 
layer  begin  to  participate  in  the  motion,  and  then  the 
next,  and  then  the  next,  and  so  on,  until  at  length  the 
whole  is  in  rotation.  Stop  the  tumbler,  and  the  liquid 
also  begins  gradually  to  stop  by  a  converse  process : 
the  outside  stopping  first,  and  then  gradually  the 
central  portions. 

If  the  liquid  sticks  together  pretty  well,  like  treacle, 
the  motion  spreads  very  rapidly  :  this  corresponds  to 
a  poor  conductor.  If  the  liquid  be  very  mobile,  the 


io8  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

propagation  of  motion  inward  is  slow :  this  corre- 
sponds to  a  very  good  conductor.  If  the  liquid 
were  perfectly  non-viscous,  it  would  correspond  to  a 
perfect  conductor,  and  no  motion  would  ever  be  com- 
municated to  it  deeper  than  its  extreme  outer  skin. 

Think  now  of  an  endless  tube  full  of  water,  say 
the  hollow  circumference  of  a  wheel,  or  the  rim  of 
a  top,  and  spin  it :  the  liquid  is  soon  set  in  rotation, 
especially  if  the  tube  be  narrow  or  the  liquid  viscous  ; 
but  it  is  set  in  motion  by  a  lateral  not  an  end  force, 
and  its  outer  layers  start  first. 

Just  so  it  is  with  a  current  starting  in  a  metal  wire. 

If  the  wire  be  fine,  or  its  substance  badly  conduct- 
ing, it  all  starts  nearly  together  ;  but  if  it  be  made 
pretty  thick,  and  of  well-conducting  substance,  its 
outer  layers  may  start  appreciably  sooner  than  the  in- 
terior. And  if  it  were  infinitely  conducting,  no  more 
than  the  outer  skin  would  ever  start  at  all  (see  Chap. 
X.  and  §  103). 

In  actual  practice  the  time  taken  for  all  the 
electricity  in  an  ordinary  wire  to  get  into  motion  is 
excessively  short — something  less  than  the  thousandth 
of  a  second — so  that  the  only  way  to  notice  the 
effect  is  to  start  and  reverse  the  current  many  times 
in  succession. 

45.  If  the  hollow-rimmed  wheel  above  spoken  of 
were  made  to  oscillate  rapidly,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  only 
the  outer  layers  of  water  in  it  would  be  moved  to  and 


§  45  ADVANTAGE  OF  SURFACE  109 

fro  ;  the  innermost  water  would  remain  stationary  ; 
and  accordingly  it  would  appear  as  if  the  tube  con- 
tained much  less  water  than  it  really  does.  The  virtual 
bore  of  the  pipe  would,  in  fact,  for  many  purposes  be 
diminished.  So  is  it  also  with  electricity  ;  the  sectional 
area  of  a  wire  to  a  rapidly  alternating  current  is 
virtually  lessened  so  far  as  its  conducting  power  is 
concerned  ;  and  accordingly  its  apparent  resistance 
is  higher  for  alternating  than  for  steady  currents. 
The  effect  is,  however,  too  small  to  notice  in  practice 
except  with  thick  wires  and  very  rapid  alternations. 

Remember  that  a  propelling  force  acts  on  electricity 
at  the  boundary  between  the  dielectric  and  the  con- 
ductor ;  hence  the  more  extensive  this  boundary  is 
the  more  readily  and  quickly  is  the  electricity  got  into 
motion  ;  and  the  conductor  in  that  case  need  not  have 
an  inert  central  portion  too  distant  from  the  propelling 
dielectric.  In  other  words,  by  splitting  up  the  con- 
ductor into  a  bundle  of  insulated  wires,  thus  affording 
the  dielectric  access  to  a  considerable  surface  of  con- 
ductor, the  force  is  applied  much  more  thoroughly, 
and  so  the  throttling  effect  spoken  of  is  greatly 
lessened.  The  same  thing  is  achieved  by  rolling 
out  the  conducting  rod  into  a  flat  thin  bar.  Making 
the  conductor  hollow  instead  of  solid  offers  no  par- 
ticular advantage,  beyond  the  gain  of  surface  per 
given  weight,  because  no  energy  travels  via  the 
hollow  space,  it  still  arrives  only  from  the  outside  ; 


no  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

unless,  indeed,  the  return  part  of  the  circuit  is  taken 
along  the  axis  of  the  hollow  like  a  telegraph  cable. 
In  this  last  arrangement  all  the  energy  travels  via 
the  dielectric  between  the  two  conductors,  and  none 
travels  outside  at  all.  It  will  be  perceived  therefore 
that,  as  in  static  electricity,  the  term  "  outside  "  must 
be  used  with  circumspection  :  it  really  means  that 
side  of  a  conductor  which  faces  the  opposite  conductor 
across  a  certain  thickness  of  dielectric. 

46.  We  learn  from  this  that,  whereas  in  the  case 
of  steady  currents  the  sectional  area  and  material  of 
a  conductor  are  all  that  need  be  attended  to,  the  case 
is  different  when  one  has  to  deal  with  rapidly  alternat- 
ing currents,  such  as  occur  in  a  telephone,  or,  again, 
such  as  are   apt  to  occur  in   a  Leyden-jar  discharge 
(see  Part  I.,  p.  46),  or  in  lightning. 

In  all  these  cases  it  is  well  to  make  the  conductor 
expose  considerable  surface  to  the  propelling  medium 
— the  dielectric — else  will  great  portions  of  it  be 
useless. 

Hence,  so  far  as  electric  facts  are  concerned,  a 
lightning  conductor  should  certainly  not  be  a  round 
rod,  but  a  flat  strip  or  a  strand  of  wires,  with  the 
strands  as  well  separated  as  convenient.  Consider- 
ations of  durability  and  chemical  deterioration  may 
modify  the  application  of  this  statement  to  practice. 

47.  I  might  go  on  to  say  here  that   iron    makes  an 
enormously  worse  conductor  than  copper   for   rapidly 


§47  THROTTLING  OF  WIRES  in 

alternating  currents.  So  it  does  for  currents  which 
alternate  with  moderate  rapidity — a  few  hundred  or 
thousand  a  second — like  those  from  a  dynamo  or  a 
telephone  ;  and  so  it  does  always  as  far  as  true  con- 
ductivity is  concerned,  the  throttling  effect  is  always 
much  more  marked  in  iron  than  in  copper ;  but, 
singularly  enough,  when  the  rapidity  of  oscillation  is 
immensely  high,  as  it  is  in  Leyden-jar  discharges  and 
lightning,  iron  acts  just  as  well  as  copper  does,  because 
the  current  keeps  to  the  extreme  outer  layer  of  the 
conductor  in  either  case  ;  and  though  the  conducting 
layer  is  decidedly  thinner  in  iron  than  it  is  in  copper, 
yet  the  total  obstruction  due  to  other  causes  is  so 
enormous  that  this  extra  throttling  is  unimportant, 
and  practically  the  material  matters  very  little. 


The  Question  of  Electrical  Momentum  again. 

48.  We  are  now  able  to  return  to  the  important 
question  whether  an  electric  current  has  any  mo- 
mentum or  not,  as  it  would  have  if  it  were  a  flow  of 
material  liquid.  Referring  to  Part  I.,  §  7,  a  hint  will 
be  found  that  the  laws  of  flow  of  a  current  in  con- 
ductors— the  shape  of  the  stream-lines,  in  fact — are 
such  as  indicate  no  inertia,  or  else  no  friction.  Now 
Ohm's  law  shows  that  at  any  rate  friction  is  not  ab- 
sent from  a  current  flowing  throufift  a.  rnefa.1  ;  hence 


112 


CURRENT  PHENOMENA 


CHAP.  V 


it  would   appear  at  first  sight  as  if  inertia  must  be 
absent. 

The  stream-lines  bear  upon  the  question  in  the 
following  kind  of  way.  If  an  obstacle  is  interposed 
in  the  path  of  a  current  of  water,  the  motion  of  the 
water  is  unsymmetrical  before  and  behind  the  obstacle. 


FIG.  14. — Stream-lines  of  water  flowing  through  a  pipe  with  an  obstruction  in  it. 

The  stream-lines  spread  out  as  the  water  reaches  the 
obstacle,  and  then  curl  round  it,  leaving  a  space  full 
of  eddies  in  its  wake  (Fig.  14). 

But  if  one  puts  an  obstacle  in  the  path  of  an  electric 
current — say  by  cutting  a  slit  in  the  conducting  strip 
of  tinfoil — the  stream-lines  on  either  side  of  it  are 
quite  symmetrical,  thus — 


FIG.  15. — Electrical  stream-lines  past  an  obstacle. 


§49  ELECTRICAL  MOMENTUM  113 

And  this  is  exactly  what  would  be  true  for  water 
also,  if  only  it  were  devoid  either  of  friction  or  of 
inertia,  or  of  both. 

49.  Is  not  this  fact  conclusive,  then  ?  Does  it  not 
prove  the  absence  of  momentum  in  electricity  ? 

Plainly  the  answer  must  depend  on  whether  there 
is  any  other  possible  mode  of  accounting  for  this  kind 
of  flow.  And  there  is. 

For  suppose  that  water,  instead  of  being  urged  by 
something  located  at  a  distance  from  the  obstacle — 
instead  of  being  left  to  its  own  impetus  to  curl 
round  or  shoot  past  as  it  pleases — suppose  it  were 
propelled  by  a  force  acting  at  every  point  of  its 
journey,  a  force  just  able  to  drive  it  at  any  point 
against  the  friction  existing  at  that  point  and  no  more  ; 
then  the  flow  of  water  would  take  place  according  to 
the  electrical  stream-lines  shown  in  Fig.  15. 

An  illustration  of  such  a  case  is  ready  to  hand. 
Take  a  spade-shaped  piece  of  copper  wire  or  sheet, 
heat  it  a  little,  and  fix  it  in  quiescent  smoky  air  ; 
looking  along  it  through  a  magnifier  in  a  strong  light 
you  will  see  the  warmed  air  streaming  up  past  the 
metal  according  to  the  stream-lines  of  Fig.  1 5  ;  and 
this  just  because  the  moving  force  has  its  location  at 
the  metal  surface,  and  not  in  some  region  below  it.1 
One  cannot  indeed  say  that  it  is  propelled  at  every 
point  of  its  course,  but  it  is  propelled  at  the  critical 

1  See  Lord  Rayleigh,  Nature,  vol.  xxviii.  p.  139. 

I 


ii4  CURRENT  PHENOMENA  CHAP,  v 

points  where  the  special  friction  occurs,  and  this 
comes  to  sufficiently  the  same  thing. 

We  learn,  therefore,  that  stream-lines  like  Fig.  1 5 
prove  one  of  three  things,  not  one  of  two  ;  and  the 
three  things  are  :  (i)  that  the  fluid  has  no  friction  ; 
or  (2)  that  it  has  no  inertia  ;  or  (3)  that  it  is  propelled 
at  every  point  of  its  course. 

If  any  one  of  these  is  true  of  electricity,  there  is  no 
need  to  assume  either  of  the  others  in  order  to  explain 
the  actual  manner  of  its  flow.  Now  we  have  just 
seen  in  §  42  that,  according  to  Prof.  Poynting's  inter- 
pretation of  Maxwell's  theory,  the  third  of  the  above 
is  true — electricity  is  propelled  at  every  point  of  its 
course  ;  consequently,  as  said  in  Part  I.  §  7,  the 
question  of  its  own  intrinsic  inertia  so  far  remains 
completely  open  (§§  88,  89,  and  98). 


CHAPTER  VI 

CHEMICAL  AND  THERMAL  METHODS  OF   PRODUCING 
CURRENTS.      CONDUCTION  IN  GASES 

Voltaic  Battery 

50.  LEAVING  the  last-mentioned  mode  of  regarding 
the  subject  for  the  present,  to  return  to  it  in  Chap.  X. 
Part  III.,  let  us  proceed  to  ask  how  it  comes  about 
that  a  common  battery  or  a  thermopile  is  able  to 
produce  a  current  (read  Chapter  IV.  again). 

If  we  allow  ourselves  to  assume  the  existence  of  an 
unexplained  chemical  attraction  between  the  atoms 
of  different  substances,  an  explanation  of  the  action 
of  an  ordinary  battery  cell  is  easy.  You  have  first 
the  liquid  containing,  let  us  say,  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
atoms,  free  or  potentially  free — that  is,  either  actually 
dissociated,  or  so  frequently  interchanging  at  random 
from  molecule  to  molecule  that  the  direction  of  their 
motion  may  be  guided  by  a  feeble  directive  force 
(§  33).  Each  of  these  atoms  in  the  free  state 

I  2 


u6  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

possesses  a  charge  of  electricity — the  hydrogen  all  a 
certain  amount  of  positive  electricity,  the  oxygen 
twice  that  amount  of  negative.  Into  this  liquid  you 
then  plunge  a  couple  of  metals  which  attract  these 
atoms  differently :  for  instance,  zinc  and  copper, 
which  both  attract  oxygen,  but  zinc  more  than 
copper  ;  or,  better,  zinc  and  platinum,  the  latter  of 
which  hardly  attracts  it  at  all  ;  or,  better  still,  zinc 
and  peroxide  of  lead,  one  of  which  attracts  oxygen, 
the  other  hydrogen. 

Immediately,  the  free  oxygen  atoms  begin  moving 
up  to  the  zinc,  the  free  hydrogen  atoms  to  the  other 
plate. 

51.  When  one  speaks  of  the  plates  attracting 
atoms,  it  is  not  necessary  to  think  of  their  exerting  a 
force  on  all  those  in  the  liquid,  distant  and  near  :  all 
that  it  is  necessary  to  assume  is  a  force  acting  on 
those  which  come  within  what  is  called  "molecular 
range  "  of  its  surface — a  distance  extremely  minute, 
and  believed,  with  excellent  reason,  to  be  about  the 
ten-millionth  part  of  a  millimetre.  If  the  zinc  plate 
could  remove  and  combine  with  all  the  oxygen  atoms 
which  come  within  this  range,  they  would  be  speedily 
replaced  by  others  from  the  next  more  distant  layer 
by  diffusion,  and  these  again  by  others,  and  so  on. 
And  thus  there  would  be  a  gradual  procession  of  oxy- 
gen atoms  all  through  the  liquid  towards  the  zinc,  the 
rate  of  the  procession  being  regulated  by  the  force 


§52  VOLTAIC  BATTERY  117 

acting,  and  by  the  rate  of  diffusion  possible  in  the 
particular  liquid  used. 

The  atoms  which  reach  the  zinc  might  be  supposed 
to  communicate  to  it  the  negative  charge  they  carry, 
and  thus  very  soon  it  would  become  negatively 
electrified  enough  to  neutralise  its  attractive  power  on 
the  similarly  charged  oxygen  atoms,  and  everything 
would  stop.  But  if  a  channel  for  the  escape  of  its 
electricity  be  provided  by  leading  a  wire  from  it  to  a 
copper  plate  immersed  in  the  same  liquid,  the  circuit 
is  completed,  the  electricity  streams  back  by  the  wire, 
and  the  procession  may  go  steadily  on.  The  negative 
electricity  thus  imparted  to  the  copper,  or  platinum, 
neutralises  any  attraction  it  may  have  exerted  on  the 
negatively  charged  oxygen  atoms,  and  enables  it  even 
to  assist  the  opposite  procession  of  hydrogen  atoms 
towards  it ;  which  on  their  arrival  deliver  up  their 
charges  to  it,  combine  with  each  other,  and  escape 
as  gas. 

Without  going  into  all  the  niceties  possible,  this 
mode  of  thinking  of  the  matter  at  least  calls  attention 
to  some  of  the  more  salient  features  of  a  battery. 

52.  If,  instead  of  two  different  plates,  plates  of 
the  same  metal  be  immersed,  they  will  need  to  be 
oppositely  electrified  by  some  means  before  they 
are  able  to  cause  the  two  opposite  processions,  and 
so  maintain  a  current  in  the  liquid.  This  plainly 
corresponds  to  a  voltameter.  In  a  voltameter  the 


ii8  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT        CHAP,  vi 

maintained  slope  of  potential  between  the  plates  must 
be  supposed  to  act  on  all  the  ions  in  the  liquid  ;  not 
only  those  within  molecular  range  of  the  electrodes. 
In  that  respect  it  appears  to  differ  from  a  cell,  where 
the  chief  propelling  force  is  the  chemical  attraction  of 
oneof  the  plates  for  one  of  the  constituents  of  the  liquid. 

53.  Taking  advantage  of  the  known  fact  that  the 
atoms  are  charged,  Helmholtz  avoids  the  necessity 
for  postulating  any  chemical  (non-electrical)  force 
between  zinc  and  oxygen,  by  imagining  that  all 
substances  have  a  specific  attraction  for  electricity 
itself,  and  that  zinc  exceeds  copper  and  the  other 
common  metals  in  this  respect. 

He  would  thus  think  of  the  zinc  attracting,  not  the 
oxygen  itself,  but  its  electric  charge  ;  and  so  would 
liken  a  battery  cell  still  more  completely  to  a 
voltameter.  The  polarisation  or  opposition  force 
acting  at  the  hydrogen-evolving  plate  he  would 
account  for  by  the  attraction  of  hydrogen  for  positive 
electricity,  and  the  consequent  repugnance  of  the 
hydrogen  atoms  to  part  with  their  charges. 


Voltds  so-called  Contact  Force 

54.  It  may  be  convenient  to  append  to  this  account 
of  the  action  of  a  battery  a  statement  of  the  way  in 
which  the  electric  charges  observed  on  plates  of  zinc 


§54      VOLTA'S  SO-CALLED  CONTACT  FORCE        119 

and  copper,  which  have  been  put  into  contact  and 
separated,  are  brought  about.  It  is  a  very  simple 
matter,  though  a  great  deal  has  been  written  about  it. 
Plates  of  zinc  and  copper  immersed  in  air  are 
under  precisely  the  same  chemical  conditions  as  if 
they  were  immersed  in  water.  The  only  difference  is 
that,  whereas  water  is  a  conductor,  air  is  an  insulator. 
Until  the  plates  of  zinc  and  copper  (or  other  pair  of 
metals)  are  made  to  touch,  nothing  happens  in  either 
case,  because  the  chemical  tendency  is  uniform  all 
over  both  plates ;  and  though  the  attraction  of 
zinc  for  oxygen  is  pretty  strong  it  is  impossible  for 
charged  atoms  to  move  up  to  it  equally  on  all  sides, 
because  by  so  doing  they  would  be  charging  a  con- 
ductor with  one  kind  of  electricity  without  any  com- 
pensating opposite  charge  of  some  other  conductor. 
(See  §§  5,  3,  4,  I4A.)  A  piece  of  pure  zinc  surrounded 
on  all  sides  uniformly  by  charged  atoms,  may  be 
considered  as  in  the  same  condition  as  the  interior  of 
a  charged  conductor  ;  and  experiment  shows  that  not 
a  trace  of  charge  can,  in  that  case,  make  its  appearance 
beneath  the  superficial  layer.  If  the  atoms  were  to 
move  towards  the  zinc  they  must  thereby  compress 
electricity  into  it,  which  is  impossible.  However  much 
they  are  pulled  towards  it  therefore,  the  only  effect  is 
to  increase  the  pressure,  or  slacken  the  tension,  of  the 
negative  electricity  in  the  zinc  (speaking  in  language 
appropriate  to  the  cord  models,  Figs.  5,  6,  &c.) ;  in 


120  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT      CHAP,  vi 

other  words  to  lower  the  potential  of  the  zinc  below 
that  of  the  air  near  it.  The  same  thing,  only  to  a  less 
degree,  occurs  with  the  isolated  piece  of  copper. 
Neither  metal  becomes  the  least  charged  so  long  as 
uniformity  of  conditions  is  maintained  all  round  it. 

But  directly  metallic  contact  between  the  two 
metals  is  effected,  all  the  oxygen  atoms  at  this  point 
are  swept  away,  and  an  unobstructed  communication 
or  clear  passage  is  opened  from  the  zinc  to  the  copper 
for  the  flow  of  electricity.  That  is  what  metallic 
contact  achieves — it  disturbs  the  uniformity  by 
removing  the  straining  atoms  at  one  spot.  Unless, 
therefore,  there  is  some  E.M.F.  at  their  junction— 
which  we  have  good  reason  for  asserting  there  is  not, 
or  any  magnitude  worth  speaking  of — an  immediate 
rush  of  negative  electricity  from  zinc  to  copper,  or  of 
positive  the  other  way,  occurs.  The  copper  therefore 
becomes  negatively  charged,  the  zinc  becomes  positive  ; 
the  charge  being  effected  by  all  the  oxygen  atoms 
moving  a  little  nearer  to  the  zinc,  a  little  further  from 
the  copper.  So  far  everything  goes  on  just  the  same 
whether  the  plates  are  in  acidulated  water  or  in 
common  air. 

What  happens  next  depends  upon  the  difference 
between  water  and  air  in  conducting  power. 
Acidulated  water  is  able  to  conduct  electricity  ;  air 
is  not.  Accordingly,  when  the  plates  are  immersed 
in  water,  the  negative  charge  is  continually  con- 


§  54      VOLTA'S  SO-CALLED  CONTACT  FORCE        121 

veyed  back  from  the  copper  to  the  zinc  through 
the  liquid  ;  whereas  when  they  are  in  the  air  nothing 
further  happens,  except  the  slight  electrostatic  strain 
into  which  the  air  is  thrown  by  the  quantity  of 
electricity  accumulated  upon  the  metals,  positive  on 
the  zinc,  negative  on  the  copper,  and  which  has  no 
vent  or  outlet. 

Unless  care  is  taken  to  make  the  capacity  of  the 
free  metallic  surfaces  considerable,  by  expanding 
them  over  a  large  surface  or  by  bringing  them  very 
close  together,  these  charges  will  be  extremely  small, 
the  electromotive  force  producing  them  being  rather 
under  than  over  one  volt ;  and  accordingly  the  electro- 
static strain  in  the  air  near  a  couple  of  zinc  and 
copper  rods  in  contact  is  extremely  minute.  By 
delicately  suspending  a  highly-charged  aluminium 
needle  near  such  a  junction,  however,  Sir  William 
Thomson  has  been  able  to  observe  the  state  of  strain  ; 
the  needle  if  positively  charged  moving  perceptibly 
towards  the  copper.  A  more  usual  method  of 
displaying  the  phenomenon,  and  the  one  originally 
used  by  Volta,  is  to  increase  the  capacity  of  the 
arrangement  by  bringing  two  carefully  ground  plates 
very  close  together.  Although  the  E.M.F.  is  small 
(just  the  same  as  with  a  mere  point  contact),  yet  now 
the  capacity  is  so  great  that  quite  a  reasonable 
quantity  of  electricity  can  be  stored  in  the  two 
opposing  metals,  opposing  each  other  across  a 


122  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

microscopic  air  film  and  only  touching  at  a  few 
points  ;  so  that,  when  the  plates  are  neatly  separated, 
sufficient  charge  is  found  in  them  to  affect  sensibly 
even  a  common  gold-leaf  electroscope. 

55.  The  mistake  which  has  been,  and  still  frequently 
is,   made  with   regard  to  this   simple  and   not  very 
important  experiment,  has  been  to  regard  the  charge 
as  evidence  of  a  peculiar  E.M.F.  at  the  point  of  con- 
tact ;  an  E.M.F.  which  causes  a  difference  of  potential 
between  the  two  metals.     And  this  fictitious  contact 
E.M.F.  has  then  been   appealed  to   to  explain  the 
voltaic  battery. 

The  right  way  of  regarding  the  matter  is  to  con- 
sider the  battery  first,  explaining  its  action  chemically 
so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  explain  it  at  present ;  and 
then  to  point  out  that  similar  things  will  occur  in  air 
(an  air  battery,  in  fact),  with  the  slight  difference  that 
since  air  is  a  dielectric  instead  of  an  electrolyte  no 
continuous  current  is  possible,  but  merely  a  slight 
electric  displacement,  which  is  the  Volta  effect. 

56.  The  effective  cause  of  the  whole  phenomenon 
in  either  case  is  the  greater  affinity  of  oxygen  for  zinc 
rather  than  copper.       This  by  itself  would   cause  a 
greater  strain  of  negative  electricity  towards  zinc — a 
slackening  of  the  negative  cords  in  it,  to  speak  in  the 
language  of  the  cord  model — and  a  consequent  rise  of 
negative  potential.     A  piece  of  isolated  zinc  is  there- 
fore some  1*8  volts  below  the  potential  of  the  atmo- 


§  56  VOLTA  EFFECT  123 

sphere  ;  the  difference  of  potential  between  metal  and 
oxygen  being  calculable  direct  from  their  experi- 
mentally known  heats  of  combination  with  oxygen.1 
The  same  sort  of  thing  is  true  for  copper,  except  that 
the  intensity  of  strain  is  less  ;  as  evidenced  by  the 
less  heat  of  formation  of  CuO  compared  with  ZnO  ; 
and  accordingly  a  piece  of  isolated  copper  is  about 
o-8  volt  below  the  potential  of  the  atmosphere. 

Directly  the  two  metals  touch  they  necessarily 
become  of  the  same  potential — all  parts  of  a  conductor 
are  at  one  potential  unless  there  are  disturbing  internal 
forces, — and  the  equalisation  of  potential  is  effected 
by  the  rush  of  electricity  across  the  junction,  whereby 
the  zinc  receives  a  positive  charge  and  the  copper  a 
negative  charge,  until  their  potential  is  equalised.  In 
air  the  equalisation  is  effected  in  an  instant.  In  water 
it  is  a  matter  of  eternity.  That  is  all  the  difference. 
The  thing  observed  in  the  Volta  effect  is  not  a  differ- 
ence of  potential  between  zinc  and  copper,  but  a 
difference  of  charge  ;  the  two  metals  being  charged 
so  as  to  make  their  potentials  the  same,  in  spite  of 
their  unequal  chemical  affinities  for  oxygen. 

What  is  observed  in  the  Sir  William  Thomson 
form  of  the  experiment  (§  54)  is  again  not  a  difference 
of  potential  between  zinc  and  copper,  but  a  slope  of 

1  See  Lodge  "On  the  seat  of  E.M.F.  in  the  Voltaic  Cell,"  Brit. 
Assoc.  Report  1884  ;  Sojourn.  Soc.  Tel.  Eng.  1885,  and  Phil.  Mag., 
vol.  xix.  1885  and  1886. 


PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT 


CHAP.  VI 


potential  in  the  air  near  them,  from  the  zinc  towards 
the  copper.  The  metals  when  in  contact  are  both 
at  a  common  potential,  1-3  volts  belov/  the  atmo- 
sphere, the  mean  of  their  original  potentials,  but  the 
original  difference  of  potential  between  each  and  the 
air  in  contact  with  it  remains  unaltered  ;  hence  there 


Zn' 


II 


\-U       1 


Cu. 


Fig.  ISA. — Diagrammatic  representation  of  the  Volta  effect  on  the  plan  of  the  cord 
models  (Figs.  5,  6,  7,  &c.)- 

I.  shows  a  piece  of  zinc  and  copper  before  contact,  with  a   cord  representing 

negative  electricity  passing  through  both,  and  beads  representing  oxygen 
atoms.  The  arrows  indicate  that  the  oxygen  is  being  pulled  by  the 
zinc  on  all  sides  of  it ;  and  that  it  is  also  pulled  by  the  copper  but  with 
less  force  The  two  metals  differ  in  potential  from  each  other  and  from 
the  air  near  them,  but  this  fact  results  in  no  sensible  phenomenon  so  long  as 
they  are  separate. 

II.  shows    the  effects  of  sweeping  away  the  oxygen  atoms   between  the   two 

metals  by  establishing  metallic  contact,  so  that  the  greater  atom-attracting 
force  of  zinc  over  copper  can  now  produce  an  effect,  until  it  is  balanced 
by  the  elastic  stress  called  out  by  an  electric  displacement.  The  surface 
of  the  zinc  has  now  less  than  its  normal  share  of  negative  cord — it  is 
positively  charged  ;  the  copper  is  negatively  charged.  The  two  metals 
are  now  at  the  same  potential,  though  oppositely  charged  ;  a  slope  of 
potential  is  thrown  upon  the  air  in  their  neighbourhood.  This  is  the  Volta 
effect. 


is  a  gradual  slope  of  potential  of  i  volt  from  the 
layer  of  air  in  contact  with  zinc  to  the  layer  in  con- 
tact with  copper  ;  and  this  slope  of  potential  is  what 
the  electrometer  needle  feels.  The  diagram  Fig.  I5A 
may  possibly  help  in  making  the  whole  thing  clear. 


§  57  PELTIER  EFFECT  125 

The  matter  is  capable  of  being  perceived  quite 
distinctly  with  the  expenditure  of  a  little  time  and 
trouble,  and  it  is  worth  an  effort. 


True  Contact  Force 

57.  So  far  we  have  assumed  that  there  is  actually 
no  force  at  the  contact  of  zinc  with  copper.     There 
is    indeed  none  of   any  appreciable    magnitude,  but 
the    force   is    not    absolutely    zero.       Between    some 
metals,  bismuth  and  antimony  for  example,  the  force 
is  much  larger,  but  it  is   still  only  a  few  hundredths 
of  a  volt.     It  is  an  important  thing  that  there  can  be 
a  true    contact  force  at  the  junction  of  two  metals, 
only  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  chemically  pro- 
duced Volta  effect.     If  the   Volta  effect  be  called  a 
contact  force  at   all,   it  is   a    contact   force    between 
metal  and  air  ;  any  true  contact  force  between  metals 
acts  as  a  slight  and  -insignificant  disturber    of    the 
simple  Volta  effect,   and   what  is  really  observed  in 
electroscopic  experiments  is  the  sum  of  the  two. 

58.  That  there  is  a  true  though  weak  contact  force 
at  a  junction  of  metals  is  proved  by  the  reversible 
heat  effects  which  are  found  there  when  a  current  is 
passed  across  the  junction  :  a  current  one  way  pro- 
duces more  heat  than  a  current  the  other  way.     In  a 
simple  homogeneous  piece  of  metal  the  heat  produced 


126  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

by  a  current  is  utterly  independent  of  direction  :  it  is 
called  irreversible  heat ;  it  is  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  current  strength,  as  Joule  showed.  But 
at  a  junction  of  different  substances,  or  even  at  a 
junction  of  the  same  substance  in  two  different  states 
—two  different  temperatures,  for  example, — in  addi- 
tion to  the  irreversible  heat  produced  by  mere  resist- 
ance there  is  a  reversible  heat  production,  one  which 
changes  sign  with  the  direction  of  the  current,  so 
that  a  current  one  way  actually  tends  to  cool  the 
junction  instead  of  heating  it.  With  care  this  cooling 
tendency  may  be  got  to  overpower  and  mask  the 
irreversible  heat,  and  a  junction  may  be  positively 
cooled  and  water  frozen  by  steadily  passing  a  mode- 
rate current  in  the  right  direction  across  it.  This 
curious  fact  was  discovered  by  Peltier. 

It  may  be  considered  as  the  fundamental  fact  of 
thermo-electricity.  Its  meaning  is  that  something  in 
the  metals  at  the  junction  is  helping  to  propel  the 
current  along ;  doing  work  in  fact,  and  consuming  its 
own  heat  in  the  process.  The  vibratory  motion  of 
the  molecules  is  getting  used  up  in  propelling  elec- 
tricity. The  contact  force  is  acting  in  the  direction 
of  the  current,  and  the  junction  is  thereby  cooled. 

If  the  current  be  reversed,  it  will  be  driven  against 
the  force  exerted  by  the  molecules,  and  an  extra 
amount  of  heat  will  be  added  to  the  irreversible  or 
frictional  generation  of  heat. 


§  59  THERMOPILE  127 

59.  This  thermal  evidence  of  contact  force,  though 
the  most  direct,  was  not  the  earliest  discovered.     The 
earliest  known  fact  in  thermo-electricity  was  that  in  a 
complete  circuit  of  different  metals  a  current  could  be 
excited  by  having  the  parts  at  different  temperatures  ; 
manifestly  because  these  contact  forces  of  which  we 
have  been  speaking  change  with  temperature — some 
increasing,  others  decreasing,  as  the   temperature  is 
raised.     They  are  accurately  balanced  in  a  circuit  of 
uniform  temperature,  but  they  have  a  resultant  when- 
ever the  temperature  is  not  uniform  ;  and  this  resultant 
E.M.F.  is  able  to  propel  a  current,  as  discovered  by 
Seebeck. 

Thermo-electric  Pile 

60.  A  thermopile  may  be  thought  of  in  the  follow- 
ing way,  but  in  trying  to  understand  the  nature  of 
these  actions  at  present  one  must  admit  that  some 
speculation  and  vagueness  exist. 

We  have  seen  that  when  electricity  is  propelled 
through  or  among  the  molecules  of  a  metal  it  experi- 
ences a  certain  resistance  or  opposition  force  which 
is  exactly  proportional  to  the  speed  of  its  motion 
(§  28).  In  other  words,  there  is  a  connection  between 
matter  and  electricity  in  many  respects  analogous  to 
fluid  friction  but  varying  accurately  as  the  first  power 
of  the  relative  velocity.  Hence,  if  an  atom  of  matter 


128  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

be  vibrating  about  a  fixed  point,  it  will  tend  to  drive 
electricity  to  and  fro  with  it ;  but  if  it  be  only  one  of  a 
multitude,  all  quivering  in  different  phases,  they  will 
none  of  them  achieve  any  propulsion.  This  may  be 
considered  the  state  of  an  ordinary  warm  solid.  But 
if  from  any  cause  a  set  of  atoms  could  be  made  to 
move  faster  in  one  direction  than  in  the  reverse 
direction — to  move  forwards  quickly  and  backwards 
slowly — then  such  an  unsym metrically-moving  set 
will  exert  a  propulsive  tendency,  and  tend  to  drive  a 
current  of  electricity  forwards,  simply  because  the 
force  exerted  is  proportional  to  the  velocity,  and  so 
is  greater  on  the  forward  journey  than  on  the  return. 
Referring  back  to  the  cord  model,  Fig.  5,  Ohm's  law 
requires  that  the  friction  between  cord  and  beads  should 
be  directly  as  the  velocity  ;  hence  if  a  bead  begins  to 
oscillate  unsymmetrically,  travelling  forward  quickly 
and  back  slowly,  it  will  propel  the  cord  along  in  the 
direction  in  which  it  moves  most  quickly,  somewhat 
as  a  child  can  propel  its  chair  by  jogging  it  upon  a 
rough  floor. 

I  have  left  this  explanation  as  it  appeared  in  the 
last  edition,  in  order  to  call  attention  to  a  fallacy  in  it 
which  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  Prof.  Fitzgerald. 

If  a  bead  is  moving  to  and  fro  with  different  speeds 
on  direct  and  return  journey,  and  if  it  be  threaded  on 
a  cord  or  immersed  in  a  liquid  whose  friction  with  it 
is  precisely  as  the  first  power  of  the  velocity,  it  will 


§  60  THERMO-ELECTRIC  FORCE  129 

undoubtedly  exert  more  force  on  the  cord  or  liquid 
during  its  quicker  than  during  its  slower  excursion,  as 
stated  above ;  but  when  we  come  to  consider  the 
motive  effects  or  impulses  of  the  to  and  fro  forces  we 
perceive  that  they  are  equal,  for  what  is  deficient  in 
force  on  the  slower  journey  is  made  up  in  duration, 
and  "  impulse  "  depends  on  the  product  of  force  and 
time.  Thus  simple  unsymmetry  of  motion  does  not 
seem  able  to  give  us  the  effect  of  barbs  or  valves 
which  is  suggested  above  as  accounting  for  thermo- 
electric forces.  (See  also  Lodge,  Philosophical 
Magazine,  December  1876.)  The  unsymmetry  of 
motion  must  exist,  and  in  some  way  or  other  it  is 
probably  the  cause  of  thermo-electric  force  ;  but  the 
precise  way  in  which  it  acts  has  still  to  be  explained. 
It  may  be  just  worth  noticing  that  if  the  friction  force 
varied  more  quickly  than  the  first  power  of  the 
velocity,  there  would  be  a  propulsion  one  way  ;  if  it 
varied  more  slowly,  there  would  be  propulsion  the 
other  way. 

Wherever  conduction  of  heat  is  going  on  along  a  sub- 
stance the  atoms  are  moving  unsymmetrically.  They 
are  driven  forward  infinitesimally  quicker  by  the  more 
rapidly  moving  atoms  at  the  hot  end,  than  they  are 
driven  back  by  the  less  rapidly  moving  atoms  in  front. 
And,  whatever  the  cause  may  be,  such  a  slope  of 
temperature  exerts  a  propulsive  tendency  :  there  is  an 
electromotive  force  in  a  substance  unequally  heated. 

K 


130  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

This  fact  was  discovered  theoretically  and  verified 
experimentally  by  Sir  William  Thomson. 

61.  But  not  only  is  there  such  a  force  at  a  junction 
of  a  hot  and  cold  substance  ;  there  is  also  a  force  at 
the  junction  of  two  substances  of  different  kinds,  even 
though  the  temperature  be  uniform.  It  is  not  quite 
so  easy  to  explain  how  it  comes  about  that  the  atoms 
at  this  kind  of  junction  are  moving  faster  one  way 
than  the  other ;  nevertheless,  such  a  thing  is  not 
unlikely,  considering  the  state  of  constraint  and 
accommodation  which  must  necessarily  exist  at  the 
boundary  surface  of  two  different  media.  However  it 
be  caused,  there  is  certainly  an  E.M.F.  at  such  a 
junction. 

Thus,  then,  in  a  simple  circuit  of  two  metals  with 
their  junctions  at  different  temperatures,  there  are 
altogether  four  electromotive  forces — one  in  each 
metal,  from  hot  to  cold  or  vice  versa,  and  one  at  each 
junction  ;  and  the  current  which  flows  round  such  a 
circuit  is  propelled  by  the  resultant  of  these  four. 

These  four  forces,  two  Thomson  forces  in  the  metals, 
and  two  Peltier  forces  at  their  junctions,  may  some 
of  them  help  and  some  hinder  the  current.  Wherever 
they  help,  the  locality  is  to  that  extent  cooled  ;  wher- 
ever they  hinder,  it  is  to  that  extent  warmed. 


§  62  CONTACT-FORCE  BETWEEN  INSULATORS     131 


Frictional  Electricity 

62.  But  the  contact  force  at  a  junction  is  by  no 
means  confined  to -metals.  It  occurs  between  in- 
sulators also,  and  it  is  to  it  that  the  striking  effects 
produced  by  all  frictional  electric  machines  are  due. 
The  essential  thing  in  the  production  of  "frictional 
electricity"  is  the  contact  of  dissimilar  substances. 
It  is  by  their  contact  force  that  electricity  gets 
transferred  from  one  to  the  other,  so  that  one  becomes 
positive  and  the  other  negative.  A  rapid  succession 
of  contacts,  easily  obtained  by  sliding  one  of  the 
surfaces  over  the  other,  is  usually  necessary  to  aid  the 
transfer ;  the  substances  being  so  badly  conducting. 

By  thus  noticing  that  the  connection  between 
matter  and  electricity,  known  as  resistance  and  defined 
by  Ohm's  law  (§  28),  is  competent  to  produce  contact 
electromotive  forces,  we  may  perceive  how  it  comes 
to  pass  that  in  good  conductors  such  forces  are  so 
weak,  while  in  insulators  they  are  so  strong.  Elec- 
tricity slips  through  the  fingers  of  a  metal  as  it  were, 
and  the  driving  force  it  can  exert  is  very  feeble  ; 
while  an  insulator  gets  a  good  grip  and  thrusts  it 
along  with  violence.  A  consequence  of  the  above 
view  is  that  in  perfect  conductors  thermo-electric  and 
all  other  contact  forces  would  necessarily  be  zero. 

K  2 


132  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 


Specific  Relation  between  Matter  and  Electricity  ; 
sometimes  called  "  Specific  Heat  of  Electricity  " 

63.  The  metals  differ  in  their  gripping  power, 
and,  roughly  speaking,  the  best  conductor  makes 
the  worst  thermo-electric  substance.  A  bad  conduc- 
tor, like  antimony,  or,  still  better,  galena,  or  selenium, 
or  tellurium,  makes  a  far  more  effective  thermo- 
electric element  than  a  well-conducting  metal.  Not 
that  specific  resistance  is  all  that  has  to  be  con- 
sidered in  the  matter  ;  there  is  also  a  specific  relation 
between  each  metal  and  the  two  kinds  of  electricity. 
Thus,  iron  is  a  metal  whose  atoms  have  a  better 
grip  of  positive  than  of  negative  electricity,  and  so 
a  positive  current  gets  propelled  in  iron  from  hot  to 
cold.  Copper,  on  the  other  hand,  acts  similarly  on 
negative  electricity,  and  it  is  a  negative  current 
which  is  driven  from  hot  to  cold  in  copper.  And  all 
the  metals  can  be  classed  with  one  or  other  of  these 
two,  except  perhaps  lead,  which  appears  to  grip 
both  equally,  and  so  to  exert  no  differential  effect 
upon  either. 

How  this  relation  can  be  likened  to  a  "  specific 
heat,"  may  be  thought  out  by  attending  to  the  last 
paragraph  of  §  61,  and  by  regarding  electricity  as  a 
material  fluid  (see  also  §  182)  ;  but  it  is  not  very 
desirable  thus  to  think  of  the  matter. 


§  63  ELECTRIC  CRYSTALS  133 


Pyro-electricity. 

Certain  crystals,  called  by  mineralogists  hemihedral, 
having  different  forms  at  the  two  ends  of  their  axis, 
which  may  be  called  the  A  end  and  the  B  end  respec- 
tively, exhibit  some  properties  not  quite  the  same 
in  the  direction  A  B  as  in  the  direction  B  A.  They  are 
more  easily  scratched,  for  instance,  in  one  sense  than 
in  the  other.  Such  crystals,  of  which  the  class  of 
tourmalines  may  be  taken  as  the  type,  have  other 
very  singular  properties.  Such  of  them  as  are  fairly 
clear  are  opaque  to  light  in  a  singular  fashion — not 
opaque  to  light  polarized  in  all  planes,  but  selectively 
opaque.  Vibrations  occurring  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  are  rapidly  quenched,  so  that  one  cannot  see  at 
all  through  a  slice  cut  perpendicular  to  the  axis  ', 
while  vibrations  occurring  along  the  axis  are  trans- 
mitted with  but  moderate  absorption.  This  opacity 
seems  quite  different  from  the  conductive  opacity  of 
metals,  about  which  we  shall  speak  later,  for,  in 
the  first  place,  the  light  stopped  is  not  reflected, 
but  absorbed  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  a  crystal 
of  tourmaline  is  not  a  conductor,  but  a  very  fair 
insulator. 

And  yet  there  are  some  peculiarities  about  such 
conducting  power  as  it  has  which  are  very  note- 
worthy, and  which  may  be  intimately  connected  with 


134  PRODUCTION  OF  A  CURRENT       CHAP,  vi 

the  selective  opacity  which  fits  a  slice  of  crystal  cut 
parallel  to  the  axis  for  use  as  a  "  polarizer  "  in  optics. 
One  of  these  peculiarities  was  found  by  Dr.  S.  P. 
Thompson  in  conjunction  with  the  present  writer,  viz. 
that  while,  like  all  other  uniaxial  crystals,  the  con- 
ductivities for  heat  along  and  across  the  axis  are  not 
the  same  (being,  in  the  case  of  tourmaline,  less  good 
along  the  axis  than  across),  yet,  in  addition  to  this, 
a  warming  crystal  conducts  heat  better  in  the  sense 
B  A  than  in  the  sense  A  B,  while  a  cooling  crystal 
does  the  opposite.  While  the  temperature  is  rising 
heat  gets  conveyed  more  easily  towards  A  than 
towards  B.1 

Whether  on  account  of  inequalities  of  temperature 
thus  set  up,  or  for  some  more  direct  reason,  electricity 
gets  automatically  transfered  in  one  direction  rather 
than  in  the  other.  And  accordingly,  while  a  crystal 
is  rising  in  temperature,  positive  electricity  accumu- 
lates at  the  A  end,  and  negative  electricity  at  the  B 
end.  So  long  as  the  temperature  remains  constant 
nothing  further  happens,  except  ordinary  leakage, 
principally  no  doubt  over  the  surface,  which  may  in 
time  completely  mask  the  effect  produced.  On  now 
cooling  the  crystal,  an  inverse  electrification  will  be 
set  up  ;  or,  if  no  leakage  has  been  permitted,  the 
effect  of  cooling  is  simply  to  replace  the  electricity 
displaced  by  the  warming. 

1  Phil.  Mag.  July  1879. 


§  64      CONVEYANCE  BY  OR  THROUGH  A  GAS       135 

While  the  temperature  of  the  crystal  is  steady  no 
difference  in  electric  conductivity  has  been  detected 
by  the  writer  between  the  sense  A  B  and  the  sense 
B  A.  Neither  is  there  any  difference  in  the  thermal 
conductivity  when  the  temperature  is  steady.  Both 
effects  depend  on  a  varying  temperature.  But  the 
electrical  phenomenon  is  more  than  a  unilateral  con- 
ductivity, it  is  a  true  axial  electromotive  force. 


Passage  of  Electricity  through  a  Gas 

64.  There  remains  to  be  said  something  about 
the  way  in  which  electricity  can  be  conveyed  by 
gases. 

The  first  thing  to  notice  is  that  gases  and  vapours 
can  be  divided  into  two  classes  :  those  which 
conduct  electricity,  and  those  which  do  not 
Those  which  conduct,  do  so  electrolytically,  that 
is  to  say  they  conduct  like  liquids  by  the  loco- 
motion of  charged  or  carrier  atoms,  or  ions  ;  and  there 
is  good  evidence  that  such  gases  are  in  a  state  of 
dissociation  so  long  as  they  possess  any  conducting 
power.  A  high  temperature  or  a  recent  electrical 
discharge,  either  of  which  is  well  known  as  a 
dissociating  agency,  is  found  to  confer  upon  some 
gases  and  vapours  a  conducting  power  which  they  do 
not  possess  in  their  ordinary  state. 


136  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

Undissociated  or  non-conducting  gases  and  vapours 
appear  not  to  conduct  in  the  slightest  degree ;  in 
other  words,  a  substance  in  this  condition  behaves 
as  a  perfect  insulator — perhaps  the  only  perfect 
insulator  there  is.  Not  water  vapour,  not  even 
mercury  vapour,  is  found  to  conduct  in  the  least. 
This  shows  that  mere  bombardment  of  molecules, 
such  as  is  known  to  go  on  in  gases,  is  not  sufficient 
either  to  remove  or  to  impart  any  electric  charge. 
Schuster  and  J.  J.  Thomson  have  found  however  that 
some  gases  do  conduct  electrolytically  ;  and  Schuster 
has  described  several  curious  facts  concerning  their 
conductivity  during  and  shortly  after  an  electric 
discharge.  Conducting  gases  we  consider  in  §  65  D. 

The  commonest  way  in  which  electricity  makes  its 
way  through  a  non-conducting  gas,  setting  aside  the 
mere  mechanical  conveyance  by  solid  carrier,  is  that 
of  disruptive  discharge.  Let  us  try  and  look  into 
the  manner  of  this  a  little  more  closely,  if  possible. 

First  of  all,  since  locomotion  is  possible  to  the 
molecules  of  a  gas,  as  to  those  of  any  other  fluid,  it  is 
natural  to  ask  why  electrolysis  does  not  go  on  as  in  a 
liquid.  Now,  for  electrolysis  in  a  liquid  two  conditions 
seemed  necessary  :  first,  that  the  atoms  or  radicles  in  a 
molecule  should  be  oppositely  charged  with  electricity  ; 
second,  that  they  should  be  in  such  a  condition 
(whether  by  dissociation  or  otherwise)  that  inter- 
changes of  atoms  from  molecule  to  molecule,  or  in 


§64  GASES  AS  DIELECTRICS  137 

some  other  way  a  procession  of  atoms,  could  be 
directed  in  a  given  direction  by  a  very  feeble  or 
infinitesimal  force. 

Since  most  gases  do  not  act  as  electrolytes,  one  of 
these  conditions,  or  perhaps  both,  must  fail.  Either 
the  atoms  of  a  gas-molecule  are  not  charged,  which  is 
a  plausible  hypothesis  for  elementary  gases,  or  else 
the  atoms  belonging  to  a  gas-molecule  remain  indivi- 
dually belonging  to  it,  and  are  not  readily  passed  on 
from  one  to  another.  The  molecules  are  free  of  each 
other  and  not  subject  to  double  decomposition. 

When  one  says  that  a  gas  does  not  act  as  a  com- 
mon electrolyte,  the  experimental  grounds  of  the  state- 
t  ment  are  that  a  finite  electrostatic  stress  is  certainly 
possible  in  its  interior — a  stress  of  very  considerable 
amount  ;  and  when  this  stress  does  overstep  the  mark 
and  cause  the  material  to  yield,  the  yielding  is  evi- 
dently not  a  quiet  and  steady  glide  or  procession,  but  a 
violent  breaking  down  and  collapse,  due  to  insufficient 
tenacity  of  something.  One  may  therefore  picture  the 
molecules  of  a  gas,  between  two  opposite  electrodes 
or  discharge  terminals  maintained  at  some  great 
difference  of  potential,  as  arranged  in  a  set  of  paral- 
lel chains  from  one  to  the  other,  and  strained  nearly 
up  to  the  verge  of  being  torn  asunder.  In  making 
this  picture  one  need  not  suppose  any  fixture  of 
individual  molecules :  there  may  be  a  wind  blowing 
between  the  plates  ;  but  all  molecules  as  they  come 


138  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES        CHAP,  vi 

into  the  field  must  experience  the  stress,  and  be 
relieved  as  they  pass  out.  See,  however,  §  65  B. 

65.  If  the  applied  slope  of  potential  overstep  a 
certain  limit,  fixed  by  observation  at  something  like 
33,000  volts  per  linear  centimetre  for  common  air,  the 
molecules  give  way,  the  atoms  with  their  charges  rush 
across  to  the  plates,  and  discharge  has  occurred.  The 
number  of  atoms  thus  torn  free  and  made  able  to 
convey  a  charge  by  locomotion  is  so  great  that  there 
has  never  been  found  any  difficulty  in  conveying  any 
amount  of  electricity  by  their  means.  In  other  words, 
during  discharge  the  gas  becomes  a  conductor ;  and, 
being  a  conductor  by  reason  of  locomotion  of  atoms, 
it  may  be  called  an  electrolyte. 

Schuster  has  discovered  that  this  conductivity  of 
gases,  or  power  of  equalising  even  very  feeble  poten- 
tials, lasts  for  a  little  time  and  extends  to  some  little 
distance  from  the  region  of  a  disruptive  discharge  ; 
as  if  a  number  of  ions  or  charged  carrier  atoms  had 
been  liberated  and  diffused  until  they  recombined 
and  neutralized  each  other  once  more. 

But  whether  the  charge  then  possessed  by  each 
carrier  atom  intrinsically  belonged  to  it  all  the  time, 
or  whether  it  was  conferred  upon  the  components  of 
the  molecules  during  the  strain  and  the  disruption,  is 
a  point  not  yet  decided. 

What  is  called  "  the  dielectric  strength  "  of  a  gas — 
that  is,  the  strain  it  can  bear  without  suffering  dis- 


§65A  GASEOUS  CONDUCTION  139 

ruption  and  becoming  for  the  instant  a  conductor — 
depends  partly  on  the  nature  of  the  gas,  and  very 
largely  on  its  pressure.  Roughly,  one  may  say 
that  a  gas  at  high  pressure  is  very  strong,  a  gas 
at  low  pressure  very  weak.  An  ordinary  electrolyte 
might  be  called  a  dielectric  of  zero  strength. 

One  reason  why  pressure  affects  the  dielectric 
tenacity  of  a  gas  readily  occurs  to  one :  it  is 
certainly  not  the  only  one,  but  it  can  hardly  help 
being  at  least  partially  a  vera  causa;  and  that  is, 
the  fact  that  in  a  rare  gas  there  are  fewer  molecules 
between  the  plates  to  share  the  strain  between  them. 

Thus  if  40,000  volts  per  centimetre  break  down 
ordinary  air,  40  volts  per  centimetre  ought  to  be 
enough  to  effect  discharge  through  air  at  a  pressure 
of  about  f  millimetre  of  mercury  ;  and  at  a  pressure 
of  50  atmospheres  2,000,000  volts  per  centimetre 
should  be  needed.1 

65,  A.  Conduction  through  a  previously  undis- 
sociated  gas,  is  probably  due  in  all  cases  to  some 
such  process  as  is  suggested  at  the  end  of  §  64, 
viz.  the  formation  of  molecular  chains,  such  as  were 
postulated  by  Grotthus  to  explain  ordinary  electro- 
lysis, and  the  breaking  down  of  such  chains  when 

1  It  is  true  that  tension  per  unit  area,  or  energy  per  unit  volume,  is 
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  potential-slope,  and  I  attach  no 
importance  to  the  simple  proportion  assumed  in  the  text.  There  is  a 
great  deal  more  to  be  said  on  these  subjects  ;  see  Lodge,  Brit.  Assoc- 
Report,  1885,  pp.  760-2. 


HO  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

strained    beyond    a   certain   amount ;    but    it  divides 
itself  into  three  principal  categories. 

(1)  When  the  chains   reach   right  along  the  path 
of  the  discharge  before  it  passes :  as  when  a  spark 
occurs  between  flat  plates. 

(2)  When  the  chains  reach  a   short  distance  only 
from    the    electrode    at    which  discharge  starts,  but 
are  perpetually  reformed  as  the  discharged  electricity 
proceeds,  the  electricity  itself  forming   an  electrode 
for  each  fresh  set  of  chains  to  grow  from  :  instance, 
a  discharge  occurring   between   small  electrodes  far 
apart,  when  it  is  more  or  less  striated. 

(3)  When  the  chains  only  occur  within  an  extremely 
short  distance   from    the  discharging    electrode,  the 
discharge  making  its  way  for  the  rest  of  its  path  by 
convection  of  the  atoms  which  were  set  free  at  the 
outer  ends  of  the    chains    when    the    latter   broke : 
this  being  the   mode  in   which  I  consider  discharge 
to  occur  from  sharp  points  on  to  distant  plates. 

The  molecular-chain  view  of  the  nature  of  gas 
discharge  finds  its  strongest  support  in  the  fact 
that  it  alone  of  all  hitherto  suggested  theories  is 
capable  of  giving  a  simple  and  connected  explana- 
tion of  many  of  the  most  striking  features  of  such 
discharge. 

In  the  case  of  sparks  between  flat  plates  for 
instance,  the  strength  of  field  necessary  to  start  a 
spark  gets  greater  as  the  distance  between  the  plates 


§65,  A  MOLECULAR  CHAINS  141 

gets  less — increasing  very  rapidly  indeed  when  the 
distance  falls  short  of  a  millimetre  or  so.  It  seems 
almost  impossible  to  account  for  this  so  long  as  the 
molecules  are  pictured  separate  and  free  throughout 
the  mass  of  the  gas.  But  allow  them  to  form  chains, 
and  it  becomes  easy  to  do  so.  For  a  chain  is  the  re- 
sult of  a  balance  between  two  opposite  tendencies — 
one,  to  cohere  under  the  influence  of  the  field,  and  the 
other,  to  disintegrate  under  the  molecular  bombard- 
ment of  surrounding  gas  molecules  ;  and  this  dis- 
integrating action  or  bombardment  will  be  more 
violent  at  some  distance  from  the  plate  than  near  to 
it,  since  the  plate  itself  acts  as  a  sort  of  shield,  its 
own  molecules  being  relatively  speaking  motionless, 
and  also  affords  a  sQlid  foundation  to  which  the  chains 
may  anchor  themselves.  The  chains  will  thus  all 
start  from  the  plates,  and  as  they  are  of  very  different 
lengths  they  will  be  more  numerous  near  the  plates 
than  at  some  distance  from  them  ;  only  a  few 
stragglers  being  able  to  reach  right  across  from  plate 
to  plate.  These  stragglers  will  have  to  bear  the  whole 
stress  in  the  middle  of  the  field,  consequently  in  a  field 
of  given  strength  they  will  absorb  a  greater  number  of 
lines  of  force,  and  be  therefore  nearer  their  breaking 
point,  when  the  plates  are  far  apart  than  when  they 
are  near  together  ;  the  lines  of  force  in  the  latter  case 
distributing  themselves  among  so  many  more  channels. 
Again,  in  case  (2)  of  discharge  between  electrodes 


142  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

far  apart,  accompanied  by  the  formation  of  striae, 
Prof.  J.  J.  Thomson  has  shown1  that  the  velocity 
of  the  discharge  is  comparable  to  that  of  light,  while 
it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  atomic  motions  have 
anything  like  this  speed.  This  apparent  difficulty 
he  surmounts  by  assuming  the  constant  formation 
and  breaking  of  chains  in  front  of  the  discharge 
as  it  proceeds.  For  each  break  occurs  nearly  simul- 
taneously at  all  points  of  a  chain  when  it  gives 
way,  and  therefore  carries  the  discharge  forward 
through  a  finite  distance  at  an  almost  infinite  rate — 
time  is  only  needed  for  each  chain  to  form.  So, 
by  choosing  appropriate  lengths  of  chain,  and  by 
thus  timing  the  successive  breaks  properly,  the  dis- 
charge may  travel  with  the  enormous  velocity  of 
light  without  its  being  necessary  to  suppose  that 
the  individual  atoms  carrying  the  electricity  are 
moving  at  any  excessive  speed.  The  passage  of  the 
electricity  on  this  hypothesis  consists  of  a  series  of 
leaps  and  bounds  ;  and  the  several  points  of  departure 
of  these — the  region  where  one  chain  ends  and  the 
next  begins — are  marked  by  the  striae. 

Finally,  in  case  (3),  a  point  discharging  on  to  a 
plate,  the  field  is  everywhere  extremely  weak  except 
close  to  the  point,  so  that  neither  spark  nor  striated 
discharge  is  possible.  Nevertheless  in  the  region 
of  the  strong  field  round  about  the  point  it  is 

1  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil.  Mag.,  August  1890. 


§  65,  B  DISCHARGE  FROM  POINTS  143 

very  probable  that  chains  are  formed,  and  that  these 
by  breaking  start  discharge.  For  observation  has 
shown  l  that  the  value  of  the  field  near  a  point  at  the 
instant  of  discharge  increases  rapidly  as  the  curvature 
of  the  point  increases  ;  also 2  that  decrease  of  gas 
pressure  causes  it  first  to  decrease  to  a  minimum  and 
then  to  rise  again  as  the  pressure  is  further  reduced  ; 
and  both  these  effects  are  readily  explicable  by  the 
alterations  in  the  lengths  of  the  chains  which 
necessarily  accompany  the  altered  conditions. 

That  the  end  atoms  of  these  point-generated  chains, 
after  being  projected  into  the  gas,  have  to  find  their 
way  through  it  by  a  comparatively  slow  process  of 
convection,  has  lately  been  rendered  more  than 
probable  by  an  experiment  of  Lehmann's,3  in  which 
he  discharges  from  a  point  on  to  a  metal  disc 
covered  with  silk.  The  silk  becomes  faintly  luminous 
in  the  place  where  the  discharge  reaches  it  ;  and,  by 
directing  a  violent  blast  of  air  at  right  angles  to  the 
path  of  the  discharge,  he  shows  that  this  luminosity 
is  displaced  in  the  direction  of  the  blast  ;  such 
treatment  producing  no  effect  on  the  path  of  a 
genuine  spark. 

65,  B.  Although  chains  are  capable  of  explaining 
much  of  the  behaviour  of  gases  when  conducting 

1  A.  P   Chattock,  Phit.  Mag.,  September  1891. 

-  Rontgen,  Wiedemann's  Elektricitdt,  vol.  iv.  §  582. 

3  Lehmann,   Wied.  Annalen,  xliv.  645. 


144  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

electricity,  they  are  not  of  themselves  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  very  marked  differences  between  the 
passage  of  positive  and  of  negative  electricity  from  an 
electrode.  When  for  instance,  sparks  pass  between  a 
point  and  a  plate  (which  they  can  be  made  to  do  by 
raising  the  potential  sufficiently  suddenly),  they  are 
longer  for  a  given  potential  difference  when  the  point 
is  the  anode  than  when  it  is  the  cathode.  Moreover, 
when  the  plate  is  positive  the  spark  will  often  choose 
a  path  from  the  point  to  the  edge  of  the  plate  instead 
of  passing  to  its  centre  by  the  shortest  route  as  it 
does  when  the  plate  is  negative.  This  looks  as 
though  when  the  plate  was  positive  the  start  took 
place  from  its  surface,  selecting  the  weakest  place  on 
it  to  begin  from  ;  but  when  the  plate  is  negative 
the  discharge  begins  at  the  point  ;  and  this  view  is 
borne  out  by  an  observation  of  Lehmann's,1  that  a 
strong  blast  directed  on  to  the  anode  stops  sparks, 
but  does  not  affect  them  when  applied  at  any  other 
part  of  their  path.  Indeed  it  may  be  doubted, 
on  the  strength  of  some  experiments  not  yet  pub- 
lished, whether  a  sudden  spark  discharge  ever  starts 
from  a  cathode  at  all.  If  then  sparks  require  the 
formation  of  chains  in  the  gas,  it  appears  to  follow 
that  chains  form  more  rapidly  outside  an  anode 
than  near  a  cathode.  This  would  be  the  case  if  the 
chains  were  from  any  cause  already  begun  at  the 

1  Wiedemann's  Annalen,  xliv.  645. 


§  65,  B  CHAINS  IN  SURFACE-FILM  145 

surface  of  the  metal  in  a  direction  corresponding  to 
that  of  positive  electrification.  Prof.  J.  J.  Thomson 
has  indeed  shown  that  in  a  very  long  vacuum  tube 
the  positive  discharge  travels  nearly  the  whole 
distance  and  meets  the  negative  discharge  very  near 
its  electrode. 

Now  it  is  very  possible  that  the  volta  effect  is  due 
to  the  presence  of  such  rudimentary  chains,  held  to 
the  surface  of  the  metal  by  its  chemical  attraction 
for  the  gas  or  medium  in  which  it  is  immersed  ; J 
hence,  it  may  perhaps  be  that  the  volta  film 
and  the  want  of  symmetry  between  positive  and 
negative  discharge  are  different  aspects  of  the  same 
phenomenon.  The  view  fits,  at  any  rate,  with  the 
fact  that  convective  discharge  from  a  point  starts 
as  a  rule  most  easily  when  the  point  is  negative. 
The  same  cause  which  helps  the  formation  of 
molecular  chains  at  an  anode  hinders  it  at  a  cathode, 
for  the  volta  film  molecules  are  here  turned  the 
wrong  way  of  the  field,  and  have  to  rearrange 
themselves  by  swinging  round  through  180°  before 
chains  can  join  the  metal  surface.  Now  the  film 
atoms  are  more  closely  combined  with  each  other 
than  with  the  electrode  ;  it  may  therefore  be  ex- 
pected that  under  the  action  of  equal  field  strength 
the  rearrangement  at  the  cathode  will  begin  before 
the  chains  break  at  the  anode.  Such  rearrange- 
1  Nature,  vol.  43,  p.  367. 

L 


146  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

ment  will  agitate  the  molecules  of  the  film,  and 
may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  provide  a  supply 
of  dissociated  atoms,  which  will  thereupon  set  out 
upon  their  convective  journey  and  constitute  nega- 
tive discharge. 

The  paths  of  these  atoms,  starting  as  they  do  from 
the  very  surface  of  the  cathode,  will  at  first  be 
perpendicular  to  it,  as  they  necessarily  follow  the 
direction  of  the  lines  of  force  there.  If  the  gas 
pressure  be  high  the  atoms  will  soon  lose  much  of  their 
initial  velocity  by  repeated  collisions,  and  will  conse- 
quently soon  be  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  the 
much  weaker  field  at  a  distance  from  the  electrode : 
following  its  direction  more  or  less  completely.  But 
if  the  vacuum  be  high,  collisions  will  be  less  frequent, 
and  the  atoms  may  then  be  expected  to  retain  most 
of  their  initial  velocity  and  continue  in  their  initial 
straight  paths  without  much  regarding  the  constraint 
of  a  feeble  field.  This  phenomenon  is  perhaps  to 
be  seen  in  the  well-known  "  radiant  matter  "  of  Mr. 
Crookes,  which  makes  its  appearance  when  the 
pressure  is  extremely  low. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  whole  question  of 
gaseous  discharge  is  in  a  most  uncertain  condition, 
and  suggestions  of  this  kind  can  only  be  put  forward 
in  a  tentative  manner. 

65,  C.  It  is  possible  to  get  a  rough  idea  of  the 
magnitude  of  the.  charge  carried  by  each  atom  of  a 


§  6s,  c  ATOMIC  CHARGE  IN  GASES  147 

gas.  This  has  been  done  by  Prof.  Schuster.1  He 
brings  a  magnet  to  bear  upon  the  charged  particles 
as  they  leave  the  cathode  in  a  moderately  high 
vacuum,  and  traces  the  resulting  alteration  in  the 
paths  of  the  particles  by  their  luminosity.  On 
certain  assumptions  he  is  able  to  calculate  the  ratio 
of  the  quantity  of  electricity  carried  to  the  mass  of 
its  carriers,  in  terms  of  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the 
luminous  path,  the  strength  of  the  magnet,  and  the 
slope  of  potential  from  the  cathode.  The  resulting 
number  is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the 
electro-chemical  equivalent  of  the  gas  obtained  from 
electrolytic  data.  Another  method  is  to  measure  the 
strength  of  field  at  a  place  where  the  chains  consist 
of  one  molecule  only.  This  is  the  case  for  plates 
at  molecular  distance  apart,  and  also  for  a  point 
of  molecular  dimensions.  If  the  strength  of  field 
under  these  unattainable  conditions  be  inferred  from 
actual  observations,2  the  corresponding  atomic  charge 
comes  out  in  each  case  to  be  of  about  the  same 
order  of  magnitude  as  the  charges  carried  by  atoms 
in  electrolysis.  It  is  not  unlikely  therefore  that 
they  may  turn  out  to  be  the  same  ;  and  this  fact 
lends  not  a  little  support  to  the  above  view,  that  the 
cause  of  the  dissymmetry  between  positive  and 
negative  discharge  is  electrolytic  in  its  character 

1  Bakerian  Lecture,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  xlvii.  p.  546. 
3  A.  P.  C.,  Phil.  Mag.  September,  1891. 

L  2 


H8  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

Chemical  changes  in  the  vapours  of  electrolytes  when 
subjected  to  sufficiently  strong  electrostatic  stress1 
(the  resolution  of  steam  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen 
for  example)  also  point  in  the  same  direction. 

65,  D.  An  important  consequence  of  the  breaking 
of  a  molecular  chain,  and  one  which  appears 
necessarily  to  accompany  gaseous  conduction,  is  the 
fact  that  at  each  end  of  the  chain  an  atom  is 
dissociated.  Indeed,  it  may  be  said  that  the 
principal  function  of  chains  is  to  enable  the  slope  of 
potential  to  cause  dissociation.  Let  the  molecules 
but  be  broken  up  round  an  electrode,  and  conduc- 
tion at  once  follows.  Prof.  Schuster  has  shown,  for 
instance,  that  a  gas  is  thrown  into  what  he  calls  a 
'  sensitive  state  '  by  a  discharge  in  any  part  of  its 
enclosure  ;  the  sensitive  state  being  one  in  which 
electricity  can  be  passed  through  the  gas  by  any 
electromotive  forces  however  small.  In  this  condition 
the  gas  has,  for  the  time  being,  entirely  lost  its 
property  of  perfect  insulation  for  low  electrostatic 
stresses  ;  and  the  dissociated  atoms  produced  by  the 
discharge  in  one  part  of  the  gas  are  doubtless  the 
cause  of  the  easy  conduction  everywhere  else. 

Since  heat  tends  to  dissociate  gases,  it  follows  that 
the  sensitive  state  should  also  occur  when  the 
temperature  of  a  gas  is  sufficiently  raised.  This  is 
found  to  be  the  case,  and  is  in  all  probability  the 

1  Lehmann,  Molecular  Physik.,  vol.  ii.  p.  328. 


§66  EFFECTS  OF  DISSOCIATION  149 

reason  why  flames  are  such  good  conductors.  Some 
experiments  of  Prof.  Worthington's  on  the  discharge 
of  electricity  by  flames 1  are  instructive  in  this 
connexion.  They  tend  to  show  that  an  apparently 
neutral  flame  contains  a  number  of  oppositely  charged 
atoms,  which  can  be  separated  by  electrostatic  stress. 
Prof.  J.  J.  Thomson  has  also  investigated  the 
conduction  of  hot  gases  and  vapours,  and  arrives 
at  the  further  significant  conclusion,  that  it  is  not 
merely  the  dissociation  but  the  particular  kind  of 
dissociation  which  is  effective  in  causing  the  gas  to 
conduct.  He  finds  that  the  molecules  must  be  split 
into  ions.  In  the  case  of  steam,  for  instance,  which 
splits  into  molecules  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  no 
increase  in  conductivity  results  from  dissociation  of 
the  water  vapour.2  Here  again  therefore  we  find 
evidence  of  the  electrolytic  character  of  gaseous 
conduction. 


A   Current  regarded  as  a  Moving  Charge. 

66.  To  review  the  ground  we  have  covered  so  far. 
We  first  tried  to  get  some  conception  of  the  nature 
of  electrostatic  charge,  and  the  function  of  a  dielectric 
medium  in  static  electricity.  We  next  proceeded  to 

1  Brit.  Ass.  Electrolysis  Committee's  Report,  1889 ;  Newcastle 
volume,  p.  225. 

'2  J.  J.  Thomson,  Phil.  Mag.y  April  1890. 


ISO  CURRENT  THROUGH  GASES         CHAP,  vi 

see  how  far  the  phenomena  of  current  electricity  could 
be  explained  by  reference  to  electrostatics.  For  a 
current,  being  merely  electricity  in  locomotion,  need 
consist  of  nothing  but  a  charged  body  borne  rapidly 
along. 

Charge  a  sphere  with  either  positive  or  negative 
electricity,  and  throw  it  in  some  direction  ;  this  con- 
stitutes a  positive  or  a  negative  current  in  that 
direction.  There  is  nothing  necessarily  more  occult 
about  a  current  than  that.  And  a  continuous  current 
between  two  bodies  may  be  kept  up  by  having  a  lot 
of  pith  balls,  or  dust  particles,  oscillating  from  one  to 
the  other,  and  so  carrying  positive  electricity  one  way, 
and  negative  the  other  way.  But  such  carriers,  as 
they  pass  each  other  with  their  opposite  charges, 
would  be  very  apt  to  cling  together  and  combine. 
They  might  be  torn  asunder  again  electrically,  or  they 
might  be  knocked  asunder  by  collision  with  others. 
Unless  one  or  other  of  these  things  happened,  the 
current  would  shortly  have  to  cease,  and  nothing  but 
a  polarized  medium  would  result. 

Instead  of  pith  balls,  picture  charged  atoms  as  so 
acting,  and  we  have  a  rough  image  of  what  is  going 
on  in  an  electrolyte  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  a  di- 
electric on  the  other.  The  behaviour  of  metals  and 
solid  conductors  is  more  obscure.  Locomotive  car- 
riage is  not  to  be  thought  of  in  them  ;  but,  inasmuch 
as  no  new  phenomenon  appears  in  their  case,  it  is 


§6;  MOTION  OF  CHARGED  BODY  151 

natural  to  try  and  picture  the  process  as  one  not 
wholly  dissimilar ;  and  this  is  what  in  §  27  we  tried 
to  do  ;  with,  however,  but  poor  success. 

67.  I  have  said  that  an  electric  current  need  be 
nothing  more  occult  than  is  a  charged  sphere  moving 
rapidly  ;  and  a  good  deal  has  been  made  out  concern- 
ing currents  by  minutely  discussing  all  that  happens 
in  such  a  case.  But,  even  so,  the  problem  is  far  from 
being  a  simple  one.  One  has  to  consider  not  only  the 
obviously  moving  charge,  but  also  the  opposite  induced 
charge  tied  to  it  by  lines  of  force  (or  tubes  of  induc- 
tion, as  they  are  sometimes  called),  and  we  have  this 
whole  complicated  system  in  motion.  And  the  effect 
of  this  motion  is  to  set  up  an  altogether  new  pheno- 
menon in  the  medium — a  spinning  kind  of  motion  that 
would  not  naturally  have  been  expected  ;  whereby 
two  similarly  charged  spheres  in  motion  repel  one 
another  less  than  when  stationary,  and  may  even 
begin  to  attract,  if  moving  fast  enough  ;  whereby  also 
a  relation  arises  between  electricity  and  magnetism, 
and  the  moving  charged  body  deflects  a  compass 
needle  (§§  113  and  184).  Of  which  more  in  the  next 
Part. 


PART   III 

MAGNETISM 


CHAPTER  VII 

RELATION   OF   MAGNETISM   TO   ELECTRICITY 

68.  WE  next  proceed  to  consider  electricity  in  a 
state  of  rotation.  What  happens  if  we  make  a  whirl- 
pool of  electricity  ?  Coil  up  a  wire  conveying  a 
current,  and  try.  The  result  is  it  behaves  like  a 
magnet :  compass-needles  near  it  are  affected,  steel 
put  near  it  gets  magnetized,  and  iron  nails  or  filings 
get  attracted  by  it — sucked  up  into  it  if  the  current 
be  strong  enough.  In  short,  it  is  a  magnet.  Not  of 
course  a  permanent  one,  but  a  temporary  one,  lasting 
as  long  as  the  current  flows.  It  is  thus  suggested  that 
magnetism  may  perhaps  be  simply  electricity  in 
rotation.  Let  us  work  out  this  idea  more  fully. 

First  of  all,  one  may  notice  that  everything  that 
can  be  done  with  a  permanent  magnet  can  be  imitated 
by  a  coiled  wire  conveying  a  current.  (It  would  not 
do  altogether  to  make  the  converse  statement.)  Float 
a  coil  attached  to  a  battery  vertically  on  water,  and 


r56 


ELECTRO-MAGNETISM 


CHAP.  VII 


you  have  a  compass-needle  :  it  sets  itself  with  its  axis 
north  and  south.  Suspend  two  coils,  and  they  will 
attract  or  repel  or  turn  each  other  round  just  like  two 
magnets. 

69.  As  long  as  one  only  considers  the  action  of  a 
coil  at  some  distance  from  itself,  there  is  no  need  to 
trouble  about  the  shape  of  the  particular  magnet 
which  it  most  closely  simulates  ;  but  as  soon  as  one 
begins  to  consider  the  action  of  a  coil  on  things  close 


FIG.  16.— Floating  battery  and  helix  acting  as  a  compass-needle. 

to    it,    it   is   necessary   to  specify   the    shape  of  the 
corresponding  magnet. 

If  the  coil  be  a  long  cylindrical  helix  like  a  close- 
spired  corkscrew,  as  in  Fig.  16,  it  behaves  like  a 
cylindrical  magnet  filling  the  same  space.  If  the  coil 
be  a  short  wide  hank,  like  a  curtain-ring,  it  behaves 
again  like  a  cylindrical  magnet,  but  one  so  short  that 
it  is  more  easily  thought  of  as  a  disk.  A  disk  or 
plate  of  steel  magnetized  with  one  face  all  north  and 


§  70  MAGNETIC  SHELL  157 

the  other  face  all  south  can  be  cut  to  imitate  any  thin 
hank  of  wire  conveying  a  current.  It  will  be  round 
if  the  coil  be  round,  square  if  it  be  square,  and 
irregular  in  outline  if  the  coil  be  irregular. 

There  is  no  need  for  the  coil  to  have  a  great  num- 
ber of  turns  of  wire,  except  to  increase  its  power : 
one  is  sufficient,  and  it  may  be  of  any  shape  or 
size.  So  when  we  come  to  remember  that  every 
current  of  electricity  must  necessarily  flow  in  a 
closed  circuit,  one  perceives  that  every  current  of 
electricity  is  virtually  a  coil  of  more  or  less  fantastic 
shape,  and  accordingly  imitates  some  magnet  or  other 
which  can  be  specified.  Thus  we  learn  that  every 
current  of  electricity  must  exhibit  magnetic  phe- 
nomena :  the  two  are  inseparable — a  very  important 
truth.  See  Appendix  (a). 

There  is  one  detail  in  which  the  magnetized  disk 
and  the  coil  are  not  equivalent,  and  the  advantage  lies 
on  the  side  of  the  coil :  it  has  a  property  beyond  that 
possessed  by  any  ordinary  magnet.  It  has  a  pene- 
trable interior,  which  the  magnet  has  not.  For  space 
outside  both,  they  simulate  each  other  exactly ;  for 
space  inside  either,  they  behave  differently.  The  coil 
can  be  made  to  do  all  that  the  magnet  can  do  ;  but 
the  magnet  cannot  in  every  respect  imitate  and 
replace  the  coil :  else  would  perpetual  motion  be  an 
every-day  occurrence. 

70.  Now    I    want    to    illustrate    and    bring    home 


T7'IU7B11SIT7 


158  ELECTRO-MAGNETISM  CHAP,  vn 

forcibly  the  fact  that  there  is  something  rotatory 
about  magnetism — something  in  its  nature  which 
makes  rotation  an  easy  and  natural  effect  to  obtain 
if  one  goes  about  it  properly.  One  will  not  observe 
this  by  taking  two  magnets  :  one  will  see  it  better  by 
taking  a  current  and  a  magnet,  and  studying  their 
mutual  action. 

A  magnet  involves,  as  you  know,  two  poles — a 
north  and  a  south  pole — of  precisely  opposite  pro- 
perties :  it  may  be  considered  as  composed  of  these 
two  poles  for  many  purposes  ;  and  the  action  of  a 
current  on  a  magnet  may  be  discussed  as  compounded 
of  its  action  on  each  pole  separately.  Now  how  does 
a  current  act  on  a  magnetic  pole  ?  Two  currents  at- 
tract or  repel  each  other  ;  two  poles  attract  or  repel 
each  other ;  but  a  current  and  a  pole  exert  a  mutual 
force  which  is  neither  attraction  nor  repulsion  :  it  is  a 
rotatory  force.  They  tend  neither  to  approach  nor  to 
recede  ;  they  tend  to  revolve  round  each  other.  A 
singular  action  this,  and  at  first  sight  unique.  All 
ordinary  actions  and  reactions  between  two  bodies 
take  place  in  the  line  joining  them  :  the  force 
between  a  current  and  a  pole  acts  exactly  at  right 
angles  to  the  line  joining  them. 

Helmholtz  long  ago  (in  1847)  showed  that  the  con- 
servation of  energy  could  only  be  true  if  forces 
between  bodies  varied  in  some  way  with  distance  and 
acted  in  the  line  joining  them.  Now  here  is  a  case 


§  7i      ROTATION  OF  CURRENT  ROUND  POLE      159 

where  the  force  is  not  in  the  line  joining  the  bodies, 
and  accordingly  the  conservation  of  energy  is  defied  : 
the  two  things  will  revolve  round  each  other  for  ever. 
This  affords,  and  has  afforded,  a  fine  field  for  the 
perpetual  motionist ;  and  if  only  the  current  would 
maintain  itself  without  a  sustaining  power,  perpetual 
motion  would  in  fact  be  attained.  But  this  after  all 
is  scarcely  remarkable,  for  the  same  may  be  said  of  a 
sewing-machine  or  any  other  piece  of  mechanism  :  if 
only  it  would  continue  to  go  without  sustaining  power 
it  would  be  a  perpetual  motion.  Attend  to  pole  and 
current  only,  and  energy  is  not  conserved,  it  is  per- 
petually being  wasted  ;  but  include  the  battery  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  complete  system,  and  the  mystery 
disappears  :  everything  is  perfectly  regular. 

7 1 .  The  easiest  way  perhaps  of  showing  the  rotation 
of  a  conductor  conveying  a  current  round  a  magnetic 
pole  is  to  take  an  8-feet-long  piece  of  gold  thread,  such 
as  is  stitched  upon  the  garments  of  military  officers 
and  hanging  it  vertically  supply  it  with  as  strong  a 
current  as  it  will  stand.  Then  bring  near  it  a  vertical 
bar-magnet,  and  instantly  you  will  see  the  thread  coil 
itself  into  a  spiral,  half  of  it  twisting  round  the  north 
end  of  the  bar,  and  half  twisting  as  part  of  the  same 
spiral  round  the  south  end  (Fig.  17). 

If  the  magnet  were  flexible  and  the  conductor  rigid 
instead  of  vice  versa,  the  magnet  would  in  like  manner 
coil  itself  in  a  spiral  round  the  current ;  the  force  is 


i6o 


ELECTRO-MAGNETISM 


CHAP.  VII 


strictly  mutual.  A  rigid  magnet,  put  near  a  stiff  con- 
ductor, shows  only  the  last  remnants  of  this  action : 
it  sets  itself  at  right  angles  to  the  wire,  and  ap- 
proaches its  middle  to  touch  it,  but  that  is  all  it 
can  do. 


FIG.  17. — A  long  flexible  conductor  twisting  itself  into  a  spiral  round  a  powerful 
bar-magnet  raised  to  meet  it. 


The  experiment  with  the  flexible  gold  thread  is 
simple,  satisfactory,  and  striking,  but  the  rotatory 
properties  connected  with  a  magnet  may  be  illustrated 
in  numbers  of  other  ways.  Thus,  pivot  a  disk  at  its 


§71 


ROTATION  OF  SOLIDS 


161 


centre,  and  arrange  some  light  contact  to  touch  its 
edge,  either  at  one  point  or  all  round,  it  matters  not  ; 
then  supply  a  current  to  disk  from  centre  to  circum- 
ference, and  bring  a  bar-magnet  near  it  along  its  axis 
or,  better,  two  bar-magnets,  with  opposite  poles  one 


W 


FIG.  18. — Pivoted  disk  with  radial  current,  revolving  in  a  magnetic  field  and  winding 
up  a  weight.  The  current  is  supplied  to  the  axle  by  screw  A,  and  leaves  the  rirn 
by  mercury  trough  M.  The  same  apparatus  obviously  serves  to  demonstrate 
currents  induced  by  motion  ;  both  directly  and  by  the  damping  effect. 


on  each  side,  near  the  contact  place  of  the  rim  ;  the 
disk  at  once  begins  to  rotate  (Figs.  18  and  19). 

Instead  of  a  disk  one  may  use  a  single  radius  of  it, 
viz.  a  pivoted  arm  (Fig.  20)  dipping  into  a  circular 
trough  of  mercury  ;  or  we  may  use  a  light  sphere 
rolling  on  two  concentric  circular  lines  of  railway 

M 


162 


ELECTRO-MAGNETISM  CHAP,  vil 


FIG.  19. — Another  pivoted  disk  with  flange  to  dip  into  liquid  so  as  to  make  contact 
all  round  its  rim.  It  rotates  when  a  magnet  is  brought  above  or  below ;  or  even 
in  the  field  of  the  earth. 


FIG.  20. — A  couple  of  radii  of  the  above  disk,  provided  with  points  to  dip  into  mercury, 
and  rotating  constantly  under  the  influence  of  the  steel  magnet  A  ;  or  under  the 
influence  of  a  current  conveyed  by  a  coil  of  wire  round  the  circular  trough. 


ROTATION  OF  LIQUIDS 


163 


(Gore's     arrangement,    Fig.     2I).1       In    every    case 

rotation  begins  as  soon  as  a  magnet  is  brought  near. 

72.  Nor  is  the  revolving  action  confined  to  metallic 

conductors    and    to   true    conduction.      Liquids    and 


FIG.  21. — Gore's  circular  railway.  The  light  spherical  metal  ball  revolves  round  the 
two  concentric  metal  hoops  or  rails  whenever  it  is  made  to  convey  a  current 
between  them  in  a  vertical  magnetic  field. 


gases,  although  they  convey  electricity  by  something 
of  the  nature  of  convection,  are  susceptible  to  rotation 
in  a  precisely  similar  manner. 

1  This  is  not  what  Gore's  railway  is  commonly  used  to  illustrate,  nor 
is  it  the  cause  of  the  motion  as  observed  by  the  inventor,  or  as  described 
in  TyndalFs  Heat.  Ordinarily  the  ball  moves  by  reason  of  an  irregular 
disturbance  due  to  heat  at  its  point  of  contact  with  the  rails,  and  it  is 
mere  accident  which  way  it  goes.  But,  in  so  far  as  the  earth's  vertical 
magnetic  field  is  strong  enough,  it  should  exhibit  a  preference  for  one 
direction  over  the  other  ;  and  if  the  field  is  strengthened  by  bringing  the 
south  pole  of  a  bar-magnet  below  the  apparatus,  true  magnetic  rotation 
is  bound  to  occur.  It  may,  however,  be  convenient  to  state  that  the 
current's  own  lines  of  force  are  powerless  to  cause  continuous  motion  in 
this  case.  An  external  field  is  essential. 

M    2 


164  ELECTRO-MAGNETISM  CHAP,  vn 

To  show  the  rotation  of  liquid  conductors  under 
the  influence  of  a  magnet,  take  a  circular  shallow 
trough  of  liquid,  supply  it  with  stout  sheet  copper 
electrodes  at  centre  and  circumference,  and  put  the 
pole  of  a  magnet  below  it.  The  liquid  at  once  begins 
to  rotate,  and  by  using  a  magnet  and  current  of  fair 
strength  it  can  easily  be  made  to  whirl  so  fast  as  to  fly 


FIG.  22. — Rotation  of  a  liquid  disk  conveying  a  radial  current  in  a  vertical 
magnetic  field. 


over  the  edge  of  the  trough  (Fig.  22).1  The  experi- 
ment is  plainly  the  same  as  Fig.  19,  except  that  a 
liquid  disk  is  used  in  place  of  a  solid  one.  Or,  again, 

1  In  practice  it  is  most  convenient  to  split  a  battery  current  between 
magnet  and  liquid  :  i.e.  to  connect  them  in  parallel  instead  of  in  series. 
It  is  also  well  to  make  the  smaller  surface  of  copper  the  cathode  ; 
because  with  intense  currents  (say  3  amperes  per  square  centimetre) 
a  crust  of  oxide  forms  on  the  anode  which  almost  entirely  stops  the 
current  by  its  resistance. 


§72 


ROTATION   OF  GASES 


165 


it  may  be  considered  the  same  as  Fig.  21.     Reverse 
the  magnet,  and  the  rotation  is  rapidly  reversed. 
Another  method  is  to  send  a  current  along  a  jet  of 


A    A 


FIG.  23. — A  falling  stream  of  liquid  conveying  a  current  between  two  magnetic  poles, 
and  being  thereby  twisted  into  a  spiral.  (Copied  from  a  paper  in  Phil.  Mag.  by 
Dr.  Silvanus  Thompson.) 


mercury  near  a  magnet  and  note  the  behaviour  of  the 
jet.  It  twists  itself  into  a  flat  spiral  as  shown  in 
Fig.  23. 

The  rotation  of  a  gas  discharge  is  most  commonly 


i66 


ELECTRO-MAGNETISM 


CHAP.  VII 


illustrated  by  an  arrangement  like  Fig.  24,  where  the 
terminals  of  the  induction  coil  are  connected  to  the 
rarefied  gas  respectively  above  one  pole  and  round  the 
middle  of  a  magnetized  bar.  If  the  discharge  can  be 
got  to  concentrate  itself  principally  down  one  side, 


FIG.  24.— Induction  coil  discharge  from  a  to  b  through  rarefied  gas,  rotating  round 
a  glass  protected  magnetized  iron  rod. 


which  it  is  not  easy  always  to  do  (it  seems  to  depend 
on  the  presence  in  the  vacuum  of  some  traces  of 
foreign  vapour,  e.g.  CS2  vapour),  the  line  of  light  so 
formed  is  seen  to  revolve. 


§  73  ROTATION  OF  CHARGED  BODIES  167 

Action  between  a  Magnet  and  an  Electric  Charge  in 
Relative  Motion 

73.  Remembering  all  this,  and  the  fact  that  a 
moving  charge  constitutes  a  current,  it  is  not  to  be 
doubted  that  a  charged  pith  ball  moving  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  magnet  is  subject  to  the  same 
rotatory  action.  There  is  no  known  action  between  a 
magnet  and  a  stationary  charged  body,  but  directly 
either  begins  to  move  there  is  an  action  between 
them  tending  to  cause  one  to  rotate  round  the  other. 
It  is  true  that  for  ordinary  speeds  of  motion  this  force 
is  extremely  small  ;  but  still  it  is  not  to  be  doubted 
that  if  a  shower  of  charged  pith  balls  or  Lycopodium 
granules  are  dropped  on  to  a  magnet  pole,  they  will 
fall,  not  perfectly  straight,  but  slightly  corkscrew 
fashion.  And  again,  if  a  set  of  charged  particles  were 
projected  horizontally  and  radially  from  the  top  of  a 
magnet,  their  paths  would  revolve  like  the  beams  of 
a  lighthouse.  And  if  by  any  means  their  paths  were 
kept  straight,  or  deflected  the  other  way,  they  would 
exert  on  the  magnet  an  infinitesimal  "  couple " 
tending  to  make  it  spin  on  its  own  axis. 

Conversely,  if  a  magnet  were  spun  on  its  axis 
rapidly  by  mechanical  means,  there  is  very  little  doubt 
but  that  it  would  act  on  charged  bodies  in  its  neigh- 
bourhood, tending  to  make  them  move  radially  either 
to  or  from  it.  x  This,  however,  is  an  experiment  that 


1 68  ELECTRO-MAGNETISM  CHAP,  vn 

ought  to  be  tried  ;  and  the  easiest  way  of  trying  it 
would  be  to  suspend  a  sort  of  electrometer  needle, 
electrified  positive  at  one  end  and  negative  at  the  other, 
near  the  spinning  magnet,  and  to  look  for  a  trace  of 
deflection — to  be  reversed  when  the  spin  is  reversed. 
A  magnet  of  varying  strength  might  be  easier  to  try 
than  a  spinning  one.1  (See  §§  1 14 — 1 16.) 


Rotation  of  a  Magnet  by  a  Current. 

74.  The  easiest  way  to  show  the  actual  rotation  of 
a  magnet  is  to  send  a  current  half-way  along  it  and 
back  outside.  Thus,  take  a  small,  round,  polished 
steel  bar-magnet  with  pointed  ends,  pivot  it  vertically, 
and  touch  it  steadily  with  two  flakes  or  light  pads  of 
tin-foil,  one  near  either  end  and  one  near  the  middle  ; 
supply  a  current  by  these  contact  pieces,  and  the 
magnet  spins  with  great  rapidity.  Reverse  the  current, 
and  it  rotates  the  other  way.  Conversely,  by  pro- 
ducing the  rotation  mechanically  a  current  will  be 
excited  in  a  wire  joining  the  two  pieces  of  tin-foil 
(Figs.  25,  26,  and  27). 

The  two  contacts  may  be  made  anywhere  on  the 
magnet  except  symmetrically  :  if  the  two  are  equi- 
distant from  the  middle,  no  effect  will  be  produced. 
The  nearer  one  is  to  the  middle  and  the  other  to 

1  For  experiments  directed  to  discover  this  effect  and  exhibiting 
a  very  minute  trace  of  it,  see  Phil.  Mag.,  June  1889,  p.  469. 


74 


SPINNING  MAGNET 


169 


FIG.  25. — Round  bright  steel  bar- magnet  pivoted  at  its  ends,  spinning  rapidly  on  its 
axis  under  the  influence  of  a  current  supplied  to  either  the  bottom  or  top  pivot, 
or  both,  and  removed  near  the  middle  by  a  scrap  of  tin-foil  lightly  touching  it. 


FIG.  26. — Another  mode  of  exhibiting  the  same  thing  as  Fig.   25. 
loaded  so  as  to  float  upright  in  mercury. 


The  magnet  is 


i;o  ELECTRO-MAGNETISM  CHAP,  vn 

the  end  the  stronger  the  effect  ;  stronger  still  if 
one  of  the  contacts  is  either  at  or  beyond  the 
end,  as  in  Fig.  25. 

75.  The  customary  or  Faraday  plan  of  exhibiting 
the  effect  depicted  in  Fig.  25,  with  a  mercury  ring 
trough  round  the  magnet  into  which  a  projecting  wire 
carried  by  the  magnet  dips,  is  not  quite  so  simple  and 


FIG.  27. — The  converse  of  Fig.  25.  Spinning  the  magnet  mechanically  gives  a  current 
between  two  springs,  one  touching  it  near  or  beyond  either  end,  the  other 
touching  it  near  the  middle. 


obvious  a  method  as  Fig.  25  ;  neither  is  it  so  effective, 
unless  the  ring  trough  fits  the  magnet  pretty  closely. 
The  arrangement  in  Fig.  25,  where  the  contact  is 
made  actually  on  the  surface  of  the  magnet,  gives  the 
theoretically  greatest  force. 

Many  more  variations  of  the  experiment  could  be 
shown,  but  these  are  typical  ones,  and  will  suffice. 
They  all  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  magnet, 
considered  electrically,  is  a  rotatory  phenomenon. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

NATURE  OF  MAQNETISM 

Ampere's  Theory 

76.  THE  idea  that  magnetism  is  nothing  more  nor 
less  than  a  whirl  of  electricity  is  no  new  one — it  is 
as  old  as  Ampere.  Perceiving  that  a  magnet  could 
be  imitated  by  an  electric  whirl,  he  made  the  hypo- 
thesis that  an  electric  whirl  existed  in  every  magnet 
and  was  the  cause  of  its  properties.  Not  of  course 
that  a  steel  magnet  has  an  electric  current  cir- 
culating round  and  round  it,  as  an  electro-magnet 
has  ;  nothing  is  more  certain  than  the  fact  that  a 
magnet  is  not  magnetized  as  a  whole,  but  that  each 
particle  of  it  is  magnetized,  and  that  the  actual  mag- 
net is  merely  an  assemblage  of  polarized  particles.  The 
old  and  familiar  experiment  of  breaking  a  magnet 
into  pieces  proves  this.  Each  particle  or  molecule  of 
the  bar  must  have  its  circulating  electric  current,  and 
then  the  properties  of  the  whole  are  explained. 


172  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  vm 

There  is  only  one  little  difficulty  which  suggests 
itself  in  Ampere's  theory — How  are  these  molecular 
currents  maintained  ?  Long  ago  a  similar  difficulty 
was  felt  in  astronomy — What  maintains  the  motions 
of  the  planets  ?  Spirits,  vortices,  and  other  contriv- 
ances were  invented  to  keep  them  going. 

But  in  the  light  of  Galileo's  mechanics  the  difficulty 
vanishes.  Things  continue  in  motion  of  themselves 
until  they  are  stopped.  Postulate  no  resistance,  and 
motion  is  essentially  perpetual. 

What  stops  an  ordinary  current  ?  Resistance. 
Start  a  current  in  a  curtain-ring,  by  any  means,  and 
leave  it  alone.  It  will  run  its  energy  down  into  heat 
in  the  space  of  half  a  second  or  so.  But  if  the  metal 
conducted  infinitely  well  there  would  be  no  such 
dissipation  of  energy,  and  the  current  would  be 
permanent. 

In  a  metal  rod,  electricity  has  to  pass  from  atom  to 
atom,  and  it  meets  with  resistance  in  so  doing  ;  but 
who  is  to  say  that  the  atoms  themselves  do  not 
conduct  perfectly  ?  They  are  known  to  have  various 
infinite  properties  already  ;  they  are  infinitely  elastic, 
for  instance.  Pack  up  a  box  of  gas  in  cotton-wool 
for  a  century,  and  see  whether  it  has  got  any  cooler. 
The  experiment,  if  practicable,  should  be  tried  ;  but 
our  present  experience  warrants  us  in  assuming  no 
loss  of  motion  among  colliding  atoms  until  the 
contrary  has  been  definitely  proved  by  experiment. 


§  76  THEORY  OF  MAGNETISM  173 

To  all  intents  and  purposes  certainly  atoms  are 
infinitely  elastic ;  why  should  they  not  also  be 
infinitely  conducting  ?  Why  should  dissipation  of 
energy  occur  in  respect  of  an  electric  current  cir- 
culating wholly  inside  an  atom  ?  There  is  no  known 
reason  why  it  should.  There  are  many  analogies 
against  it. 

How  did  these  currents  originate  ?  We  may  as 
well  ask,  How  did  any  of  their  properties  originate  ? 
How  did  their  motion  originate  ?  These  questions  are 
unanswerable.  Suffice  it  for  us,  there  they  are.  The 
atoms  of  a  particular  substance — iron  for  instance, 
or  zinc — have  an  electric  whirl  of  certain  strength 
circulating  in  them  as  one  of  their  specific  physical 
properties. 

This  much  is  certain,  that  the  Amperian  currents 
are  not  producible  by  magnetic  experiments.  When 
a  piece  of  steel  or  iron  is  magnetized,  the  act^of 
magnetization  is  not  an  excitation  of  Amperian 
current  in  each  molecule — is  not  in  any  sense  a 
magnetization  of  each  molecule.  The  molecules  were 
all  fully  magnetized  to  begin  with  :  the  act  of  mag- 
netization consists  merely  in  facing  them  round  so  as 
to  look  mainly  one  way — in  polarizing  them,  in  fact. 
This  was  proved  by  Beetz  long  ago  :  I  will  not  stop 
to  explain  it  further,  but  will  refer  students  to 
Maxwell  (vol.  ii.  chap.  vi.). 


174  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM         CHAP,  vni 


A  mpere's  Theory  extended  by  Weber  to  explain 
Diamagnetism  also 

77.  Let  us  see  how  far  we  have  got.    We  have  made 
the  following  assertions  : — 

(1)  That  a  magnet  consists  of  an  assemblage  of 
polarized  molecules. 

(2)  That  these  molecules  are  each  of  them  perman- 
ent magnets,  whether  the  substance  be  in  its  ordinary 
or  in  its   magnetized  condition,  and  that  the  act   of 
magnetization  consists  in  turning  them  round  so  as  to 
face  more  or  less  one  way. 

(3)  That  when  all  the  molecules  are  faced   in  the 
same   direction  the  substance  is   magnetically  com- 
pletely saturated. 

(4)  That  if  each  molecule  of  a  definite  substance 
contains  an  electric  current  of  definite  strength   cir- 
culating  in    a   channel    of  infinite    conductivity   the 
magnetic   behaviour  of  the  substance  is  completely 
explained. 

But  now,  supposing  all  this  granted,  how  comes  it 
that  the  molecular  currents  are  not  capable  of 
being  generated  by  magnetic  induction  ?  And  if 
we  cannot  excite  them,  are  we  able  to  vary  their 
strength  ? 

78.  The    answer    to   these    questions    is    included 
in   the  following  propositions,  which   I   will  now  for 


§  79  THEORY  OF  DIAMAGNETISM  175 

convenience  state,  and  then  proceed  to  explain   and 
justify. 

(5)  If    a    substance     possessing    these     molecular 
currents  be  immersed  in  a  magnetic  field,  all  those 
molecules  which  are  able  to  turn  and  look  along  the 
lines   of  force   in  the  right  direction  will  have  their 
currents  weakened  ;  but  on  withdrawal  from  the  field 
they  will  regain  their  normal  strength. 

(6)  If  the  currents  naturally  flowing  in  conducting 
channels  be  feeble  or  nil,  the  act  of  immersion  of  the 
substance  in  a  magnetic    field    will    reverse  them  or 
excite   opposite   currents,    which   will  last  so   long  as 
the  body  remains  in  the  field,  but  will  be  destroyed 
by  its  removal, 

(7)  The    same    thing   will     happen    whatever   the 
strength  of  the  natural  molecular  currents,  provided 
the    molecules  are    completely  fixed    and  unable   to 
face  round  under  the  influence  of  the  field. 

(8)  The    molecular   currents    so    magnetically    in- 
duced   are   sufficient    to   explain  the   phenomena  of 
diamagnetism. 

79.  Let  us  first  just  recall  to  mind  the  well-known 
elementary  facts  of  current  induction.  A  conducting 
circuit,  such  as  a  ring  or  a  coil  of  wire,  suddenly 
brought  near  a  current-conveying  coil  or  a  magnet,  has 
a  momentary  current  induced  in  it  in  the  opposite 
direction  to  the  inducing  current — in  other  words, 
such  as  to  cause  momentary  repulsion  between  the 


176  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM         CHAP,  vin 

two.  So  long  as  it  remains  steady,  nothing  further 
happens  ;  but  on  withdrawing  it  another  momentary 
current  is  induced  in  it  in  the  contrary  direction  to 
the  first  excited.  The  shortest  way  of  expressing 
the  facts  quite  generally  is  to  say,  that,  while  from 
any  cause  the  magnetic  field  through  a  conductor 
is  increasing  in  strength,  a  momentary  current  is 
excited  in  it  tending  to  drive  it  out  of  the  field  ; 
and  that,  whenever  the  magnetic  field  decreases  again 
to  its  old  value,  a  reverse  flow  of  precisely  the 
same  quantity  of  electricity  occurs.  Fig.  28  shows 
a  mode  of  illustrating  these  facts.  A  copper  disk 
is  supported  at  the  end  of  a  torsion  arm  and  brought 
close  to  the  face  of  an  unexcited  bar  electro-magnet. 
On  exciting  the  magnet  the  disk  is  driven  violently 
away :  to  be  sucked  back  again,  however,  whenever 
the  magnetism  ceases. 

80.  Now,  why  are  all  these  effects  so  temporary  ? 
What  makes  the  induced  current  cease  so  soon  after 
excitation  ?  Nothing  but  dissipation  of  energy  :  only 
the  friction  of  imperfect  conductivity.  There  is 
nothing  to  maintain  the  current,  it  meets  with  resist- 
ance in  its  flow  through  the  metal,  and  so  it  soon 
stops. 

But  in  a  perfect  conductor  like  a  molecule  no  such 
dissipation  would  occur.  Electricity  in  such  a  body 
will  obey  the  first  law  of  motion,  and  continue  to 
flow  till  stopped  by  applied  force.  Destroying  the 


§  8o  REPULSION  OF  COPPER  DISK  177 

magnetic  field  will  stop  an  induced  molecular  current, 
but  nothing  else  will  stop  it.  Hence  it  follows  that 
the  repulsion  experienced  by  a  molecule  is  no  transi- 
tory effect  like  that  in  Fig.  28,  but  is  as  permanent  as 
the  magnetic  field  which  excites  and  exhibits  it. 
Thus,  then,  a  body  whose  molecules  are  perfectly 


FIG.  28. — Stout  disk  of  copper  supported  on  a  horizontal  arm  near  one  pole  of  a  bar 
electro-magnet.  The  disk  is  repelled  while  the  magnet  is  being  excited,  and  is 
attracted  while  the  magnetism  is  being  destroyed. 

conducting,  but  without  specific  current  circulating  in 
them,  will  behave  diamagnetically,  i.e.  will  move  away 
from  strong  parts  of  the  field  towards  weak  ones,  or, 
if  only  free  to  point,  will  set  its  length  equatorially, 
just  as  bismuth  is  known  to  do. 

Whether  this  be  the  true  explanation  of  diamagnet- 

N 


178  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  viu 

ism  or  not,  it  is  at  least  a  possible  one.    It  seems  to  me 
extremely  probable.     It  is  known  as  Weber's  theory. 

It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  specific  mole- 
cular currents  of  a  diamagnetic  substance  are  really 
nil;  all  that  is  needful  is  that  they  shall  be  weaker 
than  those  induced  by  an  ordinary  magnetic  field. 
By  using  an  extremely  weak  field,  however,  the 
specific  currents  need  not  be  quite  neutralized,  and  in 
such  a  field  the  body  ought  to  behave  as  a  very 
feebly  magnetic  substance.  Such  an  effect  has  been 
looked  for.1 

8 1.  It  is  however  just  possible  for  a  substance  to 
possess  specific  molecular  currents  and  yet  not  to  be 
sensibly  magnetic :  every  molecule  might  be  so 
jammed  as  to  be  unable  to  turn  round,  and  such  a 
substance  could  hardly  exhibit  any  noticeable  mag- 
netic properties.  The  molecules  would  have  got 
themselves  into  a  state  of  minimum  potential  energy, 
and  if  jammed  therein  nothing  could  be  got  out  of 
them.  The  induced  currents  of  diamagnetism  would 
be  superposed  upon  them  just  as  if  no  initial  molecular 
currents  existed.  By  varying  the  temperature  of  such 
a  substance,  however,  one  might  expect  to  alter  its 
molecular  arrangement,  and  so  develop  magnetic 
properties  in  it,  just  as  electrical  properties  are  deve- 
loped in  crystals  like  tourmaline  by  heat  or  by  cold. 
We  are  now  able  clearly  to  appreciate  this  much — 

1  See  Nature,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  484. 


§  82  MAGNETIC  CIRCUIT  179 

that  the  molecular  currents  needful  to  explain  mag- 
netism are  not  conceivably  excited  by  the  act  of 
magnetization,  for  they  are  'in  the  wrong  direction. 
Induced  molecular  currents  will  be  such  as  to  cause 
repulsion  :  those  which  cause  attraction  must  have 
existed  there  before,  and  be  merely  rotated  into  fresh 
positions  by  the  magnetizing  force.  An  intense  mag- 
netic field  will  weaken  them,  and  thus  tend  to  render 
a  magnetic  substance  less  magnetic. 


Function  of  the  Iron   in  a  Magnet.     Two  Modes  of 
expressing  it 

82.  We  can  now  explain  the  function  of  iron,  or 
other  magnetic  substance,  in  strengthening  a  magnetic 
field.  Take  a  circular  coil  of  wire,  Fig.  29,  and  send 
a  current  round  it :  there  is  a  certain  field — a  certain 
number  of  lines  of  force — between  its  faces.  Fill  the 
coil  with  iron,  so  as  to  -make  it  a  common  electro- 
magnet, and  the  strength  of  the  field  is  greatly  in- 
creased. Why  ?  The  common  mode  of  statement 
likens  the  magnetic  circuit  to  a  voltaic  circuit ;  there 
is  a  certain  magneto-motive  force,  and  a  certain  re- 
sistance, or,  as  Mr.  Heaviside  preferably  calls  it,  "  re- 
luctance "  :  the  quotient  gives  the  resulting  magnetic 
induction,  or  total  number  of  lines  of  force.  Iron  is 
more  permeable  than  air — say,  3000  times  more 

N    2 


i8o  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP.  VITI 

permeable — and  accordingly  the  resistance  of  the  iron 
part  of  the  circuit  is  almost  negligible  in  comparison 
with  that  of  the  air-gap  between  the  poles.  Thus  a 
good  approximation  to  the  total  intensity  of  field  is 
obtained  by  dividing  the  magneto-motive  force  by  the 
width  of  the  air-gap  ;  or  more  completely  and  generally 
by  treating  the  varying  material  and  section  of  a 
magnetic  circuit  just  as  the  varying  material  and 


section  of  a  voltaic  circuit  is  treated,  and  so  obtaining 
its  total  resistance.  Iron  is  thus  to  be  regarded  as  a 
magnetic  conductor  between  100  and  10,000  times 
better  than  air.  Its  specific  magnetic  conductivity  or 
inductivity,  or,  as  it  is  more  usually  called  (after 
Thomson),  permeability,  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of 
the  magnetization  produced  to  the  magnetizing  force 
applied,  and  is  generally  denoted  by  the  symbol  /z.1 

1  See  Appendix  (b]. 


§83  FUNCTION  OF  IRON  181 

83.  This  mode  of  regarding  the  case  is  undoubtedly 
simple  and  convenient,  its  thorough  recognition  has 
greatly  improved  the  construction  of  electro-magnets 
and  dynamo-machines,  and  it  is  difficult  to  over- 
estimate its  practical  convenience  ;  nevertheless  it  is 
well  to  remember  that  it  is  not  the  fundamental  mode. 
If  we  look  at  the  matter  less  with  a  view  to  practical 
simplicity  than  with  the  aim  of  seeing  what  is  really 
going  on,  we  shall  express  it  thus : — 

Before  the  iron  was  inserted  in  the  coil  there  were 
a  certain  number  of  circular  lines  of  force  inside  it 
due  to  the  current  alone.  A  piece  of  common  iron, 
although  full  of  polarized  molecules,  has  no  external 
or  serviceable  lines  of  force  :  they  are  all  shut  up,  as 
it  were,  into  little  closed  circuits  inside  the  iron.  But 
directly  the  iron  finds  itself  in  a  magnetic  field  some 
of  these  open  out,  a  chain  of  polarized  molecules  is 
formed,  and  the  lines  due  to  its  molecular  currents 
add  themselves  to  those  belonging  to  the  current  of 
the  magnetizing  helix. 

Thus  our  ring  electro-magnet  has  now  not  only  its 
own  old  lines  of  force  but  a  great  many  of  those 
belonging  to  the  iron  which  have  sympathetically  laid 
themselves  alongside  the  first. 

Parenthetically  we  may  make  the  following  remark, 
So  long  as  the  iron  adds  some  3000  lines  of  its  own 
(more  or  less  according  to  the  quality  of  the  iron)  for 
every  one  otherwise  excited  in  the  field,  so  long  it 


182  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  vm 

has  its  maximum  permeability  :  -it  is  infinitely  far  from 
saturation.  But  after  a  certain  call  upon  it,  it  begins  to 
show  signs  of  poverty,  and  ultimately  may  refuse  to 
add  any  lines  of  its  own  at  all ;  it  is  then  said  to  be 
completely  saturated  :  its  permeability  is  then  just 
as  if  it  were  air.  The  permeability  of  iron  is  an 
extremely  indefinite  quantity.  Not  only  does  it  vary 
with  the  same  piece  as  it  nears  saturation,  but  it  is 
exceedingly  different  for  different  specimens.  Thus 
some  manganese-steel  exists  with  a  permeability  one 
and  a  half  times  that  of  air,  or  only  about  as  much  as 
zinc,  while  Ewing  finds  some  iron  with  a  permeability 
as  high  as  20,000  under  shaking. 

The  end  result  of  either  mode  of  regarding  the 
matter  is  of  course  the  same — the  lines  of  force 
between  the  poles  are  increased  in  number  by  the 
presence  of  iron  ;  but  whereas,  in  the  first-mentioned 
mode  of  treatment,  the  fact  of  permeability  had  to  be 
accepted  unexplained,  in  the  second  nothing  is  unex- 
plained except  the  fundamental  facts  of  the  subject, 
such  as  the  reason  why  currents  tend  to  set  them- 
selves with  their  axes  parallel,  and  other  matters  of 
that  sort. 

Permanent  Magnetism 

84.  There  is  one  curious  effect  of  introducing  iron 
or  other  solid  magnetic  medium  into  a  magnetic  field 
which  must  not  be  overlooked.  This  effect  depends 


§  84  MAGNETIZATION  183 

on  the  solidity  of  the  substance,  i.e.  the  fixedness  or 
stiffness  of  its  molecules.  In  a  fluid  the  molecules 
are  free  to  take  up  any  fresh  arrangement  with  ease  : 
there  is  no  set  arrangement  in  the  internal  structure 
of  a  fluid,  any  more  than  there  is  a  definiteness  in 
its  external  shape.  But  with  a  solid  it  is  different : 
its  molecules  once  set  into  any  position  tend  to  remain 
more  or  less  in  that  position  ;  the  substance  may  be 
elastic  to  a  certain  extent,  but  after  large  disturbances 
there  will  always  be  a  certain  amount  of  permanent 
set.  Hence  it  is  that  solid  bodies  have  a  definite 
shape,  which  it  requires  force  to  change  ;  hence  it  is 
also  that  their  molecules  are  able  to  crystallize  into 
geometrical  patterns. 

Now,  since  the  act  of  magnetization  consists  'in 
making  a  number  of  already  polarized  molecules  face 
round  more  or  less  in  one  direction,  it  follows  that 
solid  magnetic  substances  will  behave  differently  from 
fluid  ones.  In  fluid  media  the  magnetized  arrange- 
ment can  only  be  maintained  by  a  continuous 
exertion  of  magnetizing  force  ;  and  directly  this  is 
withdrawn  the  molecules  will  quickly  take  up  their 
old  higgledy-piggledy  arrangement  of  minimum 
energy,  and  all  trace  of  magnetization  will  cease. 
They  will  be  perfectly  easy  to  magnetize,  and  they 
will  automatically  demagnetize  themselves.  But  with 
solids  it  is  otherwise.  The  molecules  if  set  in  their 
magnetized  position  by  only  a  feeble  force  will  spring 


1 84  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  vin 

back  almost  completely  when  the  magnetizing  force 
is  removed  ;  but  if  they  have  been  arranged  by  a 
force  of  some  violence,  the  spring  back  will  be  only 
partial,  and  a  permanent  set  will  remain.  The  spring- 
back  portion  of  the  whole  arrangement  is  called 
temporary  magnetism,  the  set  portion  is  called 
permanent  magnetism.  The  difference  can  be  illus- 
trated by  bending  a  bit  of  tin  plate  or  paper  nearly 
double,  and  then  letting  it  go. 

Substances  differ  greatly  in  their  power  of  thus 
retaining  magnetization  ;  and,  as  is  well  known,  steel 
has  the  property  well  developed  ;  but  all  substances 
exhibit  it  more  or  less.1  Moreover,  many  substances 
can  retain  a  little  of  the  set  if  they  are  left  carefully 
undisturbed,  but  they  lose  it  if  shaken  or  heated  : 
sometimes  even  if  gently  touched.  A  long  thin  bar 
of  soft  iron  is  most  instructive  in  this  respect.  It  can 
be  easily  magnetized  by  the  earth's  magnetism  if  held 
vertically  and  struck  with  a  finger.  If  then  inverted 
slowly  and  cautiously,  it  will  retain  nearly  the  whole 
of  the  induced  magnetism  ;  but  if  struck  again,  or 
even  if  the  ringers  are  shuffled  on  it  (so  sensitive  some 
bars  are),  the  whole  is  immediately  reversed.  Soft 
iron  can,  in  fact,  retain  enormously  more  magnetism 
than  steel  can,  but  it  retains  it  in  a  very  feeble  and 
loose  manner.  Its  magnetism  can  only  be  styled 
sub-permanent. 

1  See  a  letter  in  Nature,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  484 


§  85  DEMAGNETIZATION  185 

85.  A  short  thick  bar  can  retain  much  less  magnet- 
ism than  a  long  thin  one  ;  in  fact,  if  a  stout  bar  is 
made  of  the  softest  iron,  it  can  retain  hardly  any. 
A  piece  of  iron  shaped  like  Fig.  29  would  have  a 
much  better  chance  of  retaining  its  magnetism,  and  if 
the  gap  were  closed  by  another  piece  of  iron,  called  a 
"  keeper,"  it  would  retain  it  very  well ;  while  if  the  last 
trace  of  air-gap,  the  air-films  between  keeper  and  mag- 
net, be  abolished  by  making  the  whole  one  welded 
ring,  then  its  magnetism  is  retained  almost  perfectly. 
There  is  some  demagnetizing  force  even  in  this 
case,  for  a  fluid  magnetized  as  a  ring  would  not 
remain  magnetized,  angj  I  find  that  tapping  or 
beating  such  a  ring  does  appreciably  weaken  its 
magnetization,  but  the  demagnetizing  force  is  very 
small  compared  with  what  it  is  when  there  is  an 
air-gap. 

Hence  we  learn  that  the  specially  demagnetizing 
portion  of  a  magnetic  circuit  is  the  fluid  portion — 
the  air  portion  ;  and  the  greater  the  proportion  of  the 
fluid  portion  to  the  whole,  the  more  easily  is  de- 
magnetization accomplished.  Fluids  having  no  power 
of  their  own  for  retaining  magnetism,  if  lines  of  force 
are  forcibly  maintained  in  air  or  other  fluid  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  solid  magnet,  all  the  strain  of 
upholding  not  only  its  own  magnetism,  but  all  the 
rest  of  the  magnetism  in  the  field — the  strain  of 
keeping  the  molecules  faced  round  in  opposition  to 


1 86  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM         CHAP,  vin 

their  mutual  restoring  forces — has  to  be  thrown  upon 
the  rigidity  and  retentivity  of  the  solid. 

86.  All  the  known  facts  of  magnetism  have  had  new 
life  and  interest  put  into  them  lately  by  the  researches 
of  Ewing.  The  long-known  fact  that  solid  substances 
store  up  in  their  structure  any  previous  arrangement 
of  their  molecules,  so  that  traces  of  the  effect  are  re- 
cognizable long  after  the  cause  of  the  effect  has  been 
withdrawn,  is  not  indeed  by  any  means  confined  to 
magnetism  ;  it  is  a  general  property  of  solids,  and 
constitutes  a  considerable  difficulty  in  dealing  with 
them  theoretically.  The  properties  of  all  fluids, 
whether  liquids  or  gases,  depend  upon  their  state  at 
the  moment,  and  upon  nothing  else  ;  not  at  all  upon 
how  they  reached  that  state,  or  upon  what  has 
happened  to  them  in  past  times.  Hydrogen  at  o°  C. 
and  76  centimetres  pressure  is  a  perfectly  definite  sub- 
stance. Water  at  50°  C.  and  one  atmosphere  pressure 
is  again  a  quite  complete  specification.  And  the  same 
is  very  nearly  true  of  some  crystalline  solids.  Quartz 
or  ice  at  given  temperature  and  pressure  is  generally 
considered  quite  a  definite  statement,  though  perhaps 
it  is  not  so  exactly  definite  as  we  imagine.  But  glass, 
or  steel,  or  copper,  at  a  specified  temperature,  is  by  no 
means  a  definite  substance.  If  it  has  been  cooled 
down  to  that  temperature  it  will  not  be  the  same  as  if 
it  had  been  warmed  up  to  it.  We  must  be  told 
whether  it  has  been  hardened,  or  tempered,  or  an- 


§  87  HYSTERESIS  187 

nealed,  and  so  on.  The  properties  of  a  solid  body 
depend  on  its  past  history  as  well  as  on  its  present 
state. 

All  this  is  pre-eminently  true  of  magnetization. 
To  understand  completely  the  behaviour  of  a  magnet 
we  must  not  only  know  its  present  state,  but  we  must 
know  how  it  got  to  that  state.  A  piece  of  steel  once 
magnetized  and  then  demagnetized  is  not  in  the  same 
condition  as  if  it  had  never  been  in  a  magnetic  field  : 
unless,  indeed,  it  has  been  re-melted  and  made  afresh. 

This  much,  however,  must  be  granted,  that  if  every- 
thing were  known  about  the  instantaneous  state  of  a 
body  there  would  be  no  need  to  go  back  upon  its  past 
history  :  it  might  even  be  possible  to  deduce  some  of 
its  past  history  from  its  present  state.  But  it  is  pre- 
cisely because  a  knowledge  of  the  position  and  relation 
of  every  individual  molecule  is  impossible,  and  because 
we  have  to  put  up  with  a  few  salient  features  of 
information,  that  an  inquiry  into  past  history  is 
necessary.  A  few  salient  features  are  sufficient  in  the 
case  of  fluids  :  they  are,  in  general,  not  sufficient  in 
the  case  of  solids. 

I  have  laid  stress  upon  this  matter  because  it  is  an 
important  general  distinction  between  states  which 
are  self-contained,  so  to  speak,  and  states  which  are 
led  up  to. 

87.  A  further  detail  of  the  distinction  is  that,  in 
solids,  a  direct  and  return  series  of  changes  are  not 


i88  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM         CHAP,  vm 

usually  the  same  ;  a  precisely  inverse  cause  does  not 
precisely  invert  the  effect.  Take  a  body  from  one 
self-contained  state  to  another.  Then,  whenever  you 
reverse  the  series  of  operations  which  brought  it  there, 
it  will  return  by  the  same  path  to  -its  previous  condi- 
tion, and  everything  will  be  as  it  had  been,  and  no 
work  need  have  been  done  on  the  whole.  Not  so  with 
the  led-up-to  states.  Magnetize  a  piece  of  steel  by 
one  series  of  operations,  and  then  perform  the  same 
operations  in  reverse  order  :  it  will  not  return  by  the 
same  path  at  all,  nor  will  it  return  to  its  original  con- 
dition. Continue  the  process  of  magnetization  and 
reverse  magnetization  several  times,  and  you  may  at 
length  succeed  in  getting  the  body  to  go  through  a 
cycle  of  changes,  at  least  approximately.  But  it  will 
go  by  one  path  and  return  by  another. 

Now  when  a  body  of  any  kind  is  taken  from  a  state 
A  to  a  state  B  by  one  path,  and  back  from  B  to  A  by 
some  other  path,  as  steam  is  for  instance  in  a  steam- 
engine,  the  result  is  always  that  some  work  is  either 
done  by  the  substance,  or  has  to  be  done  upon  it,  in 
performing  the  cycle.  The  return  by  a  different  path 
is  optional  in  the  case  of  steam,  and  accordingly  work 
may  or  may  not  be  done  on  it ;  but  in  the  case  of  a 
magnetized  solid  it  is  not  optional.  The  ascending 
curve  of  increasing  magnetism,  and  the  descending 
curve  of  decreasing  magnetism,  do  not  coincide,  and 
cannot  be  made  to  coincide.  Consequently,  whenever 


§  S;A  PROCESS  OF  MAGNETIZATION  189 

a  piece  of  iron   is  taken  round  a   cycle  of  magnetic 
changes,  some  work  is  necessarily  done. 

This  work,  in  general,  results  in  a  production  of 
heat,  and  accordingly  a  piece  of  iron  magnetized  and 
demagnetized  successively  in  rapid  succession  gets 
slightly  warm.  This  direct  heating  effect  is,  however, 
very  small,  though  it  is  becoming  perceptible  in  the 
"  transformers  "  of  modern  electrical  engineering.1 

All  this  behaviour  of  iron  and  other  substances 
with  regard  .to  magnetism  is  called  by  Ewing 
hysteresis  ;  (from  vcrrepeo),  to  lag  behind). 

8/A.  A  remarkable  discovery  has  been  recently  made 
with  regard  to  the  mechanism  of  the  act  of  magnetiza- 
tion and  the  nature  of  the  forces  in  a  solid  to  which 
magnetic  retentivity  is  due.  It  used  to  be  thought 
that  a  kind  of  friction,  or  other  mechanical  constraint, 
was  necessary  to  hold  the  molecules  in  place,  to 
permit  their  elastic  yield  up  to  a  certain  limit  as 
magnetic  forces  rotated  them,  while  beyond  that 
limit  a  sort  of  viscosity  set  in  and  fixed  them  more  or 
less  permanently  in  their  new  positions.  But  Ewing 
has  experimentally  shown  that  all  the  fixity  required 
in  a  solid  composed  of  polarized  molecules  is  the 
fixity  of  their  pivots  or  axes  of  rotation.  If  the  atoms 
are  capable  of  locomotion,  as  in  a  fluid,  then  no  doubt 

1  The  large  indirect  heating  by  induced  currents— the  so-called 
Foucault  currents — is  too  familiarly  known  to  need  any  other  statement 
than  that  it  is  quite  distinct  from  what  we  are  here  discussing. 


190  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  vm 

permanent  magnetization  will  be  impossible  ;  but  if 
locomotion  be  prevented,  so  that  the  atoms  can  only 
rotate  on  fixed  centres,  then  every  detail  of  the 
magnetic  behaviour  of  a  solid  can  be  explained  by 
the  magnetic  forces  among  the  polarized  but  other- 
wise perfectly  free  atoms.  No  mechanical  constraint 
is  necessary  to  explain  magnetic  retentivity  and 
hysteresis.  It  all  follows  at  once  from  the  behaviour 
of  a  number  of  magnetic  particles  rotating  within  the 
range  of  each  other's  influence  ;  and  it  can  be  very 
completely  imitated  by  a  flock  of  pivoted  compass- 
needles.  This  is  a  considerable  step  towards  remov- 
ing complexity  and  indistinctness  from  the  constitu- 
tion of  solids.  The  properties  of  liquids  and  gases 
are  known  to  merge  into  one  another,  and  to  be 
explicable  by  a  number  of  similar  particles  approach- 
ing more  or  less  within  each  other's  range  of  force. 
The  properties  of  solids  will  probably  follow  too,  by 
adding  to  this  conception  that  of  fixity  of  centre  or 
absence  of  locomotion. 

Electrical  Momentum  once  more 

88.  There  is  just  one  point  which  I  must  stop  here 
to  call  attention  to.  The  theories  of  magnetism  and 
diamagnetism,  which  I  have  given  according  to 
Ampere,  Weber,  and  Maxwell,  require  as  their  found- 
ation that  in  a  perfect  conductor  electricity  shall  obey 


§  89  MOMENTUM  191 

the  first  law  of  motion — shall  continue  to  flow  until 
stopped  by  force.  But  the  property  of  matter  which 
enables  it  to  do  this  is  called  inertia  ;  the  law  is  called 
the  law  of  inertia  ;  and  anything  which  behaves  in 
this  way  must  be  granted  to  possess  inertia. 

It  would  not  do  to  deduce  so  important  a  fact  from 
a  yet  unverified  theory  ;  but  at  least  one  must  notice 
that  momentum  is  essentially  involved  in  Ampere's 
theory  of  magnetism.  It  is  the  only  theory  of  mag- 
netism yet  formulated,  and  it  breaks  down  unless 
electricity  possesses  inertia. 

Nevertheless  it  is  a  fact  that  an  electro-magnet  does 
not  behave  in  the  least  like  a  fly-wheel  or  spinning- 
top  :  there  is  no  momentum  mechanically  discover- 
able (§  39).  Supposing  this  should  turn  out  to  be 
strictly  and  finally  true,  we  must  admit  that  a  molecular 
electric  current  consists  of  two  equal  opposite  streams 
of  the  two  kinds  of  electricity :  one  must  begin  to 
regard  negative  electricity  not  as  merely  the  negation 
or  defect  of  positive,  but  as  a  separate  entity.  Its 
relation  to  positive  may  turn  out  to  be  something 
more  like  that  of  sodium  to  chlorine  than  that  of  cold 
to  heat. 

89.  I  said  that  no  effect  due  to  electric  inertia  was 
mechanically  discoverable  ;  and  on  the  hypothesis  that 
an  electric  current  consists  of  a  pair  of  equal  opposite 
currents  of  positive  and  negative  electricity  respec- 
tively this  is  very  natural.  Think  of  a  couple  of 


192  NATURE  OF  MAGNETISM          CHAP,  vin 

india-rubber  pipes  tied  together  so  as  to  form  a  double 
tube,  and  through  each  propel  a  current  of  water,  one 
in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  other.  The  double 
current  has  no  gyrostatic  properties,  and  the  only  way 
the  water  can  exhibit  momentum  is  by  its  resistance 
to  change  of  velocity,  like  the  "  extra-current  "  effects 
in  electricity  (§  38). 

So  long  as  one  considered  the  flow  of  electricity  in 
ordinary  conductors,  we  could  partially  avoid  the 
question  of  inertia  by  considering  it  urged  forward  at 
every  point  with  a  force  sufficient  to  overcome  the 
resistance  there  and  no  more  ;  but  though  this  ex- 
plained the  shape  of  the  stream-lines  (§  49),  yet  it 
did  not  suffice  to  render  clear  the  phenomena  of  self- 
induction — the  lag  of  the  interior  electricity  in  a  wire 
behind  the  outside  until  definitely  pushed  (§§  43-48)  ; 
still  less  does  it  explain  its  temporary  persistence  in 
motion  after  the  pushing  force  has  ceased. 

But,  now  that  we  are  dealing  with  perfect  conduc- 
tors, with  no  pushing  force  at  all,  the  persistence  of 
molecular  currents  without  inertia,  or  an  equivalent 
property  so  like  it  as  to  be  rightly  called  by  the  same 
name  at  present,  becomes  inexplicable.  True,  the 
molecular  currents  are  as  yet  an  hypothesis  ;  and  that 
is  the  only  loop-hole  out  of  a  definite  conclusion 
(§§  98  and  185). 


CHAPTER  IX 

STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD 

90.  LET  us  now  pass  in  review  the  various  facts  and 
experiences  which  have  led  us  to  a  dual  view  of 
electricity  ;  a  kind  of  two-fluid  theory,  but  in  a  very 
modified  form. 

First,  there  are  the  old  experiments  which  vaguely 
suggest  the  separate  existence  of  negative  electricity, 
such  as  :— 

(1)  The  wind   from   a  point  whether   positive   or 
negative  ;  so  that  a  candle  gets  blown  always  away 
from  it,  whether  the  point  be  on  the  prime  conductor 
and  the  candle  held  in  the  hand,  or  whether  the  point 
be  held  in  the  hand  and  presented  to  the  candle  or 
prime   conductor ;    so,   also,  that    a    point     whirligig 
turns  the  same  way,  whether  supported  on  the  prime 
conductor,    or   whether   attached    to    the    earth    and 
placed  near  it. 

(2)  Phenomena  connected  with  the  spark  discharge, 

O 


T94     STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD     CHAP,  ix 

such  as  Wheatstone's  old  experiment  on  what  he 
called  the  velocity  of  electricity,  with  the  three  pair 
of  knobs  ;  and  the  double  burr  produced  in  cardboard 
when  pierced  with  a  spark,  suggesting  that  something 
has  pierced  it  both  ways  at  once. 

Then  there  are  the  more  recently  observed  facts  ;  as, 
for  instance  : — 

(3)  The  fact  that  an  electrostatic  strain   scarcely 
affects  the  volume  of  a  dielectric  ;    thereby  at  once 
suggesting  something  of  the  nature  of  a  shearing  or 
distorting  stress,  which  alters  shape  but  not  size  ;  a 
displacement  of  positive  outwards  and  simultaneous 
negative  inwards  (§  13). 

(4)  The    facts    of    electrolysis,    and    the    double 
procession    of    atoms    past    each    other    in    opposite 
directions. 

(5)  The    phenomena    of    self-induction,    and    the 
behaviour  of  a  thick  wire  to    an    alternating   current. 
The  delay  also  in  magnetizing  iron,  and  especially 
the  possibility  of   permanent  magnetism  ;  combined 
with 

(6)  The    absence   of   momentum    in    an     electric 
current,   or    moment    of    momentum    in    an    electro- 
magnet, as  tested  by  all  mechanical  means  yet  tried. 

I  admit  at  once  that  many  of  these  are  mere  super- 
ficial suggestions  which  may  hardly  bear  examination 
and  criticism.  Only  (3),  (4),  (5),  and  (6)  can  be  at  all 
seriously  appealed  to  ;  but  (5)  and  (6),  in  conjunction, 


§  9i  AMPERE'S  THEORY  195 

seem    to    me    to  afford    a   sort    of     provisional    and 
hypothetical  proof,  which  (3)  greatly  strengthens. 

At  this  point  we  must  for  the  present  again  leave 
the  question.     We  return  to  it  in  §  118  and  §  155. 


Representation  of  a  Magnetic  Field 

91.  The  disturbance  called  magnetism,  which  we 
have  shown  in  Chap.  VII.  to  be  something  of  the 
nature  of  a  spin — a  rotation  about  an  axis — is  con- 
spicuously not  limited  to  the  steel  or  iron  of  the 
magnet :  it  spreads  out  through  all  adjacent  space, 
and  constitutes  what  is  called  the  magnetic  field.  A 
map  of  the  field  is  afforded  by  the  use  of  iron  filings, 
which  cling  end  to  end  and  point  out  the  direction  of 
the  force  at  every  point  (Fig.  33). 

These  lines  of  force  so  mapped  are  to  be  regarded 
as  the  axes  of  molecular  whirls  (Fig.  30).  They  are 
continuous  with  similar  lines  in  the  substance  of  the 
steel,  and  every  line  really  forms  a  closed  curve,  of 
which  a  portion  is  in  the  steel  and  a  portion  in  the  air. 
In  a  wire  helix,  such  as  Figs.  16  or  29,  the  lines  are 
wholly  in  air,  but  in  one  part  of  their  course  they 
thread  the  helix,  and  in  another  part  they  spread  out 
more  or  less  between  its  faces. 

But  according  to  Ampere's  theory  of  molecular  cur- 
rents there  is  no  essential  difference  between  such  a 

O  2 


196     STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD     CHAP,  ix 

helix  and  a  steel  magnet ;  directly  the  currents  in  the 
molecules  of  the  magnet  are  considered,  everything 
resolves  itself  into  chains  of  molecular  currents,  thread- 
ing themselves  along  a  common  closed  curve  or  axis. 
Each  atom,  whether  in  the  steel  or  in  the  air,  is  the 
seat  of  a  whirl  of  electricity,  more  or  less  faced  round 


FIG''  30.— A,  an  element  of  a  magnetic  line  of  force  with  the  electric  whirl  round  it  ; 
B,  a  bit  of  an  electric  circuit  with  one  of  its  magnetic  lines  offeree  shown  round 
it,  and  the  electric  whirl  round  this  :  each  magnetic  line  of  force  round  a  current 
being  an  electric  vortex  ring.  Compare  Fig.  39. 


so  as  on  the  average  to  have  its  plane  at  right  angles 
to  the  lines  of  force.  The  simplest  plan  of  avoiding 
having  to  consider  those  only  partially  faced  round,  is 
to  imagine  the  whole  number  divided  into  a  set  which 
face  accurately  in  the  right  direction,  and  a  set  which 


§  92  MAGNETIC  ATTRACTION  197 

look  any  way  at  perfect  random  ;  and  to  neglect  this 
latter  set. 

92.  Well,  now  try  and  picture  a  chain  of  whirls 
like  beads  spinning  on  a  wire  threading  them  all,  and 
think  of  the  effect  of  a  material  fluid  thus  rotating. 
Obviously  it  would  tend  to  whirl  itself  fatter,  and  to 
shorten  its  length,  as  in  Fig.  32.  An  assemblage  of 
such  parallel  straight  whirls  would  thus  squeeze  each 
other  laterally,  or  cause  a  lateral  pressure,  and  would 
tend  to  drag  their  free  ends  together,  causing  a  longi- 
tudinal tension. 

Such  whirls  cannot  in  truth  have  free  ends  except 
at  the  boundary  of  a  medium — as  at  the  free  surface  of 
a  liquid.  Magnetic  whirls  are  in  reality  all  closed 
curves  ;  but  inasmuch  as  part  of  them  may  be  in  a 
mobile  fluid  like  air,  and  part  of  them  in  a  solid  like 
iron  or  steel,  it  is  convenient  to  distinguish  between 
their  two  portions  ;  and  one  may  think  of  the  air  whirls 
alone,  as  reaching  from  one  piece  of  iron  to  another, 
and  by  their  shortening  tendency  or  centrifugal  force 
pulling  the  two  pieces  together. 

The  arrangement  shown  in  Fig.  31  illustrates  the 
kind  of  force  exerted  by  a  spinning  elastic  framework, 
along  and  perpendicular  to  its  axis  of  rotation. 

One  can  easily  see  this  effect  of  a  whirl  in  a  tea-cup 
or  inverted  bell-jar  full  of  liquid.  Stir  it  vigorously 
and  leave  it.  It  presses  against  the  walls  harder  than 
before,  so  that  if  they  were  flexible  they  would  bulge 


198     STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD     CHAP,  ix 

out  with  the  lateral  pressure  ;  and  it  sucks  down  the 
top  or  free  end  of  its  axis  of  rotation,  producing  quite 
a  depression  or  hollow  against  the  force  of  gravity. 
Or,  as  a  more  striking  illustration,  make  the  apparatus 
sketched  in  Fig.  32. 


FIG.  31. — A  "shape  of  the  earth"  model  which,  when  whirled,  exerts  a  tension  along 
its  axis,  pulling  up  the  weight  attached  to  it,  and  a  pressure  at  right  angles,  by 
reason  of  its  bulging  out. 


Two  circular  boards  joined  by  a  short  wide  elastic 
tube  or  drum  :  a  weight  hung  to  the  lower  board,  the 
top  board  hung  from  a  horizontal  whirling  table,  the 
drum  filled  with  water,  and  the  whole  spun  round. 


§95 


MAGNETIC  REPULSION 


199 


The  weight  is  raised  by  the  longitudinal  tension  ;  the 
sides  bulge  out  with  the  lateral  pressure. 

There  is  no  need  for  the  whole  vessel  to  rotate. 
If  the  liquid  inside  rotates,  the  same  effect  is 
produced. 

93.  Imagine  now  a  medium  composed  of  a  mul- 
titude of  such  cells  with  rotating  liquid  inside  :  let 
the  cells  be  either  very  long,  or  else  be  joined  end  to 


fl 


I 


FIG.  32. — An  elastic-walled  cylindrical  vessel  full  of  liquid  hanging  from  a  whirling 
table,  and,  by  reason  of  centrifugal  force,  raising  a  weight  and  bulging  out 
laterally  when  spun,  thereby  illustrating  a  tension  along  the  axis  of  rotation  and 
a  pressure  in  every  perpendicular  direction. 


end  so  as  to  make  a  chain — a  series  of  chains  side  by 
side — and  you  have  a  picture  of  a  magnetic  medium 
traversed  by  a  field  of  force.  End-boundaries  of  the 
field  will  be  dragged  together,  thus  representing  mag- 
netic attraction  ;  while  sideways,  the  lines  of  force 
(axes  of  whirl)  squeeze  each  other  apart,  thus  illus- 
trating repulsion.  This  is  Clerk-Maxwell's  view  of 


200     STRUCTURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD     CHAP,  ix 


Attraction 


Repulsion. 


FIG.  33. — Attraction  and  Repulsion.  The  tension  along  the  lines  of  force  or  axes  of 
rotation  drags  the  one  pair  of  poles  together  ;  and  the  pressure  in  directions  per- 
pendicular to  the  axis  of  rotation,  due  to  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  whirls,  drives 
the  other  pair  apart. 


§  93  LINES  OF  FORCE  201 

an  electro-magnetic  medium,  and  of  the  mode  in 
which  magnetic  stress,  and  magnetic  attractions  and 
repulsions  between  bodies,  arise. 

Wherever  lines  of  force  reach  across  from  one  body 
to  another,  those  bodies  are  dragged  together  as  if 
pulled  by  so  many  elastics  (Fig.  33) ;  but  wherever 
lines  of  force  from  one  body  present  their  sides  to 
lines  of  force  proceeding  from  another  body,  then 
those  bodies  are  driven  apart. 


CHAPTER  X 

MECHANICAL   MODELS    OF    A   MAGNETIC    FIELD 

First  Representation  of  the  Field  due  to  a  Current 

94.  RETURN  now  to  the  consideration  of  a  simple 
circuit,  or,  say,  a  linear  conductor,  and  start  a  current 
through  it ;  how  are  we  to  picture  the  rise  of  the  lines 
of  force  in  the  medium  ?  how  shall  we  represent  the 
spread  of  magnetic  induction  ?  First  think  of  the 
current  as  exciting  the  field  (instead  of  the  field  as 
exciting  the  current,  which  may  be  the  truer  plan 
ultimately). 

If  we  can  think  of  electricity  in  the  several  mole- 
cules of  the  insulating  medium  as  something  con- 
nected like  so  many  cog-wheels  gearing  into  one 
another,  and  also  gearing  into  those  of  the  metal 
conductor,  it  is  easy  to  picture  a  sideways  spread  of 
rotation  brought  about  by  the  current,  just  as  a 
moving  rack  will  rotate  a  set  of  pinions  gearing  into 


§94  NATURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD  203 

it  and  into  each  other  (Fig.  34).  But  then  half  the 
wheels  will  be  rotating  one  way  and  half  the  other 
way,  which  is  not  exactly  right. 


FIG. 34- 


How  is  it  possible  for  a  set  of  parallel  whirls  to  be 
all  rotating  in  the  same  direction  ? 


ooo 


If  there  is  any  sort  of  connection  between  them  they 
will  stop  each  other,  because  they  are  moving  in 
opposite  directions  at  their  nearest  points  ;  and  yet, 
if  there  is  no  connection,  how  can  the  whirl  spread 
through  the  field  ? 

Well,  return  to  the  old  models  by  which  we  endea- 
voured to  explain  electrostatics,  and  think  whether 
they  will  help  us  if  we  proceed  to  superpose  upon 
them  a  magnetic  whirl  in  addition  to  the  properties 
they  already  possess.  Looking  at  Figs.  5,  6,  and  /A, 


204  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD        CHAP,  x 

we  remember  we  were  led  to  picture  atoms  and  elec- 
tricity like  beads  threaded  on  a  cord.  And  these 
cords  had  to  represent,  alternately,  positive  and 
negative  electricity,  which  always  'got  displaced  in 
different  directions  (see  §  90). 

We  are  forced  to  a  similar  sort  of  notion  in  respect 
of  the  wheels  at  present  under  discussion  ;  in  order 
that  they  may  co-operate  properly,  they  must  repre- 


FlG.  36  — Rows  of  cells  alternately  positive  and  negative,  geared  together 
and  free  to  turn  about  fixed  axles. 


sent  positive  and  negative  electricity  alternately.  If 
they  then  rotate  alternately  in  opposite  directions,  all 
is  well,  and  the  electrical  circulation  or  rotation  in  the 
field  is  all  in  one  direction.  Each  wheel  gears  into 
and  turns  the  next,  and  so  the  spin  gets  propagated 
right  away  through  the  medium,  at  a  speed  depend- 
ing on  the  elasticity  and  density  concerned  in  such 
disturbances. 

It  is  not  convenient  at  the  present  stage  to  ask  the 


§94  NATURE  OF  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD  205 

question  whether  the  wheels  represent  atoms  of  matter 
or  merely  electricity.  It  may  be  that  each  atom  is 
electrostatically  charged  and  itself  rotates,  in  which 
case  it  would  carry  its  charge  round  with  it,  and 
thereby  constitute  the  desired  molecular  current. 
The  apparent  inertia  of  electricity  would  thus  be 
explained  simply  enough,  as  really  the  inertia  of  the 
spinning  atoms  themselves  ;  and  the  absence  of  any 


FIG.  37. — Section  of  a  magnetic  field  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force.     Alternate 
ells  rotating  oppositely.     Another  mode  of  drawing  Fig.  36. 

moment  of  momentum  in  an  electro-magnet  as  tested 
mechanically  would  be  equally  explained  by  the 
simultaneous  opposite  rotation  of  adjacent  atoms. 
A  question  may  arise  as  to  why  the  opposite 
molecules  should  have  exactly  equal  opposite  in- 
ertiae,  as  they  have,  else  a  fluid  magnetized  medium 
would  bodily  rotate  ;  and  there  may  be  other 
difficulties  connected  with  a  bodily  rotation  of 
electrostatically  charged  molecules  :  it  is  merely  a 


206  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD  ,     CHAP,  x 

possibility  upon  which  stress  must  not  be  laid  till  it 
has  been  proved  able  to  bear  it.  For  our  present 
purpose  a  spin  of  the  electricity  inside  each  atom,  or 
even  independently  of  any  atoms,  is  quite  sufficient. 
Besides,  since  magnetic  induction  can  spread  through 
a  vacuum  quite  easily,  the  wheel-work  has  to  be  largely 
independent  of  material  atoms. 

If  any  difficulty  is  felt  concerning  the  void  spaces 
in  Fig.  36,  it  is  only  necessary  to  draw  it  like  Fig.  37, 
which  does  every  bit  as  well,  and  reduces  the  difficulty 
to  any  desired  minimum. 

My  cog-wheel  diagrams  are  based  on  the  ether 
model  of  Professor  Fitzgerald  referred  to  in  §  154  ; 
and,  for  actual  construction,  that  model  is  undoubtedly 
the  best.  It  is  much  more  practicable  than  the 
original  model  of  Clerk  Maxwell,  referred  to  in  §  155, 
which  is  the  basis  of  all  these  modes  of  representing 
the  equations  of  an  electromagnetic  field. 

Representation  of  an  Electric  Current 

95.  Now  notice  that  in  a  medium  so  constituted 
and  magnetized — that  is,  with  all  the  wheel-work 
revolving  properly — there  is  nothing  of  the  nature  of 
an  electric  current  proceeding  in  any  direction  what- 
ever. For,  at  every  point  of  contact  of  two  wheels, 
the  positive  and  negative  electricities  are  going  at 
the  same  rate  in  the  same  direction  ;  and  this  is  no 


§95  .        NATURE  OF  A  CURRENT  207 

current  at  all.  Only  when  positive  is  going  one  way 
and  negative  going  the  opposite  way,  or  standing 
still,  or  at  least  going  at  a  different  rate,  can  there  be 
any  advance  of  electricity,  or  anything  of  the  nature 
of  a  current. 

A  current  is  nevertheless  easily  able  to  be 
represented  by  mechanism  such  as  that  of  Fig.  36  or 
37  :  for  it  only  needs  the  wheels  to  gear  imperfectly 
and  to  work  with  slip.  At  any  such  slipping-place 
the  positive  is  going  faster  than  the  negative,  or  vice 
versa,  and  so  there  is  a  current  there.  A  line  of  slip 
among  the  wheels  corresponds  therefore  to  a  linear 
current.  Now  if  one  thinks  of  it,  it  is  quite  plain 
that  such  a  line  of  slip  must  always  have  a  closed 
contour,  in  other  words  that  electricity  must  flow  in 
a  closed  circuit  (§  4).  For,  if  only  one  wheel  slip, 
then  the  circuit  is  limited  to  its  circumference  ;  if  a 
row  slip,  then  the  direct  and  return  circuit  are  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  row.  While  if  a  large  area  of 
any  shape  with  no  slip  inside  it  is  inclosed  by  a  line 
of  slip,  then  this  gives  us  a  circuit  of  any  shape,  but 
always  closed.  Understand  :  one  is  not  here  thinking 
of  a  current  as  analogous  to  a  locomotion  of  the  wheels 
— their  axes  may  be  quite  stationary, — the  slip 
contemplated  is  that  of  one  rim  on  another. 

Imagine  all  the  wheels  inside  the  empty  contour  of 
Fig.  38  to  be  rotating,  the  positive  clockwise,  the 
negative  counter  clockwise,  and  let  all  those  outside 


208  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD        CHAP,  x 

the  contour  be  either  stationary  or  rotating  at  a 
different  rate  or  in  an  opposite  direction  ;  then  the 
boundary  of  the  inside  region  is  a  line  of  slip,  along 
which  the  positive  rims  are  all  travelling  clockwise 
and  the  negative  rims  the  other  way,  and  hence  it 
represents  a  clockwise  positive  current  round  the 
inside  of  the  empty  contour. 


FIG.  38. — Diagram  of  a  peripheral  current  partitioned  off  from  surrounding  medium 
by  a  perfect  conductor,  which  transmits  no  motion,  and  therefore  acts  as  a  perfect 
magnetic  screen.  See  also  §101,  and  Fig.  41.  Shaded  wheels  stand  for  positive. 
The  current  is  flowing  clockwise  round  the  outside  of  the  inner  nine  wheels. 

But  it  may  be  said  that  the  spin  inside  the  contour, 
if  maintained,  must  sooner  or  later  rotate  the  wheels 
outside  as  fast  as  themselves,  and  then-  all  slip  will 
cease.  Yes,  that  is  so,  unless  there  is  a  complete 
breach  of  connection  at  the  contour,  as  in  Fig.  38 
there  is.  If  the  outer  region  has  any  sort  of  connec- 
tion with  the  inner  one,  the  slip  at  its  boundary- 
can  only  be  temporary,  lasting  during  the  era  of 
acceleration. 


§  96  INDUCTION  CURRENT  209 


Distinction  between  a  Dielectric  and  a  Metal,  as  affected 
by  a  spreading  Magnetic  Field 

i 

96.  In    a   dielectric   the   connection    between     the 

atoms  is  definite  and  perfect.  If  one  rotates  the  next 
must  rotate  too ;  there  is  no  slip  between  the  geared 
surfaces  ;  a  dielectric  is  a  case  of  cogged  wheels  like 
Fig.  36.  A  conduction-current  in  it  is  impossible. 

But  in  a  metallic  conductor  the  gearing  is  im- 
perfect ;  it  is  a  case  of  friction-gearing  with  more  or 
less  lubrication  and  slip,  so  that  turning  one  wheel 
only  starts  the  next  gradually — it  may  be  very  quickly, 
but  not  instantaneously, — and  there  is  a  motion  of  a 
positive  rim  incompletely  compensated  by  an  equal 
similar  motion  of  a  negative  rim  while  getting  up 
speed  ;  in  other  words,  there  is  a  momentary  electric 
current,  lasting  till  the  wheels  have  fairly  started. 

In  a  perfect  conductor  all  gearing  is  absent ;  the 
lubrication  is  so  perfect  that  the  atoms  are  quite 
free  of  one  another,  and  accordingly  a  spin  ceases  to 
be  transmitted  into  such  a  medium  at  all.  The  only 
possible  current  in  a  perfect  conductor  is  a  skin-deep 
phenomenon.1  (See  also  Chap.  V.  and  §  104.) 

1  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  although  no  current  can  be  excited 
inside  a  perfect  conductor  by  the  lateral  action  of  the  surrounding 
dielectric,  yet  that  thermo-electric  currents  excited  by  contact  force  might 
be  possible  in  its  interior.  I  have  ventured  to  surmise  however  (§  62) 

P 


210  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD        CHAP,  x 

A  magnetized  medium  of  whatever  sort  is  thus  to 
be  regarded  as  full  of  spinning  wheels,  the  positive 
rotating  one  way  and  the  negative  the  other  way. 
If  the  medium  is  not  magnetized,  but  only  magnetic  — 
i.e.  capable  of  being  magnetized — it  may  be  thcfught 
of  either  as  having  its  wheels  stationary,  or  as  having 
them  facing  all  ways  at  random  ;  the  latter  being 
probably  the  truer,  the  former  the  easier,  representa- 
tion, at  least  to  begin  with. 

Whether  the  medium  be  conducting  or  insulating 
makes  no  difference  to  the  general  fact  of  spinning 
wheels  inside  it  wherever  lines  of  force  penetrate  it. 
But  the  wheels  of  a  conductor  are  imperfectly  cogged 
together  ;  and  accordingly,  in  the  variable  stages  of  a 
magnetic  field,  while  its  spin  is  either  increasing  or 
decreasing,  there  is  a  very  important  distinction  to 
be  drawn  between  insulating  and  conducting  matter. 
During  the  accelerating  era  conducting  matter  is  full 
of  slip,  and  a  certain  time  elapses  before  a  steady  state 
is  reached.  A  certain  time  may  be  necessary  for  the 
propagation  of  spin  in  a  dielectric,  but  it  is  excessively 
short,  and  the  process  is  unaccompanied  by  slip,  only 
by  slight  distortion  and  recovery.  (See  §§  103  and  159.) 
97.  As  for  strongly  magnetic  substances  like  iron, 
nickel,  and  cobalt,  one  must  regard  them  as  con- 
stituted in  the  same  sort  of  way,  but  with  wheels 

that  no  thermo-electric  forces  can  exist  in  a  perfect  conductor,  because 
it  cannot  get  a  grip  of  the  electricity. 


§98  VARYING  CURRENT  2rr 

greatly  more  massive,  or  very  much  more  numerous, 
or  both.  The  quantity  which  we  have  called  perme- 
ability in  §§82,  83,  and  denoted  by  the  symbol  /*,  may 
now  be  thought  of  as  physically  equivalent  to  a 
density  of  the  magnetic  medium  ;  so  that  substances 
with  a  large  /^  like  iron,  have  their  magnetic  mechanism 
or  wheel-work  exceedingly  massive. 

Phenomena  connected  with  a  varying  Current.     Nature 
of  Self-induction 

98.  Proceed  now  to  think  what  happens  in  the 
region  round  a  conductor  in  which  a  current  is  rising : 
as  partially  described  in  Chapter  V.  Without  attempt- 
ting  a  complete  and  satisfactory  representation  of 
what  is  going  on,  we  can  think  of  some  mechanical 
arrangements  which  have  some  close  analogy  with 
electrical  processes. 

Take  first  a  system  of  wheel-work  connected 
together  and  moved  at  some  point  by  a  rack.  Attend 
to  alternate  wheels  more  especially,  as  representing 
positive  electricity.  The  intermediate  negative  wheels 
are  necessary  for  the  transmission  of  the  motion,  and 
they  also  serve  to  neutralize  all  systematic  advance  of 
positive  electricity  in  any  one  direction,  except  where 
slip  occurs,  but  they  need  not  otherwise  be  specially 
attended  to. 

Remember  that  every  wheel  is  endowed  with  inertia 
like  a  fly-wheel  (§  88). 

P    2 


212  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD         CHAP,  x 

Directly  the  rack  begins  to  move,  the  wheels  begin 
to  rotate,  and  in  a  short  time  they  will  all  be  going 
full  speed.  Until  they  are  so  moving,  the  motion  of 
the  rack  is  opposed,  not  by  friction  or  ordinary 
resistance,  but  by  the  inertia  of  the  wheel-work. 

This  inertia  represents  what  is  called  self-induction, 
and  the  result  of  it  is  what  has  been  called  the  "  extra  - 


FIG.  39. — A  provisional  representation  of  a  current  surrounded  by  dielectric  medium, 
either  propelling  or  being  propelled.     Section  through  the  wire.     Compare  Fig. 


30,   B. 


current  at  make,"  or,  more  satisfactorily,  the  opposing 
E.M.F.  of  electro-magnetic  inertia  or  self-induction. 

Having  once  started  the  rack,  so  long  as  it  moves 
steadily  forward,  the  wheel-work  has  no  further  effect 
upon  it  ;  but,  directly  it  tries  to  stop,  it  finds  itself 
unable  to  stop  dead  without  great  violence  :  its  motion 
is  prolonged  for  a  short  time  by  the  inertia  of  the 


§  ioo  SELF-INDUCTION  213 

wheel-work,  and  we  have  what  is  known  as  the  "  extra- 
current  at  break." 

99.  If  the  rack  is  for  a  moment  taken  to  represent 
the  advancing  electricity  in  a  copper  wire,  then  the 
diagram  may  be  regarded  as  a  section  of  the  complete 
field  :  the   complete  field  being  obtained  from  it  by 
rotating  the    diagram  round  the    axis    of  the    rack. 
Imagining  this  done,  we  see  that  the  axis   of  each 
wheel    becomes    prolonged  into  a  circular  core,  and 
each  wheel  into   a    circular  vortex  ring  surrounding 
the  rack  and  rolling    down  it    as  it  moves  forward, 
as  when  a  stick    is    pushed  through    a    tight-fitting 
umbrella-ring  held  stationary  (see  Fig.  30,  B,  p.  196). 

As  one  goes  further  and  further  from  the  rack  the 
lengths  of  the  vortex  cores  increase,  but  there  is  only 
a  given  amount  of  rotation  to  be  shared  among  more 
and  more  stuff,  hence  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the 
rate  of  spin  diminishing  as  the  distance  increases,  so 
that  at  a  reasonable  distance  from  the  conductor  the 
medium  is  scarcely  disturbed. 

100.  To  perceive  how  much  rotation  of  the  medium 
is  associated  with  a  given  circuit,  one  must  consider 
the  shape  of  its  contour — the  position  of  the  return 
current. 

Take  first  a  long  narrow  loop  and  send  a  current 
up  one  side  and  down  the  other.  The  rotations 
belonging  to  each  are  superposed,  and  though  they 
agree  in  direction  for  the  space  inclosed  by  the  loop, 


214  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD        CHAP,  x 

they  oppose  each  other  outside,  and  so  there  is  barely 
any  disturbance  of  the  medium  outside  such  a  looped 
conductor  ;  very  little  dielectric  is  disturbed  at  all,  and 
accordingly  the  inertia  or  self-induction  is  very  small 
(see  Fig.  40). 

If  the  loop  opens  out  so  as  to  enclose  an  area,  as  the 
.centrifugal  force  of  the  wheels  will  tend  to  make  it  do, 


FIG.  40. — Diagram  of  a  direct  and  return  current  close  together,  showing  distribution 
of  rotation  and  of  slip  in  the  thickness  of  the  conductor,  and  in  the  dielectric 
between.  The  dielectric  outside  is  very  little  disturbed.  The  smooth  wheels 
represent  a  metallic  conductor,  the  cog  wheels  represent  a  thin  layer  of  dielectric 
between  the  direct  and  return  part  of  the  metallic  circuit. 
For  two  currents  going  in  the  same  direction,  see  Fig.  44. 


then  there  is  a  greater  amount  of  rotation,  a  greater 
moment  of  momentum  inside  it,  and  accordingly  its 
self-induction  is  increased.  The  axis  of  every  wheel 
is,  however,  continuous,  and  must  return  outside  the 
loop :  so  the  outside  region  is  somewhat  affected 
by  rotation,  but  of  a  kind  opposite  to  that  inside. 


101 


SIMPLE  CIRCUIT 


215 


101.  Figs.  38  and  41  show  the  state  of  things  for  a 
closed  circuit  conveying  a  current.  The  free  space  in 
Fig.  38  represents  a  perfect  conductor,  or  perfect  breach 


oooooooo 
oooooooo 


FIG.  41.— Diagram  of  simple  conducting  circuit  like  a  galvanometer  ring,  with  the 
alternate  connecting-wheels  omitted.  The  same  number  of  dielectric  wheels  are 
drawn  outside  as  inside,  to  indicate  the  fact  that  the  total  spin  is_  equal  inside 
and  out,  though  the  outside  is  so  spread  out  as  to  be  much  less  intense.  The 
diagram  shows  a  clockwise  positive  current  flowing  steadily  round  the  ring  ;  with 
the  accompanying  distribution  of  magnetism.  Section  in  the  plane  of  the  ring. 
The  length  of  the  arrows  must  be  attended  to  as  well  as  their  direction. 

of  connection.  Along  the  inner  boundary  of  this 
space  positive  electricity  is  seen  streaming  in  the 
direction  of  the  arrows,  and  it  may  be  streaming 


216  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD         CHAP,  x 

quite  independently  on  the  outer  boundary  also,  but 
nothing  happens  in  the  interior  of  the  perfect  con- 
ductor— which  is  therefore  only  represented  by  empty 
space. 

The  corresponding  portion  in  Fig.  41  is  intended  for 
an  ordinary  conductor,  full  of  wheels  capable  of  slip. 
And  slip  in  this  case  is  a  continuous  necessity,  for  the 
rotation  on  one  side  of  the  conductor  is  in  an  opposite 
direction  to  that  on  the  other  side  ;  so  the  atoms  of 
the  conductor  have  to  accommodate  themselves  as 
best  they  can  to  the  conditions,  some  of  them  rotating 
one  way,  some  the  other,  and  some  along  a  certain 
neutral  line  of  the  conductor  being  stationary.  If  a 
conductor  is  straight  and  infinitely  long,  the  neutral 
line  of  no  rotation  is  in  the  middle.  If  it  be  a  loop, 
the  neutral  line  is  nearer  the  outside  than  the  inside, 
because  the  rotation  of  the  medium  inside  is  the 
strongest.  If  the  loop  be  shut  up  to  nothing,  the 
neutral  line  is  its  outer  boundary  or  nearly  so  (Fig. 
40).  If,  again,  the  circuit  is  wound  round  and  round 
a  ring,  as  string  might  be  lapped  upon  a  common 
curtain-ring  to  cover  it,  then  the  axes  of  whirl  are 
wholly  inclosed  by  the  wire,  and  there  is  no  rotation 
outside  at  all. 

Fig.  42  shows  a  section  of  this  last-mentioned  con- 
dition, and  here  the  wheels  of  the  dielectric  outside 
are  not  rotating  at  all.  The  inside  is  revolving,  it  may 
be  furiously,  and  so  between  the  inner  and  outer  layers 


§   102 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  CURRENT 


217 


of  the  conductor  we  have  a  great  amount  of  slip  and 
dissipation  of  energy :  in  other  words,  a  strong 
current. 

102.  The  process  of  slip  which  we  have  depicted 
goes  on  in  all  conductors  conveying  a  current,  whether 
steady  or  variable,  and  in  fact  is  the  current.  The 
slip  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  dissipation  of 


FIG.  42. — Sectfon  of  a  closed  magnetic  circuit,  or  electric  vortex-ring,  or  hollow  bent 
solenoid  like  Fig.  29,  inclosing  an  anchor-ring  air  space  ;  the  axis  of  the  ring  being 
A  B,  the  sections  of  its  core  being  E  and  F.  The  lengths  of  the  arrows  indicate 
the  intensity  of  the  spin,  i.e.  of  the  magnetic  field,  which  is  a  maximum  at  the 
middle  of  each  section  and  nothing  at  all  outside.  If  the  core  contains  iron 
instead  of  air,  its  wheels  have  to  be  from  too  to  10,000  times  as  massive  :  slipping 
wheels  of  solid  iron,  cogged  wheels  if  a  bundle  of  fine  varnished  iron  wires.  Cf. 
Fig.  47- 

energy  and  production  of  heat  :  only  in  a  perfect  con- 
ductor can  it  occur  without  friction.  In  a  steady  cur- 
rent the  slip  is  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the 
section  of  the  conductor  ;  in  the  variable  stages  it  is 
unequally  distributed,  being  then  more  concentrated 
near  the  periphery  of  the  wire  as  the  diagrams 


218  MODELS  OF  MAGNETIC  FIELD        CHAP,  x 

endeavour   to  show,  and    as    has    been  described  in 

8  43- 

When    a   current    is    started    in  a   wire,  the  outer 

layers  start  first,  and  it  gradually  though  very  quickly 
penetrates  to  the  axis.  Hence  the  lag  or  self-induc- 
tion of  a  wire  upon  itself  is  greater  as  the  wire  is 
thicker,  and  also  as  it  is  made  of  better  conducting 
substance.  If  it  is  of  iron,  Jhe  mass  or  number  of  the 
wheels  is  so  great  that  the  "lag  is  much  increased,  and 
the  spin  of  its  outer  layers  is  great  enough  to  produce 
the  experimental  effects  discovered  by  Prof.  Hughes. 
One  must  never  confuse  the  slip  with  the  spin.  Slip 
is  current,  spin  is  magnetism.  There  is  no  spin  at  the 
axis  of  a  straight  infinite  wire  conveying  a  current, 
and  the  spin  occurs  in  opposite  directions  as  you  recede 
from  the  axis  either  way  ;  arranging  itself  in  circular 
vortex  cores  round  the  axis  (Fig.  30,  B).  But  the  slip 
is  uniformly  distributed  all  through  the  wire  as  soon 
as  the  current  has  reached  a  steady  state.  The  slip  is 
wholly  in  the  direction  of  the  wire.  The  axes  of  spin 
are  all  at  right  angles  to  that  direction. 


CHAPTER  XI- 

MECHANICAL   MODELS   OF   CURRENT   INDUCTION 

Rise  of  Induced  Current  in  a  Secondary  Circuit 

103.  To  study  the  way  in  which  a  magnetic  field  ex- 
cited in  any  manner  spreads  itself  into  and  through  a 
conducting  medium,  look  at  Fig.  43,  and  suppose  the 
region  inside  the  contour  A  B  C  D  to  be  an  ordinary 
conducting  region — that  is,  full  of  wheels  imperfectly 
geared  together,  and  capable  of  slip. 

Directly  the  rack  begins  to  move,  all  the  wheels 
outside  A  B  C  D  begin  to  rotate,  and  quickly  get  up  full 
speed.  The  outer  layer  of  wheels  inside  the  contour 
likewise  begins  to  rotate,  but  not  at  once  ;  there  is  a 
slight  delay  in  getting  them  into  full  motion.  For  the 
next  inner  layer  the  delay  is  rather  greater,  and  so  on. 
But  ultimately  the  motion  penetrates  everywhere 
equally,  and  everything  is  in  a  steady  state. 

But  while  the  process  of  starting  the  wheels  was 


220       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

going  on,  a  slip  took  place  round  the  contour  A  B  C  D, 
and  round  every  concentric  contour  inside  it  ;  the 
periphery  of  the  positive  wheels  moving  in  a  direction 
opposite  to  that  of  the  wheels  in  contact  with  the 
rack,  and  so  suggesting  the  opposite  induced  current 
excited  at  "  make "  in  the  substance  of  a  conductor 
near  a  growing  current,  or  generally  in  an  increasing 
magnetic  field. 


H      T> 


FIG.  43.  Diagram  illustrating  the  way  in  which  an  induced  current  arises  in  a  mass 
of  metal  immersed  in  an  increasing  magnetic  field  ;  also  how  it  decays.  A  B  C  D 
is  the  boundary  of  the  mass  of  metal.  The  dotted  lines  ABCD,  EFGH,  IJKL 
are  successive  lines  of  slip. 

The  penetration  of  the  motion  deeper  and  deeper 
and  the  gradual  dying  away  of  all  slip,  illustrate  also 
the  mode  in  which  this  induced  current  arises  and 
gradually  dies  away ;  becoming  nil  as  soon  as  the 
magnetic  field  (i.e.  the  rotation)  has  penetrated  to  the 
interior  of  all  conductors  and  become  permanently 
established  there  as  elsewhere. 


§  105  INDUCED  CURRENTS  221 

Suppose  the  motion  of  the  rack  now  stopped  :  all 
the  cogged  wheels  stop  too,  though  it  may  be  with  a 
jerk  and  some  violence  and  oscillation  due  to  their 
momentum  ;  but  those  inside  the  contour  A  B  C  D  will 
continue  moving  for  a  little  longer.  The  outside  layer 
of  this  region  will  slip  in  such  direction  as  to  illustrate 
the  direct  induced  current  at  " break"  and  will  begin 
to  stop  first ;  the  slip  and  the  stop  will  then  gradually 
penetrate  inwards,  just  as  happened  during  the  inverse 
process,  until  all  trace  of  rotation  ceases.  This  inverse 
slipping  process  is  the  direct  induced  current  at 
"  break." 

104.  Through  a  perfect  conductor  the  disturbance 
could  never  pass,  for  the  slip  of  the  dielectric  wheels 
on  its  outer  skin   would  be  perfect,  and  would  never 
penetrate  any  deeper.     A  superficial  current   lasting 
for  ever,  or  rather  as  long  as  the  magnetic  field  (the 
rotation  of  the  dielectric  wheels)  lasts,  is  all  that  would 
be  excited,  and  it  would  be  a  perfect  magnetic  screen 
to  any  dielectric  beyond  and  inclosed  by  it.     Such  a 
perfect  conductor  is  represented  by  the  empty  space 
in  Fig.  38.     A  magnetic  field  or  spin  excited  outside 
that   space    would    never   reach    the    set    of   wheels 
inclosed  and  protected  by  it ;  and  vice  versa  (§  153). 

105.  It  will  now  be  perceived  that  a   fly-wheel  in 
rotation   is  the  mechanical   analogue  of  magnetism, 
or  more  definitely  of  a  section  of  a  line  (or  tube)  of 
magnetic  force  ;  and  that  a  brake,  either  an  accelerat- 


222        MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

ing  or  retarding  brake,  applied  to  such  a  fly-wheel, 
with  consequent  slip,  dissipation  of  energy,  and  pro- 
duction of  heat,  is  a  mechanical  analogue  of  an 
electric  current. 

A  magnetic  field  is  to  be  regarded  as  full  of  geared 
elastic  vortices  or  whirls,  some  of  which  are  cogged 
together,  so  to  speak,  while  others  are  merely  pressed 
together  by  smooth  rims.  It  is  among  these  latter 
that  slip  is  possible,  and  it  is  in  the  regions  occupied  by 
these  that  currents  exist ;  the  energy  dissipated  here 
being  transmitted  through  the  non-slippery  or  die- 
lectric regions  from  the  source  of  power,  just  as  energy 
is  transmitted  from  a  steam-engine  through  mill-work 
or  shafting  to  the  various  places  where  it  is  dissipated 
by  friction.  (Refer  back  to  §§  42 — 44.) 


Transfer  of  Energy  to  a  Distance 

1 06.  Let  us  now  try  to  understand  the  use  of  a 
telegraph  wire  from  this  point  of  view.  Given  the 
means  of  exciting  a  magnetic  field  at  one  place,  how 
is  one  to  transmit  it  to  another  place  so  as  to  move 
magnetic  needles  or  make  other  signals  there  ?  The 
first  idea  of  a  method  might  be  that  inasmuch  as  no 
perfect  conductor,  or  absolute  magnetic  screen,  in- 
tervenes, the  field  of  any  magnet  is  infinite  in  extent, 
and  consequently  already  reaches  the  distant  place. 


§  io6          PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  TELEGRAPH  223 

Have  here  a  long  iron  bar  capable  of  being  magnetized 
and  demagnetized  at  pleasure,  and  have  there  a  very 
sensitive  magnetometer,  and  the  thing  is  done.  I 
see  no  reason  why,  under  certain  circumstances,  this 
mode  of  signalling  without  wire  over  short  distances 
should  not  be  attempted.  But  an  obvious  objection 
to  it  is  that  the  effect  produced  by  a  given  magnet 
varies  inversely  with  the  cube  of  its  distance,  so  that 
a  few  miles  away  the  force  of  a  magnet,  even  several 
yards  long,  is  terribly  weak. 

The  next  idea  might  be  to  carry  some  of  the 
magnetic  lines  of  force  to  the  distant  place  by  means 
of  an  iron  rod  or  wire.  A  soft  iron  wire  transmits 
them  so  much  better  than  air,  that  an  arrangement 
of  a  very  elongated  loop  of  iron,  with  a  magnetizing 
coil  upon  it  at  one  end,  and  a  receiving  coil  upon 
it  at  the  other,  might  serve  to  establish  some  con- 
nection between  the  two  places,  and  enable  primary 
currents  at  this  end  to  produce  secondary  induced 
currents  at  that.  This  would  be  a  magnetic  telegraph 
in  which  a  magnet  whirl  only  is  propagated  along 
the  wire,  and  a  current  excited  by  it  at  the  distant 
place. 

The  current  loop  and  the  magnetic  loop  are, 
however,  reciprocal :  and  the  next  idea  might  be 
that  instead  of  a  long  magnetic  loop  with  little 
current  loops  threading  it  at  either  end,  it  might 
be  better  to  have  a  long  current  loop  with  little 


224        MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP.  XI 

magnetic  loops  threading  it  at  either  end  ;  and  that 
is  exactly  what  we  have  in  the  electric  telegraph. 
It  is  a  better  plan  for  this  reason.  Iron  conducts 
magnetism,  say,  a  thousand  times  better  than  air, 
but  by  no  means  infinitely  better  ;  hence  from  a  long 
loop  of  iron  a  great  many  lines  of  force  would 
leak,  and  would  take  a  shorter  circuit  back  through 
air. 

But  copper  wire  conducts  electricity  almost  in- 
finitely better  than  gutta-percha  or  porcelain.  That 
is  why  an  electric  telegraph  is  better  than  a  magnetic. 
Lead  or  German  silver  conducts  a  million  times  better 
than  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  and  yet  it  would  be  very 
unsatisfactory  to  have  to  signal  through  an  ocean  of 
dilute  acid  with  an  uncovered  lead  or  German  silver 
wire  immersed  in  it.  The  percentage  of  loss  in  the 
case  of  a  corresponding  magnet  circuit  of  iron  would 
be  far  greater  still. 

107.  But  now  what  is  it  precisely  that  the  wire 
of  the  electric  telegraph  does  ?  A  magnetic  field  at 
this  end  is  made  to  excite  a  magnetic  field  at 
the  other  end  with  very  little  loss  ;  it  is  nearly  all 
concentrated  upon  the  other  end  by  means  of  the 
wire.  Somehow  the  wire  enables  us  to  transmit  the 
magnetic  effect  exactly  in  the  direction  we  wish, 
and  to  reproduce  it  where  we  please.  It  is  all 
very  well  to  talk  of  a  current  going  by  the  wire  ; 
but  now  that  we  are  regarding  a  current  as  a  mere 


§  lo;          FUNCTION  OF  TELEGRAPH  WIRE  225 

slipping  of  the  gearing  of  the  magnetic  medium, 
we  see  that  nothing  really  travels  along  the  wire 
at  all. 

Suppose,  for  simplicity,  the  wire  to  be  a  perfect 
conductor  :  the  magnetic  gearing,  which  penetrates 
everywhere  else  and  communicates  the  magnetic 
spin,  ceases  at  its  surface  and  nothing  is  trans- 
mitted into  the  wire.  The  wire,  in  fact,  is  electrically 
nothing  but  a  line  of  slip  of  arbitrary  shape  pene- 
trating and  modifying  the  magnetic  field.  Up  to  its 
surface  magnetic  propagation  goes  on  :  at  its  surface 
it  stops. 

Well,  how  does  that  help  us  ?  How  can  this  fact 
enable  the  wire  to  transmit  the  signals  ?  That  is  what 
we  have  got  to  see. 

Refer  back  to  Fig.  30,  B,  and  look  at  it  in  the  light 
of  Fig.  39,  taking  the  latter  as  a  section  only,  so  that 
each  of  the  arrows  in  Fig.  30,  B,  represents  the 
same  fact  as  the  cog-wheels  do  in  Fig.  39.  Further, 
imagine  the  rack  in  Fig.  39  to  be  removed,  or  replaced 
by  a  perfectly  smooth  rod,  and  let  the  wheels  be 
somehow  kept  rotating  just  as  they  would  have 
done  had  the  rack  been  pushed  along ;  then  on 
the  surface  of  the  stationary  or  non-existent  rod 
we  have  the  state  of  slip  which  we  have  now 
learned  to  recognize  as  current.  What  now  is  the 
function  of  the  rod,  or  of  the  space  it  occupies  ?  It 
permits  free  rotation  of  the  n'hrrl  -"nrjrjTri  dthrr~irlr 


226       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP.  XT 

of  it  in  opposite  directions  ;  whereas  if  the  rod  or 
space  were  removed  and  the  cogs  allowed  to  gear 
across  they  would  at  once  jamb,  and  the  action  would 
be  stopped. 

Take  away  the  long  conductor,  and  the  only 
magnetic  field  you  can  have  is  the  ordinary  state 
of  spin  round  lines  of  force,  rapidly  becoming  fainter 
and  fainter  with  distance  ;  but  with  the  long  con- 
ductor, acting  as  core  to  the  whirls,  you  have  a 
different  state  of  things  altogether.  Away  from  the 
wire  the  field  is  weak,  but  close  to  it  it  is  strong :  all 
round  the  wire  is  an  intense  magnetic  field  as  in 
Fig.  30,  B,  and  this  state  of  things  extends  along 
the  whole  length  of  the  wire  undiminished  by 
distance. 

In  order  that  a  wire  may  act  in  this  manner,  it 
must  form  a  closed  circuit,  and  it  must  have  a  pro- 
pelling arrangement  at  some  part  of  it  able  to  excite 
the  vortex  cores  upon  it  just  there.  Given  these 
conditions,  nothing  can  stop  the  vortex  cores  from 
travelling  right  along  the  wire,  however  long  it  may 
be,  and  producing  their  effect  at  the  distant  station. 

It  is  not  very  easy  to  draw  a  diagram  of  the 
arrangement,  because  it  entails  such  a  number  of 
wheels,  and  because  the  diminution  of  spin  with 
distance  is  not  well  represented  by  them.  But  the 
diagram  may  be  imagined  thus  : — 

Let  the  rack  in    Fig.    39   be  regarded    as   an    in- 


§  io;          FUNCTION  OF  TELEGRAPH  WIRE  227 

finitesimal  portion  of  a  long  circuit  extending  to 
New  York  and  back.  It  may  be  considered  smooth 
or  cogged  as  one  pleases  :  to  avoid  the  idea  of  any 
material  transfer  it  is  better  to  think  of  it  as  smooth. 
At  some  one  point,  by  means  of  a  battery,  or  a 
dynamo,  or  any  other  electromotive  arrangement, 
excite  in  a  few  of  the  wheels  the  motion  which  in 
Fig.  39  would  occur  if  the  rack  were  pushed.  Out 
and  away  through  the  dielectric  the  motion  trans- 
mitted by  the  cog-wheels  spreads,  at  a  pace  which  for 
the  present  we  may  consider  infinite,  but  which  we 
shall  learn  later  is  the  velocity  of  light  At  a  distance 
from  the  wire  the  spin  is  small — it  diminishes  as 
the  inverse  distance  ;  but  close  to  the  wire,  all  the  way 
along,  the  opposing  cogs  are  kept  apart,  and  there 
the  spin  is  most  intense.  Right  along  the  wire  flashes 
the  vortex-like  motion  ;  all  the  way  along  it  is  sur- 
rounded with  rings  of  whirl,  as  in  Fig.  30,  B,  and  by 
concentrating  some  quantity  of  this  whirl  into  small 
compass  at  the  distant  station,  a  visible  motion  or 
signal  is  produced. 

This  is  the  function  of  the  wire,  it  guides  the  effect 
transmitted  through  the  dielectric.  The  wire  transmits 
nothing — the  insulating  sheath  it  is  which  transmits 
all  the  energy :  the  wire  directs  it  on  its  way,  by 
holding  asunder  the  mutually  opposing  gearing  of 
the  dielectric. 

So  much  if  the  wire  be  perfectly  conducting.     If 

Q  2 


228        MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP.  XI 

it  be  an  ordinary  wire  it  acts  in  just  the  same  way, 
only  that  the  slip  on  its  surface  is  not  perfect — it  is 
accompanied,  as  it  were,  by  friction  ;  and  so  its  own 
wheel-work  is  more  or  less  set  in  motion  in  concentric 
cylinders,  except  just  the  axis  of  the  wire,  which  is 
undisturbed.  The  process  of  transmission  is  just  the 
same  as  in  the  case  of  a  perfect  conductor,  except  for 
two  things  : — First,  the  having  to  start  the  wheel-work 
inside  the  metal  may  delay  the  process  a  little,  espe- 
cially if  the  wheels  be  very  massive — as  they  are  in 
the  case  of  iron.  That  is  the  first  distinction — the 
delay  caused  by  the  conductor  being  either  very 
thick  or  very  magnetic,  or  both.  The  second  dis- 
tinction is  that  the  friction  and  slip  on  the  imperfect 
conductor  dissipates  some  of  the  original  supply  of 
energy  into  heat,  and  that  which  is  transmitted  is 
accordingly  less  than  with  a  perfect  conductor.  But 
observe  still  that  although  the  wire  now  dissipates 
energy,  it  transmits  none  ;  all  that  enters  it  is  lost : 
the  dielectric  alone,  with  its  cogged  gearing,  transmits 
energy  to  the  distant  station  (§§  42—45). 

Later  on  we  shall  learn  that  the  gearing  in  a 
dielectric  is  not  rigid,  but  elastic,  and  that  this  is 
why  a  certain  time  is  required  for  transmission — why 
a  definite  velocity  of  transmission  exists.  We  may 
be  said  to  have  learnt  it  already,  indeed  ;  and  we  have 
also  learned  that  some  dielectrics  are  less  rigid  than 
others— gutta-percha  less  than  air,  for  instance,  (see 


§  loS  REPULSION  OF  CURRENTS  229 

§§  1 6  and  23), — and  accordingly  transmit  the  disturb- 
ances more  slowly ;  but  always,  as  we  shall  find, 
with  the  appropriate  velocity  of  light,  so  far  as  the 
dielectric  alone  is  concerned  (§§  133  et  seq.*). 


Mechanical  Force  acting  on  a   Conductor  conveying  a 
Current 

1 08.  In  Fig.  41  the  conducting  portion  of  a  circuit 
is  shown  with  its  appropriate  opposite  rotations  on 
cither  side  of  it.  Now  superpose  a  uniform  rotation 
all  in  one  direction  upon  this,  so  as  to  increase  the 
spin  on  one  side  of  the  conductor  and  diminish  it  on 
the  other  ;  in  other  words,  immerse  the  circuit  in  a 
magnetic  field.  Immediately  the  extra  centrifugal 
force  on  one  side  will  urge  any  movable  part  of  the 
conductor  from  the  stronger  to  the  weaker  portion  of 
the  field.  And  whether  there  be  any  movable  portion 
or  not,  the  whole  circuit  will  lend  to  expand  if  the 
superposed  magnetic  whirl  agree  in  direction  with  the 
whirl  already  inside ;  while  it  will  tend  to  contract 
the  superposed  whirl  agree  with  that  outside. 

The  field  for  a  direct  and  return  circuit  may  be 
similarly  drawn  by  superposition  of  their  separate 
whirls  (see  Fig.  40).  In  this  case  there  is  strong- 
centrifugal  force  of  the  whirl  between  the  wires,  while 
outside  there  is  next  to  no  whirl  at  all.  Hence  the 


230       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

wires  tend  to  get  driven  apart ;  and  so  it  becomes 
evident  why  a  circuit  tends  to  expand  so  as  to  inclose 
the  largest  possible  area,  even  if  no  other  magnetic 
field  than  its  own  be  acting  on  it.  The  circuit  shown 
in  Fig.  41,  for  instance,  tends  to  expand  even  without 
any  superposed  magnetic  field,  simply  because  the 
whirl  inside  is  more  concentrated,  and  therefore  more 
intense,  than  the  whirl  outside. 


FIG.  44. — Two  parallel  conductors  conveying  equal  currents  in  one  direction  and 
getting  pushed  together  by  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  outside  whirls,  no  whirl 
existing  between  them.  The  length  of  the  arrows  again  suggests  the  distribution 
of  magnetism  in  the  conductors.  Fig.  40  showed  the  correlative  repulsion  of 
opposite  currents. 

Also  if  two  circuits  are  arranged  near  each  other 
in  a  plane,  with  their  currents  in  opposite  directions, 
they  will  more  or  less  neutralize  each  other's  effect  on 
the  space  between  them,  causing  (if  equal)  a  region 
of  no  spin  there.  The  two  conductors  will  thus 
get  urged  together  by  the  unbalanced  pressure  of 
the  centrifugal  force  due  to  the  whirl  on  the  other 


§  109  EFFECT  OF  IRON  231 

side ;    or,    currents    in    the    same    direction    attract. 
(Fig.  44). 

109.  As  for  the  effect  of  iron  introduced  into  a 
circuit,  it  brings  into  the  region  of  space  it  occupies 
some  hundred  or  thousand  times  as  many  lines  of 
whirl  as  were  there  before,  and  these  naturally  con- 
tribute mightily  to  the  effects,  both  those  exhibiting 
mechanical  force  and  those  exhibiting  inertia. 

When  one  says,  as  roughly  one  may  do,  that  iron 
brings  1000  fresh  lines  into  the  field,  one  means  that, 
for  every  whirl  otherwise  excited,  1000  more  are  faced 
round  in  the  iron.  And  this  process  goes  on  while 
the  field  is  increasing  in  strength  until  the  total 
number  of  whirls  in  the  iron  begins  to  be  called 
upon  ;  when  this  point  is  reached  the  rate  of  addition 
is  not  maintained,  and  the  iron  is  said  to  show  signs 
of  saturation.  Ultimately,  if  ever  all  its  whirls  were 
faced  round,  the  iron  would  be  quite  saturated  ;  but 
long  before  this  point  is  reached  another  cause  is 
likely  to  make  itself  felt,  viz.  the  falling  off  in  the 
strength  of  the  whirls  already  faced  round,  by  the 
action  of  the  strong  magnetic  induction,  which  is  all 
the  time  acting  so  as  to  weaken  the  iron  currents 
so  far  as  it  is  able.  And  thus  at  a  certain  point, 
hitherto  unreached  by  experiment,  the  iron  may  not 
only  fail  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  field  any 
more,  but  may  actually  begin  to  diminish  it.  That 
is  to  say,  its  permeability  may  conceivably  become 


232     MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION   CHAP,  xi 

less  than  I,  as  if  it  were  a  diamagnetic  substance 
(cf.  §  81). 

The  easiest  way  to  picture  the  effect  of  iron  is  to 
think  of  its  wheels  as  some  hundred  or  thousand 
times  as  massive  as  those  of  air,  so  that  their  energy 
and  momentum  are  very  great  (cf.  §  97). 

That  which  is  commonly  called  magnetic  permea- 
bility, and  denoted  by  //,  (§  82),  may  in  fact  be  thought 
of  as  a  kind  of  inertia,  an  inertia  per  unit  volume  ; 
in  other  words,  a  density — an  ethereal  density  ;  though 
how  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  ether  inside  iron  is 
endowed  with  so  great  inertia  one  cannot  say. 
Perhaps  it  is  that  the  iron  atoms  themselves  revolve 
with  the  electricity  (§  94),  perhaps  it  is  something 
quite  different.  Whatever  the  peculiar  behaviour  of 
iron,  nickel,  &c.,  be  due  to,  it  must  be  something  pro- 
foundly interesting  and  important  as  soon  as  our 
knowledge  of  their  molecular  structure  enables  us  to 
perceive  its  nature. 

Induction  in  Conductors  not  originally  carrying  Currents 
but  moving  in  a  Magnetic  Field 

110.  To  explain  the  currents  induced  in  a  conduc- 
tor moving  through  a  uniform  magnetic  field  is  not 
quite  easy,  because  none  of  the  diagrams  lend  them- 
selves naturally  and  simply  to  the  idea  of  circuits 
changing  in  form  or  size. 


§iio  INDUCED  CURRENTS  233 

If  we  take  a  rigid  circuit  in  a  magnetic  field,  like 
Fig.  45,  and  revolve  it  out  of  its  plane  180°,  it  is 
obvious  that  a  current  will  be  excited  in  it,  for  the 
process  is  essentially  the  same  as  if  the  conductor 
were  kept  still  and  the  field  reversed. 

But  to  understand  the  current  excited  in  a  closed 
circuit  when  a  portion  of  it  moves  across  the  lines  so 


FiG.  45. — Section  of  a  uniform  magnetic  field  with  two  rails  and  a  slider  in  it.  It 
the  slider  be  moved  to  or  fro,  the  wheels  inside  get  initially  compressed  or 
extended,  and  thereby  gain  or  lose  energy  respectively,  thus  exciting  the  state  ot 
slip  known  as  induced  current. 


as  to  embrace  a  greater  number  of  them,  one  has  to 
take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  inside  whirls  arc 
expanding  and  doing  work  in  forcing  the  conductor 
away,  while  the  outer  whirls  are  resisting  the  motion, 
and  being  thereby  compressed  and  rendered  more 
energetic.  Thus  the  wheels  inside  revolve  slightly 
slower  as  the  circuit  expands,  and  those  on  the  other 


234       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

side  the  slider  revolve  slightly  quicker.  Both  these 
processes  cause  a  slipping  of  the  gearing,  first  all 
round  the  inside  and  then  all  through  the  substance 
of  the  wire,  whereby  positive  electricity  moves  forward 
in  one  direction  round  the  circuit,  the  negative 
moving  oppositely  ;  and  so  a  current  is  accounted 
for.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  however,  that  any 
finite  expansion  of  the  wheels  really  occurs  ;  the 
motion  is  rapidly  equalized  by  diffusion  through  the 
wire,  and  fresh  wheels  come  in  round  it  from  out- 
side ;  hence  directly  after  the  conductor  has  stopped 
moving  the  field  is  again  steady,  but  with  many 
more  wheels  inside  the  contour  than  it  possessed 
at  first. 


Representation  of  an   Electrostatic   Field  again,  and 
superposition  of  it  on  a  perpendicular  Magnetic  Field 

in.  An  electrostatic  strain  is,  we  know,  caused  by 
a  displacement  of  positive  electricity  one  way  along 
the  lines  of  force,  and  by  an  equal  displacement  of 
negative  the  other  way.  The  process  \vas  indicated 
crudely  in  Fig.  7 A  ;  we  may  now  represent  it  rather 
more  fully  with  the  help  of  our  elastic  cells  by 
Fig.  46. 

Here  the  positive  cells  have  been  pulled  one  way, 
the  negative  the  other  way  ;  and  when  the  distorting 


ELECTROSTATIC  FIELD  235 

force  is  removed,  the  medium  tends  to  spring  back  to 
its  normal  condition,  exerting  an  obvious  tension  on 
bodies  attached  to  it  in  the  direction  of  its  lines  of 
force,  its  elongated  direction,  and  an  obvious  pressure 
in  all  perpendicular  directions,  its  compressed  direc- 
tions. 

Now,  if  all  the  cells  are  full  of  paralled  whirls,  as  in 
the  preceding  magnetic  diagrams,  it  is  not  improbable 


FIG.  46. — A  portion  of  an  electrostatic  field  between  two  oppositely  charged  bodies 
with  its  lines  of  force  going  from  right  to  left,  and  showing  a  tension  along  and  a 
pressure  at  right  angles  to  them,  due  to  the  elasticity  of  the  cells  (which  elasticity 
may  be  due  to  their  containing  fluid  in  a  state  of  whirl,  see  §  156).  Magnetic  lines 
of  force  perpendicular  to  the  paper  are  also  shown  in  section.  While  this  magnetic- 
field  was  being  excited  and  propagated  from  below  upwards,  a  slight  strain  would 
be  produced  in  the  elastic  cells,  like  but  immensely  less  than  that  shown  ;  as  con- 
trasted with  its  normal  condition  (Fig.  37).  Conversely,  while  this  electrostatic 
strain  was  being  produced,  the  positive  whirls  would  be  infinitesimally  quickened 
and  the  negative  ones  retarded  during  the  displacement,  thus  producing  a  minute 
magnetic  effect.  If  the  medium  is  not  magnetized,  the  whirls  are  not  necessarily 
absent,  only  faced  all  ways. 

that  this  electrostatic  distortion  or  "  shear "  of  the 
medium  may  affect  its  magnetic  properties  slightly, 
and  that,  if  the  direction  of  electrostatic  strain  were 
rapidly  reversed,  a  small  magnetic  oscillation  would 
also  ensue  ;  but  the  exact  details  of  these  mutual 
actions  are  difficult  to  specify  at  present. 


236       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

Disruptive  Discharge 

1 1 2.  Disruptive  discharge  may  be  thought  of  as  a 
pulling  of  the  shaded  cells  violently  along  past  the 
others  ;  the  process  being  accompanied  by  a  true 
disruption — a  sort  of  electrolysis — of  the  medium, 
and  a  passage  of  the  two  electricities  in  opposite 
directions  along  the  line  of  discharge. 

Consider  the  locomotion  of  any  one  horizontal  row 
of  shaded  cells  in  Fig.  46  during  the  occurrence  of  such 
a  disruption  of  the  medium.  The  cells  slide  on  towards 
the  right,  and,  as  they  slide,  the  spin  of  the  negative 
cells  above  them  is  retarded  while  that  of  those  below 
them  is  accelerated  ;  consequently  a  true  magnetic 
effect  is  produced,  just  like  that  accompanying  a 
current,  and  a  disruptive  discharge  has  therefore  all 
the  magnetic  properties  of  a  current. 


Effects  of  a  Moving  Charge 

113.  This  locomotion  of  a  set  of  positive  cells,  or 
of  negative  cells  the  other  way,  as  just  considered,  is 
very  near  akin  to  the  motion  of  a  charge  through  a 
dielectric  medium. 

When  a  charged  body  moves  along  with  extreme 
rapidity,  it  can  be  thought  of  as  exciting  a  rotation  in 
the  cells  most  closely  in  contact  with  it,  greater  than 


§  TI4       ELECTROSTATICS  AND  MAGNETISM        237 

that  which  it  excites  in  the  opposite  kind  of  cells,  and 
thus  produces  the  whirl  proper  to  a  magnetic  field. 
Thus  docs  a  moving  charge  behave  just  like  a  current 
of  a  certain  strength. 

It  may  be,  indeed,  that  this  is  the  customary  way  of 
exciting  a  voltaic  current  ;  for  the  chemical  forces  in 
a  cell  cause  a  locomotion  of  charged  atoms,  and  thus 
set  up  a  field,  which,  spreading  out  in  the  way  Prof. 
Poynting  has  sketched,  (§  42)  reaches  every  part  of  the 
metallic  circuit  and  excites  the  current  there. 


Electrostatic  Effects  of  a  Moving  or  Varying  Magnetic 

Field 

1 14.  Just  as  we  have  seen  that  a  moving  or  varying 
electrostatic  field  may  produce  slight  magnetic  effects, 
soon  can  perceive  that  a  moving  or  varying  magnetic 
field  brings  about  something  of  the  nature  of  an 
electrostatic  strain. 

For  a  spreading  out  field  is  continually  propagating 
the  rotation  on  from  one  layer  of  wheels  to  the  next.  If 
there  is  any  slip,  we  thus  get  induced  currents  (Fig.  43), 
and  the  rate  of  propagation  is  comparatively  slow,  being 
a  kind  of  diffusion  ;  but  even  if  there  is  not  any  slip,  yet, 
unless  the  wheel-work  is  absolutely  rigid,  the  rate  of 
propagation  will  not  be  infinite.  The  actual  rate  of 
propagation  is  very  great,  which  shows  that  the 


238       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

rigidity  or  elasticity  of  the  wheels  is  very  high  in 
proportion  to  their  inertia,  but  it  is  not  infinite  ;  and 
accordingly  the  propagation  of  rotation  is  accompanied 
by  a  temporary  strain.  One  part  of  the  field  is  in  full 
spin,  another  more  distant  part  is  as  yet  unreached  by 
the  spin  ;  between  the  two  we  have  the  region  of  strain, 
the  wheel-work  being  distorted  a  little  while  taking  up 
the  motion.  Thus  does  a  spreading  out  magnetic 
field  cause  a  slight  and  temporary  electrostatic  strain, 
at  right  angles  both  to  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force 
and  to  the  direction  of  their  advance. 


Generation  of  a  Magnetic  Field.     Induction  in  closed 
Circuits 

115.  Picture  to  one's  self  an  unmagnetized  piece  of 
iron  ;  its  whirls  are  all  existent,  but  they  are  shut  up 
into  little  closed  circuits,  and  so  produce  no  external 
effect  ;  magnetize  it  slightly,  and  some  of  the  closed 
circuits  open  out  and  expand,  with  one  portion  of 
them  in  the  air.  Magnetize  it  strongly,  and  we  have 
a  whole  set  of  them  opened  out  into  vortex  cores,  still 
with  the  whirl  round  them,  and  constituting  the 
common  magnetic  lines  of  force.  There  is  no  need  to 
think  of  iron  and  steel  in  this  connection.  In  air  or 
any  substance  the  whirls  are  still  present,  though  much 
fewer  or  feebler,  and  their  axes  ordinarily  form  little 


§  us       ELECTROSTATICS  AND  MAGNETISM          239 

closed  circuits — it  may  be  inside  the  atoms  themselves. 
But  wrap  a  current-conveying  wire  round  them,  and 
at  once  they  open  out  into  the  lines  of  force  proper  to 
a  circular  current. 

Again,  think  of  an  iron  ring,  or  a  hank  of  iron  wire 
as  bought  at  an  ironmonger's :  wrap  a  copper  wire 
several  times  round  it,  as  a  segment  of  a  Gramme  ring 
is  wound  (Fig.  47)  and  pass  a  current.  The  closed 
vortices  in  the  iron  at  once  expand  :  a  portion  of  each 
flashes  out  and  across  the  air-space  inclosed  by  the 


FIG.  47. — Closed  magnetic  circuit  like  Fig.  42,  with  a  single-ring  secondary  circuit, 
and  another  open  secondary  loop ;  also  with  a  short  conducting-rod  standing  up 
in  it. 

ring  (not  by  any  means  confining  itself  to  a  plane,  of 
course),  and  enters  the  ring  on  the  opposite  side  ;  so 
that  directly  the  current  is  steady  the  lines  all  lie  inside 
the  iron  again,  but  now  inclosing  an  area — the  area  of 
the  ring — instead  of  being  shut  up  into  infinitesimal 
links.  In  a  sense  the  iron  is  still  unmagnetized,  for 
its  lines  of  force  still  form  closed  contours  within  it, 
and  none  protrude  any  part  of  themselves  into  the  air, 
except  for  irregularities.  But  in  another  sense  it  is 
highly  and  permanently  magnetized  round  and  round 


240       MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION     CHAP,  xi 

in  itself,  the  magnetism  being  not  easy  to  get  out  of  it 
again,  except  by  judiciously  arranged  reverse  currents. 

It  is  now  like  one  great  electric  vortex  ring  instead 
of  like  a  confused  jumble  of  microscopic  ones.  Its 
section  was  shown  in  Fig.  42.  (See  also  Appendix 
(d)  and  (»).) 

During  the  variable  period,  while  the  current  is  in- 
creasing in  strength,  or  while  it  is  being  reversed,  the 
region  inclosed  by  the  ring  and  all  around  it  is  full  of 
myriads  of  expanding  lines  of  force  flashing  across, 
broadside  on,  from  one  side  of  the  iron  to  the  other, 
and  there  stopping.  It  is  the  presence  of  these 
moving  lines,  changing  rapidly  from  a  "  simply- 
connected  "  into  a  "  multiply-connected  "  space,  or 
vice  versa,  which  causes  the  powerful  induced  currents 
of  "  secondary  generators." 

In  every  case  of  varying  magnetic  field,  in  fact,  \ve 
have  lines  moving  broadside  on,  propagating  their 
whirl,  and  more  or  less  disturbing  the  medium  through 
which  they  move. 

Next  consider  a  moving  or  spinning  magnet.  Its 
lines  travel  with  it,  and,  being  closed  curves,  they  also 
must  move  broadside  through  the  field,  so  that  in  this 
case  we  may  expect  just  the  same  effect  as  can  be 
obtained  from  a  varying  magnetic  field. 

If  a  broadside-moving  line  of  force  cut  across  a 
conductor,  its  motion  is  delayed,  for  its  wheels  slip 
and  only  gradually  get  up  a  whirl  inside  the  ill-geared 


§  us        ELECTROSTATICS  AND  MAGNETISM        241 

substance ;  thus,  as  we  know,  causing  an  induced 
current  (see  §  103). 

If  a  conducting  ring  is  looped  with  the  iron  ring 
previously  mentioned,  as  a  snap-hook  is  looped  with 
an  eye,  then  every  expanding  vortex,  while  the  ring  is 
being  magnetized,  has  necessarily  to  cut  through  the 
conducting  ring  once  and  no  more,  no  matter  what  its 
shape  or  size.  The  electromotive  force  of  induction 
is  in  this  case  therefore  perfectly  definite,  and  simply 
proportional  to  the  number  of  turns  made  by  the 
secondary  round  the  core  of  the  ring  (Fig.  47). 

Instead  of  supposing  a  closed  conducting  secondary 
circuit,  imagine  an  open  one  :  there  is  still  an  E.M.F. 
in  it,  though  rather  less  than  before  because  a  few  of 
the  expanding  lines  flash  through  the  gap  and  produce 
no  effect ;  so  electricity  must  surge  to  and  fro  in  the 
conductor,  while  the  ring  is  being  magnetized  and  de- 
magnetized, as  water  surges  up  and  down  in  a  tilted 
trough,  and  a  small  condenser  attached  to  the  free 
ends  will  be  alternately  charged  and  discharged.  The 
gap  might  become  so  large  that  nothing  is  left  but  a 
short  rod  (Fig.  47) :  in  this  also  similar  electric 
oscillations  would  occur. 

But  now  suppose  no  secondary  conductor  at  all  ; 
nothing  but  dielectric  inclosed  by  the  ring.  In  it 
there  must  be  an  electric  displacement  excited  every 
time  the  magnetism  of  the  ring  is  reversed.  It  may 
be  an  oscillatory  displacement,  but  still  on  the  whole 

R 


242     MODELS  OF  CURRENT  INDUCTION   CHAP,  xi 

in  one  direction  during  rise  of  magnetism,  and  in  an 
opposite  direction  during  reversal  of  magnetism.  A 
charged  body  delicately  suspended  within  the  ring 
may  feel  the  effect  of  the  minute  electrostatic  strain 
so  magnetically  produced.1 

1 1 6.  To  see  the  mode  in  which  an  electrostatic 
displacement  arises  in  the  space  embraced  by  the  ring 
we  have  only  to  turn  to  Fig.  42,  and  look  at  the  set 
of  wheels  along  the  line  A  B  separating  one  half  the 
section  from  the  other.  They  cannot  steadily  rotate 
either  way,  for  they  are  urged  in  opposite  directions  by 
the  two  halves  ;  in  other  words,  there  is  no  magnetic 
field  anywhere  near  such  a  ring,  as  is  well  known 
but,  nevertheless,  during  a  change  of  magnetism 
while  the  whirls  inside  are  changing  in  speed,  the  rub 
on  the  dielectric  necessary  for  checking  the  outer 
wheels  of  the  conductor  is  either  increased  or 
diminished  ;  and  if  the  wheels  have  any  elastic 
"give"  in  them,  as  we  know  they  have,  (§  ill)  the 
electrostatic  strain  in  the  field  is  thereby  altered 
during  the  varying  stage  of  the  magnetism. 

For  the  experimental  detection  of  these  effects  see  Phil.  Mag. 
June,  1889 


PART    IV 
RADIA  TION 


R   2 


CHAPTER  XII 

RELATION   OF   ETHER   TO   ELECTRICITY 

117.  So  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  understand  and 
explain  electrical  phenomena,  it  has  been  by  assuming 
the  existence  of  a  medium  endowed  with  certain 
mechanical  or  quast-mechanical  properties,  such  as 
mobility  (§  12),  incompressibility  or  infinite  elasticity 
of  volume  (§  5),  combined  with  a  certain  amount  of 
plasticity  or  finite  elasticity  of  shape  (§  9).  We  also 
imagined  the  medium  as  composed  of  two  opposite 
constituents,  which  we  called  positive  and  negative 
electricity  respectively  (§  90),  and  which  were  con- 
nected in  such  a  way  that  whatever  one  did  the  other 
tended  to  do  the  precise  opposite.  Further,  we  were 
led  to  endow  each  of  these  constituents  with  a  certain 
amount  of  inertia  (§§  38  and  88),  and  we  recognized 
something  of  the  nature  of  friction  between  each 
constituent  and  ordinary  matter  (§§  28  and  63). 

Broadly  speaking  we  may  say — 

(i)  That  friction  makes  itself  conspicuous  in  the 


246  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY         CHAP.  XIT 

discussion  of  current-electricity  or  the  properties  of 
conductors,  and  that  the  laws  of  it  are  summarized  in 
the  statement  known  by  the  name  of  Ohm,  viz.  that 
the  current  through  a  given  conductor  is  proportional 
to  the  force  that  drives  it,  or  that  the  opposition  force 
exerted  by  a  conductor  upon  a  current  is  simply 
proportional  to  the  strength  of  that  current. 

(2)  That  elasticity  is  recognized  as  necessary  when 
studying  the  facts  of  electrostatics  or  the  properties  of 
insulators — electric  displacement  and  recoil,  or  charge 
and    discharge :     the   laws  having   been    studied    by 
Faraday,  and  the  relative  pliability  (or  shearability,  if 
there  were  such  a  word  for  the  reciprocal  of  rigidity 
or   elasticity   of  figure)  of  the    medium  in  different 
substances  being  measured  and  stated  in  terms  of  that 
of  air  as  their  specific  inductive  capacity,  K. 

(3)  That  inertia  is  brought  into  prominence  by  the 
facts    of     magnetism,    studied    chiefly    perhaps    by 
Thomson,  who  has  called  the  relative  density  of  the 
medium  in  different  substances  their   magnetic  per- 
meability or  magnetic  inductive  capacity;  the  ratio  of 
its  value  for  any  substance  to  its  value  for  common 
air  being  called  /-t. 

(4)  That    the    doubleness    of   constitution    of    the 
medium — its  being  composed  of  two  precisely  opposite 
entities — is  suggested  by  the  facts  of  electrolysis,  by 
the  absence  of  mechanical  momentum  in  currents  and 
magnets,  and  by  the  difficulty  of  otherwise  conceiving 


§  ii8      FLUIDITY  AND  RIGIDITY  OF  ETHER        247 

a  medium  endowed  with  rigidity  which  yet  is  perfectly 
fluid  to  masses  of  matter  moving  through  it. 

1 1 8.  With  the  hypothesis  of  doubleness  of  con- 
stitution this  last-mentioned  difficulty  disappears. 
The  ether  as  a  whole  may  be  perfectly  fluid  and  allow 
bodies  to  pass  through  it  without  resistance,  while  its 
two  components  may  be  elastically  attached  together 
and  may  resist  any  forces  tending  to  separate  them,  as 
a  solid  would  if  it  possessed  the  requisite  rigidity.  It 
is  like  the  difference  between  passing  one's  hand 
through  water,  and  chemically  decomposing  it  ;  it  is 
like  the  difference  between  waving  a  piece  of  canvas 
about,  and  tearing  it  into  its  constituent  threads. 

To  put  the  matter  boldly  and  baldly :  we  are 
familiar  with  the  conceptions  of  matter  and  of  ether, 
and  it  is  known  that  the  two  things  react  on  each 
other  in  some  way,  so  that  although  a  free  portion  of 
the  ether  appears  to  move  freely  through  matter,  yet 
another  portion  appears  to  move  with  matter  as  if 
bound  to  it.  This  mode  of  regarding  the  facts  is  as 
old  as  Fresnel  (§  1 84).  We  now  proceed  a  step  further, 
and  analyze  the  ether  into  two  constituents — two  equal 
opposite  constituents — each  endowed  with  inertia,  and 
each  connected  to  the  other  by  elastic  ties :  ties 
which  the  presence  of  gross  matter  in  general  weakens 
and  in  some  cases  dissolves.  The  two  constituents 
are  called  positive  and  negative  electricity  respectively ; 
and  of  these  two  electricities  we  imagine  the  ether  to  be 


248  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY         CHAP,  xn 

composed.  The  tie  between  them  is  dissolved  in  metals, 
it  is  relaxed  or  made  less  rigid  in  ordinary  insulators. 
The  specific  inductive  capacity  of  a  substance  means 
the  reciprocal  of  the  rigidity  of  its  doubly  constituted 

ether.     Let  us  call  this  rigidity  k,  so  that  /'  =  ~ 

K. 

The  neighbourhood  of  gross  matter  seems  also  to 
render  ether  more  dense.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  it 
can  really  condense  an  incompressible  fluid,  but  it  may 
load  it  or  otherwise  modify  it  so  as  to  produce  the  effect 
of  increased  density.  In  iron  this  density  reaches  its 
highest  known  value,  and  in  all  substances  the  density 
or  inertia  per  unit  volume  of  their  ether  may  be 
denoted  by  ytt,  and  called  their  magnetic  permeability.1 

119.  Let  it  be  understood  what  we  are  doing. 
In  Part  I.  we  discussed  effects  very  analogous  to 
those  which  would  be  produced  by  an  elastic  incom- 
pressible medium  (roughly  like  india-rubber  or  jelly)  ; 
that  is,  we  were  led  to  postulate  a  medium  possessing 
elasticity  or  something  very  analogous  to  elasticity. 
In  Parts  II.  and  III.  we  discussed  effects  suggesting 
and  more  or  less  necessitating,  the  idea  of  a  property 
of  the  medium  very  analogous  to  inertia  ;  and  we 
were  also  led  to  postulate  a  doubleness  of  constitution 
for  the  medium,  so  that  shearing  stresses  may  occur  in 
it  and  yet  it  be  perfectly  fluid  as  a  whole.  We  are 

1  Strictly  speaking,  the  density  is  more  likely  to  be  4*7*,  and  the 
ligidity  4ir/K  ;  but  the  4?r  is  omitted  for  simplicity. 


§  119       FLUIDITY  AND  RIGIDITY  OF  ETHER        249 

now  pushing  these  analogies  and  ideas  into  greater 
defmiteness  and  baldness  of  statement.  We  already 
know  of  a  continuous  incompressible  fluid  filling  all 
space,  and  we  call  it  the  ether.  Let  us  suppose  that, 
it  is  composed  of,  and  by  electromotive  force  ana- 
lyzable  into,  two  constituents  ;  let  these  constituents 
cling  together  with  a  certain  tenacity,  so  that  the  me- 
dium shall  have  an  electromotive  elasticity,  though  it  is 
mechanically  quite  fluid  ;  and  let  each  constituent  pos- 
sess inertia,  or  something  so  like  inertia  as  to  produce 
similar  effects.  Making  this  hypothesis,  electrical 
effects  are  to  a  certain  extent  explained.  Not 
ultimately,  indeed — few  things  can  be  explained 
ultimately :  not  even  as  ultimately  as  could  be 
wished  ;  for  the  nature  of  the  connection  between  the 
two  constituents  of  the  ether  and  between  the  ether 
and  gross-matter — the  nature  of  the  force,  that  is,  and 
the  nature  of  the  inertia — remains  untouched.  This  is 
a  limitation  to  be  clearly  admitted  ;  but  if  that  were 
the  only  one — if  all  else  in  the  hypothesis  were  true — 
we  should  do  well,  and  a  distinct  step  would  have  been 
gained.  It  is  hardly  to  be  hoped  that  this  is  so— 
hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  bald  statement  above 
is  more  than  a  kind  of  parody  of  the  truth  ;  neverthe- 
less, supposing  it  only  a  parody,  supposing  what  we 
call  electromotive  elasticity  and  inertia  are  things 
capable  of  clearer  conception  and  more  adequate  state- 
ment, (§  156)  yet,  inasmuch  as  they  correspond  to  and 


250  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY          CHAP,  xn 

represent  a  real  analogy,  and  inasmuch  as  we  find  that 
a  medium  so  constructed  would  behave  in  a  very  elec- 
trical manner,  and  might  in  conjunction  with  matter 
be  capable  of  giving  rise  to  all  known  electrical 
phenomena,  we  are  bound  to  follow  out  the  conception 
into  other  regions,  and  see  whether  any  other  abstruse 
phenomena,  not  commonly  recognized  as  electrical, 
will  not  also  fall  into  the  dominion  of  this  hypothetical 
substance  and  be  equally  explained  by  it  (§  8).  This 
is  what  we  shall  now  proceed  to  do. 

1 20.  Before  beginning,  however,  let  me  just  say 
what  I  mean  by  "  electromotive  elasticity."  It  might 
be  called  chemical  elasticity,  or  molecular  elasticity. 
There  is  a  well-known  distinction  between  electro- 
motive force  and  ordinary  matter-moving  force.  The 
one  acts  upon  electricity,  straining  or  moving  or,  in 
general,  "  displacing  "  it  ;  the  other  acts  upon  matter, 
displacing  it.  The  nature  of  neither  force  can  be 
considered  known,  but  crudely  we  may  say  that  as 
electricity  is  to  matter  so  is  electric  force  to  common 
mechanical  force ;  so  also  is  electric  elasticity  to 
the  common  shape-elasticity  or  rigidity  of  ordinary 
matter :  so  perhaps,  once  more,  may  electrical  inertia 
be  to  ordinary  inertia. 

Inertia  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  force  to  ac- 
celeration ;  similarly  electric  inertia  is  the  ratio  of 
electromotive  force  to  the  acceleration  of  electric 
displacement.  It  is  quite  possible  that  electric  in- 


§  120  CHEMICAL  ELASTICITY  251 

crtia  and  ordinary  inertia  arc  the  same  thing,  just 
as  electric  energy  is  the  same  with  mechanical  energy. 
If  this  were  known  to  be  so,  it  would  be  a  step 
upward  towards  a  mechanical  explanation  ;  but  it  is 
by  no  means  necessarily  or  certainly  so  ;  and  whether  it 
be  so  or  not,  the  analogy  undoubtedly  holds,  and  may 
be  fruitfully  pursued. 

And  as  to  "  electromotive  elasticity,"  one  may  say 
that  pure  water  or  gas  is  electromotively  elastic,  though 
mechanically  limpid  ;  each  resists  electric  forces  up  to 
a  certain  limit  of  tenacity,  beyond  which  it  is  broken  ; 
and  it  recoils  when  they  are  withdrawn.  Glass  acts 
in  the  same  way,  but  that  happens  to  be  mechanically 
clastic  too.  Its  mechanical  elasticity  and  tenacity 
have,  however,  nothing  to  do  with  its  electric  elasticity 
and  tenacity. 

One  perceives  in  a  general  way  why  fluids  can  be 
electrically,  or  chemically,  or  molecularly  elastic :  it  is 
because  their  molecules  are  doubly  or  multiply  com- 
posed, and  the  constituent  atoms  cling  together,  while 
the  several  molecules  are  free  of  one  another.  Mechani- 
cal forces  deal  with  the  molecule  as  a  whole,  and  to 
them  the  substance  is  fluid  ;  electrical  or  chemical 
forces  deal  with  the  constituents  of  the  molecule, 
setting  up  between  them  a  shearing  strain  and  en- 
deavouring to  tear  them  asunder.  To  such  forces, 
therefore,  the  fluid  is  elastic  and  tenacious  up  to  a 
certain  limit.  Extend  this  view  of  things  to  the 


252  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY         CHAP,  xn 

constitution    of    the   ether,   and    one   has    at  least  a 
definite  position  whence  to  further  proceed. 

121.  It  may  be  convenient  and  not  impertinent  here 
to  say  that  a  student  might  find  it  a  help  to  re-read 
Parts  I.  and  II.  in  the  light  of  what  has  just  been 
said  :   remembering  that,   for  the  sake  of  simplicity, 
only  the  simple  fact  of  an  elastic  medium  was  at  first 
contemplated    and    insisted   on  ;    no    attempt   being 
made   to  devise   a    mechanism    for  its   elasticity  by 
considering    it    as    composed    of    two    constituents. 
Hence  the  manifest  artificiality   of  such   figures   as 
Fig.  6,  p.  39,  where  fixed  beams  are  introduced  to  serve 
as  the  support  of  the  elastic  connections.     But  it  is 
pretty  obvious  now,  and  it  has  been  already  indicated 
in  Fig.  /A,  p.  46,  that  a  closer  analogy  will  be  obtained 
by  considering  two  sets  of  beads,  arranged  in  alter- 
nate parallel  rows,  connected  by  elastic  threads,  and 
displaced  simultaneously  in  opposite  directions.  A  still 
further  progressive  analogy  is  attempted   in  Fig.   46, 
p.  235.      We  have  gradually  passed,   therefore,  from 
a  sort  of  one-fluid  theory    to   a    modified   two-fluid 
theory  ;  believing  it  to   be    in    some   sense  or  other 
nearer  the  truth. 

Recovery  of  the  Medium  from  Strain 

122.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  behaviour  of  a 
medium  endowed  with  an  clastic  rigidity,   k,   and  a 
density,  ft,  subject  to  displacements  or  strains.     One 


§  123  ELECTRIC  OSCILLATIONS  253 

obvious  fact  is  that  when  the  distorting  force  is 
removed  the  medium  will  spring  back  to  its  old 
position,  overshoot  it  on  the  other  side,  spring  back 
again,  and  thus  continue  oscillating  till  the  original 
energy  is  rubbed  away  by  viscosity  or  internal  friction. 
If  the  viscosity  is  very  considerable,  it  will  not  be 
able  so  to  oscillate  ;  it  will  then  merely  slide  back  in 
a  dead-beat  manner  towards  its  unstrained  state ; 
taking  a  theoretically  infinite  time  to  get  completely 
back,  but  practically  restoring  itself  to  something 
very  near  its  original  state  in  what  may  be  quite  a 
short  time.  The  recovery  may  in  fact  be  either  a 
brisk  recoil  or  a  leak  of  any  degree  of  slowness, 
according  to  the  amount  of  viscosity  as  compared 
with  the  inertia  and  elasticity  (§  19). 

The  matter  is  one  of  simple  mechanics.  It  is  a 
case  of  harmonic  motion  modified  by  a  friction 
proportional  to  the  speed.  The  electrical  case  is 
simpler  than  any  mechanical  one,  for  two  reasons  : 
first,  because  so  long  as  capacity  is  constant  (and 
no  variation  has  yet  been  discovered)  Hooke's  law 
will  be  accurately  obeyed — restoring  force  will  be 
accurately  proportional  to  displacement  ;  secondly, 
because  for  all  conductors  which  obey  Ohm's  law 
(and  no  true  conductor  is  known  to  disobey  it)  the 
friction  force  is  accurately  proportional  to  the  first 
power  of  velocity. 

123.  There  are  two,  or  perhaps  one  may  say  three, 


254  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY         CHAP,  xn 

main  cases.  First,  where  the  friction  is  great.  In 
that  case  the  recovery  is  of  the  nature  of  a  slow  leak, 
according  to  a  decreasing  geometrical  progression 
or  a  logarithmic  curve  ;  the  logarithmic  decrement 
being  independent  of  the  inertia,  and  being  equal 
to  the  quotient  of  the  elasticity  and  the  resistance 
coefficients. 

As  the  resistance  is  made  less,  the  recovery  be- 
comes quicker  and  quicker  until  inertia  begins  to 
prominently  assert  its  effect  and  to  once  more 
lengthen  out  the  time  of  final  recovery  by  carrying 
the  recoiling  matter  beyond  its  natural  position,  and 
so  prolonging  the  disturbance  by  oscillations.  The 
quickest  recovery  possible  is  obtained  just  before 
these  oscillations  begin  ;  and  it  can  be  shown  that 
this  is  when  the  resistance  coefficient  is  equal  to  twice 
the  geometric  mean  of  the  elasticity  and  the  inertia. 
One  may  consider  this  to  be  the  second  main  case. 
The  recoil  is  then  exactly  dead-beat,  and  occurs  in  the 
minimum  of  time. 

The  third  principal  case  is  when  the  resistance  is 
quite  small,  and  when  the  recovery  is  therefore 
distinctly  oscillatory.  If  the  viscosity  were  really 
zero,  the  motion  would  be  simply  harmonic  for  ever, 
unless  some  other  mode  of  dissipating  energy  were 
provided ;  but  if  any  such  mode  is  provided,  or 
if  the  viscosity  has  a  finite  value,  then  the  vibra- 
tions will  be  simply  harmonic  with  a  dying  out 


§  124  ELECTRIC  OSCILLATIONS  255 

amplitude,  the  extremities  of  all  the  swings  lying  on 
a  logarithmic  curve.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  the  rate 
of  swing  is  practically  independent  of  friction  ;  it 
depends  only  on  elasticity  and  inertia  ;  and,  as  is  well 
known  for  simple  harmonic  motion,  the  time  of  a 
complete  swing  is  2?r  times  the  square  root  of  the 
ratio  of  inertia  and  elasticity  coefficients. 

124.  Making  the  statement  more  electrically  con- 
crete, we  may  consider  a  circuit  with  a  certain  amount 
of  stored-up  potential  energy  or  electrical  strain  in  it : 
for  instance,  a  charged  Leyden  jar  provided  with  a 
nearly,  complete  discharge  circuit.  The  main  elastic 
coefficient  here  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  capacity  of  the 
jar  :  the  more  capacious  the  jar  the  more  "  pliable  "  it 
is — the  less  force  of  recoil  for  a  given  displacement, — 
so  that  capacity  is  the  inverse  of  rigidity.  The  main 
inertia  coefficient  is  that  which  is  known  electrically 
as  the  "  self-induction  "  of  the  circuit  :  it  involves  the 
inertia  of  all  the  displaced  matter  and  ether,  of  every- 
thing which  will  be  moved  or  disturbed  when  the  jar 
is  discharged.  It  is  not  a  very  simple  thing  to  calcu- 
late its  value  in  any  given  case  ;  still  it  can  be  done, 
and  the  general  idea  is  plain  enough  without  under- 
standing the  exact  function  and  importance  of  every 
portion  of  the  surrounding  space.  (See  Appendix.) 

Corresponding,    then,    to   the   well-known    simple 

harmonic  T   =  2?r  ^f     ,  we  have,  writing  L  for  the 

fV 


256       ,  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY          CHAP,  xn 

self-induction  or  inertia  of  the  circuit,  and  S  for  its 
capacity  or  inverse  elasticity  constant, 

T  =  2 


This,  therefore,  is  the  time  of  a  complete  swing. 
Directly  the  jar  is  discharged,  these  oscillations  begin 
and  they  continue  like  the  vibration  of  a  tuning-fork 
until  they  are  damped  out  of  existence  by  viscosity 
and  other  modes  of  dissipation  of  energy. 

125.  But  now  just  consider  a  tuning-fork.  Suppose 
its  substance  were  absolutely  unviscous,  would  it  go 
on  vibrating  for  ever  ?  In  a  vacuum  it  might  :  in  air 
it  certainly  would  not.  And  why  not  ?  Because  it  is 
surrounded  by  a  medium  capable  of  taking  up  vibra- 
tions and  of  propagating  them  outwards  without  limit. 
The  existence  of  a  vibrating  body  in  a  suitable 
medium  means  the  carving  of  that  medium  into  a 
succession  of  waves  and  the  transmission  of  these 
waves  away  into  space  or  into  absorbing  obstacles. 
It  means,  therefore,  the  conveyance  away  of  the 
energy  of  the  vibrating  body,  and  its  subsequent 
appearance  in  some  other  form  wherever  the  radiating 
waves  are  quenched  (§  141), 

The  laws  of  this  kind  of  wave-propagation  are  well 
known  ;  the  rate  at  which  waves  travel  through  the 
medium  depends  not  at  all  on  any  properties  of  the 
original  vibrating  body,  the  source  of  the  disturbance  ; 
it  depends  solely  on  the  properties  of  the  medium 


§  126  RADIATION  TYPE  OF  WAVES  257 

They  travel  at  a  rate  precisely  equal  to  the  square 
root  of  the  ratio  of  its  elasticity  to  its  density. 

Although  the  speed  of  travel  is  thus  fixed  inde- 
pendently of  the  source,  the  length  of  the  indivi- 
dual waves  is  not  so  independent.  The  length  of 
the  waves  depends  both  on  the  rate  at  which  they 
travel  and  on  the  rate  at  which  the  source  vibrates. 
It  is  well  known  and  immediately  obvious  that  the 
length  of  each  wave  is  simply  equal  to  the  product  of 
the  speed  of  travel  into  the  time  of  one  vibration. 

126.  But  not  every  medium  is  able  to  convey  every 
kind  of  vibration.  It  may  be  that  the  mode  of 
vibration  of  a  body  is  entirely  other  than  that  which 
the  medium  surrounding  it  can  convey  :  in  that  case 
no  dissipation  of  energy  by  wave-propagation  can 
result,  no  radiation  will  be  excited.  The  only  kind 
of  radiation  which  common  fluids  are  mechanically 
able  to  transmit  is  well  known  :  it  is  that  which 
appeals  to  our  ears  as  sound.  The  elasticity  con- 
cerned in  such  disturbance  as  this  is  mere  volume 
elasticity  or  incompressibility.  But  electrical  ex- 
periments (the  Cavendish  experiment,  §§  4  and  14  A, 
and  Faraday's  ice-pail  experiment)  prove  the  ether 
to  be  enormously — perhaps  absolutely — incom- 
pressible ;  and  if  so,  such  vibrations  as  these  would 
travel  with  infinite  speed  and  not  carve  proper  waves 
at  all. 

Conceivably  (I  should  like  to  say  probably) 

s 


258  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY          CHAP,  xn 

gravitation  is  transmitted  by  such  longitudinal 
impulses  or  thrusts,  and  in  that  case  it  is  nearly  or 
quite  instantaneous  ;  and  the  rate  at  which  it  travels, 
if  infinite,  can  be  determined  by  a  still  more  accurate 
repetition  of  the  Cavendish  experiment  (the  electrical 
one,  not  the  customary  gravitation-constant  deter- 
mination) than  has  yet  been  made  ;  but  true  radiation 
transmitted  by  the  ether  cannot  be  of  this  longi- 
tudinal character.  The  elasticity  possessed  .by  the 
ether  is  of  the  nature  of  rigidity :  it  has  to  do 
with  shears  and  distortions  ;  not  mechanical  stresses 
—to  them  it  is  quite  limpid  and  resistless — but 
electromotive  stresses  :  it  has  an  electrical  rigidity, 
and  it  is  this  which  must  be  used  in  the  transmission 
of  wave-motion. 

But  the  oscillatory  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar  is 
precisely  competent  to  apply  to  the  ether  these 
electromotive  vibrations ,  it  will  shake  it  in  the 
mode  suitable  for  it  to  transmit  ;  and  accordingly, 
from  a  discharging  circuit,  waves  of  electrical  dis- 
tortion, or  transverse  waves,  will  spread  in  all 
directions  at  a  pace  depending  on  the  properties 
of  the  medium. 

Thus,  then,  even  with  a  circuit   of  perfect  conduc- 
tivity the    continuance    of   the    discharge    would  be 
limited,   the    energy   would    be    dissipated  ;    not    by 
friction — there  would  in  such  a  circuit  be  no  direct 
,  production     of    heat — it     would     be    dissipated    by 


§  126  FATE  OF  RADIATION  259 

radiation,  dissipated  in  the  same  way  as  a  hot  body 
cooling,  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as  a  vibrating 
tuning-fork  mounted  on  its  resonant  box.  The  energy 
of  the  vibrating  body  would  be  transferred  gradually 
to  the  medium,  and  would  by  this  be  conveyed  out 
and  away ;  its  final  destination  being  a  separate  ques- 
tion, depending  on  the  nature  and  position  of  the 
material  obstacles  it  meets  with.  (See  §  160  ;  and 
also  a  lecture  on  Discharge  of  Leyden  Jar,  below.) 


S   2 


CHAPTER  XIII 

CONSTANTS   OF   THE   ETHER 

Velocity  of  Electrical  Radiation 

127.  THE  pace  at  which  the  radiation-waves  travel 
depends,  as  we  have  said,  solely  on  the  properties  of 
the  medium,  solely  on  the  relation  between  its  elasticity 
and  its  density.  The  elasticity  considered  must  be  of 
the  kind  concerned  in  the  vibrations  ;  but  the  vibra- 
tions are  in  this  case  electrical,  and  so  electrical 
elasticity  is  the  pertinent  kind.  This  kind  of  elasticity 
is  the  only  one  the  ether  possesses  of  finite  value,  and 
its  value  can  be  measured  by  electrostatic  experiments. 
Not  absolutely,  unfortunately  :  only  the  relative  elas- 
ticity of  the  ether  as  modified  by  the  proximity  of 
gross  substances  has  yet  been  measured  :  its  reciprocal 
being  called  their  specific  inductive  capacity,  or  di- 
electric constant,  K.  The  absolute  value  of  the  quan- 
tity K  is  at  present  unknown,  and  so  a  convention  has 


§  127  ELASTICITY  AND  DENSITY  261 

arisen-  whereby  in  air  it  is  called  I.  This  convention 
is  the  basis  of  the  artificial  electrostatic  system  of 
units.  No  one  supposes,  or  at  least  no  one  has  a  right 
to  suppose,  that  its  value  is  really  I.  The  only  rational 
guess  at  ethereal  rigidity  is  one  by  Sir  William 
Thomson1  which,  if  we  reckon  it  as  47T/K,  is  equivalent 
to  saying  that  in  air  the  value  of  K  is  probably  some- 
thing like  140.  Whether  known  or  not,  and  at 
present  it  is  certainly  not  known,  the  absolute  value 
of  the  dielectric  constant  is  manifestly  a  legitimate 
problem  which  may  any  year  be  solved. 

The  other  thing  on  which  the  speed  of  radiation 
waves  depends  is  the  medium's  density — its  electric 
density,  if  so  it  must  be  distinguished.  Here,  again, 
we  do  not  know  its  absolute  value.  Its  relative  or 
apparent  amount  inside  different  substances  is  mea- 
sured by  magnetic  experiments,  and  called  their 
specific  magnetic  capacity,  or  permeability,  and  is 
denoted  by  //,. 

Being  unknown,  another  convention  has  arisen,  quite 
incompatible  with  the  other  convention  just  mentioned, 
that  its  value  in  air  shall  be  called  I.  This  convention 
is  the  basis  of  the  artificial  electro-magnetic  system 
of  units — volts,  ohms,  amperes,  farads,  and  the  like. 
Both  of  these  conventions  cannot  be  true :  no  one 

1  Trans.  R.  S.  Edin.,  xxi.  60 ;  see  also  article  "Ether,"  in  the 
Encyc.  Brit.  \  and  the  concluding  line  in  Vol.  III.  of  Mathematical 
and  Physical  Papers. 


262  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER     CHAP,  xin 

has  the  least  right  to  suppose  either  true.  The  only 
rational  guess  at  ethereal  free  density  is  that  by  Sir 
William  Thomson,  dependent  on  the  estimate  of  its 
rigidity  just  referred  to  ;  according  to  which,  on  the 
views  here  enunciated,  the  value  of  /j,  in  air  would 
be  8x  icr24. 

128.  Very  well,  then  ;    it  being  clearly  understood 

that  these  two  great  ethereal  constants,  £  or      ,  and  /-t, 

K. 

are  neither  of  them  at  present  known,  but  are  both  of 
them  quite  knowable,  and  may  at  any  time  become 
known  when  a  suitable  experiment  has  been  devised, 
it  remains  to  express  the  speed  of  wave  transmission 
in  terms  of  them.  But  it  is  well  known  that  this 
speed  is  simply  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  elasticity 
to  density,  or 

"''     v  =     or  " 


This  then  is  the  speed  with  which  waves  leave  the 
discharging  Leyden  jar  circuit,  or  any  other  circuit 
conveying  alternating  or  varying  currents,  and  travel 
out  into  space. 

Not  knowing  either  k  or  /^,  we  cannot  calculate 
this  speed  directly,  but  we  can  try  to  observe  it 
experimentally. 

129.  The  first  and  crudest  way  of  making  the 
attempt  would  be  to  arrange  a  secondary  circuit  near 
our  oscillating  primary  circuit,  and  see  how  soon  the 


§  130  HERTZ  EXPERIMENTS  263 

disturbance  reached  it.  For  instance,  we  might  take 
a  nearly  closed  loop,  make  it  face  a  Lcyden  jar  circuit 
across  a  measured  distance,  and  then  look  for  any 
interval  of  time  between  the  spark  -of  the  primary 
discharge  and  the  induced  spark  of  the  secondary 
circuit ;  using  a  revolving  mirror  or  what  we  please. 
But  in  this  way  we  should  hardly  be  able  to  detect 
any  time  at  all :  the  propagation  is  too  quick. 

130.  Since  this  was  first  written,  Dr.  Hertz,  ot 
Karlsruhe,  has  succeeded  in  making  a  measure  of 
velocity  on  this  very  plan.  He  did  not  indeed 
actually  measure  the  time  which  elapsed  between 
the  closing  of  the  primary  circuit  and  the  start  of  the 
induced  current  in  the  secondary,  neither  did  he  use 
a  Leyden  jar,  but  he  converted  the  advancing  waves 
from  an  electrically  oscillating  arrangement,  excited 
by  means  of  an  induction  coil,  into  stationary  waves, 
by  means  of  reflection  at  a  plane  metallic  wall.  Just 
as  waves  travelling  along  a  rope  or  stretched  cord 
are  converted  into  stationary  waves,  or  nodes  and 
loops,  by  the  interference  of  direct  and  reflected 
pulses  :  reflection  taking  place  from  the  fixed  end  of 
the  cord  ;  so  waves  advancing  from  an  electrostatic 
oscillator,  or  charged  body  connected  with  the  ter- 
minals of  an  induction  coil,  were  reflected  at  the  wall 
of  the  room  (lined  with  sheet  zinc  on  purpose  to 
make  it  a  conductor,  and  therefore  a  good  reflector, 
see  §  164),  and  by  interference  with  the  direct  waves 


264  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER     CHAP,  xm 

converted  them  into  stationary  nodes  and  loops : 
the  interval  between  two  nodes  being  half  a  wave- 
length. 

By  now  moving  the  secondary  circuit  about,  be- 
tween the  primary  and  the  -wall,  places  of  maxi- 
mum and  minimum  disturbance  could  be  found,  and 
thus  the  wave-length  measured.  By  calculating  the 
oscillation  period  of  the  primary  circuit  (or  part-cir- 
cuit, for  it  was  unclosed)  an  indirect  measure  of  the 
velocity  of  propagation  was  arrived  at.  So  far  as 
could  be  told  it  agreed  with  measurements  made 
by  other  means,  such  as  those  now  to  be  described. 

131.  We  might  next  make  use  of  the  principle  of 
the  electric  telegraph,  viz.  the  propagation  of  a  dis- 
turbance round  a  single  circuit  from  any  one  point  of 
origin.  Consider  a  large  closed  circuit,  either  convey- 
ing or  not  conveying  a  current :  introduce  at  any  one 
point  a  sudden  change — a  sudden  E.M.F.,  for  instance, 
or  a  sudden  resistance  if  there  be  a  current  already. 
Out.  from  that  point  a  disturbance  will  spread  into  the 
ether,  just  as  happens  in  air  when  a  blow  is  struck  or 
gun-cotton  fired.  A  regular  succession  of  disturbances 
would  carve  the  ether  into  waves :  a  single  disturb- 
ance will  merely  cause  a  pulse  or  shock  ;  but  the  rate 
of  transmission  is  the  same  in  either  case  and  we  may 
watch  for  the  reception  of  the  pulse  at  a  distant  station. 
If  the  station  has  to  be  very  distant  in  order  to  give 
an  appreciable  lapse  of  time,  a  speaking-tube  is  de- 


§  i32  TELEGRAPH  WIRE  265 

sirablc  to  prevent  spreading  out  in  all  directions — to 
concentrate  the  disturbance  at  the  desired  spot.  What 
a  speaking-tube  is  to  sound,  that  is  the  wire  of  the 
circuit — the  telegraph — to  ethereal  pulses. 

It  is  a  curious  function,  this  of  the  telegraph  wire  : 
it  docs  not  convey  the  pulses,  it  directs  them.  They 
are  conveyed  wholly  by  the  ether,  at  a  pace  deter- 
mined by  the  properties  of  the  ether,  modified  as  it 
may  be  by  the  neighbourhood  of  gross  matter.  Any 
disturbance  which  enters  the  wires  is  rapidly  dissipated 
into  heat,  and  gets  no  further :  it  is  the  insulating 
medium  round  it  which  transmits  the  pulses  to  the 
distant  station. 

All  this  was  mentioned  in  Part  III.,  and  an  at- 
tempt was  made  to  explain  the  mechanism  of  the 
process,  and  to  illustrate  in  an  analogical  way  what 
is  going  on  (Chap.  XL). 

The  point  of  the  matter  is  that  currents  are  not 
propelled  by  end-thrusts,  like  water  in  a  pipe  or  air  in 
a  speaking-tube,  but  by  lateral  propulsion,  as  by  a 
series  of  rotating  wheels  with  their  axes  all  at  right 
angles  to  the  wire  surrounding  it  as  a  central  core, 
and  slipping  with  more  or  less  friction  at  its  surface. 
This  is  characteristic  of  ether  modes  in  general  :  it 
does  not  convey  longitudinal  waves  or  end-thrust 
pulses,  like  sound,  but  it  conveys  transverse  vibrations 
of  lateral  pulses,  like  light  (§  42). 

132.  Without  recapitulating  further,  we  can  perceive 


266  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER      CHAP,  xni 

then,  that  the  transmission  of  the  pulse  round  the 
circuit  to  its  most  distant  parts  depends  mainly  on 
the  medium  surrounding  it.  The  process  is  somewhat 
as  follows  : — Consider  two  long  straight  parallel  wires, 
freely  suspended,  and  at  some  great  distance  joined 
together.  At  the  near  end  of  each,  start  equal  opposite 
electromotive  impulses,  as  by  suddenly  applying  to 
them  the  poles  of  a  battery  ;  or  apply  a  succession  of 
such  pulses  by  means  of  an  alternating  machine.  Out 
spread  the  pulses  into  space,  starting  in  opposite 
phases  from  the  two  wires,  so  that  at  a  distance  from 
the  wires  the  opposite  pulses  interfere  with  each  other, 
and  are  practically  non-existent,  just  as  but  little  sound 
is  audible  at  a  distance  from  the  two  prongs  of  a  freely 
suspended  tuning-fork.  But  near  the  wires,  and 
especially  between  them,  the  disturbance  may  be 
considerable.  The  energy  emitted  by  the  source  as 
it  reaches  each  wire  is  dissipated,  and  so  a  fresh  supply 
of  energy  goes  on  continually  arriving  at  the  wires, 
always  flowing  in  from  outside,  to  make  up  the  de- 
ficiency. If  the  wires  are  long  enough,  hardly  any 
energy  may  remain  by  the  time  their  distant  ends  are 
reached  ;  but  whatever  there  is  will  still  be  crowding 
in  upon  the  wires  and  getting  dissipated,  unless  by 
some  mechanism  it  be  diverted  and  utilized  to  effect 
some  visible  or  audible  or  chemical  change,  and  so  to 
give  the  desired  signal  (§  107). 

133.  Now  the  pace  at   which  this  transmission   of 


§  134  VELOCITY  ALONG  WIRES  267 

energy  goes  on  in  the  direction  of  the  wires  is  pretty 
much  the  same  as  in  free  space.1  There  are  various  cir- 
cumstances which  can  retard  it ;  there  are  none  which 
can  accelerate  it.  The  circumstances  which  can  retard 
it  arc,  first,  constriction  of  the  medium  by  too  great 
proximity  of  the  two  conducting  wires,  as  for  instance, 
if  they  consisted  of  two  flat  ribbons  close  together 
with  a  mere  film  of  dielectric  between,  or  if  one  were 
a  small-bore  tube  and  the  other  its  central  axis  or 
core.  In  such  cases  as  this  the  general  body  of  ether 
takes  no  part  in  the  process,  the  energy  has  all  to  be 
transmitted  by  the  constricted  portion  of  dielectric, 
and  the  free  propagation  of  ethereal  pulses  is  interfered 
with  :  the  propagation  is  no  longer  a  simple  true  wave- 
propagation,  it  approximates  more  or  less  closely  to 
a  mere  diffusion  creep  :  rapid  it  may  be,  and  yet 
without  definite  velocity,  like  the  conduction  of  heat 
or  the  diffusion  of  a  salt  into  water.  One  well-known 
effect  of  this  is  to  merge  successive  disturbances 
into  one  another,  so  that  their  individuality,  and 
consequently  the  distinctness  of  signalling,  is  lost. 

134.  Another  circumstance  which  can  modify  rate 
of  transmission  of  the  pulses  is  ethereal  inertia  in  the 
substance  of  the  conducting  wires  :  especially  extra 
great  inertia,  as,  for  instance,  if  they  are  made  of  iron. 
For  the  dissipation  of  energy  does  not  go  on  accu- 
rately at  their  outer  surface,  it  has  usually  to  penetrate 

1  Appendix  (0). 


268  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER     CHAP,  xui 

to  a  certain  depth  ;  and  until  it  is  dissipated  the  fresh 
influx  of  energy  from  behind  does  not  fully  occur. 
Now,  so  long  as  the  value  of  /JL  for  the  substance  of 
the  wires  is  the  same  as  that  of  air  or  free  space,  no 
important  retardation  is  thus  caused,  unless  the  wires 
are  very  thick  ;  but  directly  the  inertia  in  the  sub- 
stance of  the  wires  is  some  hundred  or  thousand  times 
as  big  as  that  outside,  it  stands  to  reason  that  more 
time  is  required  to  get  up  the  needful  magnetic  spin 
in  its  outer  layer  ;  and  so  the  propagation  of  pulses 
is  more  or  less  retarded.  At  the  same  time  this  cir- 
cumstance does  not  alter  the  character  of  the  pro- 
pagation, it  does  not  change  it  from  true  wave 
velocity  to  a  diffusion,  it  leaves  its  character  unaltered  ; 
and  so  the  signals,  though  longer  in  coming,  may 
arrive  quite  clear,  independent,  and  distinct.  It  is 
much  the  same,  indeed,  as  if  the  density  of  the 
surrounding  medium  had  been  slightly  increased. 

I  have  several  times  mentioned  the  name  of  Prof. 
Poynting  as  one  who  has  developed  Maxwell's  equa- 
tions, and  thrown  great  light  upon  the  mode  in  which 
electro-magnetic  energy  is  transmitted  :  in  the  same 
connection,  and  also  still  more  prominently  in  con- 
nection with  the  general  theory  of  telegraphy  and 
of  electro-magnetic  waves,  I  must  mention  with  due 
emphasis  the  name  of  Mr.  Oliver  Heavisidc.  It  is  not 
for  ijie  to  attempt  to  apportion  credit,  but  the  wide 


§  136  VELOCITY   IN  WIRES  269 

scope    of  his    mathematical  investigation   into  these 
difficult  fields  of  research  is  remarkable. 

135.  These  then  are  the  main  circumstances  which 
affect  the   rate   of  transmission   of  a  pulse  from  one 
part  of  a  closed  circuit  to  another  :  extra  inertia,  or 
so-called    magnetic   susceptibility   in  the   conducting 
substance,  especially  in   its  outer  layers  ;  and    undue 
constriction    or    throttling    of    the   medium   through 
which  the  disturbance  really  has  to   go.     Both  these 
circumstances  diminish  the  rate  of  transmission  ;  and 
one  (the  last  mentioned)  modifies  the  law,  and  tends 
to     obliterate     individual    features    and    to    destroy 
distinctness. 

Of  course,  besides  these,  the  nature  of  the  insulating 
medium  will  have  an  effect  on  the  rate  of  propagation, 
but  that  is  obvious  all  along  ;  it  is  precisely  the  rate 
at  which  any  given  medium  transmits  pulses  that  we 
want  to  know,  and  on  which  we  are  thinking  of  making 
experiments.  If  we  use  gutta-percha  (more  accu- 
rately the  ether  inside  gutta-percha)  as  our  transmit- 
ting medium  in  an  experiment,  we  are  not  to  imagine 
that  we  have  obtained  a  result  for  air. 

136.  The   circumstances    we    have    considered    as 
modifying  the  rate  of  transmission  are  both  of  them 
adventitious  circumstances,  independent  of  the  nature 
of  the  medium  ;  and  they  are  entirely  at    our   own 
disposal.     If  we  like  to  throttle  our  medium,  or  to- use 


270  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER      CHAP,  xni 

thick  iron  wires,  we  can  do  so,  but  there  is  no  com- 
pulsion :  and  if  we  wish  to  make  the  experiment  in 
the  simplest  manner,  we  shall  do  no  such  thing.  We 
shall  use  thin  copper  wires  (the  thinner  the  better),  ar- 
ranged parallel  to  one  another  a  fair  distance  apart,  and 
we  shall  then  observe  the  time  which  an  electromotive 
impulse  communicated  at  one  end  takes  to  travel  to 
the  other.  Instead  of  using  two  wires,  we  may  if  we 
like  use  what  comes  to  much  the  same  thing,  viz.  a 
single  wire  suspended  at  a  reasonable  height  above 
the  ground,  as  in  a  common  land  telegraph  ;  with 
circuit  completed  through  the  earth. 

The  experiment,  if  it  could  be  accurately  made, 
would  result  in  the  observation  of  a  speed  of  pro- 
pagation equal  to  3  x  io10  centimetres  (300,000  kilo- 
metres, or  about  185,000  miles)  per  second.  The 
actual  speed  in  practice  may  be  less  than  this,  by 
reason  of  the  various  circumstances  mentioned,  but 
it  can  never  be  greater.  This,  then,  is  the  rate  of 
transmissi@n  of  transverse  impulses,  and  therefore  of 
transverse  waves,  through  ether  as  free  as  it  can  be 
easily  obtained. 

137.  The  writer  has  succeeded  in  making  a  rough 
preliminary  determination  on  this  very  plan,  but 
avoiding  the  necessity  for  excessive  lengths  of  wire, 
by  using  the  principle  of  reflection  and  interference  to 
obtain  stationary  waves  in  a  pair  of  parallel  wires  of 


§  138  WAVE-LENGTH  IN  WIRES  271 

known  length  attached  as  lateral  appendages  to  a 
Leydcn  jar  circuit :  such  waves  being  excited  at  every 
discharge.  Alternating  pulses  travel  along  these 
wires,  and  are  reflected  at  their  far  ends,  just  as 
pulses  travel  along  a  string  attached  to  a  tuning-fork 
in  Melde's  experiment.  Reflection  of  the  pulses  at 
the  free  ends  of  the  wires  is  not  accomplished  without 
a  considerable  recoil  or  kick,  which  can  be  observed 
by  the  brightness  of  the  brush  or  the  length  of  spark 
it  gives.  The  length  of  the  wires,  or  else  the  size  of 
the  discharging  circuit,  is  adjusted  until  the  recoil  kick 
is  a  maximum,  and  the  length  of  each  wire  is  then 
considered  to  be  half  a  wave-length.  Knowing  the 
rate  of  oscillation  proper  to  the  particular  Leyden  jar 
circuit  employed,  a  determination  of  the  velocity  of 
the  pulses  can  at  once  be  made.  It  agrees  with  what 
is  said  above.1 

138.  There  are  many  methods  known  to  physicists 
by  which  an  indirect  experimental  determination  ot 
this  velocity  can  be  made.  These  methods  have  been 
more  largely  practised  than  the  one  described,  but 
they  do  not  determine  directly  the  speed  with 
which  electrical  pulses  or  waves  travel :  they  directly 
determine  the  ratio  kjfjb,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  product  K/,6,  and  it  is  left  to  theory  to  say  that 
this  is  really  the  velocity  of  electrical  pulses  in  free 

k  Phil.  Mag.  August,  1888.     See  also  Appendix  (o)  beloxv. 


272  CONSTANTS  OF  THE  ETHER      CHAP,  xiu 

ether.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  more  about  them 
here.  They  are  generally  referred  to  as  methods 
of  determining  the  ratio  "  v"  or  the  number  of 
electrostatic  units  of  quantity  in  an  electro-magnetic 
unit  ;  which  is  a  roundabout  and  forced  mode  of 
expression,  but  it  serves. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

ELECTRICAL   RADIATION,    OR   LIGHT 

139.  HAVING  now  described  one  or  two  possible 
methods  of  measuring  the  velocity  of  electric  wave 
propagation,  and  therefore  at  least  the  ratio  of  the 
two  ethereal  constants  k  and  //,  (or,  what  is  the  same 
thing,  the  product  of  the  two  constants  K  and  //,) ; 
return  to  the  consideration  of  an  ordinary  small  dis- 
charging Leyden  jar  or  other  alternating  current 
circuit  of  a  moderate  size,  it  may  be  a  few  yards  or 
a  foot  or  an  inch  in  diameter. 

If  the  alternating  currents  are  produced  artificially 
by  some  form  of  alternating  machine,  their  frequency 
is,  of  course,  arbitrary  ;  but  if  they  be  automatically 
caused  by  the  recoil  of  a  given  Leyden  jar  in  a  given 
circuit,  their  frequency  is,  as  we  have  already  said 
(§  124), 

-  per  second  : 


27rv/(LS) 

where  L  is  the  electrical  inertia  or  self-induction  of 

T 


274   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

the  circuit,  and  where  S  is  the  capacity  or  reciprocal 
of  the  elasticity-constant  of  the  jar. 

140.  It  is  not  convenient  here  to  go  into  the  deter- 
mination of  the  quantity  L,  but  roughly  one  may 
say  that  for  an  ordinary  open  single-loop  circuit 
it  is  a  quantity  somewhat  comparable  with  ten  or 
twelve  times  its  circumference  multiplied  by  the 
constant  /x.1 

The  value  of  S  has  to  do  with  the  area  and  thick- 
ness of  the  dielectric  of  the  condenser,  being,  as  is  well 

A 

known,- —   multiplied  by  the  constant  K. 

^.TTZ 

The  product  LS  in  the  above  expression  contains 
therefore  two  factors,  each  of  linear  dimensions,  ex- 
pressing the  sizes  of  circuit  and  jar  ;  and  likewise 
contains  a  factor  /tK  expressing  the  properties  of  the 
surrounding  medium.  Hence,  so  far  as  the  ether  is 
concerned,  the  above  expression  for  frequency  of 
vibration  demands  only  a  knowledge  of  the  product 
of  its  two  constants  K  and  yu- ;  and  since  this  is  known 
by  the  previous  velocity  experiments,  it  is  easy  to 
calculate  the  rate  of  oscillation  of  any  given  con- 
denser-discharge. It  is  also  easy  to  calculate  the 
wave-length  ;  for  if  there  are  n  waves  produced  per 
second,  and  each  travels  with  the  velocity  v,  the  length 


of  each  wave  is  -. 
n 


See  Appendix  (e). 


§  i4i  ELECTRIC  OSCILLATIONS  275 

T  CZ 

Hence    the  wave-length  is  2?r     / (  —  .  —  ). 

V   \/i    K/ 

141.  Now,  if  we  go  through  these  numerical  calcu- 
lations for  an  ordinary  Lcyden  jar  and  discharger,  we 
shall  find  waves  something  like,  say,  50  or  100  yards 
long.  They  may  plainly  be  of  any  length,  according 
to  the  size  of  the  jar  and  the  size  of  the  circuit. 
The  bigger  both  these  are  the  longer  will  be  the 
waves. 

A  condenser  of  I  microfarad  capacity,  discharging 
through  a  coil  of  self-induction  I  sccohm,  will  give  rise 
to  ether  waves  1900  kilometres  or  1200  miles  long; 
and  the  rate  of  its  oscillation  is  157  complete  swings 
per  second. 

A  common  pint  Leyden  jar  discharging  through  a 
pair  of  tongs  may  start  a  system  of  ether  waves  each 
not  longer  than  about  1 5  or  20  metres  ;  and  its  rate 
of  oscillation  will  be  something  like  ten  million  per 
second.  '  ; 

A  tiny  thimble-sized  jar  overflowing  its  edge  may 
propagate  waves  only  about  2  or  3  feet  long.  (See 
also  §§  143,  157  and  158  and  Appendix  (/£). 

141.  A.  Professor  J.  J.  Thomson  has  shown  that 
when  electricity  oscillates  from  pole  to  pole  of  a 
conducting  sphere,  the  waves  emitted  are  1-4  times 
the  diameter  of  the  sphere  in  length.  I  have  suc- 
ceeded in  recognizing  waves  emitted  by  spheres  only 
2  inches  in  diameter ;  but  it  is  easier  to  get  them 

T  2 


276   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT     CHAP,  xiv 

clearly  from  bigger  spheres.  The  waves  emitted  by 
spheres  6  inches  or  a  foot  in  diameter,  when  their 
electricity  is  disturbed  by  a  sudden  spark,  arc  easily, 
recognizable  several  yards  away.1 

When  the  earth  receives  a  spark,  as  a  flash  of 
lightning,  its  charge  may  oscillate  between  antipodes 
and  back  17  times  a  second.  The  time  of  one  electric 
oscillation  on  the  sun  is  6J  seconds  ;  and  the  waves 
are  therefore  a  little  over  a  million  miles  long. 
These  great  waves  are  very  likely  part  of  the  cause 
of  our  terrestrial  "  magnetic  storms." 

142.  The  oscillations  of  current  thus  recognized  as 
setting  up  waves  have  only  a  small  duration,  unless 
there  is  some  means  of  maintaining  them.  How  long 
they  will  last  depends  partly  upon  the  conductivity  of 
the  circuit  ;  but  even  in  a  circuit  of  infinite  conduc- 
tivity they  must  die  out  if  left  to  themselves,  from  the 
mere  fact  that  they  dissipate  their  energy  by  radiation. 
One  may  get  10  or  20,  or  perhaps  even  100,  percep- 
tible oscillations  of  gradually  decreasing  amplitude, 
but  the  rate  of  oscillation  is  so  great  that  their  whole 
duration  may  still  be  an  extremely  small  fraction  of 
a  second.  For  instance,  to  produce  ether  waves  a 
metre  in  length  requires  300,000,000  oscillations  per 
second. 

To  keep  up  continuous  radiation  naturally  requires 
a  supply  of  energy,  and  unless  it  is   so  supplied   the 
1  See  Nature,  Vol.  41. 


§  143  MAINTENANCE  OF  VIBRATION  277 

radiation  rapidly  ceases.  Commercial  alternating 
machines  are  artificial  and  cumbrous  contrivances  for 
maintaining  electrical  vibrations  in  circuits  of  finite 
resistance,  and  in  despite  of  loss  by  radiation, 

In  most  commercial  circuits  the  loss  by  radiation 
is  so  small  a  fraction  of  the  whole  dissipation  of 
energy  as  to  be  practically  negligible  ;  but  one  is, 
of  course,  not  limited  to  the  consideration  of  commer- 
cial circuits  or  to  alternating  machines  as  at  present 
invented  and  used.  It  may  be  possible  to  devise 
some  less  direct  method  —  some  chemical  method, 
perhaps  —  for  supplying  energy  to  an  oscillating 
circuit,  and  so  converting  what  would  be  a  mere 
discharge  or  flash  into  a  continuous  source  of 
radiation. 

143.  So  far  we  have  only  considered  ordinary  prac- 
ticable electrical  circuits,  and  have  found  their  waves  in 
all  cases  pretty  long,  but  getting  distinctly  shorter  the 
smaller  we  take  the  circuit.  Continue  the  process  of 
reduction  in  size  further,  and  ask  what  sized  circuit 
will  give  waves  6000  tenth-metres  (three-fifths  of  a 
micron,  or  25  million  ths  of  an  inch)  long.  We  have 


find 


only  to   put   2?r    /(-      -  J=croooo6,    and    we 
»       /^    J^-/ 

that  the  necessary  circuit  must  have  a  self-induction 
in  electro-magnetic  units,  and  a  capacity  in  electro- 
static units,  such  that  their  geometric  mean  is  io-5 
centimetre  (one-tenth  of  a  micron).  This  gives  us  at 


278   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT     CHAP,  xiv 

once  something  near  atomic  dimensions  for  the  circuit, 
and  suggests  immediately  that  those  short  ethereal 
waves  which  are  able  to  affect  the  retina,  and  which  we 
are  accustomed  to  call  "  light,"  may  be  really  excited 
by  electrical  oscillations  or  surgings  in  circuits  of 
atomic  dimensions  (§§  157-9). 

If  after  the  vibrations  are  once  excited  there  is 
no  source  of  energy  competent  to  maintain  them 
the  light  production  will  soon  cease,  and  we  shall 
have  merely  the  temporary  phenomenon  of  phos- 
phorescence ;  but  if  there  is  an  available  supply 
of  suitable  energy  the  electrical  vibrations  may 
continue,  and  the  radiation  may  become  no  longer 
an  evanescent  brightness  but  a  steady  and  permanent 
glow. 


Velocity  of  Electrical  Radiation  compared  with  Velocity 
of  Light,  in  Free  Space  and  in  Material  Substances 

144.  We  have  thus  imagined  the  now  well-known 
Maxwellian  theory  of  light,  viz.  that  it  is  produced  by 
electrical  vibrations,  and  that  its  waves  are  electrical 
waves. 

But  what  justification  is  there  for  such  an  hypothesis 
beyond  the  mere  fact  which  we  have  here  insisted 
on,  viz.  that  waves  in  all  respects  like  light-waves 
except  size,  i.e.  transverse  vibrations  travelling  at  a 


§  145  SPEED  OF  LIGHT  IN  SPACE  279 

certain  pace  through  ether,  can  certainly  be  produced 
temporarily  in  practicable  circuits  by  familiar  and 
very  simple  means,  and  could  be  produced  of  exactly 
the  length  proper  to  any  given  kind  of  light  if  only 
it  were  feasible  to  deal  with  circuits  ultra-micro- 
scopic in  size  ?  The  simplest  point  to  consider 
is:  Does  light  travel  at  the  same  speed  as  the 
electrical  disturbances  we  have  been  considering? 
We  described  one  method  of  measuring  how  fast 
electrical  radiation  travels  in  free  space,  and  there 
are  many  other  methods  :  the  result  was  300,000 
kilometres  per  second.  Does  light  travel  at  the  same 
pace  ? 

Methods  of  measuring  the  velocity  of  light  have 
long  been  known,  and  the  result  of  those  measure- 
ments in  free  space  or  air  is  likewise  300,000  kilo- 
metres a  second.  The  two  velocities  agree  in  free 
space.  Hence  surely  light  and  electrical  radiation 
are  identical. 

145.  But  there  is  a  further  test.  The  speed  of  elec- 
trical radiation  was  not  the  same  in  all  media  :  it 
depended  on  the  electrical  elasticity  and  the  ethereal 
density  of  the  transparent  substance  ;  in  other  words, 
it  was  equal  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  geometric  mean 
of  its  specific  inductive  capacity  and  its  magnetic 
permeability — 


28o   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT      CHAP,  xiv 

Now,  although  the  absolute  value  of  neither  K 
nor  fji  is  known,  yet  their  values  relatively  to  air 
are  often  measured,  and  are  known  for  most 
substances. 

Also,  it  is  easy  to  compare  the  pace  at  which  light 
goes  through  any  substance  with  its  velocity  in  free 
space :  the  operation  is  called  finding  the  refractive 
index  of  a  substance.  The  refractive  index  means,  in 
fact,  simply  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  light  in  space 
to  its  velocity  in  the  given  substance.  The  reciprocal 
of  the  index  of  refraction  is  therefore  the  relative 
velocity  of  light.  Calling  the  index  of  refraction  ;/, 
therefore,  we  ought,  if  the  electrical  theory  of  light 
be  true,  to  find  that  n2  =  Kyw,  ;  or  that  the  index  of 
refraction  of  any  substance  is  the  geometric  mean  of 
its  electrostatic  and  magnetic  specific  capacities. 

146.  That  this  is  precisely  true  for  all  substances 
cannot  at  present  be  asserted.  There  are  some  sub- 
stances for  which  it  is  very  satisfactorily  true :  there  are 
others  which  are  apparent  exceptions.  It  remains  to 
examine  whether  they  are  not  only  apparent  but 
real  exceptions,  and,  if  so,  to  what  their  exceptional 
behaviour  is  due. 

It  must  be  understood  what  the  essential  point  is. 
It  has  been  proved  by  various  methods,  and  with 
greater  approach  to  exactness  as  the  accuracy  of  the 
methods  is  improved,  that  electrical  disturbances — 
such  as  the  long  waves  emitted  by  any  alternating 


§  1 46  SPEED  OF   LIGHT  IN  MATTER  281 

machine — travel  through  air  or  free  space  with  exactly 
the  same  velocity  as  light ;  in  other  words,  that  there 
is  no  recognizable  difference  in  speed  between  waves 
several  hundred  miles  long  and  waves  so  small  that  a 
hundred  thousand  of  them  can  lie  in  an  inch.  This  is 
true  in  free  ether,  and  it  is  a  remarkable  fact.  If  it 
proves  anything  concerning  the  structure  of  the  ether, 
it  proves  that  it  is  continuous,  homogeneous,  and 
simple  beyond  any  other  substance  ;  or  at  least  that  if 
it  does  possess  any  structural  heterogeneity,  the  parts 
of  which  it  is  composed  are  so  nearly  infinitesimal  that 
a  hundred  miles  and  a  hundred-thousandth  of  an 
inch  are  quantities  of  practically  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  so  far  as  they  are  concerned  :  its  parts  are 
able  to  treat  all  this  variety  of  wave-length  in  the 
same  manner. 

But  directly  one  gets  to  deal  with  ordinary  gross 
matter  we  know  that  this  is  certainly  not  the  case. 
Ordinary  matter  is  composed  of  molecules  which, 
though  small,  are  far  from  being  infinitesimal.  Atoms 
are  much  smaller  than  light-waves,  indeed,  but  not 
incomparably  smaller.  Hence  it  is  natural  to  suppose 
that  the  ether  as  modified  by  matter  will  be  modified 
in  a  similarly  heterogeneous  manner  ;  and  will  accord- 
ingly not  be  able  to  treat  waves  of  all  sizes  in  the 
same  way. 

The  speed  of  all  waves  is  retarded  by  entering  gross 
matter,  but  we  should  expect  the  smallest  waves  to  be 


282   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT     CHAP,  xiv 

retarded  most.  The  phenomenon  is  well  marked  even 
within  the  range  of  such  light-waves  as  can  affect  the 
retina  :  the  smaller  waves — those  which  produce  the 
sensation  of  blue — are  more  retarded,  and  travel  a 
little  slower,  through,  say,  glass  or  water,  than  the 
somewhat  larger  ones  which  produce  the  sensation  of 
red.  This  phenomenon  has  long  been  known,  and  is 
called  dispersion.  One  result  of  it  is  that  it  is 
not  easy  to  say  at  what  rate  waves  a  few  inches  or  a 
few  yards  or  miles  long  ought  to  travel,  by  merely 
knowing  at  what  rate  the  ultra-microscopic  light- waves 
travel. 

147.  But  there  is  even  more  to  be  said  than  this. 
There  is  not  only  dispersion,  there  is  selective  absorp- 
tion possessed  by  matter  :  not  only  does  it  transmit 
different-sized  waves  at  different  rates,  but  it  absorbs 
and  quenches  some  much  faster  than  others.  Few 
substances,  perhaps  none,  are  equally  transparent  to 
all  sizes  of  waves.  Glass,  for  instance,  which  transmits 
readily  the  assortment  of  waves  able  to  affect  the 
retina,  is  practically  quite  opaque  to  waves  two  or 
three  times  as  long  or  as  short.  And  whenever  this 
selective  absorption  occurs,  the  laws  of  dispersion  are 
extraordinary — or  extraordinary  that  the  dispersion 
is  often  spoken  of  as  "  anomalous  "  ;  which  of  course 
means,  not  that  it  is  lawless,  but  that  its  laws  are 
unknown.  Dispersion  in  any  case  is  an  obscure  and 
little  understood  subject,  but  dispersion  modified  by 


§  1 48  SPEED   OF   LIGHT  283 

selected  absorption  is  still  worse.1  Until  the  theory  of 
dispersion  is  better  understood,  no  one  is  able  to  say 
at  what  speed  waves  of  any  given  length  ought  to 
travel.  One  can  only  examine  experimentally  at 
what  rate  they  do  travel.  This  has  been  done  for  long 
electrical  waves,  and  it  has  been  done  for  short  light- 
waves :  in  the  case  of  some  substances  the  speed  is  the 
same,  in  the  case  of  others  it  is  different.  But  that 
the  speed  should  be  different  is  as  I  have  now  ex- 
plained very  natural,  and  can  by  no  means  be  twisted 
into  an  admission  that  light-waves  and  electrical  waves 
are  not  essentially  identical.  That  the  speed  of  both 
should  agree  at  all  is  noteworthy  ;  the  agreement 
appears  to  be  exact  in  air,  and  practically  exact  in 
such  simple  substances  as  sulphur,  and  in  the  class  of 
hydrocarbons  known  as  paraffins  ;  whereas  in  arti- 
ficial substances  like  glass,  and  in  organic  substances 
like  fats  and  oils,  the  agreement  is  less  perfect. 

148.  So  much  for  the  vital  question  of  the  speed  at 
which  electrical  and  optical  disturbances  travel.  In 
some  cases  the  speeds  are  accurately  the  same,  in 
no  case  are  they  entirely  different  ;  and  in  those  cases 
where  the  agreement  is  only  rough,  an  efficient  and 
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  difference  is  to  hand 
in  the  very  different  lengths  of  wave  which  have  at 
present  been  submitted  to  experiment.  To  compare 

1  It  was  Ur.  Ilopkinson  who  called  attention  to  the  applicability  of 
his  fact  to  the  present  subject  (B.  A.   Report,  1886,  page  309). 


284   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

the  speeds  properly,  we  must  either  learn  to  shorten 
electrical  waves,  or  to  lengthen  light-waves,  or  both, 
and  then  compare  the  two  things  together  when  of 
the  same  size. 

It  cannot  be  seriously  doubted  that   they  will  turn 
out  identical. 


Manufacture  of  Light 

149.  The  conclusions  at  which  we  have  arrived,  that 
light  is  an  electrical  disturbance,  and  that  light-waves 
are  excited  by  electric  oscillations,  must  ultimately 
and  may  shortly,  have  a  practical  import. 

Our  present  systems  of  making  light  artificially  are 
wasteful  and  ineffective.  We' want  a  certain  range  of 
oscillation,  between  700  and  400  billion  vibrations  per 
second  :  no  other  is  useful  to  us,  because  no  other  has 
any  effect  on  our  retina  ;  but  we  do  not  know  how  to 
produce  vibrations  of  this  rate.  We  can  produce  a  de- 
finite vibration  of  one  or  two  hundred  or  thousand  per 
^second  ;  in  other  words,  we  can  excite  a  pure  tone  of 
definite  pitch  ;  and  we  can  command  any  desired  range 
of  such  tones  continuously  by  means  of  bellows  and  a 
keyboard.  We  can  also  (though  the  fact  is  less  well 
known)  excite  momentarily  definite  ethereal  vibrations 
of  some  million  per  second,  as  I  have  explained  at 
length  ;  but  we  do  not  at  present  know  how  to  main- 
tain this  rate  at  all  continuously.  To  get  much 


§  H9  MANUFACTURE  OF  LIGHT  285 

faster  rates  of  vibration  than  this  we  have  to  fall  back 
upon  atoms.  We  know  how  to  make  atoms  vibrate  :  it 
is  done  by  what  we  call  "  heating  "  the  substance  ;  and 
if  we  could  deal  with  individual  atoms  unhampered  by 
others,  it  is  possible  that  we  might  get  a  pure  and 
simple  mode  of  vibration  from  them.  It  is  possible, 
but  unlikely  ;  for  atoms,  even  when  isolated,  have  a 
multitude  of  modes  of  vibration  special  to  themselves, 
of  which  only  a  few  are  of  practical  use  to  us,  and 
we  do  not  know  how  to  excite  some  without  also  the 
others.  However,  we  do  not  at  present  even  deal  with 
individual  atoms  ;  we  treat  them  crowded  together  in 
a  compact  mass,  so  that  their  modes  of  vibration  are 
really  infinite. 

We  take  a  lump  of  matter,  say  a  carbon  filament  or 
a  piece  of  quick-lime,  and  by  raising  its  temperature 
we  impress  upon  its  atoms  higher  and  higher  modes 
of  vibration,  not  transmuting  the  lower  into  the  higher 
but  superposing  the  higher  upon  the  lower,  until  at 
length  we  get  such  rates  of  vibration  as  our  retina  is 
constructed  for,  and  we  are  satisfied.  But  how  waste- 
ful and  indirect  and  empirical  is  the  process.  WTe 
want  a  small  range  of  rapid  vibrations,  and  we  know 
no  better  than  to  make  the  whole  series  leading  up  to 
them.  It  is  as  though,  in  order  to  sound  some  little 
shrill  octave  of  pipes  in  an  organ,  we  were  obliged  to 
depress  every  key  and  every  pedal,  and  to  blow  a 
young  hurricane. 


286   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

1 50.  I  have  purposely  selected  as  examples  the 
more  perfect  methods  of  obtaining  artificial  light, 
wherein  the  waste  radiation  is  only  useless  and  not 
noxious.  But  the  old-fashioned  plan  was  cruder  even 
than  this,  it  consisted  simply  in  setting  something 
burning :  whereby  not  only  the  fuel  but  the  air  was 
consumed,  whereby  also  a  most  powerful  radiation 
was  produced,  in  the  waste  waves  of  which  we  were 
content  to  sit  stewing,  for  the  sake  of  the  minute, 
almost  infinitesimal,  fraction  of  it  which  enabled 
us  to  see. 

Every  one  knows  now,  however,  that  combustion  is 
not  a  pleasant  or  healthy  mode  of  obtaining  light  ;  but 
everybody  does  not  realize  that  neither  is  incandes- 
cence a  satisfactory  or  unwasteful  method  which  is 
like  to  be  practised  for  more  than  a  few  decades,  or 
perhaps  a  century. 

Look  at  the  furnaces  and  boilers  of  a  great  steam- 
engine  driving  a  group  of  dynamos,  and  estimate  the 
energy  expended  ;  and  then  look  at  the  incandescent 
filaments  of  the  lamps  excited  by  them,  and  estimate 
how  much  of  their  radiated  energy  is  of  real  service  to 
the  eye.  It  will  be  as  the  energy  of  a  pitch-pipe  to 
an  entire  orchestra. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  a  boy  turning  a  handle 
could,  if  his  energy  were  properly  directed,  produce 
quite  as  much  real  light  as  is  produced  by  all  this  mass 
of  mechanism  and  consumption  of  material. 


§  i5i  DIRECT  PRODUCTION  OF  LIGHT  287 

151.  There  might,  perhaps,  be  something  contrary  to 
the  laws  of  Nature  in  thus  hoping  to  get  and  utilize 
some  specific  kind  of  radiation  \vithout  the  rest,  but 
Lord  Rayleigh  has  shown  in  a  short  communica- 
tion to  the  British  Association  at  York1  that  it  is 
not  so,  and  that  therefore  we  have  a  right  to  try 
to  do  it. 

We  do  not  yet  know  how,  it  is  true,  but  it  is  one  of 
the  things  we  have  got  to  learn. 

Any  one  looking  at  a  common  glow-worm  must  be 
struck  with  the  fact  that  not  by  ordinary  combustion, 
nor  yet  on  the  steam-engine  and  dynamo  principle, 
is  that  easy  light  produced.  Very  little  waste  radia- 
tion is  there  from  phosphorescent  things  in  general. 
Light  of  the  kind  able  to  affect  the  retina  is  directly 
emitted,  and  for  this,  for  even  a  large  supply  of  this, 
a  modicum  of  energy  suffices. 

Solar  radiation  consists  of  waves  of  all  sizes,  it 
is  true  ;  but  then  solar  radiation  has  innumerable 
things  to  do  besides  making  things  visible.  The 
whole  of  its  energy  is  useful.  In  artificial  lighting 
nothing  but  light  is  desired  ;  when  heat  is  wanted 
it  is  best  obtained  separately  by  combustion.  And 
so  soon  as  we  clearly  recognize  that  light  is  an 
electrical  vibration,  so  soon  shall  we  begin  to  beat 
about  for  some  mode  of  exciting  and  maintaining 
an  electrical  vibration  of  any  required  degree  of 
1  B.  A.  Report,  1881,  p.  526. 


288   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

rapidity.      When    this   has   been    accomplished,   the 
problem  of  artificial  lighting  will  have  been  solved. 


Mechanism  of  Electrical  Radiation 

152.  In  forming  a  mental  image  of  an  electrical 
wave,  we  have  to  note  that  three  distinct  direc- 
tions are  involved.  There  is  (i)  the  direction  of 
propagation — the  line  of  advance  of  the  waves  ;  (2) 
the  direction  of  the  electric  displacements,  at  right 
angles  to  this  ;  and  (3)  the  direction  of  the  magnetic 
axis,  at  right  angles  to  each  of  the  other  two. 

One  may  get  a  rough  mechanical  idea  of  the 
process  of  electrical  radiation  (at  any  rate  in  a  plane) 
by  means  of  the  cog-wheel  system  already  used  in 
Part  III.  Imagine  a  series  of  elastic  wheels,  in  one 
plane,  all  geared  together,  and  let  one  of  them  be 
made  to  twist  to  and  fro  on  its  axis  ;  from  it,  as 
centre,  the  disturbance  will  spread  out  in  all  direc- 
tions, each  wheel  being  made  to  oscillate  similarly 
arid  to  transmit  its  oscillation  to  the  next.  Looking 
at  what  is  happening  at  a  distance  from  the  source, 
we  shall  see  the  pulses  travelling  from  left  to  right  ; 
the  electrical  displacement,  such  as  it  is,  being  up 
and  down  ;  and  the  oscillating  axes  of  the  wheels 
being  to  and  fro,  or  at  right  angles  to  the  plane 
containing  the  wheels.  The  electric  displacement 


§  153  ELECTRIC  WAVES  289 

is  small,  because  the  positive  and  negative  wheels 
gearing  into  one  another  move  almost  equally,  and 
accordingly  there  is  the  merest  temporary  balance 
of  one  above  the  other,  due  to  the  elastic  "  give  " 
of  the  wheels.  The  magnetic  oscillations,  on  the 
other  hand,  are  all  in  one  sense,  the  positive  wheels 
rotating  one  way  and  the  negative  the  other  :  all 
act  together,  and  so  the  magnetic  oscillation  is  a 
more  conspicuous  fact  than  the  electric  oscillation. 
Hence  it  is  often  spoken  of  as  electro-magnetic  radia- 
tion rather  than  as  electric  radiation.  But  the  energy 
of  the  electrostatic  strain  is  just  as  great  as  that 
of  the  electro-magnetic  motion  ;  in  fact  the  energy 
alternates  from  the  potential  to  the  kinetic  form, 
or  vice  versa,  at  every  quarter  swing,  just  like  every 
other  case  of  vibration. 

153.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  magnetic  oscillations 
arc  very  small  too.  For  just  consider  that  the  wheel- 
work  extends  right  away  to  infinity  in  all  directions  ; 
how  is  any  moderate  force  going  to  make  one  of  these 
wheels  oscillate  ?  If  they  were  rigid  it  would  be  impos- 
sible, but  as  they  are  elastic  it  is  possible,  though  only 
with  a  very  small  amplitude  of  vibration  ;  and  it  sets  up 
a  strain  all  round  which  rapidly  spreads  out  as  we  have 
said  in  all  directions  from  the  source.  If  the  source 
were  inclosed  in  a  perfect  conductor  of  moderate 
dimensions — if,  for  instance,  one  tried  to  oscillate  one 
of  the  wheels  inside  the  empty  contour  of  Fig.  38— it 

U 


290   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

would  be  easy  enough :  the  wheels  are  limited  in 
number,  and  can  be  easily  got  to  oscillate  considerably 
by  a  feeble  source  of  disturbance. 

This  is  commonly  spoken  of  as  the  concentration  of 
light  by  reflection  ;  the  conductor  is  said  to  act  as  a 
perfect  mirror;  and,  since  none  of  the  light  escapes, 
any  amount  of  illumination  can  be  produced  inside  a 
closed  spherical  mirror  of  perfect  conductivity.  Such 
illumination  would  not  be  much  use,  however ;  for, 
directly  a  bit  of  matter  is  introduced  to  receive  the 
benefit  of  it,  dissipation  goes  on  at  its  surface,  and 
the  violence  of  the  ethereal  disturbance  is  brought 
down  to  something  more  moderate.  Nevertheless, 
even  when  dissipation  is  allowed,  and  when  the 
reflecting  surface  is  by  no  means  perfectly  conduct- 
ing, but  is  bright  silver,  which  is  the  best  conductor 
we  know,  a  considerable  increase  in  illumination  is 
caused — by  reflection,  if  we  choose  to  say  so — by 
limitation,  in  at  least  some  directions,  of  the  extent  of 
ethereal  medium  to  be  affected  by  a  given  source,  as 
we  might  now  prefer  to  express  it  (§  164). 

154.  Prof.  Fitzgerald,  of  Dublin,  has  devised  a  model 
of  the  ether,  which  by  help  of  a  little  artificiality  re- 
presents the  two  kinds  of  displacement — the  electric 
and  magnetic — very  simply  and  clearly. 

His  wheels  are  separated  from  one  another  by  a 
certain  space,  and  are  geared  together  by  elastic  bands. 
They  thus  turn  all  in  one  direction,  and  no  mention 


§  155  FITZGERALD'S  MODEL  291 

need  be  made  of  positive  and  negative  electricity  as 
separate  entities. 

But,  the  wheels  being  massive,  a  rotatory  disturb- 
ance given  to  one  takes  time  to  spread  through 
the  series,  at  a  pace  depending  on  the  elasticity  of 
the  bands  and  the  inertia  of  the  wheels ;  and  during 
the  period  of  acceleration  one  side  of  every  elastic 
is  stretched,  while  the  other  side  is  relaxed  and  there- 
fore thickened.  This  thickening  of  the  elastics  goes 
on  in  one  direction,  and  corresponds  to  an  electric 


FIG.  48. — Fitzgerald's  Ether  Model.  A  set  of  massive-rimmed  brass  wheels  on 
fixed  pivots  with  their  axles  connected  by  common  elastic  bands.  If  the  bands 
are  taken  off  any  region,  it  becomes  a  perfect  conductor,  into  which  disturbances 
cannot  penetrate.  (Cf.  Fig.  38.) — Proc.  Roy.  Dub.  Soc.,  January  1885. 

displacement  in  that  direction  ;  the  direction  being 
perpendicular  both  to  the  direction  of  advance  of 
the  disturbance  and  to  the  axes  of  the  wheels.  A 
row  of  wheels  corresponds  to  a  section  of  a  wave- 
front  ;  the  displacements  of  india-rubber  and  the 
rotating  axes,  i.e.  the  electric  and  the  magnetic 
disturbances,  both  lie  in  the  wave-front. 

155.  Clerk  Maxwell's  originally  suggested  repre- 
sentation was  not  unlike  this.1  It  consisted  of  a 
series  of  massive  wheels,  connected  together  not  by  a 

1  Phil.  Mag.    April  1861. 

U    2 


292    ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

series  of  elastic  bands  but  by  a  row  of  elastic  particles 
or  "  idle  wheels."  These  particles  represented  "  elec- 
tricity "  ;  their  displacement  during  the  period  of  ac- 
celeration corresponding  to  the  one-sided  thickening 
of  the  elastic  bands  in  Fitzgerald's  model.  The 
object  of  the  idle  wheels  was  to  enable  all  the  main 
wheels  to  rotate  in  the  same  sense,  as  desiderated  in 
Fig.  35,  p.  203. 

I  have  proposed  to  contemplate  a  double  series  of 
wheels  geared  directly  into  one  another,  representing 
positive  and  negative  electricity  respectively,  because 
it  seems  to  me  that  so  many  facts  point  to  the 
existence  of  these  two  entities  ;  and  because  then  no 
distinction  has  to  be  drawn  between  one  part  of  the 
medium  which  is  ether,  and  another  part  which  is 
electricity,  but  the  whole  is  ether  and  the  whole  is  also 
electricity  ;  while,  nevertheless,  a  much-needed  distinc- 
tion can  be  drawn  between  a  motion  of  the  ether  as  a 
whole,  and  a  relative  motion  of  its  component  parts — 
a  distinction  between  forces  able  to  move  ether,  i.e.  to 
displace  the  centre  of  gravity  of  some  finite  portion  of 
it,  and  forces  which  shear  it  and  make  its  components 
slide  past  each  other  in  opposite  senses  ;  these  latter 
forces  being  truly  electromotive  (§  120). 

156.  If  it  be  asked  how  the  elasticity  of  the  ether  is 
to  be  explained,  we  must  turn  to  the  vortex  sponge 
theory,  suggested  by  Prof.  Fitzgerald,1  as  well  as 
1  Proc.  R,  Dub.  Soc.,  Jan,  1885, 


§  156  KINETIC  ELASTICITY  293 

by  Mr.  Hicks1  and  recently  elaborated  by  Sir 
William  Thomson.2  But  this  is  too  complicated  a 
matter  to  be  suited  for  popular  exposition  just  at 
present.  It  must  suffice  to  indicate  that  the  points 
here  left  unexplained  are  not  necessarily  at  the  present 
time  unexplainable,  but  that  the  explanations  have  not 
yet  been  so  completely  worked  out  that  an  easy  grasp 
can  be  obtained  of  them  by  simple  mechanical  illus- 
trations and  conceptions.  At  the  same  time,  the 
general  way  in  which  motion  is  able  to  simulate  the 
effects  of  elasticity  will  be  found  popularly  illustrated 
by  help  of  gyrostats  in  Sir  William  Thomson's  article 
"  Elasticity  "  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica  ; 3  and 
the  fact  that  elastic  rigidity  of  a  solid  can  be  pro- 
duced by  impressing  motion  on  a  homogeneous  and 
otherwise  structureless  fluid  must  be  regarded  as 
one  of  the  most  striking  among  his  many  vital 
discoveries. 

We  have  found  it  necessary  all  through  Part  III. 
to  imagine  the  ether  as  composed  of  cells  containing 
electricity  in  rotation,  and  that  the  act  of  magnetiza- 
tion consisted  in  facing  these  whirls  round.  Sir 
William  Thomson  has  taught  us  that  a  medium 
containing  whirls  like  this  will  simulate  the  behaviour 

1  Brit.  Assoc.  Report,  1885,  Aberdeen,  p.  930. 

"  Ibid.  1887,  Manchester,  p.  486.  Also  Phil.  Mag.,  October  1887. 
See  also  the  preface  to  this  book. 

3  Also  in  a  recent  volume  of  the  Nature  Series — Popular  Lectures 
and  Addresses ,  vol.  i.,  "The  Constitution  of  Matter." 


294   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

of  an  elastic  solid,  and  in  fact  that  whirling  motion 
is  all  that  is  required  to  explain  elasticity  (Fig.  46). 
With  this  hint,  which  might  be  developed  at  greater 
length,  I  must  leave  this  part  of  the  subject. 

157.  We  have  seen  that  to  generate  radiation  an 
electrical  oscillation  is  necessary  and  sufficient,  and  we 
have  attended  mainly  to  one  kind  of  electric  oscilla- 
tion, viz.  that  which  occurs  in  a  condenser  circuit  when 
the  distribution  of  its  electricity  is  suddenly  altered — 
as,  for  instance,  by  a  discharge  (§§  124,  141).  But  the 
condenser  circuit  need  not  be  thrown  into  an  obviously 
Leyden  jar  form  ;  one  may  have  a  charged  cylinder 
with  a  static  charge  accumulated  mainly  at  one  end, 
and  then  suddenly  released.  The  recoil  of  the  charge 
is  a  true  current,  though  a  weak  one  ;  a  certain  amount 
of  inertia  is  associated  with  it,  and  accordingly  oscilla- 
tions will  go  on,  the  charge  surging  from  end  to  end  of 
the  cylinder  like  the  water  in  a  tilted  bath  suddenly 
levelled. 

In  a  spherical  or  any  other  conductor,  the  like 
electric  oscillations  may  go  on  :  and  the  theory  of 
these  oscillations  has  been  treated  with  great  mathe- 
matical power  both  by  Mr.  Niven  and  by  Prof. 
Lamb.1 

Essentially,  however,  the  phenomenon  is  not  distinct 
from  a  Leyden  jar  or  condenser  circuit,  for  the  ends  of 

1  Phil.  Trans.,  1881  and  1883.  Also  by  Prof.  J.  J.  Thomson, 
Math.  Soc.  Proc.,  April  1884. 


§  157  LIGHT  VIBRATIONS  295 

the  cylinder  have  a  certain  capacity,  and  the  cylinder 
has  a  certain  self-induction  ;  the  difficulty  of  the 
problem  may  be  said  to  consist  in  finding  the  values 
of  these  thing  for  the  given  case.  The  period  of 
an  oscillation  may  still  be  written  2?r  >/(LS)  ;  only, 
since  L  and  S  are  both  very  small,  the  "  frequency  " 
of  vibration  is  likely  to  be  excessive.  And  when  we 
come  to  the  oscillation  of  an  atomic  charge  the 
frequency  may  easily  surpass  the  rate  of  vibration 
which  can  affect  the  eye.  The  damping  out  of  such 
vibrations,  if  left  to  themselves,  will  be  also  a  very 
rapid  process,  because  the  initial  energy  is  but  small. 
It  can  be  calculated  that  the  oscillation  of  an  atomic 
charge  would  give  rise  to  only  ultra-violet  rays.  It  is 
probably  because  these  ultra-violet  rays  synchronize 
with  the  period  of  vibration  of  atomic  charges  that 
they  have  such  extraordinarily  powerful  chemical 
effects  (§  187). 

I5/A.  The  waves  of  visible  light  if  produced  by 
electric  oscillation  in  atoms  must  be  caused  not  by 
simple  oscillations  as  in  conducting  spheres,  but  by 
surgings  in  conducting  channels,  more  after  the  fashion 
of  a  Leyden  jar  circuit.  But  it  may  be  held  more 
probable  that  the  vibrations  to  which  ordinary  light 
is  due  are  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  substance 
of  the  atoms  and  that  the  electrical  disturbance 
accompanying  it  and  recognized  by  the  retina  is  a 
secondary  effect. 


296   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT     CHAP,  xiv 

I  have  also  pointed  out l  that  the  rods  and  cones  in 
the  retina  are  of  a  diameter  suitable  to  respond 
directly  to  electric  oscillations  of  the  frequency  of 
visible  light ;  and  by  means  of  a  graduated  series  of 
metallic  cylinders  facing  a  source  of  electric  radiation 
end-on,  have  so  to  speak  imitated  a  retina  which  is 
able  to  select  and  respond  to  vibrations  of  assorted 
pitch,  after  the  manner  of  Corti's  fibres  in  the  ear. 
(See  Fig.  60  below.)  But  at  present  there  is  no  phy- 
siological basis  for  such  an  assortment  of  size  among 
the  rods  and  cones  as  would  correspond  to  the  three 
colour  sensations  red,  green  and  violet. 

The  correspondence  of  the  diameter  of  the  rods 
and  cones  to  the  wave-length  of  ordinary  light  may 
be  accidental,  but  it  seems  hardly  likely  to  be  mere 
coincidence. 

In  all  probability  sight  is  a  chemical  sense,  some 
molecular  complexes  being  shaken  asunder  by  the 
impact  of  synchronous  ether  waves,  and  thus  stimu- 
lating the  associated  nerve-fibres.  The  nourishment 
supplied  by  the  tissues  may  be  trusted  to  build  up 
the  substances  again  almost  as  fast  as  they  are  shaken 
asunder  ;  leaving  however  a  little  margin  or  lag  to 
correspond  to  the  observed  fact  of  retinal  "  fatigue." 

158.  Whether  the  charge  oscillates  in  a  stationary 
conductor,  or  whether  a  charged  body  vibrates  as 
a  whole,  it  equally  constitutes  an  alternating  current, 

1  Nature,  vol.  xli.,  p.  462,  March  1890. 


§  158  NATURE  OF  VISION  297 

and  can  equally  well  be  treated  as  a  source  of  radiation. 
Now,  when  we  were  considering  the  subject  of  elec- 
trolysis, we  were  led  to  think  of  molecules  as  com- 
posed of  two  atoms  or  groups  of  atoms,  each  charged 
with  equal  quantities  of  opposite  kinds  of  electricity. 
Under  the  influence  of  heat  we  may  suppose  the 
components  of  the  molecules  to  be  set  in  vibration 
like  the  prongs  of  a  tuning-fork,  the  rate  of  vibration 
depending  on  and  being  characteristic  of  the  constants 
of  the  particular  molecule.  The  atoms  being  charged, 
however,  their  mechanical  oscillation  is  necessarily 
accompanied  by  an  electric  oscillation,  and  so  an 
electric  radiation  is  excited  and  propagated  outwards. 
These  vibrations  would  appear  to  be  often  of  the 
frequency  suited  to  our  retina,  hence  these  vibrating 
atoms  indirectly  constitute  our  usual  source  of  light. 
The  "  frequency "  of  the  visible  radiation  can  be 
examined  and  determined  by  optical  means  (some 
form  of  interference  experiment,  usually  a  diffraction 
grating),  and  hence  many  of  the  rates  of  vibration 
possible  to  the  atoms  of  a  given  molecule  under  given 
circumstances  become  known,  and  this  is  the  founda- 
tion of  the  science  of  spectroscopy. 

It  is  possible  that  the  long  duration  of  some  kinds 
of  phosphorescence  may  be  due  to  the  atoms  receiving 
indirectly  some  of  the  ethereal  disturbance,  and  so 
prolonging  it  by  their  inertia,  instead  of  leaving  it  to 
the  far  less  inertia  of  the  ether  alone.  It  is  possible 


298   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

also  that  the  definite  emissivity  of  some  fluorescent 
substances  is  due  to  periods  of  vibration  proper  to 
their  atoms,  which,  being  disturbed  in  an  indirect  way 
by  receipt  of  radiation,  re-emit  the  same  radiation  in 
a  modified,  and,  as  it  were,  laden  manner. 

1 59.  To  get  some  further  idea  concerning  the  way  in 
which  an  oscillating  charge  or  an  oscillating  charged 
body  can  propagate  radiation,  refer  back  to  Fig.  39, 
Part  III.,  and  imagine  the  rack  oscillating  to  and  fro. 
It  will  produce  rotatory  oscillation  in  the  wheels 
gearing  into  it,  these  again  in  the  next,  and  soon.  If 
the  wheel-work  were  rigid,  the  propagation  would  go 
on  at  an  infinite  speed  to  the  most  distant  wheels,  but 
if  it  be  elastic  then  the  pace  of  propagation  depends 
on  the  elasticity  and  the  density,  in  a  way  we  have 
already  said  enough  about.  The  line  of  rack  is  the 
direction  of  electric  oscillation,  the  axes  of  the  wheels 
the  direction  of  magnetic  rotatory  oscillation,  and  at 
right  angles  to  both  these  is  the  direction  of  advance 
of  the  waves.  True,  the  diagram  is  not  a  space 
representation,  it  is  a  mere  section,  and  a  very  crude 
suggestion  of  a  mechanical  analogy  to  what  may  be 
taking  place. 

The  wheels  being  perfectly  geared  together  and  into 
the  rack  represent  an  insulator  or  dielectric  ;  there  is 
no  slip  or  frictional  dissipation  of  energy — in  other 
words,  there  are  no  true  electric  currents.  The  electric 
oscillation  is  a  mere  displacement  oscillation  due  to 


§  160  MECHANISM  OF  RADIATION  299 

elasticity  and  temporary  give  of  the  elastic  wheels, 
whereby  during  each  era  of  acceleration  they  are 
thrown  slightly  into  the  state  represented  in  Fig.  46 
as  contrasted  with  Fig.  37. 


Effects  of  encountering  a  New  Medium 

1 60.  Now  contemplate  an  advancing  system  of 
waves,  and  picture  their  encounter  with  an  obstacle  ; 
say,  a  medium  of  greater  density,  or  less  elasticity,  or 
both.  If  the  new  medium  is  a  perfect  insulator,  it 
must  be  considered  as  having  its  wheels  thoroughly 
geared  up  both  with  each  other  and  with  those  of 
the  initial  medium,  so  that  there  is  no  slip  or  dissipa- 
tion of  energy  at  the  surface,  In  this  case  none  of 
the  radiation  will  be  lost :  some  will  be  reflected 
and  some  transmitted  according  to  ordinary  and 
well-known  mechanical  laws.  The  part  transmitted 
will  suddenly  begin  to  travel  at  a  slower  pace,  and 
hence  if  the  incidence  were  oblique  would  pursue 
a  somewhat  different  path.  Also,  at  the  edges  of 
the  obstacle,  or  at  the  boundary  of  any  artificially 
limited  portion  of  the  wave,  there  will  be  certain 
effects  due  to  spreading  out  and  encroaching  on 
parts  of  the  medium  not  lying  in  the  direct  path. 
These  refraction  and  diffraction  effects  are  common  to 
all  possible  kinds  of  wave  propagation,  and  there  is 
nothing  specially  necessary  to  be  said  concerning 


300   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

electrical  radiation  on  these  heads  which  is  not  to  be 
found  in  any  work  on  the  corresponding  parts  of 
optics. 

161.  Concerning  the  amount  and  direction  of  the 
reflected    vibrations   there    is  something   to   be   said 
however,  and  that  something  very  important  j1  but  it 
is    no    easy   subject  to  tackle,   and    I    fear  must  be 
left,    so   far  as    I    am    concerned,  as    a   distinct,  but 
perhaps  subsequently-to-be-filled-up,  gap. 

If  the  gearing  between  the  new  medium  and  the 
old  is  imperfect  ;  if,  for  instance,  there  were  a  layer  of 
slippery  wheels  between  them,  representing  a  more  or 
less  conducting  film  ;  then  some  of  the  radiation  would 
be  dissipated  at  the  surface,  not  all  would  be  reflected 
and  transmitted,  and  the  film  would  get  to  a  certain 
extent  heated.  By  such  a  film  the  precise  laws  of  re- 
flection might  be  profoundly  modified,  as  they  would 
be  also  if  the  transition  from  one  medium  to  another 
were  gradual  instead  of  abrupt.  But  all  these  things 
must  remain,  for  the  present,  part  of  the  unfilled  gap. 

Electric  Radiation  encountering  a  Conductor 

162.  We  will  proceed  now  to  the  case  of  a  conducting 
obstacle — that   is,  of  waves  encountering  a  medium 
whose  electrical  parts  are  connected,  not  by  elasticity, 
but  by  friction.     It  is  plain  here  that  not  only  at  the 

1  Lord  Rayleigh,  Phil.  Mag.,  Sept.  1888. 


§  162  NATURE  OF  OPACITY  301 

outer  layer  of  such  a  medium,  but  at  every  subse- 
quent layer,  a  certain  amount  of  slip  will  occur  during 
every  era  of  acceleration,  and  hence  that  in  penetrating 
a  sufficient  thickness  of  a  medium  endowed  with  any 
metallic  conductivity  the  whole  of  the  incident  radia- 
tion must  be  either  reflected  or  destroyed :  none  can 
be  transmitted  (§  104). 

Refer  back  to  Fig.  43,  and  think  of  the  rack  in  that 
figure  as  oscillating.  Through  the  cog-wheels  the  dis- 
turbance spreads  without  loss,  but  at  the  outer  layer 
of  the  conducting  region  A  B  C  D  a  finite  slip  occurs, 
and  a  less  amount  of  radiation  penetrates  to  the  next 
layer,  E  F  G  H,  and  so  on.  Some  thickness  or  other, 
therefore,  of  a  conducting  substance  must  necessarily 
be  impervious  to  electric  radiation  :  that  is,  it  must  be 
opaque.  And  since  a  good  conductor  dissipates  very 
little  energy,  it  will  not  act  by  absorbing  the  radiation 
but  will  reflect  it.  (Sec  §§153  and  164.) 

Conductivity  is  not  the  sole  cause  of  opacity.  It 
would  not  do  to  say  that  all  opaque  bodies  must  be 
conductors.  But  conductivity  is  a  very  efficient  cause 
of  opacity,  and  it  is  true  to  say  that  all  conductors  of 
electricity  are  necessarily  opaque  to  light  ;  under- 
standing, of  course,  that  the  particular  thickness  of 
any  homogeneous  substance  which  can  be  considered 
as  perfectly  opaque  must  depend  on  its  conductivity. 
It  is  a  question  of  degree,  and  a  minute  but 
specifiable  fraction  of  an  original  disturbance  may  be 


302    ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

said  to  get  through  any  obstacle.  Practically,  how- 
ever, it  is  well  known  that  a  thin,  though  not  the 
thinnest,  film  of  metal  is  quite  impervious  to  light. 

163.  The  statement  that  conductivity  is  not  the  sole 
cause  of  opacity,  has  reference  to  the  kind  of  opacity 
caused  by  heterogeneity.  A  confused  mass  of  per- 
fectly transparent  substance  may  be  quite  opaque  ; 
witness  foam,  powdered  glass,  chalk,  &c. 

Hence,  though  a  transparent  body  must  indeed  be 
an  insulator,  the  converse  is  not  necessarily  true.  An 
insulator  need  not  necessarily  be  transparent.  A 
homogeneous  flawless  insulator  must,  however,  be 
transparent  to  some,  though  not  necessarily  to  all, 
wave-lengths.  A  homogeneous  and  flawless  opaque 
body,  if  really  opaque  to  all  wave-lengths,  must  be  a 
conductor. 

These,  then,  are  the  simple  connections  between 
two  such  apparently  distinct  things  as  conducting 
power  for  electricity  and  opacity  to  light  which 
Maxwell's  theory  points  out  ;  and  it  is  possible 
to  calculate  the  theoretical  opacity  of  any  given 
simply-constructed  substance  by  knowing  its  specific 
electric  conductivity.  There  are  however  reasons  for 
asserting  that  the  opacity  as  so  calculated  does  not 
agree  very  well  with  that  actually  observed.  There 
is  a  field  for  work  here. 


§  1 64  REFLECTION  OF  RADIATION  303 


Fate  of  the  Radiation 

164.  To  understand  what  happens  to  radiation  im- 
pinging on  a  conducting  body  it  is  most  simple  to 
proceed  to  the  limiting  case  at  once  and  consider  a 
perfect  conductor.  In  the  case  of  a  perfect  conductor 
the  wheels  are  connected  not  even  by  friction  ;  they 
are  not  connected  at  all.  Consequently  the  slip  at 
the  boundary  of  such  a  conductor  is  perfect,  and  there 
is  no  dissipation  of  energy  accompanying  it.  The 
blank  space  in  Fig.  38  represented  a  perfectly  con- 
ducting layer.  Ethereal  vibrations  impinging  on  a 
perfect  conductor  practically  arrive  at  an  outer  con- 
fine of  their  medium  :  beyond,  there  is  nothing  capable 
of  transmitting  them  ;  the  outer  wheels  receive  an  im- 
petus which  they  cannot  get  rid  of  in  front,  and  which 
they  therefore  return  back  the  way  it  came  to  those 
behind  them  :  the  radiation  is  totally  reflected.  It  is 
like  what  happens  when  a  sound-pulse  reaches  the 
open  end  of  an  organ-pipe  ;  like  what  happens  when 
sound  tries  to  go  from  water  to  air  ;  like  the  last  of  a 
row  of  connected  balls  along  which  a  knock  has  been 
transmitted  ;  except  that  in  the  case  of  these  longi- 
tudinal pulses  the  phase  is  reversed,  whereas  for 
transverse  pulses  under  the  same  circumstances  it  is 
just  not  reversed.  Our  massive  elastic  wheels, 


304   ELECTRICAL  RADIATION,  OR  LIGHT    CHAP,  xiv 

especially  the  wheels  of  Fig  48,  are  able  to  represent 
the  act  of  reflection  quite  properly. 

165.  The  reflected  pulses  will  be  superposed  upon 
and  interfere  with  the  direct  pulses,  and  accordingly 
if  the  distances  are  properly    adjusted  we  can  have 
the  familiar  formation  of  fixed  nodes  and  stationary 
waves  (§  130). 

1 66.  The  point    of   main  interest,  however,  is    to 
notice  that  a  perfect  conductor  of  electricity,  if  there 
were  such  a  thing,  would  be   utterly  impervious  to 
light :    no  light  could  penetrate   its    outer    skin,    it 
would   all   be   reflected  back :    the  substance  would 
be  a    perfect   reflector   for   ethereal   waves   of  every 
size. 

Thus  with  a  perfect  conductor,  as  with  a  perfect 
non-conductor,  there  is  no  dissipation.  Radiation 
impinging  on  them  is  either  all  reflected  or  some 
reflected  and  some  transmitted.  It  is  the  cases  of 
intermediate  conductivity  which  destroy  some  of  the 
radiation  and  convert  its  ethereal  vibrations  into 
atomic  vibrations,  i.e.  which  convert  it  into  heat. 

167.  The    mode  in   which  radiation  or  any  other 
electrical   disturbance    diffuses    with    continual    loss 
through  an  imperfect  conductor  can  easily  be  appre- 
ciated by  referring  to  §  103   again.     The  successive 
lines  of  slip,  A  B  C  D,  E  F  G  H,  &c.,  are  successive  layers 
of  induced  currents.     An  electromotive  impulse  loses 
itself  in  the  production  of  these  currents,  which  are 


§  1 67  ABSORPTION  OF  RADIATION  305 

successively  formed  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  material 
according  to  laws  of  diffusion. 

If  the  waves  had  impinged  on  one  face  of  a  slab,  a 
certain  fraction  of  them  would  emerge  from  the  other 
face — a  fraction  depending  on  the  thickness  of  the  slab 
according  to  a  logarithmic  or  geometrical-progression 
law  of  decrease.  (See  also  Chap.  XVI.) 


CHAPTER  XV 

ELECTRO-MAGNETIC   AND   ELECTROSTATIC   EFFECTS 
ON    LIGHT 

1 68.  WE  must  now  mention  one  or  two  phenomena 
which  depend  entirely  upon  a  modification  of  ether 
by  the  neighbourhood  of  matter,  and  which  we  have 
reason  to  believe  would  not  occur  in  free  ether  at  all. 
These  are  the  optical  phenomena  of  Faraday  and  Kerr, 
and  the  electric  phenomenon  of  Hall. 

Faraday  discovered,  long  before  there  was  any  other 
connection  known  between  electricity  and  light,  that 
the  plane  in  which  light-vibrations  occur  could  be 
rotated  by  transmitting  light  through  certain  magnet- 
ized substances  along  the  lines  of  magnetic  force.  To 
make  this  effect  easily  manifest,  it  is  necessary  to  use 
plane-polarized  light,  and  to  transmit  it  through  a  fair 
length  of  magnetized  substance,  analyzing  it  after 
emergence,  and  showing  that,  though  it  remains  plane- 


§  1 69  FARADAY'S  ROTATION  307 

polarized,  the  plane  has  been  rotated,  possibly  through 
a  right  angle  or  more. 

Now  in  a  general  way  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that, 
inasmuch  as  something  of  the  nature  of  a  rotation  is 
going  on  in  a  magnetic  field  round  the  lines  of  force, 
vibrations  travelling  into  such  a  field  along  these  lines 
should  be  twisted  round,  corkscrew  fashion,  and  emerge 
vibrating  in  a  different  plane.  But  on  trying  to  follow 
out  this  process  into  detail,  it  turns  out  not  quite  so 
simple  a  matter.  It  has,  however,  no  business  to  be 
a  very  simple  and  obvious  consequence  of  the 
existence  of  a  magnetic  rotation  round  the  rays  of 
light,  else  would  it  occur  in  free  space,  and  in  the 
same  direction  in  all  media.  But  the  facts  are  that 
in  free  space — that  is,  in  free  ether — it  does  not  occur 
at  all,  and  the  direction  of  rotation  is  not  the  same 
for  all  media  :  substances  can,  in  fact,  be  divided  into 
two  groups,  according  to  the  way  in  which  given 
magnetization  shall  rotate  the  plane  of  polarized 
light  passing  through  them. 

169.  Similar  statements  can  be  made  concerning  the 
electrostatic  optical  effect  discovered  by  Dr.  Kerr,  who 
showed  that  plane-polarized  light  transmitted  across 
the  lines  of  force  in  an  electrostatic  field  could,  in  cer- 
tain media,  come  out  elliptically  polarized.  Now,  in- 
asmuch as  an  electric  field  is  a  region  of  strain,  and 
strain  in  transparent  bodies  is  well  known  to  make 
them  slightly  doubly  refracting  and,able  to  turn  plane- 

X  2 


308  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

polarized  into  elliptically  polarized  light,  it  is  very 
easy  to  imagine  such  a  result  in  an  electric  field  to  be 
natural  and  probable.  But  the  explanation  is  not  so 
simple  as  that,  else  it  ought  to  be  a  large  effect,  occur- 
ring in  all  sorts  of  media  in  the  same  direction,  and 
likewise  in  free  space.  But  the  facts  are  that  it  does 
not  occur  at  all  in  free  space,  and  it  occurs  in  different 
senses  in  different  substances  ;  so  that  again  they  can 
be  grouped  into  two  classes  according  to  the  sign  of 
the  Kerr  effect. 

Thus,  then,  the  rotatory  effect  of  a  magnetic  field 
upon  light,  discovered  by  Faraday,  and  the  doubly 
refracting  effect  of  an  electrostatic  field  upon  light, 
discovered  by  Kerr,  agree  in  this  :  that  they  are  both 
small  or  residual  effects,  depending  on  the  existence  of 
a  dense  or  material  medium,  and  both  varying  in  sign 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  medium. 

1 70.  The  only  substance  in  which  the  Faraday  effect 
is  large,  is  iron,  including  with  iron  the  other  highly 
magnetic  substances.  The  discovery  of  the  effect  in 
these  bodies  was  likewise  made  by  Kerr.  The  diffi- 
culty of  dealing  with  them  is  that  they  are  very 
opaque,  and  hence  that  the  merest  film  of  them  can 
be  used.  The  film  can  be  used  either  by  way  of 
transmission  or  by  way  of  reflection,  it  matters  not 
which,  but  reflection  is  the  way  in  which  it  was  first 
done.  Light  reflected  from  the  polished  face  of  a 
magnet  has  indeed  barely  penetrated  at  all  into  the 


§  i;i  KERR'S  PHENOMENA  309 

substance  of  the  iron  before  being  sent  back  ;  still, 
it  has  penetrated  deep  enough  to  be  distinctly 
rotated  by  the  tremendous  magnetic  whirl  which  it 
finds  there. 

1 7 1.  All  these  highly  magnetic  substances  arc 
metallic  conductors,  and  are  therefore  very  opaque. 
Whether  there  is  any  real  connection  between  high 
magnetic  susceptibility  and  conductivity  is  more  than 
I  can  say.  But  it  is  quite  natural,  and  indeed 
necessary,  that  the  greatest  portion  of  light  should 
be  reflected  on  entering  a  highly  magnetic  medium, 
because  in  such  a  medium  the  ethereal  density,  p,  is 
so  great,  and  hence  the  velocity  of  wave  transmission, 
must  undergo  a  sudden  and  immense  decrease — a 
circumstance  always  causing  a  great  amount  of 
reflection  ;  just  as  when  sound  tries  to  pass  from  any 
one  medium  to  a  much  denser  one. 

But  the  opacity  of  iron  and  other  magnetic  sub- 
stances may  be  explained  by  the  mere  fact  of  their 
conducting  power,  just  like  other  metals,  and  no 
noteworthy  effect  of  their  large  value  of  //,  need  be 
detectable  optically. 

If  a  non-conducting  highly  magnetic  substance 
could  be  found,  it  would  probably  reflect  a  great  deal 
of  light  at  its  surface,  though  it  would  not  dissipate 
that  which  entered  it.  Such  a  substance  would  be 
most  interesting  to  submit  to  experiment,  but  perhaps 
its  existence  presupposes  a  combination  of  impos- 


ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS 


CHAP.  XV 


sible  properties.  Certainly  it  has  not  yet  been 
discovered.1 

As  to  the  phenomenon  detected  by  Hall,  it  appears 
intimately  associated  with  that  of  Faraday,  and  it  will 
be  most  simple  to  omit  all  reference  to  it  for  the 
present. 

172.  A  general  idea  of  what  is  happening  in  the 
Faraday  and  Kerr  phenomena  can  be  given  thus. 


A — 


A  simple  vibration,  like  a  pendulum-swing,  or  any 
other  oscillation  in  one  plane,  can  be  resolved  into 
two  others  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways  ;  just  as  one 
force  can  be  resolved  into  any  number  of  pairs  of 
equivalent  forces.  The  two  most  useful  modes  of 
analyzing  a  simple  vibration  into  a  pair  of  constituents 
are  these:  (i)  two  equal  components,  likewise  plane 
vibrations,  each  inclined  at  45°  to  the  original  one,  as 
when  P  Q  is  resolved  into  A  B  and  C  D  (Fig.  49)  ;  and 
(2)  two  equal  circular  or  rotatory  oscillations  in  oppo- 

1  So  I  had  to  write  in  1889  :  but  now  M.  Pictet's  and  Prof.  Dewar's 
observations  render  it  probable  that  at  very  low  temperatures  such  a 
substance  may  be  found. 


§  172  FARADAY  AND  KERR  311 

site  directions,  as  when  p  Q  is  resolved  into  P  M  Q  and 
P  N  Q  (Fig.  50).  The  first  method  of  resolution  is 
useful  in  explaining  Kerr's  effect,  the  second  in 
explaining  Faraday's. 

Of  the  two  component  vibrations,  A  B  and  C  D,  into 
which  P  Q  can  be  supposed  analyzed,  let  some  cause, 
no  matter  what,  make  one  gain  upon  the  other,  so 
that  in  travelling  along  a  line  perpendicular  to  the 
paper  one  goes  a  little  the  quicker  :  the  effect  at  once 
is  to  change  the  character  of  the  vibration  into  which 
they  will  recompound.  After  the  gain,  they  no  longer 
reproduce  the  original  simple  vibration  P  Q  :  they  give 
rise  to  elliptic,  or  it  may  be  to  circular,  vibrations  ;  this 
last,  if  the  retardation  is  equal  to  a  quarter  period. 

These  are  matters  fully  treated  in  any  elementary 
treatise  on  polarized  light,  and  they  are  quite  easily 
illustrated  by  means  of  a  simple  pendulum.  One 
may  assume  them  known. 

Similarly  with  the  second  system  of  analyzing  the 
vibration  into  two  opposing  circular  ones.  If  the 
components  travel  through  any  interposed  medium 
at  the  same  rate,  they  will,  on  emergence,  reproduce 
the  original  vibration  in  its  original  position  ;  but  if 
one  travels  quicker  than  the  other  they  recombine 
into  a  vibration  of  the  same  character  as  at  first,  but 
turned  through  a  certain  angle.  Thus  anything  which 
retards  one  of  the  rectangular  components  behind  the 
other,  changes  the  character  of  the  vibration  from 


3i2  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS         CHAP,  xv 

plane  into  elliptical  ;  while  anything  which  retards  one 
of  the  circular  components  behind  the  other,  leaves 
the  character  of  the  vibration  unaltered,  but  rotates  it 
through  a  certain  angle. 

173.  So  far  one  has  said  nothing  but  the  simplest 
mechanics.  The  next  point  to  consider  is  what  deter- 
mines the  rate  at  which  light  travels  through  any  sub- 
stance ?  This  we  have  discussed  at  length  (§  128),  and 

shown  to  be  —  Anything  which  increases  either 


the  electric  or  the  magnetic  permeability  of  the 
medium  decreases  the  velocity  of  light.  Now,  when 
a  medium  is  already  subject  to  a  violent  strain  in  any 
one  direction  it  is  possibly  less  susceptible  to  further 
strain  in  that  direction  and  responds  less  readily.  Not 
necessarily  so  at  all  :  such  an  effect  would  only  be 
produced  when  the  strain  was  excessive,  when  the 
medium  was  beginning  to  be  overdone,  and  when  its 
properties  began  thereby  to  be  slightly  modified. 
There  are  reasons  for  believing  the  specific  inductive 
capacity  of  most  media  to  be  very  constant  ;  of  some 
media,  perhaps,  precisely  constant  ;  but  if  there  were 
any  limit  beyond  which  the  strain  could  not  pass  it  is 
probable  that  on  nearing  the  limit  the  specific  induc- 
tive capacity  would  be  altered  —  possibly  increased, 
possibly  diminished  —  one  could  hardly  say  which. 
Quincke  has  investigated  this  matter,  and  has  shown 
that  the  value  of  K  is  affected  by  great  electric  strain. 


§  174        EFFECT  OF  VARYING  CONSTANTS  313 

Suppose  now  that  a  dielectric  is  subject  to  a  violent 
electrical  stress,  so  that  its  properties  along  the  lines 
of  force  become  slightly  different  from  its  properties 
at  right  angles  to  those  lines.  The  value  of  K  will 
not  be  quite  the  same  along  the  lines  of  strain  as  across 
them,  and  accordingly  the  rectangular  component  of 
a  vibration  resolved  along  the  lines  of  force  will  travel 
rather  quicker  or  rather  slower  than  the  component 
at  right  angles,  because  the  velocity  of  transmission 
depends  upon  K,  as  already  explained  :  such  a  me- 
dium at  once  acquires  the  necessary  doubly-refractive 
character,  and  will  show  Kerr's  effect. 

174.  Similarly  with  magnetization.  It  is  well 
known  that  for  many  media  p  is  not  constant.  Take 
iron,  for  instance.  For  very  small  magnetizing  forces 
the  susceptibility  is  moderate,  and  increases  as  they 
increase  ;  at  a  certain  magnetization  it  reaches  a  maxi- 
mum, and  then  steadily  decreases.  But  not  only  is 
it  thus  very  inconstant,  its  ascending  and  descending 
values  are  not  the  same.  To  forces  tending  to  mag- 
netize it  more,  the  susceptibility  has  one  value  ;  to 
forces  tending  to  demagnetize  it,  it  has  another  and 
in  general  smaller  value.  This  property  has  been 
specially  studied  by  Ewing,  and  has  been  called  by 
him  "hysteresis."  Slightly  susceptible  substances 
cannot  be  magnetized  to  anything  like  the  same 
extent,  and  hence  the  property  in  them  has  been  less 
noticed,  perhaps  not  noticed  at  all.  Nevertheless  it 


3H  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

must  exist  in  every  substance  which  exhibits  a  trace 
of  permanent  magnetism,  and  every  substance  I  have 
tried  appears  to  show  some  such  trace.1 

An  already  strongly  magnetized  medium  will  be 
rather  differently  susceptible  to  additional  magnetizing 
forces  in  the  same  direction  from  what  it  is  to  those 
in  a  contrary  direction.  Nothing  more  is  wanted  to 
explain  Faraday's  effect.  The  vibration  being  resolved 
into  two  opposite  circular  components,  one  of  them 
must  agree  in  direction  with  the  magnetism  already  in 
the  medium  and  try  to  magnetize  it  for  the  instant 
infmitesimally  more  ;  the  other  component  will  for 
the  instant  infinitesimally  tend  to  demagnetize  it. 
The  value  of  //,  offering  itself  to  the  two  components 
will  be  different,  hence  they  will  go  at  different  rates, 
and  the  plane  of  vibration  will  be  rotated.2 

175.  The    direction    of  rotation    will    depend    on 

1  See  Nature,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  484. 

2  The  connection   which   I  here  trace  between  hysteresis  and    the 
magnetic  rotation  of  plane  of  polarization,  is  not  one  which  I  at  all 
press.     Prof.  Fitzgerald  has  intimated  to  me  that  if  I  take  a  whole 
wave-front  into  consideration,  the  theory  will  hardly  work,  and  that  it 
would  have  been  better  if  the  real  electro-magnetic  disturbance  were 
the  thing  acted  on  instead  of  having  to  fall  back  upon  a   secondary 
magnetic  effect  of  the  electrostatic  displacement.     And  Prof.  Ewing, 
though  he  adduced  at  first  some  facts  which  appeared  to  strengthen  my 
view,  now  doubts  whether  the  kinematic  resolution  of  a  displacement 
into  two  circular  components  is  under  the  circumstances  legitimate.     I 
have  doubts  too.     If  I  were  quite  sure  that  there  were  no  vestige  of 
truth  in  the  suggestion  I  have  made  in  the  text,   I  should  of  course 
suppress  it ;  but  as  I  am  not  quite  sure,  I  let  it  stand  for  the  present, 
taking  any  possible  harm  out  of  it  by  this  note.     See  also  §§  180  et  seq. 


§  175         EFFECT  OF  VARYING  CONSTANTS  315 

whether  the  value  of  //,  is  greater  for  small  relaxa- 
tions, or  for  small  intensifications,  of  magnetizing 
force  ;  and  diamagnetic  substances  may  be  expected 
to  be  opposite  in  this  respect  to  paramagnetic  ones. 
Any  substance  for  which  /*,  is  absolutely  constant, 
whatever  the  strength  of  magnetic  polarization  to 
which  it  is  submitted,  can  hardly  be  expected  to  ex- 
hibit any  hysteresis  ;  the  ascending  and  descending 
curves  of  magnetization  will  coincide,  being  both 
straight  lines,  and  such  a  substance  will  show  no 
Faraday  effect.  Similarly,  any  substance  for  which  K 
is  absolutely  constant,  whatever  the  electric  polariza- 
tion to  which  it  is  submitted,  can  show  no  Kerr's  effect. 
Free  space  appears  to  be  of  this  nature  ;  and  gases 
approach  it  very  nearly,  but  not  quite. 

In  iron,  //,  is  greater  for  an  increasing  than  for  a 
decreasing  force,  as  is  shown  by  the  loops  in  Ewing's 
curves  ;  hence  the  circular  component  agreeing  in 
direction  with  the  magnetizing  current  will  travel 
slower  than  the  other  component,  and  hence  the 
rotation  in  iron  will  be  against  the  direction  of  the 
magnetizing  current.  The  same  appears  to  hold  in 
most  paramagnetic  substances,  and  the  opposite  in 
most  diamagnetic;  but  the  mere  fact  of  paramagnetism 
or  diamagnetism  is  not  sufficient  to  tell  us  the  sign  of 
the  effect  in  any  given  substance.  We  must  know 
the  mode  in  which  its  magnetic  permeability  is  affected 
by  waxing  and  by  waning  magnetization  respectively. 


316  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 


Possible  Electrical  Method  of  detecting  the  Faraday 
Effect 

176.  Thus  far  we  have  considered  the  rotation  of 
electric  displacement  by  a  magnetic  field  as  being 
examined  optically,  the  displacements  being  those 
concerned  in  light,  and  the  rotation  being  detected 
by  a  polarizing  analyzer  suitable  for  determining  the 
direction  in  which  the  vibrations  occur  before  and 
after  the  passage  of  light  through  a  magnetized  sub- 
stance. This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  effect  has 
at  present  been  observed  in  transparent  bodies.  But 
one  ought  not  to  be  limited  to  an  optical  method  of 
detection. 

Electrical  displacements  are  easily  produced  in  any 
insulator,  and  if  it  be  immersed  in  a  strong  magnetic 
field,  so  that  the  electric  and  magnetic  lines  of  force 
are  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  every  electric  dis- 
turbance ought  to  experience  a  small  rotation.  A 
steady  strain  will  not  be  affected  ;  it  is  the  variable 
state  only  which  will  experience  an  effect,  but  every 
fresh  electric  displacement  should  experience  a  slight 
rotatory  tendency  just  like  the  displacements  which 
occur  in  light. 

Now  to  rotate  a  displacement  A  B  into  the  position 
A  c  requires  the  combination  with  it  of  a  perpen- 
dicular displacement  B  C  (Fig.  51).  Hence  the  effect 


§ 


ROWLAND'S  THEORY 


317 


of  the  magnetic  field  upon  an  electric  displacement, 
A  B,  may  be  said  to  be  the  generation  of  a  small 
perpendicular  E.M.F.,  B  C,  which, compounded  with  the 
original  one,  has  the  resultant  effect  A  C.  It  will  be 


FIG.  51. 

only  a  temporary  effect,  lasting  while  the  displace- 
ment is  being  produced,  and  ceasing  directly  a  steady 
state  of  strain  is  set  up. 

An  inverse  E.M.F.,A  D,  will  be  excited  by  the  same 
magnetic  field  directly  the  displacement  is  reversed. 


D 

FIG.  52. 


And  so,  if  a  continual  electric  oscillation  is  kept  up 
between  A  and  B  in  a  magnetic  field,  an  accompanying 
very  minute  transverse  oscillation  may  be  expected, 
and  may  be  looked  for  electrically. 


3i8  ELF.LCTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

Some  such  arrangement  as  that  here  shown  (Fig.  52) 
may  be  employed :  a  square  of  heavy  glass,  per- 
forated with  four  holes  towards  the  centre,  supplied 
with  electrodes  :  one  pair  of  electrodes,  A,  B,  to  be 
connected  with  the  poles  of  some  alternating  machine, 
and  the  other  pair,  c,  D,  connected  to  a  telephone  or 
other  detector  of  minute  oscillatory  disturbance.  So 
soon  as  a  strong  steady  magnetic  field  is  applied,  by 
placing  the  glass  slab  between  the  poles  of  a  strong 
magnet,  the  telephone  ought  to  be  slightly  affected 
by  the  transverse  oscillations.  This  effect  has  not  yet 
been  experimentally  observed,  though  I  have  had  a 
bored  piece  of  glass  ready  to  look  for  it  for  some  time, 
but  it  seems  to  me  a  certain  consequence  of  the 
Faraday  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization  of 
light. 

Hall  Effect 

177.  Although  the  existence  of  this  transverse 
E.M.F.,  excited  by  a  magnetic  field  in  substances 
undergoing  varying  electric  displacement,  has  at 
present  only  been  detected  optically  in  transparent 
bodies,  i.e.  in  insulators,  yet  in  conductors  the  corre- 
sponding effect  with  a  steady  current  has  been  dis- 
tinctly observed  electrically.  By  many  persons  it  had 
been  looked  for  (by  Prof.  Carey  Foster  and  the  writer, 
among  others,  though  unfortunately  they  were  not 
sufficiently  prepared  for  its  extreme  smallness)  ; 


§  177  HALL'S  PHENOMENON  319 

by  Mr.   Hall,  at  Baltimore,  was  it  first  successfully 
observed. 

In  conductors  it  is  natural  to  use  a  conduction- 
current  instead  of  a  displacement-current.  A  steady 
current  can  be  maintained  in  a  square  or  cross  of 
gold-leaf  or  other  thin  sheet  of  metal  between  the 
electrodes  A,  B  ;  and  a  minute  traverse  E.M.F.  can  be 
detected,  causing  a  very  weak  steady  current  through 


FIG.  53. — The  direction  of  the  transverse  E.M.F.  excited  by  the  earth's  vertical 
magnetic  field  in  this  conductor,  conveying  a  current  as  shown,  is  c  u  if  it 
represents  gold,  D  c  if  it  represents  iron. 


a  galvanometer  connected  to  the  terminals  C,  D,  so  soon 
as  a  strong  magnetic  field  is  applied  perpendicularly 
to  the  plate.  Fig.  53  will  sufficiently  indicate  the 
arrangement.  The  poles  of  the  magnet  are  one  above 
and  one  below  the  paper. 

In  iron  it  is  easy  to  see  which  way  the  transverse 
E.M.F.  ought  to  be  found.  It  has  been  shown  (§  175) 
that  a  displacement  will  be  rotated  in  iron  against  the 


320  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

magnetizing  current  ;  hence  to  rotate  the  displace- 
ment A  B  to  A  C  (Fig.  51),  requires  in  iron  a  clockwise 
magnetizing  current.  Such  a  current,  or,  what  is  the 
same  thing,  a  south  pole  below  the  paper,  a  north  pole 
above,  excites,  in  the  cross  of  Fig.  53,  an  E.M.F.  in 
the  direction  D  C  ;  and  this  by  Ampere's  rule  is  just  the 
direction  in  which  the  conductor  itself  is  urged  by  the 
magnetic  forces  acting  on  the  current-conveying  sub- 
stance. Most  diamagnetic  substances  should  exhibit  a 
transverse  E.M.F.  in  the  opposite  sense.  This  trans- 
verse E.M.F.  excited  in  conductors  conveying  a 
current  in  a  magnetic  field  is  the  effect  known  by 
the  name  of  Hall.  It  is,  as  Prof.  Rowland  and 
others  have  pointed  out,  intimately  connected  with 
the  Faraday  rotation  of  light. 

1 78.  Unfortunately  a  pure  and  simple  Hall  effect  is  a 
difficult  thing  to  observe.  Magnetism  affects  the  con- 
ductivity of  metals  in  a  rather  complicated  manner  ; 
and  strain  affects  their  thermo-electric  properties. 
Now  a  metal  conveying  a  current  in  a  magnetic  field  is 
certainly  more  or  less  strained  by  mechanical  forces  ; 
and  hence  heat  will  be  developed  unequally  in  different 
parts,  by  a  sort  of  Peltier  effect ;  and  the  result  of  this 
will  be  to  modify  the  resistance  in  patches,  and  so  to 
produce  a  disturbance  of  the  flow  which  may  easily 
result  partly  in  a  transverse  E.M.F.  This  has  been 
pointed  out  by  Mr.  Shelford  Bidwell. 

The  more  direct  effect  of  magnetism  on  conductivity 


§  179  SHELFORD  BIDWELL'S  VIEW  321 

may  be  negligibly  small  in  many  metals,  but  in  bis- 
muth it  is.  certainly  large.  Both  of  these  spurious 
effects  seem  to  be  large  in  bismuth,  and  probably 
quite  mask  any  true  Hall  effect  there  may  be  in  that 
metal.  In  all  cases  the  existence  of  these  spurious 
effects  makes  it  difficult  to  be  sure  of  the  magnitude 
and  sign  of  the  real  rotational  effect. 

179.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  what  right  have  we  to 
distinguish  between  a  real  and  a  spurious  Hall  effect  ? 
If  a  transverse  E.M.F.  can  be  predicted  by  reason  of 
known  strains  and  thermo-electric  properties,  as  well 
as  by  known  rotation  of  light  effects,  why  should  the 
two  things  be  considered  different  ?  Why  should  they 
not  be  different  modes  of  regarding  one  and  the  same 
phenomenon  ? 

In  other  words,  may  not  the  Faraday  rotation  of 
light  be  due  to  infinitesimal  temporary  strains  and 
heatings  in  the  medium,  caused  by  the  fact  that 
minute  electric  displacements  are  occurring  in  a 
violent  magnetic  field  ?  May  not  the  Hall  effect  also  be 
accounted  for  by  the  action  of  magnetism  on  thermo- 
electric properties  ?  These  are  questions  capable  of 
being  answered  by  a  quantitative  determination  of 
the  amounts  and  direction  of  the  effects  to  be  expected, 
and  a  comparison  with  those  actually  observed.  I  do 
not  know  of  data,  at  present  obtained,  sufficient  to 
enable  us  to  answer  it.  If  their  answers  should  turn 
out  in  the  affirmative,  several  apparently  distinct 
phenomena  will  be  linked  together. 


322  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 


Possible  Accounts  of  the  Faraday  and  Hall  Effects 

1 80.  As  has  been  stated,  the  rotation  of  the  plane 
of  polarization  observed  by  Faraday  in  transparent 
bodies  is  supposed  to  be  intimately  connected  with 
the  effect  observed  by  Mr.  Hall  in  conductors  ;  for  the 
rotation  of  a  displacement  is  equivalent  to  combining 
it  with  a  small  perpendicular  displacement  ;  and  it 
is  this  perpendicular  of  transverse  E.M.F.  exerted  by 
a  magnetic  field  which  Hall  discovered.  At  the  same 
time,  there  are  one  or  two  facts  which  militate  against 
this  simple  connection  between  the  two  phenomena, 
chief  among  them  being  the  singular  behaviour  of 
nickel,  which  rotates  light  one  way  and  electric  dis- 
placement the  other  way.  For  some  time  it  was 
possible  to  hope  for  a  way  out  of  this  through  the 
usual  convenient  avenue  of  "  impurity  "  ;  but  now  that 
both  experiments  have  been  performed  on  the  same 
identical  piece  of  metal,  still  with  opposite  results, 
this  exit  is  closed.  In  this  unsettled  state,  so  far  as  I 
know,  the  connection  between  the  rotation  of  light 
and  the  Hall  effect  at  present  stands. 

1 8 1.  It  may  be  well  here  to  repeat  the  caution 
appended  as  a  footnote  to  §  174,  not  to  assume  that 
the  tentative  explanation  there  given  of  the  magnetic 
rotation  of  light  and  the  Hall  effect  is  true.  If  true, 
however,  it  is  convenient  as  linking  the  phenomena  on 


§  182  FARADAY  ROTATION  AND  TIME  323 

to  hysteresis  ;  and  the  direction  of  the  effect  in  iron  is 
correctly  given — namely,  a  rotation  against  the 
magnetizing  current  (§  177). 

Prof.  Ewing  has  since  pointed  out,  in  a  letter  to  me, 
that,  attending  more  precisely  to  the  instruction  of 
his  curves,  we  find  the  difference  in  fj,  for  positive 
and  negative  magnetizing  forces  only  lasts  through 
a  number  of  cycles  for  the  time  during  which  the 
final  state  has  been  approached,  and  does  not  persist 
after  a  steady  state  has  been  reached.  This  would 
make  the  magnetic  rotation  of  light  a  function  of 
time  ;  and  though  certain  experiments  by  Villari  on 
spinning  a  glass  disk  between  the  poles  of  a  magnet, 
so  that  fresh  and  fresh  portions  of  glass  were  con- 
tinually exposed  to  the  magnetic  field,  seemed  to  show 
a  marked  falling  off  in  the  amount  of  rotation  as  soon 
as  high  speeds  were  obtained ;  thus  proving, apparently, 
that  a  certain  short  time  was  necessary  to  set  up  the 
effect ;  these  results  have,  by  Mr.  A.  H.  Ward,  been 
otherwise  explained  as  due  to  centrifugal  force  strain  ; 
and  more  recent  experiments  tend  to  negative  the  idea 
of  any  appreciable  time  being  needed  for  the  Faraday 
rotation.1 

182.  Another  and  apparently  distinct  account  of  the 
magnetic  rotation  can  also  be  hinted  at,  which  links  the 
phenomenon  on  to  the  facts  of  thermo-electricity. 

1  See  a  paper  by  the  present  writer  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine 
for  April,  1889.  See  also  Lecture  on  Leyden  Jar,  below. 

Y    2 


324  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS         CHAP,  xv 

Referring  back  to  §  63,  we  find  that,  to  explain 
what  is  called  the  "  Thomson  effect  "  in  metals,  we 
were  led  to  suppose  a  connection  between  one  kind 
of  electricity  and  some  kinds  of  matter  more 
intimate  than  between  the  other  kind  of  elec- 
tricity and  the  same  matter.  Thus,  the  atoms 
of  iron  were  said  to  have  a  better  grip  of  positive 
electricity  than  of  negative ;  while  copper,  on 
the  other  hand,  had  a  better  grip  of  negative 
than  of  positive.  All  metals  could  be  arranged  in 
one  or  other  of  the  two  classes,  with  the  exception 
of  lead,  which  appears  to  grip  both  equally.  It  is 
the  same  phenomenon  as  was  originally  named  by 
Sir  W.  Thomson  "  the  specific  heat  of  electricity  in  a 
substance."  Certain  it  is  that  vibrating  atoms  of  iron 
push  positive  electricity  from  places  of  more  rapid,  to 
places  of  less  rapid,  vibration — that  is,  from  hot  to  cold 
— and  a  whole  class  of  the  metals  do  the  same  ;  while 
another  class,  like  copper,  push  it  from  cold  to  hot. 

Permitting  ourselves  to  picture  this  effect  as  a  direct 
consequence  of  the  Ohm's  law  relation  between  elec- 
tricity and  matter  (§  60),  combined  with  a  special 
relationship  between  certain  kinds  of  matter  and  one 
or  other  kind  of  electricity,  a  relationship  which  can 
exhibit  itself  in  other  ways  also,  we  get  a  possible 
though  rather  hazy  notion  of  a  Faraday  rotation  in  a 
magnetic  field  by  supposing  that  the  Amperian  mol- 
ecular currents  in  these  substances  consist  not  of  pre- 


§  1 83  THERMO-ELECTRICITY  AND  HALL  EFFECT  325 

cisely  equal  positive  and  negative  currents,  but  of 
positive  currents  slightly  unequal  ;  say,  for  instance, 
that  the  density  of  the  positive  constituent  of  the  bound 
ether  of  a  substance  is  slightly  different  from  that  of  the 
negative  constituent  ;  so  that  on  the  whole  the  bound 
ether  in  a  magnetized  molecule  is  slowly  rotating  one 
way  or  the  other,  at  a  pace  equal  to  the  resultant 
rotation  of  its  constituents.  Suppose  that  in  iron  the 
positive  Amperian  electric  current  is  the  weaker  of  the 
two  ;  then  the  ether,  as  a  whole,  will  be  rotating  with 
the  negative  current,  and  accordingly  an  ethereal  vibra- 
tion entering  such  a  medium  will  begin  to  screw  itself 
round  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  mag- 
netizing current ;  whereas  in  copper  or  other  such 
substance  it  would  be  rotated  the  other  way. 

183.  According  to  this  (admittedly  indistinct)  view, 
lead  ought  to  show  no  rotatory  effect  at  all :  and  of 
course,  therefore,  no  Hall  effect  either.  And  the 
classes  into  which  metals  are  divided  by  the  sign  of 
their  Hall  effect  should  coincide  with  the  classes  into 
which  the  sign  of  their  Thomson  effect  throws  them. 

Hall  finds  that,  of  the  metals  he  examined,  iron, 
cobalt,  and  zinc  fall  into  one  class,  while  gold,  silver, 
tin,  copper,  brass,  platinum,  nickel,  aluminium,  and 
magnesium,  fall  into  the  other.  Now,  referring  to  the 
thermo-electric  results  of  Prof.  Tait,  we  find  iron, 
cobalt,  platinum,  and  magnesium  with  a  negative  sign 
to  their  Thomson-coefficient,  or  with  lines  in  the 


326  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

thermo-electric  diagram  sloping  downwards  ;  while 
gold,  silver,  tin,  copper  aluminium,  and  zinc  slope 
upwards,  or  have  a  positive  sign  to  their  "  specific 
heat  of  electricity." 

According  to  this,  therefore,  the  discordant  metals 
are  zinc,  platinum,  and  magnesium.  The  proper 
thing  to  say  under  these  circumstances  is  that  the 
metals  used  in  the  very  different  experiments  were 
not  pure.  They  certainly  were  not  ;  but  I  do  not  feel 
able  to  conscientiously  bolster  up  so  inadequate  a 
theory  by  help  of  this  convenient  fact. 

In  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  May  1885,  Mr. 
Hall  gives  some  more  measurements,  showing  that  in 
bismuth  the  effect  is  enormous,  and  in  the  same  direc- 
tion as  in  copper,  whereas  in  antimony  it  is  also  great, 
and  in  the  same  direction  as  in  iron.  All  these  things 
seem  to  point  to  some  thermo-electric  connection— 
whether  it  be  of  the  sort  I  have  tried  to  indicate,  or 
some  other. 

Other  Outstanding  Problems 

184.  Outstanding  problems  bristle  all  over  the  sub- 
ject, and  if  I  pick  out  any  for  special  mention  it  will 
only  be  because  I  happen  to  have  made  some  experi- 
ments in  their  direction  myself,  or  otherwise  have  had 
my  thoughts  directed  to  them,  and  because  they  have 
not  been  so  directly  called  attention  to  in  the  body  of 
the  book. 


§  i8s  MOTION  THROUGH  ETHER  327 

Referring  back  to  §  66  at  the  end  of  Part  II.,  a  "  cur- 
rent regarded  as  a  moving  charge,"  it  is  natural  to  ask, 
Is  this  motion  to  be  absolute,  or  relative  to  the  ether 
only,  or  must  it  be  relative  to  the  indicating  magneto- 
meter ?  In  other  words,  if  a  charged  body  and  a  mag- 
netic needle  are  flying  through  space  together,  as,  for 
instance,  by  reason  of  the  orbital  motion  of  the  earth, 
will  the  needle  experience  any  deflecting  couple  ? 

It  is  one  of  many  problems  connected  with  the 
ether  and  its  motion  near  gross  matter — problems 
which  the  experiment  of  Fizeau  (showing  that  a 
variable  part  of  ether  was  bound  with  matter  and 
transmitted  with  it,  while  another  constant  portion 
was  free  and  blew  through  it)  began  to  throw  light 
upon  ;  aberration  problems  such  as  have  exercised 
the  genius  of  Sir  G.  G.  Stokes ;  problems  connected 
with  the  motion  of  ether  near  great  masses  of  matter 
like  those  which  Michelson  is  so  skilfully  attacking 
experimentally  ;  it  is  among  these  that  we  must 
probably  relegate  the  question  whether  absolute  or 
relative  motion  of  electric  charges  is  concerned  in  the 
production  of  magnetic  field,  and  what  absolute 
motion  through  the  ether  precisely  means.  It  is 
doubtless  a  question  capable  of  being  attacked 
experimentally,  but  the  experiments  will  be  very 
difficult  I  believe  that  Prof.  Ayrton  has  attempted 
one  of  them. 

185.  Referring  back  to  Parts  L,  II.,  and  I II.,  §§7, 


328  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS         CHAP,  xv 

39,  41,  48,  88,  89,  97,  98,  109,  122,  134,  we  find  a 
number  of  questions  regarding  momentum  left  un- 
settled. Has  an  electric  current  any  true  momentum 
mechanically  discoverable  ?  Now,  this  question,  before 
it  can  be  answered  in  the  negative,  will  have  to  be 
attacked  under  a  great  number  of  subdivisions.  One 
may  classify  them  thus.  Two  main  heads  :  (i)  When 
steady,  Does  a  magnet  behave  in  the  least  like  a 
gyrostat  ?  (2)  When  variable;  Is  there  a  slight 
mechanical  kick  on  starting  or  stopping  a  current  ? 
With  four  or  more  subsidiary  heads  under  each,  viz. 
(a)  in  metallic  conductors ;  (ft)  in  electrolytes  ;  (c)  in 
gases  ;  (//)  in  dielectrics. 

Suppose  the  answer  turns  out  negative  in  metals, 
it  by  no  means  follows  that  it  should  be  negative  in 
electrolytes  too.  In  fact,  as  matter  travels  with  the 
current  in  the  case  of  electrolytic  conduction  (§  36),  it 
is  hardly  possible  that  there  is  not  some  momentum, 
though  it  may  be  too  small  to  observe — either  a  kick 
of  the  vessel  as  a  whole  at  starting  and  stopping,  or 
a  continuous  impact  on  an  electrode  receiving  a 
deposit.  The  present  writer  has  looked  for  these 
things,  but  after  gradually  eliminating  a  number  of 
spurious  effects  the  result  has  been  so  far  negative. 
In  a  light  quill  vessel  fixed  to  the  end  of  a  torsion 
arm,  the  main  disturbance  was  due  to  variations  of 
temperature  which  gradually  introduced  a  minute  air- 
bubble,  and  by  kicking  this  backwards  and  forwards 


§  i86  EXPERIMENTS  ON  MOMENTUM  329 

simulated  the  effects  sought.  In  the  case  of  the  sus- 
pended electrode,  convection  currents  in  the  electro- 
lyte, caused  by  extra  concentration  or  the  reverse,  seem 
determined  to  mask  any  possible  effect. 

One  obvious  though  very  troublesome  source  of 
disturbance  in  all  cases  is  the  direct  effect  of  terrestrial 
magnetism  on  the  circuit.  To  get  over  this,  the  writer 
not  only  made  his  circuits  as  nearly  as  possible  of 
zero  area,  but  also  inclosed  them  in  the  iron  case  of  a 
Thomson  marine  galvanometer,  lent  for  the  purpose 
by  Dr.  Muirhead. 

In  gases,  the  experiment  of  Mr.  Crookes,  where  an 
electrical  stream  inside  a  vacuum-tube  propels  a  mill 
along  rails — perhaps  even  the  ancient  experiment  of 
the  blast  from  a  point — shows  that  momentum  is  by 
no  means  absent  from  an  electric  current  through  a 
gas  (§  64). 

To  see  if  there  are  any  momentum  effects  accom- 
panying variation  of  electric  displacement  in  dielec- 
trics, the  writer  has  suspended  a  mica-disk  condenser 
at  the  end  of  a  torsion  arm,  and  arranged  it  so  that 
it  could  be  charged  and  discharged  in  situ.  Many 
spurious  effects,  but  no  really  trustworthy  ones,  were 
observed. 

In  the  writer's  opinion  the  subject  is  by  no  means 
thoroughly  explored,  and  he  only  mentions  his  old 
attempts  as  a  possible  guide  to  future  experimenters. 

1 86.  Then,  again,  there  is  the  influence  of  light  on 


330  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

conductivity.  Annealed  selenium,  and  perhaps  a  few 
other  things,  improve  in  conductivity  enormously 
when  illuminated.  The  cause  of  this  is  unknown  at 
present,  and  whether  it  is  a  general  property  of 
matter,  possessed  by  metals  and  other  bodies  to  a 
slight  degree,  is  uncertain  ;  for  the  experiments  of 
Bornstein,  with  an  affirmative  result  for  the  case  of 
metals,  have  been  seriously  criticised. 

Even  though  metals  show  no  effect,  yet  electrolytes 
might  possibly  do  so,  but  the  effect,  if  any,  is  small  ; 
and  it  is  particularly  difficult  in  their  case  to  distinguish 
any  direct  radiation  effect  from  the  similar  effect  of 
mere  absorbed  radiation  or  heat. 

The  writer  has  found  that  a  glass  test-tube  kept 
immersed  in  boiling  water  conducted  distinctly  better 
when  the  blinds  of  a  room  were  raised  than  when 
they  were  lowered,  though  nothing  but  diffuse  daylight 
fell  upon  it.  But  as  the  effect  could  have  been  pro- 
duced by  a  rise  in  temperature  of  about  the  tenth  of 
a  degree,  and  as  the  absorption  of  diffuse  daylight  is 
competent  to  produce  a  rise  of  temperature  as  great 
as  this  in  the  glass  of  a  thermometer-bulb  even  though 
immersed  in  boiling  water,  he  feels  constrained  to 
regard  the  result,  though  very  clear  and  distinct,  as 
after  all  a  negative  one,  and  has  accordingly  not 
published  it. 

187.  The  fact  that  ultra-violet  waves  have  a  period 
of  vibration  synchronous  with  probable  electric  vibra- 


§  1 88       ACTIONS  OF  ULTRA-VIOLET  LIGHT          331 

tion  in  molecules  (§  157)  seems  to  cause  a  multitude 
of  consequences  now  being  discovered.  Hertz  noticed 
that  the  light  of  one  spark  influenced  another  at  a 
distance,  so  that  a  sparking  interval  was  virtually 
shortened  when  illuminated.  Wiedemann  and  Ebert 
have  further  investigated  this,  and  obtained  several 
interesting  results,  distinctly  proving  that  it  is  ultra- 
violet light  which  is  effective.  Hallwachs  has  dis- 
covered that  a  clean  metallic  plate  becomes  electrified 
when  light  falls  upon  it.  And  there  are  a  number  of 
other  similar  facts,  some  long  known,  some  recent, 
which  all  illustrate  the  molecular  effects  of  light.  It 
appears  probable  that  they  all  depend  on  some 
synchronized  disturbance  set  up  in  .the  air  or  other 
film  in  contact  with  the  substance,  a  disturbance  re- 
sulting in  some  kind  of  chemical  action  ;  and  hence 
that  these  physical  effects  are  of  the  same  order  as 
those  other  familiar  but  vaguely  grasped  facts  summed 
up  under  the  category  of  the  chemical  or  actinic 
power  of  light,  For  that  light  affects  silver  salts, 
ebonite,  hydrogen  and  chlorine,  &c.,  is  an  old  story. 
Some  progress  is  now  likely  to  be  made  in  ascertain- 
ing the  precise  mode  in  which  these  changes  occur 

(§  33). 

1 88.  A  few  months  ago  I  should  have  put  in  a 
prominent  position  among  outstanding  problems  the 
production  of  electric  radiation  of  moderate  wave- 
length, and  the  performance  with  this  radiation  of  all 


332  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

the  ordinary  optical  experiments — reflection,  refrac- 
tion,  interference,  diffraction,  polarization,  magnetic 
rotation,  and  the  like  (§  i).  But  a  great  part  of  this 
has  now  been  done,  and  so  these  things  come  to  be 
mentioned  under  a  different  heading : — 


Conclusion 

"  Conclusion  "  is  an  absurd  word  to  write  at  the 
present  time,  when  the  whole  subject  is  astir  with 
life,  and  when  every  month  seems  to  bring  out  some 
fresh  aspect,  to  develop  more  clearly  some  already 
glimpsed  truth.  The  only  proper  conclusion  to  a 
book  dealing  with  electricity  at  the  present  time  is 
to  herald  the  advent  of  the  very  latest  discoveries, 
and  to  prepare  the  minds  of  readers  for  more. 

189.  Referring  back  to  Chap.  XIV.,  to  §§  I  and  8, 
and  all  Part  IV.,  we  spoke  confidently  of  a  radiation 
being  excited  by  electric  oscillations,  a  radiation  which 
travelled  at  the  same  rate  as  light,  which  is  reflected 
and  refracted  according  to  the  same  laws,  and  which, 
in  fact,  is  identical  with  the  radiation  able  to  affect 
our  retina,  except  in  the  one  matter  of  wave-length. 
Such  a  radiation  has  now  been  definitely  obtained 
and  examined  by  Dr.  Hertz,  late  of  Karlsruhe,  now 
Professor  at  Bonn  ;  and  in  December,  1888,  Prof, 
von  Helmholtz  communicated  to  the  Physical  Society 
of  Berlin  an  account  of  Dr.  Hertz's  researches. 


§  1 89  PRODUCTION  OF  RADIATION  333 

The  step  in  advance  which  has  enabled  Dr.  Hertz 
to  do  easily  that  which  others  have  long  wished  to  do, 
has  been  the  invention  of  a  suitable  receiver.  Light 
when  it  falls  on  a  conductor  excites  first  electric 
currents  and  then  heat.  The  secondary  minute  effect 
was  what  we  had  thought  of  looking  for ;  but  Dr. 
Hertz  has  boldly  taken  the  bull  by  the  horns,  looked 
for  the  direct  electric  effect,  and  found  it  manifesting 
itself  in  the  beautifully  simple  form  of  microscopic 
sparks  across  a  gap  between  two  conductors,  or 
between  the  ends  of  a  looped  conductor. 

He  takes  a  brass  cylinder,  some  inch  or  two  in 
diameter,  and  a  foot  or  so  long,  divided  into  two 
halves  with  a  small  sparking  interval  between,  and 
connects  the  halves  to  the  terminals  of  a  small  induc- 
tion-coil ;  every  spark  of  the  coil  causes  a  charge  in 
the  cylinder  to  surge  to  and  fro  about  five  hundred 
million  times  a  second,  and  to  disturb  the  ether  in  a 
manner  precisely  equivalent  to  a  diverging  beam  of 
plane-polarized  light,  with  waves  about  thrice  the 
length  of  the  cylinder. 

The  radiation,  so  emitted,  can  be  reflected  by  plane 
conducting  surfaces,  and  can  be  concentrated  by 
metallic  parabolic  mirrors ;  the  mirror  ordinarily 
used  being  a  large  parabolic  cylinder  of  sheet  zinc, 
with  the  electric  oscillator  situate  along  its  focal  line. 
By  this  means  the  effect  of  the  wave  could  be  felt  at 
a  fair  distance,  the  receiver  consisting  of  a  synchro- 


334  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP.  XV 

nized  pair  of  straight  conductors  with  a  microscopic 
spark-gap  between  them,  across  which  the  secondary 
induced  sparks  were  watched  for.  By  using  a  second 
mirror  like  the  first  to  catch  the  parallel  rays  and 
reconverge  them  to  a  focus,  the  effect  could  be  ap- 
preciated at  a  distance  of  20  yards.  If  the  receiving 
mirror  were  rotated  through  a  right  angle,  it  lost  its 
converging  power  on  this  particular  light. 

Apertures  in  a  series  of  interposed  screens  proved 
that  the  radiation  travelled  in  straight  lines  (roughly 
speaking,  of  course). 

A  gridiron  of  metallic  wires  is  transparent  to  the 
waves  when  arranged  with  the  length  perpendicular 
to  the  electric  oscillations,  but  it  reflects  them  when 
rotated  through  a  right  angle,  so  that  the  oscillations 
take  place  along  the  conducting  wires ;  thus  repre- 
senting a  kind  of  analyzer  proving  the  existence  of  po- 
larized light.  The  receiver  itself  also  acted  as  analyzer, 
for  if  rotated  much  it  failed  to  feel  the  disturbance. 

Conducting  sheets,  even  thin  ones,  were  very 
opaque  to  the  electrical  radiation ;  but  non-con- 
ducting obstacles,  even  such  as  wood,  interrupt  it 
very  little,  and  Dr.  Hertz  remarks,  "  not  without 
wonder,"  that  the  door  separating  the  room  contain- 
ing the  source  of  radiation  from  that  containing 
the  detecting  receiver  might  be  shut  without  inter- 
cepting the  communication.  The  secondary  sparks 
were  still  observed. 


§  190  REFRACTION  OF  RADIATION  335 

But  the  most  crucial  test  yet  applied  is  that  of 
refraction.  A  great  prism'  of  pitch  was  made,  its 
faces  more  than  a  yard  square,  and  its  refracting 
angle  about  30°.  This  being  interposed  in  the  path 
of  the  electric  rays,  they  were  lost  to  the  receiver 
until  it  was  shifted  considerably.  Adjusting  it  till 
its  sparks  were  again  at  a  maximum,  it  was  found 
that  the  rays  had  been  bent  by  the  pitch  prism,  when 
set  symmetrically,  some  22°  out  of  their  original 
course,  and  hence  that  the  pitch  had  an  index  of 
refraction  for  these  2-foot  waves  about  17. 

190.  These  are  great  experiments.  When  the  first 
edition  of  this  book  was  written,  the  latest  of  them 
were  but  a  month  or  two  old,  and  they  are  still  only 
a  beginning.  Most  of  the  experiments  were  simple, 
and  had  already  been  repeated.1  They  seem  likely 
to  settle  many  doubtful  points.  There  has  been  a 
long-standing  controversy  in  optics,  nearly  as  old 
as  the  century,  as  to  whether  the  direction  of  the 
vibrations  was  in,  or  was  perpendicular  to,  the  plane 
of  polarization  ;  in  other  words,  whether  it  was  the 
elasticity  or  the  density  of  the  ether  which  varied  in 
dense  media  ;  or,  in  the  language  of  Maxwell's  theory, 
whether  it  was  the  electro-magnetic  or  the  electrosta- 
tic disturbance  that  coincided  with  that  plane.  This 

1  See  Fitzgerald  and  Trouton,  Nature,  Vol.  39,  p.  391  ;  also 
Dr.  Dragoumis,  Nature,  Vol.  39,  p.  548.  Also  Lodge  and  Howard, 
who  have  concentrated  the  radiation  by  a  suitable  lens  ;  Phil.  Mag. 
July  1889. 


336  ELECTRO-OPTIC  EFFECTS          CHAP,  xv 

point  has  indeed  by  the  exertion  of  extraordinary 
power  been  almost  settled  already,  through  the  con- 
sideration of  common  optical  experiments  ;  but  now 
that  we  are  able  electrically  to  produce  radiation  with 
a  full  knowledge  of  what  we  are  doing,  of  its  direc- 
tions of  vibration  and  all  about  it,  the  complete 
solution  of  this  and  of  many  another  recondite 
optical  problem  may  be  expected  during  the  next 
decade  to  drop  simply  and  easily  into  our  hands. 
(See  page  353.) 

We  have  now  a  real  undulatory  theory  of  light,  no 
longer  based  on  analogy  with  sound,  and  its  inception 
and  early  development  are  among  the  most  tremendous 
of  the  many  achievements  of  the  latter  half  of  the 
nineteenth  century. 

In  1865,  Maxwell  stated  his  theory  of  light.  Before 
the  close  of  1888  it  is  utterly  and  completely  verified. 
Its  full  development  is  only  a  question  of  time,  and 
labour,  and  skill.  The  whole  domain  of  Optics  is  now 
annexed  to  Electricity,  which  has  thus  become  an 
imperial  science. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

RECENT     PROGRESS 

191.  THUS  far  in  the  first  edition.  Since  then  much 
has  been  written  concerning  Hertz's  experiments  and 
the  consequences  deducible  from  them.1  A  brief 
account  of  the  essential  principles  involved  may  be 
here  suitable. 

The  discovery  of  Hertz,  which  made  all  the  rest 
possible,  was  the  fact  that  sparks  could  be  excited  in 
properly  arranged  conductors  exposed  to  the  electric 
radiation  from  an  alternate  current  generator  of 
sufficient  rapidity.  The  oscillatory  character  of  a 
Leyden  jar  discharge  was  referred  to  in  §  19,  and 
again  in  §  124  ;  and  the  easiest  way  of  displaying  the 
spark-producing  power  of  electric  radiation  is  the 
plan  I  described  in  Nature  of  February  20,  1890,  with 
the  following  diagram  (Fig.  54). 

1  For  instance,  a  set  of  three  articles  by  Prof.   Fitzgerald  in  Nature, 
vol.  xliii.  p.  536,  and  vol.  xliv.  pp.  12  and  31. 

Z 


338 


RECEIVERS 


CHAP.  XVI 


Two  similar  Leyden  jars  are  connected  up  to  cir- 
cuits of  equal  size  ;  but  so  that,  while  the  circuit  of  A 
is  interrupted  by  a  spark  gap,  that  of  B  is  complete, 
the  B  circuit  being  conveniently  adjustable  in  size,  till 
it  corresponds  with  the  other,  by  means  of  a  slider,  S. 

If,  now,  A  is  charged  and  discharged  in  the  ordinary 
way,  the  oscillations  at  every  discharge  disturb  the 
circuit  of  the  jar  B,  exciting  in  it  similar  but  feebler 
electric  oscillations.  If  the  two  jars  and  their  circuits 


FIG.  54. — A  couple  of  Leyden  jars  arranged  so  that  a  discharge  in  one  causes  the 

other  short-circuited  one  to  overflow  along  the  easy  tinfoil  path,  c . 

(See  Lodge  in  Nature,  vol.  xli.  p.  368.     See  also  §  194.) 

are  properly  synchronized,  as  can  be  done  by  shifting 
the  slider  S  to  and  fro,  the  oscillations  in  B  may  be 
sufficiently  violent  to  make  it  overflow.  It  cannot  be 
expected  to  overflow  its  lip,  unless  this  happens  to  be 
very  much  shallower  than  usual ;  but  a  little  tinfoil 
strip,  c,  pasted  on  the  glass,  and  reaching  over  from  the 
inner  coating  till  it  nearly  touches  the  outer  coating, 
provides  an  easy  overflow  path,  of  which  the  disturb- 
ance readily  makes  use.  Accordingly,  when  the  two 
circuits  [are  arranged  with  their  planes  parallel,  and 


§  193  SYNTONY  339 

their  distance  not  more  than  two  or  three  times 
their  diameter,  a  bright  little  spark  at  the  air-gap  of 
the  overflow  path  on  the  jar  B  can  be  seen  at  every 
discharge  of  the  jar  A. 

A  slight  motion  of  the  slider  either  way  usually 
suffices  to  throw  the  jars  out  of  tune,  and  to  stop  the 
effect. 

192.  The  phenomenon  is  commonly  spoken  of  as 
illustrating  electric   "  resonance,"  which   it    certainly 
does  very  well,  for  the  discharge  of  such  a  jar  has  many 
oscillations  per  spark,  and  accordingly  there  is  oppor- 
tunity for  "  beats,"  and  destruction  of  incipient  effect, 
unless  the  tuning  is  pretty  exact ;  but  the  name  "reson- 
ance "  is  too  suggestive  of  some  acoustic  reverberation 
phenomenon  to  be  very  expressive.     It  is  at  present 
commonly  used  to  express  the  sympathetic  response 
of  similarly  tuned  or  timed  vibrators  in  general,   but 
even  when  thus  used  in  acoustics  it  hardly  conveys 
this   meaning,    except   by    reason   of    habit.       The 
essential  thing  to  be  connoted  is  the  synchronizing  of 
the  vibration-period  of  two  things,   and   this  is  well 
expressed  by  the  adjective  "  syntonic,"  which  has  been 
suggested  for  the  purpose  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers.     That 
which  has  been  styled  resonance  I  propose,  therefore, 
in  future,  to  call  "  syntony." 

193.  The  alternations  in  the  case  of  a  circuit  like  this 
are  what  it  is  now  customary  to  call  moderately  quick 
— for  instance,  about  a  million  per  second.     It  is  easy 

Z  3 


340  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

to  get  them  either  slower  or  quicker.  To  get  them 
quicker  the  wire  part  of  the  circuit  may  be  diminished 
in  length,  and  the  coatings  of  the  jar  may  be  diminished 
in  size  and  removed  to  a  greater  distance  from  each 
other. 

The  figures  in  the  diagram  below  show  the  gradual 
transition  from  a  Leyden  jar  to  a  Hertz  oscillator  as 
ordinarily  made  :  the  smaller  and  dumpier  the  arrange- 
ment the  quicker  will  be  its  frequency  of  vibration. 
It  is  easy  to  make  one  to  emit  waves  only  a  yard  long, 


FIG.  55. — Showing  the  relationship  between  Hertz  oscillator  and  Leyden  jar. 

in  which  case  its  charge  vibrates  at  the  rate  of  three 
hundred  million  times  a  second.  Quicker  vibrators 
still  can  be  obtained  by  using  spheres.  One  sphere 
is  sufficient,  but  sometimes  several  equal  ones  give  a 
stronger  effect ; l  and  I  have  succeeded  in  working 
with  a  sphere  two  inches  in  diameter,  which  vibrates 
twelve  or  thirteen  times  as  rapidly  as  the  one  just 
mentioned  above.  But  it  is  not  feasible  at  present 

1  See  Nature,  vol.  xli.  p.  462,  March  1890.     See  also  Fig.  64  below. 


§  194 


HERTZ  VIBRATORS 


341 


to  produce  recognizable  vibrations  of  any  such  rate 
as  a  billion  per  second  ;  whereas  to  affect  the  retina 
they  must  be  at  least  400  billions  per  second.1 

194.  Failing  the  retina,  the  principle  of  syntony 
enables  waves  to  be  detected  :  the  "  electric  eye " 
being  some  conductor  with  the  same  rate  of  vibration. 
It  maybe  alike  in  all  respects,  but  usually  there  is  a 
difference  between  sender  and  receiver.  For  instance, 
in  Fig.  54,  the  circuit  of  the  sender  has  a  spark-gap 


-00- 


FIG.  56. 

in  it,  but  the  circuit  of  the  receiver  must  be  closed, 
else  the  feeble  beginnings  of  electric  surgings  which 
are  to  be  worked  up  by  properly  timed  impulses  can- 
not occur.  It  is  useless,  therefore,  to  use  as  receiver  a 
Leyden  jar  arranged  like  A.  The  Leyden  jar  B  must 
have  its  circuit  carefully  completed,  and  a  side  dis- 

1  A  seconds  pendulum  beats  a  million  times  in  twelve  days  ;  or  a  thou- 
sand million  times  in  thirty  years.  A  tuning  fork  sounding  a  note  two 
octaves  above  middle  C  (one  thousand  a  second)  in  thirty  years  vibrates 
a  billion  times.  Hence  before  such  a  fork  can  execute  the  number  of 
vibrations  which  are  achieved  in  one  second  by  dull  red  light  a  period  of 
twelve  thousand  years  must  elapse. 


342  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

turbance  or  overflow  must  be  utilized  as  indication 
of  the  induced  effect. 

Some  forms  of  Hertz  oscillators,  and  methods  for 
emitting  from  them  a  parallel  beam,  are  shown  in 
figures  56  to  58. 

The  circle  in  Fig.  57  represents  primarily  a  magnetic 
receiver ;  for  it  is  best  held  so  that  the  magnetic 
oscillation  occurs  along  its  axis,  i.e.  perpendicular  to 
its  plane,  and  then  sparklets  or  scintillae  may  occur 
across  its  microscopic  air-gap. 


FIG.  57- 

If  the  circle  be  turned  so  that  the  line  joining  its 
knobs  is  parallel  to  the  electric  force,  this  also  can  ex- 
cite sparks  ;  for  it  may  be  then  regarded  as  a  branched 
conductor,  with  one  branch  interrupted,  and  therefore 
ineffective.  But  as  an  explorer  of  electric  force  a 
linear  receiver  is  simpler  and  is  preferable.  I  commonly 
used  a  pair  of  stiff  wires,  each  half  a  wave-length  long, 
supported  end  to  end  on  a  long  bar  of  mahogany, 
with  their  near  ends  pointed,  and  one  of  them 
movable  in  the  direction  of  its  length  by  a  screw 


194 


RECEIVERS 


343 


operating  on  it  through  a  glass 
tube.  With  the  wood  near  the 
points  blackened  arid  otherwise 
shaded  from  light,  excessively 
minute  sparks  can  be  seen 
(Fig.  58). 

A  bulkier  but  more  demon- 
strative receiver  is  an  arrange- 
ment exactly  like  the  oscillator, 
as  in  Fig.  56,  but  with  an  entire 
metal  rod  connecting  the  plates 
instead  of  one  interrupted  by 
knobs.  Oscillations  begin  and 
increase  in  this  under  the  opera- 
tion of  syntony  or  resonance, 
and  the  consequent  sparking  or 
overflow  can  be  detected  by 
holding  a  penknife  or  other 
point  to  either  of  the  plates. 

A  receiver  exactly  like  an 
oscillator,  with  spark-gap  in 
same  position,  really  answers 
very  fairly  ;  but  it  must  be  re- 
sponding to  a  subordinate  oscil- 
lation, chiefly  one  in  each  half 
of  the  emitter ;  or  else  is  not 
really  syntonic.  Precise  tuning 
is  never  very  important  in  these 


344 


RECENT  PROGRESS 


CHAP.  XVI 


short-waved  vibrators,  because  their  rate  of  damping 
is  so  enormous.  With  greater  capacity,  as  in  the 
Leyden  jars  of  page  338,  tuning  is  essential. 

195.  Sometimes  as  oscillator  I  used  a  simple  sphere, 
sparked  to  on  either  side  by  knobs  connected  with  an 


70  C.     > 


Emitter.     Side  elevation. 


Receiver. 


Plan. 

FIG.  59.— Small  Hertz  vibrator  and  receiver,  arranged  in  focus  of  parabolic  mirror  for 
emission  and  reception  of  parallel  beam. 


induction  coil  ;  and  a  precisely  similar  sphere  acted  as 
receiver,  a  penknife  being  held  to  it  or  lightly  dragged 
over  it  at  the  end  of  the  proper  diameter.  The 
arrangement  was  unexpectedly  sensitive,  and  affords 
very  short  waves  (Fig.  64). 

At  a  distance,  it  is  easier  to  detect  the  radiation 


§195 


ELECTRIC  EYES 


345 


from  a  large  vibrator,  i.e.  one  possessing  an  extensive 
field,  because  of  the  greater  initial  energy  electrostatic- 


FIG.  60. — Lodge's  Electric  Retina — a  set  of  copper  cylinders  40  centims.  long, 
diameters  14,  13,  12,   n,  10,  9  centims.  ;  facing  a  source  of  radiation,  as 

w !„ I '       .1    _  ji    ___         j- i          j*  .11..  «i 


j,  and  of 

..    „ .— , „  ,  -s  do  the 

rods  and  cones  m  the  eye,  and  responding  by  diametral  electric  vibration  to  the 
appropriate  frequency.     Nature,  vol.  41,  p.  462  ;  cf.  also  p.  296  above. 

ally  stored  before  a  discharge  begins,  and  because 
of  its  sort  of  "  sounding-board  "  action  ;  but  there  is 
no  particular  advantage  in  a  great  length  of  spark, 


I 


i 


FIG.  61. — Robinson's  electric  harp,  responding  to  vibrations  through  a  considerable 
range  of  wave-length.  Only  a  few  of  the  tinfoil  strips  are  shown.  There  are 
really  fifty-  one  of  them,  closely  packed  together.  Their  length  varies  from  about 
30  centims.  to  i  centim.  The  scintillae  occur  at  the  razor-cuts  marked  S.  The 
slant  line  of  large  gaps  is  simply  to  terminate  the  strips  in  a  graduated  series. 

for  its  resistance  wastes  energy.     Half  an  inch  or  less 
is  usually  about  the  best  length. 

The  smaller  the  oscillator,  the  more  polished  must 


RECENT  PROGRESS 


CHAP.  XVI 


be  the  knobs,  else  the  requisite  suddenness  of  start- 
ing will  not  be  attained.  Excessively  sudden  dis- 
turbances are  necessary  to  excite  waves  in  such  rapidly 
vibrating  things.  Else,  as  when  a  beer-barrel  is  care- 
fully tilted,  the  potential  has  time  to  equalize  itself 


FIG.  62. — Small  oscillator,  drawn  to  scale  J,  used  for  experiments  with  the  pitch  lens. 
(Lodge  and  Howard,  Phil.  Mag.,  July,  1889.)  Rate  of  vibration,  300  million 
per  second. 

leisurely,  and  no  waves  are  caused.  Ultra-violet 
light  falling  on  either  knob,  especially  on  the  cathode, 
is  to  be  avoided,  for  it  enables  the  spark  to  occur 
too  easily,  and  apparently  with  a  less  sudden  break- 
down. Anything  of  the  nature  of  an  electric  brush 


•o  o- 


FIG.  63. — Gigantic  oscillator,  drawn  to  scale  jta.for  violent  and  distant  effects.  When 
this  is  excited  by  very  large  coil,  most  gas  and  water  pipes  in  the  buildingj  and 
some  wire  fencing  also,  give  off  sparks  to  conductors  brought  close  to  them  or  to 
each  other.  (Lodge,  "  Lightning  Conductors.")  Rate  of  vibration,  10  million  per 
second.  Average  radiation  activity,  while  it  lasts,  64  horse-power. 

glow  is  especially  deadly  ;  and  that  is  one  reason,  I 
think,  why  a  Voss  or  Wimshurst  machine  is  usually 
less  effective  than  a  coil  ;  even  if  it  be  able  to  give  as 
many  sparks  per  second.  The  quality  of  the  spark  at 
the  oscillator  is  very  important,  and  is  exceedingly 
capricious.  Some  days  it  declines  to  emit  any  reason- 


§i96 


RADIATION  FROM  SPHERES 


347 


able  amount  of  radiation,  and  on  other  days  the 
receiver  responds  at  surprising  distances.  Practice, 
however,  tends  to  reduce  these  caprices,  and  there  is 


0== 


FIG.  64. — Arrangement  for  triple-sourced  radiation  from  six-inch  spheres  ;  suitable  for 
exciting  the  electric  retina,  Fig.  60.     (Nature,  vol.  xli.  page  462.) 

seldom  any  difficulty  in  working  with  a  good-sized 
oscillator,  such  as  one  with  foot-disks  a  yard  apart. 


Process  of  Radiation. 

196.  Consider  now  in  more  detail  what  is  happening. 
To  and  fro  round  the  circuit  of  the  jar  A  (Fig.  54)  an 
electric  current  alternates,  charging  up  the  coatings 
with  alternately  plus  and  minus  charges.  As  a  result 


348  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

of  this  electric  current,  a  magnetic  oscillation  is  going 
on  along  the  axis  of  the  circuit,  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  diagram  ;  and  this  it  is  which  may  be 
thought  of  as  disturbing  the  ether  at  a  distance.  It 
is,  in  fact,  primarily  a  magnetic  oscillator,  and  it 
excites  induced  currents  in  the  ordinary  way.  But  it 
does  more  than  that ;  for  it  throws  off  true  waves, 
which  do  not  return  to  it,  but  convey  its  energy  out 
into  space. 

A  linear  vibrator,  as  No.  3  in  Fig.  55,  may  be  called 
primarily  an  electric  oscillator,  for  the  electric  surg- 
ings  from  one  end  to  the  other  and  back  are  the  pro- 
minent feature.  Its  ends  are  alternately  positive  and 
negative  at  the  end  of  each  half-swing  ;  and  thence 
arises  the  electric  strain  which  is  felt  by  the  surround- 
ing ether.  In  mid-swing  there  is  no  electrostatic 
strain,  but  there  is  a  linear  current  which  exerts 
magnetic  influence  all  round  itself,  causing  circular 
lines  of  magnetic  force  surrounding  the  conductor. 

Ring  vibrators,  such  as  No.  I,  Fig.  55,  or  such 
as  Fig.  57,  only  cause  electric  disturbance  as  a 
secondary  consequence  of  the  magnetic  oscillations 
along  their  axis  ;  which  is  their  primary  effect.  Linear 
oscillators  excite  primarily  an  electric  oscillation.  But 
in  neither  case  do  the  two  occur  simultaneously  ;  one 
lags  a  quarter-period  behind  the  other  in  time,  just  as 
the  maximum  velocity  and  maximum  excursion  of  a 
simple  pendulum  differ  by  a  quarter-period. 


§  196  PROCESS  OF  RADIATION  349 

This  lag  is,  however,  strange  to  say,  very  soon  made 
up  or  compensated  by  reason  of  a  start  in  space. 
The  magnetic  disturbance  being  considered  to  start 
at  the  oscillator,  the  electric  starts  a  quarter  of  a  wave- 
length in  advance  ;  and  accordingly,  though  it  occurs  a 
quarter-period  later,  the  two  travel  together  every- 
where except  within  the  first  quarter  wave-length. 
They  are  not,  indeed,  coincident,  because  they  occur 
in  planes  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  but  their 
maxima  and  zeros  agree  in  position.  If  one  is 
likened  to  a  series  of  crests  and  troughs,  the  other  is 
that  same  series  rotated  through  a  right  angle. 

But  within  the  first  quarter  wave-length  all  this  is 
different.  The  electric  and  magnetic  forces  there 
sometimes  agree  in  phase  and  sometimes  differ,  one 
being  occasionally  even  opposite  in  sign  to  the 
other. 

This  fact  has  important  though  not  obvious  conse- 
quences. In  a  varying  electro-magnetic  field,  energy 
flows,  as  Poynting  showed,  in  a  direction  determined 
by  the  direction  of  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces  ; 
it  flows  at  right  angles  to  both  of  them,  and  is 
reversed  in  direction  if  either  of  them  is  reversed 
in  sign.  Now,  within  the  first  quarter  wave-length 
from  an  oscillator,  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces 
sometimes  have  the  same  sign  and  sometimes  opposite 
sign  ;  hence  the  energy  there  oscillates  to  and  fro ; 
more,  indeed,  travels  outward  than  returns,  but 


350 


RECENT  PROGRESS 


CHAP.  XVI 


some   returns,  and  assists   in    maintaining   the   next 
oscillation.1 


V 


l\ 
'    "*•*, 


6     \ 


\ 


6    \ 


3         \ 


7 


.    FIG.  65. — Diagram  of  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces  concerned  in  radiation. 
(Drawn  by  Mr.  Trouton,  see  NATURE,  vol.  xlii.  p   172.) 

Beyond  the  first  quarter  wave-length,  however,  the 
magnetic  and  electric  forces  wax  and  wane  together  ; 

1  Hertz's   own   treatment  of  the  theory  of  these  actions,  with   fulj 
diagrams,  will  be  found  in  Natitre,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  451. 


§  196  EMISSION  OF  ENERGY  351 

neither  is  ever  reversed  without  the  other,  and  conse- 
quently the  flux  of  energy  there  is  steadily  outward  : 
no  more  returns,  but  all  travels  out  into  space  as 
radiation. 

Whether  it  be  much  or  little  that  thus  travels  out 
is  a  question  of  wave-length.  With  long  waves  the 
point  of  departure,  or  origin  of  radiation,  is  a  long  way 
from  the  vibrator,  and  accordingly  the  disturbance 
there  is  but  slight.  Most  of  the  energy  in  that  case 
returns  to  the  oscillator,  whose  rate  of  damping  will 
be  controlled  only  by  resistance  and  the  production 
of  local  heat.  Thus  a  commercial  alternator,  with 
frequency  100  per  second,  emits  waves  3,000  kilo- 
metres (about  2,000  miles)  long.  Consequently,  the 
radius  where  its  energy  begins  to  radiate  away  is 
something  like  the  distance  of  the  Shetlands  from 
London ;  and  accordingly  no  appreciable  loss  of 
energy  is  due  to  uncompensated  emission  of  waves. 
But  a  small  Hertz  vibrator,  whose  wave-length  is  a 
few  feet,  radiates  powerfully — more  powerfully  than 
sunshine,  for  instance,  while  it  lasts  ;  and  the  rapid 
dying  out  of  its  vibrations  is  due  almost  entirely  to 
this  cause. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  effective  source  of 
the  emitted  radiation  is  not  at  the  oscillator  itself, 
but  at  a  quarter- wave-length  in  advance  of  it.  If  it 
be  assumed  to  start  at  the  oscillator,  the  light  will 
seem  to  travel  too  quickly  ;  and  this  Hertz  found  to  be 


352  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

the  case.  It  travels  with  a  quarter-wave-length  start, 
and  so  its  phase  at  any  distance  is  a  quarter-period 
more  than  would  have  been  expected. 

The  fact  that  there  was  this  sort  of  quarter-wave 
acceleration  of  phase  in  ordinary  light  was  discovered 
mathematically  by  Sir  George  Stokes,1  and  had 
become  an  accepted  part  of  optics ;  the  reason  of 
it,  in  Maxwell's  electric  theory,  is  now  clear. 

Direction  of  Vibration. 

197.  The  electric  disturbance  emitted  by  a  linear 
oscillator,  like  that  in  Fig.  62,  occurs  parallel  to  the 
axis  of  the  oscillator ;  the  magnetic  force  is  at  right 
angles  to  it ;  and  the  direction  of  flow  of  energy,  or  ray, 
is  out  from  the  oscillator,  perpendicular  to  both  the 
electric  and  magnetic  disturbances.  Since  the  direc- 
tion of  vibration  is  thus  definite,  the  beam  is  what  is 
spoken  of  in  optics  as  "polarized";  though  whether 
the  vibration  retains  its  precision  unimpaired  to  great 
distances  may  be  uncertain. 

An  important  experiment  on  radiation  thus  obtained 
has  been  made  by  Mr.  Trouton,  in  Prof.  Fitzgerald's 
laboratory,  Dublin,2  to  ascertain  which  is  the  plane 
of  polarization  when  a  non-conducting,  i.e.  transparent, 

1  Dynamical  Theory  of  Diffraction,  1849  ;  Stoke1  s  Papers,  vol.   ii. 
pp.  280,  321. 

2  See  lecture  by  Prof.  Fitzgerald  at  the  Royal  Institution,  March  21, 
1890,  reported  in  Nature,  vol.  xlii.  p.    172.      See  also  Mr.  Trouton  in 
Natiire,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  391. 


§  197  DIRECTION  OF  VIBRATION  353 

obstacle  is  interposed  in  the  beam  at  appropriate 
obliquity,  tan"1  //,.  It  is  found  that  if,  under  these 
circumstances,  the  plane  of  incidence  is  arranged  to 
coincide  with  the  direction  of  the  electric  disturbance, 
none  of  the  radiation  is  reflected  ;  whereas,  if  the 
magnetic  disturbance  is  in  the  plane  of  incidence,  a 
portion  of  the  radiation  is  reflected.  Now,  Fresnel — 
who  was,  of  course,  unacquainted  with  the  fact  that 
there  are  two  distinct  kinds  of  vibration  to  be 
attended  to,  and  who  treated  light  as  if  it  were  a 
mechanical  disturbance  in  an  elastic  solid — surmised 
that  the  direction  of  vibration  of  light  reflected  at  the 
polarizing  angle  from  a  transparent  substance  was 
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  incidence  at  which  it 
was  reflected.  Hence  we  see  that  the  disturbance 
contemplated  by  Fresnel  corresponds  to*  the  electric 
disturbance  ;  whereas  the  vibration  contemplated  in 
the  opposition  theory  advanced  by  McCullagh  cor- 
responds to  the  magnetic  disturbance. 

Thus  Maxwell's  theory  that  the  magnetic  force  is 
in  the  plane  of  polarization  is  directly  verified. 

In  some  cases,  as  in  the  action  of  light  on  chemicals, 
diffraction  by  small  particles,  and  so  on,  the  electric 
oscillation  is  the  more  efficient  of  the  two  ;  and  it 
turns  out  to  be  this  which  has  been  properly  treated 
as  the  direction  of  vibration  by  Stokes  and  others, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  elastic  solid  theory. 

When  trying  the  experiment  on  reflection  at  the 

A  A 


354  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

polarizing  angle,  it  was  found  that  no  thin  plate  such 
as  a  slab  of  glass  would  give  any  reflection,  the  reason 
being  that  its  two  surfaces  are  so  close  together  that 
reflection  from  one  masked  by  interference  reflection 
from  the  other  ;  just  as  happens  in  the  black  spot  of 
Newton's  rings.  But  by  using  as  reflector  a  wall 
3  feet  thick  the  surfaces  were  further  separated  ;  and 
the  transparency  being  imperfect,  reflection  from  the 
back  surface  would  be  much  weakened,  so  that  un- 
interrupted reflection  from  the  front  surface  could  be 
dealt  with  ;  and  this  it  was  which  varied  with  the  angle 
of  incidence  and  with  the  direction  of  vibration 
relatively  to  the  plane  of  incidence. 

Mr.  Trouton  has  tried  a  number  of  other  inter- 
ference experiments1  imitating  Newton's  rings,  &c., 
and  has  obtained  some  diffraction  phenomena  when 
a  reflector  was  smaller  than  a  wave-length  in  size  : 
obtaining  results  analogous  to  Stokes's  "  experi- 
mentum  crucis  "  with  respect  to  direction  of  vibration. 

The  readiest  way  in  which  I  obtained  interference 
effects  was  when  using  a  spherical  oscillator,  a  metal 
sphere  about  6  inches  in  diameter  supported  by  a 
glass  rod  2  feet  high  on  a  teak  table  :  one  of  those  in 
Fig.  64.  The  receiver  being  a  precisely  similar  sphere, 
it  was  found  to  respond  at  certain  distances  along  the 
table  and  not  at  others  ;  and  moving  it  steadily  and 
gradually  towards  the  oscillator  from  a  distance  of  12 

1  See  Naittre,  vol.  xl.  p.  398  ;  also  Phil.  Mag.,  July,  1891. 


§  197  VACUUM  RECEIVERS  355 

feet,  a  succession  of  silences,  or  at  least  minima,  were 
observed.  On  measuring  the  positions  of  these,  they 
were  found  to  correspond  well  with  a  difference  in  path 
amounting  to  one,  three,  and  five,  half  wave-lengths, 
between  the  source  and  its  image  in  the  table. 

The  radiation  from  a  sphere  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
purer  tone,  more  monochromatic,  than  the  radiation 
from  a  dumbbell-shaped  conductor  with  a  spark-gap 
in  the  middle  of  it.  I  prefer,  as  a  rule,  to  have  the 
spark-gap  beyond  the  oscillator,  instead  of  in  the 
middle  of  it,  and  to  depend  on  oscillations  excited 
in  a  regularly-shaped  conducting  body  when  thus 
suddenly  supplied  with  an  electric  charge. 

Other  Receivers  or  Detectors  of  Radiation. 

Since  Hertz's  discovery  that  little  sparks  could  be 
excited  in  a  conductor  exposed  to  electric  radiation, 
various  other  methods  of  detecting  radiation  have 
been  devised.  Dr.  Dragoumis,  working  in  my 
laboratory,  has  used  vacuum  tubes,  and  has  shown 
that  they  glow  in  the  oscillating  field  near  an 
electric  vibrator  without  being  attached  to  wires  or 
any  form  of  conductor;1  also  that  they  furnish 
a  fairly  convenient  means  of  displaying  Hertz's 
experiment  to  a  small  audience  when  attached  to  an 
ordinary  syntonized  receiver.  They  are  not  bright 

1  Nature,  vol.  xxxix.  p.  548. 

A   A   2 


356  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

enough  to  be  visible  far  away,  nor  except  in  a  dark 
room  ;  but  when  they  contain  some  of  Mr.  Crookcs's 
phosphorescent  powders  they  are  very  fairly  bright. 
The  brightest  I  possess  is  one  sent  me  in  1889 
by  Dr.  Lenard,  from  Heidelberg,  containing  strontic 
sulphide  rendered  impure  with  calcic  fluoride  and  a 
trace  of  copper,  which  last  impurity  seems  necessary 
to  the  brilliant  glow.1  I  estimate  the  light  when  its 
terminals  are  attached  to  the  terminals  of  a  small  coil 
as  about  half  a  candle,  and  I  have  been  accustomed 
to  exhibit  it  to  my  class  as  possibly  the  embryo  of 
the  light  of  the  future. 

Mr.  Crookes  has  long  been  working  at  the  subject 
of  phosphorescence  with  this  idea  in  view ;  and  recently 
M.  Nikola  Tesla  has  delighted  every  one  by  con- 
structing alternating  dynamos  of  extraordinarily  high 
frequency,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  means  of 
maintaining  electric  oscillations,  and  thereby  making 
vacuum  tubes  and  other  bodies  glow  with  consider- 
ably greater  brightness,  sometimes  connected  with, 
sometimes  disconnected  from,  the  source,  but  always 
subject  to  rapid  electric  oscillations. 

The  oscillations  maintained  by  M.  Tesla's  dynamos 
must  at  present  be  considered  "  slow,"  for  they  do 
not,  I  believe,  rise  to  a  hundred  thousand  per  second  ; 
but  they  are  vastly  quicker  than  any  which  have  been 

1  Wied.  Ann.,  xxxviii.  p.  90  ;  abstract  in  Phil.  Mag.,  November, 
1889,  p.  428. 


§  197  POWER  OF  RADIATION  357 

steadily  maintained  before.  The  Leyden  jar  and  Hertz 
vibrations,  of  millions  or  thousands  of  millions  per 
second,  do  not  last  an  appreciable  instant  of  time. 
Three  or  four,  or  at  most  a  dozen,  vibrations,  and 
they  are  done.  The  intervals  for  refreshment  bear  an 
appalling  proportion  to  the  moments  of  activity,  even 
when  hundreds  of  sparks  are  excited  per  second  ;  hence 
it  is  that  any  illumination  or  other  effect  that  they  can 
produce  is  so  feeble.  To  maintain  them  at  their 
maximum  intensity  would  indeed  demand  a  good 
many  horse-power  ;  but  the  effects  then  obtainable 
would  be  prodigious.1 

Another  mode  of  detecting  electric  radiation  is  by 
its  heating  effects.  The  late  Mr.  Gregory,  of  Cooper's 
Hill,  constructed  a  very  delicate  arrangement  of  a 
fine  wire  attached  to  a  spiral  shaving  and  mirror, 
whereby  extremely  minute  changes  of  length  were 
translated  into  perceptible  rotations.  This  receiver, 
held  in  an  oscillating  field  with  its  length  parallel  to 
the  direction  of  the  electric  disturbance,  was  heated 
by  the  electric  currents  induced  in  it,  and  produced 
a  measurable  deflection  of  a  beam  of  light.  Mr. 
Gregory's  hope  was  with  such  an  instrument  to  make 
a  series  of  metrical  determinations  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  a  Hertz  oscillator  ;  but  the  difficulty  of 

1  The  power  of  tropical  sunshine  (by  which  I  mean  sunshine  at  the 
earth's  distance,  but  unaffected  by  the  British  climate,  natural  or  artificial) 
is  about  2  horse-power  per  square  yard. 


358  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

obtaining  consistent  results  lies  at  present  not  in  the 
receiver,  which  seems  well  enough  adapted  for  the 
purpose,  but  in  the  capricious  behaviour  of  the  spark 
at  the  emitter.  If  every  spark  could  be  depended  on 
as  being  like  every  other,  many  difficulties  and  distrac- 
tions, at  present  inseparable  from  the  experimental 
investigation  of  electric  radiation,  would  cease. 

Another  thermal  method  has  been  recently  tried 
by  several  experimenters,  viz.  the  interposition  of  a 
thermal  junction  in  the  thin  wire  receiver.  This  is 
heated  by  the  induced  currents,  and  can  be  connected 
with  a  galvanometer. 

For  making  the  effects  merely  visible  at  a  distance, 
perhaps  the  best  method  is  that  discovered  by  Prof. 
Fitzgerald,  who  found  that,  if  the  two  halves  of  an 
ordinary  Hertz  receiver  were  connected  with  a 
delicate  fine  wire  galvanometer,  its  needle  was 
disturbed  whenever  the  little  scintillae  ordinarily 
depended  on  occurred. 

Similarly,  Mr.  Blyth,  of  Glasgow,  has  used  a 
quadrant  electrometer  in  the  same  sort  of  way  ;  while 
Prof.  Boltzmann  makes  the  little  spark  effect  moment- 
ary contact  between  a  charged  jar  and  an  electroscope, 
and  thus  display  itself. 

The  effect  observed  by  Fitzgerald  depends  on  the 
induced  electrostatic  charging  of  the  plates  of  the 
receiver  connected  through  the  galvanometer  wire. 
If  there  is  no  spark,  their  charge  and  discharge 


§  197  FITZGERALD  RECEIVER  359 

quantities  both  pass  through  the  galvanometer,  and 
produce  no  effect ;  but,  if  they  spark,  the  charge  alone 
passes  through  it,  and  causes  a  minute  effect 

I  found  something  apparently  of  the  same  sort 
in  some  experiments  on  lighting  guards.  When 
the  knobs  of  the  guard  were  exceedingly  close 
together,  and  were  used  to  protect  a  galvano- 
meter, that  galvanometer  was  liable  to  capricious 
disturbance  whenever  sparks  passed  across  the 
microscopic  air-gap.  If  the  air-gap  was  too  big,  there 
was  nothing  ;  and  if  it  was  too  small,  i.e.  zero,  there 
was  nothing  ;  but  when  just  short  of  zero  there  was 
a  very  pronounced  effect,  and  sometimes  the  jaws 
of  the  gap  were  found  afterwards  to  be  feebly  at  a 
single  point  cohering. 

This  suggested  a  sort  of  thermal  junction — a 
heat  pimple  ;  and  Prof.  Hughes  tells  me  he  once 
observed  the  same  effect  and  came  to  this  con- 
clusion. But  I  now  doubt  its  being  thermal, 
I  rather  surmise  it  is  a  chemical  effect ;  due,  perhaps, 
to  the  momentary  dissociation  of  the  air  molecules  in 
a  spark  discovered  by  Schuster,  or  to  the  unequal 
oxidation  of  the  two  poles. 

The  fact  that  the  light  of  phosphorescence — such 
light  as  that  of  the  glow-worm,  for  instance — is  far 
more  economical  than  any  other  known  kind  of  lumin- 
escence (in  other  words,  consists  wholly  of  the  kinds 
able  to  affect  the  retina,  and  of  little  else,  as  mentioned 


360  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

in  §  151)  has  now  been  directly  ascertained  by  Prof. 
Langley,  of  the  Smithsonian  Institute,  Washington.1 

He  has  examined  the  spectrum  of  a  firefly  with  his 
bolometer,  and  found  that  the  whole  intensity  of  radia- 
tion is  concentrated  in  its  visible  portion  ;  while  of 
infra-red  or  ultra-violet  rays  there  is  hardly  a  trace. 
It  is,  perhaps,  rather  singular  that  the  eyes  of  fire- 
flies, to  which  this  light  is  of  course  intended  to 
appeal,  should  thus  prove  to  respond  to  just  the 
same  wave-lengths  as  do  ours.  Without  this  fact  it 
would  have  been  rash  to  assert  that  other  animals 
might  not  often  be  emitting  radiation,  unperceived 
by  us,  but  visible  enough  to  them.  The  observation 
of  Prof.  Langley,  although  it  does  not  of  course 
negative  this  possibility,  yet  seems  to  me  to  render  it 
improbable,  and  to  suggest  that  the  molecular  struc- 
tures adapted  to  respond  to  light  in  animal  tissues  are 
fairly  definite,  and  not  susceptible  of  variety. 

The  structure  susceptible  to  light  in  vegetable 
economy  also  responds  to  much  the  same  range  of 
vibration  ;  for  plants  are  injured  by  ultra-violet  light 
of  too  high  an  order,  such  as  is  given  by  the  electric 
arc,  and  I  believe  that  chlorophyll  is  not  known  to 
be  affected  by  infra-red  rays.  The  range  of  vision 
of  Algae  and  other  subaqueous  vegetation  has  not,  I 
think,  yet  been  ascertained. 

1  Langley  and  Very,  ' '  On  the  Cheapest  Form  of  Light,  from  Studies 
at  the  Allegheny  Observatory,"  Phil.  Mag.,  September,  1890,  p.  278. 


§  197  OPACITY  AND  WAVE-LENGTH  361 


Opacity. 

The  possibility  of  experimenting  with  radiations  of 
great  variety  of  wave-length  throws  a  new  meaning 
on  the  subject  of  opacity.  It  is  well  known  that  thin 
layers  of  anything,  even  gold  if  thin  enough,  will 
transmit  some  light,  but  that  in  sufficient  thickness 
most  things  become  opaque. 

Opacity  however,  on  Maxwell's  theory,  ought  to 
depend,  not  only  on  the  nature  of  the  medium,  but  also 
on  the  frequency  of  vibration  of  the  light  which  is 
trying  to  penetrate  it.  For  the  quenching  takes  place 
after  a  certain  number  of  vibrations,  and  not  instan- 
taneously. Suppose  a  substance  so  opaque  as  to 
destroy  or  reflect  the  greater  part  of  an  incident 
beam  in  the  course  of  three  vibrations,  it  must  de- 
pend entirely  on  the  wave-length  of  those  vibrations 
how  great  a  thickness  is  needed  to  be  effectively 
opaque.  If  the  waves  are  each  the  hundred- 
thousandth  of  an  inch  in  length,  like  ordinary  light,  a 
mere  film  is  sufficient.  If  the  waves  are  each  a  foot 
long,  then  a  wall  a  yard  thick  would  be  necessary. 
And  if  the  wave-lengths  are  reckoned  in  miles,  no 
practicable  thickness  will  stop  them. 

So  it  is  experimentally  found. 

Hertz  waves  can  get  through  deal  doors  and  stone 


362  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

walls — not,  of  course,  without  some  loss, — but  they  are 
stopped  dead  by  a  copper  plate,  or  even  by  tinfoil. 
I  am  unable  to  detect  them  on  the  other  side  of 
paper  covered  with  Dutch  metal.  But  a  coating  of 
plumbago  lets  them  partially  through.  Very  long 
waves,  such  as  are  emitted  by  an  electro-magnet  fed 
with  an  ordinary  alternating  current,  can  get  through 
not  only  walls  and  buildings,  but  through  sheet 
copper ;  though  again  not  without  some  loss.  And 
if  the  copper  be  thick  enough,  not  very  much 
will  get  through.  A  perfect  conductor,  if  such  a 
thing  existed,  would  reflect  everything,  however 
thin  it  might  be.  Still  slower  waves,  such  as  are 
generated  by  slowly  waving  a  magnet  about,  can  get 
through  copper  of  any  reasonable  thickness,  and 
affect  compass  needles  on  the  other  side.  But  the 
more  rapidly  the  magnet  moves,  the  more  will  its 
effect  be  screened  ;  and  the  best  way  of  showing  the 
experiment  is  not  to  move  the  magnet,  but  the 
copper.  Sir  W.  Thomson  has  inclosed  a  fixed 
magnet  in  a  thick  copper  box,  and  shown  that  when 
the  box  is  rapidly  revolved,  a  compass  needle  outside 
is  much  less  deflected  than  when  it  is  stationary.1 

M.  Pictet  at  Berlin  has  recently  ascertained  that 
screens  are  singularly  transparent  to  the  "  heat  "  radia- 
tion emitted  by  bodies  200  Centigrade  degrees  below 
zero. 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.,  vol.  xlix.  p.  422. 


§  197  LIGHT  FORCE  363 

Thus  there  are  all  possible  gradations  of  opacity, 
depending  on  the  frequency  of  the  incident  vibration. 
To  very  long  waves  almost  everything  is  transparent. 
To  very  short  waves  almost  everything  is  opaque. 


Pressure  of  Light. 

Maxwell  predicted  that  light  falling  upon  a  reflect- 
ing metallic  surface  must  repel  it  or  press  upon  it  with 
a  minute  but  calculable  force.  Thus  tropical  sun- 
shine falling  normally  on  a  square  centimetre  of 
silver  must  press  on  it  with  about  the  ten-thousandth 
part  of  a  dyne  :  that  being  about  the  force  needed  to 
reverse  the  tide  of  energy.  The  pressure  of  sunlight 
on  the  whole  earth  amounts  to  about  100,000  tons 
weight.  On  a  small  enough  dust  particle  in  a  comet's 
tail  the  solar  radiation  could  overpower  the  solar 
gravitative  attraction.1 

This  effect,  though  looked  for  by  Mr.  Crookes,  has 
not  been  yet  detected  with  ordinary  light,  because  it 
is  altogether  masked  by  the  far  greater  effect  of  the 
air  molecules,  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of,  however 
good  the  so-called  vacuum  be  made.  Mr.  Crookes, 
however,  was  fortunate  enough  to  discover  this  mole- 
cular effect,  and  to  invent  the -radiometer.  If  the  direct 

1  Note  by  the  writer  at  Cardiff;  reported  briefly  in  Nattire,  vol.  xliv. 
p.  454.  I  find  that  Prof.  Fitzgerald  had  discussed  the  same  thing 
before  (Proc.  Roy.  Dub.  Soc.,  May,  1882). 


364  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

Jight  effect  is  ever  to  be  seen,  it  must  be  looked  for 
with  a  very  bright  surface.  Black  surfaces  get 
heated,  and  then  are  beaten  back  by  rebounding 
molecules. 

But  there  is  no  real  need  to  trouble  much  about 
the  detection  of  the  direct  light  effect,  because,  by 
using  longer  waves,  it  is  very  conspicuous. 

It  is,  indeed,  essentially  nothing  else  than  the  fact 
discovered  by  Faraday  as  to  the  odd  behaviour  of 
metallic  masses  near  the  pole  of  a  magnet :  the 
effect  described  and  illustrated  in  Fig.  28,  p.  177. 

A  copper  disk  held  near  a  magnet  fed  by  an  alternat- 
ing current  is  repelled  by  reason  of  the  currents  induced 
in  it,  and  their  reaction  on  the  field.  That  is  precisely 
why  light  exerts  pressure  on  a  conducting  surface. 
It  induces  currents  in  it,  and  then  repels  them  because 
it  disagrees  with  them  in  phase.  The  repulsion  of  a 
disk  near  an  alternating  magnet  is  not,  indeed,  a  steady 
or  one-directioned  effect ;  there  may  be  moments  of 
attraction,  but  on  the  whole  there  is  distinct  balance 
of  repulsion,  and  repulsion  alone  is  observed  if  the 
alternations  are  rapid  and  sinuously  regular. 

The  strength  of  the  alternating  currents  now  readily 
available  has  enabled  Prof.  Elihu  Thomson  to  throw 
this  kind  of  repulsion  into  various  striking  forms, 
making  it  support  rings,  rotate  spheres,  and  exert 
forces  expressible  in  pounds  weight. 


§  197  MAINTENANCE  OF  VIBRATION  365 


Future  Experiments. 

Experiments  on  optical  "  dispersion,"  with  a  view 
of  understanding  the  mechanism  of  the  process,  and 
affording  information  concerning  the  interaction  of 
material  atoms  and  the  ether  in  which  they  are  em- 
bedded, have  not  at  present,  so  far  as  I  know,  been 
made.  But  Fitzgerald  and  Trouton  have  suggested 
filling  pitch  or  paraffin  with  bullets,  or  some  such  plan, 
and  studying  the  behaviour  of  a  prism  of  it  to 
Hertz  waves  of  assorted  wave-lengths  not  enormously 
greater  than  the  size  of  the  metallic  balls  embedded 
in  the  transparent  substance. 

They  have  also  many  instructive  ideas  on  the  sub- 
ject of  maintaining  an  electrical  vibration  of  a  high 
degree  of  frequency,1  without  those  disastrous  intervals 
of  darkness,  or  silence,  or  rest,  which  at  present  exist 
between  one  spark  and  the  next :  intervals  which  are 
to  the  time  of  one  vibration  as  a  year  is  to  a  minute. 
You  cannot  expect  to  make  much  impression  on  the 
universe  by  a  performance,  however  brilliant,  of  five 
minutes'  duration  repeated  once  a  year. 

Progress  towards  the  direct  manufacture  of  light, 
suggested  in  §§  149—151,  is  thus  apparently  going 
on  in  two  different  directions.  One  is  by  the  at- 
tempt to  construct  mechanism  or  discover  principles 

1  e.g.  abstract  in  Nature,  vol.  xlv.  p.  358. 


366  RECENT  PROGRESS  CHAP,  xvi 

able  to  cause  and  maintain  electric  oscillations  of  the 
desired  frequency  ;  the  other  is  to  depend  on  the 
properties  of  certain  molecules  disturbed  and  thrown 
into  vibrations  by  comparatively  slow  electric  oscilla- 
tions and  being  thus  caused  to  phosphoresce. 

This  last  may  seem  a  short  cut  to  the  desired 
result,  but  it  has  rather  too  strong  a  family  likeness 
to  the  present  blindfold  method  of  coaxing  molecules 
to  radiate,  viz.  by  jogging  them  with  heat,  to  be  quite 
satisfactory.  The  direct  maintenance  method  may  lie 
dormant  longer,  and  be  far  from  the  achievement  of 
success,  but  it  seems  to  have  a  deeper  comprehension 
of  actual  conditions  latent  within  it. 

This  latter  method  fails  at  present  from  insufficient 
frequency  ;  the  phosphorescence  method  fails  at  pre- 
sent from  insufficient  intensity. 


APPENDED    LECTURES 

(The  following  lectures  bearing  on  the  subject  of  this  book 
are  here  conveniently  appended.  In  one  or  two  places  the 
date  of  their  delivery  umst  be  taken  into  account?) 


LECTURE  I 

THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  ELECTRICITY  AND 
LIGHT1 

EVER  since  the  subject  on  which  I  have  the  honour 
to  speak  to  you  to-night  was  arranged,  I  have*  been 
astonished  at  my  own  audacity  in  proposing  to  deal 
in  the  course  of  sixty  minutes  with  a  subject  so 
gigantic  and  so  profound  that  a  course  of  sixty 
lectures  would  be  inadequate  for  its  thorough  and 
exhaustive  treatment. 

I  must  indeed  confine  myself  carefully  to  some  few 
of  the  typical  and  most  salient  points  in  the  relation 
between  electricity  and  light,  and  I  must  economize 
time  by  plunging  at  once  into  the  middle  of  the 
matter  without  further  preliminaries. 

Now  when  a  person  is  setting  off  to  discuss  the 
relation  between  electricity  and  light  it  is  very  natural 
and  very  proper  to  pull  him  up  short  with  the  two 

1  Delivered  at  the  London  Institution  on  December  16,  1880. 

B  B 


370  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  i 

questions  :  What  do  you  mean  by  electricity  ?  and 
What  do  you  mean  by  light  ?  These  two  questions  I 
intend  to  try  briefly  to  answer.  And  here  let  me 
observe  that  in  answering  these  fundamental  questions 
I  do  not  necessarily  assume  a  fundamental  ignorance 
on  your  part  of  these  two  agents,  but  rather  the 
contrary  ;  and  must  beg  you  to  remember  that  if 
I  repeat  well-known  and  simple  experiments  before 
you,  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  directing  attention  to 
their  real  meaning  and  significance,  not  to  their  obvious 
and  superficial  characteristics :  in  the  same  way  that 
I  might  repeat  the  exceedingly  familiar  experiment 
of  dropping  a  stone  to  the  earth  if  we  were  going  to 
define  what  we  meant  by  gravitation. 

Now  then  we  will  ask  first,  What  is  Electricity  ? 
and  the  simple  answer  must  be,  We  don't  know.  Well, 
but  this  need  not  necessarily  be  depressing.  If  the 
same  question  were  asked  about  Matter,  or  about 
Energy,  we  should  have  likewise  to  reply,  No  one 
knows. 

But  then  the  term  Matter  is  a  very  general  one, 
and  so  is  the  term  Energy.  They  are  heads,  in  fact, 
under  which  we  classify  more  special  phenomena. 

Thus  if  we  were  asked  What  is  sulphur  ?  or  What 
is  selenium  ?  we  should  at  least  be  able  to  reply,  A 
form  of  matter  ;  and  then  proceed  to  describe  its  pro- 
perties, z>.  how  it  affected  our  bodies  and  other  bodies. 

Again,  to  the  question,  What  is  heat  ?  we  can  reply, 


LECT.  I  WHAT  IS  ELECTRICITY?  371 

A  form  of  energy  ;  and  proceed  to  describe  the 
peculiarities  which  distinguish  it  from  other  forms 
of  energy. 

But  to  the  question,  What  is  electricity  ?  we  have 
no  answer  pat  like  this.  We  cannot  assert  that  it  is 
a  form  of  matter,  neither  can  we  deny  it ;  on  the 
other  hand,  we  certainly  cannot  assert  that  it  is  a  form 
of  energy,  and  I  should  be  disposed  to  deny  it.  It 
may  be  that  electricity  is  an  entity  per  se,  just  as 
matter  is  an  entity  per  se. 

Nevertheless  I  can  tell  you  what  I  mean  by 
electricity  by  appealing  to  its  known  behaviour. 

Here  is  a  battery—  that  is,  an  electricity  pump :  it 
will  drive  electricity  along.  Prof.  Ayrton  is  going, 
I  am  afraid,  to  tell  you,  on  the  2Oth  of  January  next, 
that  \\.  produces  electricity  ;  but  if  he  does,  I  hope  you 
will  remember  that  that  is  exactly  what  neither  it  nor 
anything  else  can  do.  It  is  as  impossible  to  generate 
electricity  in  the  sense  I  am  trying  to  give  the  word, 
as  it  is  to  produce  matter.  Of  course  I  need  hardly 
say  that  Prof.  Ayrton  knows  this  perfectly  well ;  it  is 
merely  a  question  of  words,  i.e.  of  what  you  understand 
by  the  word  electricity.1 

1  Or  rather  of  what  one  understands  by  the  word  "  produces."  The 
title  of  Prof.  Ayrton's  lecture 'was  "The  Production  of  Electricity"  ; 
and  it  was  to  guard  persons  from  supposing  that  it  is  right  to  speak 
of  the  generation  or  creation  of  electricity  in  the  same  way  as  it  is 
possible  to  speak  of  the  generation  or  creation  (or,  as  it  is  often  called, 
"production  ")  of  heat,  that  I  gave  this  caution. 

B  B  2 


372  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

I  want  you  then  to  regard  this  battery  and  all 
electrical  machines  and  batteries  as  kinds  of  electricity 
pumps,  which  drive  the  electricity  along  through  the 
wire  very  much  as  a  water-pump  can  drive  water  along 
pipes,  and  that  no  electric  machine  can  manufacture 
electricity  any  more  than  a  pump  can  manufacture 
water.  While  the  flow  of  electricity  is  going  on,  the 
wire  manifests  a  whole  series  of  properties,  which  are 
called  the  properties  of  the  current. 

[Here  were  shown  an  ignited  platinum  wire,  the 
electric  arc  between  two  carbons,  an  electric  machine 
spark,  an  induction-coil  spark,  and  a  vacuum  tube 
glow.  Also  a  large  nail  was  magnetized  by  being 
wrapped  in  the  current,  and  two  helices  were  sus- 
pended and  seen  to  direct  and  attract  each  other.] 

To  make  a  magnet,  then,  we  only  need  a  current  of 
electricity  flowing  round  and  round  in  a  whirl.  A 
vortex  or  whirlpool  of  electricity  is  in  fact  a  magnet ; 
and  vice  versa.  And  these  whirls  have  the  power  of 
directing  and  attracting  other  previously  existing 
whirls  according  to  certain  laws,  called  the  laws  of 
magnetism.  And,  moreover,  they  have  the  power  of 
exciting  fresh  whirls  in  neighbouring  conductors,  and 
of  repelling  them  according  to  the  laws  of  dia- 
magnetism.  The  theory  of  the  actions  is  known  ; 
though  the  nature  of  the  whirls,  as  of  the  simple 
stream  of  electricity,  is  at  present  unknown. 

[Here  was  shown   a  large  electro-magnet  and  an 


LECT.  I  WHAT  IS  LIGHT?  373 

induction-coil  vacuum  discharge  spinning  round   and 
round  when  placed  in  its  field  (Fig.  24).] 

So  much  for  what  happens  when  electricity  is  made 
to  travel'along  conductors,  i.e.  when  it  travels  along 
like  a  stream  of  water  in  a  pipe,  or  spins  round  and 
round  like  a  whirlpool. 

But  there  is  another  set  of  phenomena,  usually  re- 
garded  as  distinct  and   of  another  order,  but  which 
are  not  so  distinct  as   they  appear,  which   manifest 
themselves  when  you  join  the  pump  to  a  piece  of  glass 
or  any  non-conductor  and  try  to  force  the  electricity 
through  that.     You  succeed  in  driving  some  through, 
but  the  flow  is  no  longer  like  that  of  water  in  an  open 
pipe  ;  it  is  as  if  the  pipe  were   completely  obstructed 
by  a  number  of   elastic  partitions,    or    diaphragms. 
The  water  cannot  move  without  straining  and  bending 
these  diaphragms,  and  if  you  allow  it,  these  strained 
partitions  will  recover  themselves  and  drive  the  water 
back   again.     [Here  was    explained    the    process    of 
charging  a  Leyden  jar,  and  the  model  (Fig.  1 1  page  64 
was  shown.]      The  essential   thing    to    remember  is 
that  we  may  have  electrical    energy  in    two    forms, 
the  static  and  the  kinetic  ;    and  it  is  therefore  also 
possible  to   have  the  rapid   alternation  from   one  of 
those  forms  to  the  other,  called  vibration. 

Now  we  will  pass  to  the  second  question  :  What 
do  you  mean  by  light  ?  And  the  first  and  obvious 
answer  is,  Everybody  knows.  And  everybody  that  is 


374  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

not  blind  does  know  to  a  certain  extent.  We  have  a 
special  sense-organ  for  appreciating  light,  whereas  we 
have  none  for  electricity.  Nevertheless,  we  must  ad- 
mit that  we  really  know  very  little  about  the  intimate 
nature  of  light — very  little  more  than  about  electricity. 
But  we  do  know  this,  that  light  is  a  form  of  energy  ; 
and,  moreover,  that  it  is  energy  rapidly  alternating 
between  the  static  and  the  kinetic  forms — that  it  is,  in 
fact,  a  special  kind  of  energy  of  vibration.  We  are  ab- 
solutely certain  that  light  is  a  periodic  disturbance  in 
some  medium,  periodic  both  in  space  and  time  ;  that  is 
to  say,  the  same  appearances  regularly  recur  at  certain 
equal  intervals  of  distance  at  the  same  time,  and  also 
present  themselves  at  equal  intervals  of  time  at  the 
same  place  ;  that  in  fact  it  belongs  to  the  class  of 
motions  called  by  mathematicians  undulatory  or  wave 
motions. 

The  wave  motion  in  this  model  (Powell's  wave  ap- 
paratus) results  from  the  simple  up-and-down  motion 
popularly  associated  with  the  term  wave.  But  when 
a  mathematician  calls  a  thing  a  wave  he  means  that 
the  disturbance  is  represented  by  a  certain  general 
type  of  formula,  not  that  it  is  an  up-and-down  motion, 
or  that  it  looks  at  all  like  those  things  on  the  top  of 
the  sea.  The  motion  of  the  surface  of  the  sea  falls 
within  that  formula,  and  hence  is  a  special  variety  of 
wave  motion,  and  the  term  wave  has  acquired  in 
popular  use  this  signification  and  nothing  else.  So 


LECT.  1  WHAT  ARE  WAVES  ?  375 

that  when  one  speaks  ordinarily  of  a  wave  or  undula- 
tory  motion  one  immediately  thinks  of  something 
heaving  up  and  down,  or  even  perhaps  of  something 
breaking  on  the  shore.  But  when  we  assert  that  the 
form  of  energy  called  light  is  undulatory,  we  by  no 
means  intend  to  assert  that  anything  whatever  is 
moving  up  and  down,  or  that  the  motion,  if  we  could 
see  it,  would  be  anything  at  all  like  what  we  are 
accustomed  to  in  the  ocean.  The  kind  of  motion  is 
unknown  ;  we  are  not  even  sure  that  there  is  anything 
like  motion  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  at  all. 

Now  how  much  connection  between  electricity  and 
light  have  we  perceived  in  this  glance  into  their 
natures  ?  Not  much  truly.  It  amounts  to  about  this  : 
That  on  the  one  hand  electrical  energy  may  exist  in 
either  of  two  forms — the  static  form,  when  insulators 
are  electrically  strained  by  having  had  electricity 
driven  partially  through  them  (as  in  the  Leyden  jar), 
which  strain  is  a  form  of  energy  because  of  the 
tendency  to  discharge  and  do  work  ;  and  the  kinetic 
form,  where  electricity  is  moving  bodily  along  through 
conductors  or  whirling  round  and  round  inside  them, 
which  motion  of  electricity  is  a  form  of  energy, 
because  the  conductors  and  whirls  can  attract  or  repel 
each  other  and  thereby  do  work. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  that  light  is  the  rapid  alter- 
nation of  energy  from  one  form  to  another — from  the 
static  form  where  the  medium  is  strained,  to  the 


376  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

kinetic  form  where  it  moves.  It  is  just  conceivable 
then  that  the  static  form  of  the  energy  of  light  is 
electro-static — that  is,  that  the  medium  is  electrically 
strained — and  that  the  kinetic  form  of  the  energy  of 
light  is  electro-kinetic — that  is,  that  the  motion  is  not 
ordinary  motion,  but  electrical  motion  ;  in  fact  that 
light  is  an  electrical  vibration,  not  a  material  one. 

On  November  5  last  year  there  died  at  Cambridge 
a  man  in  the  full  vigour  of  his  faculties— such  faculties 
as  do  not  appear  many  times  in  a  century — whose 
chief  work  has  been  the  establishment  of  this  very 
fact,  the  discovery  of  the  link  connecting  light  and 
electricity  ;  and  the  proof— for  I  believe  it  amounts  to 
a  proof — that  they  are  different  manifestations  of  one 
and  the  same  class  of  phenomena :  that  light  is,  in 
fact,  an  electro-magnetic  disturbance.  The  premature 
death  of  James  Clerk  Maxwell  is  a  loss  to  science 
which  appears  at  present  utterly  irreparable,  for  he 
was  engaged  in  researches  that  no  other  man  can  hope 
as  yet  adequately  to  grasp  and  follow  out :  but  for- 
tunately it  did  not  occur  till  he  had  published  his 
book  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  one  of  those 
immortal  productions  which  exalt  one's  idea  of  the 
mind  of  man,  and  which  has  been  mentioned 
by  competent  critics  in  the  same  breath  as  the 
Principia  itself. 

But  it  is  not  perfect  like  the  Principia ;  much 
of  it  is  rough-hewn,  and  requires  to  be  thoroughly 


LECT.  I       ELECTRICAL  THEORY  OF  LIGHT  377 

worked  out.  It  contains  numerous  misprints  and 
errata,  and  part  of  the  second  volume  is  so  difficult 
as  to  be  almost  unintelligible.  Some,  in  fact,  con- 
sists of  notes  written  for  private  use,  and  not 
prepared  for  publication.  It  seems  next  to  im- 
possible now  to  mature  a  work  silently  for  twenty 
or  thirty  years,  as  was  done  by  Newton  two  and  a 
half  centuries  ago.  But  a  second  edition  was  pre- 
paring, and  much  might  have  been  improved  in  form 
if  life  had  been  spared  to  the  illustrious  author. 

The  main  proof  of  the  electro-magnetic  theory  of 
light  is  this.  The  rate  at  which  light  travels  has  been 
measured  many  times,  and  is  pretty  well  known. 
The  rate  at  which  an  electro-magnetic  wave  disturb- 
ance would  travel,  if  such  could  be  generated,  can  be 
also  determined  by  calculation  from  electrical  measure- 
ments. The  two  velocities  agree  exactly.  This  is 
the  great  physical  constant  known  as  the 'ratio  "  v" 
which  so  many  physicists  have  been  measuring,  and  are 
likely  to  be  measuring  for  some  time  to  come  (§  138). 

Many  and  brilliant  as  were  Maxwell's  discoveries, 
"  not  only  in  electricity,  but  also  in  the  theory  of  the 
nature  of  gases,  and  in  molecular  science  generally,  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  if  one  of  them  is  more 
striking  and  more  full  of  future  significance  than  the 
rest,  it  is  the  one  I  have  just  mentioned — the  theory 
that  light  is  an  electrical  phenomenon. 


378  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  i 

The  first  glimpse  of  this  splendid  generalization 
was  caught  in  1845,  five  and  thirty  years  ago,  by  that 
prince  of  pure  experimentalists,  Michael  Faraday. 
His  reasons  for  suspecting  some  connection  between 
electricity  and  light  are  not  clear  to  us — in  fact  they 
could  not  have  been  clear  to  him  ;  but  he  seems  to 
have  felt  a  conviction  that  if  he  only  tried  long  enough, 
and  sent  all  kinds  of  rays  of  light  in  all  possible 
directions  across  electric  and  magnetic  fields  in  all 
sorts  of  media,  he  must  ultimately  hit  upon  some- 
thing. Well,  this  is  very  nearly  what  he  did.  With 
a  sublime  patience  and  perseverance  which  remind 
one  of  the  way  Kepler  hunted  down  guess  after 
guess  in  a  different  field  of  research,  Faraday  com- 
bined electricity,  or  magnetism,  and  light  in  all  manner 
of  ways,  and  at  last  he  was  rewarded  with  a  result. 
And  a  most  out-of-the-way  result  it  seemed.  First 
you  have  to  get  a  most  powerful  magnet  and  very 
strongly  excite  it  ;  then  you  have  to  pierce  its  two 
poles  with  holes,  in  order  that  a  beam  of  light  may 
travel  from  one  to  the  other  along  the  lines  of  force  ; 
then,  as  ordinary  light  is  no  good,  you  must  get  a 
beam  of  plane-polarized  light  and  send  it  between  the 
poles.  But  still  no  result  is  obtained  until,  finally,  you 
interpose  a  piece  of  a  rare  and  out-of-the-way  material 
which  Faraday  had  himself  discovered  and  made,  a  kind 
of  glass  which  contains  borate  of  lead,  and  which  is  very 
heavy,  or  dense,  and  which  must  be  perfectly  annealed. 


LECT.  i  FARADAY'S  DISCOVERY  379 

And  now,  when  all  these  arrangements  are 
completed,  what  is  seen  is  simply  this,  that  if  an 
analyser  is  arranged  to  stop  the  light  and  make  the 
field  quite  dark  before  the  magnet  is  excited  then 
directly  the  battery  is  connected  and  the  magnet 
called  into  action  a  faint  and  barely  perceptible 
brightening  of  the  field  occurs  ;  which  will  disappear 
if  the  analyzer  be  slightly  rotated.  [The  experiment 
was  then  shown.]  Now  no  wonder  that  no  one  under- 
stood this  result.  Faraday  himself  did  not  under- 
stand it  at  all  :  he  seems  to  have  thought  that  the 
magnetic  lines  of  force  were  rendered  luminous,  or 
that  the  light  was  magnetized  ;  in  fact  he  was  in  a  fog, 
and  had  no  idea  of  its  real  significance.  Nor  had 
anyone.  Continental  philosophers  experienced  some 
difficulty  and  several  failures  before  they  were  able  to 
repeat  the  experiment.  It  was  in  fact  discovered  too 
soon,  before  the  scientific  world  was  ready  to  receive  it, 
and  it  was  reserved  for  Sir  William  Thomson  briefly 
but  very  clearly  to  point  out,  and  for  Clerk  Maxwell 
more  fully  to  develop,  its  most  important  consequences. 

[The  principle  of  the  experiment  was  then  illus- 
trated by  the  aid  of  a  mechanical  model.  The 
model  was  a  Wheatstone  photometer  consisting  of 
one  cogged  circle  rolling  inside  a  fixed  outer  circle 
of  twice  the  diameter,  so  that  a  bead  attached  to  the 
inner  one  described  some  ellipse.  An  extra  adjust- 
ment was  provided  whereby  the  bead  could  be  set 


380  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

exactly  over  the  circumference  of  the  smaller  wheel  : 
it  then  describes  a  straight  line,  a  diameter  of  the 
large  circle,  with  a  simple  harmonic  motion  ;  and  this 
simple  harmonic  motion  is  actually  compounded  of 
two  equal  opposite  circular  motions,  viz.  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  centre  of  the  smaller  wheel,  and  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  bead  about  this  moving  centre  in  an 
opposite  direction  and  at  the  same  speed. 

The  whole  instrument  was  mounted  in  such  a  wray 
that  it  could  be  slowly  rotated  one  way  or  other 
by  a  second  handle  and  endless  screw  ;  by  this  means 
one  of  these  circular  motions  was  accelerated  and  the 
other  retarded,  and  as  a  consequence  the  path  of  the 
oscillating  bead  slowly  rotated,  describing  a  more 
complicated  hypocycloid,  and  representing  the  rota- 
tion of  the  direction  of  vibration  of  light  (§  172).] 

This  is  the  fundamental  experiment  which  probably 
suggested  Clerk  Maxwell's  theory  of  light ;  but  of  late 
years  many  fresh  facts  and  relations  between  electricity 
and  light  have  been  discovered,  and  at  the  present 
time  they  are  tumbling  in  in  great  numbers. 

It  was  found  by  Faraday  that  many  other  trans- 
parent media  besides  heavy  glass  would  show  the 
phenomenon  if  placed  between  the  poles  :  only  in  a 
less  degree  ;  and  the  very  important  observation  that 
air  itself  exhibits  the  same  phenomenon,  though  to  an 
exceedingly  small  extent,has  just  been  made  by  Kundt 
and  Rontgen  in  Germany. 


LECT.-l  KERR'S  DISCOVERY  381 

Dr.  Kerr,  of  Glasgow,  has  extended  the  result  to 
opaque  bodies,  and  has  shown  that  if  light  be  passed 
through  magnetized  iron  its  plane  is  rotated.  The  film 
of  iron  must  be  exceedingly  thin,  because  of  its  opacity, 
and  hence,  though  the  intrinsic  rotating  power  of  iron 
is  undoubtedly  very  great,  the  observed  rotation  is 
exceedingly  small  and  difficult  to  observe  ;  and  it  is 
only  by  very  remarkable  patience  and  care  and  in- 
genuity that  Dr.  Kerr  has  obtained  his  result.  Mr. 
Fitzgerald,  of  Dublin,  has  examined  the  question 
mathematically,  and  has  shown  that  Maxwell's  theory 
would  have  enabled  Dr.  Kerr's  result  to  be  predicted. 

Another  requirement  of  the  theory  is  that  bodies 
which  are  transparent  to  light  must  be  insulators  or 
non-conductors  of  electricity,  and  that  conductors  of 
electricity  are  necessarily  opaque  to  light.  Simple 
observation  amply  confirms  this  ;  metals  are  the  best 
conductors,  and  are  the  most  opaque  bodies  known. 
Insulators  such  as  glass  and  crystals  are  transparent 
whenever  they  are  sufficiently  homogeneous  ;  and  the 
very  remarkable  researches  of  Prof.  Graham  Bell  in 
the  last  few  months  have  shown  that  even  ebonite,  one 
of  the  most  opaque  insulators  to  ordinary  vision,  is 
certainly  transparent  to  some  kinds  of  radiation,  and 
transparent  to  no  small  degree. 

[The  reason  why  transparent  bodies  must  insulate, 
and  why  conductors  must  be  opaque,  was  here 
illustrated  by  mechanical  models. 


382  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

The  model  which  represented  a  dielectric  has  already 
been  depicted  in  Fig.  8  ;  and  when  the  cord  thread- 
ing all  the  elastically  supported  balls  is  vibrated, 
waves  travel  readily  through  it. 

The  model  which  represented  a  metallic  conductor 
is  shown  here  in  Fig.  66.  It  has  its  wooden  balls 
sliding  on  smooth  brass  rods  so  that  they  have  no 
tendency  to  recoil  to  a  settled  position,  but  remain 
where  placed.  On  shaking  the  cord  connecting  these 


FIG.   66. — Rude  model  to  pair  with  Fig.  8  (p.  48)  and  to  call  attention  to  some  of 
the  differences  between  a  metal  and  an  insulator. 


balls  the  waves  penetrate  a  certain  small  depth  into 
the  medium  but  fail  to  get  through  it. 

The  two  models  were  connected  in  series,  and 
waves  which  had  been  transmitted  along  the  cord  by 
one  were  partly  quenched,  partly  reflected,  by  the 
other.] 

A  further  consequence  of  the  theory  is  that  the 
velocity  of  light  in  a  transparent  medium  will  be 
affected  by  its  electrical  strain  constant  ;  in  other 
words,  that  its  refractive  index  will  bear  some  close 


LECT.  I      ELECTRICAL  EFFECTS  OF  LIGHT  383 

but  not  yet  quite  ascertained  relation  to  its  specific 
inductive  capacity.  Experiment  has  partially  con- 
firmed this,  but  the  confirmation  is  as  yet  very 
incomplete. 

But  there  are  a  number  of  results  not  predicted  by 
theory,  and  whose  connection  with  theory  is  not 
clearly  made  out.  We  have  the  fact  that  light  falling 
on  the  platinum  electrode  of  a  voltameter  generates  a 
current  ;  first  observed,  I  think,  by  Sir  W.  R.  Grove  — 
at  any  rate  it  is  mentioned  in  his  Correlation  of 
Forces — extended  by  Becquerel  and  Robert  Sabine 
to  other  substances,  and  now  being  extended  to 
fluorescent  and  other  bodies  by  Prof.  Minchin.  And 
finally — for  I  must  be  brief — we  have  the  remarkable 
action  of  light  on  selenium.  The  fact  was  discovered 
accidentally  by  an  assistant  in  the  laboratory  of  Mr. 
Willoughby  Smith,  who  noticed  that  a  piece  of 
selenium  conducted  electricity  very  much  better  when 
light  was  falling  upon  it  than  when  it  was  in  the  dark. 
The  light  of  a  candle  is  sufficient,  and  instantaneously 
brings  down  the  resistance  to  something  like  one-fifth 
of  its  original  value. 

I  could  show  you  these  effects,  but  there  is  not  much 
to  see  ;  it  is  an  intensely  interesting  phenomenon,  but 
its  external  manifestation  is  not  striking — any  more 
than  Faraday's  heavy  glass  experiment  was. 

This  is  the  phenomenon  which,  as  you  know,  has 
been  utilized  3>y  Prof.  Graham  Bell  in  that  most 


384  ELECTRICITY  AND  LIGHT  LECT.  I 

ingenious  and  striking  invention,  the  photophone. 
By  the  kindness  of  Prof.  Silvanus  Thompson  I  have 
a  few  slides  to  show  the  principle  of  the  invention, 
and  Mr.  Shelford  Bidwell  has  been  good  enough  to 
lend  me  his  -home-made  photophone,  which  answers 
exceedingly  well  for  short  distances. 

I  have  now  trespassed  long  enough  upon  your 
patience,  but  I  must  just  allude  to  what  may  very 
likely  be  the  next  striking  popular  discovery,  and  that 
is  the  transmission  of  light  by  electricity  ;  I  mean  the 
transmission  of  such  things  as  views  and  pictures  by 
means  of  the  electric  wire.  It  has  not  yet  been  done, 
but  it  seems  already  theoretically  possible,  and  it  may 
very  soon  be  practically  accomplished. 


LECTURE     II 

THE   ETHER   AND   ITS   FUNCTIONS  l 

I  HOPE  that  no  one  has  been  misled  by  an  error  in 
the  printing  of  the  title  of  this  lecture,  viz.,  the 
omission  of  the  definite  article  before  the  word  ether, 
into  supposing  that  I  am  going  to  discourse  on 
chemistry  and  the  latest  anaesthetic  ;  you  will  have 
understood,  I  hope,  that  "  ether  "  means  //aether, and 
that  the  ether  is  the  hypothetical  medium  which  is 
supposed  to  fill  otherwise  empty  space. 

The  idea  of  an  ether  is  by  no  means  a  new  one.  As 
soon  as  a  notion  of  the  enormous  extent  of  space  had 
been  grasped,  by  means  of  astronomical  discoveries, 
the  question  presented  itself  to  men's  minds,  what 
was  in  this  space  ?  was  it  full,  or  was  it  empty  ?  and 
the  question  was  differently  answered  by  different 
metaphysicians.  Some  felt  that  a  vacuum  was  so 

1  Delivered  at  the  London  Institution  on  December  28,  1882. 

C  C 


386  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

abhorrent  a  thing  that  it  could  not  by  any  possibility 
exist  anywhere,  but  that  Nature  would  not  be  satisfied 
unless  space  were  perfectly  full.  Others,  again,  felt 
that  empty  space  could  hardly  exist,  that  it  would 
shrink  up  to  nothing  like  a  pricked  bladder  unless  it 
were  kept  distended  by  something  material.  In  other 
words,  they  made  matter  the  condition  of  extension. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  was  contended  that,  however 
objectionable  the  idea  of  empty  space  might  be,  yet 
emptiness  was  a  necessity  in  order  that  bodies  might 
have  room  to  move  ;  that,  in  fact,  if  all  space  were 
perfectly  full  of  matter  everything  would  be  jammed 
together,  and  nothing  like  free  attraction  or  free 
motion  of  bodies  round  one  another  could  go  on. 

And  indeed  there  are  not  wanting  philosophers  at 
the  present  day  who  still  believe  something  of  this 
same  kind,  who  are  satisfied  to  think  of  matter  as 
consisting  of  detached  small  particles  acting  on  one 
another  with  forces  varying  as  some  inverse  power  of 
the  distance,  and  who,  if  they  can  account  for  a 
phenomenon  by  an  action  exerted  across  empty 
space,  are  content  to  go  no  further,  nor  seek  the  cause 
and  nature  of  the  action  more  closely.1 

Now  metaphysical  arguments,  in  so  far  as  they 
have  any  weight  or  validity  whatever,  are  unconscious 

1  In  illustration  of  this  statement  an  article  has  since  appeared  in 
the  January  number  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  1883,  by 
Mr.  Walter  Browne. 


LECT.  II  ARGUMENT  FROM  INCONCEIVABILITY     387 

appeals  to  experience  ;  a  person  endeavours  to  find 
out  whether  a  certain  condition  of  things  is  by  him 
conceivable,  and  if  it  is  not  conceivable  he  has  some 
primd  facie  ground  for  asserting  that  it  probably  does 
not  exist.  I  say  he  has  some  ground,  but  whether  it 
be  much  or  little  depends  partly  on  the  nature  of  the 
thing  thought  of,  whether  it  be  fairly  simple  or  highly 
complex,  and  partly  on  the  range  of  the  man's  own 
mental  development,  whether  his  experience  be  wide 
or  narrow. 

If  a  highly-developed  mind,  or  set  of  minds,  find  a 
doctrine  about  some  comparatively  simple  and  funda- 
mental matter  absolutely  unthinkable,  it  is  an  evidence, 
and  is  accepted  as  good  evidence,  that  the  unthink- 
able state  of  things  is  one  that  has  no  existence  ;  the 
argument  being  that  if  it  did  exist,  either  it  or  some- 
thing not  wholly  unlike  it  would  have  come  within 
the  range  of  experience.  We  have  no  further  evidence 
than  this  for  the  statement  that  two  straight  lines 
cannot  inclose  a  space,  or  that  the  three  angles  of  a 
triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Nevertheless  there  is  nothing  final  about  such  an 
argument ;  all  that  the  inconceivability  of  a  thing 
really  proves,  or  can  prove,  is  that  nothing  like  it 
has  ever  come  within  the  thinker's  experience  ;  and 
this  proves  nothing  as  to  the  reality  or  non-reality  of 
the  thing,  unless  his  experience  of  the  same  kind  of 
things  has  been  so  extensive  as  to  make  it  reasonably 

C  C  2 


388  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

probable  that  if  such  a  thing  had  existed  it  would  not 
have  been  so  completely  overlooked. 

The  experience  of  a  child  or  a  dog,  on  ordinary 
scientific  phenomena,  therefore,  is  worth  next  to 
nothing  ;  and  as  the  experience  of  a  dog  is  to 
ordinary  science,  so  is  the  experience  of  the  human 
race  to  some  higher  phenomena,  of  which  they  at 
present  know  nothing,  and  against  the  existence  of 
which  it  is  perfectly  futile  and  presumptuous  to  bring 
forward  arguments  about  their  being  inconceivable,  as 
if  they  were  likely  to  be  anything  else. 

Now  if  there  is  one  thing  with  which  the  human 
race  has  been  more  conversant  from  time  immemorial 
than  another,  and  concerning  which  more  experience 
has  been  unconsciously  accumulated  than  about 
almost  anything  else  that  can  be  mentioned,  it  is  the 
action  of  one  body  on  another ;  the  exertion  of  force 
by  one  body  upon  another,  the  transfer  of  motion  and 
energy  from  one  body  to  another  ;  any  kind  of  effect, 
no  matter  what,  which  can  be  produced  in  one  body 
by  means  of  another,  whether  the  bodies  be  animate 
or  inanimate.  The  action  of  a  man  in  felling  a  tree, 
in  thrusting  a  spear,  in  drawing  a  bow  ;  the  action  of 
the  bow  again  on  the  arrow,  of  powder  on  a  bullet,  of 
a  horse  on  a  cart  ;  and  again,  the  action  of  the  earth 
on  the  moon,  or  of  a  magnet  on  iron.  Every  activity 
of  every  kind  that  we  are  conscious  of  may  be  taken 
as  an  illustration  of  the  action  of  one  body  on  another. 


LECT.  II  ACTION  AT  A  DISTANCE  389 

Now  I  wish  to  appeal  to  this  mass  of  experience, 
and  to  ask,  is  not  the  direct  action  of  one  body  on 
another  across  empty  space,  and  with  no  means 
of  communication  whatever,  is  not  this  absolutely 
unthinkable  ?  We  must  not  answer  the  question 
off-hand,  but  must  give  it  due  consideration,  and  we 
shall  find,  I  think ,  that  wherever  one  body  acts  on 
another  by  obvious  contact,  we  are  satisfied  and  have 
a  feeling  that  the  phenomenon  is  simple  and  intelli- 
gible ;  but  that  whenever  one  body  apparently  acts  on 
another  at  a  distance,  we  are  irresistibly  impelled  to 
look  for  the  connecting  medium. 

If  a  marionette  dances  in  obedience  to  a  prompting 
hand  above  it,  any  intelligent  child  would  feel  for  the 
wire,  and  if  no  wire  or  anything  corresponding  to  it 
was  discovered,  would  feel  that  there  was  something 
uncanny  and  magical  about  the  whole  thing.  An- 
cient attempts  at  magic  were  indeed  attempts  to 
obtain  results  without  the  trouble  of  properly  causing 
them,  to  build  palaces  By  rubbing  rings  or  lanterns,  to 
remove  mountains  by  a  wish  instead  of  with  the 
spade  and  pickaxe,  and  generally  to  act  on  bodies 
without  any  real  means  of  communication ;  and 
modern  disbelief  in  magic  is  simply  a  statement  of 
the  conviction  of  mankind  that  all  attempts  in  this 
direction  have  turned  out  failures,  and  that  action  at  a 
distance  is  impossible. 

If  a  man  explained  the  action  of  a  horse  or  a  cart 


390  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  il 

by  saying  that  there  was  an  attraction  between  them 
varying  as  some  high  direct  power  of  the  distance,  he 
would  not  be  saying  other  than  the  truth — the  facts 
may  be  so  expressed — but  he  would  be  felt  to  be 
giving  a  wretchedly  lame  explanation,  and  any  one 
who  simply  pointed  out  the  traces  would  be  going 
much  more  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  Similarly  with 
the  attraction  of  a  magnet  for  a  distant  magnetic 
pole.  To  say  that  there  is  an  attraction  as  the 
inverse  cube  of  the  distance  between  them  is  true,  but 
it  is  not  the  whole  truth  ;  and  we  should  be  obliged  to 
any  one  who  will  point  out  the  traces,  for  traces  we 
feel  sure  there  are. 

If  any  one  tries  to  picture  clearly  to  himself  the 
action  of  one  body  on  another  without  any  medium  of 
communication  whatever,  he  must  fail.  A  medium  is 
instinctively  looked  for  in  most  cases  ;  and  if  not  in  all, 
as  in  falling  weights  or  magnetic  attraction,  it  is  only 
because  custom  has  made  us  stupidly  callous  to  the 
real  nature  of  these  forces. 

When  we  see  a  vehicle  bowling  down-hill  without 
any  visible  propelling  force,  we  ought  to  regard  it  with 
the  same  mixture  of  curiosity  and  wonder  as  the 
Chinaman  felt  when  he  saw  for  the  first  time  in 
the  streets  of  Chicago  a  tram-car  driven  by  a  rope 
buried  in  a  pipe  underground.  The  attachment  to 
these  cars  comes  through  a  narrow  slit  in  the  pipe, 
and  is  quite  unobstrusive.  After  regarding  the  car 


LECT.  ii  VIS  A  TERGO  391 

with  open-mouthed  astonishment  for  some  time,  the 
Chinaman  made  use  of  the  following  memorable 
exclamation,  "No  pushee — No  pullee — Go  like  mad  !" 
He  was  a  philosophic  Chinaman. 

Remember,  then,  that  whenever  we  see  a  thing 
being  moved  we  must  look  for  the  rope  ;  it  may  be 
visible  or  it  may  be  invisible,  but  unless  there  is 
either  "  pushee  "  or  "  pullee  "  there  can  be  no  action. 
And  if  you  further  consider  a  pull  it  resolves  itself 
into  a  push  ;  to  pull  a  thing  towards  you,  you  have  to 
put  your  finger  behind  it  and  push  ;  a  horse  is  said  to 
pull  a  cart,  but  he  is  really  pushing  at  the  collar  ;  an 
engine  pushes  a  truck  by  means  of  a  hook  and  eye  ; 
and  so  on. 

There  is  still  the  further  very  important  and 
difficult  question  as  to  why  the  parts  hang  together, 
and  why  when  you  push  one  part  the  rest  follows. 
Cohesion  is  a  very  striking  fact,  and  an  explanation  of 
it  is  much  to  be  desired  ;  I  shall  have  a  little  more  to 
say  about  it  later,  but  at  present  we  have  nothing  more 
than  an  indication  of  the  direction  in  which  an  ex- 
planation seems  possible.  We  cannot  speak  distinctly 
about  those  actions  which  are  as  yet  mysterious  to  us  ; 
but  concerning  those  which  are  comparatively  simple 
and  intelligible  we  may  make  this  general  state- 
ment : — The  only  way  of  acting  on  a  body  directly 
is  to  push  it  behind. 

There  must  be  contact  between  bodies  before  they 


392  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

can  directly  act  on  each  other  ;  and  if  they  are  not  in 
contact  with  each  other  and  yet  act,  they  must  both 
be  in  contact  with  some  third  body  which  is  the 
medium  of  communication,  the  rope. 

Consider  now  for  an  instant  the  most  complex  case, 
the  action  of  one  animate  body  on  another  not  touch- 
ing it.  To  call  the  attention  of  a  dog,  for  instance, 
there  are  several  methods  :  one  plan  is  to  prod  him 
with  a  stick,  another  is  to  heave  a  stone  at  him,  a 
third  is  to  whistle  or  call,  while  a  fourth  is  to  beckon 
him  by  gesture,  or,  what  is  essentially  the  same  pro- 
cess, to  flash  sunlight  into  his  eye  with  a  mirror.  In 
the  first  two  of  these  methods  the  media  of  com- 
munication are  perfectly  obvious — the  stick  and  the 
stone  ;  in  the  third,  the  whistle,  the  medium  is  not  so 
obvious,  and  this  case  might  easily  seem  to  a  savage 
like  action  at  a  distance,  but  we  know  of  course  that 
it  is  the  air,  and  that  if  the  air  between  be  taken  away, 
all  communication  by  sound  is  interrupted.  But  the 
fourth  or  optical  method  is  not  so  interrupted  ;  the 
dog  can  see  through  a  vacuum  perfectly  well,  though 
he  cannot  hear  through  it ;  but  what  the  medium  now 
is  which  conveys  the  impression  is  not  so  well  known. 
The  sun's  light  is  conveyed  to  the  earth  by  such  a 
medium  as  this  across  the  emptiness  of  planetary 
space. 

The  only  remaining  typical  plans  of  acting  on  the 
dog  would  be  either  by  electric  or  magnetic  attrac- 


LECT.  ii  TRANSFER  OF  ENERGY  393 

tions,  or  by  mesmerism,  and  I  would  have  you  seek 
for  the  medium  which  conveys  these  impressions  with 
just  as  great  a  certainty  that  there  is  one  as  you  feel 
in  any  of  the  other  cases. 

Leaving  these  more  mysterious  and  subtle  modes 
of  communication,  let  us  return  to  the  two  most 
simple  ones,  viz.  the  stick  and  the  stone.  These  two 
are  representative  of  the  only  possible  fundamental 
modes  of  communication  between  distant  bodies^ 
for  one  is  compelled  to  believe  that  every  more 
occult  mode  of  action  will  ultimately  resolve  itself 
into  one  or  other  of  these  two.  The  stick  represents 
the  method  of  communication  by  continuous  sub- 
stance ;  the  stone  represents  the  communication  by 
actual  transfer  of  matter,  or,  as  I  shall  call  it,  the 
projectile  method.  There  are  no  other  known  methods 
for  one  body  to  act  on  another  than  by  these  two — by 
continuous  medium,  and  by  projectile. 

We  know  one  clear  and  well-established  example 
of  the  projectile  method,  viz.  the  transmission  of 
pressure  by  gases.  A  gas  consists  of  particles  per- 
fectly independent  of  each  other,  and  the  only  way  in 
which  they  can  act  on  each  other  is  by  blows.  The 
pressure  of  the  air  is  a  bombardment  of  particles,  and 
actions  are  transmitted  through  gases  as  through  a 
row  of  ivory  balls.  Sound  is  propagated  by  each 
particle  receiving  a  knock  and  passing  it  on  to  the 
next,  the  final  effect  being  much  the  same  as  if  the 


394  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

first  struck  particles  had   been   shot  off  through  the 
whole  distance. 

The  explanation  of  the  whole  behaviour  of  gases 
in  this  manner  is  so  simple  and  satisfactory,  and 
moreover  is  so  certainly  the  true  account  of  the 
matter,  that  we  are  naturally  tempted  to  ask  whether 
this  projectile  theory  is  not  the  key  to  the  universe, 
and  whether  every  kind  of  action  whatever  cannot  be 
worked  out  on  this  hypothesis  of  atoms  blindly  driving 
about  in  all  directions  at  perfect  random,  and  with 
complete  independence  of  each  other  except  when 
they  collide.1  And  accordingly  we  have  the  cor- 
puscular theories  of  light  and  of  gravitation  :  both 
account  for  their  respective  phenomena  by  a  battering 
of  particles.  The  corpuscular  theory  of  gravitation 
is,  however,  full  of  difficulties,  for  it  is  not  obvious 
according  to  it  why  the  weight  of  a  plate  is  the  same 
when  held  edgeways  as  when  held  broadside  on,  in 
the  stream  of  corpuscles  ;  while  it  is  surprising  (as 
indeed  it  perhaps  is  on  any  hypothesis)  that  the 
weight  of  a  body  is  the  same  in  the  solid,  liquid,  and 
gaseous  states.  It  has  been  attempted  to  explain 
cohesion  also  on  the  same  hypothesis,  but  the  diffi- 
culties, which  were  great  enough  before,  are  now 
enormous  ;  and  to  me  at  any  rate  it  seems  that  it  is 
only  by  violent  straining  and  by  improbable  hypothesis 

1  To  this  hypothesis  Mr.  Tolver  Preston  has  addressed  himself  with 
much  ingenuity. 


LECT.  ii      NEED  OF  CONTINUOUS  MEDIUM  395 

that  we  can  explain  all  the  actions  of  the  universe  by 
a  mere  battery  of  particles. 

Moreover,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  what  the 
atoms  themselves  can  be  like,  or  how  they  can 
strike  and  bound  off  one  another  without  yielding 
to  compression  and  then  springing  out  again  like 
two  elastic  balls  ;  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the 
elasticity  of  really  ultimate  hard  particles.  And  if 
the  atoms  are  not  such  hard  particles,  but  are  elastic 
and  yielding,  and  rebound  from  one  another  according 
to  the  same  sort  of  law  that  ivory  balls  do :  of  what 
are  they  composed  ?  We  shall  have  to  begin  all  over 
again,  and  explain  the  cohesion  and  elasticity  of  the 
parts  of  the  atom. 

The  more  we  think  over  the  matter,  the  more  are 
we  compelled  to  abandon  mere  impact  as  a  complete 
explanation  of  action  in  general.  But  if  this  be  so 
we  are  driven  back  upon  the  other  hypothesis,  the 
only  other,  viz.,  communication  by  continuous 
medium. 

We  must  begin  to  imagine  a  continuous  connecting 
medium  between  the  particles — a  substance  in  which 
they  are  embedded,  which  penetrates  into  all  their 
interstices,  and  extends  without  to  the  remotest 
limits  of  space.  Once  grant  this,  and  difficulties 
begin  rapidly  to  disappear.  There  is  now  continuous 
contact  between  the  particles  of  bodies,  and  if  one  is 
pushed  the  others  naturally  receive  the  motion.  The 


jfnost  secret 
parti  j 
ons  in  wl 


tullliii 

matter  of  very  small  importance,  but  "  the  ether "  is. 
as  good  a  name  for  it  as  another. 

As  far  as  we  know  it  appears  to  be  a  perfectly 
homogeneous  incompressible  continuous  body,  in- 
capable of  being  resolved  into  simpler  elements  or 
atoms ;  it  is,  in  fact,  continuous,  not  molecular. 
There  is  no  other  body  of  which  we  can  say  this, 
and  hence  the  properties  of  ether  must  be  somewhat 
different  from  those  of  ordinary  matter.  But  there 


LECT.ii  CONTINUOUS  MEDIUM  NOT  MOLECULAR  397 

is  little  difficulty,  in  picturing  a  continuous  sub- 
stance to  ourselves,  inasmuch  as  the  molecular  and 
porous  nature  of  ordinary  matter  is  by  no  means 
evident  to  the  senses,  but  is  an  inference  of  some 
difficulty. 

Ether  is  often  called  a  fluid,  or  a  liquid,  and  again 
it  has  been  called  a  solid  and  has  been  likened  to 
a  jelly  because  of  its  rigidity  ;  but  none  of  these  names 
are  very  much  good  ;  all  these  are  molecular  group- 
ings and  therefore  not  like  ether  ;  let  us  think  simply 
and  solely  of  a  continuous  frictionless  medium  pos- 
sessing inertia,  and  the  vagueness  of  the  notion  will 
be  nothing  more  than  is  proper  in  the  present  state 
of  our  knowledge. 

We  have  now  to  try  and  realize  the  idea  of  a 
perfectly  continuous,  subtle,  incompressible  substance 
pervading  all  space  and  penetrating  between  the 
molecules  of  all  ordinary  matter,  which  are  embedded 
in  it  and  connected  with  one  another  by  its  means. 
And  we  must  regard  it  as  the  one  universal  medium 
by  which  all  actions  between  bodies  are  carried  on. 
This,  then,  is  its  function — to  act  as  the  transmitter 
of  motion  and  of  energy. 

First  consider  the  propagation  of  light. 

Sound-  is  propagated  by  direct  excursion  and  im- 
pact of  the  atoms  of  ordinary  matter.  Light  is  not 
so  propagated.  How  do  we  know  this  ? 

(i)  Because  of  its  speed,  3   x    io10  centimetres  per 


398  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

second,  which  is  greater  than  anything  transmissible 
by  ordinary  matter. 

(2)  Because  of  the  kind  of  vibration,  as  revealed  by 
the  phenomena  of  polarization. 

The  vibrations  of  light  are  not  such  as  can  be 
transmitted  by  a  set  of  disconnected  molecules  ;  if 
by  molecules  at  all,  it  must  be  by  molecules  con- 
nected into  a  solid,  i.e.  by  a  body  with  rigidity. 
Rigidity  means  active  resistance  to  shearing  stress, 
i.e.  to  alteration  in  shape  ;  it  is  also  called  elasticity 
of  figure ;  it  is  by  the  possession  of  rigidity  that 
a  solid  differs  from  a  fluid.  For  a  body  to  transmit 
vibrations  at  all  it  must  possess  inertia  ;  transverse 
vibrations  can  only  be  transmitted  by  a  body  with 
rigidity.  All  matter  possesses  inertia,  but  fluids 
possess  only  volume  elasticity,  and  accordingly  can 
transmit  only  longitudinal  vibrations.  Light  consists 
of  transverse  vibrations  ;  air  and  water  have  no 
rigidity,  yet  they  are  transparent,  i.e.  transmit  trans- 
verse vibrations  ;  hence  it  must  be  the  ether  inside 
them  which  really  conveys  the  motion,  and  the  ether 
must  have  properties  which,  if  it  were  ordinary  matter, 
we  should  style  inertia  and  rigidity.  No  highly 
rarefied  air  will  serve  the  purpose  ;  the  ether  must  be 
a  distinct  body.  Air  may  exist  indeed  in  planetary 
space,  even  to  infinity,  but  if  so  it  is  of  almost  in- 
finitesimal density  compared  with  the  ether  there. 
It  is  easy  to  calculate  the  density  of  the  atmosphere 


LECT.  II  ETHER  DENSITY  399 

at  any  height  above  the  earth's  surface,  supposing 
other  bodies  absent  and  supposing  the  temperature 
constant.  (All  numbers  following  are  in  C.G.S.  units.) 
The  density  of  the  air  at  a  distance  of  n  earth 
radii  from  the  centre  of  the  earth  is  equal  to  a 
quarter  the  density  here  divided  by  io350~.  So  at  a 
height  of  only  4000  miles  above  the  surface,  the 
atmospheric  density  is  a  number  with  127  ciphers 
after  the  decimal  point  before  the  significant  figures 
begin.1  The  density  of  ether,  on  the  other  hand, 
has  been  calculated  by  Sir  William  Thomson  from 
data  furnished  by  Pouillet's  experiments  on  the 
energy  of  sunlight,  and  from  a  justifiable  guess  as 
to  the  amplitude  of  a  vibration  ;  and  it  comes  out 

-22 

about  10  ,  a  number  with  only  21  ciphers  before 
the  significant  figures.  In  inter-planetary  space, 
therefore,  all  the  air  that  exists  is  utterly  negligible  ; 
the  density  of  the  ether  there,  though  small  is 
enormous  by  comparison.  [See  also  page  261.]  * 

Once  given  the  density  of  the  ether,  its  rigidity 
follows  at  once,  because  the  ratio  of  the  rigidity 
to  the  density  is  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  trans- 

]  I  have  left  this  statement  in,  because  it  is  a  view  which  has  been 
apparently  held  by  high  authority  that  the  atmosphere  has  no  limit. 
To  me  I  confess  it  appears  much  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  at  a 
certain  height,  which  on  the  hypothesis  of  thorough  stirring  or  convec- 
tive  equilibrium  is  only  1 6  or  17  miles,  but  is  probably  a  good  deal 
more  in  reality  (because  rare  air  is  very  viscous),  a  free  surface  exists 
although  of  very  small  density. 


400  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT  II 

verse  wave  propagation,  viz.  in  the  case  of  ether 
9  x  io20.  The  rigidity  of  ether  comes  out,  therefore, 
to  be  about  fTth.  The  most  rigid  solid  we  know 
is  steel,  and  compared  with  its  rigidity,  viz.  8  x  io11, 
that  of  ether  is  insignificant.  Neither  steel  nor  glass, 
however,  could  transmit  vibrations  with  anything  like 
the  speed  of  light,  because  of  their  great  density.  The 
rate  at  which  transverse  vibrations  are  propagated  by 
crown  glass  is  half  a  million  centimetres  per  second— 
a  considerable  speed,  no  doubt,  but  the  ether  inside 
the  glass  transmits  them  40,000  times  as  quick,  viz. 
at  twenty  thousand  million  centimetres  per  second. 

The  ether  outside  the  glass  can  do  still  better  than 
this,  it  comes  up  to  thirty  thousand  million,  and  the 
question  arises  what  is  the  matter  with  the  ether 
inside  the  glass  that  it  can  only  transmit  undulations 
at  two-thirds  the  normal  speed.  Is  it  denser  than  free 
ether,  or  is  it  less  rigid  ?  Well,  it  is  not  easy  to  say, 
but«the  fact  is  certain  that  ether  is  somehow  affected 
by  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  gross  matter, 
and  it  appears  to  be  concentrated  inside  it  to  an  ex- 
tent depending  on  the  density  of  the  matter.  Fresnel's 
hypothesis  is  that  the  ether  is  really  denser  inside 
gross  matter,  that  there  is  a  sort  of  attraction  be- 
tween ether  and  the  molecules  of  matter  which  results 
in  an  agglomeration  or  binding  of  some  ether  round 
each  atom,  and  that  this  additional  or  bound  ether 
belongs  to  the  matter,  and  travels  about  with  it.  The 


LECT.  II  EFFECT  OF  MOTION  401 

rigidity  of  the  bound  ether  Fresnel  supposes  to  be  the 
same  as  that  of  the  free,  except  in  some  crystals. 

If  anything  like  this  can  be  imagined,  a  measure 
of  the  relative  density  of  the  bound  ether  is  easily 
given.  For  the  inverse  velocity-ratio  of  light  is 
n  (the  index  of  refraction),  and  the  density  is  inversely 
as  the  square  of  the  velocity ;  hence  the  density- 
measure  is  n2.  The  density  of  ether  in  free  space 
being  called  I,  that  inside  matter  has  a  density  #2, 
and  the  density  of  the  bound  portion  of  this  is  .nz  -  i . 

This  may  all  sound  very  fanciful,  but  something 
like  it  is  sober  truth  ;  not  as  it  is  here  stated  very 

likely,  but  the  fact  that  (i  -  -Llth  of  the  whole 
ether  inside  matter  is  bound  to  it  and  travels  with  it, 
while  the  remaining •— 2th-  is  free  and  blows  freely 

through  the  pores,  is  fairly  well  established  and 
confirmed  by  direct  experiment  (§  118). 

Consider  the  effect  of  wind  on  sound.  Sound  is 
travelling  through  the  air  at  a  certain  definite  rate 
depending  simply  on  the  average  speed  of  the  atoms 
in  their  excursions,  and  on  the  rate  at  which  they 
therefore  pass  the  knocks  on  ;  if  there  is  a  wind 
carrying  all  the  atoms  bodily  in  one  direction,  natur- 
ally the  sound  will  travel  quicker  in  that  direction 
than  in  the  opposite.  Sound  travels  quicker  with  the 
wind  than  against  it.  Now  is  it  the  same  with  light  ? 

D  D 


402  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  11 

does  it  too  travel  quicker  with  the  wind  ?  Well  that 
altogether  depends  on  whether  the  ether  is  blowing 
along  as  well  as  the  air  ;  if  it  is,  then  its  motion  must 
help  the  light  on  a  little  ;  but  if  the  ether  is  at  rest,  no 
motion  of  air  or  matter  of  any  kind  can  make  any 
difference.  But  according  to  Fresnel's  hypothesis  it 
is  not  wholly  at  rest  nor  wholly  in  motion  ;  the  free  is 
at  rest,  the  bound  is  in  motion  ;  and  therefore  the 
speed  of  light  with  the  wind  should  be  increased  by  an 

addition  of  (  I Jth  of  the  velocity  of  the  wind. 

Utterly  infinitesimal,  of  course,  in  the  case  of  air, 
whose  n  is  but  a  trifle  greater  than  I  ;  but  for  water 
the  fraction  is  7-i6ths,  and  Fizeau  thought  this  not 
quite  hopeless  to  look  for.  He  accordingly  devised 
a  beautiful  experiment,  executed  it  successfully,  and 
proved  that  when  light  travels  with  a  stream  of 
water,  7-i6ths  of  the  velocity  of  the  water  must  be 
added  to  the  velocity  of  the  light ;  and  when  it  travels 
against  the  stream  the  same  quantity  must  be 
subtracted,  to  get  the  true  resultant  velocity  with 
which  the  light  is  travelling  through  space. 

Arago  suggested  another  experiment.  When  light 
passes  through  a  prism,  it  is  bent  out  of  its  course 
by  reason  of  its  diminished  velocity  inside  the  glass 
and  the  refraction  is  strictly  dependent  on  the  re- 
tardation ;  now  suppose  a  prism  carried  rapidly 
forward  through  space,  say  at  the  rate  of  nineteen 


LECT.  II  FRESNEL'S  THEORY  403 

miles  a  second  by  the  earth  in  its  orbit,  which  is 
the  quickest  accessible  carriage  ;  if  the  ether  is  all 
streaming  freely  through  the  glass,  light  passing 
through  the  prism  will  be  less  retarded  when  going 
with  the  ether  than  when  going  against  it,  and  hence 
the  bending  will  be  different. 

Maxwell  tried  the  experiment  in  a  very  perfect 
form,  but  found  no  difference.  If  all  the  ether  were 
free  there  would  have  been  a  difference  ;  if  all  the 
ether  were  bound  to  the  glass  there  would  have  been 
a  difference  the  other  way  ;  but  according  to  Fresnel's 
hypothesis  there  should  be  no  difference,  because 
according  to  it,  the  free  ether,  which  is  the  portion  in 
relative  motion,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  refraction, 
it  is  the  addition  of  the  bound  ether  which  causes  the 
refraction,  and  this  part  is  stationary  relatively  to  the 
glass,  and  is  not  streaming  through  it  at  all.  Hence 
the  refraction  is  the  same  whether  the  prism  be  at  rest 
or  in  motion  through  space.1 

An  atom  embedded  in  ether  is  vibrating  and  send- 
ing out  waves  in  all  directions  ;  the  length  of  the 

1  Several  of  this  class  of  experiments  have  been  recently  performed 
with  consummate  skill  and  with  refined  appliances  by  Mr.  Michelson 
in  America.  The  result  of  his  repetition  of  the  Fizeau  experiment  is 
entirely  confirmatory  of  Fizeau's  result  and  of  Fresnel's  theory.  The 
results  of  some  of  the  other  experiments,  having  reference  to  the  theory 
of  aberration  and  the  motion  of  the  ether  near  the  earth,  are  more 
puzzling,  and  seem  discordant  with  ordinarily  received  notions  at 
present.  [See  Nature,  vol.  xlv.,  pp.  499,  549,  "Aberration."] 

D   D    2 


404  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

wave  depends  on  the  period  of  the  vibration,  and 
different  lengths  of  wave  produce  the  different  colour 
sensations.  Now  through  free  ether  all  kinds  of  waves 
appear  to  travel  at  the  same  rate  ;  not  so  through 
bound  ether  ;  inside  matter  the  short  waves  are  more 
retarded  than  the  long,  and  hence  the  different  sizes 
of  waves  can  be  sorted  out  by  a  prism.  Now  a  free 
atom  has  its  own  definite  period  of  vibration,  like  a 
tuning-fork,  and  accordingly  sends  out  light  of  a 
certain  definite  colour  or  of  a  few  definite  colours,  just 
as  a  tuning-fork  emits  sound  of  a  certain  definite  pitch 
or  of  a  few  definite  pitches  called  harmonics.  By  the 
pitch  of  the  sound  it  is  easy  to  calculate  the  rate  of 
vibration  of  the  fork  ;  by  the  colour  of  the  light  one 
can  determine  the  rate  of  vibration  of  the  atom. 

When  we  speak  of  the  atoms  vibrating,  we  do  not 
mean  that  they  are  wagging  to  and  fro  as  a  whole  ;  it 
is  more  likely  that  they  are  crimping  themselves,  that 
they  are  vibrating  as  a  tuning-fork  or  a  bell  vibrates, 
we  know  this  because  it  is  easy  to  make  the  free 
atoms  of  a  gas  vibrate.  It  is  only  in  the  gaseous 
state,  indeed,  that  we  can  study  the  rate  of  vibration 
of  an  atom  ;  when  they  are  packed  closely  together 
in  a  solid  or  liquid,  they  are  cramped,  and  all  manner 
of  secondary  vibrations  are  induced.  They  then,  no 
doubt,  wag  to  and  fro  also  ;  and  in  fact  these  con- 
strained vibrations  are  executed  in  every  variety,  but 
the  simple  periodicity  of  the  free  atom  is  lost. 


LECT.  II  DISPERSION  405 

To  study  the  free  atoms  we  take  a  gas — the  rarer 
the  better  :  heat  it,  and  then  sort  out  the  waves  it 
produces  in  the  ether  by  putting  a  triangular  prism 
of  bound  ether  in  their  path. 

Why  the  bound  ether  retards  different  waves 
differently,  or  "  disperses  "  the  light,  is  quite  unknown, 
beyond  the  fact  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  the 
size  of  the  atoms  of  matter  being  comparable  to  the 
size  of  waves  :  being  most  nearly  comparable  to  the 
smallest  waves,  and  therefore  affecting  them  most. 
It  is  not  easy  accurately  to  explain  refraction,  but 
it  is  extremely  difficult  to  explain  dispersion.  How- 
ever, the  fact  is  undoubted,  and  more  light  will 
doubtless  soon  fall  upon  its  theory. 

The  result  of  the  prismatic  analysis  is  to  prove 
that  every  atom  of  matter  has  its  own  definite  rate 
of  vibration,  as  a  bell  has  ;  it  may  emit  several 
colours  or  only  one,  and  the  number  it  emits  may 
depend  upon  how  much  it  is  struck  (or  heated) ;  but 
those  it  can  emit  are  a  perfectly  definite  selection, 
and  depend  in  no  way  on  the  previous  history  of 
the  atom.  Every  free  atom  of  sodium,  for  instance, 
vibrates  in  the  same  way,  and  has  always  vibrated 
in  the  same  way,  whatever  other  element  it  may 
have  been  at  intervals  combined  with,  and  whether 
it  exists  in  the  sun  or  in  the  earth,  or  in  the  most 
distant  star.  The  same  is  true  of  every  other 
kind  of  matter,  each  has  its  own  mode  of  vibration 


406  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

which  nothing  but  bondage  changes  ;  and  hence 
has  arisen  a  new  chemical  analysis,  wherein  sub- 
stances are  detected  simply  by  observing  the  rate  of 
vibration  of  their  free  atoms,  a  branch  of  physical 
chemistry  called  spectrum  analysis. 

The  atoms  are  small  bodies,  and  accordingly 
vibrate  with  inconceivable  rapidity. 

An  atom  of  sodium  vibrates  5  x  io14  times  in  a 
second  ;  that  is,  it  executes  five  hundred  million 
complete  vibrations  in  the  millionth  part  of  a  second. 

This  is  about  a  medium  pace,  and  the  waves  it  emits 
produce  in  the  eye  the  sensation  of  a  deep  yellow. 

4  X  io14  corresponds  to  red  light,  7  x  io14  to  blue. 

An  atom  of  hydrogen  has  three  different  periods, 
viz.  4-577,  6*179,  and  6-973,  eacn  multiplied  by  the 
inevitable  io14. 

Atoms  may,  indeed,  vibrate  more  slowly  than 
this,  but  the  retina  is  not  constructed  so  as  to  be 
sensible  of  slower  vibrations  ;  however,  thanks  to 
Capt.  Abncy,  there  are  ways  now  of  photographing 
the  effect  of  much  slower  vibrations,  and  thus  of 
making  them  indirectly  visible ;  so  we  can  now 
hope  to  observe  the  motion  of  atoms  over  a  much 
greater  range  than  the  purely  optical  ones,  and  so 
learn  much  more  about  them.1 

1  Still  more  perhaps  may  we  now  hope  from  the  modified  line 
thermopile  or  Siemens  pyrometer,  which  Prof.  Langley  has  so  ably 
developed  and  used  in  a  series  of  fine  researches  :  the  instrument 


LECT.  ii  ETHER  AND  ELECTRICITY  407 

The  distinction  between  free  and  bound  ether  is 
forced  on  our  notice  by  other  phenomena  than 
those  of  light.  When  we  come  to  electricity,  we 
find  that  some  kind  of  matter  has  more  electricity 
associated  with  it  than  others,  so  that  for  a  given 
electromotive  force  we  get  a  greater  electric  dis- 
placement ;  that  the  electricity  is,  as  it  were,  denser 
in  some  kinds  of  matter  than  in  others.  The  density 
of  electricity  in  space  being  called  I,  that  inside 
matter  is  called  K,  its  specific  inductive  capacity.  In 
optics  the  relative  density  of  the  ether  inside  matter 
was  ft2,  the  square  of  the  index  of  refraction,  p.  401. 
These  numbers  appear  to  be  the  same. 

Is  the  ether  electricity  then  ?  I  do  not  say  so, 
neither  do  I  think  that  in  that  coarse  statement 
lies  the  truth ;  but  that  they  are  connected  there 
can  be  no  doubt. 

What  I  have  to  suggest  is  that  positive  and 
negative  electricity  together  may  make  up  the  ether, 
or  that  the  ether  may  be  sheared  by  electromo- 
tive forces  into  positive  and  negative  electricity. 
Transverse  vibrations  are  carried  on  by  shearing 
forces  acting  in  matter  which  resists  them,  or  which 
possesses  rigidity.  The  bound  ether  inside  a  con- 
ductor has  no  rigidity  ;  it  cannot  resist  shear  ;  such 
a  body  is  opaque.  Transparent  bodies  are  those 

which  he  calls  the  "  bolometer."     Or  from  Mr.  Boys's  still  more  recent 
"  Radio-micrometer." 


408  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

whose  bound  ether,  when  sheared,  resists  and  springs 
back  again  ;  such  bodies  are  dielectrics. 

We  have  no  direct  way  of  exerting  force  upon 
ether  at  all ;  we  can,  however,  act  on  it  in  a  very 
indirect  manner,  for  we  have  learnt  how  to  arrange 
matter  so  as  to  cause  it  to  exert  the  required 
shearing  (or  electromotive)  force  upon  the  ether 
associated  with  it.  Continuous  shearing  force  applied 
to  the  ether  in  metals  produces  a  continuous  and 
barely  resisted  stream  of  the  two  electricities  in 
opposite  directions  ;  or  a  conduction  current. 

Continuous  shearing  force  applied  to  the  ether 
in  transparent  bodies  produces  an  electric  displacement 
accompanied  by  elastic  resilience,  and  thus  all  the 
phenomena  of  electric  induction  (Chap.  III.). 

Some  chemical  compounds,  consisting  of  binary 
molecules,  distribute  the  bound  ether  of  the  molecule, 
at  any  rate  as  soon  as  it  is  split  up  by  dissociation  ; 
and,  instead  of  each  nascent  radicle  or  atom  taking 
with  it  neutral  ether,  one  takes  a  certain  definite 
quantity  of  positive,  the  other  the  same  amount 
of  negative,  electricity.  In  the  liquid  state  the 
atoms  are  capable  of  locomotion  ;  and  a  continuous 
shearing  force  applied  to  the  ether  in  such  liquids 
causes  a  continual  procession  of  the  matter  and 
associated  electricity,  the  positive  one  way,  and  the 
negative  the  other,  and  thus  all  the  phenomena  of 
electrolysis  (Chap.  IV.). 


LECT.  II  MATTER  NECESSARY   TO  CONDUCTION  409 

What  I  say  about  electricity,  however,  is  not  to  be 
taken  without  salt  ;  you  will  not  regard  it  as  recognized 
truth,  but  as  a  tentative  belief  of  your  lecturer's  which 
may  be  found  to  be  more  or  less,  and  possibly  more 
rather  than  less,  out  of  accordance  with  facts.  I  can 
only  say  that  it  hangs  phenomena  together,  and  that 
it  has  been  forced  upon  my  belief  in  various  ways. 

Now  what  about  the  free  ether  of  space,  is  it  a  con- 
ductor of  electricity  ?  There  are  certain  facts  which 
suggest  that  it  is,  and  Edlund  has  suggested  that  it  is 
an  almost  perfect  conductor.  When  a  sun-spot  or 
other  disturbance  breaks  out  on  the  sun,  accompanied 
as  it  is,  no  doubt,  by  violent  electric  storms,  the  electric 
condition  of  the  earth  is  affected,  and  we  have  aurorae 
and  magnetic  disturbances.  Is  this  by  induction 
through  space  ?  or  can  it  be  due  to  conduction  and 
the  arrival  of  some  microscopic  portion  of  a  derived 
current  travelling  our  way  ? 

For  my  part  I  cannot  think  the  ether  a  conductor. 
Maxwell  has  shown  that  conductors  must  be  opaque, 
and  ether  is  nothing  if  not  transparent  ;  one  is  driven, 
then,  to  conclude  that  what  we  call  conduction  does 
not  go  on  except  in  the  presence  of  ordinary  matter — 
in  other  words,  perhaps,  that  it  is  a  phenomenon  more 
connected  with  bound  ether  than  with  free. 

But  now,  looking  back  to  Fresnel's  hypothesis  of 
the  extra  density  of  matter  inside  gross  matter,  and 
also  to  the  fact  that  it  must  be  regarded  as  incom- 


4TO  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

pressible  ;  the  question  naturally  arises,  How  can  it  be 
densified  by  matter  or  anything  else  ?  Perhaps  it  is 
not ;  perhaps  matter  only  strains  the  ether  towards 
itself,  thus  slackening  its  tension,  as  it  were,  inside 
bodies,  not  producing  any  real  increase  of  density  ; 
and  this  is  roughly  McCullagh's  form  of  the  undulatory 
theory.  In  this  form  gravitation  may  be  held  to  be 
partially  explained  ;  for  two  bodies  straining  at  the 
ether  in  this  way  will  tend  to  pull  themselves  together. 
Newton  himself  dimly  suggested,  in  one  of  the  queries 
appended  to  the  later  editions  of  his  "  Opticks,"  that 
gravitation  would  be  produced  if  only  matter  exerted 
a  kind  of  pressure  on  an  all  pervading  ether,  the  pres- 
sure varying  as  the  inverse  distance.  (See  Appendix.) 
He  did  not  follow  the  idea  up,  however,  because 
he  had  then  no  other  facts  to  confirm  him  in  his 
impression  of  the  existence  of  such  an  ether,  or  to 
inform  him  concerning  its  properties.  We  now  not 
only  feel  sure  that  an  ether  exists,  but  we  know  some- 
thing of  its  properties  ;  and  we  also  have  learnt 
from  light  and  from  electricity,  that  some  such  action 
between  matter  and  ether  actually  occurs,  though  how 
or  why  it  occurs  we  do  not  yet  know.  I  am  therefore 
compelled  to  believe  that  this  is  certainly  the  direction 
in  which  an  ultimate  explanation  of  gravitation  and 
of  cohesion  is  to  be  looked  for. 

In  thinking  over  the  Fresnel  and  McCullagh  forms 


LECT.  ii  NATURE  OF  ELASTICITY  411 

of  the  undulatory  theory,  with  a  view  to  the  recon- 
ciliation between  them  which  appears  necessary  and 
imminent,  one  naturally  asks,  is  there  any  such  clear 
distinction  to  be  drawn  between  ether  and  matter  as 
we  have  hitherto  tacitly  assumed  ?  may  they  not  be 
different  modifications,  or  even  manifestations,  of  the 
same  thing  ? 

Again,  when  we  speak  of  atoms  vibrating,  how  can 
they  vibrate  ?  of  what  are  their  parts  composed  ? 

And  now  we  come  to  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
and  suggestive  speculations  of  modern  times — a 
speculation  based  on  this  experimental  fact,  that  the 
elasticity  of  a  solid  may  be  accounted  for  by  the 
motion  of  a  fluid  ;  that  a  fluid  in  motion  may  possess 
rigidity. 

I  said  that  rigidity  was  precisely  what  no  fluid 
possessed  :  at  rest  this  is  true  ;  in  motion  it  is  not  true 

(§  156). 

Consider  a  perfectly  flexible  india-rubber  O-shaped 
tube  full  of  water  ;  nothing  is  more  flaccid  and  limp. 
But  set  the  water  rapidly  circulating,  and  it  becomes 
at  once  stiff ;  it  will  stand  on  end  for  a  time  without 
support ;  kinks  in  it  take  force  to  make,  and  are  more  or 
less  permanent.  A  practicable  form  of  this  experiment 
is  the  well-known  one  of  a  flexible  chain  over  a  pulley, 
which  becomes  stiff  as  soon  as  it  is  set  in  rapid 
motion. 

This  is  called  a  vortex  stream-line,  and  a  vortex  is  a 


412  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

thing  built  up  of  a  number  of  such  stream-lines.  If  they 
are  arranged'  parallel  to  one  another  about  a  straight 
axis  or  core,  we  have  a  vortex  cylinder,  such  as  is 
easily  produced  by  stirring  a  vessel  of  water  or  by 
pulling  the  plug  out  of  a  wash-hand  basin  ;  or  such 
as  are  made  in  the  air  on  a  large  scale  in  America, 
and  telegraphed  over  here,  when  they  are  called 
"  cyclones,"  or  "  depressions."  The  depression  is  visible 
enough  in  the  middle  of  revolving  water.  These 
vortices  are  wonderfully  permanent  things,  and  last  a 
long  time,  though  they  sometimes  break  up  unex- 
pectedly. 

Vortices  need  not  have  straight  cores  :  they 
may  have  cores  of  various  ring  forms,  the  simplest 
being  a  circle.  To  make  a  vortex  ring  we  must  take 
a  plane  disk  of  the  fluid,  and  at  a  certain  instant  give 
to  every  atom  in  the  disk  a  certain  velocity  forward, 
graduating  the  velocity  according  to  its  distance  from 
the  edge  of  the  disk.  We  have  as  yet  no  means  of 
doing  this  in  a  frictionless  fluid,  but  with  a  fluid  such 
as  air  and  water  it  happens  to  be  easy  ;  we  have  only 
to  knock  a  little  of  the  fluid  suddenly  out  of  a  box 
through  a  sharp-edged  hole,  and  the  friction  of  the 
edges  of  the  hole  does  what  we  want.  The  central 
portion  travels  rapidly  forward,  and  returns  round 
outside  the  core,  rolling  back  towards  the  hole.  But 
the  impetus  sends  the  whole  forward,  and  none  really 
returns  ;  it  rolls  on  its  outer  circumference  as  a  wheel 


LECT.  II  VORTEX  RINGS  413 

rolls  along  a  road.  In  a  perfect  fluid  under  conceivable 
circumstances  it  need  not  so  roll  forward,  as  there  would 
be  no  friction,  but  in  air  or  water  a  vortex  ring  has 
always  a  definite  forward  velocity,  just  as  a  locomotive 
driving-wheel  has  when  it  does  not  slip  on  the  rails. 

We  have  in  these  rings  a  real  mass  of  air  moving 
bodily  forward,  and  it  impinges  on  a  face  or  a  gas 
flame  with  some  force.  One  is  thus  easily  able  to 
blow  out  a  distant  gas  flame  ten  or  twelve  yards  away 
by  an  invisible  projectile  of  air.  It  is  differentiated 
from  the  rest  of  the  atmosphere  by  reason  of  its 
peculiar  rotational  motion.  The  ring  may  be  rendered 
visible  by  means  of  smoke,  but  it  is  in  no  way 
improved  by  that  addition  except  in  the  matter  of 
visibility. 

The  cores  of  these  rings  are  elastic — they  possess 
rigidity  ;  the  circular  is  their  stable  form,  and  if  this 
is  altered,  they  oscillate  about  it.  Thus  when  two 
vortex  rings  impinge,  or  even  approach  fairly  near  one 
another,  they  visibly  deflect  each  other,  and  also  cause 
each  other  to  vibrate. 

The  theory  of  the  impact  of  interference  of  vortex 
rings  whose  paths  cross  but  which  do  not  come 
very  near  together,  has  been  quite  recently  worked 
out  by  Mr.  J.  J.  Thomson.  It  is  quite  possible  to 
make  the  rings  vibrate  without  any  impact,  by  serrating 
the  opening  out  of  which  they  are  knocked.  The 
simplest  serration  of  a  circle  turns  it  into  an  ellipse, 


414  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

and  here  you  have  an  elliptic  ring  oscillating  from  a 
tall  to  a  squat  ellipse  and  back  again.  Here  is  a 
four-waved  opening,  and  the  vibrations  are  by  this 
very  well  shown.  A  six-waved  opening  makes  the 
vibrations  almost  too  small  to  be  perceived  at  a  dis- 
tance, but  still  they  are  sometimes  distinct. 

The  rings  vibrate  very  much  like  a  bell  vibrates  : 
perhaps  very  much  like  an  atom  vibrates.  They  have 
rigidity,  although  composed  of  fluid  :  they  are  com- 
posed of  fluid  in  motion.  These  air  vortices  are  imper- 
fect, they  increase  in  size,  and  decrease  in  energy  ;  in 
a  perfect  fluid  they  would  not  do  this,  they  would 
then  be  permanent  and  indestructible,  but  then  also 
you.  would  not  be  able  to  make  them. 

Now  does  not  the  idea  strike  you  that  atoms  of 
matter  may  be  vortices  like  these — vortices  in  a  perfect 
fluid,  vortices  in  the  ether.  This  is  Sir  William 
Thomson's  theory  of  matter.  It  is  not  yet  proved  to 
be  true,  but  is  it  not  highly  beautiful  ?  a  theory  about 
which  one  may  almost  dare  to  say  that  it  deserves  to 
be  true  ?  The  atoms  of  matter,  according  to  it,  are 
not  so  much  foreign  particles  imbedded  in  the  all- 
pervading  ether,  as  portions  of  it  differentiated  off 
from  the  rest  by  reason  of  their  vortex  motion,  thus 
becoming  virtually  solid  particles,  yet  with  no  transi- 
tion of  substance  ;  atoms  indestructible  and  not  able 
to  be  manufactured,  not  mere  hard  rigid  specks,  but 
each  composed  of  whirling  ether  ;  elastic,  capable  of 


LECT.  II  NATURE  OF  MATTER  415 

definite  vibration,  of  free  movement,  of  collision.  The 
crispations  or  crimpings  of  these  rings  illustrate  the 
kind  of  way  in  which  we  may  suppose  an  atom  to 
vibrate.  They  appear  to  have  all  the  properties  of 
atoms  except  one,  viz.  gravitation  ;  and  before  the 
theory  can  be  accepted,  I  think  it  must  account  for 
gravitation.  This  fundamental  property  of  matter 
cannot  be  left  over  to  be  explained  by  an  artificial 
battery  of  ultra-mundane  corpuscles.  We  cannot  go 
back  to  mere  impact  of  hard  bodies  after  having 
allowed  ourselves  a  continuous  medium.  Vortex 
atoms  must  be  shown  to  gravitate. 

But  then  remember  how  small  a  force  gravitation 
is.  Ask  any  educated  man  whether  two  pound- 
masses  of  lead  attract  each  other,  and  he  will  reply  no. 
He  is  wrong,  of  course,  but  the  force  is  exceedingly 
small.  Yet  it  is  the  aggregate  attraction  of  trillions 
upon  trillions  of  atoms  ;  the  slightest  effect  of  each 
upon  the  ether  would  be  sufficient  to  account  for 
gravitation  ;  and  no  one  can  say  that  vortices  do  not 
exert  some  such  residual,  but  uniform,  effect  on  the 
fluid  in  which  they  exist,  till  second,  third,  and  every 
other  order  of  small  quantities  have  been  taken  into 
account,  and  the  theory  of  vortices  in  a  perfect  fluid 
worked  out  with  the  most  final  accuracy. 

At  present,  however,  the  Thomsonian  theory  of 
matter  is  not  a  verified  one  ;  it  is,  perhaps,  little  more 
than  a  speculation,  but  it  is  one  that  it  is  well  worth 
knowing  about,  working  at,  and  inquiring  into.  It 


416  THE  ETHER  AND  ITS  FUNCTIONS    LECT.  n 

may  stand  or  it  may  fall  ;  but  if  it  is  the  case,  as  I 
believe  it  is,  that  our  notions  of  natural  phenomena, 
though  they  often  fall  short,  yet  never  exceed  in 
grandeur  the  real  truth  of  things,  how  splendid  must 
be  the  real  nature  of  matter  if  the  Thomsonian 
hypothesis  turns  out  to  be  inadequate  and  untrue. 

I  have  now  endeavoured  to  introduce  you  to  the 
simplest  conception  of  the  material  universe  which 
has  yet  occurred  to  man — the  conception,  that  is,  of 
one  universal  substance,  perfectly  homogeneous  and 
continuous  and  simple  in  structure,  extending  to  the 
furthest  limits  of  space  of  which  we  have  any  know- 
ledge, existing  equally  everywhere  ;  some  portions 
either  at  rest  or  in  simple  irrotational  motion  trans- 
mitting the  undulations  which  we  call  light  ;  other 
portions  in  rotational  motion,  in  vortices  that  is,  and 
differentiated  permanently  from  the  rest  of  the  medium 
by  reason  of  this  motion. 

These  whirling  portions  constitute  what  we  call 
matter  ;  their  motion  gives  them  rigidity,  and  of  them 
our  bodies  and  all  other  material  bodies  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  are  built  up. 

One  continuous  substance  filling  all  space  :  which 
can  vibrate  as  light ;  which  can  be  sheared  into 
positive  and  negative  electricity ;  which  in  whirls 
constitutes  matter  ;  and  which  transmits  by  continuity 
and  not  by  impact,  every  action  and  reaction  of  which 
matter  is  capable.  This  is  the  modern  view  of  the 
Ether  and  its  functions. 


LECTURE    III 

THE   DISCHARGE   OF   A   LEYDEN   JAR1 

IT  is  one  of  the  great  generalizations  established 
by  Faraday,  that  all  electrical  charge  and  discharge 
is  essentially  the  charge  and  discharge  of  a  Leyden 
jar.  It  is  impossible  to  charge  one  body  alone. 
Whenever  a  body  is  charged  positively,  some  other 
body  is  ipso  facto  charged  negatively,  and  the  two 
equal  opposite^charges  are  connected  by  lines  of  in- 
duction. The  charges  are,  in  fact,  simply  the  ends  of 
these  lines,  and  it  is  as  impossible  to  have  one  charge 
without  its  correlative  as  it  is  to  have  one  end  of  a 
piece  of  string  without  there  being  somewhere,  hidden 
it  may  be,  split  up  into  strands  it  may  be,  but  some- 
where existent,  the  other  end  of  that  string. 

This  I  suppose  familiar  fact  that  all  charge  is 
virtually  that  of  a  Leyden  jar  being  premised,  our 
subject  for  this  evening  is  at  once  seen  to  be  a  very 

1  Delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution   of   Great  Britain,  on  Friday 
evening,  March  8,  1889. 

E   E 


418     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR     LECT.  in 

wide  one,  ranging,  in  fact,  over  the  whole  domain  of 
electricity.  For  the  charge  of  a  Leyden  jar  includes 
virtually  the  domain  of  electrostatics  ;  while  the  dis- 
charge of  a  jar,  since  it  constitutes  a  current,  covers 
the  ground  of  current  electricity,  all  except  that  por- 
tion which  deals  with  phenomena  peculiar  to  steady 
currents.  And  since  a  current  of  electricity  necessarily 
magnetizes  the  space  around  it,  whether  it  flow  in  a 
straight  or  in  a  curved  path,  whether  it  flow  through 
wire  or  burst  through  air,  the  territory  of  magnetism 
is  likewise  invaded  ;  and  inasmuch  as  a  Leyden  jar 
discharge  is  oscillatory,  and  we  now  know  the  vibra- 
tory motion  called  light  to  be  really  an  oscillating 
electric  current,  the  domain  of  optics  is  seriously  en- 
croached upon. 

But  though  the  subject  I  have  chosen  would  permit 
this  wide  range,  and  though  it  is  highly  desirable  to 
keep  before  our  minds  the  wide-reaching  import  of  the 
most  simple-seeming  fact  in  connection  with  such  a 
subject,  yet  to-night  I  do  not  intend  to  avail  myself 
of  any  such  latitude,  but  to  keep  as  closely  and  dis- 
tinctly as  possible  to  the  Leyden  jar  in  its  homely  and 
well-known  form,  as  constructed  out  of  a  glass  bottle, 
two  sheets  of  tinfoil,  and  some  stickphast. 

The  act  of  charging  such  a  jar  I  have  permitted 
myself  now  for  some  time  to  illustrate  by  the 
mechanical  analogy  of  an  inextensible  endless  cord 
able  to  circulate  over  pulleys,  and  threading  in  some 


LECT.  Ill 


ELECTROSTATIC  MODEL 


419 


420     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

portion  of  its  length  a  row  of  tightly-gripping  beads 
which  are  connected  to  fixed  beams  by  elastic  threads. 

The  cord  is  to  represent  electricity ;  the  beads 
represent  successive  strata  in  the  thickness  of  the 
glass  of  the  jar,  or,  if  you  like,  atoms  of  dielectric  or 
insulating  matter.  Extra  tension  in  the  cord  repre- 
sents negative  potential,  while  a  less  tension  (the 
nearest  analogue  to  pressure  adapted  to  the  circum- 
stances) represents  positive  potential.  Forces  applied 
to  move  the  cord,  such  as  winches  or  weights,  are 
electromotive  forces  ;  a  clamp  or  fixed  obstruction 
represents  a  rheostat  or  contact-breaker ;  and  an 
excess  or  defect  of  cord  between  two  strata  of  matter 
represents  a  positive  or  a  negative  charge. 

The  act  of  charging  a  jar  is  now  quite  easily  depicted 
as  shown  in  the  diagram. 

To  discharge  the  jar  one  must  remove  the  charging 
E.M.F.  and  unclamp  the  brake,  i.e.  close  the  circuit. 
The  stress  in  the  elastic  threads  will  then  rapidly  drive 
the  cord  back,  the  inertia  of  the  beads  will  cause  it  to 
overshoot  the  mark,  and  for  an  instant  the  jar  will 
possess  an  inverse  charge.  Back  again  the  cord 
swings,  however,  and  a  charge  of  same  sign  as  at 
first,  but  of  rather  less  magnitude,  would  be  found  in 
the  jar  if  the  operation  were  now  suspended.  If  it  be 
allowed  to  go  on,  the  oscillations  gradually  subside, 
and  in  a  short  time  everything  is  quiescent,  and  the 
jar  is  completed  discharged. 


LECT.  in  OSCILLATORY  DISCHARGE  421 

All  this  occurs  in  the  Leyden  jar  ;  and  the  whole 
series  of  oscillations,  accompanied  by  periodic  reversal 
and  re-reversal  of  the  charges  of  the  jar,  is  all  accom- 
plished in  the  incredibly  short  space  of  time  occupied 
by  a  spark. 

Consider  now  what  the  rate  of  oscillation  depends 
on.  Manifestly  on  the  elasticity  of  the  threads  and 
on  the  inertia  of  the  matter  which  is  moved.  Take 
the  simplest  mechanical  analogy,  that  of  the  vibration 
of  a  loaded  spring,  like  the  reeds  in  a  musical  box. 
The  stiffer  the  spring  and  the  less  the  load,  the  faster 
it  vibrates.  Give  a  mathematician  these  data,  and  he 
will  calculate  for  you  the  time  the  spring  takes  to 
execute  one  complete  vibration,  the  "  period  "  of  its 
swing.  [Loaded  lath  in  vice.] 

The  electrical  problem  and  the  electrical  solution 
are  precisely  the  same.  That  which  corresponds  to 
the  flexibility  of  the  spring  is  in  electrical  language 
called  static  capacity,  or,  by  Mr.  Heaviside,  per- 
mittance. That  which  corresponds  to  the  inertia  of 
ordinary  matter  is  electro-magnetic  inertia,  or  self- 
induction,  or  by  Mr.  Heaviside,  inductance. 

Increase  either  of  these,  and  the  rate  of  oscillation 
is  diminished.  Increasing  the  static  capacity  corre- 
sponds to  lengthening  the  spring  ;  increasing  the  self- 
induction  corresponds  to  loading  it. 

Now  the  static  capacity  is  increased  simply  by 
using  a  larger  jar,  or  by  combining  a  number  of  jars 


422    THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

into  a  battery  in  the  very  old-established  way.  In- 
crease in  the  self-induction  is  attained  by  giving  the 
discharge  more  space  to  magnetize,  or  by  making  it 
magnetize  a  given  space  more  strongly.  For  electro- 
magnetic inertia  is  wholly  due  to  the  magnetization 
of  the  space  surrounding  a  current,  and  this  space  may 
oe  increased,  or  its  magnetization  intensified,  as  much 
as  we  please. 

To  increase  the  space  we  have  only  to  make  the 
discharge  take  a  long  circuit  instead  of  a  short  one. 
Thus  we  may  send  it  by  a  wire  all  round  the  room,  or 
by  a  telegraph  wire  all  round  a  town,  and  all  the  space 
inside  it  and  some  of  that  outside  will  be  more  or  less 
magnetized.  More  or  less,  I  say,  and  it  is  a  case  of 
less  rather  than  more.  Practically  very  little  effect  is 
felt  except  close  to  the  conductor,  and  accordingly  the 
self-induction  increases  very  nearly  proportionally  to 
the  length  of  the  wire,  and  not  in  proportion  to  the 
area  inclosed  :  provided  also  the  going  and  return 
wires  are  kept  a  reasonable  distance  apart,  so  as  not 
to  encroach  upon  each  other's  appreciably  magnetized 
regions.  See  Appendix  (e). 

But  it  is  just  as  effective,  and  more  compact,  to 
intensify  the  magnetization  of  a  given  space  by  send- 
ing the  current  hundreds  of  times  round  it  instead  of 
only  once  ;  and  this  is  done  by  inserting  a  coil  of  wire 
into  the  discharge  circuit. 

Yet  a  third  way  there  is  of  increasing  the  magnet- 


LECT.  ill  RATE  OF  OSCILLATION  423 

ization  of  a  given  space,  and  that  is  to  fill  it  with 
some  very  magnetizable  substance  such  as  iron. 
This,  indeed,  is  a  most  powerful  method  under  many 
circumstances,  it  being  possible  to  increase  the 
magnetization  and  therefore  the  self-induction  or  in- 
ertia of  the  current  some  5000  times  by  the  use  of  iron. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar 
iron  is  of  no  advantage.  The  current  oscillates  so 
quickly  that  any  iron  introduced  into  its  circuit,  how- 
ever subdivided  into  thin  wires  it  may  be,  is  protected 
from  magnetism  by  inverse  currents  induced  in  its 
outer  skin,  as  your  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy l 
has  shown,  and  accordingly  it  does  not  get  simply  mag- 
netized ;  and  so  far  from  increasing  the  inductance  of 
the  discharge  circuit  it  positively  diminishes  it  by 
the  reaction  effect  of  these  induced  currents :  it  acts, 
in  fact,  much  as  a  mass  of  copper  might  be  expected 
to  do. 

The  conditions  determining  rate  of  oscillation 
being  understood,  we  have  next  to  consider  what 
regulates  the  damping  out  of  the  vibrations,  i.e.  the 
total  duration  of  the  discharge. 

Resistance  is  one  thing.  To  check  the  oscillations 
of  a  vibrating  spring  you  apply  to  it  friction,  or 
make  it  move  in  a  viscous  medium,  and  its  vibrations 
are  speedily  damped  out.  The  friction  may  be  made 
so  great  that  oscillations  are  entirely  prevented,  the 

1   Lord  Rayleigh. 


424     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR     LECT.  in 

motion  being  a  mere  dead-beat  return  to  the  position 
of  equilibrium  ;  or,  again,  it  may  be  greater  still,  and 
the  motion  may  correspond  to  a  mere  leak  or  slow 
sliding  back,  taking  hours  or  days  for  its  accomplish- 
ment. With  very  large  condensers,  such  as  are  used 
in  telegraphy,  this  kind  of  discharge  is  frequent,  but 
in  the  case  of  a  Leyden  jar  discharge  it  is  entirely 
exceptional.  It  can  be  caused  by  including  in  the 
circuit  a  wet  string,  or  a  capillary  tube  full  of  distilled 
water,  or  a  slab  of  wood,  or  other  atrociously  bad 
conductor  of  that  sort ;  but  the  conditions  ordinarily 
associated  with  the  discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar, 
whether  it  discharge  through  a  long  or  a  short  wire, 
or  simply  through  its  tongs,  or  whether  it  overflow  its 
edge  or  puncture  its  glass,  arc  such  as  correspond 
to  oscillations,  and  not  to  leak.  [Discharge  jar,  first 
through  wire,  and  next  through  wood.] 

When  the  jar  is  made  to  leak  through  wood  or 
water  the  discharge  is  found  to  be  still  not  steady :  it 
is  not  oscillatory  indeed,  but  it  is  intermittent.  It 
occurs  in  a  series  of  little  jerks,  as  when  a  thing  is 
made  to  slide  over  a  resined  surface.  The  reason  of 
this  is  that  the  terminals  discharge  faster  than  the 
circuit  can  supply  the  electricity,  and  so  the  flow  is 
continually  stopped  and  begun  again. 

Such  a  discharge  as  this,  consisting  really  of  a 
succession  of  small  sparks,  may  readily  appeal  to  the 
eye  as  a  single  flash,  but  it  lacks  the  noise  and 


LECT.  Ill  DAMPING  OF  OSCILLATION  425 

violence  of  the  ordinary  discharge  ;  and  any  kind 
of  moving  mirror  will  easily  analyze  it  into  its 
constituents  and  show  it  to  be  intermittent.  [Shake 
a  mirror,  or  waggle  head  or  opera-glass.] 

It  is  pretty  safe  to  say,  then,  that  whenever  a  jar 
discharge  is  not  oscillatory  it  is  intermittent,  and 
when  not  intermittent  is  oscillatory.  There  is  an 
intermediate  case  when  it  is  really  dead-beat,  but  it 
could  only  be  hit  upon  with  special  care,  while  its 
occurrence  by  accident  must  be  rare. 

So  far  I  have  only  mentioned  resistance  or  friction 
as  the  cause  of  the  dying  out  of  the  vibrations  ;  but 
there  is  another  cause,  and  that  a  most  exciting  one. 

The  vibrations  of  a  reed  are  damped  partly  indeed 
by  friction  and  imperfect  elasticity,  but  partly  also  by 
the  energy  transferred  to  the  surrounding  medium 
and  consumed  in  the  production  of  sound.  It  is  the 
formation  and  propagation  of  sound-waves  which 
largely  damp  out  the  vibrations  of  any  musical 
instrument.  So  it  is  also  in  electricity.  The  oscilla- 
tory discharge  of  a  Leyden  jar  disturbs  the  medium 
surrounding  it,  carves  it  into  waves  which  travel 
away  from  it  into  space  :  travel  with  a  velocity  of 
185,000  miles  a  second  :  travel  precisely  with  the 
velocity  of  light.  [Tuning-fork.] 

The  second  cause,  then,  which  damps  out  the 
oscillations  in  a  discharge  circuit  is  radiation: 
electrical  radiation  if  you  like  so  to  distinguish  it,  but 


426     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

it  differs  in  no  respect  from  ordinary  radiation  (or 
"  radiant  heat "  as  it  has  so  often  been  called  in  this 
place)  ;  it  differs  in  no  respect  from  Light  except  in 
the  physiological  fact  that  the  retinal  mechanism, 
whatever  it  may  be,  responds  only  to  waves  of  a 
particular,  and  that  a  very  small,  size,  while  radiation 
in  general  may  have  waves  which  range  from  a 
million  miles  to  a  millionth  of  an  inch  in  length. 

The  seeds  of  this  great  discovery  of  the  nature  of 
light  were  sown  in  this  place :  it  is  all  the  outcome  of 
Faraday's  magneto-electric  and  electrostatic  induc- 
tion :  the  development  of  them  into  a  rich  and  full- 
blown theory  was  the  greatest  part  of  the  life-work  of 
Clerk  Maxwell :  the  harvest  of  experimental  verifica- 
tion is  now  being  reaped  by  a  German.  Dr.  Hertz, 
now  Professor  in  the  University  of  Bonn,  is  a  young 
investigator  of  the  highest  type.  Trained  in  the 
school  of  Helmholtz,  and  endowed  with  both  mathe- 
matical knowledge  and  great  experimental  skill,  he 
has  immortalized  himself  by  a  brilliant  series  of 
investigations  which  have  cut  right  into  the  ripe 
corn  of  scientific  opinion  in  these  islands,  and  by  the 
same  strokes  as  have  harvested  the  grain  have 
opened  up  wide  and  many  branching  avenues  to  other 
investigators. 

At  one  time  I  had  thought  of  addressing  you  this 
evening  on  the  subject  of  these  researches  of  Hertz, 
but  the  experiments  are  not  yet  reproducible  on  a 


LECT.  ill  HERTZ'S  DISCOVERIES  427 

scale  suited  to  a  large  audience,  and  I  have  been  so 
closely  occupied  with  some  not  wholly  dissimilar,  but 
independently  conducted,  researches  of  my  own — 
researches  led  up  to  through  the  unlikely  avenue  of 
lightning-conductors — that  I  have  had  as  yet  no 
time  to  do  more  than  verify  some  of  them  for  my 
own  edification  (§  189). 

In  this  work  of  repetition  and  verification  Prof. 
Fitzgerald  has,  as  related  in  a  recent  number  of 
NATURE  (vol.  xxxix.  p.  391),  probably  gone  further  ; 
and  if  I  may  venture  a  suggestion  to  your  Honorary 
Secretary,  I  feel  sure  that  a  discourse  on  Hertz's 
researches  from  Prof.  Fitzgerald  next  year  would  be 
not  only  acceptable  to  you,  but  would  be  highly 
conducive  to  the  progress  of  science. 

I  have  wandered  a  little  from  my  Leydcn  jar,  and 
I  must  return  to  it  and  its  ocillations.  Let  me  very 
briefly  run  over  the  history  of  our  knowledge  of  the 
oscillatory  character  of  a  Leyden  jar  discharge.  It 
was  first  clearly  realized  and  distinctly  stated  by  that 
excellent  experimentalist,  Joseph  Henry,  of  Wash- 
ington, a  man  not  wholly  unlike  Faraday  in  his  mode 
of  work,  though  doubtless  possessing  to  a  less  degree 
that  astonishing  insight  into  intricate  and  obscure 
phenomena  ;  wanting  also  in  Faraday's  circumstantial 
advantages. 

This  great  man   arrived  at  a  conviction  that   the 


428     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

Leyden  jar  discharge  was  oscillatory,  by  studying  the 
singular  phenomena  attending  the  magnetization  of 
steel  needles  by  a  Leyden  jar  discharge,  first  observed 
in  1824  by  Savary.  Fine  needles,  when  taken  out  of 
the  magnetizing  helices,  were  found  to  be  not  always 
magnetized  in  the  right  direction,  and  the  subject  is  re- 
ferred to  in  German  books  as  "  anomalous  magnetiza- 
tion." It  is  not  the  magnetization  which  is  anomalous, 
but  the  currents  which  have  no  simple  direction  ;  and 
we  find  in  a  memoir  published  by  Henry  in  1842,  the 
following  words  :— 

"  This  anomaly,  which  has  remained  so  long  unex- 
plained, and  which,  at  first  sight,  appears  at  variance 
with  all  our  theoretical  ideas  of  the  connection  of 
electricity  and  magnetism,  was,  after  considerable 
study,  satisfactorily  referred  by  the  author  to  an 
action  of  the  discharge  of  the  Leyden  jar  which  had 
never  before  been  recognized.  The  discharge,  what- 
ever may  be  its  nature,  is  not  correctly  represented 
(employing  for  simplicity  the  theory  of  Franklin)  by 
the  single  transfer  of  an  imponderable  fluid  from  one 
side  of  the  jar  to  the  other  ;  the  phenomenon  requires 
us  to  admit  the  existence  of  a  principal  discharge  in  one 
direction  and  then  several  reflex  actions  backivard  and 
forward,  eac/t  more  feeble  than  the  preceding,  until  the 
equilibrium  is  obtained.  All  the  facts  are  shown  to 
be  in  accordance  with  this  hypothesis,  and  a  ready 
explanation  is  afforded  by  it  of  a  number  of  pheno- 


LECT.  in  HENRY'S  DISCOVERIES  429 

mena,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  older  works 
on  electricity,  but  which  have  until  this  time  remained 
unexplained." 1 

The  italics  are  Henry's.  Now  if  this  were  an 
isolated  passage  it  might  be  nothing  more  than  a 
lucky  guess.  But  it  is  not.  The  conclusion  is  one 
at  which  he  arrives  after  a  laborious  repetition  and 
serious  study  of  the  facts,  and  he  keeps  the  idea  con- 
stantly before  him  when  once  grasped,  and  uses  it  in 
all  the  rest  of  his  researches  on  the  subject.  The  facts 
studied  by  Henry  do  in  my  opinion  support  his 
conclusion,  and  if  I  am  right  in  this  it  follows  that  he 
is  the  original  discoverer  of  the  oscillatory  character  of 
a  spark,  although  he  does  not  attempt  to  state  its 
theory.  That  was  first  done,  and  completely  done,  in 
1853,  by  Sir  William  Thomson  ;  and  the  progress  of 
experiment  by  Feddersen,  Helmholtz,  Schiller,  and 
others  has  done  nothing  but  substantiate  it. 

The  writings  of  Henry  have  been  only  quite 
recently  collected  and  published  by  the  Smithsonian 
Institution  of  Washington  in  accessible  form,  and 
accordingly  they  have  been  far  too  much  ignored. 
The  two  volumes  contain  a  wealth  of  beautiful  ex- 
periments clearly  recorded,  and  well  repay  perusal. 

The  discovery  of  the  oscillatory  character  of  a 
Leyden  jar  discharge  may  seem  a  small  matter,  but  it 

1  Scientific  Writings  of  Joseph  Henry,  vol.  i.  p.  201.  Published  by 
the  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington',  1886. 


430     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR     LECT.  Ill 

is  not.  One  has  only  to  recall  the  fact  that  the 
oscillators  of  Hertz  are  essentially  Leyden  jars — one 
has  only  to  use  the  phrase  "  electro-magnetic  theory 
of  light  " — to  have  some  of  the  momentous  issues  of 
this  discovery  flash  before  one. 

One  more  extract  I  must  make  from  that  same 
memoir  by  Henry,1  and  it  is  a  most  interesting  one  : 
it  shows  how  near  he  was,  or  might  have  been,  to 
obtaining  some  of  the  results  of  Hertz  ;  though,  if  he 
had  obtained  them,  neither  he  nor  any  other  experi- 
mentalist could  possibly  have  divined  their  real 
significance. 

It  is,  after  all,  the  genius  of  Maxwell  and  of  a  few 
other  great  theoretical  physicists  whose  names  are  on 
every  one's  lips  2  which  endows  the  simple  induction 
experiments  of  Hertz  and  others  with  such  stupendous 
importance. 

Here  is  the  quotation  : — 

"In  extending  the  researches  relative  to  this  part 
of  the  investigations,  a  remarkable  result  was  obtained 
in  regard  to  the  distance  at  which  induction  effects 
are  produced  by  a  very  small  quantity  of  electricity  ; 

1  Loc.  cit.,  p.  204. 

2  And  of  one  whose  name  is  not  yet  on  everybody's  lips,  but  whose 
profound    researches    into    electro-magnetic    waves   have    penetrated 
further  than  is  generally  understood  into  the  depths  of  the  subject, 
and  whose  papers  have  possibly  contributed  to  the  theoretical  inspira- 
tion  of  Hertz — I   mean   that   powerful   mathematical   physicist,    Mr. 
Oliver  Heaviside.  v 


LECT.  in  SYNTONY  43i 

a  single  spark  from  the  prime  conducter  of  a  machine, 
of  about  an  inch  long,  thrown  on  to  the  end  of  a  cir- 
cuit of  wire  in  an  upper  room,  produced  an  induction 
sufficiently  powerful  to  magnetize  needles  in  a  parallel 
circuit  of  iron  placed  in  the  cellar  beneath,  at  a  per- 
pendicular distance  of  30  feet,  with  two  floors  and 
ceilings,  each  14  inches  thick,  intervening.  The 
author  is  disposed  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  an 
electrical  plenum  "  [in  other  words,  of  an  ether],  "  and 
from  the  foregoing  experiment  it  would  appear  that  a 
single  spark  is  sufficient  to  disturb  perceptibly  the 
electricity  of  space  throughout  at  least  a  cube  of 
400,000  feet  of  capacity ;  and  when  it  is  considered 
that  the  magnetism  of  the  needle  is  the  result  of  the 
difference  of  two  actions,  it  may  be  further  inferred 
that  the  diffusion  of  motion  in  this  case  is  almost 
comparable  with  that  of  a  spark  from  a  flint  and  steel 
in  the  case  of  light." 

Comparable  it  is,  indeed,  for  we  now  know  it  to  be 
the  self-same  process. 

One  immediate  consequence  and  easy  proof  of  the 
oscillatory  character  of  a  Leyden  jar  discharge  is  the 
occurrence  of  phenomena  of  sympathetic  resonance. 

Every  one  knows  that  one  tuning-fork  can  excite 
another  at  a  reasonable  distance  if  both  are  tuned  to 
the  same  note.  Every  one  knows,  also,  that  a  fork  can 
throw  a  stretched  string  attached  to  it  into  sympathetic 


432    THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

vibration  if  the  two  are  tuned  to  unison  or  to  some 
simple  harmonic.  Both  these  facts  have  their  electrical 
analogue.  I  have  not  time  to  go  fully  into  the  matter 
to-night,  but  I  may  just  mention  the  two  cases  which 
I  have  myself  specially  noticed. 

A  Leyden  jar  discharge  can  so  excite  a  similarly- 
timed  neighbouring  Leyden  jar  circuit  as  to  cause  the 
latter  to  burst  its  dielectric  if  thin  and  weak  enough. 
The  well-timed  impulses  accumulate  in  the  neighbour- 
ing circuit  till  they  break  through  a  quite  perceptible 
thickness  of  air. 

Put  the  circuits  out  of  unison,  by  varying  the 
capacity  or  by  including  a  longer  wire  in  one  of  them  ; 
then,  although  the  added  wire  be  a  coil  of  several  turns, 
well  adapted  to  assist  mutual  induction  as  ordinarily 
understood,  the  effect  will  no  longer  occur.  It  can  be 
obtained  again  by  diminishing  the  static  capacity. 

That  is  one  case,  and  it  is  the  electrical  analogue  of 
one  tuning-fork  exciting  another.  It  is  too  small  at 
present  to  show  here  satisfactorily,  for  I  only  recently 
observed  it,  but  it  is  exhibited  in  the  library  at  the 
back.  [The  more  recent  form  of  the  experiment,  page 
338,  is  readily  seen  by  an  audience.] 

The  other  case,  analogous  to  the  excitation  of  a 
stretched  string  of  proper  length  by  a  tuning-fork,  I 
published  last  year  under  the  name  of  the  experiment 
of  the  recoil  kick  ;  where  a  Leyden  jar  circuit  sends 
waves  along  a  wire  connected  by  one  end  with  it,  which 


LECT.  in  SPARKS  IN  WALL-PAPER  433 

waves  splash  off  at  the  far  end  with  an  electric  brush 
or  long  spark. 

I  will  show  merely  one  phase  of  it  to-night,  and 
that  is  the  reaction  of  the  impulse  accumulated  in  the 
wire  upon  the  jar  itself,  causing  it  to  either  overflow 
or  burst.  [Sparks  of  gallon  or  pint  jar  made  to  over- 
flow by  wire  round  room.1] 

The  early  observations  by  Franklin  on  the  bursting 
of  Leyden  jars,  and  the  extraordinary  complexity 
or  multiplicity  of  the  fracture  that  often  results,  are 
most  interesting.  (See  Electrician  for  March  29  and 
April  5,  1889.) 

His  electric  experiments,  as  well  as  Henry's,  well 
repay  perusal,  though  of  course  they  belong  to  the 
infancy  of  the  subject. 

1  During  the  course  of  this  experiment,  the  gilt  paper  on  the  wall  was 
observed  by  the  audience  to  be  sparkling,  every  gilt  patch  over  a  certain 
area  discharging  into  the  next,  after  the  manner  of  a  spangled  jar.  It 
was  probably  due  to  some  kind  of  sympathetic  resonance.  Electricity 
splashes  about  in  conductors  in  a  surprising  way  everywhere  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  discharge.  For  instance,  a  telescope  in  the  hand 
of  one  of  the  audience  was  reported  afterwards  to  be  giving  off  little 
sparks  at  every  discharge  of  the  jar.  Everything  which  happens  to  have 
a  period  of  electric  oscillation  corresponding  to  some  harmonic  of  the 
main  oscillation  of  a  discharge  is  liable  to  behave  in  this  way.  When 
light  falls  on  an  opaque  surface  it  is  quenched  ;  producing  minute 
electric  currents,  which  subside  into  heat.  What  the  audience  saw  was 
probably  the  result  of  waves  of  electrical  radiation  being  quenched  or 
reflected  by  the  walls  of  the  room,  and  generating  electrical  currents 
in  the  act  (§  166).  It  is  these  electric  surgings  which  render  such 
severe  caution  necessary  in  the  erection  of  lightning-conductors. 

This  explanation  has  since  been  entirely  confirmed  by  similar 
occurrences  in  other  places. 

F   F 


434    THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR     LECT.  in 

He  notes  the  striking  fact  that  the  bursting  of  a  jar 
is  an  extra  occurrence — it  does  not  replace  the  ordinary 
discharge  in  the  proper  place,  it  accompanies  it ;  and 
we  now  know  that  it  is  precipitated  by  it,  that  the 
spark  occurring  properly  between  the  knobs  sets  up 
such  violent  surgings  that  the  jar  is  far  more  violently 
strained  than  by  the  static  charge  or  mere  difference 
of  potentials  between  its  coatings  ;  and  if  the  surgings 
are  at  all  even  roughly  properly  timed,  the  jar  is 
bound  to  either  overflow  or  burst. 

Hence  the  jar  should  always  be  made  without  a  lid, 
and  with  a  lip  protruding  a  carefully  considered  dis- 
tance above  its  coating  :  not  so  far  as  to  fail  to  act 
as  a  safety  valve,  but  far  enough  to  prevent  overflow 
under  ordinary  and  easy  circumstances. 

And  now  we  come  to  what  is  after  all  the  main 
subject  of  my  discourse  this  evening,  viz.  the  optical 
and  audible  demonstration  of  the  oscillations  occur- 
ring in  the  Leyden  jar  spark.  Such  a  demonstration 
has,  so  far  as  I  know,  never  before  been  attempted,  but 
if  nothing  goes  wrong  we  shall  easily  accomplish  it. 

And  first  I  will  do  it  audibly.  To  this  end  the 
oscillations  must  be  brought  down  from  their  extra- 
ordinary frequency  of  a  million  or  hundred  thousand 
a  second  to  a  rate  within  the  limits  of  human  audition. 
One  does  it  exactly  as  in  the  case  of  the  spring — one 
first  increases  the  flexibility  and  then  one  loads  it. 
[Spark  from  battery  of  jars  and  varying  sound  of  same.] 


LECT.  in  MUSICAL  SPARKS  435 

Using  the  largest  battery  of  jars  at  our  disposal,  I 
take  the  spark  between  these  two  knobs — not  a  long 
spark,  J  inch  will  be  quite  sufficient.  Notwithstanding 
the  great  capacity,  the  rate  of  vibration  is  still  far 
above  the  limit  of  audibility,  and  nothing  but  the 
customary  crack  is  heard.  I  next  add  inertia  to  the 
circuit  by  including  a  great  coil  of  wire,  and  at  once 
the  spark  changes  character,  becoming  a  very  shrill 
but  an  unmistakable  whistle,  of  a  quality  approxi- 
mating to  the  cry  of  a  bat.  Add  another  coil,  and 
down  comes  the  pace  once  more,  to  something  like 
5000  per  second,  or  about  the  highest  note  of  a  piano. 
Again  and  again  I  load  the  circuit  with  magnetiza- 
bility,  and  at  last  the  spark  has  only  500  vibrations 
a  second,  giving  the  octave,  or  perhaps  the  double 
octave,  above  the  middle  C. 

One  sees  clearly  why  one  gets  a  musical  note  :  the 
noise  of  the  spark  is  due  to  a  sudden  heating  of  the 
air  ;  now  if  the  heat  is  oscillatory,  the  sound  will  be 
oscillatory  too,  but  both  will  be  an  octave  above  the 
electric  oscillation,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  because 
two  heat-pulses  will  accompany  every  complete  electric 
vibration,  the  heat  production  being  independent  of 
direction  of  current. 

Having  thus  got  the  frequency  of  oscillation  down 
to  so  manageable  a  value,  the  optical  analysis  of  it 
presents  no  difficulty  :  a  simple  looking-glass  waggled 
in  the  hand  will  suffice  to  spread  out  the  spark  into 

F  F  2 


436     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

a  serrated  band,  just  as  can  be  done  with  a  singing 
or  a  sensitive  flame  :  a  band  too  of  somewhat  the  same 
appearance. 

Using  an  ordinary  four-square  rotating  mirror  driven 
electro-magnetically  at  the  rate  of  some  two  or  three 
revolutions  per  second,  the  band  is  at  the  lowest  pitch 
seen  to  be  quite  coarsely  serrated  ;  and  fine  serrations 
can  be  seen,  with  four  revolutions  per  second,  in  even 
the  shrill  whistling  sparks. 

The  only  difficulty  in  seeing  these  effects  is  to  catch 
them  at  the  right  moment.  They  are  only  visible  for 
a  minute  fraction  of  a  revolution,  though  the  band 
may  appear  drawn  out  to  some  length.  The  further 
away  a  spark  is  from  the  mirror,  the  more  drawn 
out  it  is,  but  also  the  less  chance  there  is  of 
catching  it. 

With  a  single  observer  it  is  easy  to  arrange  a  contact 
maker  on  the  axle  of  the  mirror  which  shall  bring  on 
the  discharge  at  the  right  place  in  the  revolution,  and 
the  observer  may  then  conveniently  watch  for  the 
image  in  a  telescope  or  opera-glass ;  though  at  the 
lower  pitches  nothing  of  the  kind  is  necessary. 

But  to  show  it  to  a  large  audience  various  plans  can 
be  adopted.  One  is  to  arrange  for  several  sparks 
instead  of  one  ;  another  is  to  multiply  images  of  a 
single  spark  by  suitably  adjusted  reflectors,  (which  if 
they  are  concave  will  give  magnified  images)  ;  another 
is  to  use  several  rotating  mirrors  ;  and  indeed  I  do  use 


LECT.  in     DEMONSTRATION  OF  OSCILLATION       437 

two,  one  adjusted  so  as  to  suit  the  spectators  in  the 
gallery. 

But  the  best  plan  that  has  struck  me  is  to  combine 
an  intermittent  and  an  oscillatory  discharge.  Have 
the  circuit  in  two  branches,  one  of  high  resistance  so 
as  to  give  intermittences,  the  other  of  ordinary  resist- 
ance so  as  to  be  oscillatory,  and  let  the  mirror  analyze 
every  constituent  of  the  intermittent  discharge  into  a. 
serrated  band.  There  will  thus  be  not  one  spark,  but 
a  multitude  of  successive  sparks,  close  enough  together 
to  sound  almost  like  one,  separate  enough  in  the 
rotating  mirror  to  be  visible  on  all  sides  at  once. 

But  to  achieve  it  one  must  have  great  exciting 
power.  In  spite  of  the  power  of  this  magnificent 
Wimshurst  machine,  it  takes  some  time  to  charge 
up  our  great  Leyden  battery,  and  it  is  tedious  waiting 
for  each  spark.  A  Wimshurst  does  admirably  for 
a  single  observer,  but  for  a  multitude  one  wants  an 
instrument  which  shall  charge  the  battery  not  once 
only  but  many  times  over,  with  overflows  between, 
and  all  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye. 

To  get  this  I  must  abandon  my  friend  Mr. 
Wimshurst,  and  return  to  Michael  Faraday.  In 
front  of  the  table  is  a  great  induction  coil  ;  its 
secondary  has  the  resistance  needed  to  give  an  inter- 
mittent discharge.  The  quantity  it  supplies  at  a 
single  spark  will  fill  our  jars  to  overflowing  several 
times  over.  The  discharge  circuit  and  all  its  circum- 


438     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR     LECT.  in 

stances   shall    remain    unchanged.     [Excite   jars    by 
coil.] 

Running  over  the  gamut  with  this  coil  now  used 
as  our  exciter  instead  of  the  Wimhurst  machine — 
everything  else  remaining  exactly  as  it  was — you 
hear  the  sparks  give  the  same  notes  as  before,  but 
with  a  slight  rattle  in  addition,  indicating  inter- 
mittence  as  well  as  alternation.  Rotate  the  mirror, 
and  every  one  should  see  one  or  other  of  the  serrated 
bands  of  light  at  nearly  every  break  of  the  primary 
current  of  the  coil.  [Rotating  mirror  to  analyze 
sparks.] 

The  musical  sparks  which  I  have  now  shown  you 
were  obtained  by  me  during  a  special  digression x 
which  I  made  while  examining  the  effect  of  dis- 
charging a  Leyden  jar  round  heavy  glass  or  bi- 
sulphide of  carbon.  The  rotation  of  the  plane  of 
polarization  of  light  by  a  steady  current,  or  by  a 
magnetic  field  of  any  kind  properly  disposed  with 
respect  to  the  rays  of  light,  is  a  very  familiar  one  in 
this  place.  Perhaps  it  is  known  also  that  it  can  be 
done  by  a  Leyden  jar  current.  But  I  do  not  think  it 
is  ;  and  the  fact  seems  to  me  very  interesting.  It  is 
not  exactly  new — in  fact,  as  things  go  now  it  may  be 

1  Most  likely  it  was  a  conversation  which  I  had  with  Sir  Wm. 
Thomson,  at  Christmas,  which  caused  me  to  see  the  interest  of  getting 
slow  oscillations.  My  attention  has  mainly  been  directed  to  getting 
them  quick. 


LECT.  in  ROTATION  OF  PLANE  OF  POLARIZATION  439 

almost  called  old,  for  it  was  investigated  six  or  seven 
years  ago  by  two  most  highly  skilled  French  experi- 
menters, Messrs.  Bichat  and  Blondlot. 

But  it  is  exceedingly  interesting  as  showing  how 
short  a  time,  how  absolutely  no  time,  is  needed  by 
heavy  glass  to  throw  itself  into  the  suitable  rotatory 
condition.  Some  observers  have  thought  they  had 
proved  that  heavy  glass  requires  time  to  develop  the 
effect,  by  spinning  it  between  the  poles  of  a  magnet 
and  seeing  the  effect  decrease  ;  but  their  conclusions 
cannot  be  right,  for  the  polarized  light  follows  every  os- 
cillation in  a  discharge,  the  plane  of  polarization  being 
waved  to  and  fro  as  often  as  70,000  times  a  second  in 
my  own  observation.  (See  Phil.  Mag.  April  1889.) 

Very  few  persons  in  the  world  have  seen  the  effect. 
In  fact,  I  doubt  if  anyone  had  seen  it  a  month  ago 
except  Messrs.  Bichat  and  Blondlot.  But  I  hope  to 
make  it  visible  to  most  persons  here,  though  I  hardly 
hope  to  make  it  visible  to  all. 

Returning  to  the  Wimshurst  machine  as  exciter,  I 
pass  a  discharge  round  the  spiral  of  wire  inclosing  this 
long  tube  of  CS2,  and  the  analyzing  Nicol  being 
turned  to  darkness,  there  may  be  seen  a  faint — by 
those  close  to  not  so  faint,  but  a  very  momentary — 
restoration  of  light  on  the  screen  at  every  spark. 
[CS2  tube  experiment  on  screen.] 

Now  I  say  that  this  light  restoration  is  also 
oscillatory.  One  way  of  proving  this  fact  is  to  insert 


440     THE  DISCHARGE  OF  A  LEYDEN  JAR    LECT.  in 

a  biquartz  between  the  Nicols.  With  a  steady  current 
it  constitutes  a  sensitive  detector  of  rotation,  its  sen- 
sitive tint  turning  green  on  one  side  and  red  on  the 
other.  But  with  this  oscillatory  current  a  biquartz 
does  absolutely  nothing.  [Biquartz.] 

That  is  one  proof.  Another  is  that  rotating 
the  analyzer  either  way  weakens  the  extra  bright- 
ening of  the  field,  and  weakens  it  equally  either 
way. 

But  the  most  convincing  proof  is  to  reflect  the  light 
coming  through  the  tube  upon  our  rotating  mirror, 
and  to  look  now  not  at  the  spark,  or  not  only  at  the 
spark,  but  at  the  faint  band  into  which  the  last  residue 
of  light  coming  through  polarizer  and  tube  and 
analyzer  is  drawn. out.  [Analyze  the  light  in  rotating 
mirror.] 

At  every  discharge  this  faint  streak  brightens  into 
a  beaded  band.  If  the  analyzer  is  now  rotated  a  little, 
alternate  beads  brighten,  while  the  other  alternate  ones 
fade  ;  by  just  extinguishing  alternate  beads,  a  measure 
of  the  rotation  can  be  made,  and  it  is  considerable : 
these  are  the  oscillations  of  the  polarized  light ;  and 
when  examined  side  by  side  they  are  as  absolutely 
synchronous  with  the  oscillations  of  the  spark  itself 
as  can  be  perceived. 

Out  of  a  multitude  of  phenomena  connected  with 
the  Leyden  jar  discharge  I  have  selected  a  few  only 


LECT.  in  CONCLUSION  441 

to  present  to  you  here  this  evening.  Many  more 
might  have  been  shown,  and  great  numbers  more  are 
not  at  present  adapted  for  presentation  to  an  audience, 
being  only  visible  with  difficulty  and  close  to. 

An  old  and  trite  subject  is  seen  to  have  in  the 
light  of  theory  an  unexpected  charm  and  brilliancy. 
So  it  is  with  a  great  number  of  other  old  familiar 
facts  at  the  present  time. 

The  present  is  an  epoch  of  astounding  activity  in 
physical  science.  Progress  is  a  thing  of  months  and 
weeks,  almost  of  days.  The  long  line  of  isolated 
ripples  of  past  discovery  seem  blending  into  a  mighty 
wave,  on  the  crest  of  which  one  begins  to  discern 
some  oncoming  magnificent  generalization.  The  sus- 
pense is  becoming  feverish,  at  times  almost  painful. 
One  feels  like  a  boy  who  has  been  long  strumming  on 
the  silent  keyboard  of  a  deserted  organ,  into  the  chest 
of  which  an  unseen  power  begins  to  blow  a  vivifying 
breath.  Astonished,  he  now  finds  that  the  touch  of  a 
finger  elicits  a  responsive  note,  and  he  hesitates,  half 
delighted,  half  affrighted,  lest  he  be  deafened  by  the 
chords  which  it  would  seem  he  can  now  summon 
forth  almost  at  will. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX. 

CERTAIN  portions  of  electrical  science  have  recently  come 
into  considerable  prominence,  and,  as  they  are  hardly  satis- 
factorily treated  in  text-books  yet,  it  may  be  a  help  to  students 
to  say  something  about  them  here  in  less  popular  language 
than  in  the  body  of  the  book. 

Electro-magnetism. 

(a)  The  fundamental  fact  of  electro-magnetism,  ascertained 
by  direct  experiment,  is  that  a  circuit  conveying  a  current 
exactly  imitates  a  magnet  of  definite  moment,  the  equivalent 
moment  being 

ml  =  /i/zAC, 

where  A  is  the  mean  area  of  the  coil,  n  the  number  of  turns  of 
wire,  C  the  current,  and  p  a  constant  characteristic  of  the 
medium  inside  the  coil,  whose  absolute  value  we  have  as  yet 
no  means  of  ascertaining  (§§  68,  69,  127). 

Magnetic  Induction^  Reluctance ',  and  Permeability, 
(ft)  The  intensity  of  magnetic  field  at  a  distance  r  from  a  pole 
of  strength  m  is  — ,  and  this  may  be  called  the  number  of  lines 

of  force  (or  tubes  if  the  idea  be  preferred)  per  unit  area.  The 
total  number  of  lines  offeree  through  a  spherical  surface  of  this 

.    m  o 

radius  is  -2  X  4JTT8,  or 


446  APPENDIX 

This  number  must  likewise  thread  any  closed  surface  what- 
ever inclosing  the  pole  ;  and  in  fact  it  is  the  number  the  pole 
possesses.  It  may  be  called  the  total  magnetic  flux  or  displace- 
ment, or  the  total  magnetic  induction,  due  to  the  pole  ;  the 
name  "  induction,"  first  used  vaguely  in  the  sense  of  influence  by 
Faraday,  having  been  given  this  definite  connotation  by  Maxwell. 
The  same  expression  Ijkewise  gives  the  number  of  lines  offeree 
due  to  a  complete  magnet  ;  for  the  superposition  of  lines  due  to  an 
equal  opposite  pole  curves  the  original  lines  but  alters  not  their 
number.  With  two  detached  poles  the  lines  simply  go  from 
one  to  the  other.  With  a  complete  magnet  the  lines  all  form 
closed  loops  extending  from  north  to  south  through  air,  and 
back  through  steel.  In  the  case  of  a  coil  they  likewise  are 
closed  loops,  all  threading  the  coil  and  then  spreading  out 
through  the  surrounding  medium.  In  all  real  cases,  therefore, 
the  lines  of  force  form  closed  curves.  Magnetic  circuits  are 
always  closed,  just  as  electric  circuits  are. 

Take  the  simplest  case  of  an  anchor-ring  coil,  a  helix  bent 
into  a  closed  circuit  (like  Fig.  47  or  29)  :  all  its  lines  are  then 

inside  it,  and  their  total  number,  being  ^.TTHI,  is    - ;  where 

/  is  the  mean  circumference  of  the  anchor-ring,  or  length  of  the 
magnetic  circuit.  This  is  called  the  total  flux  of  magnetic 
induction,  or  briefly  the  total  induction,  and  we  will  denote  it 
by  I. 

Now,  in  the  analogous  case  of  a  voltaic  circuit,  the  current 
is  ratio  of  electromotive  force  to  resistance,  and  the  resistance 

may  be  written  —  ;  K  being  specific  conductivity,  and  A  sectional 

area  of  conductor  of  length  /. 

To  bring  out  the  analogy,  we  shall  write  the  magnetic  flux — 


where  the  numerator  is  sometimes  called  magneto-motive  force. 


APPENDIX  447 

and  the  denominator  magnetic  resistance,  or  preferably,  as 
suggested  by  Mr.  Heaviside,  magnetic  reluctance.  Obviously  /* 
takes  the  place  of  electric  conductivity,  and  is  a  sort  of  mag- 
netic conductivity  :  it  was  from  this  point  of  view  that  Sir  W. 
Thomson  long  ago  christened  it  "  permeability  "  (see  §  82). 

If  the  magnetic  circuit  is  not  -so  simply  constituted,  but  is 
composed  of  portions  of  different  areas,  length,  and  material  in 
series  —  as  the  magnetic  circuit  of  a  dynamo  is,  for  instance  — 
the  magnetic  reluctance  can  be  written  (still  pursuing  the 
analogy)— 


and  I  =  as  before. 

R 


Mutual  Induction. 

(c)  If  a  single  turn  of  a  secondary  wire  surround  this  closed 
magnetic  circuit,  as  in  Fig.  47,  the  total  induction  through  it, 
whatever  its  shape  or  size,  is  just  I  :  and  if  it  surround  the  ring 
n'  times,  the  effective  total  induction  is  ri\.  This  is  the  induc- 
tion of  the  primary  through  the  secondary,  which,  written  out 
in  full,  is  — 


The  relation  is  a  mutual  one;  and  if  the  same  current 
were  to  flow  in  secondary,  the  same  number  of  lines  would 
thread  effectively  the  primary.  Hence  we  call  it  mutual  in- 
duction, and  write  it  MC  ;  where  M,  the  coefficient  of  mutual 
induction  between  the  two  coils,  is— 

M  = 


the  A  and  the  /  referring  most  easily  to  the  simply  and  obviously 
closed  magnetic  circuit.     Two  detached  coils  situated  anyhow 


448  APPENDIX 

with  respect  to  each  other,  will  have  a  specifiable  value  of  M, 
but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  write  down. 

Self-induction. 

(d]  Instead  of  using  a  secondary  coil  to  surround  the  induction 
caused  by  the  primary,  we  may  consider  the  primary  as  sur- 
rounding the  induction  itself  has  produced,  and  so  speak  of  its 
"  self-induction  "  as — 

47T/z?/2AC 
/ ' 

which,  written  LC,  gives  us  the  coefficient  of  self-induction — 


or 


where  n1  —  number  of  turns  per  unit  length.  (§§  115  and  98.) 
Here,  again,  every  coil  has  a  specifiable  self-induction,  but  in 
most  cases  it  is  not  so  easy  to  write  down.  It  always  means, 
however,  the  ratio  of  the  self-produced  magnetic  induction  to 
the  current  which  has  produced  it  —  • 

L--1. 


Value  of  Coefficient  of  Self  -Induction  in  a  few  other  Simple 

Cases. 

(e)  The  magnetic  field  produced  by  a  straight  wire  varies  in- 
versely with  the  distance  ;  being,  at  a  distance  r  from  a  straight 
wire  of  sectional  radius  a,  conveying  a  current,  C  — 


and  .this  therefore  specifies  the  number  of  lines  through  unit 
area. 


APPENDIX  449 

So  the  whole  number  of  lines  of  force  included  between  the 
wire  and  any  distance  b,  in  a  drum  of  thickness  /,  is — 


Now,  if  at  the  distance  b  there  is  a  parallel  wire,  conveying  the 
return  current,  it,  too,  will  have  the  same  number  of  lines  of 
force,  and  the  whole  number  lying  between  a  length,  /,  of  each 
of  the  two  parallel  wires  is  — 


and  as  all  the  lines  of  force  that  exist  pass  between  the 
wires,  this  expression  sums  up  the  whole  magnetic  flux  pro- 
duced by  the  going  and  return  parallel  currents  ;  and  the  co- 
efficient of  C  in  the  last  expression  is  therefore  the  coefficient  of 
self-induction  for  the  case  of  two  thin  parallel  wires  at  a 
distance  b. 

For  a  circular  loop  of  radius  r,  radius  of  section  of  wire  being 
a,  this  modifies  itself  to  — 

8r 

L  =  47i>ir  log  - 
a 

(see  §  140).  In  every  case  p  refers  to  the  space  near  the  wire, 
not  to  the  substance  of  the  wire  itself. 

In  both  these  cases,  the  magnetization  of  the  substance  of  the 
wires  themselves  is  supposed  nil.  In  the  case  of  extremely 
rapidly  alternating  currents,  this  is  correct  (§  47).  In  the  case 
of  copper  wires  not  too  close  together,  it  is  never  very  incorrect. 


Energy  of  a  Current. 

(/)  A  magnet  of  moment  ml,  in  a  magnetic  field  of  intensity 
H,  experiences  a  couple  mlH  sin  6  :  and  therefore  a  simple 

G  G 


450  APPENDIX 

stiff  coil  of  wire  conveying  a  current  experiences  a  couple 
/M»ACH  sin  9.  If  it  turns  a  small  angle,  d6,  the  work  done,  or 
the  change  of  potential  energy,  is  /zwACH  sin  6dB  ;  and  there- 
fore the  potential  energy  of  the  circuit  in  any  position  is 
-/xwACH  cos  6  ;  which  may  be  written  1C,  because  nA.  cos  6 
is  the  effective  area  of  the  coil  resolved  perpendicularly  to  the 
lines  of  force  which  thread  it  to  the  number  /*H  per  unit  area. 

This  result  may  be  generalised  ;  a  current  in  a  magnetic  field 
always  possesses  energy  1C.  If  the  field  is  due  to  external 
causes,  i.e.  having  an  existence  independent  of  the  current,  the 
energy  is  potential  energy  of  strain,  and  tends  to  cause  the  cir- 
cuit to  rotate.  This  is  the  principle  of  electric  motors.  But  if 
the  field  is  due  to  nothing  but  the  current  itself—  if  it  is  a  self- 
produced  and  self-maintained  field  —  the  value  of  I  is  LC,  and 
the  energy  is  now  more  conveniently  called  kinetic  energy. 
To  obtain  its  value,  we  must  remember  that  the  induction  and 
the  current  die  out  togethef  :  it  is  not  as  if  they  had  an 
independent  existence,  and  so  the  energy  is  — 


This  is  the  work  which  must  be  done  at  starting  and  at 
stopping  the  current  (Chap.  V.). 


Pole  near  a  Circuit, 

(g)  If  a  single  pole  find  itself  on  the  axis  of  a  circle,  the 
number    of  its  lines  of  force  which    penetrate  the   circle  is 

-2 .  27rr2(i  -  cos  6),  the  latter  factor  being  the  area  of  the  portion 

of  a  sphere  with  centre  at  m,  cut  off  by  the  said  circle.  The 
expression  27r(i  ~cos#),  since  it  measures  the  ratio  of  the  area 
subtended  by  a  conical  angle  to  the  square  of  the  radius,  is,  in 
analogy  with  the  circular  measure  of  a  plane  angle,  called  a  solid 


APPENDIX  451 

angle  :  the  solid  angle  of  the  cone  with  vertex  m  and  base  the 
circle,  or  the  angle  subtended  by  the  circle  to  an  eye  placed  at 
m.  Call  this  angle  o> ;  then  the  number  of  lines  of  force,  or 
the  magnetic  induction  through  the  circle  is  tna>. 

If  the  circle  becomes  now  a  circuit  conveying  a  current  C, 
the  system  has  energy  muC,  and  accordingly  there  will  be  a 
tendency  to  relative  motion,  the  force  in  any  direction  being 
equal  to  the  rate  of  change  of  7/zwC  per  unit  distance  in  that 
direction. 


The  potential  of  the  pole  on  the  circuit  is  mo> ;  the  potential 
of  the  circuit  on  the  pole  is  Co>.  If  the  pole  is  situated  any- 
where, and  the  coil  is  of  any  shape,  w  can  still  be  specified, 
but  not  so  easily.  If  there  is  a  collection  of  magnets,  their 
potential  on  a  circuit,  or  induction  through  it,  can  be  written 
2  (;;/«). 


Magneto-electricity. 

(h]  The  fundamental  fact  of  magneto -electricity  is  that  if  the 
induction  through  a  circuit  change  from  any  cause  whatever,  an 
E.M.F.  is  set  up  in  the  circuit  equal  to  the  rate  of  change  of  the 
magnetic  induction — 


This  is  not  strictly  a  relation  independent  of  the  fundamental 
fact  of  electro-magnetism  :  the  two  are  connected  by  the  law  of 
the  conservation  of  energy.  I  may  indicate  this  important 

G  G   2 


452  APPENDIX 

fact  sufficiently  for  our  present  purpose  by  quoting  the  conser- 
vation of  energy,  in  a  form  applicable  to  the  case  of  a  circuit 
conveying  a  steady  current,  as— 


whence 


or  the  resultant  E.M.F.  consists  not  only  of  the  E.M.F.  applied, 
but  contains  also  an  intrinsic  or  indirect  E.M.F.  magnetically 
excited  in  the  circuit  ;  this  being  what  Faraday  discovered  as 
magneto-electricity. 


Various  Modes  of  exciting  Induction  Currents. 

(i)  Now  /  may  be  made  up  in  a  multitude  of  ways.  It  may 
be  a  component  of  terrestrial  magnetic  field,  say,  nAH  cos  6.  It 
may  be  caused  by  magnets  in  the  neighbourhood  2(;#o>).  It 
may  be  due  to  induction  from  some  other  coil,  MC.  It  may 
be  due  to  the  current  passing  in  the  coil  itself,  say  LC.  The 
total  induced  E.M.F.  is  the  rate  of  change  of  the  sum  of  all 
these,  or  — 


e  =    _  |^AH  cos  6  -f-  2(wo>)  -f  MC+  LC}  ; 
dt 

and  accordingly  it  may  be  excited  in  many  ways  :  by  changes 
in  size  or  shape  of  coil  ;  by  changing  its  aspect  to  the 
field  (as  in  a  dynamo)  ;  by  moving  magnets  in  its  neigh- 
bourhood (as  in  an  alternating-current  machine)  ;  by  varying 
the  current  in  or  shifting  the  position  of  other  circuits 
(as  in  a  Ruhmkorff  coil)  ;  or,  lastly,  by  changing  its  own 
current,  or  its  own  coefficient  of  self-induction.  Changes 

in  the  last  term,  —  (LC),  are  specially  called  E.M.F.  of  self- 
induction,  and  used  to  be  called  extra-currents. 


APPENDIX  453 

Primary  Current  alone  :  and  Coil  with  Revolving 
Commutator. 

(/)  The  equation  'to   a  current  of  varying  strength  in  the 
simplest  case  of  a  lone  circuit  is  — 


where  E  is  the  applied  E.M.F.  ;  and  this  may  be  written  out 
more  fully  — 

,tiL 


which  shows  that  in  the  case  of  circuits  of  variable  self-induction 
the  resistance  has  not  its  most  simple  value,  but  has  an  extra 

term  in  it,  a  spurious  or  imitative  resistance,  -j-. 

An  example  of  a  circuit  of  variable  self-induction  is  one 
which  is  continually  having  wire  withdrawn  from  or  added  to 
it,  so  that  a  current  has  to  be  stopped  in  portions  where  it  was 
already  established,  and  started  in  hitherto  stagnant  portions  ; 
a  case  quite  analogous  to  the  viscosity  of  gases,  and  commonly 
illustrated  by  passengers  of  appreciable  inertia  getting  in  and  out 
of  a  moving  train.  An  instance  of  the  case  occurs  in  every 
Gramme  ring,  or  indeed  every  dynamo  armature  when 
spinning  with  a  commutator,  quite  independently  of  the 
magnetic  field  in  which  it  may  happen  to  be  spinning.  In 
all  such  cases  the  effective  resistance  is  rather  greater  than 

R,    being   R  -f        ,   or    R  -f-  n  L  ;    where   the    self-induction 
virtually  added  to  the  circuit  n  times  a  second  is  L. 


Leyden  Jar. 

(k]  In  the  case  of  a  discharging  condenser  of  capacity  S,  the 
quantity   stored  in  it  at  any   instant  is    such    that  C  =  — ~ 


454  APPENDIX 

ft 

or  that  Q  =  Q0—  /  Cdt  ;    and   the   difference   of  potential   be- 
J  o 

tween  its  terminals  is  ^,  which  is  the   E.M.F.  applied  to   the 

o 

circuit.     So  the  equation  to  the  discharge  current  is  — 


. 
dt  S 

The  solution  of  the  equation  in  this  case  is  — 

•p 

C  —  —  e-i"t  sin  pt, 
pL 

•o 

where  ;#  =__    and  regulates  the  total  duration  of  the  discharge, 

and  where  p  =  --  approximately 
V(LS) 


more  accurately  *       - 

and  regulates    the   rapidity  of  alternation,  which  is  —  .    The 
wave-length  of  the  emitted  radiation  (Chapter  XIV.)  is  — 
\       27r  //"L       s\ 

A   =    -   .-Z/-=27Ti/(—      .     -I. 
p  V     \p  K/ 

With  these  quick  oscillations,  R  is  nothing  at  all  like  its 
ordinary  value  for  steady  currents  ;  because  the  outside  of  the 
wire  only  is  used  (§§  45  and  102)  ;  but,  calling  the  ordinary  value 
R0,  R  is  very  approximately,  for  high  rates  of  alternation,  —  1 


/  being  the  length  of  the  wire,  and  /u()  the  magnetic  permeability 
of  its  substance  (§  46). 

1  See  Rayleigh,  Phil.  Mag.,  May  1886. 


APPENDIX  455 

The  emission  of  radiation  by  such  a  circuit  goes  to  increase 
R  still  more  (§  142  and  p.  425).     See  also  (m). 


Alternating  Current. 

(I)  In  case  of  any  coil  or  armature  spinning  in  a  magnetic 
field,  the  equation  to  the  current  is  — 

-  RC  =  4(^AH  sin  6  +  LC  Y 
dt\  J 


or  L"^  +    R  +  ^  C  =  «AH  sin  6  -  ; 
dt       \          dt )  dt 

and  the  E.M.F.  is  therefore  alternating  according   to    a  sine 
function.     Writing  this  equation — 

T    d£,       |       TUf*  T-         '          ^J 

L—  +  RC  =  E0sm//, 

the  solution  is — 

C  =    Ensin(//-  e) 


where  tan  e  =  —7.     The  R'  differs  from  simple  R,  as  already 
K. 

explained  in  (f),  only  when  a  commutator  is  employed :  which 
it   often   is   not.      The  denominator  of  the   above  expression 


may  be  called  impedance,  and  denoted  by  P  (see  next  section), 
the  quantities  being  related  as  in  this  little  diagram.  The 
quantity  e  is  the  lag  of  the  current  behind  the  applied  E.M.F. 

The  hypothenuse  may  be  called  the  applied  E.M.F.,  the 
vertical  side  the  counter  or  induced  E.M.F.,  and  the  base  the 
effective  E.M.F. ;  when  an  alternating  current  is  being  by  any 
means  generated  in  a  coil. 


456  APPENDIX 


Two  Definitions  of  'Electric  Resistance ',  and  Distinction  between 
the  Two. 

(m)  The  oldest  definition  of  the  term  "  resistance  of  a  con- 
ductor "  is  that  given  by  Ohm,  viz.  the  ratio — 
E.M.F.  applied  to  the  conductor 

Current  excited  in  it 
But  another  is  contained  in  the  law  of  Joule,  viz.  the  ratio — 

Energy  dissipated  per  second  by  the  conductor 
Current  squared  which  it  transmits 

In  cases  of  no  reversible  obstruction  the  two  definitions  agree, 
but  in  cases  of  chemical  action,  of  reversible  heat  effects,  and  of 
varying  magnetic  induction,  some  of  the  energy  may  be  stored, 
all  is  not  dissipated,  and  under  these  circumstances  the  two 
definitions  do  not  agree.  A  distinction  must  be  drawn  between 
them  :  the  term  resistance  cannot  properly  be  applied  to  both 
quantities. 

Now  it  is  found  convenient  to  retain  the  name  resistance  for 
the  second  definition  —the  dissipation  of  energy  coefficient ; 
and  to  realize  that  in  the  total  obstruction  specified  by  the  first 
definition  there  is  included  "back  E.M.F."  "polarization,"  or 
other  reversible  obstruction,  in  addition  to  resistance  proper ; 
while  in  the  very  important  case  of  the  total  obstruction  met 
with  by  an  alternating  current,  it  has  become  convenient  to 
call  the  quantity  defined  by  the  first  of  the  two  equations 
"  impedance." 

The  two  definitions  of  resistance  may  indeed  be  always  made 
to  agree,  if,  in  the  Ohm's  law  definition,  instead  of  applied 
E.M.F.,  we  reckon  resultant  E.M.F.  And  this  is  the  neatest 
and  simplest  mode  of  taking  into  account  such  things  as  che- 
mical or  thermal  polarization,  and  also  a  magnetic  back  E.M.F., 
so  long  as  it  is  steady  and  external,  as  in  the  case  of  electric 
motors.  But,  when  dealing  with  alternating  generators,  some 
understanding  has  to  be  come  to  as  to  how  the  value  of  their 


APPENDIX  457 

E.M.F.  is  to  be  reckoned,  and  no  simple  subtraction  of  a  back 
E.M.F.  is  convenient.  Referring  to  last  section,  we  see  that 
the  expression  for  current  contains  as  numerator  a  lessened  or 
lagging  E.M.F..  and  as  denominator  an  obstruction  or  impedance 
containing  a  term  in  addition  to  what  is  usually  called  resist- 
ance. It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  the  idea  and  term 
"  impedance  "  become  so  useful. 

The  value  of  this  quantity  is,  in  general,  as  has  been  shown, 

VK/L)^  +  R'j  ; 

and  its  two  portions  may  be  styled  respectively  the  inertia,  or 
conservative  portion,  and  the  frictional  or  dissipative  portion 

(§  38). 

Part  of  the  energy  dissipated  appears  as  heat  in  the  con- 
ductor, and  this  is  the  only  portion  on  which  Joule  experi- 
mented, but  another  portion  we  now  know  is  propagated  out  as 
radiation  into  space  (§  142)  :  both  portions  together  are  included 
in  the  numerator  proper  in  the  second  definition  of  R. 


Induced  Current  in  Secondary  Circuit.     Transformers. 

(n)  The  E.M.F.  induced  in  a  secondary  circuit  surrounding 
a  ring  like  Fig.  47,  whose  primary  coil  has  an  alternating  or 
intermittent  current,  C,  sent  round  it,  is,  referring  back  to  (h} 
and  (c} — 

,.^/C  ,wA     dC 

M_,    or^'i..-^; 

and  depends,  therefore,  directly  on  the  number  of  turns  of 
wire  in  the  secondary  coil,  and  on  the  rate  of  variation  of  the 
primary  current.  This  is  the  principle  of  induction-coils,  and  of 
"  secondary-generators  "  or  transformers  (§115)-  The  E.M.F. 
thus  obtained  is  completely  under  control  by  choosing  a  suit- 
able value  for  »',  according  as  high  E.M.F.  (in  Ruhmkorff  coils) 
or  a  powerful  current  (for  electric  welding)  is  required.  They 


458  APPENDIX 

are  called  transformers,  because,  of  the  two  electrical  factors  in 
mechanical  "  power,"  EC,  they  can  change  their  ratio,  leaving 
the  product  nearly  constant :  just  as  ordinary  machines  do  with 
the  force  and  velocity  factors  of  the  same  product  "  power." 
So,  in  precise  analogy  with  gaining  in  force  what  you  lose  in 
speed,  you  gain  in  E.M.F.  what  you  lose  in  current ;  or  vice 
versa. 

The  equations  to  primary  and  secondary  currents,  C  and  C' 
are — 

E-RC    =- 
dt 


and  from  the  solution  of  these,  the  effective  or  apparent  self- 
induction  of  primary,  when  its  secondary  is  short-circuited 
and  when  all  resistances  are  kept  small,  comes  out  equal  to 

M2 
L —  — -.      Now    since,  for  a  simply  closed    magnetic    circuit, 

L  :  L':  M  =  n2  :  n'2 :  nn', 

the  effective  self-induction  (and  therefore  the  impedance)  of  the 
primary  is  approximately  zero  when  its  secondary  is  short- 
circuited— a  fact  which  is  the  Magna  Charta  of  commercial 
transformers. 


Rate  of   Transmission  of  Telegraph  Signals,  in  the  Simplest 

Case. 

(o)  Consider  a  unit  length  of  a  pair  of  parallel  thin  copper 
wires  not  too  close  together,  a  going  and  return  wire,  at  a 
distance  b  apart,  the  sectional  radius  of  each  wire  being  a. 
The  self-induction  of  this  portion,  see  (e),  is— 

L1  =  4/z  log  -  =  I48olog1()  (  -  jmicro-secohms  per  mile, 
a  \aJ 


APPENDIX  459 

and  the  static  capacity  of  the  same  portion  is  (by  somewhat 
similar  reasoning) — 


K  i 

7  -  —  TT\  micro-farads  per  mue. 

* 


4  log- 

a 

Hence 


The  resistance  of  the  same  unit  length  may  be  called  Rx. 

Now  consider  an  element  of  the  pair  of  wires  of  length  dxt 
and  write  down  the  slope  of  potential  between  its  ends  when  a 
current,  C,  flows  along  it,  and  also  their  rise  of  potential  with 
time  ;  we  get  — 


and 

Sd  V    i   dC. 
j        -j-  .  =  o. 

The  solution  of  these  equations  for  the  case  of  an  applied 
rapidly  alternating  E.M.F.,  V0  sin  //,  at  the  origin,  may  be 
written — 


T5 

where  m^  =  -  -1  and  pl 
2Lt 

Now,  a  "  wave  "  being  any  disturbance  periodic  both  in  space 
and  time,  its  simplest  general  equation  is  — 

y  —  a  sin  (pt  -  nx), 

where  y  is  the  extent  of  this  disturbance  at  any  place  distant  x 
from  the  origin,  and  at  any  time,  /,  from  the  era  of  reckoning. 

The  coefficient  a  is  the  amplitude  of  the  vibration  ;  n  is  the 

space-period-constant,  or  —  ;  p  is  the  time-period-constant,  or 

A 

77  ;  the  velocity  of  advance  of  the  waves  is  one  space-period  in 

X        p 
one  time-period,  viz.  —  or  —  . 


460  APPENDIX 

Hence  the   above  bracketed  pair  of  equations  give  waves 
travelling  along  the  wires   with  the  speed   -jrr~c~\i  which  we 


have  seen  equals  -    -  -  -,  and  with  an  amplitude  dying  out  along 
the  length  of  the  wires  according  to  a  logarithmic  decrement 


The  speed  of  propagation  of  pulses  along  wires  is  therefore 
precisely  the  same,  in  this  simple  case,  as  the  propagation  of 

waves  out  through  free  space,  viz.  the  velocity   -^  —  -  (§§  128, 


J32>  I37)-     All  complications  go  to  decrease,  not  to  increase,  the 
speed  (§  135). 

Dimensions  of  Electrical  Quantities. 

(/>)  Writing  L,  M,  T,  F,  ?/,  for  units  of  length,  mass,  time, 
force,  velocity,  as  usual,  and  A  for  area  ;  the  fundamental  and 
certain  experimental  relations,  independent  of  all  considerations 
about  units  and  systems  of  measurements,  are  — 
Of  electrostatics,  Q  =  L  >/(KF)    ......     (i) 

Of  magnetism,  m  =  L  x/0*F)      ......     (2) 

Of  electro-magnetism,     ;;/L  =  /uAC        .......     (3) 

The  last  may  also  be  written  — 

m  =  pvQ       .......     (3') 

in   which  form  it  suggests  the  magnetic  action   of  a  moving 
charge,  which  Rowland's  experiment  has  established. 

Combining  the  three  equations,  we  deduce  — 


I          density 

whence  itK  =  —5  =    ,      .  .     » 

-v2       elasticity 

the  well-known  relation  connecting  the  two  etherial  constants. 

Comparing     many    electrical    equations     with     correspond- 
ing mechanical  ones,  we  find  that  the  product  LC  takes  the 


APPENDIX  461 

place  of  momentum  (inv},  and  that  ^LC2  takes  the  place  of 
kinetic  energy  (^;;zz/2),  and  indeed  is  the  energy  of  a  current, 
see(/).  Hence  it  is  natural  to  think  of  L  as  involving  inertia, 
and  of /A  or  4717*  as  a  kind  of  density  of  the  medium  concerned. 

Assuming  this,  •--  at  once  becomes  an  elasticity  coefficient 
K 

(as  indeed  electrostatics  itself  suggests),  because  /zK?/2=i  ;  and 
the  dimensions  of  all  electrical  units  can  be  specified  as  fol- 
lows, without  any  arbitrary  convention  or  distinction  between 
electrostatic  and  electro-magnetic  units  :— 

strain         area         LT2 

Sp.  md.  cap.,  K  =  -       -  =       --   =   -~—   =  shearabihty. 
stress        force          M 

inertia          M 
Permeability,  /*  =  — -          -  density. 


volume 

Electric  charge,  Q  =  L-  =  — — - —       — 
displacement 

M 
Magnetic  pole,  m  =F  ™   =  momentum  per  unit  length. 

L2 
Electric  current,  C  =  -  -  =  displacement  X  velocity. 

Mag'netic  moment,  ml  =     T    =  momentum. 

E.M.F.,  E  =  ?™F  _      t     =   pressure   X   displacement,  or 

work  per  unit  area. 

Intensity  of  magnetic  field,  H  =  -    =  T  =  velocity. 

Intensity  of  electrostatic  field,  ?    =  ^  =  energy  per  unit 

volume. 

Surface  density,  o-  =  ^ •  =  a  pure  number. 
A 

Electric  tension,  ^f  =  T-^L  -  a  pressure  or  tension. 


462  APPENDIX 

O         L2T2 

Capacity,  S  =  ^  =  =  displacement  per  unit  pressure. 

Coefficient  of  resistance,  ^    =  r-^,  =  impulse  or  momentum 

per  unit  volume. 

L2 
Magneto-motive  force,  4?r«C  =        =  current. 

Reluctance,-^   =   L-    =  ,area 


M         inertia 

Magnetic  induction,  I  =         =  moment  of  momentum   per 

unit  area. 

Coefficient  of  induction  (self  or  mutual),  ^  =  -  -=  =  inertia  per 

V^  J-i 

unit  area. 

This  is  an  improvement  on  the  rough  practical  system  which 
assumes  as  of  no  dimensions  sometimes  K,  and  sometimes  /u, 
according  as  one  is  dealing  with  electrostatics  or  with  magnet- 
ism ;  but  very  likely  it  is  only  a  stepping-stone.  Prof.  Fitzgerald 
has  recently  suggested  that,  regarding  everything  from  the  strictly 
kinematic  and  ethereal  point  of  view,  both  K  and  p.  may  be 
a  slowness  of  the  vorticity ;  and  by  that  assumption  also 
everything  becomes  simple  and  of  unique  dimensions.  What- 
ever of  this  turns  out  true,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  we 
can  long  go  on  with  two  distinct  systems  of  units,  the  electro- 
static and  the  electromagnetic,  and  two  distinct  sets  of  di- 
mensions for  the  same  quantities  ;  knowing  as  we  do  that 
neither  set  can  by  any  reasonable  chance  turn  out  to  be  the 
right  one. 


NEWTON'S  GUESSES  CONCERNING  THE  ETHER. 

(q)  Newton's  queries  at  the  end  of  his  "  Opticks"  finish  in 
the  early  editions  with  Query  16,  and  I  have  found  it  difficult  to 


APPENDIX  463 

come  across  the  later  queries  except  in  Latin.  I  therefore  here 
copy  such  portions  of  these  queries  as  have  an  obvious  bearing 
on  our  present  subject  ;  in  order  to  make  them  more  easy  of 
reference. 

"  Qu.  17.  If  a  Stone  be  thrown  into  stagnating  Water,  the 
Waves  excited  thereby  continue  some  time  to  arise  in  the  place 
where  the  Stone  fell  into  the  Water,  and  are  propagated  from 
thence  in  concentrick  Circles  upon  the  Surface  of  the  Water 
to  great  distances.  And  the  Vibrations  or  Tremors  excited  in 
the  Air  by  percussion,  continue  a  little  time  to  move  from  the 
place  of  percussion  in  concentrick  Spheres  to  great  distances. 
And  in  like  manner,  when  a  Ray  of  Light  falls  upon  the  Surface 
of  any  pellucid  Body,  and  is  there  refracted  or  reflected,  may 
not  Waves  of  Vibrations  or  Tremors  be  thereby  excited  in  the 
refracting  or  reflecting  Medium  at  the  point  of  Incidence  .  .  .  ?  " 

"  Qu.  1 8.  If  in  two  large  tall  cylindrical  Vessels  of  Glass 
inverted,  two  little  Thermometers  be  suspended  so  as  not  to 
touch  the  Vessels,  and  the  Air  be  drawn  out  of  one  of  these 
Vessels,  and  these  Vessels  thus  prepared  be  carried  out  of  a 
cold  place  into  a  warm  one ;  the  Thermometer  in  vacuo  will 
grow  warm  as  much  and  almost  as  soon  as  the  Thermometer 
which  is  not  in  vacuo.  And  when  the  vessels  are  carried  back 
into  the  cold  place,  the  Thermometer  in  vacua  will  grow  cold 
almost  as  soon  as  the  other  Thermometer.  Is  not  the  Heat  of 
the  warm  Room  conveyed  through  the  Vacuum  by  the  Vibra- 
tions of  a  much  subtiler  Medium  than  Air,  which  after  the  Air 
was  drawn  out  remained  in  the  Vacuum  ?  And  is  not  this 
Medium  the  same  with  that  Medium  by  which  Light  is  re- 
fracted and  reflected,  and  by  whose  Vibrations  Light  communi- 
cates Heat  to  Bodies,1  and  is  put  into  Fits  of  easy  Reflexion 

1  Note  the  precision  and  propriety  of  this  phrase  :  far  superior  to 
most  of  the  writing  on  the  subject  of  absorption  of  radiation  during 
the  present  century.  It  could  only  be  improved  by  substituting 
generates  in  for  "communicates  to,"  in  accordance  with  the  modern 
kinetic  theory  of  heat. 


464  APPENDIX 

and  easy  Transmission  ?  And  do  not  the  Vibrations  of  this 
Medium  in  hot  Bodies  contribute  to  the  intenseness  and 
duration  of  their  Heat  ?  And  do  not  hot  Bodies  communicate 
their  Heat  to  contiguous  cold  ones,  by  the  Vibrations  of  this 
Medium  propagated  from  them  into  the  cold  ones  ?  And  is  not 
this  Medium  exceedingly  more  rare  and  subtile  than  the  Air, 
and  exceedingly  more  elastick  and  active  ?  And  doth  it  not 
readily  pervade  all  bodies  ?  And  is  it  not  (by  its  elastick  force) 
expanded  through  all  the  Heavens  ?  "  » 

"  Qu.  19.  Doth  not  the  Refraction  of  Light  proceed  from 
the  different  density  of  this  ^therial  Medium  in  different 
places,  the  Light  receding  always  from  the  denser  parts  of  the 
Medium  ?  And  is  not  the  density  thereof  greater  in  free  and 
open  Space  void  of  Air  and  other  grosser  Bodies,  than  within 
the  Pores  of  Water,  Glass,  Crystal,  Gems,  and  other  compact 
Bodies?"1.  .. 

u  Qu.  21.  Is  not  this  Medium  much  rarer  in  the  denser  Bodies 
of  the  Sun,  Stars,  Planets,  and  Comets,  than  in  the  empty 
celestial  Spaces  between  them  ?  And  in  passing  from  them  to 
great  djstances,  doth  it  not  grow  denser  and  denser  perpetually, 
and  thereby  cause  the  gravity  of  those  great  Bodies  towards 
one  another,  and  of  their  parts  towards  the  Bodies  ;  every  body 
endeavouring  to  go  from  the  denser  parts  of  the  Medium 
towards  the  rarer?  For  if  this  Medium  be  rarer  within  the 
Sun's  Body  than  at  its  surface,  and  rarer  there  than  at  the 
hundredth  part  of  an  Inch  from  its  Body,  and  rarer  there  than 
at  the  fiftieth  of  an  Inch  from  its  Body,2  and  rarer  there  than  at 

1  In  Newton's  opinion  light  travelled  quicker  in  gross  matter  than 
in  space,  and  hence  it  is  that  he  inverts  our  Fresnel-derived  views.    He 
continues  the  same  inversion  in  his  query  concerning  gravitation,  here 
next  following. 

2  It  was  his  experiments  in  diffraction  which  made  him  think  of  this 
gradual  change  in  the  properties  of  ether  as  one  recedes  from  a  body. 
A  few  years  ago  such  gradual  changes  would  have  seemed  to  us  quite 
unlikely  ;   but   the  most  recent  experiments  of  Michelson    shake    all 
preconceived  opinions. 


APPENDIX  465 

the  Orb  of  Saturn;  I  see  no  reason  why  the  Increase  of  density 
should  stop  anywhere,  and  not  rather  be  continued  through  all 
distances  from  the  Sun  to  Saturn,  and  beyond.  And  though 
this  Increase  of  density  may  at  great  distances  be  exceeding 
slow,  yet  if  the  elastic  force l  of  the  medium  be  exceeding 
great,  it  may  suffice  to  impel  Bodies  from  the  denser  parts  of  the 
Medium  towards  the  rarer,  with  all  that  power  which  we  call 
Gravity.  And  that  the  elastick  force  of  the  Medium  is 
exceeding  great,  may  be  gathered  from  the  swiftness  of  its 
Vibrations.  Sounds  move  above  1140  English  Feet  in  a  second 
Minute  of  Time,  and  in  seven  or  eight  Minutes  of  Time  they 
move  about  one  hundred  English  Miles.  Light  moves  from 
the  sun  to  us  in  about  seven  or  eight  Minutes  of  Time,  which 
distance  is  about  70,000,000  English  Miles  supposing  the 
horizontal  Parallax  of  the  Sun  to  be  about  12".  And  the 
Vibrations  or  Pulses  of  this  Medium,  that  they  may  cause  the 
alternate  Fits  of  easy  Transmission  and  easy  Reflexion,  must 
be  swifter  than  Light,  and  by  consequence  above  700,000  times 
swifter  than  Sounds.  And  therefore  the  elastick  force  of  this 
Medium,  in  proportion  to  its  density,  must  be  above  700,000  X 
700,000  (that  is,  above  490,000,000,000)  times  greater  than  this 
elastick  force  of  Air  is  in  proportion  to  its  density.  For  the 
Velocities  of  the  Pulses  of  Elastick  Mediums  are  in  a  sub- 
duplicate  Ratio  of  the  Elasticities  and  the  Rarities  of  the 
Mediums  taken  together."  .  .  . 

"  Qu.  22.  May  not  Planets  and  Comets,  and  all  gross  Bodies, 
perform  their  motions  more  freely,  and  with  less  resistance  in 
this  ^Etherial  Medium  than  in  any  Fluid,  which  fills  all  Space 
adequately  without  leaving  any  Pores,  and  by  consequence  is 
much  denser  than  Quick-silver  and  Gold  ?  And  may  not  its 
resistance  be  so  small  as  to  be  inconsiderable  ?  For  instance  ; 


1  Meaning  what  we  call  the  pressure.  This  is,  of  course,  pursuing 
the  analogy  of  sound  waves,  and  does  not  accord  with  our  present 
knowledge. 

H   H 


466  APPENDIX 

if  this  ^Ether  (for  so  I  will  call  it 1)  should  be  supposed  700,000 
times  more  elastick  than  our  Air,  and  above  700,000  times  more 
rare  ;  its  resistance  would  be  above  600,000,000  times  less  than 
that  of  Water.  And  so  small  a  resistance  would  scarce  make 
a  sensible  alteration  in  the  Motions  of  the  Planets  in  ten 
thousand  Years.  If  any  one  would  ask  me  how  a  Medium  can 
be  so  rare,  let  him  tell  me  how  the  Air  in  the  upper  parts  of  the 
Atmosphere  can  be  above  an  hundred  thousand  times  rarer 
than  Gold.  Let  him  also  tell  me  how  an  electrick  Body  can  by 
Friction  emit  an  Exhalation  so  rare  and  subtile,  and  yet  so 
potent,  as  by  its  Emission  to  cause  no  sensible  Diminution  of 
the  weight  of  the  electrick  Body,  and  to  be  expanded  through 
a  Sphere  whose  Diameter  is  above  two  Feet,  and  yet  to  be 
able  to  agitate  and  carry  up  Leaf  Copper,  or  Leaf  Gold,  at  the 
distance  of  above  a  Foot  from  the  electrick  Body  ?  And  how 
the  Effluvia  of  a  Magnet  can  be  so  rare  and  subtile,  as  to  pass 
through  a  Plate  of  Glass  without  any  Resistance  or  Diminution 
of  their  Force,  and  yet  so  potent  as  to  turn  a  magnetick.  Needle 
beyond  the  Glass?" 

1  The  interest  of  these  extracts  lies  largely  in  their  belonging  to  the 
very  early  days  of  the  conception  of  an  ether,  and  in  their  remarkable 
insight  into  many  things,  though  in  detail  they  often  do  not  completely 
accord  with  present  knowledge. 


INDEX 


H   H   2 


INDEX 


A. 

ABERRATION,  327 

Abney,  406 

Absolute  minimum  of  electricity,  83 

Absolute  motion,  327 

Absorption,  model  of,  304 

selective,  282 

Action  at  a  distance,  386-390 
Actinic  rays,  295 
Affinity,  chemical,  82,  83 
Air-battery,  122 

Air-gap,  effect  of,  in  magnets,  185 
Alternate  contact,  discharge  by,  61, 

62 
Alternating  current,  equation  to,  455 

resistance  to,  108,  454 
Ampere,  100 
Ampere's  theory  of  magnetism,  171 

—173,  195 

Amperian  currents,  173 
Analogies,  see  Models 
Analysis    of  oscillatory   discharge, 

435 

Anion,  90 
Anomalous  dispersion,  282 

magnetization,  428 
Arago  experiment,  402 
Argument  from  experience,  387,  388 
Artificial  lighting,  284—288 
Atmosphere,  density  of,  399 


Atomic  charge,  79,  82,  83 

potential,  83 

vibration,  278 

vibration,  frequency  of,  294 — 

296 

Atomicity,  81 
Atom,  of  electricity,  83 

current  in,  173 

elasticity  of,  395 

infinite  properties  of,  1 72 

locomotion  of,  88 — 93 

intensity  of  attraction,  84 

surgings  in,  278 

vibration  of,  404 — 406 
Attraction  and  repulsion,  caused'  by 

strain  in  medium,  29 
Attraction  of  atoms,  intensity  of,  84 
Ayrton,  327,  371 


B. 


BEETZ,  173 

Bell,  Graham,  381,  383 

Bichat  and  Blondlot,  439 

Bidwell,  Shelford,  320,  384 

Biot,  ii 

Bird-cage  experiment,  10 

Bismuth,  effect  of  magnetism  on,  321 

Boltzmann,  358 

Bornstein,  330 


470 


INDEX 


Boys,  V.,  12,  406 
Browne,  Walter,  386 
Burr  in  pierced  card,  194 
Bursting  of  jar,  433 


C. 


CAMBRIDGE  physicists,  5 
Capacity,  31 

effect  of,  on  signals,  267 
Carey  Foster,  318 
Cation,  90 
Cavendish,  5,  6 

experiment,  II,  29 

experiment,  moral  of,  257 
Cavities  in  medium,  21,  28,  29,  66 
Centrifugal      force      analogue      of 

magnetic  repulsion,  197 — 200 
Charge,  27,  29,  33 

atomic,  79,  82,  83 

and  varying  magnetic  field,  168 

by  alternate  contact,  61 

by  induction,  47 — 58 

internal,  39 

moving,    149—151,    167,    236, 

327 

residual,  40 

spurious,  58 

surface,  58 

Charged  air  penetrating  wire  gauze, 
II 

sphere,  motion  of,  151 
Chemical  affinity,  83,  84 

elasticity,  250 

equivalent,  81 
Chinaman,  390 
Clausius,  85 

Clerk  Maxwell,  see  Maxwell 
Cohesion,  391,  396 

and  gravitation,  410 
Coil  imitating  magnet,  156 
Combustion,    an  indirect  source  of 

light,  286 
Communication,  modes  of,  392 — 

394 

Commutated  circuit,  resistance  of, 

453 


Concentration  by  reflexion,  290 
Condenser,  stratified,  39 

discharge  of,  254 — 259 

momentum  in,  29 
Condensers,  35 
Conduction,  gaseous,  135 — 139 

in  liquid,  78 — 94 

in  metals,  73 — 7& 

surface,  109 
Conductivity,  magnet,  180 

effect  of  light  on,  330 
Conductor, moving  in  magnetic  field, 
232 

perfect,  190,  192,  209,  221,  289, 

3p4. 

radiation  encountering,  300 
Conductors,  like  cavities,  21,  71 

opacity  of,  300-305, 
Connexion  of  Faraday  and  Hall,  381, 
382 

effects,  318,  320 
Contact-force,  118 — 127 
Convection  of  heat,  water,  and  elec- 
tricity. 72 

Copper-disc  experiment,  176 
Cord-models,  37—61 
Corpuscular  theories,  394 
Crookes,  146,  329,  356,  363, 
Currents,  action  between  two,  99 
Current,  action  of,  on  pole,  158 

alternating,  108 

Amperian,  173 

as  moving  charge,  327 

brake  analogue  of,  222 

condition  of  medium  near,  98 

density  of,  75 

distribution  of,  217 

disturbance    not    confined    to 
conductor,  98 — 105 

energy  of,  103  —  106,  449, 

excited  by  light,  334 

exerting  mechanical  force,  229 

extra,  96,  99 — 101,  212,  452 

heat  of,  76 

imitating  magnet,  445 

in  atom,  173 

induced,  452 

in  perfect  conductor,  209 


INDEX 


Current,  intensity  of,  74 

induction,  99 
Current,  magnetic  properties  of,  98 

— 102 

model  of,  206 — 218 
molecular,  173 — 179,  192 
produced  by  rotating  magnet, 

170 

production  of,  236 
propelled  by  side  thrust,  101, 

105,  265 
rise  in  secondary  circuit,  219 — 

222 

rotating  magnet,  168 
starts  at  surface  of  wire,   105, 

265 

stopped  by  resistance,  1 72 
time  taken  to  start,  105 
varying,  210 — 218 
viscosity,  analogue  of,  105,  106 
Cycle,  magnetic,  188 
Cyclone,  412 

D. 

DECOMPOSITION,  84 — 90 
Density,  of  current,  75 

of  ether,  210,  232,  248 

of  ether  and  atmosphere,  399 
Diamagnetism,  experiment  illustrat- 
ing, 177 

Weber's  theory  of,  174 — 179 
Dielectric,  breaking  down  of,  32 

constant,  see  Specific  inductive 
capacity 

cord-model  of,  37,  43 

stratified,  39—45 

strength,  138,    139 
Differences  between  electricity  and 

fluid,  15 
Diffraction,   299 
Diffusion  velocity  in  cables,  267 
Dimensions   of    electric   quantities, 

460 

Direction  of  vibration,  335 
Discharge,  by  alternate  contact,  62, 

63 
disruptive,  36,  40,  46,  235,  236 


Discharge,     dissipation    of    energy 

from,  258 

intermittent,  424,  436 
of  condenser,  three  main  cases, 

254,  424 
Discharge  of  condenser,  dying  out 

of  vibrations,  255,  425 
of  condenser,  theory  of,  454 
oscillatory,  46,  47,  101,  253 — 

259,  420—440,  453 
tuning-fork  analogue,  256,  420., 

425 

wave-length,  275,  454 
Dispersion,  281 — 283 

anomalous,  282 
Displacement,  45,  47,  48 
Disruptive   discharge,   36,    40,    46, 

235,  236 

Dissipation    of    energy     from    dis- 
charge, 258 

Dissociation,  83 — 86,  114,  403 
Dog,  modes  of  calling,  392 
Double  decomposition,  85,  86 
Doubleness  of  constitution  of  ether, 

246,  see  also  Dual  view  of  elec- 
tricity 

Dragoumis,  Dr.,  355 

Dual  view  of  electricity,  28,  30,  50 

87,   90,  91,   92,    191,    I92-I95> 

247,  408,  preface 


E. 

EDLUND,  409 

Elastic  bags,  14,  18,  29,  36 

cells,  235 
Elasticity,  253 

chemical,  250 

electromotive,  249 — 251 

of  ether,  246 

of  ether  accounted  for,  292 — 293 

of  ether,  probable  real  value, 
261 

of  moving  fluid,  191,  235,  292, 
293,  413,  414 

Thomson  theory  of,  235,  293, 

413 


472 


INDEX 


Electricity,    absolute   minimum    of, 

83 

always  flows  in  closed  circuit,  9 
and  ether,  17,  396,  407,  preface 
and  light,  356,  375 
atom  of,  82 
conduction  of,  72 — 91 
convection  of,  90 — 92 
Electricity,  displacement  of,  37,  38, 

45 
dual  view  of,  27,  29,  46,  87,  90, 

91,96,  191,  193-195,  247 
fluid  theories  of,  7,  21,  27,  29 
four  ways  of  recognizing,  14 
frictional,  131 
inertia  of,    15,  16,  48,  94 — 96, 

101,     no — 113,     190 — 192, 

205,  212,  328,  329 

liquid  theory  of,  12 

like  incompressible  fluid,  12,  18, 

28,  257,  differences,  15 
locomotion  of,  72,  150 
modes  of  transfer,  73,  78 
momentum  of,  16,  94 — 96,  no 

—113,    190—192,  265,   328, 

329 

natural  unit  of,  82 
not  a  form  of  energy,  7 
not  created  nor  destroyed,  J,  9, 

371 
positive  and  negative,  see  Dual 

view  of 

possibly  a  form  of  matter,  7,  9 
pyro,  132 

rotation  of,  96,  155 
specific  heat  of,  132,  324 
stream  line  of,  in 
subdivisions  of,  I 
weight  unascertainable,  14 
what  is,  371 
Wheatstone's     experiment     on 

velocity  of,  194 
whirl  of,  96,  155,  196,  372 
Electric  analyzer  (Hertz),  334 
eye,  333 

light,  a  temporary  phase,  286 
oscillation,  model  of,  298,  299 
radiation  refracted,  335 


Electric  radiation,  speed  of,  260 — 

284 

resonance,  333,  432 
tenacity,  251 

vortex  ring,  196,  212,  239 
wave  length,  274,  275 
wind,  191,  329 
Electrode,  77,  80,  88 
Electrolysis,  408 

laws  of,  80—86,  90 
Electrolyte,  79 

differing   from   metal    and    di- 
electrics, 87,  90 
model  of,  86,  92 
Electrolytes  and  gases,  136 — 138 
Electrolytic  conduction,  78 — 93 

momentum,  328 
Electromagnetic    system    of    units, 

261 
Electromagnetism,  fundamental  fact 

of,  156,  445 

Electromotive  elasticity,  249 — 251 
force,  35,  40,  451 
force,  thermal,  128 
Electro-optic  effects,  see  Faraday  and 

Kerr,  also  Hall 

Electrophorus,  cord  model  of,  48 — 5 1 
Electrostatic    and    magnetic    fields 

superposed,  234 
displacement  inside  ring  mag- 
net, 241 

effect    of    moving    or    varying 
magnetic  fields,  168,  237,  241 
system  of  units,  261 
Empiricism    of   present   modes    of 

getting  light,  285 
Energy,  of  current,  100 — 104,  449 
paths  of,  101 — 104 
transfer  of,  to  distance,  222— 

228 

transmission  of,  102 — 104 
two  forms  of,  375 

Ether  and  electricity,    17,  396,   407 
and  gravitation,  9 
and  matter,  410 — 416 
constants  of,  260,  461 
constitution  of,  249,   396,  397, 
407,  preface 


INDEX 


473 


Ether,    density   of,    210,    211,  232, 

248,  407 
density  of,  probable  real  value, 

261,  399 

doubleness  of  constitution,  246 
dual  view  of,  247,  407,  408 
effect  of  matter  on,  400 
elasticity    of,     18,     246,     261, 

39.8 
elasticity  accounted  for,  18,  292, 

293 

Fitzgerald's  model  of,   290-292 
fluidity   and   rigidity   of,     247, 

248 

free  and  bound,  401,  407 
free,  simple  structure  of,  281 
functions  of,  416 
incompressibility  of,  267 
inertia  of,  246,  398 
jelly  theory  of,  18,  20,  397 
Maxwell's  model,  291 
motion  through,  327 
rigidity,  probable  value,  400 
sheared,  408 

Ewing,  185,  189,  313,  322,  323 
Extra  current,  95,  99,  100,  212 
Eye,  electric,  333 


F. 


FARADAY,  5,  6,  n,  22,  23,  99,  307, 

378,  425 
electroptic  effect,  306-318,  378 

-38o 
electroptic     effect,     connected 

with  Hall's,  320 
electroptic     effect,    model    of, 

379 

electroptic  effect,  time  of,  322, 

438 

laws   of    electrolysis,    80 — 83, 

90 

Feddersen,  47 
Film  affecting  reflexion,  299 
Fitzgerald,  323,  335,  381,  427,  pre- 
face 
Fitzgerald's  ether  model,  290 — 292 


Fitzgerald  receiver,  the,  358 
Fizeau  experiment,  327,  401,  402 
Fluids,  magnetization  of,  185 
Fluid  theories  of  electricity,  7 
Fluidity  and  rigidity  of  ether,  247 

248 

Fluorescence,  297,  298 
Fly-wheel,  analogue  of  magnetism, 

221 

Forces  acting  on  conductors,  229 
Foster,  318 
Franklin,  5,  6,  27 
Frequency  of  atomic  vibration,  294 

—297 

Fresnel,  247 
Fresnel's   ether   theory,    400 — 403, 

409,  464 
Friction,  between  matter  and  ether, 

245 

resistance,  33,  75,   76 
Frictional  electricity,  245 


G. 


GALILEO,  172 
Galvanometer  analogy,  15 
Ga^,  momentum  in,  329 
Gaseous  conduction,  135 — 139 
Gases  and  electrolytes,  136,  137 

kinetic  theory  of,  394 
Gore's  railway,  163 
Generation  of  magnetic  field,  238 
Glass  conductivity,  affected  by  light, 

330 

Glow-worm,  287 

Gold-thread  experiment,  159,  160 
Gravitation  and  the  ether,  9 

Newton's  views  on,  410,  465 

propagation  of,  257 

smallness  of,  415 

theories  of,  394,  396,  410 
Gravity    compared    with    chemical 

affinity,  84 
Green,  6 

Gregory,  Mr.,  357 
Grotthus,  86,  139 
Grove,  Sir  W.  R.,  383 


474 


INDEX 


Gyrostat  explaining  elasticity,  293 
Gyrostatic   inaction  of  magnet,  95, 
96,  192,  328 


H. 

HALL,  309,  318,  326 
effect,  306,  318 
effect  in  insulators,  317 
effect  connected  with  Thomson 
effect,  324—326 

Hall  effect,  thermo-electric  view  of, 
321,  322—326 

Hallwachs,  331 

Heat  and  radiation,  71 

modes  of  transfer,  71,  78 
produced  by  current,   76 
produced     by     magnetization, 
1 88 

Heaviside,  179,  268,  421,  430 

Heavy  glass,  378 

Helmholtz,  85,  116,  156,  429 

Henry,  Joseph,  427 — 431 

Hertz,  263,  331,  332,  336,  426 
experiments,  331 — 337  et  seq. 

Hicks,  W.  M.,  292 

Hollow  vessel,   experiments  in,    8, 
11,257 

Holtz  machine,  91,  92 

Hooke's  law  in  electrical  case,  253 

Horse  and  cart,  390,  391 

Hot  glass  conducting,  330 

Hughes,  104,  217 

Hydraulic  analogies,  breakdown  of, 

102 
models,  55 — 62 

Hydrogen,  speed  of,  92,  93 

Hysteresis,  185,  313,  315 


I. 


ICE  pail  experiment,  10,  24 

moral  of,  257 

Illustrations,  23—26,  37,  39,  42,  45, 
48,  5°,  53>  57,  59,  60,  64,  65,  89, 


112,  124,  156,  160 — 166,  169, 
170,  177,  1 80,  196,  198—200, 
203 — 205,  208,  212,  214,  215, 

217,  220,  230,  233,  235,  239, 
291,  310,  317,  319,  338,  340— 

347,  350,  3.82,  419 
Impact  theories,   261 — 263 
Impedance,  455,  456 

and  resistance,  456 
Impetus,  see  Momentum 
Incompressibility  of  ether,  257 
Index  of  refraction  and  sp.  ind.  cap. 

277—284 
Induced  charge,  47 — 55 

current,  219 — 222,  450 
Induction  coil  theory,  457 
Induction,  cord  model  of,  48 

illustrated  by  strained  medium, 

29 

in  conductors  moving  in  mag- 
netic field,  232 
magnetic,  179,  446 
mutual,  447 
self,  see  Self-induction 
Inductive  retardation,  31 
Inductivity,  39 

Inertia,  of  electricity,  15,  16,  47, 
94 — 96,  101,  110—113,  I9° 
—192,  205,  212,  328,  329, 
421 

electromagnetic,  421,  422 
of  ether,  246 
of  iron,  267 
Insulating  medium  conveys  signals, 

265 
Insulators,  Hall  effect  in,  117 

transparency  of,  298 — 302,  381 
Intensity  of  current,  75 
Internal  charge,  43 
Ions,  speed  of,  93 
Iron,     function     of,     in     retarding 

signals,  217,  267 
ether  density  in,  231 
magnetic  effect   of,    179,   217, 

231,  422,  423 

permeability  of,  181,  210,  232 
saturation  of,  181 
wire,  properties  of,    105,  109 


INDEX 


475 


J- 


JELLY,  analogue  of  ether,  17,  20, 

64—66 
Joule,  76,  125,  122 


K. 

KEEPER,  use  of,  184 
Kepler,  378 
Kerr,  308,  381 

electroptic  effect,  306 — 314 
Kinds  of  wave  propagation,  16,  257 
Kinetic  theories,  392 — 395 
Kohlrausch,  93 
Kundt  and  Rontgen,  380 


L. 


LAMB,  Prof.  Horace,  294 

Langley,  360,  406 

Lateral  propulsion  of  currents,  100, 

105,  265 
Lehmann,  143 
Leyden  jar,  35—37,  4^,   100,   108, 

416—441 
bursting,  433,  434 
discharge,    rotating     plane    of 

polarization,  438 — 441 
emitting  waves,  258 
frequency,  273 
hydraulic  model  of,  55 — 64 
insulated,  61 
method   of  determining  speed 

of  pulses  in  wires,  270 
theory,  453 
wave-length,  257 

Light,    affecting   conductivity,    330 
and  electricity,  375 
common     indirect     mode      of 

obtaining,  286 
exciting  currents,  333 
manufacture      of,      284  —  287, 

331 

modern  theory  of,  336 
present  modes  of  obtaining,  285 


Light,  pressure  of,  363 

reflected  at  surface,  amount  of, 
299,  300 

velocity  of?  272—285,  398,  402 

and  electric  radiation  velocities 
compared  in  matter,  278 

violet,  on  spark-length,  331 

waves,  length  of,  277 

what  is,  370 — 373 
Lighting,  artificial,  284 — 287 
Lightning  conductor,  109 
Lines  offeree,  22 — 27 

between  two  discs,  24 

like  elastic  threads,  23 

like  rays  of  light,  26 

magnetic,  196 — 201 
Liquid  rotated  by  magnet,  164 

spiral  jet  of,  165 

theory  of  electricity,  12 
Locomotion  of  electricity,  72,  150 


M. 

MACALISTER,  DONALD,  experiment 

by,  ii 

McCuIlagh's  ether  theory,  410 
Magic,  389,  353 
Magnet,  and  gold-thread,  160 
and  moving  charge,  167 
gyrostatic   inaction  of,  96,  97, 

191,  328 
imitated    by     coil,     155— 157, 

448 
in  form  of  ring,  181,  185,  239 — 

242 

rotated  by  current,  168 
rotating,     producing     current 

170 

rotating  liquid,  163 
Magnetic    and    electrostatic    fields 

superposed,  234 
attraction  and  repulsion,  197 — 

20 1 

circuit,  179 
conductivity,   180 
cycle,  1 88 
field,  generation  of,  238 


476 


INDEX 


Magnetic  field,  map  of,  195 

field,  models  of,  202 — 217 

field,     producing     electrostatic 
effect,  1 68,  237,  241 

field,  spreading,  208 

function  of  iron,  179,  218,  231, 
267,  422 

induction,  179,  445 

line  offeree,  169 

medium,  stress  in,  197,  201 

moment  of  circuit,  445 

permeability,     179—181,    210, 
211,  232,447 

permeability,      probable      real 
value,  261 

properties    of    disruptive    dis- 
charge, 236 

reluctance,  179,  446 

rotation  experiments,  159 — 170 

screen,  221 
Magnetic  substances,  opacity  of,  309 

whirls,  197 — 201 

Magnetism,    Ampere's    theory    of, 
170—174,  195 

flywheel,  analogue  of,  191,  211 

permanent,  182 

permanent,  universal,  313 

sub  permanent,  184 
Magnetization,  173,  174,  183,  238 

anomalous,  427 

heat  produced  by,  188 

mechanism  of  the  act  of,  189 

of  fluids,  185 

of  steel,  187 

Magneto-motive  force,  1 79,  446 
Maintenance  of  radiation,  277,  278 
Manganese  steel,  181 
Manufacture    of    light,    283 — 287, 

331 

Map  of  magnetic  field,  195 
Marionette,  389 
Matter  and  ether,  410 — 416 
Matter,  vortex  theory  of,  414 — 416 
Maxwell,  5,  6,  II,   I2n.,   191,  336, 

376^426,  430,  431 
Maxwell's  ether  model,  291 

experiment  on  Fresnel's  theory, 
4°3 


Maxwell's   momentum   experiment, 
96 

theory  of  light,  336 
Mechanical  analogies,  see  Models 
Mechanism  of  radiation,  288 — 305 
Media  of  communication,  389 — 395 
Medium,  strain  of,  252 
Meld's  experiment  analogue,  270 
Mental  imagery,  advantage  of,  86 
Metallic  conduction,  72 — 78 

cord-model,  37 

reflexion,  290 
Metaphysical  arguments,  validity  of, 

387 
Methods  of  communication,  392 — 

395 

Michelson,  327 

recent  experiments  of,  403 

Minchin,  383 

Model  of  rotation  of  plane  of  polari- 
zation, 329 
cord,  37—55 
ethers,  290—292 
hydraulic,  55 — 63 
of  absorption,  304,  382 
of  electric  currents,  206 — 217 
of  electrolyte,  86 — 90 
of  magnetic  field,  202 — 217 
of  radiation,  288 
of  reflexion,  300 — 305,382 
of  self-induction,  210 — 217 

Molecular  currents,  173 — 179,  192, 

195 

chains,   139 — 148 
Momentum  in  condenser  looked  for, 

329 

electric,  in  gas,  329 
of  electricity,  16,94 — 9^>  IIQ — 
113,     190 — 192,    205,     328, 

329 

Motion  absolute,  327 

Moving    charge,     149 — 151,     236, 

327 

charge  and  magnet,  167 
Muirhead,  329 
Musical  sparks,  434 — 439 
Mutual  induction,  447 
Myers,  339 


INDEX 


477 


N. 

NEGATIVE  electricity,  existence  of, 

see  Dual  view  of  electricity 
Newton,  377 
Newton's  guesses  on  the  ether,  464 

queries,  410,  462 
Niven,  294 


O. 

OCEAN  of  incompressible  fluid,  19 
Ohm's  law,  74,  246 
Opacity,  model  of,  382 

and  wave-lengths,  361 

of  conductors,   300—305,  334, 
381,  382 

of  magnetic  substances,  309 
Optical  controversies,  335 
Optics  and  electricity,  336 
Organ  analogue,  285 
Oscillation  in  conductor,  294—298 

period,  256 

Oscillators  of  Hertz,  333 
Oscillatory  discharge,   46,  47,  101, 
253,  259,  418—440, 

analysed  by  mirror,  435 
Outstanding  problems,  326 — 332 
Overflow  of  jar,  432 


P. 


PATHS  of  energy,  101 — 104 
Peltier  effect,  125,   126 
Penetrability  of  ether,  20 
Perfect   conductor,    191,   192,  208, 

209,  221,  289,  304 
Period  of  oscillation,  256,  420—429 
Permanent  magnetism,  182 

magnetism,  universal,  313 
Permeability,    180,  181,  210,  232, 

445 

not  constant,  313 

real  value  of,  261 
Perpetual  motion,  159 
Phosphorescence,  278,  287,  297 


Photophone,  383 

Pictet,  m.,  362 

Pitch,  index  of  refraction  of,  335 

prism,  335 
Plane  of  polarization  rotated,  model 

of,  379 
Point  whirligig,  193 

wind,  329 
Polarization,  electrolytic,  117 

of  electric  radiation,  333 
Pole,  acted  on  by  current,  158 
Potential,  29,  66 

of  atoms,  83 

of  isolated  metals,  122 

of  pole  on  circuit,  451 

uniform  in  conductors,  21 
Poynting,  16,  101 — 104,  105,  106, 

113,  268,  349 

Pressure  and  dielectric-strength,  139 
Preston,  Tolver,  394 
Principia,  376 
Problems  outstanding,  326 
Production  of  electricity,  371 
Projectile  method  of  communication, 

393—395 

Pyro-electricity,  132 
Progress,  recent,  337 — 366 


Q- 

QUANTIVALENCE,  8l 

Quincke,  312 


RADIATION  and  heat,  72 

electric,  speed  of,  260 — 284 
encountering     conductor,    300 

T305 

exciting  currents,  333 
loss  of  energy,  276,  277 
maintenance  of,  276,  277 
mechanism  of,  288 — 305 
polarized,  334 
process  of,  347  et  seq 
production  of,  294,  332 


478 


INDEX 


Radiation  reflected,   333 

refracted,  335 

speed,  modes  of  observing,  262 

—284 

waste  286,  287 
Rails  and  slider,  233 
Range  of  light  waves,  425,  426 
Rate  of  oscillation,  48 
Ratio  of  units,  271 
Rayleigh,  Lord,  287,  423,  454 
Reflected  light,  amount  of,  299,  300 
Reflexion,  298—305 

by  magnetic  medium,  309 

concentration  of  light  by,  290 

metallic,  290 

model  of,  300 — 305 
Refraction  of  electric  waves,    299, 

300—335 
index  and  spec.  ind.   cap.,   277 

—284 

Reluctance,  179 
Residual  charge,  44 
Resistance,  37,  74,  75 
and  impedance,  456 
of  commutated  circuit,  453 
to  alternating  currents,  455 
magnetic,  see  Reluctance 
Resonance,  electric,  333,  432 
Retentivity,  183,  185 
Return  circuit,  29,  30 
Reversible  heat,  125,  126 
Rigidity  and  fluidity  of  ether,  247, 

248 
of  moving  fluid,  191,  235,  293, 

411 

Ring  magnet,  181,  185,  239,  242 
Rise  of  induced  current  in  secondary 

circuit,  219 — 222 
Rotating  discharge  in  vacuum-tube, 

1 66 

magnet  producing  current,  170 
Rotation  experiments,  159 — 170 
of  magnet  by  current,  168 
of  plane  of  polarization,  306 
of  polarization  by  Ley  den  jar 

discharge,  438—440 
of  plane  of  polarization,  model 
illustrating,  379 


Rotation  of  viscous  liquid,  105 — 107 
Rowland,  320,  460 
Royal  Institution,  425 
wall-paper,  432 


s. 


SATURATION  of  iron,  181 
Savary,  428 
Schiller,  429 
Schuster,  147 

Secondary  circuit,  rise  of  current  in, 
219—222 

generators,  240,  457 
Seebeck,  127 
Selective  absorption,  282 
Selenium,  330,  383 
Self-induction,  66,  95,  100,  101,  255 
448 

coefficient  of,  448 

effect  of,  on  signals,  268 

explained,  421 — 423 

model  of,  210 — 218 
Shearing  of  ether,  408,  preface 

stress,  46 
Signalling  by  wire,  225,  264 

speed,  33,  228,  264,  271,  458 
Signals   affected   by   capacity,  and 

self-induction,  267,  268 
Simple  harmonic  motion  analyzed, 
310 

harmonic  motion  period,  255 
Slider  on  rails,  233 
Slip  and  spin,  217,  218 
Smith,  Willoughby,  383 
Soaking  in,  40,  42 
Solid  angle,  451 
Solids,  properties  dependent  on  past 

history,  186,   187 
Sound,  propagation  of,  78 
Space  not  a  conductor,  17,  409 
Spark-length  affected  by  light,   331 
Spark,  light  of,  one  starting  another, 

331 

Sparks,  in  wall  paper,  432 

musical,  434—439 
Specific  heat  of  electricity,  132,  324 


INDEX 


479 


Specific  inductive  capacity,  39,  55, 

246,  248 

compared  with  index  of  refrac- 
tion, 277 — 284 
not  constant,  312 
probable  real  value,  261 
Specific  resistance,  75 
Speed,  see  Velocity 
Spin  and  slip,  217 
Spiral  liquid  jet,  165 
Spring    analogue    to    Ley  den  jar, 

420,  421 

Spurious  charge,  55 
Stationary    waves,     Hertz's,     263, 

304 

Steel,  magnetization  of,  187 

state  of,  1 86 

Stokes,  Sir  G.  G.,  6,  327,  352 
Strain  in  dielectric,  21 

in  medium,  causing  attraction 
and  repulsion,  29 

of  medium,  recovery,  252 
Stratified  condenser,  40 — 45 
Stream  lines,  no — 114 
Stress  in  magnetic  medium,    197 — 

20 1 

Sub-permanent  magnetism,  184 
Surface  charge,  55 

conduction,  109 
Surgings  in  circuit,  432,  433 


T. 


TAIT,  325 

Telegraph,    function    of    wire    in, 

224-228,  264 

Telegraphic  return  circuit,  30,  31 
Telegraphing,    methods    of,     222- 

228 

speed  of,  222,  458 
affected  by  capacity   and  self- 
induction,  267,  268,  460 
Telephone  currents,  109 
Tenacity,  electric,  251 
Tension    along    magnetic    lines   of 

force,  197-201 
Temperature  raised  by  current,  77 


Tesla,  M.,  his  dynamos,  356 
Thermal  E.M.F.,  127,  128 
Thermo-electric  pile,  126,  127 

view  of  Hall  effect,   321,    322 

—326 

Thompson,  S.  P.,  133,  165,  384 
Thomson,  Prof.  E.,  364 
Thomson,  J.  J.,  142,  145,  149,  294, 

413 

Thomson,    Sir  W.,  5,  6,  47,   121, 
261,    293,    362,    379,    429, 
438,  preface 
effect,  129,  130,  324 
effect   connected   with    Hall's, 

324—326 

form  of  Volta  effect,  123 
theory  of  elasticity,  18,  293 
theory  of  matter,  414 — 416 
Time  necessary  to  start  current,  107 
of  Faraday   effect,   323,     438, 

439 

Tourmaline,  133,  134 
Traces,  390,  391 
Tram-car,  electric,  104 

rope,  103,  391 
Transfer  of  energy  to  distance,  102 

— 104,  222 — 228 
of  heat,  water,  and  electricity, 

72 

Transformers,  240,  457 
Transmission  of  energy,  102 — 104 
of  pictures  by  electricity,  384 
Transparency     of    insulators,  298 — 

301,  334,  381 
Transverse  vibrations,  transmissible 

by  ether,  257,  265 
Trouton,  Mr.,  352,  354 
Tuning-fork  analogue  to  discharge, 

256—258 

Two -fluid  theory,  27,  29,  see  Dual 
view  of  electiicity 


U. 

ULTRA-VIOLET     light,     effect    on 

sparks,  331 
rays,  296 


480 


INDEX 


Undulations,  15 

Undulatory,  meaning  of  word,  375 
Unit,  natural,  of  electricity,  83 
Units,  artificial  systems  of,  261 

ratio  of,  271 

system  of,  462 


V. 


"V"  modes  of  determining,   271, 

377 

Vacuum-tube,  rotating  discharge  in, 

166 

Vacuum  versus  Plenum,  386 
Valency,  81 
Varying  current,  210 — 221 

magnetic  field  and  electrostatic 

charge;  168,  237,  241 
Velocity  of  electricity,  Wheatstone's 

experiment  on,  194 
of  electric  pulses   along  wires, 
method   of  determining,  270 
of  electric   pulses    along  wire, 

271 
of  electric  radiation,  260,  262 

—284 

of  gravitation,  258 
of  ions,  93 

of  light,  271—284,   398,  465 
of  signalling,  31,  228,  264,  270, 

458 

of  wave  propagation,  256 
Velocities  of  light  and  electric  waves 

compared  in  substances,  278 
Vibration,   direction  of,    335,    352, 

et  seq. 

Villari,  322—323 

Viscosity      analogue     of     starting 
current,  105,  107 


Viscosity  resistance,  203 
Volta-effect,  cord-model  of,  124 

Thomson  form  of,  124 
Voltaic-battery,  114 — 119 

E.M.F.,  236 
Voltameter,  81,  116 
Vplta's  contact  force,  117 — 125 
Vortex,  elasticity  of,  413 

ring,  electric,  196,  212,  239 

theory  of  matter,  414 — 416 

vibration  of,  413 
Vortices,  15,  412 — 416 


W. 

WALL  paper,  sparks  in,  432 

Ward,  A.   W..  323 

Waste  radiation,  286,  287 

Water-ram,  94 

Wave,  definition  of,  374 

length,  electric,  274,  275,  339 
propagation,  16,  256 — 259,  425 

Waves,  Hertz's,  263,  333 

length    of    Leyden    jar,     275, 

454 

stationary,  304 
Webber's  theory  of  diamai;netism, 

174—179 
Wheatstone  photometer,  379 

velocity  of  electricity,  194 
Whirl  of  electricity,  96,   154,   196, 

201,  372 

Wiedemann  and  Ebert,  331 
Wimshurst  machine,  437,  439 
Wind,  electric,  193,  329 
Wire,  function  of,  102,  103,  264 
Work  done  in  magnetic  cycle,  188 
Worthington,  149 


AND   BUNGAV. 


NATURE    SERIES. 

Crown  8vo. 

THE  ORIGIN  AND  METAMORPHOSES  OF  INSECTS. 

By  Sir  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  M.P.,  F.R.S.     With  Illustrations.     2s.  6d. 

THE  TRANSIT  OF  VENUS.     By  Prof.  G.  FORBES.    With 

Illustrations.     3$.  6d. 

POLARISATION    OF    LIGHT.      By  W.   SPOTTISWOODE, 

LL.D.     Illustrated.     3^.  6d. 

ON    BRITISH    WILD    FLOWERS    CONSIDERED    IN 

RELATION  TO  INSECTS.     By  Sir  JOHN   LUBBOCK,    M.P.,    F.R.S. 

Illustrated.     4$.  6d. 

FLOWERS,   FRUITS,   AND   LEAVES.      By    Sir    JOHN 

LUBBOCK,  M.P.,  F.R  S.     Illustrated.     4*.  6d. 

HOW  TO  DRAW  A  STRAIGHT  LINE  :  A  LECTURE  ON 

LINKAGES.     By  A.  B.  KEMPE,  B.A.     Illustrated,     i*.  6d. 

LIGHT :  A  SERIES  OF  SIMPLE,  ENTERTAINING,  AND> . 

USEFUL  EXPERIMENTS.       By  A.  M.    MAYER  and  C.   BARNARD. 
Illustrated,     zs.  6d. 

SOUND:    A   SERIES   OF   SIMPLE,  ENTERTAINING, 

AND  INEXPENSIVE  EXPERIMENTS.     By  A.  M.  MAYER,     y.  6d. 

SEEING  AND  THINKING.      By  Prof.  W.  K.  CLIFFORD,. 

F.R.S.    Diagrams.     3$.  6d. 

CHARLES  DARWIN.     Memorial  Notices  reprinted  from. 

Nature.     By  THOMAS  H.  HUXLEY,  F.R.S.,  G.  J.  ROMANES,  F.R.S., 
Sir  ARCHIBALD  GEIKIE,  F.R.S.,  and  W.  T.  DYER,  F.R.S.    zs.  6d. 

ON  THE  COLOURS  OF  FLOWERS.      By  GRANT  ALLEN, 

Illustrated.     3^.  6d. 

THE  CHEMISTRY  OF  THE  SECONDARY  BATTERIES 

OF  PLANTE  AND  FAURE.     By  J.  H.  GLADSTONE  and  A.  TRIBE. 

vs.  6d. 

A  CENTURY  OF  ELECTRICITY.    By  T.  C.  MENDENHALL. 

4*.  6d. 

ON  LIGHT.      The   Burnett   Lectures.      By   Sir   GEORGE 

;:  I. 


GABRIEL  STOKES,  M.P.,  F.R.S.  Three  Courses:  I.  On  the  Nature  o£ 
Light.  II.  On  Light  as  a  Means  of  Investigation.  III.  On  Beneficial  Effects 
of  Light,  7  jr.  6d. 

THE  SCIENTIFIC  EVIDENCES  OF  ORGANIC  EVOLU- 
TION.    By  GEORGE  J.  ROMANES,  M.A..1L.D.    25.  6d. 

POPULAR    LECTURES    AND    ADDRESSES.      By    Sir 

WILLIAM  THOMSON.  In  3  vols.  Vol.  I.  .Constitution  of  Matter.  Illustrated. 
7$.  &/.  Vol.  III.  Papers  on  Navigation.  7$.  6d. 

THE  CHEMISTRY  OF  PHOTOGRAPHY.      By  Prof.  R. 

MELDOLA,  F.R.S.     Illustrated.    6s. 

MODERN  VIEWS  OF  ELECTRICITY.     By  Prof.  O.  J. 

LODGE,  LL.D.    Illustrated.    6*.  6et. 

MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,  LONDON. 


NATURE    SERIES— Continued, 

TIMBER  AND    SOME  OF  ITS  DISEASES.      By   Prof. 

H.  M.  WARD,  M.A.     Illustrated.    6*. 

ARE    THE    EFFECTS    OF     USE    AND    DISUSE    IN- 

HERITED  ?     An  Examination  of  the  View  held  by  Spencer  and  Darwin.      By 
W.  PLATT  BALL.     35.  6d. 

THE     RIGHTHAND  -  LEFTHANDEDNESS.       By     Sir 

D.  WILSON.     Illustrated.     4*.  6d. 

ON     COLOUR     BLINDNESS,       By  T.   H.    BICKERTON. 

Illustrated.  [/«  the  Press. 

EVERY  THURSDAY  AFTERNOON,  Price  6d. 
(A  Specimen  Number,  post  free,  6\d.  stamps.) 

MT  A.  TTJ  Ifc  E  : 

A  Weekly  Illustrated  Journal  of  Science. 

N  ATURE  contains  Original  Articles  on  all  subjects  coming  within  the  domain  of 
'Science,  contributed  by  the  most  eminent  Scientists,  belonging  to  all  parts  of  the 
•world. 

Reviews,  setting  forth  the  nature  and  value  of  recent  Scientific  works,  are  written 
for  NATURE  by  men  who  are  acknowledged  masters  in  their  particular  departments. 

The  Correspondence  columns  of  NATURE,  while  forming  a  medium  of  Scientific 
•discussion  and  of  intercommunication  am  ng  the  most  distinguished  men  of  Science, 
have  become  the  recognized  organ  for  announcing  new  discoveries  and  new  illustra- 
tions of  Scientific  principles  among  observers  of  Nature  all  the  world  over — from 
Japan  to  San  Francisco,  from  New  Zealand  to  Iceland. 

The  Serial  columns  of  NATURE  contain  the  gist  of  the  most  important  Papers  that 
•appear  in  the  numerous  Scientific  Journals  which  are  now  published  at  home  and 
abroad,  in  various  languages  ;  while  longer  Abstracts  are  given  of  the  more  valuable 
Papers  which  appear  in  foreign  Journals. 

The  Principal  Scientific  Societies  and  Academies  of  the  world,  British  and  foreign, 
have  their  transactions  regularly  recorded  in  NATURE,  the  Editor  being  in  correspon- 
•dence,  for  this  purpose,  with  representatives  of  Societies  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 

Notes  from  the  most  trustworthy  sources  appear  each  week  recording  the  latest 
.gossip  of  the  Scientific  world  at  home  and  abroad. 

As  questions  of  Science  compass  all  limits  of  nationality,  and  are  of  universal  in- 
terest, a  periodical  devoted  to  them  may  fitly  appeal  to  the  intelligent  classes  in  all 
countries  where  its  language  is  read.  The  proprietors  of  NATURE  aim  so  to  conduct 
it  that  it  shall  have  a  common  claim  upon  all  English-speaking  peoples.  Its  articles 
are  brief  and  condensed,  and  are  thus  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  an  active  and 
•busy  people  who  have  little  time  to  read  extended  and  elaborate  treatises. 

Subscriptions  to   "  Nature  " : 

Yearly 28*.      |      Half-Yearly        i4j.  6rf. 

Quarterly         js.  6d.  S/\ 

To  the  Colonies,  United  States,  the  Continent,  and  all  places  within  the 
Postal  Union. 

Yearly 30*.  &/.      1      Half-Yearly        i$s.  6d. 

Quarterly         Ss. 

P.O.O.  to  be  made  payable  to  MACMILLAN  AND  CO., 

OFFICE:    29    BEDFORD    STREET,    STRAND. 

2  10  I2.QI. 


RETURN     ENGINEERING  LIBRARY 


642-3366 


LOAN  PERIOD  1 

T~ 

3 

4 

5 

6 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
Overdues  subject  to  replacement  charges 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
FORM  NO.  DD1 1 ,  80m,  8/80  BERKELEY,  CA  94720 


U.C.   BERKELEY  LIBRARIES 


C031S3742S 


YB  23992 


Engineering 
Library
