The Survival of Man (Oliver Lodge, 1909)
========================================
Oliver Lodge — A leading physicist's landmark case for survival — carried psychical research into mainstream science. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (TheSurvivalOfMan) — 1909 first edition.

WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 

Modern Views of Electricity (Macmillan) 6s, 

Life and Matter (Williams & Norgate) zs. 6 d. 

Pioneers of Science (Illustrated) (Macmillan) 6s. 

School Teaching and School Reform (Williams & Norgate) 3s. 
Easy Mathematics, Arithmetic, etc. (Macmillan) 4s. 6d. 
Elementary Mechanics (Chambers) 4s. 6d. 

Signalling without Wires (Electrician Co.) 5s. 

Modern Views on Matter (Clarendon Press) is. 

The Substance of Faith (Methuen) 2s. 

Electrons (Bell & Sons) 6s. 

The Ether of Space (Harper & Bros.) 2s. 6d. 

Man and the Universe (Methuen) 7s. 6d. 

DEDICATED TO 

THE FOUNDERS OF THE 
SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH 
THE TRUEST AND 
MOST PATIENT WORKERS 
IN AN UNPOPULAR REGION OF SCIENCE 
THAT I HAVE EVER KNOWN 

“ It is mere dogmatism to assert that we do not survive death, and mere 
prejudice or inertia to assert that it is impossible to discover whether we do 
or no. We in the West have hardly even begun to inquire into the matter; 
and scientific method and critical faculty were never devoted to it, so far as 
I am aware, previous to the foundation, some quarter of a century ago, of 
the Society for Psychical Research. . . . 

“Alleged facts suggesting frimd facie the survival of death . , . are 
now at last being systematically and deliberately explored by men and 
women of intelligence and good faith bent on ascertaining the truth. . . . 

“ I am asking you to take seriously a branch of scientific inquiry which 
may have results more important than any other that is being pursued in 
our time.” 

G. Lowes Dickinson 

Ingersoll Lecture on Immortality at Harvard\ 1908 

And assuredly the religious implications of all these phenomena are 
worthy of any man’s most serious thought. Those who most feel the 
importance of the ethical superstructure are at the same time most plainly 
bound to treat the establishment of the facts at the foundation as no mere 
personal search for a faith, to be dropped when private conviction has been 
attained, but as a serious, a continuous, public duty. And the more con¬ 
vinced they are that their faith is sound, the more ready should they be 
to face distrust and aversion,—to lay their account for a long struggle with 
the vis inertia of the human spirit. 

F. W. H. Myers, Human Personality ^ ii. 225 

■I p. 

PREFACE 

rvive death, and mere 
scover whether we do 
quire into the matter; 

Ievoted to it, so far as 
: of a century ago, of 

V 

rat of death . , . are 
'*M>lor<xi by men and 
rang the truth. . . . 
ticmtific inquiry which 
t is being pursued in 

•um . ..'V 

at Harvard^ 1908 ; 

.■'■I! 

these phenomena are 
»e who most feel the 
me time most plainly 
aundati.on as no mere 
e amvictum has been 
, And the more con- 
ready should they be 
r a long struggle with 

/Vww% ii. 225 

T HE author’s conviction of man's,survival of bodily 
death —a conviction based on a large range of 
natural facts—is well known; and in this volume 
some idea can be gained as to the most direct and 
immediate kind of foundation on which in the future he 
considers that this belief will in due course be scien¬ 
tifically established. 

The author gives an account of many of his in¬ 
vestigations into matters connected with psychical 
research during the last quarter of a century, with an 
abridgement of contemporary records. His inquiry, 
following the lines of the Society for Psychical Research, 
began with experimental telepathy; but the largest 
section of the book treats of automatic writing, trance 
speech, and other instances of temporary lucidity,— 
for In this department of the subject he considers 
that the most direct evidence for continued personal 
existence and posthumous activity will most likely be 
found. 

An account of his experiences in connexion with the 
controverted and often discredited “physical phenomena” 
associated with exceptional mental states, and a discus¬ 
sion of the right scientific and philosophic attitude to 
these puzzling and at first sight incredible facts—which 
are pressing for Inclusion in our scheme of Nature,—are 
reserved for another volume. 

AIMS AND OBJECTS OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH 

I. The Origin of the Society for Psychical Research 

II. Practical Work of the Society . 

SECTION II 

EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY OR THOUGHT- 
TRANSFERENCE 

III. Some Early Experiments in Thought-Transference 38 

IV. Further Experiments in Telepathy . . .58 

V. Spontaneous Cases of Thought-Transference . 73 

VI. Applied Telepathy ...... 78 

SECTION III 

SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY AND CLAIRVOYANCE 

VIL Apparitions considered in the light of Telepathy 

VOL Telepathy from an Immaterial Region 

IX. Examples of Apparent Clairvoyance . 

X. Prevision 

SECTION IV 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY 

XL Automatic Writing and Trance Speech 

XII. Personal Identity .... 

XIII. Beginning of the Case of Mrs. Piper . 

mm 

X 

THE SURVIVAL OF MAN 

PAGE 

CHAP. 

XIV. Professor. William James’s Early Testimony . ■ *93 

XV. The Author’s First Report on Mrs. Piper . • *99 

XVI. Extracts from Piper Sittings * 2 °9 

XVII. Discussion of Piper Sittings • • • • 2 3S 

^XVIII. Summary of Dr. Hodgson’s Views • • .242 

XIX. Recent Piper Sittings. General Information • 255 

XX. The Isaac Thompson Control . . • .266 

XXI. General Remarks on the Piper Sittings . - 277 

’ XXII. The Myers Control . 284 

, XXIII- The Myers and Hodgson Controls in Recent 

Piper Sittings . • • • • ■ 3° 8 

XXIV. Brief Summary of other Experiences and Comment 

thereupon . • • • • • 3 l( > 

XXV. Introduction to the Study of Cross-Corre¬ 

spondence ..... • 3 2 4 

XXVI. Tentative Conclusion . . • -335 

XXVII. In Memory of Myers. 34i 

Index 

355 

Testimony . 

‘Rs* Piper . * 

J 93 

199 

. f 

209 

2 35 

Information 

242 

255 

»i nriNGs 

266 

277 

284 

OvOls in Recent 

308 

/ 

«;iks and Comment 

of Cross-Corre, 

316 

* * 

3 2 4 # 

3351 

341 1 

THE SURVIVAL OF MAN 

THE SURVIVAL OF 

SECTION I 

AIMS AND OBJECTS OF PSYCHICAL 
RESEARCH 

CHAPTER I 

THE ORIGIN OF THE SOCIETY FOR 
PSYCHICAL RESEARCH 

P UZZLING and weird occurrences have been 
vouched for among all nations and in every age. 
It is possible to relegate a good many asserted 
occurrences to the domain of superstition, but it is not 
possible thus to eliminate all. Nor is it likely that in 
the present stage of natural knowledge we are acquainted 
with all the workings of the human spirit and have 
reduced them to such simplicity that everything capable 
of happening in the mental and psychical region is of 
a nature readily and familiarly to be understood by all. 
Yet there are many who seem practically to believe 
in this improbability; for although they are constrained 
from time to time to accept novel and surprising 
discoveries in biology, in chemistry, and in physical 
science generally, they seem tacitly to assume that these 
^are the only parts of the universe in which fundamental 
| discovery is possible, all the rest being too well known. \ 

2 

AIMS AND OBJECTS [Sect, i 

It is a simple faith, and does credit to the capacity 
for belief of those who hold it—belief unfounded upon 
knowledge, and tenable only, in the teeth of a great mass 

of evidence to the contrary. . , , , , 

It is not easy to unsettle minds thus fortified 
against the intrusion of unwelcome facts ; and their strong 
faith is probably a salutary safeguard against that un¬ 
balanced and comparatively dangerous condition called 
“ open-mindedness,” which is. ready to learn and 
investigate anything not manifestly self-contradictory 
and absurd. Without people of the solid, assured 
self-satisfied order, the practical work of the world would 
not so efficiently be done. 

But whatever may be thought of the subject by 
the majority of people at present, this book is intended 
to indicate the possibility that discoveries of the 
very first magnitude can still be made are indeed in 
process of being made—by strictly scientific methods, 
in the region of psychology: discoveries quite com¬ 
parable in importance with those which have been made 
during the last century in physics and biology, but 
discoveries whose opportunities for practical, application 
and usefulness may similarly have to remain for some 
time in the hands of experts, since perhaps they cannot 
be miscellaneously absorbed or even apprehended by the 
multitude without danger. 

It has been partly the necessity for caution—the 
dread of encouraging mere stupid superstition—that has 
instinctively delayed advance in these branches of 
inquiry, until the progress of education gave a reasonable 
chance of a sane and balanced and critical reception by 
a fairly considerable minority. _ j 

But, within the last half century, assertions concerning: 
psychological supernormalities have not only excitedv. 

\f 

general 
interest 
domain 
Twt 
with dis 
with th 
of these 
letters 
acquain 
facts so 
in amc 
sensible 
desirabl 
provinc 

and dec 
Till: 

respond 
is to J 

' m * * 

as true 

It i 
of the 
gallon 

to the capacity 
•iulounded upon 
1 of a great mass 

thus fortified 
and their strong 
tgainst that un- 
condition called 
to learn and 
elf-contradictory 
•'"• i( l, assured, 
the world would 

the subject by 
«'»k is intended 
>veries of the 
- are indeed in 
■atide methods. 
T.s quite com 

been mad 

appncatH 

ev cann 

Ued by tr 

caution—tl 

at h 

Chap. iJ 

ORIGIN OF THE SOCIETY 

general attention, but have rather notably roused the 
interest of careful and responsible students, both in the 
domain of science and in that of letters. 

Twenty-eight years ago, in fact, a special society 
with distinguished membership was enrolled in London, 
with the object of inquiring into the truth of many 
of these assertions. It was started by a few men of 
letters and of science who for some years had been 

acquainted with a number of strange apparent facts_ 

facts so strange and unusual, and yet so widely believed 
in among a special coterie of ordinarily sane and 
sensible people, that it seemed to these pioneers highly 
desirable either to incorporate them properly into the 
province of ordered knowledge, or else to extrude them 
definitely as based upon nothing but credulity, imposture, 
and deceit. 

The attempt was to be made in a serious and 
responsible spirit, a spirit of genuine “scepticism,”—that 
is to say, of critical examination and inquiry, not of 
dogmatic denial and assertion. No phenomenon was 
to be unhesitatingly rejected because at first sight 
incredible. No phenomenon was to be accepted which 
could not make its position good by crucial and repeated 
md convincing tests. Every class of asserted fact was 
:° have the benefit of inquiry, none was to be given 
the benefit of any doubt. So long as doubt * 3 was 
possible, the phenomenon was to be kept at arm’s 
ength: to be criticised as possible, not to be embraced 
as true. 

It is often cursorily imagined that an adequate supply 
of the critical and cautious spirit necessary in this investi¬ 
gation is a monopoly of professed men of science. It is • 
lot so. Trained students of literature—not to mention* 
perts in philosophy—have shown themselves as 

careful, as exact, as critical, ana as cautious, as any 
professed student of science. They have even displayed 
an excess of caution. They have acted as a curb and a 
restraint upon the more technically scientific workci s, 
w ho—presumably because their constant business is to 
deal at first hand with new phenomena of one kind or 
another—have been willing to accept a fresh variety of 
them upon evidence not 'tzztcclz stronger than that to 
which they were already well accustomed. Whereas 
some of the men and women of letters associated with 
the society have been invariably extiemcly cautious, less 
ready to be led by obtrusive and plausible appearances, 
more suspicious of possibilities and even impossibilities 
of fraud, actually more inventive sometimes of other and 
quasi-normal methods of explaining inexplicable facts. 
I name no names, but from a student of science, this 
testimony is due i and it is largely to the sceptical and 
extremely cautious wisdom of some representatives of 
letters and philosophy, as well as to their energy and 
enthusiasm for knowledge, that the present moderately 
respectable position of the subject in the estimation of 
educated people is due. 

The first President was Professor Henry Sidgwick, 
and in his early Presidential Addresses the following 
sentences occur:— 

It is a scandal that a dispute as to the reality of these 
phenomena should still be going on, that so many 
competent witnesses should have declared their belief 
in them, that so many others should be profoundly 
interested in having the question determined, and yet 
that the educated world, as a body, should still be simply 
in the attitude of incredulity. 

Now the primary aim of our Society, the thing which 
we all unite to promote, whether as believers or non- 

cautious, 

appearai 
impossibii 
i of other 

plica!)!*: I 

been produced: if that were so we could not hope to 
do much. I think that something has been done; that 
the advocates of obstinate incredulity—I mean the 
incredulity that waives the whole affair aside as un¬ 
deserving of any attention from rational beings—feel 
their case to be not prima facie so strong now as 
it was. 

Thirty years ago it was thought that want of 

6 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

f Sect, i 

“ pegging away,” as Lincoln said; we must accumulate 
fact upon fact, and add experiment upon experiment, 
and, I should say, not wrangle too much with incredulous 
outsiders about the conclusiveness of any one, but trust 
to the mass of evidence for conviction. The highest 
degree of demonstrative force that we can obtain out of 
any single record of investigation is, of course, limited 
by the trustworthiness of the investigator. We have 
done all that we can when the critic has nothing left to 
allege except that the investigator is in the trick. But 
when he has nothing else left to allege he will allege 
that. 

We shall, I hope, make a point of bringing no 
evidence before the public until we have got it to this 
pitch of cogency. 

To many enthusiasts outside and to some of those 

inside the Society — who, through long acquaintance 
with the phenomena under investigation, were already 
thoroughly convinced of their genuine character •• litis 
attitude on the part of the founders and LnT rs <■! 

the Society for Psychical Research always seemed 
wrong-headed, and sometimes proved irritating to an 
almost unbearable degree. The hostility of the out 
side world and of orthodox science to the investiga¬ 
tion, though at times fierce and scornful, and alwav; 
weighty and significant, has been comparatively mild - 
perhaps because fragmentary and intermittent wht-u 
compared with the bitter and fairly continuous diatribes 
which have issued, and still often issue, from the 
spiritualistic press against the slow and ponderous and 
repellent attitude of those responsible for the working of 
the Society. b ’ 

It has been called a society for the suppression of 
facts, for the wholesale imputation of imposture, for the 
discouragement of the sensitive, and for the repudia- 

8 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

There are persons who believe themselves to have 
certain knowledge on the most important matters on 
which we are seeking evidence, who do not doubt that 
they have received communications from an unseen 
world of spirits, but who think that such communications 
should be kept as sacred mysteries and not exposed to 
be scrutinised in the mood of cold curiosity which they 
conceive to belong to science. Now we do not wish 
to appear intrusive; at the same time we are anxious 
not to lose through mere misunderstanding any good 
opportunities for investigation: and I therefore wish 
to assure such persons that we do not approach these 
matters in any light or trivial spirit, but with an ever¬ 
present sense of the vast importance of the issues 
involved, and with every desire to give reverence 
wherever reverence is found to be due. But we feel 
bound to begin by taking these experiences, however 
important and however obscure, as a part of the great 
aggregate which we call Nature; and we must ascertain 
carefully and systematically their import, their laws and 
causes, before we can rationally take up any definite 
attitude of. mind with regard to them. The unknown 
or uncommon is not in itself an object of reverence; 
there is no sacredness in the mere limitations of our 
knowledge. 

This, then, is what we mean by a scientific spirit; 
that we approach the subject without prepossessions, 
but with a single-minded desire to bring within the 
realm of orderly and accepted knowledge what now 
appears as a chaos of individual beliefs. 

It is instructive to look back at the original pro¬ 
gramme issued by the Society, which is now housed at 
20 Hanover Square; and accordingly I make a few 
quotations from the prelude to its first volume of Pro¬ 
ceedings, wherein is contained a statement of its aims 
and objects:— 

Chap, i] 

ORIGIN OF THE SOCIETY 

Programme of the Society 

# From the recorded testimony of many competent 
witnesses, past and present, including observations 
recently made by scientific men of eminence in various 
countries, there appears to be, amidst much illusion and 
deception, an important body of remarkable phenomena, 
which are pnmd facie inexplicable on any generally 
recognised hypothesis, and which, if incontestably 
established, would be of the highest possible value. 

The task of examining such residual phenomena has 
often been undertaken by individual effort, but never 
hitherto by a scientific society organised on a sufficiently 
broad basis. As a preliminary step towards this end, 
a Conference, convened by Professor Barrett, was held 
in London, on January 6th, 1882, and a Society for 
Psychical Research was projected. The Society was 
definitely constituted on February 20th, 1882, and its 
Council, then appointed, sketched out a programme of 
future work:— 

1. An examination of the nature and extent of any 

influence which may be exerted by one mind 
upon another, apart from any generally recog¬ 
nised mode of perception. C 

2. The study of hypnotism, and the forms of so- 

called mesmeric trance, with its alleged insensi¬ 
bility to pain; clairvoyance and other allied 
phenomena. 

3. A critical revision of Reichenbach’s researches 

with certain organisations called “sensitive,” 
and an inquiry whether such organisations 
possess any power of perception beyond a 
highly exalted sensibility of the recognised 
sensory organs. 

4. A careful investigation of any reports, resting 

on strong testimony, regarding apparitions at 
the moment of death, or otherwise, or regard- 

„ 8 „ AIMS AND OBJECTS [Sect, i 

ing disturbances in houses reputed to be 
haunted. 

5. An inquiry into the various physical phenomena 

commonly called Spiritualistic ; with an attempt 
to discover their causes and general laws. 

6. The collection and collation of existing materials 

bearing on the history of these subjects. 

The aim of the Society is to approach these 
various problems without prejudice or prepossession of 
any kind, and in the same spirit of exact and unimpas¬ 
sioned inquiry which has enabled Science to solve so 
many problems, once not less obscure nor less hotly 
debated. The founders of this Society fully recognise 
the exceptional difficulties which surround this branch 
of research; but they nevertheless hope that by patient 
and systematic effort some results of permanent value 
may be attained. 

To prevent misconception, it must be expressly 
stated that Membership of the Society does not imply 
the acceptance of any particular explanation of the 
phenomena investigated, nor any belief as to the 
operation, in the physical world, of forces other than 
those recognised by Physical Science. 

And to this I may add that all seriously interested 
people are welcome as members, provided they have 
no selfish or commercial ends to serve by seeking to 
join. Their interest, and in a minor degree their sub¬ 
scription, tend to promote the object we have in view. 
Merely superstitious and emotional people would find 
themselves out of place at our meetings, but otherwise 
we do not seek to be exclusive. It is a kind of work 
to which any fair-minded and honest person can, as 
opportunity offers, contribute his or her share. 

to he | 

* : f 

' ungna 
tu-mpt 

* 

trrjals 

these 
ion of 
inji.is 
[ve so 
hotly 
notiv: 
H'.’IIK 1) 
sit it’iH 

value 

imply 

»t the 
> the 
til-ill 

re,te»! 

have 

•h{ t<» 

• 'tub* 
view, 
i r.it.i 
•rwtsn 

work 
m, nr. 

CHAPTER II 

PRACTICAL WORK OF THE SOCIETY 

I N the three earliest years of the present century it 
fell to my lot to occupy the Presidential Chair 
of the Society for Psychical Research and to give 
an Address each year. One of those Addresses—the 
one for 1903—dealt with the lines of profitable work 
which seemed at that time to be opening before us; and, 
since the general nature of our investigation is there 
referred to in a preliminary manner, it is useful to re¬ 
produce: it here as an introduction to the more detailed 
records which follow. 

Our primary aim is to be a Scientific Society, to 
conduct our researches and to record our results in an 
accurate and scientific manner, so as to set an example 
of careful work in regions where it has been the excep¬ 
tion rather than the rule, and to be a trustworthy guide 
to the generation of workers who shall follow. 

To be scientific does not mean to be infallible, but 
it means being clear and honest, and as exact as we 
know how to be. In difficult investigations pioneers 
have always made some mistakes, they have no im¬ 
mediate criterion or infallible touchstone to distinguish 
the more true from the less true, but if they record 
their results with anxious care and scrupulous honesty 
and painstaking precision, their mistakes are only less 

12 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

valuable to the next generation than their partially 
true generalisations; and sometimes it turns out, after 
a century or so, that mistakes made by early pioneers 
were no such thorough errors as had been thought, that 
they had an element of truth in them all the time, as if 
discoverers were endowed with a kind of prophetic 
insight whereby they caught a glimpse of theories and 
truths which it would take several generations of workers 
to disencumber and bring clearly to light. 

Suppose, however, that their errors were real ones, 
the record of their work is just as important to future 
navigators as it is to have the rocks and shoals of a 
channel mapped out and buoyed. It is work which 
must be done. The great ship passing straight to its 
destination is enabled to attain this directness and spee 1 
by the combined labours of a multitude of workers, some 
obscure and forgotten, some distinguished and remem¬ 
bered, but few of them able to realise its stately passage. 
So it is also with every great erection,—much of the 
work is indirect and hidden;—the Forth Bridge stands 
upon piers sunk below the water-mark by the painful and 
long continued labours of Italian workmen in “ caissons ” 
full of compressed and heated air. 

The study of specifically Natural knowledge was 
fostered and promoted by the recognition in the reign 
of Charles II. of a body of enthusiasts who, during the 
disturbed but hopeful era of the Commonwealth, had 
met together to discuss problems of scientific interest; 
and to-day The Royal Society is among the dignified 
institutions of our land, taking all branches of Natural 
Philosophy and Natural History—the Physical Sciences 
and the Biological Sciences—under its wing. 

Us it does not recognise; but then neither does it 
recognise Mental and Moral Philosophy, or Ethics, or 

Psychol 
of knot) 
side the 
It is 
if it tut 
not, it 
place b; 
is the r< 
the psy 
day for 
Hal 
barriers 
affixes 
this wo 
ally net 
shall b< 
shade 
classific 
anti cl pi 
the day 
doing < 
advant: 
arrived 

Popi 

t Oui 

pioneet 
\ incorpc 

build,; 
; contriv 

{ literary 

among 
'f ■ ligious 

Chap, ii] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

13 

Psychology, or History, or any part of a great region 
of knowledge which has hitherto been regarded as out¬ 
side the pale of the Natural Sciences. 

It is for us to introduce our subjects within that pale, 
if it turns out that there they properly belong ; and if 
not, it is for us to do pioneer work and take our 
place by the side of that group of Societies whose object 
is the recognition and promotion of work in the mental, 
the psychological, the philosophical. direction, until the 
day for unification shall arrive. 

Half knowledge sees divisions and emphasises 
barriers, delights in classification into genera and species, 
affixes labels, and studies things in groups. And all 
this work is of the utmost practical value and is essenti¬ 
ally necessary. That the day will come when barriers 
shall be broken down, when species shall be found to 
shade off into one another, when continuity and not 
classification shall be the dominant feature, may be 
anticipated by allbut we have no power of hastening 
the day except by taking our place in the workshop and 
doing our assigned quota; still less do we gain any 
advantage by pretending that the day of unification has 
arrived while as yet its dawn is still in the future. 

Popular Mistrust of Science, and its Remedy 

Our primary aim is to be a Scientific Society, doin 

in cr 

pioneering and foundation work in a new and not 
incorporated plot on which future generations m; 
build, and making as few mistakes as we can reasonal 
contrive by the exercise of great care. We are not 
literary society, though we have had men of lei 
among our guides and leaders; and we are not a re¬ 
ligious society, though some of the members take an 

«jy '"tf."'' ■' '.'v' 

y y': ; 

. 1 .1. 

sin 

H 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

interest in our subject because it seems to them to have 
a bearing on their religious convictions or hopes. I will 
say a few words on both these points. 

First, our relations to literature. 

The name of Francis Bacon is a household word in 
the history of English scientific ideas. I do not mean 
in the recent, and as it seems to me comic, aspect, that 
he wrote everything that was written in the Elizabethan 
era (a matter to which I wish to make no reference one 
way or the other, for it is completely off my path). But, 
before that hare was started, his name was weighty and 
familiar in the history of English scientific ideas ; and it 
is instructive to ask why. Was he a man of Science ? 
No. Did he make discoveries? No. Do scientific 
men trace back their ancestry to him ? No. To Isaac 
Newton they trace it back, to Gilbert, to Roger Bacon, 
speaking for those in England; but of Francis Bacon 
they know next to nothing. Outside England all the 
world traces its scientific ancestry to Newton, to 
Descartes, to Galileo, to Kepler; but of Francis Bacon 
scientific men outside England have scarcely heard, 
save as a man of letters. Yet the progress of science 
owes much to him. All unconsciously scientific men 
owe to him a great debt. Why ? 

Because he perceived afar off the oncoming of the 
scientific wave, and because he was able, in language 
to which men would listen, to herald and welcome its 
advance. 

Scientifically he was an amateur; but he was an 
enthusiast who, with splendid eloquence, with the fire 
of genius, and with great forensic skill, was able to 
impress his generation, and not his own generation 
alone, with some idea of the dignity and true place of 
science, and to make it possible for the early pioneers 

into the sc 
from our 

if need w 

mean no c 
world gen 
a thing to 
to the d< 
eminent 

manner o 

[Sect, i | 

hem to have t 
opes. I will ! 

i(t!d word in f 

i<> not mean 'i 

aspect, that • 

Elizabethan )' 
(Terence one f 

path). But, ' 

weighty and '■ 

leas; and it 
of Science? ' 

)o scientific 
To Isaac 

'>ger Bacon, 
tncts Bacon 
land all the j. 
Vewton, to j, 
tncis Bacon | 
ceiy heard, I 
s of science 1 ■ | 
cntific men I 

ning of the \ 
in language 
welcome its 

he was an 
ith the fire 
nm able to 
generation 
ue place of 
ly pioneers 

Chap, ii] PRACTICAL WORK 15 

of the Royal Society to pursue their labours unimpeded 
by persecution, and to gain some sort of recognition 
even from general and aristocratic Society. 

For remember that the term “science” was not always 
respectable. To early ears it sounded almost as the 
term witchcraft or magic sounds, it was a thing from 
which to warn young people; it led to atheism and to 
many other abominations. It was an unholy prying 
into the secrets of Nature which were meant to be hid 
from our eyes, it was a thing against which the Church 
resolutely set its face, a thing for which it was ready 
if need were to torture or to burn those unlucky men 
of scientific genius who were born before their time. I 
mean no one Church in particular: I ’mean the religious 
world generally. Science was a thing allied to heresy, 
a thing to hold aloof from, to shudder at, and to attribute 
to the devil. All which treatment that great and 
eminent pioneer, Roger Bacon, experienced at the 
U niversity of Oxford; because the time was not yet 
ripe. 

How came it that a little later, in the days of the 
Stuarts, the atmosphere was so different from that pre¬ 
valent in the days of the Plantagenets ? Doubtless the 
age of Elizabeth, the patriotism aroused by the Armada 
and by the great discoveries in geography, had had their 
vivifying effect; and the same sort of originality of 
thought which did not scruple to arraign a king for high 
treason likewise ventured to set orthodoxy at defiance, 
and to experiment upon and investigate openly all 
manner of natural facts. But, in partial contradiction 
to the expressed opinion of some men of science, I am 
disposed to agree to a considerable extent with the 
popular British view that the result was largely due to 
the influence of the writings of Francis Bacon, He 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

i 6 

had accustomed scholars and literary men to the possi¬ 
bilities and prerogatives of scientific inquiry, he had 
emphasised the importance and the dignity of experi¬ 
ment, and it is to his writings that the rapid spread of 
scientific ideas, discovered as always by a few, became 
acceptable to and spread among the many. 

Do not let us suppose, however, that the recognition 
of science was immediate and universal. Dislike of it, 
and mistrust of the consequences of scientific inquiry— 
especially in geology and anthropology,—persisted well 
into the Victorian era, and is not wholly extinct at the 
present day. Quite apart from antipathy to investigation 
into affairs of the mind—which is unpopular and mis¬ 
trusted still, so that good people are still found who will 
attribute anything unusual to the devil, and warn young 
people from it,—there is some slight trace of lingering 
prejudice against the orthodox sciences of Chemistry 
and Physics and Biology. They have achieved their 
foothold, they are regarded with respect—people do not 
disdain to make money by means of them when the 
opportunity is forthcoming—but they are not really liked. 
They are admitted to certain schools on sufferance, as 
an inferior grade of study suited to the backward and 
the ignorant; they are not regarded with affection and 
enthusiasm as revelations of Divine working to be 
reverently studied, nor as subjects in which the youth 
of a nation may be wholesomely and solidly trained. 

Very well, still more is the time not quite ripe for 
our subject; pioneers must expect hard knocks, the 
mind of a people can change only slowly. Until the 
mind of a people is changed, new truths born before 
their time must suffer the fate of other untimely births ; 
and the prophet who preaches them must expect to be 
mistaken for a useless fanatic, of whom every age has 

Chap, ii] PRACTICAL WORK - 

always had too many, and must be content to be liter¬ 
ally or metaphorically put to death, as part of the process 
of the regeneration of the world. 

The dislike and mistrust and disbelief in the validity 
or legitimacy of psychical inquiry is familiar: the 
dislike of the Natural Sciences is almost defunct. It 
survives, undoubtedly—-they are not liked, though they 
are tolerated and I am bound to say that part of the 
surviving dislike is due not alone to heredity and imbibed 
ideas, but to the hasty and intolerant and exuberant 
attitude of some men of science, who, knowing them¬ 
selves to be reformers, feeling that they have a grain 
of seed-corn to plant and water, have not always been 
content to go about their business in a calm and con¬ 
ciliatory spirit, but have sought to hurry things on by a 
rough-shod method of progression, which may indeed 
attain its ends, but gives some pain in the process, and 
perhaps achieves results less admirable than those which 
might have been attained by the exercise of a little 
patience, a little more perception of the point of view of 
others, a little more imagination, a little more of that 
recognition of the insignificance of trifles and of the 
transitory character of full-blown fashions which is called 
a sense of humour, a little cultivation of the historic 
sense. In a word, a little more general education. 

But this is a digression. I admit the importance 
of Trancis Bacon in the history of the development of 
the national recognition of the natural sciences in 
England; and I wish to suggest that in the history 
of the psychical sciences we too have had a Bacon,— 
and one not long departed from us. It is possible 
that in his two posthumous volumes we have a book 
which posterity will regard as a Novum Organon. 
History does not repeat itself, and I would not draw 

[Sect, i 

i8 aims and objects 

the parallel too close. It may be that posterity will 

regard Myers as much more than that,—as a philo¬ 
sophic pioneer who has not only secured recognition 
for but has himself formulated some of the philosophic 
unification of, a mass of obscure and barely recog¬ 
nised human faculty,—thereby throwing a light on the 
meaning of “personality” which may survive the test 
of time. It may be so, but that is for no one living to 
say. Posterity alone, by aid of the experience and 
further knowledge which time brings,, is able to make 
a judgment of real value on such a topic as that. _ 

Meanwhile it is for us to see that time does bring 
this greater knowledge and experience. For time # one 
is impotent. Millions of years passed on this planet, 
durino- which the amount of knowledge acquired was 
small or nil. Up to the sixteenth century, even, 
scientific progress was at the least slow. Recently it 
has been rapid,—none too rapid, but rapid. The rate 
of advance depends upon the activities and energies 
of each generation, and upon the organisation and 
machinery which it has inherited from its immediate 

forebears. .... 

The pioneers who created the S.P.R. have left it in 

trust with us to hand it on to future generations, an 
efficient and powerful machine for the spread of scientific 
truth, —an engine for the advancement of science in 
a direction overgrown with thickets of popular super¬ 
stition, intermixed with sandy and barren tracts of 
resolute incredulity. We have to steer our narrow way 
between the Scylla of stony minds with no opening in 
our direction, and the Charybdis of easy and omnivorous 
acceptance of every straw and waif, whether of truth or 
falsehood, that may course with the currents of popular 
superstition. 

Chap, it] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

*9 

Need for Qualified Investigators 

Realising this to be our duty, and perceiving that 
we have a long period of danger and difficulty before 
us, it has become evident to persons of clear vision that 
the Society must be established on a sound and per¬ 
manent basis, and must endeavour to initiate an attitude 
of regarding the psychical sciences as affording the same 
sort of scope to a career, the same sort of opportunities 
of earning a livelihood, as do the longer recognised 
sciences,-—those which are more specifically denominated 
“ natural,” because of the way they fit into our idea of 
the scheme of nature as by us at present recognised, or 
at any rate because they deal with facts to which we 
have gradually grown accustomed. 

Any young man who wishes to make money should 
be warned off the pursuit of pure science at the outset. 
People who enter the field with that object in view will 
do neither themselves nor science any good. A certain 
amount of enthusiasm and pioneering proclivity is 
essential, but fortunately that has never yet been wanting 
in our race; witness the hardships willingly entered 
upon, and the risks run, in Arctic or Antarctic explora¬ 
tion, for nothing more than a living wage. A living 
wage is however to many a necessity. It has always 
been recognised that those who labour at the altar 
should live by the altar; and a minimum of provision 
for bread and homely needs ought to be at the disposal 
of a Society like this wherewith to enable a person of 
ability and enthusiasm to undertake the prosecution 
of our researches in a definite and continuous and so to 
speak professional manner. Hitherto we have depended 
on the spontaneous and somewhat spasmodic work of 
amateurs, often of wealthy amateurs, before whose minds 

30 

[Sect, i 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

such questions as salary never even momentarily 
pass. We shall always have need of services such as 
theirs. In the more orthodox sciences, in Physics for 
instance, it has been notorious that throughout ast 
century the best work has often been done by people 
who—having the means of living otherwise secured to 
them—were able to devote their time, and often con¬ 
siderable means too, to the prosecution of research. 
There has been no rule either way. Some of the 
leaders have been paid a small salary, like Faraday. 
others have had independent means, like Cavendish an 
Joule. Always I say we shall depend upon and be 
grateful for the spontaneous work and help of people of 
means; but we must not depend solely upon that, else 
will young people of genius be diverted by sheer force 
of circumstance into other channels, and our nascent 
science will lose the benefit of their powers and con¬ 
tinuous work. 

We cannot always depend on spontaneous cases 
alone. They are most important, and are often extremely 
valuable instances of a spontaneous, and purposeful 
exercise of the faculty we are investigating, and it would 
be a great mistake to suppose that we have had enough 
of them. It is essential that we be kept informed 
of recent well-attested cases, especially of apparitions 
at or near the time of death; but we shall not make 
progress in understanding the laws of the phenomena 
and disentangling their deeper meaning if we confine 
ourselves to observation alone. We must experiment, 
we must endeavour to produce and examine phenomena 
as it were in a laboratory'—such as I have elsewhere 
foreshadowed {Journal S.P.R., vi. 357)—must 
submit them to minute investigation. 

For instance there is the question of so-called spirit 

Chap, ii] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

21 

photography, there are asserted levitations and apports 
and physical movements, none of which have been sub¬ 

jected to adequate scientific examination. Many such 
cases have been examined and found fraudulent, and 
there is great difficulty in obtaining the phenomena 
under prescribed and crucial conditions; but until 
these. things have been submitted to long-continued 
scientific scrutiny they will make no undisputed impres¬ 
sion, they will be either improperly accepted or improperly 
rejected, and will continue in that nebulous hazy region, 
the region of popular superstition, from which it is the 
business of this Society to rescue them ; raising them 
on to the dry land of science, or submerging them as 
impostures in the waters of oblivion. And I may say 
parenthetically that we do not care one iota which 
alternative fate is in store for them: we only want 
the truth. 

Now I know that some few persons are impatient of 
such an investigation, and decline to see any need for it. 
They feel that if they have evidence enough to justify 
their own belief, further inquiry is superfluous. These 
have not the scientific spirit, they do not understand 
the meaning of “law.” A fact isolated and alone, 
joined by no link to the general body of know¬ 
ledge, is almost valueless. If what they believe is 
really a fact, they may depend upon it that it has its 
place in the cosmic scheme, a place which can be de¬ 

tected by human intelligence; and its whole bearing 
and meaning can gradually be made out. 

Moreover, their attitude is selfish. Being satisfied 
themselves, they will help us no more. But real know- 
ledge, like real wealth of any kind, cannot be wrapped up 
in a napkin ; it pines for reproduction, for increase : “ how 
am I straightened till it be accomplished.” The missionary 

22 

[Sect, i 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

spirit, in some form or other, is inseparably associated 
with all true and worthy knowledge. Think of a man 
who, having made a discovery in Astronomy, seen a 
new planet, or worked out a new law,—should keep it 
to himself and gloat over it in private. It would be 
inhuman and detestable miserliness; even in a thing 
like that, of no manifest importance to mankind. There 
would be some excuse for a man who lived so much in 
advance of his time that, like Galileo with his newly 
invented and applied telescope, he ran a danger of rebuffs 
and persecution for the publication of discoveries. But 
even so, it is his business to brave this and tell out 
what he knows ; still more is it his business so to act 
upon the mind of his generation as to convert it 
gradually to the truth, and lead his fellows to accept what 
now they reject. 

Those who believe themselves the repositories of any 
form of divine truth should realise their responsibility. 
They are bound in honour to take such steps as may 
wisely cause its perception and recognition by the mass 
of mankind. They are not bound to harangue the 
crowd from the nearest platform: that might be the 
very way to retard progress and throw back the accept¬ 
ance of their doctrine. The course to pursue may be 
much more indirect than that. The way may be hard 
and long, but to the possessor of worldly means it is far 
easier than to another. If the proper administration of 
his means can conduce to the progress of science, and 
to the acceptance by the mass of mankind of important 
and vivifying knowledge of which they are now 
ignorant, then surely the path lies plain. 

CHAP. IlJ 

PRACTICAL WORK 

Argvmentum ad Dignitatem 

Still however there are persons who urge that a 
study of occult phenomena is beneath the dignity of 
science, and that nothing will be gained of any use to 
mankind by inquisitiveness regarding the unusual and 
the lawless, or by gravely attending to the freaks of the 
unconscious or semi-conscious mind. 

But—as Myers and Gurney said long ago in 
Phantasms of the Living —it is needful to point out 
yet once more, how plausible the reasons for discourag¬ 
ing some novel research have often seemed to be, while 
yet the advance of knowledge has rapidly shown the 
futility and folly of such discouragement. 

It was the Father of Science himself who was the 
first to circumscribe her activity. Socrates expressly 
excluded from the range of exact inquiry all such 
matters as the movements and nature of the sun and 
moon. He wished—and as he expressed his wish it 
seemed to have all the cogency of absolute wisdom— 
that men’s minds should be turned to the ethical and 
political problems which truly concerned them,—not 
wasted in speculation on things unknowable—things 
useless even could they be known. 

In a kindred spirit, though separated from Socrates 
by the whole result of that physical science which 
Socrates had deprecated, we find a great modern 
systematiser of human thought again endeavouring to 
direct the scientific impulse towards things serviceable to 
man ; to divert it from things remote, unknowable, an J 
useless if known. What then, in Comte’s view, are m 
fact the limits of man’s actual home and business ? the 
bounds within which he may set himself to learn all 
he can, assured that all will serve to inform his con¬ 
science and guide his life ? It is the solar system which 
has become for the French philosopher what the street 
and market-place of Athens were for the Greek. 

24 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

I need not say that Comte’s prohibition has been 
altogether neglected. No frontier of scientific demarca¬ 
tion has been established between Neptune and Sirius, 
between Uranus and Aldebaran. Our knowledge of 
the fixed stars increases yearly; and it would be rash to 
maintain that human conduct is not already influenced 
by the conception thus gained of the unity and im¬ 
mensity of the heavens. 

The criticisms which have met us, from the side 
sometimes of scientific, sometimes of religious ortho¬ 
doxy, have embodied, in modernised phraseology, 
nearly every well-worn form of timid protest, or obscur¬ 
antist demurrer, with which the historians of science 
have been accustomed to give piquancy to their long 
tale of discovery and achievement. 

Sometimes we are told that we are inviting the old 
theological spirit to encroach once more on the domain 
of Science; sometimes that we are endeavouring to lay 
the impious hands of Science upon the mysteries of 
Religion. Sometimes we are informed that competent 
savants have already fully explored the field which we 
propose for our investigation. Sometimes that no respect¬ 
able man of science would condescend to meddle with 
such a reeking mass of fraud and hysteria. Sometimes 
we are pitied as laborious triflers who prove some 
infinitely small matter with mighty trouble and pains; 
sometimes we are derided as attempting the solution of 
gigantic problems by slight and superficial means. 

Use of Continued Investigation 

But the question is reiterated, Why investigate that 
of which we are sure ? Why conduct experiments in 
hypnotism or in telepathy ? Why seek to confirm that 
of which we already have conviction ? Why value well- 
evidenced narratives of apparitions at times of death or 

Chap, ii] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

25 

catastrophe, when so many have already been collected 
in Phantasms of the Living, and when careful scrutiny 
has proved that they cannot be the result of chance 
coincidence ? 1 There is a quite definite answer to 
this question—an answer at which I have already 
hinted—which I wish to commend to the consideration 
of those who feel this difficulty or ask this sort of 
question. 

The business of Science is not belief but investiga¬ 
tion. Belief is both the prelude to and the outcome 
of knowledge. If a fact or a theory has had a primct 
facie case made out for it, subsequent investigation is 
necessary to examine and extend it. 

Effective knowledge concerning anything can only be 
the result of long-continued investigation; belief in the . 
possibility of a fact is only the very first step. Until 
there is some sort of tentative belief in the reasonable 
possibility of a fact there is no investigation,—the scien¬ 
tific priest and Levite have other business, and pass by 
on the other side. And small blame to them: they cannot 
stop to investigate everything that may be lying by the 
roadside. If they had been sure that it was a fellow 
creature in legitimate distress they would have acted 
differently. Belief of a tentative kind will ensure 
investigation, not by all but by some of the scientific 
travellers along the road; but investigation is the 
prelude to action, and action is a long process. Some 
one must attend to the whole case and see it through. 
Others, more pressed for time, may find it easier to 
subscribe their “ two pence ” to an endowment fund, and 
so give indirect but valuable assistance. 

The object of investigation is the ascertainment of 

1 See the Report of Professor Sidgwick’s Committee, Proceedings S.P,R. } 
yol x. p. 394. 

2 6 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

law, and to this process there is no end. What, for 
instance, is the object of observing and recording 
earthquakes, and arranging delicate instruments to 
detect the slightest indication of earth tremor ? Every 
one knows that earthquakes exist, there is no scepticism 
to overcome in their case; even people who have 
never experienced them are quite ready to believe in 
their occurrence. Investigation into earthquakes and 
the whole of the motile occurrences in the earth’s 
crust, is not in the least for the purpose of confirming 
faith, but solely for the better understanding of the 
conditions and nature of the phenomena; in other 
words, for the ascertainment of law. 

So it is in every branch of science. At first among 
new phenomena careful observation of fact is necessary, 
as when Tycho Brahd made measurements of the 
motion of the planets and accumulated a store of 
careful observations. Then came the era of hypothesis, 
and Kepler waded through guess after guess, testing 
them pertinaciously to see if any one of them would 
fit all the facts: the result of his strenuous life-work 
being the three laws which for all time bear his 
name. And then came the majestic deductive epoch 
of Newton, welding the whole into one comprehensive 
system; subsequently to be enriched and extended by 
the labours of Lagrange and Laplace; after which the 
current of scientific inquiry was diverted for a time 
into other less adequately explored channels. 

For not at all times is everything equally ripe for 
inquiry. There is a phase, or it may be a fashion, 
even in Science. I spoke of geographical exploration 
as the feature of Elizabeth’s time. Astronomical 
inquiry succeeded it. Optics and Chemistry were the 
dominating sciences of the early part of the nineteenth 

[Sect, i 

28 AIMS AND OBJECTS 

We have to combine the labours of Tycho with those of 
Kepler, and thus prepare the way for a future Newton ; 
who has not yet appeared above the psychical horizon.. 

His advent must depend upon how far we of this 
and the next few generations are faithful to our trust, 
how far we work ourselves, and by our pecuniary 
means enable others to work; and I call upon those 
who are simultaneously blessed with this world’s goods 
and likewise inspired with confidence in the truth and 
value of mental and spiritual knowledge, to bethink 
themselves whether, either in their lifetime or by their, 
wills, they cannot contribute to the world’s progress in 
a beneficent way, so as to enable humanity to rise to 
a greater height of aspiration and even of religion ; as 
they will if they are enabled to start with a substantial 
foundation of solid scientific fact on which to erect 
their edifice of faith. 

If it be said that investigation should not be expen¬ 
sive, I would point to what is expended on the investi¬ 
gation of the orthodox sciences. Before Columbus’s 
voyage could be undertaken, the Courts of Europe 
had to be appealed to for funds. Before astronomical 
discoveries can be made, large observatories and costly 
telescopes have to be provided,—and not one only, but 
many, so that by collaboration of observers in many 
parts of the world the truth may be ascertained. 

Look at the expense of geographical and ethnological 
exploration to-day. Think of the highly equipped 
physical laboratories, one of which is maintained at 
every College 6r University in the civilised world. 
And as to chemical laboratories,—-remember that every 
large commercial chemical manufacturing firm in 
Germany maintains a band of trained and competent 
chemists, always investigating, in the hope of a new 

Chap . „] PRACTICAL WORK 29 

compound or a new process or some little profitable 
improvement. 

Money is not scarce, and if people realised the 
interest of science to the human race it would be poured 
out far more lavishly than it is at present. Certain 
small special sums are now provided for the investigation 
of disease. The origin of Malaria has been traced, and 
this disease has some chance of being exterminated, so 
that the tropical belt of the earth may become open to 
white habitation. Cancer is being pursued to its lair, 

■ without success so far ; but funds for researches such as 
these are bound to be forthcoming. When practical 
benefits can be definitely foreseen, people feel justified m 
spending money even on Science ; though as a rule that 
and Education are things on which they are specially 
economical. Municipal extravagance in any .such direc- ,. 
tion is sternly checked, though in other directions it may* 
be permitted. 

And why should not psychical investigation lead to 
practical results? Are we satisfied-with our treatment 
of criminals? As civilised people.are we content to 
grow a perennial class of habitual criminals, and to keep 
them in check only by devices appropriate to savages; 
hunting them, flogging them, locking them up, ex¬ 
terminating them? Any savage race in the history of 
the world could do as much as that; and if they know 
no better they are bound to do it for their own protec¬ 
tion. Society cannot let its malefactors run wild, any 
more than it can release its lunatics. Till it understands 
these things it must lock them up, but the sooner it 
understands them the better; an attempt at comprehen¬ 
sion is being made by criminologists in Italy, r ranee, 

1 E.g. Bulletin de Hmtitut Giniral Psychologique, dirige par Dr. Pierre 
Janet, Decembre, I 9 02 P* 22 5 * 

30 AIMS AND OBJECTS [Sect, i 

and elsewhere. Force is no remedy: intelligent treat-' 
ment is. Who can doubt but that a study of obscure 
mental facts will lead to a theory of the habitual criminal, 
to the tracing of his malady as surely as malaria has 
been traced to the mosquito ? And once we understand 
the evil the remedy will follow. Already hypnotic treat¬ 
ment, or treatment by suggestion, occurs to one; and 
quite normal measures of moral improvement can also 
be tried. The fact of imprisonment ought to lend itself 
to brilliant efforts at reform: such efforts are the only 
real justification for destruction of liberty; The essence 
of manhood is to be free—for better for worse, free—and 
coercion is only justified if it is salutary. It is a great 
advantage to doctors to have their patients collected 
compactly in a hospital—and without it medical practice 
would languish; it ought to be a similar advantage—a 
similar opportunity—to have criminals herded together 
in gaols, and lunatics in asylums. It is unwise and un¬ 
scientific to leave prisoners merely to the discipline of 
warders and the preaching of chaplains. That is not 
the way to attack a disease of the body politic. I have 
no full-blown treatment to suggest, but I foresee that 
thf will be one in the future. Experiments are already 
being made in America, in the prisons of Elmira and 
Concord,—experiments of hope, if not yet of achieve- 
men. Society will not be content always to employ 
methods of barbarism; the resources of civilisation are 
not really exhausted, though for centuries they have 
appeared to be. The criminal demands careful study 
on the psychical side, and remedy or palliation will be 
a direct outcome of one aspect of our researches. The 
influence of the unconscious or subliminal self, the power 
of suggestion, the influence of one mind over another, 
the phenomena of so-called “possession,”—these are not 

Chap, ii] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

academic or scientific facts alone: they have a deep 
practical bearing, and sooner or later it must be put to 
the proof. 

Hint to Investigators 

To return to the more immediate and special aspect 
of our work : one of the things I want to impress upon 
all readers, especially upon those who are gifted with a 
faculty for receiving impressions which are worth record¬ 
ing, is that too much care cannot be expended in getting 
the record exact. Exact in every particular, especially 
as regards the matter of time. In recording a vision or 
an audition or some other impression corresponding to 
some event elsewhere, there is a dangerous tendency 
to try to coax the facts to fit some half-fledged precon¬ 
ceived theory and to make the coincidence in point of 
time exact. 

Such distortions of truth are misleading and useless. 
What we want to know is exactly how the things occurred, 
not how the impressionist would have liked them to 
occur, or how he thinks they ought to have occurred. 
If people attach importance to their own predilections 
concerning events in the Universe, they can be^ftt 
forth in a footnote for the guidance of any one wmo 
hereafter may think of starting a Universe on his own 
account: but such speculations are of no interest to us 
who wish to study and understand the Universe as it is. 
If the event preceded the impression, by all means let us 
know it,—and perhaps some one may be able to detect 
a meaning in the time-interval, when a great number 
of similar instances are compared, hereafter. If the 
impression preceded the event, by all means let us know 
that too, and never let the observation be suppressed 
from a ridiculous idea that such anticipation is impossible. 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

Nor let us exclude well-attested physical phenomena from 
historical record, on any similar prejudice of impossibility. 
We want to learn what is possible, not to have minds 
made up beforehand and distort or blink the facts to suit 
our preconceptions. 

If the correspondence in time is exact, then let future 
students be able to ascertain that also from the record ; 
but the recorder need not make any remark about 
“allowing for difference of longitude” or anything of 
that kind, unless indeed he is an astronomer or some 
one who thoroughly understands all about “time.” 
Arithmetic of that sort can be left to those who sub¬ 
sequently disentangle and criticise the results. The 
observer may of course indicate his ideas on the subject 
if he chooses, but his record should be accurate and cold¬ 
blooded and precise. Sentences indicating contemporary 
emotion, in so far as that is part of the facts to be 
recorded, are entirely in place; but ejaculations of 
subsequent emotion, speculation as to the cause, or 
moralisation as to the meaning, are out of place. It 
may be said that these do no harm, and can easily be 
ignored by a future student; and that is so in one sense, 
but their atmosphere is rather apt to spoil the record, to 
put the recorder into an unscientific frame of mind. 
And, even when they have biassed him no whit, they 
suggest to a subsequent reader that they may have 
biassed him, and so discount unfairly the value of his 
testimony. 

With respect to the important subject of possible 
prediction, on which our ideas as to the ultimate nature 
of time will so largely depend, every precaution should 
be taken to put far from us the temptation or the 
possibility of improving the original record after the fact 
to which it refers has occurred, if it ever does occur ; 

"l-IAP. ii] 

PRACTICAL WORK 

then let futut 

remark ahnn 

; iniur or 

who sub- 
■■'•-suits. The 

' the subject 
ir;i -te and cold- 

and to remember that though we have done nothing of 
the sort, and are in all respects honest, and known to be 
honest and truthful, yet the contrary may be surmised 
by posterity or by strangers or foreigners who did not 
know us; and even our friends may fancy that we did 
more than we were aware of, in some quite hypothetical 
access of somnambulic or automatic trance. Automatic 
writers for instance must be assumed open to this 
suspicion, unless they take proper precautions and 
deposit copies of their writings in some inaccessible 
and responsible custody ; because the essence of their 
phenomenon is that the hand writes what they themselves 
are not aware of, and so it is an easy step for captious 
critics to maintain that it may also have supplemented 
or amended, in some way of which they were likewise 

not aware. 

The establishment of cases of real prediction, not mere 
inference, is so vital and crucial a test of something not 
yet recognised by science that it is worth every effort to 
make its evidence secure. 

Another thing on which I should value experiments 
is the detection of slight traces of telepathic power in 
quite normal persons,—in the average man for instance, 
or rather more likely perhaps, in the average child. 
The power of receiving telepathic impressions may be 
a rare faculty existing only in a few individuals, and in 
them fully developed; but it is equally possible, and, if 
one may say so, more likely, that what we see in them 
is but an intensification of a power which exists in every 
one as a germ or nucleus. If such should be the fact, 
it behoves us to know it; and its recognition would do 
more to spread a general belief in the fact of telepatny 
—a belief by no means as yet universally or even wide 
spread—than almost anything else. 

34 

AIMS AND OBJECTS 

[Sect, i 

. One method that has been suggested for detecting 
faint traces of the power, is to offer to a percipient 
the choice of one out of two things, and to see 
whether in multitudes of events the predetermination 
of a bystander as to which shall be chosen, exerts any 
influence whatever on the result. Many devices can be 
made for carrying this out, but experiments of greater 
interest and novelty will be made if the devices are left 
to individual ingenuity and experience. Leisure, and 
patience, and system, and industry, are the requisites : 
and if I do not myself practise what I preach, in this 
and other particukrs, it is because, whatever I may lack 
o the others, I am at present conspicuously lacking in 
the first of these essentials. h 

Bearing on Allied Subjects 

. There are man y topics on which I might speak : one 
is the recent advance in our knowlege of the nature of the 
atom, and the discovery of facts concerning the Ether and 
Matter which I think must have some bearing, -some to 
me at present quite unknown bearing,-on the theory of 
what are called “physical phenomena”; but it is hardlv 
necessary to call the attention of educated persons to 

subject mtefeSt m ° St rGCent Pur6ly Scientific 

.1 0n another topic I might say a few words, viz., on 
the ambiguity clinging round the phrase “action at a 
distance, in connection with telepathy. Physicists denv 
action at a distance, at least most of them dH do for 
one;—at the same time I admit telepathy. Therefore 
|t is supposed I necessarily ’assume that telepathy must 
be conducted by an etherial process analogous to the 
transm.ss.on of waves. That is however a Lse,luur 

f for detecting 
° a P^cipient 

and to S e e 
ed etermin ation . 

’ exe rts any 
devices can be 

f ts . of greater 
devices are left 
Leisure, and 
■ he requisites • 
,reach > in this 
/Cr 1 may lack 
IsJ y lacking- in 

u s l>eak: one 
nature of the 

!»&—some to 

'action at 

■ -I do for 

Chap. iiJ 

PRACTICAL WORK 

The phrase “action at a distance” is a technical one. 
Its denial signifies that no physical force is exerted save 
through a medium. There must either be a projectile from 
A to B, or a continuous medium of some kind extending 
from A to B, if A exerts force upon B, or otherwise 
influences it by a physical process. 

But what about a psychical process? There is no 
such word in physics; the term is in that connection 
meaningless. A physicist can make no assertion on it 
one way or the other. If A mesmerises B, or if A 
makes an apparition of himself appear to B, or if A 
conveys a telepathic impression to B ; is a medium 
necessary then ? As a physicist I do not know : these 
are not processes I understand. They may not be 
physical processes at all. 

Take it further :—A thinks of B, or A prays to B, or 
A worships B.—Is a medium necessary for these things ? 
Absolute ignorance! The question is probably meaning¬ 
less and absurd. Spiritual and psychical events do not 
enter into the scheme of Physics; and when a physicist 
denies “ action at a distance ” he is speaking of things 
he is competent to deal with,—of light and sound and 

electricity and magnetism and cohesion and gravitation,_ 

he is not, or shoind-not be, denying anything psychical 
or spiritual at all. All the physical things, he asserts, 
necessitate a medium ; but beyond that he is silent. If 
telepathy is an etherial process, as soon as it is proved 
to be an etherial process, it will come into the realm of 
physics ; till then it stays outside. 

There are rash speculators who presume to say that 
spiritual and psychical and physical are all one. In the 
higher reaches of Philosophy this may have some 
meaning—there may be some advantage in thus treating 
questions of ultimate Ontology,—boundaries and classi- 

[Sect, i 

3< 5 aims and objects 

fication must be recognised as human artifices; but for 
practical purposes distinctions are necessary, and if peop e 
unqualified in Metaphysics make these assertions I ven¬ 
ture to say that the instinct for simplification has run 
away with them, that they are trespassing out of bounds 
and preaching what they do not know, ekmg out a 
precarious ignorance with cheap dogmatism. 

There is one important topic on which I have not yet 
spoken,—I mean the bearing of our inquiry on religion. 
It is a large subject and one too nearly trenching on the 
region of emotion to be altogether suitable for considera¬ 
tion by a scientific Society. Yet every science has its 
practical applications,—though they are not part of the 
science, they are its legitimate outcome,—and the value 
of the science to humanity must be measured in the 
last resort by the use which humanity can make of it. 
To the enthusiast, knowledge for its own sake, without 
ulterior ends, may be enough,-and if there were none 
of this spirit in the world we should be poorer than we 

are ._but for the bulk of mankind this is too high, 

too’arid a creed, and people in general must see just 
enough practical outcome to have faith that ^ there may¬ 
be yet more. , 

That our researches will ultimately have some bearing, 
some meaning, for the science of theology, I do not doubt. 
What that bearing may be I can only partly tell. I have 
indicated in Man and the Universe, Chapter II. called 
“ The Reconciliation,” part of what I feel on the subject, 
and I have gone as far in that article as I feel entitled 
to go. We seek to unravel the nature and hidden powers 
of man; and a fuller understanding of the attributes of 
humanity cannot but have some influence on our theory 

of Divinity itself. 

PRACTICAL WORK 

37 

[Sect, i 

ss; but for 
id if people 
ions I ven- 
>n has run 
■ of bounds 
dug out a 

ave not yet 
an religion, 
ning on the 
r considera- 
•ncc has its 
part of the 
■d the value 
ured in the 
make of it. 
tk<:, without 
- were none 
irer than we 
is too high, 
w:;t see just 
i. there may 

>me bearing, 
Id not doubt 
L* til. I have 
Dr 1 i. called 
! the subject, 
hri entitled 
idden jlowers 
, it tributes of 

Chap, ii] 

If any scientific Society is worthy of encouragement 
and support it should surely be this. If there is any 
object worthy of patient and continued attention, it is 
surely these great and pressing problems of whence, 
what, and whither, that have occupied the attention of 
Prophet and Philosopher since human history began. 
The discovery of a new star, of a marking on Mars, 
of a new element, or of a new extinct animal or plant, 
is interesting: surely the discovery of a new human 
faculty is interesting too. Already the discovery of 
“ telepathy ” constitutes the first-fruits of this Society’s 
work, and it has laid the way open to the discovery of 
much more. Our aim is nothing less than the investiga¬ 
tion and better comprehension of human faculty, human 
personality, and human destiny. 

SECTION II 

EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY OR 
THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

CHAPTER III 

SOME EARLY EXPERIMENTS IN 
THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

I AM not attempting a history of the subject; and 
for the observations of Prof. Barrett and others in 
the experimental transference of ideas or images 
from one person to another I must refer students to the 
first volume of the Proceedings of the Society, where a 
number of facsimile reproductions of transferred diagrams 
and pictures, which are of special interest, will also be 
found. Prof. Barrett had experimented in conjunction 
with Mr. William de Morgan so long ago as 1870-73, 
and he endeavoured to make a communication on the 
subject to the British Association in 1876, but the subject 
was unwelcome or the attempt premature, and he 
naturally encountered rehuff. - There was some Corre¬ 
spondence on the subject in Nature in 1881, and an 
article in The Nineteenth. Century for June 1882. All I 
shall do here is to describe some later observations and 
experiments of my own. « 

Suffice it to say that the leading members of the 
Society for Psychical Research — actuated in the first 

38 , 

Chap, hi] 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

39 

instance largely by Prof. Barrett’s report—investigated the 
matter, and gradually by pertinacious experiment became 
convinced of the reality of thought-transference,—taking 
due precaution, as their experience enlarged, against the 
extraordinary ingenuity and subtle possibility of code 
signalling, and discriminating carefully between the 
genuine phenomenon and the thought-reading or rather 
muscle-reading exhibitions, with actual or partial contact, 
which at one time were much in vogue. 

Before coming to our conclusion as to Thought- 
transference, says Prof. Sidgwick, we considered carefully 
the arguments brought forward for regarding cases of 
so-called “ Thought-reading ” as due to involuntary 
indications apprehended through the ordinary senses; 
and we came to the conclusion that the ordinary ex¬ 
periments, where contact was allowed, could be explained 
by the hypothesis of unconscious sensibility to involuntary 
muscular pressure. Hence we have always attached 
special importance to experiments in which contact was 
excluded ; with regard.to which this particular hypothesis 
is clearly out of court. 

My own first actual experience of Thought-trans¬ 
ference, or experimental Telepathy, was obtained in the 
years 1883 and 1884 at Liverpool, when I was invited 
by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie^ of that city to join in an 
investigation which he was conducting with the aid of 
one or two persons who had turned out to be sensitive, 
from among the employees of the large drapery firm of 
George Henry Lee & Co. 

A large number of these experiments had been 
conducted, before I was asked to join, throughout the 
Spring and Autumn of 1883, but it is better for me to 
adhere strictly to my own experience and to relate only 
those experiments over which I had control. Accordingly 

40 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

I reproduce here a considerable part of my short paper 
on the subject, originally published in the Proceedings 
of the Society for Psychical Research. 

Most of these experiments were confirmations of 
the kind of thing that had been observed by other 
experimenters. But one experiment which I tried was 
definitely novel, and, as it seems to me, important; 
since it clearly showed that when two agents are acting, 
each contributes to the effect, and that the result is due, 
not to one alone, but to both combined. The experi¬ 
ment is thus described by me in the columns of Nature, 
vol. xxx. page 145 :— 

An Experiment in Thought-Transference 

Those of your readers who are interested in the 
subject of thought-transference, now being investigated, 
may be glad to hear of a little experiment which I 
recently tried here. The series of experiments was 
originated and carried on in this city by Mr. Malcolm 
Guthrie, and he has prevailed on me, on Dr. Herdman, 
and on one or two other more or less scientific witnesses, 
to be present on several occasions, critically to examine 
the conditions, and to impose any fresh ’ ones that we 
thought desirable. I need not enter into particulars, 
but I will just say that the conditions under which 
apparent transference of thought occurs from one or 
more persons, steadfastly thinking, to another in the 
same room blindfold and wholly disconnected from the 
others, seem to me absolutely satisfactory, and such as 
to preclude the possibility of conscious collusion on the 
one hand or unconscious muscular indication on the 
other. 

One evening .last week—after two thinkers, or agents, 
had been several-times successful in instilling the idea 
of some object or drawing, at which they were looking, 

Chap, hi] 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

41 

into the mind of the blindfold person, or percipient—I 
brought into the room a double opaque sheet of thick 
paper with a square drawn on one side and a St, 
Andrew s cross or X on the other, and silently arranged 
it between the two agents so that each looked on one side 
without any notion of what was on the other. The 
percipient was not informed in any way that a novel 
modification was being made; and, as usual, there was 
no contact of any sort or kind,—a clear space of several 
feet existing between each of the three people. I 
thought that by this variation I should decide whether 
one of the two agents was more active than the 
other; or, supposing them about equal, whether two 
ideas in two separate minds could be fused into one by 
the percipient. 

In a very short time the percipient made the following 
remarks, every one else being silent: “ The thing won’t 
keep still.” “ I seem to see things moving about.” 
“ First I see a thing up there, and then one down 
there.” “ I can’t see either distinctly.” The object 
was then hidden, and the percipient was told to 
take off the bandage and to draw the impression 
in her mind on a sheet of paper. She drew a square, 
and then said, “ There was the other thing as well,” 
and drew a cross inside the square from corner to corner, 
saying afterwards, “I don’t know what made me put it 
inside.” 

The experiment is no more conclusive as evidence, 
than fifty others that I have seen at Mr. Guthrie’s, but 
it seems to me somewhat interesting that two minds 
should produce a disconnected sort of impression on the 
mind of the percipient, quite different from the single 
impression which we had usually obtained when two 
agents were both looking at the same thing. Once, for 
instance [to take a nearly corresponding case under those 
conditions], when the object was a rude drawing of the 
main lines in a Union Jack, the figure was reproduced 
by the percipient as a whole withdut misgiving; except, 

42 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ii 

indeed, that she expressed a doubt as to whether its 
middle horizontal line were present or not, and ultimately 
omitted it. 

University College, Liverpool, 

5 June 1884 

It is preferable thus to quote the original record and 
contemporary mode of publication of an experiment, so 
as to avoid the risk either of minimising or over¬ 
emphasising the cogency of the circumstances. But I 
wish to say strongly that the experiment was quite 
satisfactory, and that no reasonable doubt of its validity 
has been felt by me from that time to this. 

Report on the Main Series 

I now proceed to give my report on the whole series 
of experiments:— 

In reporting on the experiments conducted by me, at 
the invitation and with the appliances of Mr. Guthrie, I 
wish to say that I had every opportunity of examining 
and varying the minute conditions of the phenomena, 
so as to satisfy myself of their genuine and objective 
character, in the same way as one is accustomed to 
satisfy oneself as to the .truth and genuineness of any 
ordinary physical fact. If I had merely witnessed facts 
as a passive spectator I should not publicly report upon 
them. So long as one is bound to accept imposed 
conditions and merely witness what goes on, I have no 
confidence in my own penetration, and am perfectly sure 
that a conjurer could impose on me, possibly even to the 
extent of making me think that he was not imposing on 
me; but when one has the control of the circumstances, 
can change them at will and arrange one’s own experi- 

CHAP. Uij 

■ ments, or 
observed 
repetition 

I hav< 
only a fei 
elemental 
though c€ 
head of 
explicable 
sions, wl 
reading. 

In usi 
ask to t 
because t 
under su< 
implying 
dangerou 
phrase; < 
words, j 

Chap, in] 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

43 

ments, one gradually acquires a belief in the phenomena 
observed quite comparable to that induced by the 
repetition of ordinary physical experiments. 

I have no striking or new phenomenon to report, but 
only a few more experiments in the simplest and most 
elementary form of what is called Thought-transference ; 
though certainly what I have to describe falls under the 
head of “Thought-transference” proper, and is not 
explicable by the merely mechanical transfer of impres¬ 
sions, which is more properly described as muscle¬ 
reading. 

In using the term “ Thought-transference,” I would 
ask to be understood as doing so for convenience, 
because the observed facts can conveniently be grouped 
under such a title; but I would not be understood as 
implying any theory on the subject. It is a most 
dangerous thing to attempt to convey a theory by a 
phrase; and to set forth a theory would require many 
words. As it is, the phrase describes correctly enough 
what appears to take place, viz., that one person may, 
under favourable conditions, receive a faint impression 
of a thing which is strongly present in the mind, or 
thought, or sight, or sensorium of another person not in 
contact, and may be able to describe or draw it, more or 
less correctly. But how the transfer takes place, or 
.whether there is any transfer at all, or what is the 
physical reality underlying the terms “ mind,” “ conscious¬ 
ness,” “ impression,” and the like; and whether^ this 
thing we call mind is located in the person, or in the 
space round him, or in both, or neither ; whether indeed 
the term location, as applied to mind, is utter nonsense 
and simply meaningless,—concerning all these things I 
obtrude no hypothesis whatsoever. I may, however, be 
permitted to suggest a rough and crude analogy. That 

44 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

the brain is the organ of consciousness is patent, but 
that consciousness is located in the brain is what no 
psychologist ought to assert; for just as the energy of 
an electric charge, though apparently in the conductor, 
is not in the conductor, but in the space all round it; so 
it may be that the sensory consciousness of a person, 
though apparently located in his brain, may be conceived 
of as also existing like a faint echo in space, or in other 
brains, although these are ordinarily too busy and pre¬ 
occupied to notice it. 

The experiments which I have witnessed proceed in 
the following way. One person is told to keep in a 
perfectly passive condition, with a mind as vacant as 
possible ; and to assist this condition the organs of sense 
are unexcited, the eyes being bandaged and silence 
maintained. It might be as well to shut out even the 
ordinary street hum by plugging the ears, but as a matter 
of fact this was not done. 

A person thus kept passive is “ the percipient.” In 
the experiments I witnessed the percipient was a girl, 
one or other of two who had been accidentally found to 
possess the necessary power. Whether it is a common 
power or not I do not know. So far as I am aware 
comparatively few persons have tried. I myself tried, 
but failed abjectly. It was easy enough to picture things 
to oneself, but they did not appear to be impressed on 
me from without, nor did any of them bear the least 
resemblance to the object in the agent’s mind. (For 
instance, I said a pair of scissors instead of the five of 
diamonds,—and things like that.) Nevertheless, the 
person acting as percipient is in a perfectly ordinary 
condition, and can in no sense be said to be in a hypnotic 
state, unless this term be extended to include the 
emptiness of mind produced by blindfolding and silence. 

Chap, hi] 

To all app 

bypnotisec 
unbandagc 
successive 
Anotht 
at first h< 
without an 
distance, \ 
either a na 
drawing s< 
position fo 
has, on tin 
tiring and i 
or a donke 
for the sp 
term “thi 
barbarous 
its difficult 
Very f 
and when 
all told to 

f 

I 

SOME EXPERIMENTS . 

[Sect, h j 

3 patent, but 
i is what no [ 

he energy 0 f ; 

ie conductor, 
round it; so 1 

°f a person, i 

be conceived 
e, or in other 
'usy and pre- 

d proceed in ! 

to keep in a f 

as vacant as | 

k r ans of sense f 

and silence 
out even the 
ut as a matter J 

rcipient.” In 
it was a girl, 
tally found to 

t' 

is a common ; , 

picture things '" : j 
x:ar the legist 

m 

ii 

Chap, iii] 

45 

To all appearance a person in a brown study is far more 
hypnotised than the percipients I saw, who* usually 
unbandaged their own eyes and chatted between 
successive experiments. 

Another person sitting near the percipient, sometimes 
at first holding her hands but usually and ordinarily 
without any contact at all but with a distinct intervening 
distance, was told to think hard of a particular object, 
either a name, or a scene, or a thing, or of an object or 
drawing set up in a good light and in a convenient 
position for staring at. This person is “the agent” and 
has, on the whole, the hardest time of it. It is a most 
tiring and tiresome thing to stare at a letter, or a triangle, 
or a donkey, or a teaspoon, and to think of nothing else 
for the space of two or three minutes. Whether the 
term “thinking” can properly be applied to such 
barbarous concentration of mind as this I am not sure; 
its difficulty is of the nature of-tediousness. 

Very frequently more than one agent is employed, 
and when two or three people are in the room they are 
all told to think of the object more or less strenuously; 
the idea being that wandering thoughts in the neighbour¬ 
hood certainly cannot help, and may possibly hinder, the 
clear transfer of impression. As regards the question 
whether when several agents are thinking, only one is 
doing the work, or whether all really produce some 
effect, a special experiment has led me to conclude 
that more than one agent can be active at the same 
time. We have some right therefore to conclude that 
several agents are probably more powerful than one, 
but that a confusedness of impression may sometimes be 
produced by different agents attending to different parts 
or aspects of the object. 

Most people seem able to act as agents, though some 

4 g THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect.; ii 

appear to do better than others. I can hardly say 
whether I am much good at it or not. I have not oft’en 
tried alone, and in the majority of cases when I have 
tried I have failed; on the other hand, I have once or 
twice succeeded. We have many times succeeded with 
agents quite disconnected from the percipient in ordinary 
life, and sometimes complete strangers to them. Mr. 
Birchall, the headmaster of the Birkdale Industrial 
School, frequently acted ; and the house physician at the 
Eye and Ear Hospital, Dr. Shears, had a successful 
experiment, acting alone, on his' first and only visit. 
All suspicion of a pre-arranged code is thus rendered 
impossible even to outsiders who are unable to witness 
the obvious fairness of all the experiments. 

The object looked at by the agent is placed usually 
on a small black opaque wooden screen between the 
percipient and agents, but sometimes it is put on a larger 
screen behind the percipient. The objects were kept in 
an adjoining room and were selected and brought in 
by me, with all due precaution, after the percipient was 
blindfolded. I should say, however, that no reliance 
was placed on, or care taken in, the bandaging. It was 
merely done because the percipient preferred it to merely 
shutting the eyes. After remarkable experiments on blind¬ 
folding by members of the Society (see Journal ,, S.P.R., 
vol. i. p. 84), I certainly would not rely on any ordinary 
bandaging; the opacity of the wooden screen on which 
the object was placed was the thing really depended on, 
and it was noticed that no mirrors or indistinct reflectors 
were present. The only surface at all suspicious was the 
polished top of the small table on which the opaque 
screen usually stood. But as the screen sloped back¬ 
wards at a slight angle, it was impossible for the object 
on it to be thus mirrored. Moreover, sometimes I 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

49 

in hardly sJay j 

have not often | 

when I hajve ; 

have once jor ! 

succeeded with h 

ent in ordinary i 

■o them. Mr. 
ale Industrial 
hysician at the 
J a successful 
nd only visit. 1 
thus rendered 
ible to witness f 

placed usually 
i between the 
aut on a larger 
s were kept in 
nd brought in 
percipient was 
it no reliance 
iging. It was 
sd it to merely 
Hunts on blind- 
urml, S.P.R., 
i any ordinary 
*een on which 
’ depended on, 
tinct reflectors 
jicious was the 
■h the opaque 
sloped baclc- 
(> >r the object 
sometimes I 

Chap. iiiJ 

Description of some of the Experiments 

In order to describe the experiments briefly I will 
put in parentheses everything said by me or by the 
agent,, and in inverted commas all the remarks of the 
percipient. The first seven experiments are all that 
were made on one evening with the particular percipient, 
and they were rapidly performed. 

! A -— Experiments with Miss R. as Percipient 

Pipst Agtnty Mr. Pinball, holding hands. Mb om slss present 

except myself 

Object—a blue square of silk.— (Now, it’s going to be a colour; 
ready.) “Is it green?” (No.) “It’s something between green and 
blue. . . . Peacock.” (What shape?) She drew a rhombus. 

[MB,—It is not intended to imply that this was a success by any 
means, and it is to be understood that it was only to make a start on 
the first experiment that so much help was given as is involved in 
saying “it’s a colour.” When they are simply told “it’s an object,” 
or, what is much the same, when nothing is said at all, the field for 
guessing is practically infinite. When no remark at starting is recorded 

none was made, except such an one as “Now we are ready,”_by 

myself.] 

Next object—a key on a black ground,—{ It’s an object.) In a few 
seconds she said, “ It’s bright. ... It looks like a key.” Told to 
draw, she drew it just inverted. 

Next object — three gold studs in morocco case, —“Is it yellow? . 
Something gold. . . . Something round. ... A locket or a watch, 
perhaps.” (Do you see more than one round?) “Yes, there seem to 
be more than one. . . . Are there three rounds? . . . Three rings.” 
(What do they seem to be set in?) “Something bright like beads.” 
[Evidently not understanding or attending to the question.] Told to 
unblindfold herself and draw, she drew the three rounds in a row 
quite correctly, and then sketched round them absently the outline 
of the case; which seemed, therefore, to have been apparent to her 
1 though she had not consciously attended to it. It was an interesting 
and striking experiment. 

50 • THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ji 

Next object—a pair of scissors standing partly open with their points 
down. —“Is it a bright object? . . . Something long ways [indicating 
vertically]. ... A pair of scissors standing up. ... A little bit 
open.” Time, about a minute altogether. She then drew her 
impression, and it was correct in every particular. The object in this 
experiment was on a settee behind her, but its position had to be 
pointed out to her when, after the experiment, she wanted to see it. 

Next object—a drawing of a right angle triangle on its side. (It’s 
a drawing.) She drew an isosceles triangle on its side. 

Next—a circle with a chord across it.— She drew two detached 
ovals, one with a cutting line across it. . 

Next—a drawing of a Union Jack pattern. —As usual in drawing 

ORIGINAL 

REPRODUCTION 

experiments, Miss R. remained, silent for perhaps a minute; then she 
said, “Now I am ready.” I hid the object,* she took off the hand¬ 
kerchief, and proceeded to draw on paper placed ready in front of hen 
She this time drew all the lines of the figure except the horizontal 
middle one. She was obviously much tempted to draw this, and, 
indeed, began it two or three times faintly, but ultimately said, “ No, 
I'm not sure,” and stopped. 

[end op sitting] 

Experiments with Miss A —continued 

I will now describe an experiment indicating that one agent may 
be better than another. 

Object—the Three of Hearts.—Miss E. and Mr. Rirchall both 
present as agents, but Mr. Birchall holding percipient’s hands at first. 
“Is it a black cross ... a white ground with a black cross on it?” 
Mr. Birchall now let Miss E. hold hands instead of himself, and Miss 
R. very soon said, “Is it a card?” (Right.) “Are there three spots 
on it? . . . Don’t know what they are. ... I don’t think I can get 
the colour. . . . They are one above the other, but they seem three 
round spots. ... I think they’re red, but am not clear.” 

Next object—a playing card with a blue anchor painted on it 
slantwise ., instead of pips. No contact at all this time, but another lady, 
Miss R-d, who had entered the room, assisted Mr. B. and Miss E. 

CE [Sect. „ ■ 

f^mth their Points I 
‘ on S w ays [indicating 
l f ' • • A little bit : 
Mie ^ then drew her ' 
■ The object in this 
s position had to be ; 
wanted to see it. 

on its side,—n$ s 
side, - 

drew two detached 

L/HAP* IIIJ 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

‘As usual in 

drawing 

a Minute; then she 
off the hand- 
r, *ady in front of her, 
^ rpi the horizontal 
draw this, and, 
ultimately said, "No, 

tliat one agent 

■Mr. Hin‘hall both 

*■ of:; hands at 

nhtd, cross on 

*‘i iiimaelf, and 

m agente; ‘‘h it an anehor ? ... a little on the slant.” (Do you 

WherT^ iffT'l? C ° ° Ur ls black ' ' • It>s a nicely drawn anchor.” 
for t “ p k t ed ° dra ^ she . sketched of it, but had evidently half 
forgotten it, and not knowing the use of the cross arm, she could only 
indicate that there was something more there, but she couldn’t 
remember what. Her drawing had the right slant. 

Another object-two pair of coarse lines crossing; drawn in red chalk, 
and set up at some distance from agents. No contact. “I only see 
mes crossing. She saw no colour. She afterwards drew them quite 

Tw? h ,? "7 SmalL [It TOS n ° ticeable that the ™1 distance 
at which the drawing was placed from the agent on this occasion 

seemed to be interpreted by the percipient as smallness of size.l 

Double object—It^ was now that I arranged the double object 

between Miss R-d and Miss E., who happened to be sitting nearly 

facmg one another. [See Nature, June 12th, 1884, for the published 
report of this particular incident which has been reproduced above.! 

ofW M nS r a jTT ° n ° ne side of the P a P er > a cross on the 
he . Miss R d looked at the side with the square on it. Miss 

□ X 

ORIGINALS 

REPRODUCTION 

Mr. II. 

E. looked at the side with the cross. Neither knew what the other 
was looking at—nor did the percipient know that anything unusual 
was being tried. Mr. Birchall was silently asked to take off his 
attention, and he got up and looked out of window before the drawings 
were brought m, and during the experiment. There was no contact. 
Very soon. Miss R. said, “ I see things moving about ... I seem to 
see two things ... I see first , one up there and then one down there 
... I don’t know which to draw. ... I can’t see either distinctly ” 
(Well anyhow, draw what you have seen.) She took off the bandage 
and drew first a square, and then said, “Then there was the other 
thing as well . . . afterwards they seemed to go into one,” and she 
drew a cross inside the square from corner to corner, afffling afterwards 
“ I don’t know what made me put it inside.” ’ 

The next is a case of a perfect stranger acting as agent by himself 
at the first trial. Dr. Shears, house physician at the Eye and Ear 
Infirmary, came down to see the phenomena, and Miss R. having 
arrived before the others, Mr. Guthrie proposed his trying as agent 
alone. Dr. Shears, therefore, held Miss R.’s hand while I set up in 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

52 

[Sect, ii 

front of him a card: nothing whatever being said as to the nature of 
the object. 

Object—the five of clubs , at first on a white ground . “ Is it some¬ 

thing bright ?” (No answer, but I changed the object to a black 
ground where it was more conspicuous.) ££ A lot of black with a white 
square on it.” (Go on.) ££ Is it a card ? ” (Yes.) [The affirmative 
answer did not necessarily signify that it was a playing card,* because 
cards looking like playing cards had been used several times previously, 
on which objects had been depicted instead of pips.] “Are there five 
spots on it ? ” (Yes.) ££ Black ones.” (Right.) ££ I can’t see the suit, 
but I think it’s spades.” 

Another object at same sitting , but with several agents , no contact\ was 
a drawing of this form — 

ORIGINAL 

REPRODUCTION 

££ I can see something, but I am sure I can’t draw it. . . . It’s 
something with points all round it. . . . It’s a star, . . . or like a 
triangle within a triangle.” Asked to draw it, she expressed reluctance, 
said it was too difficult, and drew part of a star figure, evidently a crude 
reproduction of the original, but incomplete. She then began afresh 
by drawing a triangle, but was unable to proceed. 

I then showed her the object for a few seconds. She exclaimed, 
>£ Oh yes, that’s what I saw. ... I understand it now.” I said, ££ Well 
now draw it.” She made a more complete attempt, but it was no more 
really like the original than the first had been. Here it is : 

1 

V 

s 

z 

1 

A 

SKETCH MADE AFTER SEEING THE ORIGINAL 

Experiments at a Sitting in the room of Dr. Herdman , Professor of 
Zoology at University College 

Object—a drawing of the outline of a flag. —Miss R. as percipient in 
contact with Miss E. as agent. Very quickly Miss R. said, “It’s a 
little flag,” and when asked to draw, she drew it fairly well but 
<£ perverted” as depicted in the figure. I showed her the flag (as usual 

Chap, iii] 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

53 

[Sect, n ■ 1 

to the nature of f 

" t 

i 

n d- “ Is it some- I 

ibjeet to a black [ 

black with a white 
[The affirmative 
ng card; because 1 
1 times previously, 
“Are there five 
can’t see the suit, 

e &> no contact^ was ; 

f.CTIOK | 

draw it . . . It’s 
♦ or like a 
trussed reluctance, 

r evidently a crude V 

then began afresh j 

i* She exclaimed, 1 - '; 

1 said, “Well ;; ! j 
mi it was no more/ 1 ;>1 

itias ' 1 11 1 ,•/! 

41* . ■ ■ 

an, Professor of 

t. as percipient in 
It said, “It’s a 
it fairly well but 
r iht: flag (as usual 

after a success), and then took it away to the drawing place to fetch 
something else. I made another drawing, but instead of bringing it 

REPRODUCTION 

I brought the flag back again, and set it up in the same place as before, 

but upside down. There was no contact this time. Miss R-d 

and Miss E. were acting as agents. 

Object—same flag inverted. —After some time, Miss R. said, “ No, 
I can’t see anything this time. I still see that flag, . . . The flag 
keeps bothering me. ... 1 shan’t do it this time.” Presently 
1 said, “Well, draw what you saw anyway.” She said, “I only saw 
the same flag, but perhaps it had a cross on it.” So she drew a flag 
in the same position as before, but added a cross to it. Questioned 
as to aspect she said, ct Yes, it was just the same as before.” 

m 

Object—an oval gold locket hanging by a bit of string with a little 
price label attached. —Placed like the former object on a large drawing 
board, swathed in a college gown. The percipient, Miss R., close 

behind the said board and almost hidden by it. Agents, Miss R-d 

and Miss E. sitting in front; no contact; nothing said. “I see 
something gold, . . . something hanging, . . like a gold locket.” 
(What shape?) “It’s oval,” indicating with her fingers correctly. 
(Very good so far, tell us something more)—[meaning ticket at top]. 
But no more was said. When shown the object she said, “Oh yes, 
it was just like that,” but she had seen nothing of the little paper ticket. 

Next object—a watch and chain pinned up to the board as on a 
waiHcoat. —This experiment was a failure, and is only interesting 
because the watch-ticking sounded abnormally loud, sufficient to give 
any amount of hint to a person on the look out for such sense 
indications. But it is very evident to those witnessing the experiments 
that the percipient is in a quite different attitude of mind to that of a 
clever guesser, and ordinary sense indications seem wholly neglected. 

L 3 

ORIGINAL 

54 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

I scarcely expected, however, that the watch-ticking could pass 
unnoticed, though indeed we shuffled our feet to drown it somewhat, 
but so it was; and all we got was “ something bright . . . either steel 
or silver. . . . Is it anything like a pair of scissors ? ” (Not a bit.) 

I have now done with the selection of experiments in which Miss 
R. acted as percipient; and I will describe some of those made with 
Miss E. At the time these seemed perhaps less satisfactory and 
complete, but there are several points of considerable interest noticeable 
in connection with them. 

B.— Experiments with Miss E. as Percipient 

Object—an oblong piece of red (cerise) silk. Agent, Mr. B., in 
contact.—“ Red.” (What sort of red ?) “A dark red.” (What shape ?) 
“One patch.” (Well, what shade is it?) “Not a pale red.” 

Next object — a yellow oblong. Agent as before.—“ A dusky gold 
colour. . . . A square of some yellow shade.” 

Object—the printed letter r. Told it was a letter; agent as before. 
—“ I can see R.” (What sort of R ?) “ An ordinary capital R.” 

This illustrates feebly what often, though not always, happens with 
Miss E.—that the idea of the object is grasped rather than its actual 
shape. 

Another object — a small printed e. —“Is it E?” (Yes.) But, 
again, she couldn’t tell what sort of E it was. 

Object—a teapot cut out of silver paper .—Present—Dr. Herdman, 

<3^ - 'C0 l 

ORIGINAL REPRODUCTION 

Miss R-d, and Miss R., Miss R. holding percipient’s hands, but all 

thinking of the object. Told nothing. She said, “Something light. 
. . . No colour. . . . Looks like a duck. . . . Like a silver duck. . . . 
Something oval. ... Head at one end and tail at the other.” [This 
is not uncommon in ducks.] The object, being rather large, was then 
moved farther back, so that it might be more easily grasped by the 
agents as a whole, but percipient persisted that it was like a duck. On 
being told to unbandage and draw, she drew a rude and “ perverted ” 
copy of the teapot, but didn’t know what it was unless it was a duck. 
Dr. Herdman then explained that he had been thinking all the time 
how like a duck the original teapot was, and, in fact, had been thinking 
more of ducks than teapots. 

Chap, hi] 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

Next object-a hand mirror brought in and set up in front of Miss 
** T0ldnoth ^ She said, “Is iba 
for Miss R to Innt > Idont seean y t hmg-” The glass was then shifted 

I don’t set this » r ^ ^ erSe f m lt; holdin g percipient’s hand. “No 
, d ° f ge ‘ * 1S ' Gave 1 * U P- I then hid the mirror in my coat and 

uisTii^rr- **:***** ^ 

rSed f ,° b !“ t M >*«. <>« <to BgJ: 

’ ^ ^ evidently wished to keep it secret Half 

a n iooking-glai’ ^ * d ° eSn,t matter ' 1 belieTC * 

« ° f a jangled triangle. No contact.- 

“rt’s lin!t n .- T nS a trkngle with her fin Ser (no answer). 
1 • lke 3 tnangle ” She then dr ewan isosceles triangle. ’ 

contact rtT a dmWin l ° f ^ paraUd but curved Unes - No 
they seem to close up.” ’ tW ° P3rallel lbes - “ Now 

Next object—a tetrahedron outline rudely drawn in projection.—“Is 

it another tnangle? (No answer was made, but I silently passed round 

hen saif «T * ? meSS3ge ’ “ Think ° f a P^mid.”) Miss E. 

itvnt w I T° n y ? e 3 tnangle '” • • • then has %> “ Pyramids of 
triangle. ’ ' thiS ‘” Asked to dnw ’ she ° nl y drew a 

Object—a rude outline of a donkey or other quadruped .—Still no 
contact at first “ Can’t get it, I am sure.” I then asked the agents 
to leave the room, and to come in and try one by one. First Miss 
' d without contact, and then with. Next Miss R., in contact, 
w en Miss E. said hopelessly, “An old woman in a poke bonnet.” 
hmally I tned as agent alone, and Miss E. said, “It’s like a donkey 
but I can’t see it, nor can I draw it.” 

General Statements about the Experiments 

In addition to the experiments with single percipients, 
ried a few with both oercioients sirtino- tncr^tb^r _ 

1 tried a few with both percipients sitting together— 
hoping to learn something by comparing their different 
perceptions of the same object. But unfortunately these 

r 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

56 

experiments were not very successful; sometimes they 
each appeared to get different aspects or the parts of 
object, but never very distinct or perfect impressions. 
The necessity of imposing silence on the percipients, 
as well as on the agents, was also rather irksome, and 
renders the results less describable without the actual 
drawings. I still think that this variation might convey 
something interesting if pursued under favourable cir¬ 
cumstances. Whether greater agent-power is necessary 
to affect two percipients as strongly as one ; or whether 
the blankness of mind of one percipient re-acts on the 
other, I cannot say. 

With regard to the feelings of the percipients when 
receiving an impression, they seem to have some sort 
of consciousness of the action of other minds on them ; 
and once or twice, when not so conscious, have com¬ 
plained that there seemed to be “ no power” or anything 
acting, and that they not only received no impression, 
but did not feel as if they were going to. 

I asked Miss E. what she felt when impressions 
were coming freely, and she said she felt a sort of 
influence or thrill. They both say that several images 
appear to them sometimes, but that one among them 
persistently recurs, and they have a feeling when they 
fix upon one that it is the right one. 

Sometimes they seem quite certain that they are 
right. Sometimes they are very uncertain, but still 
right. Occasionally Miss E. has been pretty confident 
and yet wrong. 

One serious failure rather depresses them, and after 
a success others often follow. It is because of these 
rather delicate psychological conditions that one cannot 
press the variations of an experiment as far as one 
would do if dealing with inert and more dependable 

UHAP. IIIJ 

SOME EXPERIMENTS 

matter. Usually the presence of a stranger spoils the 
phenomenon, though in some cases a stranger has 
proved a good agent straight off. 

The percipients complain of no fatigue as induced 
by the experiments, and I have no reason to suppose 
that any harm is done them. The agent, on the other 
hand, if very energetic, is liable to contract a headache; 
and Mr. Guthrie himself, who was a powerful and 
determined agent for a long time, now feels it wiser to 
refrain from acting, and conducts the experiments with 
great moderation. 

If experiments are only conducted for an hour or so 
a week, no harm can, I should judge, result, and it 
would be very interesting to know what percentage of 
people have the perceptive faculty well developed. 

The experiments are easy to try, but they should be 
tried soberly and quietly, like any other experiment. 
A public platform is a most unsuitable place; and 
nothing tried before a mixed or jovial audience can be 
of the slightest scientific value. Such demonstrations 
may be efficient in putting money into the pockets of 
showmen, or in amusing one's friends; but all real 
evidence must be obtained in the quiet of the laboratory 
or the study. 

CHAPTER IV 

FURTHER EXPERIMENTS IN TELEPATHY 

T HE next experience of any importance which I 
had in this kind of experimental telepathy took 
place during a visit to the Austrian province 
beyond Tyrol with some English friends during the 
summer of 1892, and is thus described in the Pro¬ 
ceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol vii 
page 374- 

While staying for a fortnight in the house of Herr von 
Lyro, at Portschach am See, Carinthia, I found that 
his two adult daughters were adepts in the so-called 
, willing-game,” and were accustomed to entertain their 
friends by the speed and certainty with which they 
could perform actions decided on by the company • the 
operator being led either by one or by two others’ and 
preferring to be led by someone to whom she was 
accustomed Another lady staying in the house was 
said to be able to do things equally well, but not with¬ 
out nervous prostration. 

On the evening when I witnessed the occurrences 
nothing done could be regarded as conclusive against 
6 r ^ a ln j=’ '-hough the speed and accuracy with 
which the willed action was performed exceeded any 
muscle-reading that I had previously seen, and left me 

S8 

telepathy 

portance which I 
tal telepathy took 
Austrian province 
'ends during the 
bed in the Pro- 
vesearch, vol. vii 

louse of Herr von 
nn, I found that 
in the so-called 
-o entertain their 
with which they 

ie company; t 
! two others, am 

- 

whom she was 
the house w"- 
ell, but not w 

WEBm 

Chap, iv.] EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 

little doubt but that there was some genuine thought- 

transference power. ^ 

Accordingly I obtained permission to experiment in 
a more satisfactory manner, and on several occasions 
tested the power of the two sisters, using one as agent 
and the other as percipient alternately. Once or twice 

a stranger was asked to act as agent, but without 
success. 

The operations were conducted in an ordinary simple 
manner. One of the sisters was placed behind a drawing 
board, erected by me on a temporary sort of easel, while 
the other sat in front of the same board ; and the objects 
or drawings to be guessed were placed on a ledge in 
front of the board, in full view of the one and completely 
hidden from the other. 

Naturally I attended to the absence of mirrors and 
all such obvious physical complications. The percipient 
preferred to be blindfolded, but no precaution was taken 
with reference to this blindfolding, since we know that 
it is unsafe to put any trust in bandaging of eyes 
{Journal, i. 84). Agent and percipient were within 
reach of one another, and usually held each other’s 
hands across a small table. The kind and amount of 
contact was under control, and was sometimes broken 
altogether, as is subsequently related. 

The ladies were interested in the subject, and were 
perfectly willing to try any change of conditions that I 
suggested, and my hope was gradually to secure the 
phenomenon without contact of any kind, as I had 
done in the previous case reported; but unfortunately 
in the present instance contact seemed essential to the 
transfer. Very slight contact was sufficient, for instance 
through the backs of the knuckles; but directly the 
hands were separated, even though but a quarter of an 

6b THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ii 

inch, the phenomena ceased,—reappearing again directly 
contact was established. I tried whether I could bridge 
over the gap effectively with my own, or another lady s 
hand; but that did not do. I also once tried both 
sisters blindfolded, and holding each other by one hand, 
while two other persons completed the chain and tried 
to act as agents. After a time the sisters were asked 
to draw, simultaneously and independently, what they 
had “ seen ”; but though the two drawings were close 
imitations of each other, they in this case bore no 
likeness to the object on which the agents had been 
gazing. My impression, therefore, is that there is some 
kind of close sympathetic connection between the sisters, 
so that an idea may, as it were, reverberate between 
their minds when their hands touch, but that they are 
only faintly, if at all, susceptible to the influence of 
outside persons. 

Whether the importance of contact in this case 
depends upon the fact that it is the condition to which 
they have always been accustomed, or whether it is a 
really effective aid, I am not sure. 

So far as my own observation went, it was interesting 
and new to me to see how clearly the effect seemed to 
depend on contact, and how abruptly it ceased when 
contact was broken. While guessing through a pack of 
cards, for instance, rapidly and continuously, I some¬ 
times allowed contact and sometimes stopped it; and 
the guesses changed, from frequently correct to quite 
wild, directly the knuckles or finger tips, or any part of 
the skin of the two hands, ceased to touch. It was 
almost like breaking an electric circuit. At the same 
time, partial contact seemed less effective than a thorough 
hand grasp. 

It is perfectly obvious how strongly this dependence 

Chap, iv] EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 61 

on contact suggests the.idea of a code; and I have to 
admit at once that this flaw prevents this series of 
observations from having any value as a test case, or as 
establishing de novo the existence of the genuine power. 
My record only appeals to those who, on other grounds, 
have accepted the general possibility of thought-trans¬ 
ference, and who, therefore, need not feel unduly strained 
when asked to credit my assertion that unfair practices 
were extremely unlikely; and that, apart from this 
moral conviction, there was a sufficient amount of 
internal evidence derived from the facts themselves to 
satisfy me that no code was used. The internal 
evidence of which I am thinking was: (i) the occa¬ 
sionally successful reproduction of nameless drawings; 
(2) the occasional failure to get any clue to an object or 
drawing with a perfectly simple and easily telegraphed 
name, (3) the speed with which the guesses were often 
made. 

I wish, however, distinctly to say that none of the 
evidence which I can offer against a prearranged code 
is scientifically and impersonally conclusive, nor could it 
be accepted as of sufficient weight by a sceptic on the 
whole subject. It is only because, with full opportunity 
of forming a judgment, and in the light of my former 
experience, I am myself satisfied that what I observed 
was an instance of genuine sympathetic or syntonic 
communication, and because such cases seem at the 
present time to be rather rare, that I make this brief 
report on the circumstances. 

I detected no well-marked difference between the 
powers of the two sisters, and it will be understood that 
one of them was acting as agent and the other as 
percipient in each case. Sometimes the parents of 
the girls were present, but often only one or two 

62 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, xi 

friends of my own, who were good enough to invite 
the young ladies to their sitting-room for the pur¬ 
pose of experiment; though such experiments are, 
when carefully performed, confessedly rather tedious 

and dull. _ . . 

In the early willing-game experiments, such things 
were done as taking a particular ring from one person’s 
hand and putting it on another’s; selecting a definite 
piece of music from a pile, taking it to the piano, and 
beginning to play it. The last item (the beginning to 
play) I did not happen to witness, but I was told of it 
by several persons as more than could be accounted for 
by muscle-reading. A sceptic, however, could of course 
object that imperfect bandaging would enable a title to 
be read. 

One of the things I suggested was aimed at exclud¬ 
ing the operation of unconscious muscular guidance as 
far as possible, and it consisted in desiring that the lady 
while standing in the middle of the room should kick off 
her shoes without touching them and begin to sing a 
specified song. Success, however, was only partial. 
After one or two attempts to wander about the room as 
usual, she did shuffle a shoe off, but though she did not 
actually touch her feet she stooped so that the held hand 
came very near them. She then stood some little time 
uncertain what to do next, and at last broke silence by 
saying “Shall I sing?” 

The first attempt at the more careful experiments 
was not at all successful, but novelty of conditions may 
fairly be held responsible for that. On the second and 
subsequent evenings success was much more frequent: 
on the whole, I think, more frequent than failure,— 
certainly far beyond chance. I proceed to give a fairly 
complete account of the whole series. 

63 

Chap, iv] EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 

The first object was a teapot; but there was no result 

The first drawing was the outline of a box with a flag at one corner; 
but that produced no impression. 

Next, for simplicity, I explained that the object this time was a 
letter (Buch$tabe)> on which it was correctly guessed E. Another 
letter, M, was given quite wrong. A childish back-view outline of a 
cat was given oval like an egg; some other things were unperceived. 

On the second evening I began by saying that the object was a 
colour; on which red was instantly and correctly stated. 

A blue object which followed was guessed wrong. 

An outline figure of a horse was correctly named. So was the 
letter B. I then drew a square with a diagonal cross, and a round ring 
or spot just above the intersection, the whole looking something like the 
back of an envelope. After a certain interval of silence (perhaps two 
minutes) the lady said she was ready to draw what she had “ seen,” and 
drew the thing almost exactly, except that the spot was put right on the 
centre of the cross instead of above it, and a superfluous faint vertical 
stroke was added. Its possible resemblance to an envelope was not 
detected, nor did the reproduction suggest the idea: it was drawn as, 
and looked like, a nameless geometrical figure. 

The reproductions were nearly always much smaller in size than the 
originals. The agent did not look on while the reproduction was being 
made. It is best for no one to look on while the percipient draws, to 
avoid the possibility of unconscious indications. The original drawings 
were always made by me, sometimes before, sometimes during, the 
sitting. These conditions were all satisfactory. 

On the third evening I began with a pack of cards, running through 
them quickly; with 2 reporters, one recording the card held up, the 
other recording the guess made, without knowing whether it was right 
or wrong. I held up the cards one after the other and gave no indica¬ 
tion whether the guesses were right or wrong. The suit was not 
attempted, so that the chances of error were, I suppose, 12 to 1. 

On comparing the two lists afterwards, out of 16 guesses only 6 were 
wrong. Full contact was allowed during this series. The lists are 
reproduced below. 

The card guessing is obviously not of the slightest use unless bona 
fides be certain, but, given that, it affords the readiest method of study¬ 
ing the effect of varied conditions, interposed obstacles, and such like. 
The whole pack was always used and I simply cut it at random and 
held up the bottom card. About 10 or 12 cards could be got through 
in a minute. 

<5 4 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect. « 

The following is the list of the first card series. Full contact 

allowed:— 

CARD LOOKED AT 

Seven of Spades 
Six of Hearts . 

Queen of Spades 
Nine of Spades 
Three of Spades 
Eight of Diamonds 
Ace of Clubs . 

Knave of Diamonds . 

Five of Diamonds 
Two of Spades. 

Ten of Hearts . 

King of Diamonds 
Ace of Spades . 

Nine of Diamonds 
Eight of Hearts 
Four of Spades 
Thus, out of the sixteen trials, 

CARD GUESSED 

Seven 

Six 

King 

Nine 

Six 

Eight 

Ace 

Queen 

Five 

Ace 

Six 

King 

Ace 

Six 

Eight 

, . Four 

were correct and 6 were wrong. 

Whatever may be the cause of this amount of 
success, chance is entirely out of the question, since 
the probability of so many successes as ten in sixteen 
trials, when the individual probability each time is one- 
thirteenth, is too small to be taken into account.. 

The theory of such a calculation is given in Tod- 
hunter’s Algebra, articles 740 and 741 ; but as exactness 
in such a case is rather tedious and unnecessary, we may 
over-estimate the total probability by calculating it as 

follows: thus leavin S out the factor p- 

This factor would be necessary to give the chance of ten 
successes exactly j but that is needlessly narrow, since 
there is no particular point in the exact number of xo. 
The chance of ten at least is more like what we have to 

express. 

So an over-estimate of probability is ^£5 > that is to 

chap, ivj EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 65 

say, there is less than one chance in ten million that 
such a result would occur at perfect random, i.e. without 
any special cause. 

Some guesses were made, both with cards and objects, on another 
evening, without contact, but none were successful. With contact there 
was success again. 

I then went back to simple drawings ; with the result that a cross 
was reproduced as a cross; a figure like 4 petals was reproduced in two 
ways, one of them being a vague 5-petalled figure. 

An object consisting of an ivory pocket measure, standing on end 
like an inverted Y, was drawn fairly well as to general aspect. 

A sinuous line was reproduced as a number of sinuous lines. A 
triangle or wedge, point downward, was reproduced imperfectly. 

On other evenings other simple diagrams were tried, such as a 
face, reproduced as 3 rounds with dots and cross; and a figure 
like an A with an extra long cross stroke, which could be easily 
signalled as an A, but which was reproduced correctly as a geometrical 
diagram with the long stroke prominent. 

A circle with 3 radii was reproduced as a circle with roughly 
inscribed triangle. 

The number 3145 was reproduced orally and very quickly as 3146; 
715 also quickly as “714, no 715.” The written word hund was 
reproduced correctly, but with a capital initial letter. 

And being told that they had previously thus reproduced a word 
in an unknown language (not unknown character), viz., Hungarian, I 
tried the Greek letters $<uS<o; this, however, was considered too puzzling 
and was only reproduced as Uaso. 

A French high-heeled shoe, of crockery, set up as object, was 
drawn by the percipient very fairly correct, and said to be something 
like a boot, and a protuberance was tacked on where the heel was. 

A white plaster cast of a child's hand, next tried, failed to give any 
impression. An unlighted candle in candlestick was unsuccessful, and 
it was objected that there was too much glare of light. Subsequently 
the percipient said she had seen the general outline of a candlestick but 
did not think of its being the thing. A teapot and a cup both failed, 
and two of the drawings did not succeed in stimulating any colour¬ 
able imitation. 

Lastly, another set of card trials were made, with the object of 
testing the effect of various kinds of contact: a card series being quick 
and easy to run through. 

. 5 

thought-transference 

CARD 

EXHIBITED 
TO AGENT 

Full contact with both /Nine 
hands . * • l King 

'Knave . 
Nine 

Contact with tips of 

fingers only . • Q ueen . 

Eight . 
'Five 
Seven 

Contact with one Three . 

finger of one hand . Ten 

Queen . 
v Ace 
f Ace 

No contact • Q Knave 

No direct contact, fKing 
but gap bridged by-I Four 
other person’s hand vTen 

C Eight . 

Slight contact of S gix 

knuckles * • | Xwa 

Full contact again 

Two 

'Knave . 

Seven 
Three . 

Four 

Ace of diamonds 

named by 
percipient 
Nine 
King 
Two 
Nine 
Ten 
Two 
Eight 
Six 
Seven 
Four 
Six 
Two 
Ace 
, Four 
. Five 
, Four 
. Eight 
. Seven 
. Six 
. Ace 
. Two 
. Ace 
, Six 
. Three 
. Four 

. Ace—red—diamond 

Nine of clubs held sideways Nine—clubs 

The record of this series is more complete than that of another 

varying contact series,—reported below—but it did not strike me as 
so instructive at the time; and as it came toward the end of an 
evening there was probably some fatigue. 

The last two entries represent attempts to get the suit as well; 
but as the particulars are given in stages there is no particular advan¬ 
tage in thus naming a card completely, and it takes a longer time. 

On another evening the amount of contact was varied, but I 
omitted to call out to the reporter the position of the hands with 

67 

Chap, iv] EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 

reference to each other. One hand of each person lay on a table, and 
I sometimes made them touch, sometimes separated them, all the time 
going on with the card series. My impression at the time was (as 
^pressed above) that pronounced failure began directly I broke contact, 
but that mere knuckle contact was sufficient to permit some amount of 
success. [When successes are frequent in the following list, fairly 
complete contact may be assumed. At other times I broke and united 
the two hands as I chose, for my own edification, and was struck with 
the singular efficiency of contact.] 

I can only give the record as it stands. I believe we began without 
any contact, but very soon made the hands touch intermittently. 

Second Card Series. Vtrying amount of contact: sometimes none 

CARD SHOWN CARD GUESSED 

2 of Spades 
Ace of Diamonds 
Knave of Diamonds 
10 of Diamonds 
6 of Hearts 

8 of Hearts 

9 of Diamonds . 

King of Diamonds 
ro of Hearts 
9 of Clubs 

5 

Knave 

9 

5 

9 

Ace 

King 

10 

68 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, h 

CARD SHOWN CARD GUESSED 

Ace 

7 

Ace 

5 

5 

, 10 

5 

4 

6 

7 

S 

3 

6 

6 

2 

3 

3 

6 

4 

4 

2 

8 

4 

5 

3 

3 

4 

Knave 

Where lines are drawn it is because I called out some change in the 
contact ; but I made other changes whose occurrence is not recorded. 

The only use to be made of the record of this series, therefore, is to 
treat it as a whole and to observe that out of 39 trials 16 were correct 
and 23 wrong. 

On this occasion there was one reporter who wrote 
down both what he saw and what he heard; and the 
operation was so rapid that he had sometimes barely 
time to do the writing. Towards the end of a series, 
fatigue on the part of either agent or percipient generally 
seemed to spoil the conditions. 

It is manifest that these experiments should not be 
conducted too long consecutively, nor repeated without 
sufficient interval; but if common sense is used there is 
nothing deleterious in the attempt, and if more persons 
tried, probably the power would be found more widely 
distributed than is at present suspected. 

I wish to express gratitude to the Fraulein von Lyro 
and their parents, for the courtesy with which they 
acquiesced in my request for opportunities of experiment, 

69 

Chap. ivJ EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY" 

and for the willingness with which they submitted to 
dull and irksome conditions, in order to enable me to 
give as good evidence as possible. 

Experiments at a Distance 

For more recent experiments, and for experiments 
conducted over a considerable intervening distance, I 
must refer to the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical 
Research, vol. xxi., where an account is given of the 
notable and careful series of observations made by two 
lady members of the Society, Miss Miles and Miss 
Ramsden. These ladies, while at their respective 
homes, or staying in country houses and other places 
at a distance from each other, endeavoured to transmit 
an impression of scenes and occupations from one to the 
other. They kept a careful record both of what they 
tried to send, and of what was received. And when 
these records are compared, the correspondence is seen 
to be beyond and above anything that might be due to 
chance. 

Collusion might rationally be urged as an explana¬ 
tion, by strangers ; but that is not an explanation that 
can be accepted by those who know all the facts. 

When Miss Miles and Miss Ramsden began their 
experiments in 1905, Miss Miles was living in London, 
and Miss Ramsden in Buckinghamshire, and the ar¬ 
rangement was that Miss Miles should play the part of 
agent, Miss Ramsden that of percipient, the times of the 
experiment being fixed beforehand. Miss Miles noted, 
at the time of each experiment, in a book kept for the 
purpose, the idea or image which she wished to convey ; 
while Miss Ramsden wrote down each day the impres¬ 
sions that had come into her mind, and sent the record 

70 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ii 

to Miss Miles before knowing what she had attempted 
on her side. Miss Miles then pasted this record into 
her book opposite her own notes, and in some cases 
added a further note explanatory of her circumstances 
at the time; since to these it was found that Miss Rams- 
den’s impressions often corresponded. Whenever it was. 
possible Miss Miles obtained confirmatory evidence 
from other persons as to the circumstances that had not 
been noted at the time, and the corroboration of these 
persons was written in her book. All the original 
records of these experiments have been submitted to the 
Editor of the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical 
Research, and have passed that very critical ordeal. 

In the second series of experiments, in October and 
November 1906, Miss Miles, the agent, was staying 
first near Bristol and afterwards near Malmesbury in 
Wiltshire; while Miss Ramsden, the percipient, was 
living all the time near Kingussie, Inverness-shire, and 
therefore at a distance of about 400 miles from the 
agent. During the last three days of the experi¬ 
ments, Miss Miles, unknown to Miss Ramsden, was 
in London. 

The general plan of action was that Miss Ramsden 
should think of Miss Miles regularly at 7 p.m. on every 
day that an experiment was to be tried, and should write 
her impressions on a postcard or letter card, which was 
posted almost always on the next morning to Miss 
Miles. These postcards or letter cards were kept by 
Miss Miles and pasted into her notebook, so that the 
postmarks on them show the time of despatch. And 
copies of many of these postcards were sent also at the 
same time to Professor Barrett, who had advised con¬ 
cerning the method of experiment. 

Miss Miles on her side had no fixed time for think- 

7i 

Chap rv] EXPERIMENTAL TELEPATHY 

ing of Miss Ramsden, but thought of her more or less 
during the whole day, and in the evening noted briefly 
what ideas had been most prominently before her mind 
during the day, and which she wished to convey, or 
thought might have been conveyed, to Miss Ramsden. 
These notes were made generally on a postcard, which 
was, as a rule, posted to Miss Ramsden next day. The 
postcards were afterwards returned to Miss Miles to be 
placed with her records,—so that here also the postmarks 
show the date of despatch of the information to Miss 
Ramsden. 

Out of a total of fifteen days’ experiments, the idea 
that Miss Miles was attempting to convey, as recorded 
on her postcards, appeared on six occasions in a complete 
or partial form among Miss Ramsden’s impressions on 
the same date. But it also happened that almost every 
day some of Miss Ramsden’s impressions represented, 
pretty closely, something that Miss Miles had been 
seeing or talking about on the same day. In other 
words,—while the agent only succeeded occasionally in 
transferring the ideas deliberately chosen by her for the 
purpose, the percipient seemed often to have some sort 
of supernormal knowledge of her friend’s surroundings, 
irrespective of what that friend had specially wished her 
to see. 

When this happened, Miss Miles at once made 
careful notes of the event or topic to which Miss Rams¬ 
den’s statement seemed to refer, and also obtained 
corroborations from her friends on the spot. Further, 
when Miss Ramsden gave descriptions of scenes which 
seemed to Miss Miles like the places where she was 
staying, she got picture postcards of them, or photo¬ 
graphed them, to show how far the descriptions really 
corresponded. 

72 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ii 

The actual record is given in the Proceedings of the 
Society for Psychical Research, vol. xxL, together with 
illustrations, but it must suffice here to quote the critical 
and judicial opinion of the Editor, which is thus given : 

“ After studying all the records, it appears to us that 
while some of the coincidences of thought between the 
two experimenters are probably accidental, the total 
amount of correspondence is more than can be thus 
accounted for and points distinctly to the action of tele¬ 
pathy between them.” 

CHAPTER V 

SPONTANEOUS CASES OF THOUGHT- 
TRANSFERENCE 

A NEW fact of this sort, if really established, must 
have innumerable consequences: among other 
things it may be held to account for a large 
number of phenomena alleged to occur spontaneously, 
but never yet received with full credence by scientific 
authority. 

Such cases as those which immediately follow, for 
instance, we now begin to classify under the head 
“spontaneous telepathy,” and it is natural to endeavour 
to proceed further in the same direction and use 
telepathy as a possible clue to many other legendary 
occurrences also; as we shall endeavour to show in the 
next chapter. 

Two Cases 

As stepping stones from the experimental to the 
spontaneous cases I quote two from a mass of material 
at the end of Mr. Myers’s first volume, page 674; the 
first concerning a remote connexion of my own. 

On the 27th of April, 1889, we were expecting my sister-in-law and 
her daughter from South America. My wife, being away from home, 
was unable to meet them at Southampton, sp an intimate friend of the 

family, a Mr. P., offered to do so. It was between Derby and Leicester 

73 

74 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

about 3.30 p.m. My wife was travelling in the train. She closed her 
eyes to rest, and at the same moment a telegram paper appeared before 
her with the words, “ Come at once, your sister is dangerously ill.” 
During (the afternoon I received a telegram from Mr. P. to my wife, 
worded exactly the same and sent from Southampton 3.30 p.m. to 
Bedford. On my wife’s arrival home about 9 p.m. I deferred 
communicating it until she had some refreshment, being very tired. 
I afterwards made the remark, “I have some news for you,” and she 
answered, “ Yes, I thought so, you have received a telegram from 
Mr. P.!” I said, £C How do you know ? ” She then told me the 
contents and her strange experiences in the train, and that it impressed 
her so much that she felt quite anxious all the rest of the journey. 

With regard to the above, my wife had no idea of her sister being 
ill, and was not even at the time thinking about them, but was thinking 
about her own child she had just left at a boarding school. Also the 
handwriting my wife saw, she recognised at once to be Mr. P.’s. But 
then, again, he would have been writing on a white paper form, and 
the one she saw was the usual brown coloured paper. 

Fredk. L. Lodge 

In reply to Inquiries, Mr. F. Lodge wrote as 
follows:— 

The letter I sent you, with account of vision, I wrote from my wife’s 
dictation. After it occurred in the train she took notice of the hour, 
and from the time marked on the telegram of its despatch from 
Southampton, we at once remarked it must have occurred as Mr. P. 
was filling in a form at Southampton. Mr. P. is now in South America 
constructing a railway line, and will not return to England for about a 
year. The occurrence was mentioned to him. 

Two years having elapsed, my wife could not say the exact time 
now, but it was between 3 and 4 p.m., although when it happened, we 
did notice from the telegram that the time corresponded. 

Fredk. L. Lodge 

The second case illustrates the communicating ‘of 
sensations,—a possibility verified in the Liverpool ex¬ 
periments of Mr. Malcolm Guthrie. A pinch or other 
pain, or a taste caused by some food or chemical, was 
there often transferred from agent to percipient. Contact 
was usually found essential for success in these experi- 

Chap, v] 

SPONTANEOUS CASES 

75 

mental cases ; but, to guard against normal sensation, the 
agent and percipient were arranged in separate rooms, 
with a specially contrived and padded small hole in the 
wall so that they could hold hands through it. Some 
early experiments of this kind are narrated in the first 
volume of Proceedings , S.P.R., page 275 ; but I myself 
was present at many others of the same kind. 

Here follows an account of the incident which 
happened to Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Severn; the narrative 
having been obtained through the kindness of Mr. 
Ruskin. Mrs. Severn says :— 

Brantwood, Coniston 

October 1883 

I woke up with, a start, feeling I had had a hard blow on my mouth, 
and with a distinct sense that I had been cut, and was bleeding under 
my upper lip, and seized my pocket-handkerchief, and held it (in a little 
pushed lump) to the part as I sat up in bed; and after a few seconds, 
when I removed it, I was astonished not to see any blood, and only 
then realised it was impossible anything could have struck me there, as 
I lay fast asleep in bed, and so I thought it was only a dream I—but I 
looked at my watch, and saw it was seven, and finding Arthur (my 
husband) was not in the room, I concluded (rightly) that he must have 
gone out on the lake for an early sail, as it was so fine. 

I then fell asleep. At breakfast (half-past nine), Arthur came in 
rather late, and I noticed he rather purposely sat farther away from 
me than usual, and every now and then put his pocket-handkerchief 
furtively up to his lip, in the very way I had done. I said, c Arthur, 
why are you doing that ?’ and added a little anxiously, 8 I know you 
have hurt yourself! but I’ll tell you why afterwards.’ He said, ‘ Well, 
when I was sailing, a sudden squall came, throwing the tiller suddenly 
round, and it struck me a bad blow in the mouth, under the upper lip, 
and it has been bleeding a good deal and won’t stop.’ I then said, 
8 Have you any idea what o’clock it was when it happened ? ’ and he 
answered, c It must have been about seven.’ 

I then told what had happened to me, much to his surprise, and all 
who were with us at breakfast. 

It happened here about three years ago at Brantwood. 

Joan R. Severn 

76 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, n 

The episode is duly authenticated, in accordance with 
the rule of the S.P.R., by concurrent testimony ( Pros . 
S.P.R. vol ii. p. 128 ; also Phantasms , i. 188. 

Another Case 

A case of clairvoyance or distant telepathy was told 
me by my colleague, Professor R. A. S. Redmayne, as 
having happened in his own experience when he was 
engaged in" prospecting for mines in a remote district 
of South Africa accompanied only by a working miner 
from Durham. His account is here abbreviated :— 

So far as they could keep a record of weeks the solitary two used 
to play at some game on Sundays, instead of working, but on one 
particular Sunday the workman declined to play, saying he did not 
feel up to it, as he had just had an intimation of his mother’s death,— 
that she had spoken of him in her last hours saying that she “would 
never see Albert again.” 

My informant tried to chaff his assistant out of his melancholy, 
since it was a physical impossibility that they could receive recent news 
by any normal means. But he adhered to his conviction, and in 
accordance with North Country tradition seemed to regard it as natural 
that he should thus know. 

Weeks afterwards complete confirmation came from England, both 
as to date and circumstance ; the words of the dying woman having 
been similar to those felt at the time by her distant son. 

The occurrence made a marked impression on my 
informant and broke down his scepticism as to the 
possibility of these strange occurrences. 

Fortunately I am able to quote confirmatory evidence 
of this narrative; for very soon after the verification 
Professor Redmayne wrote an account of it to his father, 
and from this gentleman I have received a certified copy 
of the letter :— 

Chap, v] 

SPONTANEOUS CASES 

Letter from Professor Redmayne to his Father 

Mgagane, nr. Newcastle, Natal, 

21st Nov. 1891 

I have a curious and startling thing to tell you:—About 6 weeks 
ago, Tonks said to me one morning, “ My mother is dead, Sir. I saw 
her early this morning lying dead in bed and the relatives standing 
round the bed; she said she would never see me again before she died.” 

I laughed at him and ridiculed the matter, and he seemed to forget it, 
and we thought (no) more of it, but Tonks asked me to note the date 
which I did not do. Last Wednesday, however, Tonks received a letter 
from his wife telling him that his mother was dead and had been buried 
a week, that she died early one Sunday morning about six weeks since 
and in her sleep ; but before she fell asleep she said she would never 
see “Albert” again. About a fortnight since I told some people what 
Tonks had told me, giving it as an instance of the superstitiousness of 
the Durham pitmen, and they were startled when, the other day, I told 
them the dream had come true. I will never laugh at anything like this 

The above is an extract from a letter from my son R. A. S. Redmayne 
written from Mgagane, Natal, S.A., and dated November 21st [1891]. 

John M. Redmayne 

August 1st, 1902, Harewood, Gateshead 

Professor Redmayne has also been good enough to 
cret a certificate from the workman concerned, in the form 
of a copy of the main portion of the above letter, with 
the following note appended;— 

The above extract correctly relates what occurred to me whilst 

living in Natal with Mr. Redmayne. 

6 Signed Albert Tonks 

Date August 21st, 1901 

Witness to above Signature N. B. Paddon, Seaton Delaval 

Garibaldi’s dream of the death of his mother at Nice, 
when he was in mid-Pacific, is a historical instance of 
the same kind (G. M. Trevelyan, Garibaldi and the 
Thousand, p. 18). 

CHAPTER VI 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

An Example of the Influence of Modern 
Thought on Ancient Superstitions 

I T is being made clear, I hope, how the fact of 
thought-transference—especially of the unconscious 
or subliminal variety—enables us to admit the 
possibility of the truth of a large number of occurrences 
which previously we should have been liable to 
stigmatise as impossible and absurd. For in truth not 
only apparitions of the dying and phantasms of the 
living may tentatively and hypothetically be thus ex¬ 
plained, but a number of other phenomena seem likely 
gradually to fall into their place in an orderly and 
intelligible Universe when submitted to this rationalising 
treatment. I do not say that its success is universal. I 
hold that it may be pressed too far; there are some 
things which even the greatest extension of it will not 
explain. Nevertheless when we have a clue we are 
bound to follow it up to the utmost before abandoning 
it, and we will therefore enter upon a consideration of as 
man y phenomena as at this stage we can see any chance 
of beginning rationally to understand. So let us con¬ 
template the subject as reasonably and physically as 
we can. 

?8 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

79 

Chap, vi] 

By thought-transference I mean a possible communi¬ 
cation between mind and mind, by means other than 
any of the known organs of sense: what I may call a 
sympathetic connexion between mind and mind; using 
the term mind in a vague and popular sense, without 
strict definition. And as to the meaning of sympathetic 
connexion,—let us take some examples :— 

A pair of iron levers, one on the ground, the other 
some hundred yards away on a post, are often seen to 
be sympathetically connected; for when a railway 
official hauls one of them through a certain angle the 
distant lever or semaphore-arm revolves through a 
similar angle. The disturbance has travelled from one 
to the other through a very obvious medium of com¬ 
munication—viz., an iron wire or rope. 

A reader unacquainted with physics may think 
“transmission” in this case a misnomer, since he may 
think the connexion is instantaneous—-but it is not. 

The connexion is due to a pulse which travels at a 
perfectly definite and measured pace—-approximately 

•three miles per second. j 

The pulling of a knob, followed by the ringing of a 
bell, is a similar process, and the transmission of the 
impulse in either of these cases is commonly considered 
simple and mechanical. It is not so simple as we think ; 
for concerning cohesion we are exceedingly ignorant, 
and why one end of a stick moves when the other end is 
touched no one at present is able clearly to tell us. 

Consider, now, a couple of tuning forks, or precisely 
similar musical instruments, isolated from each other and 
from other bodies,—suspended in air, let us say. Sound 
one of them and the other responds— i.e. begins to emit 
the same note. This is known in acoustics as sym¬ 
pathetic resonance; and again a disturbance has 

8o 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

travelled through the medium from one to the other. 
The medium in this case is intangible, but quite familiar, 
viz., atmospheric air. 

Next, suspend a couple of magnets, alike in all 
respects; pivoted, let us say, on points, at some distance 
from each other. Touch one of the magnets and set it 
swinging,—the other begins to swing slightly, too. Once 
more, a disturbance has travelled from one to the other, 
but the medium in this case is by no means obvious. 

It is nothing solid, liquid^ or gaseous; that much is 
certain. Whether it is material or not depends partly 
on what we mean by “material”—partly requires more 
knowledge before a satisfactory answer can be given. 
We do, however, know something of the medium 
operative in this case, and we call it the Ether—the 
Ether of Space. 

In these cases the intensity of the response varies 
rapidly with distance, and at a sufficiently great distance 
the response would be imperceptible. 

This may be hastily set down as a natural conse¬ 
quence of a physical medium of communication, and a 
physical or mechanical disturbance; but it is not 
quite so. 

Consider a couple of telephones connected properly 
by wires. They are sympathetic, and if one is tapped 
the other receives a shock. Speaking popularly, what¬ 
ever is said to one is repeated by the other, and distance 
is practically unimportant; at any rate, there is no ! 
simple law of inverse square, or any such kind of law; 
there is a definite channel for the disturbance between 
the two. 

The real medium of communication, I may say 
parenthetically, is still the ether. 

Once more, take a mirror, pivoted on an axle, and 

Cl A.P. Vi] 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

81 

capable of slight motion. At a distance let there be a 
suitable receiving instrument, say a drum of photographic 
paper and a lens. If the sun is shining on the mirror, 
and everything properly arranged, a line may be drawn 
by it on the paper miles away, and every tilt given to 
the mirror shall be reproduced as a kink in the line. 
And this may go on over great distances; no wire, or 
anything else commonly called “material” connecting 
the two stations, nothing but a beam of sunlight, a 
peculiar state of the ether. 

So far we have been dealing with mere physics. 
Now poach a little on the ground of physiology. Take 
two brains, as like as possible, say belonging to two 
similar animals; place them a certain distance apart, 
with no known or obvious means of communication, and 
see if there is any sympathetic link between them. 
Apply a stimulus to one, and observe whether the other 
in any way responds? To make the experiment 
conveniently, it is best to avail oneself of the entire 
animal, and not of its brain alone. It is then easy to 
stimulate one of the brains through any of the creature’s 
peripheral sense organs, and it may be possible to detect 
whatever effect is excited in the other brain by some 
motor impulse, some muscular movement of the corre¬ 
sponding animal. 

So fair as I know the experiment has hitherto been 
principally tried on man. This has certain advantages 
and certain disadvantage^. The main advantage is that 
the motor result of intelligent speech is more definite 
and instructive than mere pawings and gropings or 
twitchings. The main disadvantage is that the liability 
to conscious deception and fraud becomes serious, much 
more serious than it is with a less cunning animal. 

Of course it by no means follows that the experiment 

82 THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sue* II 

will succeed with a lower animal because it succeeds 
with man ; but I am not aware of its having been tried 

at present except with man. 

One mode of trying the experiment would be to pinch 
or hurt one individual and see if the other can feel any 
pain. If he does feel anything he will probably twitch 
and rub, or he may become vocal with displeasure. 
There are two varieties of the experiment: First, with 
some manifest link or possible channel, as, for instance, 
where two individuals hold hands through a stuffed-up 
hole in a partition-wall; and, second, with no such 
obvious medium, as when they are at a distance from 
one another. 

Instead of simple pain in any part of the skin, one 
may stimulate the brain otherwise, by exciting some 
special sense organ; for instance, those of taste or 
smell. Apply nauseous or pleasant materials to the 
palate of one individual and get the receptive person 
to describe the substance which the other is tasting. 

Experiments of this kind are mentioned above, and 
they have had a fair measure of positive result. But 
I am not asking for credence concerning specific facts at 
present. A serious amount of study is necessary before 
one is in a position to criticise any statement of fact. 
What I am concerned to show is that such experiments 
are not, on the face of them, absurd; that they are 
experiments which ought to be made; and that any 
result actually obtained, if definite and clear, ought to be 
gradually and cautiously accepted, whether it be positive 
or negative. 

So far I have supposed the stimulus to be applied 
to the nerves of touch, or more generally the skin 
nerves, and to the taste nerves; but we may apply 
a stimulus equally well to the nerves of hearing, or of 

Chap, vij 

applied telepathy 

83 

a“meU sumuL t n& ex P erime « with a sound or 
unless ,h 1 ' °* eVe J. ,s “anifestly not very crucial 

excessive 6 h r betWeen A and B is 

within nairow irjtfoVspace" xls^*? 7 

held u p in f f A Th “V B P-“; - he 

or to move during- the rnnrc^ .1 1 . 9 

l & tne oourse 01 the experiment annf 

screenir before; * b f P»**utioa of 

sMeTnteT m h” * p,Ct " re C “ be P^vely as- 
bertea never to have entered the eves of R. „ a -c 

nevertheless, B describes himself as “ seeing’’’i t how 

te^*****? d r * “ ^^siiie^ 

would be a good one 6 ™ 6 ’ * ^ * Say> the ex P erim ent 

But not yet would it be conclusive. We must con 
sider who A and B are. ° n ' 

If they are a pair of persons who go about too- e ther 
and make money out of the exhibition; if they "are in 

togethe^I denvAh f pr ° fessionals ac customed to act 
together I deny that anything is solidly proved by such 

SS“ : f ° r ™ improbable 

Cunning takes such a variety of forms that if ;<= 

d ?hT ** 7 - ? i/b '“ * 

together. _ That can be done by using unassorted 
individuals in unaccustomed rooms. True, the experi- 
men, may thus become much more difficult ,{, 
indeed qutte impossible. Two entirely different tuning 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

84 

forks will not respond. Two strangers are not usually 
sympathetic, in the ordinary sense of that word ; perhaps 
we ought not to expect a response. Nevertheless, the 
experiment must be made; and if B is found able to 
respond, not only to A x , but also to A 2 , A 3 , and other 
complete strangers, under the conditions already briefly 
mentioned, the experiment may be regarded as satis¬ 
factory. I am prepared to assert that such satisfactory 

experiments have been made. 

But the power of response in this way to the unin¬ 
teresting impression of strangers does not appear to be 
a common faculty. The number of persons who can 
act efficiently as B is apparently very limited. But I 
do not make this assertion with any confidence, for so 
few people have as yet been seriously tried. It is most 
likely a question of degree. All shades of responsive¬ 
ness may exist, from nearly o to something considerable. 

More experiments are wanted. They are not diffi¬ 
cult to try, and sufficient variety may be introduced to 
prevent the observations from being too deplorably dull. 
They are, I confess, rather dull. 

Before considering them satisfactory or publishing 
them it would be well to call in the assistance of a 
trained observer, who may be able to suggest further 
precautions; but at first it is probably well to choose 
fairly easy conditions. 

Relations are probably more likely to succeed than 
are strangers; persons who feel a sympathy with each 
other, who are accustomed to imagine they know what 
the other is thinking of, or to say things simultaneously, 
and such like vague traditions as are common in most 
families: such individuals as these would naturally be 
the most likely ones to begin with, until experiment 
shows otherwise. The A power seems common 

i 

B 

m 

ISP 

fCflp 

i 

Chap, vr] 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

enough; the B power, so, far as I know, is rather rare 
—at least to a prominent extent. 

. . h is customary to call A the agent and B the per¬ 
cipient, but there may be some objection to these names. 

The name agent suggests activity ; and it is a distinct 
question whether any conscious activity is necessary. 
Sender and receiver are terms that might be used, but 
they labour under similar and perhaps worse objections. 
For the present let us simply use the terms A and B, 
which involve no hypothesis whatever. 

A may be likened to the sending microphone or 
transmitter; B to the receiving telephone. 

A to the sounded fork or quivering magnet, B to the 
responsive one. 

A to the flashing mirror, B to the sensitive sheet. 

But observe that in all the cases hitherto mentioned 
a third person is mentioned too, the experimenter, C. 
A and B are regarded as mere tools, instruments, 
apparatus, for C to make his experiments with. 

Both are passive till C comes and excites the nerve 
of A, either by pinching him, or by putting things in 
his mouth, or by showing him diagrams or objects; and 
B is then supposed to respond to A. It may be objected 
that he is really responding to C all the time. Yes, 
indeed, that may sometimes be so, and it is a distinct 
possibility to remember. If something that C is uncon¬ 
sciously looking at is described by B, instead of the 
object which is set in front of A, the experiment will 
seem a failure. There are many such possibilities to 
bear in mind in so novel a region of research. 

But now I want to go on and point out that C is 
not essential. . He probably is not an assistance at all, 
very likely he is an obstruction, even if he is a serious 
and well-intentioned being. But if D, E, F are present 

m 

86 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

too as irresponsible spectators, talking or fidgeting, or 
even sitting still and thinking, the conditions are bad. 
One can never be sure what F is doing, he may be 
simply playing the fool. An experiment conducted in 
front of a large audience is scientifically useless. 

Whenever I use the term thought-transference I 
never mean anything like public performances, whether 
by genuine persons or impostors. The human race is 
so constituted that such performances have their value 
—they incite others to try experiments; but in them¬ 
selves, and speaking scientifically, public performances 
are useless, and except when of an exceptionally high 
order—as they were in the case of the Zancigs—they 
often tend to obscure a phenomenon by covering it with 
semi-legitimate contempt. 

I fear that some hypnotic exhibitions are worse than 
useless ; in so far as they are conducted, not to advance 
science, but to exhibit some well known fact again and 
again, not even to students, but to an idle gaping 
crowd. 

To return, however, to A and B : let us suppose 
them left alone, not stimulated by any third person; it 
is quite possible for A to combine the functions of C 
with his own functions, and to stimulate himself. He 
may look at a picture or a playing card, or he may 
taste a substance, or he may, if he can, simply think of 
a number, or a scene, or an event, and, so to speak, 
keep it vividly in his mind. It may happen that B will 
be able to describe the scene of which A is thinking, 
sometimes almost correctly, sometimes with a large 
admixture of error, or at least of dimness. 

The experiment is virtually the same as those above 
mentioned, and may be made quite a good one; the 
only weak part is that, under the circumstances, every- 

Chap, vi] APPLIED TELEPATHY 87 

thing depends on the testimony of A, and A is not 
always believed. 

This is, after all, a disability which he shares with 
C ; and, at any rate, he is able to convince himself by 
such experiments, provided they are successful. 

But now go a step further. Let A and B be not 
thinking of experimenting at all. Let them be at a 
distance from one another, and going about their ordinary 
vocations, including somnolence and the other passive as 
well as active occupations of the twenty-four hours. 
Let us, however, not suppose them strangers, but 
relatives or intimate friends. Now let something 
vividly excite A; let him fall down a cliff, or be run 
over by a horse, or fall into a river; or let him be taken 
violently ill, or be subject to some strong emotion; or 
let him be at the point of death. 

Is it not conceivable that if any such sympathetic 
connexion between individuals as I have been postul¬ 
ating exists,—if a paltry stimulus supplied by a third 
person is capable in the slightest degree of conveying 
itself from one individual to another,—is it not conceiv¬ 
able or even probable that a violent stimulus, such as we 
have supposed A to receive, may be able to induce in 
B, even though inattentive and otherwise occupied, some 
dim echo, reverberation, response, and cause him to be 
more or less aware that A is suffering or perturbed. 
If B is busy, self-absorbed, actively engaged, he may 
notice nothing. If he happen to be quiescent, vacant, 
moody, or half or whole asleep, he may realise and be 
conscious of something. He may perhaps only feel a 
vague sense of depression in general; or he may feel 
the depression and associate it definitely with A ; or he 
may be more distinctly aware of what is happening, and 
call out that A has had a fall, or an accident, or is being 

88 THOUGHT-TRANSFFRENCE [Sect, it 

drowned, or is ill; or he may have a specially vivid 
dream which will trouble him long after he wakes, and 
may be told to other persons, and written down ; or he 
may think he hears A’s voice; or, lastly, he may conjure 
up an image of A so vividly before his “ mind s eye 
that he may be able to persuade himself and others that 
he has seen his apparition -.—sometimes a mere purpose¬ 
less phantom, sometimes in a “ setting ” of a sort ol 
vision or picture of an event not unlike what is at the 

time elsewhere really happening. , 

The Society for Psychical Research have, with 
splendid perseverance and diligence, undertaken and 
carried forward the thankless labour of receiving and 
sifting a great mass of testimony to phenomena such as 
I have hinted at. They have published some of them 
in two large volumes, called Phantasms of the Living\ 
Fresh evidence comes in every month. The evidence 
is so cumulative, and some of it is so well established, 
as to bear down the dead wall of scepticism in all those 
who have submitted to the drudgery of a study of the 
material. The evidence induces belief. It is not yet 
copious enough to lead to a valid induction. 

I cannot testify to these facts as I can to the simple 
experiments where I have acted the part of C. Evidence 
for spontaneous or involuntary thought-transference must 
obviously depend on statements received from A and 
from B, as well as from other persons, some in the 
neighbourhood of A, others in the neighbourhood of B, 
together with contemporary newspaper reports, Times 
obituaries, and other past documents relating to matters 
of fact, which are available for scrutiny, and may be 
regarded as trustworthy. 

I am prepared, however, to confess that the weight 
of testimony is sufficient to satisfy my own mind that 

Chap, vi] 

applied telepathy 

between 1° undoubtedly occur; that the distance 
pathetic r ngan< ? aad Ind * a is no barrier to the syin- 
which °™ mu ™ catlon of intelligence in some way if 

sTcShW t lre . at T pre f ent that, just as a 

g g key in London causes a telegraphic instru 

reverydav 0 ^ inStantaneous] y Tehefan,-which iS " 

distlnt child' ° CC ™ ce ’~ so th e danger or death of 4 
tant child, or brother, or husband, may be sig-nalled \ 

being fitted to be the recipient of such a message. ' 

distance -^w Pr ° CeSS tele P a *hy ~ sympathy at a' 
distance we do not understand it. What is the 

medium of communication ? Is it through the air like 

he tuning forks ; or through the ether, like the magnets • 

or is it somethmg non-physical, and exclusively psychical ? 

aboul ft Sr ^ tdl y ° U - We ™ S£ knir more 
about it before we can answer that question.-perhaps 

before we can be sure whether the quest on^has a 
meaning or not. 1 a 

Undoubtedly, the scientific attitude, after beinp- 
orce to admit the fact, is to assume a physical medium 
an to discover it and its processes if possible When 
the attempt has failed, it will be time enough'to enter 
upon fresh hypotheses. g 0 enter 

Meanwhile, plainly, telepathy strikes us as a spon¬ 
taneous occurrence of that intercommunication between 

a bettTr ter ^ ^ ^ which for want of 

Welav be ^ ^ P l GSent StyIe Nought-transference. 

men that is hlw^ re £ ardin g i<; , but as scientific 

ten that is how we are bound to regard it unless forced 

t ^S° f eViden “ iMO S ° me V!™* 

cr T he ° pi f i0n is stren §fthened by the fact that the 
spontaneously occurring impressions can be artificially 

■ 

9Q j THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE [Sect, ii 

arid experimentally imitated by conscious attempts to 
produce them. Individuals are known who can by an 
efort of will excite the brain of another person at a 
moderate distance-say in another part of the sam 
or even in some distant place,—so that th 
second person imagines that he hears a call or sees 

^^These are called experimental apparitions, and 
, appear well established. These experim,arts a^so want 
! repeating. They require care, obviously ; but^ they ae 
( very valuable pieces of evidence, and must contnbut 

i immensely to experimental psychology. 

, What now is the meaning of this unexpected y 
pathetic resonance, this syntonic reverberation between 
, minds ? Is it conceivably the germ of a new. sense, a 
- it were,—something which the human race is, in e 
' progress of evolution, destined to receive m fuller 
measure ? or is it the relic of a faculty possessed by our 

animal ancestry before speech was ? 

I have no wish to intrude speculations upon yo , 
and I cannot answer these questions except m te ™* s 0 
speculation. I wish to assert nothing but what I believe 

to be solid and verifiable facts. 

Let me, however, point out that the intercommunion 

of minds, the exciting in the brain of B a thought 
possessed by A, is after all a very ordinary and well 
known process. We have a quantity of well-arranged 
mechanism to render it possible. The human race has 
advanced far beyond the animal in the development 
of this mechanism; and civilised man has advanced 
beyond savages. Conceivably, by thus developing the 
mechanism, we may have begun to lose the spontaneous 
and really simpler form of the power; but the power, 
with mechanism, conspicuously exists. 

■■ 

I find that R iTr r and a Short time afterwards 
nnd that B is perfectly aware of it. It sometime* 

accustomed ^ bas . P roba % happened in what we are 

A has told t C ° nSI t, a Very common place fashion; 
A has told him. When you come to analyse the 

process of transmission it existed for a finite SDace of 
time m this intermediate and curiously mechaniSl con 

p"c°e n ss yOU Ia: yre r liSe ° f P-"n C “e‘ 

some diJ, ™ n o a ,r r h We ° Ught t0 consid « 

m , ? sympathy between two minds, without this 

mode f pr0cess ' “ rea,I y a simple and ^ec 
mode of conveying an idea. However, all dualism is 

epugnant when pressed far enough, and I do not 
now wish to insist on any real and essential anti¬ 
thesis between mind and matter, between idea and 
process. Pass on to another illustration. 

that b b Tp T f’ NeW Zealani d; ssover 

Petersburg, is before long aware of it 

neither having travelled. How can that happen ? That 

LZoT'l: -° 3 ^ “ ™> d seem to Urn 1 

mysterious. It is mysterious in reality. The idea 
existed for a tune in the form of black scrawls on a bit 

traS 61 *’ f WhlCh -T elIed between the two places. A 
ansfer of material occurred, not an aerial vibration • 

him P fh Ce -d hdd b fr ° nt ° f B ’ S eyes edited in 

m the idea or knowledge of fact which you had com¬ 
municated to A. • J m 

Not even a material transfer is necessary however • 

“bid’T al0n f a ^ egraph Wire ' ^ 

undisturbed by an electric current, but thought-trans- 

92 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

ference through the etherial medium (with, or indeed j 
without, the help of a telegraph or telephone wire) is an 
accomplished fact, though it would have puzzled our 
ancestors of last century. And yet it is not really new, 
it is only the distance and perfection of it that is new. 
We all possess an etherial receiving instrument, in our 
organ of vision. The old semaphore system of signal¬ 
ling, as well as the heliograph method, is really a utilisa¬ 
tion of the ether for this kind of thought-transference. 
Much information, sometimes of momentous character, 
may be conveyed by a wink or nod ; or even by a look. 
These also are messages sent through the ether. The 
eye is affected by disturbances arriving through the 
ether, and by those alone. 

Now, then, I say, shut the eyes, stop the ears, 
transmit no material substance, interpose distance 
sufficient to stop all pushing and pulling. Can thought 
or ideas still be transmitted ? Experiment answers that 
they can. But what the medium is, and how the process 
occurs, it remains for further investigation to ascertain. 

We reduced our initial three individuals to two; we 
can reduce the two to one. It is possible for the A and 
B functions to be apparently combined in one individual. 
Some practice seems necessary for this, and it is a curious 
state of things. It seems assisted by staring at an object 
such as a glass globe or crystal—a slight amount of self¬ 
hypnotism probably. Then you see visions and receive 
impressions, or sometimes your hand works unconsci¬ 
ously, as if one part of y<mr brain was signalling to 
another part, and your own identity was dormant or 
complexed for a time. But in these cases of so-called 
automatic writing, crystal vision, trance-utterance, clair¬ 
voyance, and the like, are we quite sure whether it is a 
case of A and B at all • and, if so, whether the subject 

”-- -N. i ...I * - ' 

Chap, vi] APPLIED TELEPATHY 9 , 

before us is really acting as both? I am not sure;!! 

istinctly doubt it in some cases. It is possible that the 
c airvoyant is responding to some unknown world-mind 
o which he forms a part: that the real agent is neither 
himself nor any other living person. This possibility 
must not be ignored in ordinary cases of apparent 
thought-transference, too. 

Well, now, take a further step. Suppose I discover 
a piece of paper with scrawls on it. I may guess they 
are intended for something, but as they are to me 
illegible hieroglyphics, I carry it to one person after 
another, and get them to look at it; but it excites in them 
no response. They perceive little more than a savage 
would perceive. But not so with all of them. One man 
to whom I show it has the perceptive faculty, so to 
speak; he becomes wildly excited; he begins to sing;, 
he rushes for an arrangement of wood and catgut, anc 
fills the air with vibrations. Even the others can now 
faintly appreciate the meaning. The piece of paper was ; 
a lost manuscript of Beethoven ! i 

. What sort of thought-transference is that ? Where ■ 
is the A to whom the ideas originally occurred? He 
has been dead for years ; his fossilised thought has lain 
dormant in matter; but it only wanted a sympathetic and 
educated mind to perceive it, to revive it, and to make 
it the property of the world. Idea, do I call it? but / 
it is not only idea: there may be a world of emojk*'"-' 
too, thus stored up in matter, ready to be released aj. 
detent. Action of mind on matter, reaction of mat 
on mind—are these things, after all, commonplaces^ f 
If so what is not possible ? 

Here is a room where- " 
the, hurngja sph > ' ' 
there ah '’ w 

Chap, vi] 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 

[Sect, ii 

oe appreciated by an attuned or receptive _ mind. I 
issert nothing, except that it is not inconceivable. It 
it happen, it may take many forms; vague, disquiet, 
perhaps, or imaginary sounds or vague visions, or 
perhaps a dream or picture of the event as it ° ccurre • 
Understand, I do not regard the evidence for these 
things as so conclusive as for some of the other 
phenomena I have' dealt with, but the belief m such 
facts may be forced upon us, and you perceive that the 
garment of superstition is already dropping from them. 
They will take their place, if true, in an orderly universe 
along with other not wholly unallied and already well 
known occurrences. 

Relics again : is it credible that a relic, a lock of hair, 
an old garment, retains any trace of a deceased friend 
represents any portion of his personality? Does not an 
'pld letter ? Does not a painting ? An “ old master we 
call it. Aye, there may be much of the personality ot 
the old master thus preserved. Is not the emotion e t 
on looking at it a kind of thought-transference from the 
departed? A painting differs from a piece of music m 
that it is constantly incarnate, so to speak. It is there 
for all to see, for some to understand. The music re¬ 
quires incarnation, it can be “performed ” as we say, and 
then it can be appreciated. But in no case without the 
\ attuned and thoughtful mind; and so these things are, 
J-sx sense, thought-transference, but deferred thought- 
v sference. They may be likened to telepathy not 

'y reaching over tracts of space but deferred throug 

r f, -hs of time . 1 , ... 

cli <>tfaj a _j these gr eat things and be not unduly 

Chap, vi] 

APPLIED TELEPATHY 

■ 

sceptical about little things. An attitude of keen and 
critical inquiry must continually be maintained, and in 
that sense any amount of scepticism is not only legitimate 
but necessary. The kind of scepticism I deprecate- is 
not that which sternly questions and rigorously probes, 
it is rather that which confidently asserts and dogmati- 
cally denies; but this kind is not true scepticism, in the 
proper sense of the word, for it deters inquiry and 
forbids inspection. It is too positive concerning the 
boundaries of knowledge and the line where superstition 
begins. 

Phantasms and dreams and ghosts, crystal-gazing, 
premonitions, and clairvoyance: the region of supersti- 
tion ? Yes, hitherto, but possibly also the region of fact. 
As taxes on credulity they are trifles compared to things 
with which we are already familiar ; only too familiar, 
for our familiarity has made us stupidly and inanely 
inappreciptive of them. 

The whole of our knowledge and existence is 
shrouded in mystery: the commonplace is itself full of 
marvel, and the business of science is to overcome the 
forces of superstition by enlisting them in the service 
of genuine knowledge. And when this is done I do not 
doubt that some of these forces will be found auxiliary 
to the sacred cause of religion itself. 

[Sect, iii 

9 8 SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY 

that the ether of space had been definitely affected in 
a certain way also, so that the impression had probably fi 
become received by the optical apparatus of the eye, « 
and had been transmitted in the usual way to the brain. ' 
It would not prove substantiality; since of course it is ' 
perfectly easy to photograph the virtual image formed 
by a looking-glass. Still, genuine photography would 
indicate a step in advance of telepathy: it would 
establish one variety of what are called “physical 
phenomena.” There is, in truth, a vast amount of 
evidence for physical phenomena of this technically I 
supernormal kind; but they have not yet made good I 
their claim to clear and positive acceptance in the way , 

that telepathy has done. _ _ | 

But we are at present not attending to physical 
phenomena. e need not assume that an apparition j 
has any objective or physical reality. It may be only 
an impression on the mind of a percipient, analogous 
to the image or impression caused in one person while 
another is endeavouring to transfer the image of an : 
object. That which experimentally is found to occur 
of conscious purpose we think may sometimes occur 
unconsciously too. We are not sure indeed that the . 
consciousness or will power of the agent has anything 
to do with it; the transfer is effected we know not how, 
and it may be wholly an affair of the subconsciousness. 

If so, a strong emotion even in a distant person may 
produce an echo or reverberation in the mind of a 
relative or even a sympathetic stranger, without the 

agent being in the least conscious of what is happening, 
and without the percipient in the least understanding 
the process. He may think that the impression in the 
mind is real, and may only be undeceived by trying to 
touch it, or he may perceive that it is no more real than 

Ibb 

mk 

jflMIlH 

'•iWPi 

Chap, vii] 

APPARITIONS 

the image in a looking-glass,—or not so real as that,— 
and yet may feel certain that it corresponds to some 
sort of psychical reality somewhere. 

In that case the impression is called veridical or 
truth-telling, because it does convey real information, 
though it does so in a phantasmal or unreal manner. 
Hallucinations need not necessarily be unreal or 
phantasmal in every case: that is a matter for further 
investigation, but it does assuredly clear the ground to 
treat them as such in the first instance. 

Phantasms 

Examples of apparitions seen by relatives at or very 
near to the epoch of death are so common that it is 
hardly worth while to quote any here. The publications 
of the Society for Psychical Research and the book 
called Phantasms of the Living are full of them ; 
and in most assemblages it will be found that a few 
of those present are aware of cases of this kind in their 
own family history. 

Part of the scepticism which has surrounded the 
subject has been undoubtedly due to the difficult 
notions which are rendered necessary if those apparitions 
are to be supposed objective realities. Even supposing 
a human being could thus appear, the apparition of his 
clothes and simplest accessories must thus become 
puzzling. Sometimes such figures are seen accompanied 
by animals, sometimes with their surroundings lightly 
sketched in as it were,—as for instance part of a ship in 
the case of a sailor. All these difficulties sink into non¬ 
existence directly it is apprehended that the vision is 
a mental impression produced by a psychical agency, 

veridical in 

corresponding to reality more 

w 

m 

I00 SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY [Sect, hi 

or less closely but f 

no actual bodily present. Psychical 

alising theory on which the boaety ^ ^ 

running through a great v “fL. t :i«\ X)W er necessary. 

»be due to telepathy from the dying person and were 
called Phantasms of the Living. 

they had no special interes , andeve ^ 

the actors, diragh^ seemproper i y assim- 

strangers to : ^ describe mere places and 

dated to those wherethey ^lescr £ sed t0 be 

objects, the ideaOnce 

impressed on them y y £ th y e fact G f death 

more, apparitions; 11 ’ ent 0 f disturbance in one 

"ave Tn been ^fevS 

!l[Ta n se S above c°cSered-but by other observers who 
had no personal interest in t ^ ™ att ^ cs we have had to 

until by inquiry anu F records of various kinds, 

we nave *,i ivtno* nor drawing unduly on their 

much “ 

they'have narrated or at the time recorded them. 

Chap, vii] 

APPARITIONS 

ioi 

44 Phantasms of the Dying” might be a better name 
for these very numerous cases of apparition or veridical 
hallucination. Whatever the cause, the fact of their 
existence has been thoroughly established ; there is a con¬ 
cordance far beyond chance between apparitions which 
convey the impression of the unexpected death or illness 
of a distant person, and the actual fact;—the intelligence 
being, in this form, impressed on a percipient at a dis¬ 
tance, by some apparently unconscious mental activity 
and by means at present unknown. 

Abbreviated Examples 

As an instance of a vision with appropriate accessories I might 
take a case reported more fully in the Proceedings of the Society for 
Psychical Research, vol. iii. page 97—the case of a favourite and 
devoted Scottish workman who appeared to his employer in what is 
described as an extraordinarily vivid dream in which the workman 
appeared with a face of “indescribable bluish pale colour and on his 
forehead spots like blots of sweat,” and earnestly said several times 
that he had not done the thing which he was accused of doing. When 
asked what this was, he replied impressively “ Ye’ll sune ken.” Almost 
immediately afterwards the news of this man’s suicide arrived. But 
the employer felt assured on the strength of his vision that, though 
dead, the man had not committed suicide \ and said so. Before long 
it turned out that his assurance was correct, for the workman had 
drunk from a bottle containing nitric acid by accident. The employer 
moreover subsequently ascertained that the symptoms exhibited by the 
phantasmal appearance were such as are appropriate to poisoning by 
this liquid. 

Another case of vision with more detailed accessories 
is in vol vii. page 33, communicated by Dr. Hodgson, 
and may be abbreviated thus :— 

Mrs. Paquet on the morning of October 24th, 1889, after her 
husband had gone to work and the children to school, feeling gloomy, 
was making some tea for herself, when she saw a vision of her brother, 

102 SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY [Sect, nt 

Edmund Dunn, standing only a few feet away; and her report 
continues:— 

44 The apparition stood with back toward me, or rather, partially so, 
and was in the act of falling forward—away from me—seemingly im 
pelled by two ropes or a loop of rope drawing against his legs. The 
vision lasted but a moment, disappearing over a low railing or bulwark, 
but was very distinct. I dropped the tea, clasped my hands.,to my 
face, and exclaimed, 4 My God 1 Ed. is drowned. 5 

“At about half-past ten a.m. my husband received a telegram from 
Chicago announcing the drowning of my brother. When he arrived 
home, he said to me, 4 Ed. is sick in hospital at Chicago; I have just 
received a telegram,’ to which I replied 4 Ed. is drowned; I saw him 
go overboard. 3 I then gave him a minute description of what I had 
seen. I stated that my brother, as I saw him, was bareheaded, had on 
a heavy, blue sailor’s shirt, no coat, and that he went over the rail or 
bulwark. I noticed that his pants’ legs were rolled up enough to show 
the white lining inside. I also described the appearance of the boat 
at the point where my brother went overboard. 

44 1 am not nervous, and neither before nor since have I had any 
experience in the least degree similar to that above related. 

44 My brother was not subject to fainting or vertigo. 

44 Agnes Paqtjet ” 

Mr. Paquet’s Statement 

44 At about 10.30 o’clock a.m., October 24th, 1889, I received a 
telegram from Chicago; announcing the drowning of my brother-in-law, 
Edmund Dunn, at 3 o’clock that morning. I went directly home, and 
wishing to break the force of the sad news I had to convey to my wife, 
I said to her : 4 Ed. is sick in hospital at Chicago; I have just received 
a telegram. 3 To which she replied: 4 Ed, is drowned; I saw him go 
overboard.’ She then described to me the appearance and dress of 
her brother as described in her statement, also the appearance of the 
boat, etc. 

44 1 started at once for Chicago, and when I arrived there I found 
the appearance of that part of the vessel described by my wife to be 
exactly as she had described it, though she had never seen the vessel; 
and the crew verified my wife’s description of her brother’s dress, etc,, 
except that they thought he had his hat on at the time of the accident. 
They said that Mr. Dunn had purchased a pair of pants a few days 
before the accident occurred, and as they were a trifle long, wrinkling 

Chap, vii] 

APPARITIONS 

at the knees, he had worn them rolled up, showing the white lining 
as seen by my wife.” 

I 

Statement of Accident 

“On October 24th, 1889, Edmund Dunn, brother of Mrs. Agnes 
Paquet, was serving as fireman on the tug Wolf, a small steamer engaged 
in towing vessels in Chicago harbour. At about three o’clock mm., 
the tug fastened to a vessel, inside the piers, to tow her up the river. 
While adjusting the tow-line Mr. Dunn fell, or was thrown overboard 
by the tow-line, and drowned.” 

In this case, if 3 a.m, signifies Chicago time, the 
vision must have followed the accident very closely, 
but it has gradually become clear that some of these 
cases do not coincide precisely with the epoch of death, 
but follow it sometimes at so long an interval that 
another group has to be classified as “ Phantasms of the 
Dead.” (See Mrs. Sidgwick’s Memoir on the subject in 
Proceedings, vol. iii.) 

Again occasionally the hallucinations are collective, 
so that several people present see the same vision.. It 
is possible to consider these as cases of contagious 
hallucination : and it is not usually necessary to suppose 
that”the distant person whose image was being seen 
knew anything about it or was making any conscious 
effort to communicate. 

If indeed he were conscious of the attempt, still more 
if he knew of its success and reception, it would be a 
feature of greatly added interest; it would then fall into 
the class of reciprocal cases—which are rarer. 

Experimental Apparitions 
The fact that such visions can also be produced 
through the agency of living people—even in health— 
was proved by the experiments conducted by Mr. S. 

104 

SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY [Sect, in 

H. B., as recorded in Phantasms of the Livings vol. L 
pp. 104-9, an d in Human Personality , vol. i. p. 293. 
This gentleman willed himself or rather his phantom 
to appear to two ladies, without their knowing of the 
experiment; and he succeeded in his intention. They 
both saw him simultaneously, though he did not see 
them, and his appearance was as of one in evening 
dress wandering aimlessly about their room, after the 
traditional manner of “ ghosts.” This experimental 
production of a ghost is a particularly instructive case; 
and many ghostly appearances belong to living people, 
who are usually unconscious that they are producing 
any such effect. There appears to be no reason why 
an apparition should always be of a deceased person. 
But whether every apparition is of this unsubstantial 
and purely subjective order, or whether a few proceed 
to a further degree of reality and belong to what are 
sometimes spoken of as incipient materialisation, I do 
not at this stage even discuss. It is sufficient to 
indicate that a true hypothesis does not close the door 
to other and more extended ones, if the first is found 
incompetent to explain all the facts. 

For the convenient analogy of conscious and pur- 
posed Thought-transference must not be pressed too 
far. Our phenomena break through any attempt to 
group them under heads of purposely transferred impres- 
sion ; and the words Telcesthesia and Telepathy were 
introduced by Mr. Myers to cover all cases of impression 
received at a distance without the normal operation of 
the recognised sense organs. 

These general terms are found of permanent service ; 
but as regards what is for the present included under 
them, we must limit and arrange our material rather 
with an eye to convenience, than trith any belief that 
our classification will ultimately prove a fundamental 

Chap, vii] 

APPARITIONS 

lip 

one. No true demarcation, in fact, can as yet be made 
between one class of those experiences and another; 
we need the record of as many and as diverse phenomena 
as we can get, if we are to be in a position to deal 
satisfactorily with any one of them. 

The popular term “ghost” may cover a wide range 
of essentially different phenomena, and the hallucinatory 
but veridical kind of apparition, which has no close con¬ 
nexion with any particular place, is the best established 
and commonest variety. 

Hauntings 

The kind of ghost associated with a place—say a 
room,—and seen by any one who happens to sleep in 
that room, provided he is fairly wakeful and not too 
^ case-hardened against weird influences, constitutes a 
difficult and at present somewhat unsatisfactory region 
of inquiry. The evidence for the existence of this 
, “fixed local” kind of apparition is strong, but hardly 
: conclusive; and this kind is not included among those 
called “phantasms of the living” nor among halluci¬ 
nations due to telepathy from the injured or dying. 

The Society has not had the opportunity of investi¬ 
gating so-called haunted houses in any considerable 
number; and many of such cases—even when reported— 
resolve themselves merely into uncanny noises such as 
may be accounted for in one of a great many different 
ways. I would not be understood as expressing any 
opinion as to the actual occurrence of this class of 
phantom—our study of it as yet has been insufficient,— 
but of the occurrence of visions which coincide fairly 
in time with some severe shock to the person repre¬ 
sented. it is impossible for me to entertain a doubt. 

| 

m 

fef: 

■ 

to 6 SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY [Sect, m 

The evidence must certainly depend on human testi¬ 
mony, but immense trouble has been taken to collect 
such testimony over a wide range of persons, to sift and 
examine and test it by every means in our power, and 
then to record it in volumes accessible to the public. 
Those who have been chiefly occupied for years in this 
work are able to testify concerning it as follows:— 

We have thus accumulated a great body of testimony 
which it is impossible to overlook or to discard. These 
facts form a foundation for the beginning of knowledge 

concerning them. . . 

Our evidence is no shifting shadow, which it may 

be left to individual taste or temperament to interpret, 
but more resembles a solid mass seen in twilight 
which men may indeed avoid stumbling over, but only 
by resolutely walking away from it. And when the 
savant thus deserts the field, the ordinary man needs 
to have the nature and true amount of the testimony 
far more directly brought home to him, than is necessary 
in realms already mastered by specialists to whose dicta 
he may defer. Failing this direct contact with the facts, 
the vaguely fascinated regard of the ordinary public is, 
for all scientific purposes, as futile as the savant s deter¬ 
mined avoidance. Knowledge can never grow until it 
is realised that the question “Do you believe m these 
things ? ” is puerile unless it has been preceded by the 
inquiry, “ What do you know about them ? ” 

For, in fact, this subject is at present very much in 
the position which zoology and botany occupied in the 
time of Aristotle, or nosology in the time of Hippocrates. 
Aristotle had no zoological gardens or methodical treatises 
to refer to; he was obliged to go down to the fish- 
market, to hear whatever the sailors could, tell, and 
look at whatever they could bring him. This spirit of 
omnivorous inquiry no doubt exposed him to hearing 
much that was exaggerated or untrue; but plainly the 
science of zoology could not have been upbuilt without 

Chap, vii] APPARITIONS to y 

it. Diseases afford a still more striking parallel to the 
phenomena of which we are in quest. Men of science 
.are wont to make it an objection to this quest that 
phenomena cannot be reproduced under our own con¬ 
ditions or at our own time. The looseness of thought 
here exhibited by men ordinarily clear-headed is surely 
a striking example of the prepotence of prejudice over 
education. Will the objectors assert that all aberrations 
of function and degenerations of tissue are reproducible 
by direct experiment? Can physicians secure a case 
of cancer or Addison s disease by any previous arrange¬ 
ment of conditions ? Our science is by no means the 
only one concerned with phenomena which are at 
present to a large extent irreproducible : all the sciences 
of life are still within that category, and all sciences 
whatever were in it once. 

CHAPTER VIII 

TELEPATHY FROM AN IMMATERIAL REGION 

T HE phenomenon upon a consideration of which 
we shall shortly enter is that exhibited in several 
forms and known under various names, of which 
the simplest perhaps is automatic writing —that is, 
writing executed independently of the full knowledge 
and consciousness of the operator—the hand acting 
in obedience either to some unconscious portion of the 
operator’s mind, or else responding to some other 
psychical influence more or less distinct from both his 
normal and his hypernormal personality. Sometimes 
it takes the form not of writing, but of unconscious 
speech; and occasionally the person whose hand or 
voice is being used is himself completely entranced 
and unconscious for one or two hours together. There 
is evidently a great deal to be learned about this 
phenomenon, and many surmises are legitimate 
respecting it, but it is useless and merely ignorant to 
deny its occurrence. It is often quite clear that parts 
of the writings or speech so obtained do not represent 
the normal knowledge of the automatist; but whence 
the information is derived is uncertain, and probably 
in different cases the source is different. The simplest 
assumption, and one that covers perhaps a majority 
of the facts, is that the writer’s unconscious intelligence 

X08 

Chap, viii] 

IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 

109 

or subliminal self—his dream or genius stratum—is at 
work—that he is in a condition of unconscious and 
subliminal lucidity, and subject to a sort of hyper- 
sesthesia. 

It has long been known that in order to achieve 
remarkable results in any department of intellectual 
activity, the mind must be to some extent unaware of 
passing occurrences. To be keenly awake and “on 
the spot” is a highly valued accomplishment, and for 
the ordinary purposes of mundane affairs is a far more 
useful state of mind than the rather hazy and absorbed 
condition which is associated with the quality of mind 
called genius; but it is not as effective for brilliant 
achievement. 

When a poet or musician or mathematician feels 
himself inspired, his senses are—at least his common¬ 
place and non-relevant attention is — dulled or half 
asleep; and though probably some part of his brain 
is in a state of great activity, I am not aware of any 
experiments directed to test which that part is, nor 
whether, when in that state, any of the more ordinarily 
used portions are really dormant or no. It would be 
interesting, but difficult, to ascertain the precise physio¬ 
logical accompaniments of that which on a small scale 
is called a brown study, and on a larger scale a period 
of inspiration. 

It does not seem unreasonable to suppose that the 
state is somewhat allied to the initial condition of 
anaesthesia—the somnambulic condition in which, though 
the automatic processes of the body go on with greater 
perfection than usual, the conscious or noticing aspect 
of the mind is latent, so that the things which influence 
the person are apparently no longer the ordinary 
events which affect his peripheral organs, but either 

no 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, hi 

something internal or else something not belonging to 
the ordinarily known physical universe at all. 

The mind is always in a receptive state, perhaps, 
but whereas the business - like wide - awake person 
receives impressions from every trivial detail of his 
physical surroundings, the half-asleep person seems to 
receive impressions from a different stratum altogether; 
higher in some instances, lower in some instances, but 
different always from those received by ordinary men 
in their every-day state. 

In a man of genius the state comes on of itself, and 
the results are astounding. There are found occasion¬ 
ally feeble persons, usually young, who seek to attain 
to the appearance of genius by the easy process of 
assuming or encouraging an attitude of vacancy and 
uselessness. There may be all grades of result attained 
while in this state, and the state itself is of less than 
no value unless it is justified by the results. 

By experiment and observation it has now been 
established that a state not altogether dissimilar to 
this can be induced by artificial means, eg, by drugs, 
by hypnosis, by crystal gazing, by purposed inattention; 
and also that a receptive or clairvoyant condition occurs 
occasionally without provocation, during sleep and during 
trance. All these states seem to some extent allied, 
and, as is well known, Mr. Myers has elaborated their 
relationship in his series of articles on the subliminal 
consciousness. 

Well now, the question arises, What is the source 
of the intelligence manifested during epochs of clair¬ 
voyant lucidity, as sometimes experienced in the 
hypnotic or the somnambulic state, or during trance, 
or displayed automatically ? 

The most striking cases of which I am now 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 

ill 

immediately or mediately cognisant, are the trance 
state of Mrs. Piper and the automatism of such writers 
as Mrs. Verrall and Mrs. Holland. Without any 
apparent lulling of attention at all I am experimentally 
assured of the possibility of conveying information 
between one mind and another without the aid of 
ordinary sense organs; but the cases mentioned are 
especially striking, and will serve to narrow the field to 
what, after all, may be considered at present the main 
points. 

Mrs. Piper in the trance state is undoubtedly (I use 
the word in the strongest sense; I have absolutely no 
more doubt on the subject than I have of my friends’ 
ordinary knowledge of me and other men),—Mrs. 
Piper’s trance personality is undoubtedly aware of 
much to which she has no kind of ordinarily recognised 
clue, and of which in her ordinary state she knows 
nothing. But how does she get this knowledge ? She 
herself when in the trance state asserts that she gets 
it by conversing with the deceased friends and relatives 
of people present. And that this is a genuine opinion 
of hers, i.e. that the process feels like that to her 
unconscious or subconscious mind—the part of her 
which used to call itself Phinuit and now calls itself 
“ Rector ”—I am fully prepared to believe. But that 
does not carry us very far towards a knowledge of what 
the process actually is. 

Conversation implies speaking with the mouth,—and 
when receiving or asking information she is momentarily 
in a deeper slumber, and not occupied in normal 
speech. At times, indeed, slight mutterings of one¬ 
sided questions and replies are heard, or are written, 
very like the mutterings of a person in sleep under¬ 
going a vivid dream. 

112 TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, iii 

Dream is certainly the ordinary person’s nearest 
approach to the entranced condition; and the fading of 
recollection as the conscious memory returns is also 
paralleled by the waking of -Mrs. Piper out of the 
trance. But, instead of a nearly passive dream, it is 
more nearly allied to the somnambulic state ; though 
the activity, far from being chiefly locomotory, is 
mainly mental and only partially muscular. 

She is in a state of somnambulism in which the 
mind is more active than the body; and the activity 
is so different from her ordinary activity, she is so 
distinctly a different sort of person, that she quite 
appropriately calls herself by another name. 

It is natural to ask, Is she still herself? But it is a 
question difficult to answer, unless “herself” be defined. 
It is her mouth that is speaking, or her hand which is 
writing, and I suppose her brain and nerves are work¬ 
ing the muscles; but they are not worked in the 
customary way, nor does the mind manifested thereby 
at all resemble her mind. Until, however, the meaning 
of identity can be accurately specified, I find it difficult 
to discuss the question whether she or another person 
is really speaking. 

On this point the waking experience of Mrs. 
Newnham—an automatic writer quoted in Phantasms of 
the Living, vol. i. p. 63 — is of assistance. In her case 
the hand wrote matter not in the writer’s mind and 
which she did not feel that she was writing. Her hand 
wrote while she was taking the attention of her own 
conscious mind away from her’hand and letting it be 
guided by her subconscious or by some other mind. 

The instructive feature about this case was that 
the minds apparently influencing the hand were not so 
much those of dead as of living popple. The advantage 

J 

; 

£ 

i 

u] 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 113 

of this was that they could be catechised afterwards 
about their share in the transaction ; and it then appeared 
that they either knew nothing about it or were sur¬ 
prised at it; for though the communication did corre¬ 
spond to something in their minds, it did not represent 
anything of which they were consciously thinking, and 
was only a. very approximate rendering of what they 
might be wishing to convey. They did not seem able 
to exercise control over the messages, any more than, 
untrained people can control their thoughts in dreams. 
But we must not jump to the conclusion that this will 
always be the case; that the connexion is never re¬ 
ciprocally conscious, as when two persons are talking; 
but it shows that at any rate it need not be so. Since' 
the living communicant is not aware of what is being 
dictated, so the dead person need not be consciously 
operative; and thus conceivably the hand of the auto- 
matist may be. influenced by minds other than his own, 
minds both living and dead (by one apparently as 
readily as by the other), but not by a conscious portion 
of the mind of any one; by the subconscious or dreamy 
portion, if by any portion at all. 

When Phinuit then, or Mrs. Piper in the trance 
state, reports conversations which she has had with 
other minds (usually in Phinuit’s case with persons 
deceased), . and even when the voice changes and 
messages come apparently from those very people 
themselves, it does not follow that they themselves 
are necessarily aware of the fact, nor need their 
conscious mind (if they have any) be active in the 
process. 

The signature of an automatist’s hand is equivalent 
to the assertion that Miss X., for instance, is deliberately 

writing; Phinuit’s statement is equally an assertion that 
8 

liM 

1X4 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, iii 

Mr. E. is deliberately speaking; and the one statement 
may be no more a lie than the other is a forgery, and 
yet neither need be what is ordinarily called “true.” 

That this community of mind or possibility of distant 
interchange or one-sided reception of thoughts exists, is 
to me perfectly clear and certain. I venture further to 
say that persons who deny the bare fact, expressed as 
I here wish to express it without any hypothesis, are 
simply ignorant. They have not studied the facts of the 
subject. It may be for lack of opportunity, it may be 
for lack of inclination; they are by no means bound to 
investigate it unless they choose; but any dogmatic 
denials which such persons may now perpetrate .will 
henceforth, or in the very near future, redound to the 
discredit, not of the phenomena thus ignorantly denied, 
but of themselves, the over-confident and presumptuous 

deniers. 

We must not too readily assume that the apparent 
action of one mind on another is really such an action. 
The impression received may come from the ostensible 
agent, but it may come from a third person; or again it 
may, as some think more likely, come from a central mind 
—some Anima Mundi—to which all ordinary minds are 
related and by which they are influenced. If it could 
be shown that the action is a syntonic or sympathetic 
connexion between a pair of minds, then it might be 
surmised that the action is a physical one, properly to be 
expressed as occurring directly between brain and brain, 
or body and body. On the other hand, the action may 
conceivably be purely psychological, and the distant 
brain may be stimulated not by the intervention of 
anything, physical or material but in some more im¬ 
mediate manner,—from its psychological instead of from 
its physiological side. 

Chap, pin] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY llS 

The question is quite a definite one if properly 
expressed: Does the action take place through a 
physical medium, or does it not? g 

;f fi? UeSSeS - at - ^ ^ riori IikeIiho °d are worthless- 
e question is to be answered it must be attacked 
experimentally. nausea 

withal £** <H f Ha$y Way in Which A cornrn unicates 
thought of A° Ug h Certa , m phySICal mec hanism, and the 
3 ° f A may be . said to exist for a finite time as an 

rhn - 0r f na qU1V6r before k ^produces a similar 
hought m the mind of B. We have got so accustomed 
to the existence of this intermediate physical process 
that instead of striking us as roundabout and puzzling it 
appeals to us as natural and simple; and any more 

is "scouted^ ^ 7 B ’ ^ 7 °^ physical mechanism, 
^ scouted as absurd or at least violently improbable. 

Well, it is merely a question of fact, and perhaps it is 

within the range of a crucial experiment. 

But it may be at once admitted that such an 
experiment is difficult of execution. If the effect is a 
p ysical one it should vary according to some law of 
• distance, Gr it should depend on the nature of the inter¬ 
vening medium; but, in order to test whether in any 
given ca- such variation occurs, it is necessary to have 
both agent and percipient in an unusually dependable 
condition, and they should if possible be unaware of the 
variation which is under test. 

This last condition is desirable because of the 
sensitiveness of the sub-consciousness to suggestion- 
self-suggestion and other. If the percipient got an idea 
at dls tance or interposed screens were detrimental, 
most likely they would be detrimental; and although a 
suggestion might be artificially instilled that distance was 
advantageous, this would hardly leave the test quite fair 

ti6 TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, hi 

for the lessened physical stimulus might perhaps be 
over-utilised by the more keenly excited organism. Still 
that is an experiment to be tried among others ; and it 
would be an instructive experience if the agent some day 
was, say, in India when the percipient thought he was in 
London, or vice versd. 

It is extremely desirable to probe this question of a 
physical or non-physical mode of communication in cases 
of telepathy; and if the fact can be established beyond 
doqbt that sympathetic communication occurs between 
places as distant as India or America and England, or 
the terrestrial antipodes,—being unfelt between, or in the 
neighbourhood of the source,—then I should feel that 
this was so unlike what we are accustomed to in Physics 
that I should be strongly urged to look to some other 
and more direct kind of mental relationship as the clue. 
Some of the recent experiments conducted by Miss 
Miles and Miss Ramsden ( Proc ., vol. xxi. pp. 60-93) 
tend to support such a contention. 

This, then, is the first question on which crucial 
experiments are desirable though difficult. 

(1) Is the mechanism of telepathy physical or not? 

The second question of which I am thinking is one 

less easy to state and far less easy (as I think) to resolve. 
It may be stated thus, in two parts, or as two separate 
questions:— 

(2) Is the power of operating on the minds of 
terrestrial persons confined to living terrestrial people ? 

(3) Is the power of operating on or interfering with 
the rest of the physical universe confined to living 
material bodies ? 

I should conjecture that an affirmative answer to 
Question 1 would render likely an affirmative answer 
to Questions 2 and 3 ; but that a negative answer to 

mm 

wKSm.'- 

Hr 

ll® 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY ri7 

Question i would leave 2 and 3 entirely open; because 
so far as we at present know, terrestrial people, and' " 

people with material bodies, may be the only people who 

exist. 

^ If possibility, or, as many would hold 
probability or almost certainty, that renders the strict 
scientific statement of Questions 2 and 3 so difficult. 

Yet they are questions which must be faced, and they 

ought to be susceptible, in time, of receiving definite 
answers. 

That there are living terrestrial people we know • 
we also know that there is an immense variety of other 
terrestrial life ; though, if we were not so familiar with 
the fact, the luxuriant prevalence and variety of life 
would be surprising. The existence of a bat, for instance, 
or a lobster, would be quite incredible. Whether there 
is life on other planets we do not know, and whether 
there is conscious existence between the planets we do 
not know; but I see no a priori reason for making 
scientific assertions on the subject one way or the other. 

It is only at present a matter of probability. Just 
because we know that the earth is peopled with an 
immense variety of living beings, I myself should rather 
expect to find other regions many-peopled, and with a 
sti 1 more extraordinary variety. So also since mental 
action is conspicuous on the earth I should expect to find 
ip existent elsewhere. If life is necessarily associated 
with a material carcase, then no doubt the surface of one 
of the many planetary masses must be the scene of its 
activity; but if any kind of mental action is independent 
of material or physical environment, then it may con¬ 
ceivably be that the psychical population is not limited 
to the surface of material aggregates or globes of matter, 
but may luxuriate either in the interstellar spaces or 

g ap 

118 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, hi 

in some undimensional form of existence of which we 
have no conception. 

Were it not for the fact of telepathy the entire 
question would be an idle one,—a speculation based on 
nothing and apparently incapable of examination, still 
less of verification or disproof. But granted the fact of 
telepathy the question ceases to be an idle one, because 
it is just possible that these other intelligences, if they 
in any sense exist, may be able to communicate with us 
by the same sort of process as that by which we are now 
learning to be able to communicate with each other. 
Whether it be true or not, it has been constantly and 
vehemently asserted as a fact that such communications, 
mainly. from deceased relatives, but often also from 
strangers, are occasionally received by living persons. 

The utterances of Phinuit, the handwriting of Miss 
A., Mr. Stainton Moses, and others, abound with 
communications purporting to come from minds not now 
associated with terrestrial matter. 

Very well then; is a crucial or test experiment 
possible, to settle whether this claim is well founded 
or not? 

Mere sentimental messages, conveying personal 
traits of the deceased, though frequently convincing to 
surviving friends, cannot be allowed much scientific 
weight. Something more definite or generally intelli¬ 
gible must be sought. 

.Of such facts the handwriting of the deceased person, 
if reproduced accurately by an automatist who has never 
seen that handwriting, seems an exceptionally good test 
if it can be obtained. But the negative proof of 
ignorance on the part of the writer is difficult. 

At first sight facts known to the deceased but not 
known to the automatist, if reported in a correct and 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 

detailed manner so as to surpass mere coincidence, would 
seem a satisfactory test. But here telepathy, which 
has stood us in good stead so far, begins to operate the 
other way; for if the facts are known to nobody on 
earth they cannot perhaps be verified; and if they are 
known to somebody still alive—however distant he may 
be—it is necessary to assume it possible that they were 
unconsciously “telepathed” from his mind. 

But a certain class of facts may be verified without 
the assistance or knowledge of any living person,—as 
when a miser having died with the sole clue to a deposit 
of “valuables,” an automatist’s hand, over the miser’s 
signature, subsequently describes the place; or when a 
sealed document, carefully deposited, is posthumously 
deciphered. The test in either of these cases is a better 
one. But still, living telepathy of a deferred kind is not 
excluded (though to my thinking it is rendered extremely 
improbable), for, as Mr. Podmore has often urged, the 
person writing the document or burying the treasure 
may have been ipso facto an unconscious agent on the 
minds of contemporaries. 

Case of Apparently Posthumous Activity 

One of the most remarkable instances of this kind, 
and one which fortunately received the attention of the 
philosopher Kant, is one in which Swedenborg acted as 
the Medium, and is thus described by Kant in a letter 
published as an Appendix to his cautious little book on 
clairvoyance which has been translated into English 
under the title, Dreams of a Spirit Seer. 

Madame Herteville (Marteville), the widow of the Dutch Am¬ 
bassador in Stockholm, some time after the death of her husband, 
was called upon by Croon, a goldsmith, to pay for a silver service 

120 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, iii 

which her husband had purchased from him. The widow was 
convinced that her late husband had been much too precise and 
orderly not to have paid this debt, yet she was unable to find this 
receipt. In her sorrow, and because the amount was considerable, she 
requested Mr. Swedenborg to call at her house. After apologising to 
him for troubling him, she said that if, as all people say, he possessed 
the extraordinary gift of conversing with the souls of the departed, he 
would perhaps have the kindness to ask her husband how it was about 
the silver service. Swedenborg did not at all object to comply with 
her request. Three days afterward the said lady had company at her 
house for coffee. Swedenborg called, and in his cool way informed her 
that he had conversed with her husband. The debt had been paid 
several months before his decease, and the receipt was in a bureau in 
the room upstairs. The lady replied that the bureau had been quite 
cleared out, and that the receipt was not found among all the papers. 
Swedenborg said that her husband had described to him, how after 
pulling out the left-hand drawer a board would appear, which required 
to be drawn out, when a secret compartment would be disclosed, 
containing his private Dutch correspondence, as well as the receipt. 
Upon hearing this description the whole company arose and accom¬ 
panied the lady into the room upstairs. The bureau was opened; 
they did as they were directed; the compartment was found, of which 
no one had ever known before; and to the great astonishment of all, 
the papers were discovered there, in accordance with his description. 

It is difficult to attribute this apparently posthumous 
activity to deferred telepathy from the living burgo¬ 
master— i.e. deferred from the time when he was 
engaged in storing the papers—perhaps still more in this 
case because they were not stored with any view of 
subsequently disclosing their hiding place. Postpone¬ 
ment of the apparently posthumous action for more than 
a century, so that all contemporaries are necessarily 
dead, strains this sort of telepathic explanation ‘still 
more—in fact to breaking point; but such an event is 
hardly within the reach of purposed experiment. The 
storage of objects or messages is; and responsible 
people ought to write and deposit specific documents, for 
the purpose of posthumously communicating them to 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 

121 

some one if they can; taking all reasonable precautions 
against fraud and collusion, and also,—which is perhaps 
a considerable demand,—taking care that they do not 
forget the contents themselves. 

That such forgetfulness is extremely probable has 
always strongly presented itself to my mind, and has been 
of force sufficient to prevent my depositing any of these 
documents with my friends. I am sure that I should 
forget their contents—forget even that I had written 
anything—and if reminded should be hopelessly confused 
as to which sentence I had placed in which envelope. 

That the test may fail, owing either to this or to 
some other reason, is manifested by the following record 
—which has already been more than sufficiently published 
and has become well known. As a negative experiment, 
however, it is my business not to slur it over in any way, 
so I reproduce the judicial statement in the Journal of 
"■ the Society. 

Opening of an Envelope containing a Posthumous Note 
left by Mr. Myers 

On December 13th, 1904, Sir Oliver Lodge invited the Members 
of the Council and a few other Members of the Society to the 
Society’s Rooms at 20 Hanover Square to witness the opening of 
a sealed envelope which had been sent to him by Mr. Myers in 
January 1891 (nearly fourteen years ago), in the hope that after his 
death its contents might be given by communication through some 
medium. 

It had been decided to open it because various statements made 
in Mrs. Verrall’s automatic script during the last three years had led 
her to infer that it contained a certain phrase. The apparent references 
to this posthumous note had begun vaguely, and gradually developed, 
with some repetition, into what seemed to be a clear and definite 
statement of what was contained in Sir Oliver Lodge’s envelope. The 
references to the envelope purported to come from Mr. Myers, and 
were mixed up with writing, some of which appeared to be veridical, 

122 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, hi 

relating to other topics, especially with a statement—written before the 
publication of Human Personality —that a certain passage would be 
found in that book when published. This having been verified, it was 
hoped that the account given by the script of the contents of the 
envelope might turn out equally correct. 

The meeting was summoned by a circular, of which the annexed is 
a copy:— 

Mariemont , Edgbaston^ December 1904 
It is probably known to you that some years ago F. W. H. Myers 
deposited with me an envelope containing some sort of writing or 
message, to be posthumously deciphered if possible. 

It is also known to you that Mrs. Verrall developed the faculty of 
automatic writing soon after Myers’s death. It now appears that she 
believes herself to have received messages or indications as to the 
contents of this envelope. This impression of hers may, of course, be 
mistaken, but the advantage of it is that it is definite, and she is able to 
put into writing what she thinks the contents of the envelope will be 
found to be. 

That being so, I have taken advice, and find a general consensus 
of opinion that it is time now to open the envelope and verify or 
disprove the agreement ; or, if there is partial agreement, to ascertain 
its amount. 

The envelope has been for some time deposited in a bank, but I 
propose to have it handed back to me some time this week, and to 
bring it up to London on Tuesday, December 13th, and then, at 
4 p-ni., in the rooms of the Society for Psychical Research, 20 Hanover 
Square, after making a statement regarding it and reading Mrs. VerralFs 
statement of what she believes to be in it, to open it in the presence 
of a sufficient number of witnesses. I do not propose to do it at a 
Council meeting, because I think it desirable that one or two outsiders 
should be present, inasmuch as I wish the event to be known and 
“ counted,” whether it turn out successful or the reverse. The only 
way to avoid chance coincidence is to determine beforehand whether 
any given event shall “ count ” or not ; and, subject to anything that 
may happen between now and then, I propose that this shall count, 
and that the envelope shall then be opened. 

I invite you, therefore, if you think fit, to come to the rooms of the 
Society on Tuesday, December 13th, at 4 p.m. 

It must be understood that the proceedings are confidential, and 
that the question of subsequent publication must be reserved for the 
Council or the Society. Oliver Lodge 

m, 

mmtm 

■llli 

\ 

. j.*,feU9A.H ”-*«*• »a ‘ 

Char viji] 

IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 

Mrs. Verrall first reported to the meeting the conclusions she had 
been led to form concerning the envelope from her own script, and 
read the apparently relevant passages. On the envelope being opened, 
however, it was found that there was no resemblance between its 
actual contents and what was alleged by the script to be contained 
in it. 

It has, then, to be reported that this one experiment 
completely failed, and it cannot be denied that the 
failure is disappointing. But after all, even if this 
communication of the contents of a sealed envelope had 
been successfully achieved, the proof to us of mental 
action on the part of the deceased “agent ” would still be 
incomplete, for it may be that telepathy is not the right 
kind of explanation of these things at all; it may be that 
they are done—if ever they are done—by clairvoyance ; 
that the document, though still sealed or enclosed in 
metal, is read in some unknown or fourth-dimensional 
manner by the subliminal self. 

The existence of such a power as this, however, can 
be separately tested ; because, if straightforward clairvoy¬ 
ance is possible, things unknown to any person living or 
dead may be read or inspected,—such as a piece of print 
torn at random out of an unread newspaper and sealed 
up, or a handful of alphabet letters or figures grasped 
from a box (p. 221). And in trying this experiment 
a negative conclusion must not be jumped at too readily. 
A positive answer might be definite enough ; a negative 
answer can only be a probability. Moreover, it might 
be unwise to tell an automatist who is endeavouring to 
decipher the unknown figures that in that collocation 

they have never been inspected by man,—the know¬ 
ledge should act as a gratuitously hostile or debilitating 

suggestion. 

But even when such things are read, allowance must 
be made for some extraordinary possibility of hyperaes- 

124 

TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, iii 

thesia—whether it be that of feeling on the part of the 
person who sealed them up, or of a kind of X-ray vision 
on the part of the clairvoyant, or some other even more 
forced hypothesis. M rs. Sidgwick’s paper on the evidence 
for real clairvoyance is in the Proceedings, S.P.R. vol. vii., 
but I will not quote any of the instances there given. 
The term clairvoyance ought strictly to be reserved for 
direct apprehension of hidden things without aid from 
any human knowledge, but in common practice the term 
is often applied also to the more numerous cases when 
some kind of telepathy is possible, provided the circum¬ 
stances are such as to make a sensitive kind of direct 
perception not altogether improbable. 

If telepathy ever occurs from a supra-mundane and 
immaterial region, that is to say from a discamate mind 
not possessed of a brain, it may be difficult or impossible 
to distinguish it from clairvoyance. And indeed 
probably no discrimination would be necessary: that 
may be what “ second-sight ” or clairvoyance really is. 
But from the scientific point of view there is clearly all 
the difference in the world between recognised telepathy, 
such as has been proved to occur between one living 
person and another, and that other more hypothetical 
kind which has been suspected as occurring between 
discarnate intelligences, if there are any, and living 
people. If the process of ordinary experimental 
telepathy were ever ascertained to be a direct action 
of brain on brain, then acceptance of the other more 
hypothetical kind of telepathy would be almost forbidden 
—at any rate would be rendered extremely difficult. If, 
however the process of transmission should turn out to 
be a purely psychical one,—that is a psychological action 
directly between mind and mind, so that the brains at 

Iwl 

Chap, viii] IMMATERIAL TELEPATHY 125 

each end are only the instruments of record s and 
verification,—then the possibility of a transfer of thought 
between minds unprovided with these appliances—or 
between one such mind and an embodied mind—is not 
at all inconceivable. It still has to be established, of 
course, and the difficulty of proof is still very great; but 
the effort towards such a proof is a legitimate one. It 
is that effort which for some years now the Society has 
been patiently making, and some of the results so far 
attained will be dealt with in Section IV. 

The distinction here drawn, between a comparatively 
customary, and what may strike us as a more recondite 
and unexpected, method of communication, may be 
illustrated by reference to the facts of telegraphy :_ 

In ordinary telegraphy the message manifestly goes 
somehow from signalling key to receiving galvanometer ; 
and, if attention is concentrated upon those obvious 
instruments alone, it might be thought that there was 
some direct mechanical connexion between them. But 

the real arrangement is more elaborate than that_a 

battery or dynamo in the cellar has to be taken into 
account,—and the actual process of transmission involves 
some fairly recently discovered properties of the ether of 
space. The message is conveyed etherially, not by 
matter at all, it can cross vacuum with perfect ease, 
though it is sent and received and interpreted by matter. 

I am speaking of ordinary telegraphy ; there is no need 
to distinguish it from “wireless,” in this particular. 

I am not denying of course that telegraphic trans¬ 
mission is a physical process. All I imply by the parable 
is that the first impression of a spectator or critic, that 
telepathy is a physiological process effected direct 
between brain and brain, may not be the correct one. 
For telegraphy had been carried on commercially for 

126 TELEPATHY OR CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, iii 

years, before it was properly understood ; and even now 
there must remain many things to be discovered about 
it. So it is hardly likely that in telepathy we have a 
process which is easily and quickly intelligible; nor is it 
in the least certain that the mode of transmission can be 
stated in terms of matter. 

Perhaps it cannot be stated even in terms of Ether. 
The whole idea or imagery of space-relations in respect 
of mind may be misleading. 

CHAPTER IX 

EXAMPLES OF APPARENT CLAIRVOYANCE 

T O show that some apparent clairvoyance, whether 
it be due to hypersesthesia or telepathy or some¬ 
thing else, is really possible, I take an instructive 
little experiment recorded by Mrs. Verrall in Proceedings , 
vol. xl page 192—which'she tried in November 1890 
with her daughter, who was then a child aged 7J years. 
Other instances will be mentioned later on—see for 
instance p. 217. 

Recognition of Objects by Telepathy or Hyperesthesia 
Percipient, H. Aged 7! Years 

Mrs. Verrall reports as follows :— 

In November, 1890, I tried the following experiment with H. I 
drew a diagram, which I placed on H.’s forehead, while her eyes were 
shut, and asked her to describe it. To make the performance more 
like a game, I went on to ask what colour it was, and what she could 
see through it. We tried four experiments, three on the afternoon of 
November 16th, and one at 6.15 on November 30th, with the following 
results:— 

Object drawn .—A triangle. 

Result .—H. drew a triangle with her finger in the air. Right. 

Object drawn .—A triangle with apex cut off. 

Result —H. described and drew an irregular figure, which did not 
seem to satisfy her, then said it was like an oval dish CD* 
Wrong. 

Object drawn. —A square. 

127 

128 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, iii 

Result, H. said: ‘ It s like a window with no cross bars,” and 
drew a four-sided rectangular figure in the air. Right. 

Object drawn ,—.A square divided into 4 squares by a vertical and a 
horizontal line. 

Result. H. said: “It’s a diamond.” “What else?” said I, mean¬ 
ing what colour, etc. “ It’s got a line across it, and another 
across that. [Right.] The colour is pale blue.” 

* S ave ,^ er t ^ le diagram, she turned it anglewise dnd said, 
Oh yes, that’s right, and the colour was not far wrong.” As the 
diagram was drawn in ink on white paper, I did not understand, and 
asked what she meant. She said, “Why it’s all blue, bluish white 
msxde, and even the ink is blue.” The diagram had been dried with 
blotting paper and was not a very deep black, but I could see nothing- 
blue. Ten minutes afterwards she picked up the paper again and 
commented on the fact that it was blue, the lines dark bright blue, and 
t e inside pale blue. I burnt the diagram and discontinued the same 
after observing this persistence of a self-suggested hallucination 

We had previously tried experiments which seemed to show that 
the child could feel the diagram. She could almost always tell whether 
the right or wrong side of a playing card were placed on her forehead 
I was quite unable to distinguish the two sides. I am more inclined to 
attribute her successes (3 out of 4) to hyperesthesia than to telepathy. 

I will now quote a case which is rather a striking 
example of the fact that the intelligence operative 
through unconscious or subliminal processes is superior 
to that of the normal intelligence of the persons con¬ 
cerned; so that just as people occasionally seem able to 
become cognisant of facts or events by means ordinarily 
closed to them,—a phenomenon which appears akin to 
the water-dowsing faculty and to the “ homing ” instincts 
of animals,—so sometimes they can write poetry or solve 
problems beyond their normal capacity. 

Here for instance is the case of the solution of a 
mathematical problem by automatic writing—with the 
pencil not held in the hand, but attached to the heart- 
shaped piece of board called a “ planchette ” It is 
quoted from the record which I communicated at the 

EXAMPLES 

Chap, ix] 

time to the Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 
vol. xl. 

A Case of Automatic Intelligence 

One feature of interest is that both the witnesses are 
exceptionally competent The account was written by 
an old pupil of my own at Bedford College in the 
seventies—one of the ablest students there,—Miss C. M. 
Pole, daughter of the late Dr. Pole, F.R.S., the well- 
known Engineer, Musician, and writer on card-games. 
Miss Pole is now Mrs. Garrett Smith, living at 
Magdeburg, and writes as follows:— 

In the early part of 1885 I was staying at-in the house of Mrs. 

Q., and I and her daughter, Miss Q., B.A.Lond., used to amuse ourselves 
in writing with a Planchette. We had several Planchettes (I think four), 
but we could only get response from one of them, which belonged to 
Miss Q. In the house with us were some eight or nine others, . . . 
but for no other pair would the Planchette act. The same one had 
formerly given good results with Miss Q. and another friend, but I have 
never written with a Planchette before or since. We got all sorts of 
nonsense out of it, sometimes long doggerel rhymes with several verses. 
Sometimes we asked for prophecies, but I do not remember ever getting 
•one which came true, and my impression is that generally when we 
asked for a prophecy the thing went off in a straight line—running off 
the table if we did not take our hands off. It often did this, refusing 
to write at all, and towards the end of my stay there I believe it was 
always so ; we could get no answer from it. I believe we often asked 
Planchette who the guiding spirit was; but I only once remember 
getting a definite connected answer. Then it wrote that his name was 
“ Jim,” and that he had been a Senior Wrangler. After other questions 
we asked it to write the equation to its own curve [in other words, 
to express mathematically the outline of the heart-shaped board]. 
Planchette wrote something like this quite distinctly— 

(The curl backwards always denoted that the answer was finished.) 
9 

mm 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, ih 

130 

We repeated the question several times, but each time‘the answer was 

the same, sometimes more, sometimes less distinct. We mterprete 1 ^ j 

as r= a s ?- , ? ... I knew just enough to be able to draw the curve 

represented by the equation. In my first try I made a mistake and 
believed the curve to be quite a different one, but afterwards I drew 
[something like] the following [rough sketch]—a double never-ending 

spiral: 

We checked our result by taking the equation to the Mathematical 
Master at the Boys’ College, who drew the same [sort of] curve for us, 
but we did not tell him where we got the equation from. 

I cannot say whether the Planchette we used was really exactly the 
shape of the outside curve ; I should rather fancy that with the heart 
shape the resemblance ended. I am quite sure that I had never seen 
the curve before, and therefore the production of the equation could 
not have been an act of unconscious memory on my part. Also I most 
certainly did not know enough mathematics to know how to form an 
equation which would represent such a curve, or to know even of what 
type the equation must be. But I had come across such equations 
and drawn the curves represented by them;—for instance, afterwards 
I found in my notebook the spiral r 6 = \va, and the cardioid r— 
a (j + cos 0 ). We had used no text-book, and in the full notes of the 
lectures I had attended, these were the two curves I found most 
si milar to Planchette’s. If my brain produced the equation written by 
Planchette, it must have been that I unconsciously formed an equation 
like some I had seen before, which by a curious coincidence chanced 
to represent a heart-shaped curve. 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

131 

I know that *we were both quite unconscious of any influence we 
may have eracfed on the Planchette. “ Ckii „ q arrett Smiih 

Magdeburg, November 1903 

I (O. L.) made inquiries about Miss Q., and found 
that she was well known to friends of mine, and was a 
serious and responsible and trustworthy person, so I 
wrote some further questions to her, and received the 

following reply:— 

March 23rd, 1904 

... As far as Miss Pole and I were concerned, it was quite boni- 
fide, and was not open to any suspicion of practical joking or setting 
traps for each other. It is true that when we wrote planchette, it was 
never with any serious motive, such as with the object of testing the 
unconscious mind, or for any scientific purpose, but merely for the fun 
of the thing. We used to ask it to prophesy future events, and to 
make up poetry, and all purely for amusement, after the manner of 
schoolgirls. Nevertheless, all that was written was quite in good faith. 

The equation written did not come within the mathematical knowledge 
I then possessed, which was limited to the mathematics necessary for the 
London B.A, Pass Degree. I knew of course that every curve could 
be represented by an equation, and I was familiar with polar co-ordinates 
in which the equation was written. But the only equations I could then 
identify were those of the conic sections. Miss Pole had read some 
elementary Differential, and knew more than I did, but my impression 
is that her knowledge was not sufficient to enable her to trace curves. 

Certainly neither of us perceived from the appearance of the 
equation that the reply was the correct one, but that I think would 
have been too much to expect, even if our knowledge had been much 
higher than it was. 

I did not know sufficient at that time to attempt to plot the curve. 

I believe Miss Pole did attempt it, but if so, her attempts were un¬ 
successful We were not satisfied that the equation did represent a 
curve like the outline of the planchette till we had asked our mathe¬ 
matical master to trace it for us. (This was done without telling him 
any of the facts of the case.) 

I do not remember that we ever closely compared the curve he 
drew in tracing the equation with the actual planchette in question. 
We did not take the matter very seriously, and were quite content 
when we saw that the solution was at all events approximately true. 

I}3 CLAIRVOYANCE t s *«- 

On - «* *• 

< The t-***"*- 

" '“riis'l (O. L.) add that thee^f™ would 

naturally occur to any one m he gad. 1 

but it is quite likdy. „ doub tedly aware of this 

afterward, be able to 

^qu^ptt ^ 

one and certainly woul , | t tb e sketch given 

nor would it ^ve occurred to me. b« ^ ^ 

does not profe. » '“to“hf equation written by the 
^"tlf represen ts^her recollection of its 

here fs* his drawing on a*reduce<f scale. 

. smp 

It is to be remembered that the equation r-a-j- 

saw -^SigSSK 

'ontrolling its movements being representea 
a Cambridge Wrangler. 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

133 

With regard to his drawing Mr. Sharpe observes 
that the curve does not consist of two sets of spirals, as 
at first depicted roughly, but of two sets of loops, all 
passing through the cusp and touching one another 
there, and all contained within the outer heart-shaped 
boundary.. The loops meet only at the cusp, and there 
is an infinite number of them. They decrease in area 
without limit, ultimately sinking into the point of the cusp. 

The equation very well represents the ordinary form 
of a planchette. But if it had accidentally been reversed 

into r — the curve would have been entirely 

different and entirely unlike any planchette outline. 

Mr. Sharpe thinks it very unlikely that either of the 
automatists had ever seen an accurate graph of the 
equation given in their writing. It is of course much 
more difficult to invent an equation to fit a given curve 
(which was the feat performed by the writing in this case) 
than, when the equation is given, to draw the curve 
represented by it. 

Power of Unseen Reading 

In illustration of supernormal power of a still more 
excessive kind I quote from the automatic writings of 
Mr. Stainton Moses—well known as a master for m an y 
years in University College School, London—who for a 
great part of this period used to write automatically in 
the early morning in solitude. A great number of these 
writings have been published and are well known to all 
students of the subject; but the following incident is of 
a surprising character and is an example, though an 
exceptionally strong one, of the power of reading letters, 
etc., possessed in some degree by one or two of the 
“ controls ” of Mrs. Piper and of many another medium 
in history. 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

IJ 4 

The following script was obtained by Mr. Stainton Moses while he 
was sitting In Dr. Speer’s library and discoursing with various supposed 
communicators through his wiiting hand:— 

See Proceedings, S.P.JR.., vol. xi. p. 106. 

S. M. Can you read ? 

“ No, friend, 1 cannot, but Zachary Gray can, and Rector. 

I am not able to materialise myself, or to command the elements.” 
S. M. Are either of those spirits here? 

“ I will bring one by and by. I will send . . . Rector is here.” 
S. M. i am told you can read. Is that so ? Can you read a book ? 

(Handwriting changed.) “ Yes, friend, with difficulty.” 

S. M. Will you write for me the last line of the first book of the JEneid ? 

“Wait- Omnibus errantem terns etftuciibus cestas” [This 

was right.] 

S. M. Quite so. But I might have known it. Can you go to the book¬ 
case, take the last book but one on the second shelf, and read 
me the last paragraph of the ninety-fourth page ? I have not 
seen it, and do not even know its name. 

[With a little delay the following writing came.] 

“ I will curtly prove by a short historical narrative, that Popery 
is a novelty, and has gradually arisen or grown up since the 
primitive and pure time of Christianity, not only since the 
apostolic age, but even since the lamentable union of kirk and 
state by Constantine.” 

(The book on examination proved to be a queer one called 
u Roger's Antipoj)Qfiriestian, an attempt to liberate and purify 
Christianity from Popery, Politikirkality, and Priestrule.” 
The extract given above was accurate, but the word 
u narrative ” substituted for <£ account”) 

S. M, How came I to pitch upon so appropriate a sentence ? 

“I know not, my friend. It was done by coincidence. The 
word was changed in error. I knew it when it was done, but 
would not change.” 

S. M. How do you read ? You wrote more slowly, and by fits and starts. 

“ I wrote what I remembered and then went for more. It is a 
special effort to read, and useful only as a test. Your friend 
was right last night ; we can read, but only when conditions 
are very good. We will read once again, and write, and then 
impress you of the book:— 4 Pope is the last great writer of 
that school of poetry, the poetry of the intellect, or of the 
intellect mingled with the fancy.’ That is truly written. Go 

EXAMPLES 

m 

Chap, ix] 

and take the eleventh book on the same shelf. [I took a book 
called Poetry , Romance , and Rhetoric.'] It will open at the 
page for you. Take it and read, and recognise our power, and 
the permission which the great and good God gives us, to show 
you of our power over matter. To Him be glory. Amen.” 

(The book opened at page 145, and there was the quotation 
perfectly true. I had not seen the book before: certainly 
had no idea of its contents. S. M.) [These books were in 
Dr. Speer’s library :—F. W. H. M.] 

To this Mr. Myers pertinently appends the note :— 

It is plain that a power such as this, of acquiring and 
reproducing fresh knowledge, interposes much difficulty 
in the way of identifying any alleged spirit by means of 
his knowledge of the facts of his earth life. 

Dream Lucidity 

To illustrate the fact that extra or supernormal lucidity 
is possible in dreams, a multitude of instances might be 
quoted from the publications of the Society for Psychical 
Research. Almost at random I quote two,—the first a 
short one of which the contemporary record is reported 
on by a critical and sceptical member of the Society, 
Mr. Thos. Barkworth, in the Journal of the Society for 
Dec. 1895. 

G. 249. Dream. 

The following is a case which was noted at the time, before it was 
known to be veridical. 

It was received by Mr. Barkworth, who writes concerning it: 

“ West Hatch, Chigwell, Essex, August 24 tk , [1895] 

“ It has been often made a subject of reproach by persons who dis¬ 
trust the S.P.R. that the evidence we obtain is seldom, if ever, supported 
by written records demonstrably made before the dream or the hallu¬ 
cination had been verified by subsequently ascertained facts. Indeed, 
a Mr. Taylor Innes, writing in the Nineteenth Century some years ago, 
went so far, if I remember rightly, as to assert that no such case 
could be produced up to the time he wrote. It must certainly be 

m 

136 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

admitted that in provoklngly numerous instances it is found that the 
alleged letter or diary has been destroyed. 

“The following experience of the Rev. E. K. Elliott, Rector of 
Worthing, who was formerly in the navy, and who made the entry in 
his diary as quoted when he was cruising in the Atlantic out of reach 
of post or telegraph, will therefore be found of interest. The diary is 
still in his possession. 

T. B. 

Extract from Mary written out in Atlantic , January iqth, 1847 
f “ learnt *ast night I received a letter from my uncle, H. E,, dated 
January 3rd, in which news of my dear brother’s death was given. It 
greatly struck me. 

My brother had been ill in Switzerland, but the last news I received 
on leaving England was that he was better. 

“The * January 3rd’ was very black, as if intended to catch my eye. 

On my return to England I found, as I quite expected, a letter 
awaiting me saying my brother had died on the above date. 

Worthing “ E. K. Elliott ” 

The second case I quote is a much longer and more 
elaborate one, and we owe its receipt to Dr. Hodgson 
while in America. 

There are many partially similar records of people 
becoming aware of an accident in which some near 
relative was injured or killed : and it is noteworthy that 
the emotion caused by injury seems as likely to convey 
such an impression as anything pertaining to death 
itself; but the point of the following narrative is that 
a complete stranger became impressed with facts which 
were happening at a distance, without the slightest 
personal interest in any one concerned—so that it seems 
to make in favour of a general clairvoyant faculty 
rather than for any spiritistic explanation. The prefix 
r. 224 is merely a classificatory reference number. 

■ P. 224. Dream. 

The following case has some resemblance to Mrs. Storie’s experi¬ 
ence, of which an account was published in Phantasms of the Living 
vol. 1. p. 37 o, except that the person whose fate was represented in the 

EXAMPLES 

*37 

4 Chap. ix] 

dream was in the case here printed entirely unknown to the dreamer. 
The account is written by Mr. H. W. Wack, Attorney, and comes to 
us through the American Branch of the Society. 

u Court House, St. Paul, Minn., February ioih f 1892 

“ I believe I have had a remarkable experience. About midnight 
on the 29th day of December, headsore and fatigued, I left my study 
where I had been poring over uninspiring law text, and, climbing to my 
chamber door, fell into bed for the night. 

« Nothing unusual had transpired in my affairs that day, and yet, 
when I gave myself to rest, my brain buzzed on with a myriad fancies. 

I lay an hour, awake, and blinking like an over-fed owl. The weird * 
intonation of an old kitchen clock fell upon my ears but faintly, as it 
donged the hour of two. The sound of the clock chime had hardly died 
when I became conscious [of] my position in a passenger coach on the 
St. Paul, Minneapolis and Omaha railroad. I was journeying to 
Duluth, Minnesota, from St. Paul, in which latter place I had gone to 
sleep. I was aware that I had been on the train about four hours and 
that I was somewhere near the town of Shell Lake, Wis., distant from 
St. Paul about eighty miles. I had often been over the road, and as I 
peered through the coach window, I recognised, in the moonlit scene, 
features of country and habitation I had seen before. We were plunging 
on, almost heedlessly as it seemed, when I fancied I heard and was 
startled from my reverie by a piercing shriek, which was protracted 
into a piteous moaning and gasping, as if some human creature were 
suffering some hideous torture. 

“Then I felt the train grind heavily to an awkward stop. There 
was a sudden commotion fore and aft. Train men with lanterns 
hurried through my car and joined employes near the engine. I cou 
see the lights flash here and there, beside and beneath the cars; brake- 
men moved along the wheels in groups, the pipe voice of the con¬ 
ductor and the awe-stricken cry of the black porter infused a livening 
sense to a scene which 1 did not readily understand. Instinctively I 
concluded that an accident had happened, or perhaps that a break to 
the train had occasioned this sudden uprising of train men. A minute 
later I was out upon the road bed. The brusque and busy search and 
the disturbed manner of the attendants did not propitiate elaborate 
inquiry from a curious passenger, so I was appeased to be told, in very 
ugly snappish English, that if I had eyes I might see for myself that 
‘someone got killed, I reckon.’ Everybody moved and acted-in a 
spirit of stealth, and each, it appeared, expected a horrible find. 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

138 

The trucks were being examined from the rear of the train forward. 
Blood splotches were discovered on nearly all the bearings under e 
entire train. When the gang reached one of the forward cars, all lights 
were cast upon a truck which was literally scrambled with what 
appeared to be brains—human brains, evidently, for among t e c o s 
were small tufts of human hair. This truck, particularly must have 
ground over the bulk of a human body. Every fixture between e 
wheels was smeared with the crimson ooze of some crushed victim. 
But where was the body, or at least its members? The trucks were 
covered only with a pulp of mangled remnants. The search for. wha 
appeared of the killed was extended 500 yards back of the tram and ait 
about the right-of-way with no more satisfactory result than to occasion- 

ally find a blood-stained tie. 

“All hands boarded the train; many declaring that it was an un¬ 
usual mishap on a railroad which left such uncertain trace of its victim. 
Again I felt the train thundering on through the burnt pme wastes ot 
northern Minnesota. As I reclined there in my berth, I reflected upon 
the experience of the night, and often befuddled my sleepy head in an 
effort to understand how a train, pushing along at the rate of thirty 
miles an hour, could so grind and triturate a vital bulk, staining on y 
trucks behind the engine, unless the killed at the.fatal time were upon 
the truck or huddled closely by it. I concluded, therefore, that the 
being destroyed under the train had been concealed near the be¬ 
spattered fixtures of the car. I had read of death to tramps stealing 
rides by hiding themselves under or between cars, and finally I dis¬ 
missed meditation—assured that another unfortunate itinerant had 
been crushed out of existence. Horrible! I shuddered and awoke— 
relieved to comprehend it all a dream . 

“Now the fact that the foregoing is an accurate statement of a 
dream experienced by me is not a matter for marvel. Taken alone, 
there is nothing remarkable in the time at which this vision blackened 
my sleep. The spell was upon me between two and three o clock in 
the morning—of that I am certain. I am positive of the time, because, 
when I awoke, I heard the clock distinctly, as it struck three. 

“ On the morrow, I,—who usually forget an ordinary dream long 
before breakfast*—recounted to the family the details of the night’s, 
distraction. From my hearers there followed only the ordinary com¬ 
ments of how ghastly and how shocking the story was as told and how 
strange the nature of the accident —that no parts of the body had been 
found. The latter circumstance was, to me also, quite an unusual 
feature of railroad casualty. 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

139 

“ The evening following the night of the dream (December 30th), 
at 5 o’clock, I returned to my home, stepped into my study, and, as I 
am in the habit of doing, 1 glanced at a page of the St. Paul Dispatch^ 
a daily evening newspaper. It had been casually folded by a previous 
reader, so that in picking it up flatly, the article which first fixed my 
attention read: 

“ ‘Fate of a tramp. Horrible death experienced by an unknown 
man on the Omaha Road. His remains scattered for miles along the 
track by the merciless .wheels. 

“‘Duluth, December 30.—Every truck on the incoming Omaha 
train from St. Paul this morning was splashed with blood. Train men 
did not know there had been an accident till they arrived here, but 
think some unfortunate man must have been stealing a ride between 
St Paul and this city. Train men on a later train state that a man’s leg 
was found by them at Spooner, and that for two miles this side the 
tracks were scattered with pieces of flesh and bone. There is no 
possible means of identification/ 

“ Here was an evident verification of all that transpired in nfy mind 
between two and three o’clock on the previous night. I reflected, and 
the more I pondered the faster I became convinced that I had been in 
some mysterious form, spirit or element, witness of the tragedy reported 
in the columns of the press—that my vision was perfect as to general 
details, and the impression complete and exact to time, place, and 
circumstance. The next morning I scanned the pages of the Pioneer 
Press of December 31st, and read the following paragraph :— 

“‘Unknown man killed, Shell Lake, Wis. Special telegram, 
December 30th.—Fragments of the body of an unknown man were 
picked up on the railroad track to-day. Portions of the same body 
were also found on over 100 miles of the railroad. He is supposed to 
have been killed by the night train, but just where is not known/ 

“ With this came the conviction to me that, living and asleep, 100 
miles from the place of the killing, I had been subjected to the 
phantom-sight of an actual occurrence on the Omaha railroad, as vivid 
and in truth as I have stated it above. 

“I have not written this account because Mark Twain and other 
authors have published in current magazines their experiences in what 
is termed Mental Telepathy or Mental Telegraphy. On the contrary, 
having read a number of those articles, I have hesitated to utter, as 
authentic, what I now believe to be a material and striking evidence of 
the extent, the caprice, and the possibilities of this occult phenomenon. 

“Harry W. Wack” 

140 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

In reply to Dr. Hodgson’s inquiries, Mr. Wack wrote:— 

“St. Paul, February 20 th, 1892 

“ My Dear Sir, —Replying to your valued favour of the 15th inst., 
I will say that you are right in understanding that nay account of the 
dream submitted to your Society is a true narrative. 

“ I reaffirm every word of it, and give you my solemn assurance that, 
as I have stated, I informed the family and friends of the dream and its 
details, before I had the first suspicion that the public press ever had 
contained or ever would contain a report of such an actual occurrence. 

" If desirable I will make affidavit as to the truth of the substance 
of the narrative in your hands. 

“I enclose a few corroborative letters, the signatures to which I 
procured yesterday, February 19th. If these serve you, well and good. 

“Harry W. Wack” 

The following were the corroborative letters enclosed:— 

( I ) “St. Paul, February 20 th, 1892 

“ Gentlemen, —Referring to an account of a dream submitted to 
you by Mr. Harry Wack of this city which I have read, I beg leave to 
add the following facts corroborative of the narrative. 

“After careful consideration of the article, I find that the story 
of the dream on December 29th~3oth is in substance identical with 
that which was related by Mr. Wack at breakfast on the morning of 
December 30th, 1891, On that occasion Mr. Wack stated that he had 
been agitated the previous night by a dream of unusual features, and 
then, at the request of those present, he recited what'now appears in 
his article, which I have just perused for the first time. On the evening 
of December 30th, 1891, when Mr. Wack discovered the newspaper 
item, he again mentioned the dream and called my attention to the 
newspaper item, and several of the family discussed the matter. On 
the morning of December 31st, another newspaper clipping bearing on 
the same matter was debated by the family. 

“Aside from the unusual features and hideousness of the dream, 
there was nothing to startle us, until the newspaper accounts developed 
the affair in a mysterious sense. The first version of the dream was 
given in the morning of December 30th. The first newspaper dispatch 
appeared and was discovered in the evening of the same day. This I 
know of my own knowledge, being present on each occasion. 

“Mrs. Margaret B. Macdonald” 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

^ «St. Paul, Minn., February 20th , 1892 

“Gentlemen, -I have read the letter of Mrs. Macdonald, with 
____rttct cinrl rl^vs following, and 

££ Gentlemen, —1 nave reau me . ' , 

whom I visited on December 29th, 30th, 31st, and days following, and 
Sh your permission I will say that I also was present at breakfast 
when Mr. Wack mentioned the dream, and at dinner ( p. •) 

Mr W*ck called our attention to the newspaper tan, *«»he then 
declared was a positive verification of .he d,ea» he 3™™?^ 
night before. I have read the account of the dream, and I believe it 
°o be precisely as I understood it from Mr. Week’s account given on 
the morning of December 30th, 1891- „ R(m R H ,„ ILT01J » 

«g x , Paul, February 20th, 1892 
(3) 

“ Gentlemen,- Having read the foregoing ^e^ of Mrs. MacdonaM 
, vtr-:.... "D race, is TTomiltnn. and being familiar with the tacts ana 

“Gentlemen,— navmgreaubutitrvrr^^--- 

and Miss Rose B. Hamilton, and being familiar with the facts ana 
incidents therein set forth. I would add my endorsement to lhem as 

‘Lm'as he - written of it in the article 

which I understand he has submitted to you, on the morning _ 
December 30th, 1891. He came upon and drew our attention to t e 

—f s:SbS ** 

Mr. H. W. Smith, an Associate Member of the American Branch 
writes to Dr. Hodgson in connection with the case: 

“ Office of Smith & Austrian, Commission Merchants, 

“290 E., 6th Street, Produce Exchange, 

«St. Paul, Minn., April 14 th l % 9 2 

“ My Dear Sir,— It has been impossible for me to accept Mr. 
Wack’s invitation to meet at his house the witnesses he cited in his 

. • , t Lnvp alreadv written you. of my preliminary 

communication to you. I have aireaoy wm y ' * high 

interview with Mr. Wack, and it confirms m my own mma tne mgn 

Sn which I previously held of him through our acquaintanceship 

exteXI over a series of years. There is no reasonable doubt “i my 

2d thft the statement he makes is substantially correct, at least as 

resoects any and all allegations of fact. Of course the application of 

ti„Lfacts to an unknown force is a matter ’ 

“Herbert W. Smith” 

IT 

142 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, iii 

Instances like this are by no means solitary, and 
whatever view we take of them we have to include them 
in the roll of facts demanding explanation—an explana¬ 
tion which may not be readily forthcoming. It may be 
presumed that as far as they go they make against .the 
spiritistic hypothesis in any simple or direct form; and 
that is why in a book like this it is necessary to emphasise 
them. 

Meanwhile all we are sure of is that information is 
obtained by some mediums which is entirely beyond 
their conscious knowledge, and occasionally beyond the 
conscious knowledge of everyone present. But as to 
how this lucidity is attained we are as yet in the dark ; 
though we must ultimately proceed to consider the pos¬ 
sibility that it is by some sort of actual communication 
from other intelligences, akin to the conveyance of 
information in the accustomed and ordinary human way, 
by rumour, by conversation, and by the press. 

Incidents that seem to point to some form of super¬ 
normal communication are exemplified in the experi¬ 
ments of Dr. van Eeden of Bussum, in Holland, 
with Mrs. Thompson' at Hampstead,—a lady who is 
referred to more particularly in Section IV. of this book. 
(See his paper on sittings with Mrs. Thompson in Pro¬ 
ceedings, S.P.R., vol. xvii., especially pp. 86-7 and 
112-115), Dr. van Eeden, having cultivated the power 
of controlling his own dreams, so as to be able to dream 
of performing actions which he had planned while awake, 
arranged with Mrs. Thompson that he would occasion¬ 
ally call “Nelly” (her “control”) in his dreams after 
returning to Holland, and that if she heard him calling 
she should tell Mr. Piddington, who was in charge of 
the sittings, at his next sitting. On three occasions, in 
January and February 1900, some success was obtained 
in these experiments; that is, “Nelly” stated that she 

EXAMPLES 

143 

Chap, ix] 

had heard Dr. van Eeden calling, and had “been to see 
him the dates she gave were approximately, though 
not exactly, the same as those recorded in his diary of 
dreams; but on each occasion she gave details, which 
were afterwards verified, as to his circumstances at the 
time. On a fourth occasion (April 19th, 1900), when 
“ Nelly” stated that she had been to see Dr. van Eeden, 
he had no dream of her at the time, but she gave a 
description of his condition which corresponded with 
what it had been during the early part of the same 
month. 

A case of a somewhat similar kind is the one recorded 
in Dr. Hodgson’s report on Mrs. Piper ( Proceedings , 
vol. viii. p. 120), where Mr. M. N. in America relates 
that Mrs. Piper’s control, “ Dr. Phinuit,” had said that 
he would visit Mr. N.’s dying father in England about 
certain matters connected with his will, and where later 
on it was reported by those attending the dying father 
that he had complained of the presence of an obtrusive 
old man. (This case is quoted below, see page 146.) 

Clairvoyance of the Dying 

. The extra lucidity of the dying is a thing so often 
asserted that it has become almost a commonplace, and 
sometimes, as in the case of children, it would seem to 
eclipse mere imagination—as for instance when a dying 
child welcomes, and appears to be welcomed by, its 
deceased mother. But these visions and auditions, 
which are unmistakably common, are usually of things 
beyond our ordinary cognisance, so that for the most 
part they have to be relegated to the category of the 
unverifiable. Occasionally, however, we have records of 
a kind of clairvoyant faculty whereby terrestrial occur¬ 
rences also are perceived by persons who in health had 
no such power ; and these are worthy of attention,— 

144 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, iii 

especially those which are reciprocal, producing an 
impression at both ends of a terrestrial line, as if the 
telepathic and less material mode of communication 
had in their case already begun. 

The extant descriptions of dying utterances are very 
much like the utterances in the waking stages of Mrs. 
Piper’s trance, to be subsequently mentioned—and these 
do not appear to be random or meaningless sayings, but 
do really correspond to some kind of reality, since in 
them the appearance of strangers is frequently described 
correctly and messages are transmitted which have a 
definite meaning. Moreover, the look of ecstasy on Mrs. 
Piper’s face at a certain stage of the waking process is 
manifestly similar to that seen on the faces of some 
dying people; and both describe the subjective vision 
as of something more beautiful and attractive than those 
of earth. 

Whether the dying really have greater telepathic 
power as agents, which is what is assumed in the 
ordinary telepathic explanation of Phantasms of the 
Living, is doubtful, but that they sometimes have greater 
sensibility as percipients seems likely; and sometimes 
the event which they are describing is likewise appre¬ 
hended by another person at a distance,—thus appearing 
to demonstrate reciprocal telepathic influence. There 
is a small group of cases illustrative of the reciprocal 
clairvoyance of the dying,—I can only quote an illustra¬ 
tive case or two from the few which are well evidenced : 
i.e. which come up to the standard of the Society for 
Psychical Research in this matter — but I omit the 
authentication in quoting them, and I also abbreviate, 
as I only here wish to indicate the kind of thing. 

The writer of the following account is Colonel B., 
a well-known Irish gentleman. He explains that his 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

I4S 

wife engaged to sing with her daughters a Miss X., who 
was training as a public singer but who ultimately did not 
come out in that capacity, having married a Mr. Z.' 

. Six or seven years afterwards Mrs. B., who was 
dying, in the presence of her husband spoke of 
voices she heard singing, saying that she had heard 
them several times that day, and that there was one 
voice among them which she knew, but could not 
remember whose voice it was. 

“ Suddenly she stopped and said, pointing over my head,” says 
Colonel B., “ ‘ Why, there she is in the comer of the room; it is Julia 
X .; she is coming on; she is leaning over you; she has her hands up; 
she is praying; do look; she is going.’ I turned but could see nothing. 
Mrs. B. then said, ‘ She is gone.’ All these things [the hearing of singing 
and the vision of the singer] I imagined to be the phantasies of a dying 
person. 

“Two days afterwards, taking up the Times newspaper, I saw 
recorded the death of Julia Z., wife of Mr. Z. I was so astounded that 

in a day or so after the funeral I went up to-and asked Mr. X. if 

Mrs. Z., his daughter, was dead. He said, ‘ Yes, poor thing, she died 
of puerperal fever. On the day she died she began singing in the 
morning, and sang and sang until she died.’ ” 

The case next quoted is a curious incident connected 
with a deceased child, obtained in one of the bereaved 
mother’s sittings with Mrs. Piper in America, at a time 
when Phinuit was in control. 

It is the concluding portion of a long and striking 
series of communications, extremely characteristic of 
identity, which are quoted both in Human Personality , 
vol. ii. 245-7, and in Proc. S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 386-9. 
The mother’s testimony is thus reported :— 

The remarks made at her second sitting suggest that “the little 
book ” in the child’s mind was not this one. “ Kakie wants the little 
bit of a book mamma read by her bedside, with the pretty bright things 
hanging from it—mamma put it in her hands—the last thing she 
remembers,” Mrs. Sutton states that this was a little prayer book with 

146 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

a cross and other symbols in silver attached to ribbons for marking the 
places, and that it was sent to her by a friend after Kakie had ceased 
to know any one except perhaps for a passing moment. Mrs. Sutton 
read it when Kakie seemed unconscious, and after Kakids death placed 
it in her hands to prevent the blood settling in the nails. She adds 
later that Mrs. Piper’s hands, when the book was asked for at the 
sitting, were put into the same position as Kakie’s. 

There is also evidence of reciprocity of an unusual 
kind in connection with the Piper case; for “Phinuit” 
has been described as perceived by a dying person at 
a distance, in correspondence with the assertion of 
Phinuit that he would go and talk to this same person 
about unfair clauses in his will. 

The account of this curious episode is from an 
American gentleman who had had a good deal of 
experience in Piper sittings, and who does not want his 
name disclosed. Of three examples of what he calls pre¬ 
dictions, thus obtained, I select this one, as it illustrates 
the kind of reciprocal experience of which I am now 
speaking. The account is corroborated by Mrs. 
“ M.N.” 

April 5th, 1889 

. . . About the end of March of last year I made [Mrs. Piper] a 
visit (having been in the habit of doing so, since early in February, 
about once a fortnight). [As Phinuit] told me that the death of a near 
relative of mine would occur in about six weeks, from which I should 
realise some pecuniary advantages, I naturally thought of my father, 
who was advanced in years, and whose description Mrs. Piper had 
given me very accurately some week or two previously. She had not 
spoken of him as my father, but merely as a person nearly connected 
with me. I asked her at that sitting whether this person was the one 
who would die, but she declined to state anything more clearly to me. 
My wife, to whom I was then engaged, went to see Mrs. Piper a few 
days afterwards, and she told her (my wife) that my father would die 
in a few weeks. 

About the middle of May my father died very suddenly in London 
from heart failure, when he was recovering from a very slight attack of 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

147 

bronchitis, and the very day that his doctor had pronounced him out 
of danger. Previous to this Mrs. Piper (as Dr. Phinuit) had told me 
that she would endeavour to influence my father about certain matters 
connected with his will before he died. Two days after I received the 
cable announcing his death, my wife and I went to see Mrs. Piper, and 
she [Phinuit] spoke of his presence, and his sudden arrival in the spirit- 
world, and said that he (Dr. Phinuit) had endeavoured to persuade 
him in those matters while my father was sick. Dr. Phinuit told me 
the state of the will, and described the principal executor, and said 
that he (the executor) would make a certain disposition in my favour, 
subject to the consent of the two other executors, when I got to 
London, England. Three weeks afterwards I arrived in London*,; 
found the principal executor to be the man Phinuit had described. 
The will went materially as he had stated. The disposition was made 
in my favour, and my sister, who was chiefly at my father’s bedside 
the last three days of his life, told me that he had repeatedly com¬ 
plained of the presence of an old man at the foot of his bed, who 
annoyed him by discussing his private affairs. . . . 

(“M.N”) 

A similar illustration of reciprocity occurred in the 
case of the lady called “ Elisa Mannors,” whose near 
relatives and friends concerned* in the communications 
were known also to Mr. Myers. 

On the morning after the death of her uncle, called 
F. in the report, she described an incident in connection 
with the appearance of herself to her uncle on his 
death-bed. Dr. Hodgson’s account of this is in 
Proceedings , S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 378, as follows:— 

The notice of his [F.’s] death was in a Boston morning paper, and 
I happened to see it on my way to the sitting. The first writing of 
the sitting came from Madame Elisa, without my expecting it. She 
wrote clearly and strongly, explaining that F. was there with her, but 
unable to speak directly, and that she wished to give an account of 
how she had helped F. to reach her. She said that she had been 
present at his death-bed, and had spoken to him, and she repeated 
what she had said, an unusual form of expression, and indicated that 
he had heard and recognised her. This was confirmed in detail in the 

148: 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

only way possible at the time, by a very intimate friend of Madame 
Elisa and myself, and also of the nearest surviving relative of F. I 
showed my friend the account of the sitting; and to this friend, a day 
or two later, the relative, who was present at the death-bed, stated 
spontaneously that F. when dying saw Madame Elisa who was speaking 
to him, and he repeated what she was saying. The expression so 
repeated, which the relative quoted to my friend, was that which I had 
received from Madame Elisa through Mrs. Piper’s trance, when the 
death-bed incident was, of course, entirely unknown to me. 

Writing of Foreign Languages 

Instances in which foreign languages unknown to the 
medium are written or spoken are comparatively rare. 

At a sitting in 1892, when Madame Elisa Manners was “ communi¬ 
cating,” some Italian was written by request, the lady being as familiar 
with Italian as with English, but only two or three common words were 
decipherable. The first names of sitter and communicator »vere given, 
and the last name was both written and afterwards given by G.P. to 
Phinuit. Some of the writing was of a personal character, and some 
about the watch [concerning which inquiry had been made ]; and G.P. 
stated correctly, inter alia , that the sitter’s mother was present (in 
u spirit ”) with the communicator, and that he himself did not know 
her. The real names are very uncommon. The Italian for “It is 
well, Patience,” was whispered at the end of the sitting as though by 
direct control of the voice by Madame Elisa. 

Further attempts were made to speak and write. 
Italian, but not much was said, and the writing was 
not very legible. Concerning this Dr. Hodgson 
remarks:— 

' As I have mentioned elsewhere (Report, pp. 293, 
332), the intelligence communicating by writing is not 
conscious of the act of writing. The chief difficulty 
apparently in getting another language written by the 
hand is that strange words tend to be written phon¬ 
etically unless they are thought out slowly letter by 
letter. The writing is usually much more legible now 

Chap, ix] 

EXAMPLES 

149 

than it was during the period of the records from which 
I am quoting, when there was frequently much difficulty 
in deciphering even the simplest English words. It 
was therefore not surprising that so little of the Italian 
written by Madame Elisa was decipherable. 

This does not appear to be a strong case, but the 
next one seems to me better : 

Dr. Hodgson reports the following case in a sitting 
which a Mr. Vernon Briggs had with Mrs. Piper in 
October 1893 (Proc. S.P.R. xiii. 337; or Hum . Pers. 
ii. 244). 

The communication purported to come from a Honolulu boy 
named Kalua, who became much attached to Mr. Briggs, during a 
six months’ stay of Mr. Briggs in Honolulu in 1881, and who followed 
Mr. Briggs back to Boston under somewhat romantic circumstances 
in 1883. He was soon sent back to his native island, but again 
returned to Boston, where he was shot in 1886, in a sailor’s Bethel, 
whether intentionally or not was unknown. There was some suspicion 
against a Swede who was imprisoned, but there was no evidence 
against him, and he was finally discharged. The Swede said that 
Kalua had accidentally shot himself with a revolver, and eventually 
confessed that after the accident he had himself hidden the revolver 
behind a fine, where, after taking part of the chimney down, it was 
found. Mr. Briggs had taken a handkerchief belonging to Kalua with 
him to the sitting. Kalua had been shot through the heart, and 
there was some confusion apparently about the locality of the suffer¬ 
ing, “stomach” and “side” being mentioned, under what appeared 
to be the direct control of the voice by “ Kalua,” and Mr. Briggs 
asked if it was Kalua. Phinuit then spoke for “ Kalua,” who said 
that he did not kill himself, that he had been gambling with the other 
man who disputed with him and shot him, but did not mean to, and 
who threw the revolver “into the hot box where the pepples are” 
(meaning the “furnace” and the “coals”), and hid his purse under 
the steps where he was killed. “ Kalua ” also said there was shrubbery 
near it. The cellar of the house was examined, but no purse was 
found, and there was no shrubbery in the cellar. “ Kalua ” tried to 
write Hawaiian, but the only “ ordinary ” words deciphered were “ lei ” 
(meaning wreaths^ which he made daily for Mr. Briggs) which was 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

150 

written clearly and frequently, and an attempt at “aloha’’-greeting. 
Phinuit tried to get the answer to the question where Kalua’s father 
was, but could only succeed in getting “Hiram.” But the writing 
gave the answer “ Hawaiian Islands.” In reply to the question which 
one, the answer in writing was Kawai, but Phinuit said Tawai. The 
word is spelt Kawai, but is pronounced Tawai by the natives of the 
island itself and in the island where Kalua was born. The natives of 
the other islands call it Kawai. 

Cases in which the lucidity or clairvoyant faculty is 
not limited to the present, but apparently anticipates the 
future, are sufficiently important to deserve a separate 
chapter. 

It is extremely difficult to contemplate such a faculty. 
Hitherto we have dealt only with knowledge of the 
present and the past. 

CHAPTER X 

PREVISION 

B UT assertions are made that there is a kind of 
lucidity occasionally attainable by healthy people 
which is beyond the powers of any ordinary 
intelligence, even aided by telepathy; inasmuch as 
knowledge is sometimes exhibited not only of occur¬ 
rences at a distance but also of events which have not 
yet happened, and which could not by any process of 
reasoning be inferred. 

Is it possible to become aware of events before 
they have occurred, by means other than ordinary 
scientific prediction? 

The anticipation of future events is a power not 
at all necessarily to be expected on a Spiritistic or any 
other hypothesis; it is a separate question, and will 
have important bearings of its own. An answer to 
this question in the affirmative may vitally affect our 
metaphysical notions of “Time,” but will not of 
necessity have an immediate bearing on the existence 
in the universe of intelligences other than our own. 
A cosmic picture gallery (as Mr. Myers calls it), or 
photographic or phonographic record of all that has 
occurred or will occur in the universe, may conceiv¬ 
ably—or perhaps not conceivably—in some sense exist, 
and may be partly open and dimly decipherable to the 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

152 

[Sect, hi 

lucid part of the automatist’s or entranced person’s 
mind. 

But the question for us now is whether we can 
obtain clear and unmistakable proof of the existence 
of this foreseeing power in any form. It is not an 
easy thing to establish beyond any kind of doubt. 
Casual and irresponsible critics have said that docu¬ 
mentary evidence, such as a postmark on a letter 
which detailed an event either not yet happened or 
certainly not known by ordinary methods at the date 
of the postmark (like a recent shipwreck in mid-ocean 
for instance), would be proof positive to them of some¬ 
thing occult. A writer in The Nineteenth Century goes 
so far as to say that a document thus officially verified by 
a Post Office clerk would be worth thousands of pounds 
to the British Museum. If so it would be singularly easy 
to get rich. I believe that a postmark on an envelope 
would satisfy some of these critics, but a postmark on 
the document itself would be entirely convincing. 

I wonder some enterprising forger has not en¬ 
deavoured to gull a leading journal by an elaborate 
account, say, of the Victoria disaster, or the Santander 
explosion, or the Messina earthquake, written on 
foolscap paper transmitted blank through the post, at 
small cost, in preparation for any such striking event; 
or perhaps on paper subsequently covered with previous 
postmarks by a genial Post Office friend, and decorated 
with red tape by a live Government clerk! 

The feeling that everything done by a Post Office 
official is conclusive, is of the same order as the opinion 
that barristers or criminal judges or medical practitioners 
are the only people fit to investigate unusual mental 
phenomena, because their practice makes them familiar 
with the warpings of the human mind. 

Chap, x] 

PREVISION 

153 

But to consider the case of a medical practitioner; 
as I understand a doctor’s business, it is to cure an 
abnormality if he can, not to prolong and investigate 
it. True, a doctor may be a scientific man in addition, 
but qua physician he is out of his element as a general 
investigator, and as a leading practitioner he has very 
little spare time. Were it not so, the record against 
the profession—the attitude the main body of doctors 
has taken or used to take to everything new—would be 
not only pitiful, as it is, but essentially disgraceful. To 
this day I expect that in some countries there are pro¬ 
mising subjects, some for investigation and some for 
psychical cure, lost both to science and to themselves 
within the walls of asylums. 

But about this question of postmarks. Let it not 
be thought that I claim that their evidence is worth¬ 
less. As evidence subsidiary to testimony they may 
be very valuable, and every effort should be made to 
get them; my contention only is that they do not dis¬ 
pense with testimony. 

This I hold is the function of all circumstantial 
evidence, or of any automatic record; it lessens the 
chance of self-delusion or over-exuberant imagination, 
it can never be held to guard against fraud. If a 
couple of friends by interchanging letters, with their 
dates verified in some cold blooded official manner, are 
able to establish foreknowledge of events such as could 
hardly be guessed or inferred, then their testimony is 
strengthened by the date-marks to this extent:—Either 
the things happened as they say, or they are in some 

154 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

That is how these automatic records, photographs 
and the like, may be so valuable—as supplementary to 
human testimony—never as substitutes for it. 

Anticipation or Events 

Have we any trustworthy evidence at all as to the 
power of foreseeing unpredictable events ? Strange to 
say, we have, but it is not yet sufficient in volume to 
justify any generalisation: it is only enough to cause 
us to keep an open mind, even in this direction, and 
be ready critically to scrutinise future evidence as it 
arrives. Mrs. Sidgwick’s paper on the evidence for 
Premonitions is in vol. v. of Proceedings S.P.R. 

I attach no high importance to predictions of illness 
and death: they may represent an unusual power of 
diagnosis, but need not represent anything more. 
Besides, a great number of these predictions fail; so 
much so that a prediction of this kind now hardly 
perturbs an experienced person who receives it. 

And even the successful prevision of an accident 
must be attributed as a rule to accidental concordance 
unless it is accompanied by an exceptional amount of 
detail. 

The following case is contained in Mrs. Sidgwick’s 
paper, Proceedings, vol. v. p. 333. It is from an engine- 
driver who was interviewed afterwards by an agent of 
the S.P.R. in America. 

[In 1853] I was firing a locomotive, a fine new passenger engine, 
b,uilt for speed, and just from the shop. I thought myself lucky to 
be on such a fine engine, and was proud of my position. One night, 
May 29th, 1853, I dreamed that the train ran through a shallow cut, 
and came out on a high stone bridge, over which the train passed, 
and then the engine turned over down the bank some 70 feet, into 
the river. I mentioned my dream the next morning to the family 

Chap, x] 

PREVISION 

155 

with whom I was living. The lady [now dead] told me I was going 
to be killed, but I told her that in my dream I had assurance that I 
should not be hurt. On the second morning after my dream, we 
were sent over a part of the road with which I was not familiar and 
presently came to a shallow cut, and I saw a number of men ahead 
on the track. The engineer was near-sighted and did not see them. 
I called to him to stop the engine; he tried to do so, but the track 
was wet, and seeing that part of the track ahead had been taken up, 
he jumped from the engine, I remained on it and tried to stop it. 
Before this could be done, we were on a stone bridge, and I could 
not get off. The engine left the track, and at the other end of the 
bridge turned over twice before it reached the bottom, and I with it, 
receiving but a small scratch how I do not know. I climbed the bank, 
and looking back, saw just what I had seen in my dream. The bridge 
was 200 feet long, with five stone arches, 54 feet high, and the bank 
down which the engine rolled 7 o feet 

The Marmontel Case 

The perception of incidents at a distance is common 
enough, but the perception of incidents in the future is 
rare. The following selection from experiences of this 
kind received by Mrs. Verrall must serve as an example 
of the few trustworthy cases I know of ( Proc . S.P.R., 
vol. xx. p. 331). 

On December 1 ith, 1901— i.e. towards the end of the 
first year in which Mrs. Verrall had developed the power 
of automatic writing—her hand wrote as follows :— 

Nothing too mean, the trivial helps, gives confidence. Hence this. 
Frost and a candle in the dim light. Marmontel, he was reading on a 
sofa or in bed—there was only a candle’s light. She will surely re¬ 
member this. The book was lent, not his own—he talked about it. 

Then there appeared a fanciful but unmistakable 
attempt at the name Sidgwick. 

No meaning was conveyed by the above, but the 
concluding effort naturally suggested that Mrs. Sidgwick 
should be applied to. This was done; and her reply, 

156 

CLAIRVOYANCE 

[Sect, hi 

received on December 17th,. said that she could make | 
nothing of it but would report if the name Marmontel 
turned up. 

Mrs. Verrall was now away from home and had 
decided to abandon writing till her return. But all the 
17th she was so disturbed by a desire to write that 'she 
made time, and that evening obtained the following:— 

I wanted to write. Marmontel is right. It was a French book, a 
Memoir I think. Passy may help, Souvenirs de Passy, or Fleury. 
Marmontel was not on the cover—the book was bound and was lent— 
two volumes in old-fashioned binding and print. It is not in any papers 
—it is an attempt to make some one remember—an incident. 

Soon after my return to Cambridge—Mrs. Verrall ' 
reports—about December 25th, 1901, I was looking 
through a list of books—which I had glanced at before 
December nth — and found an advertisement of 
“ Marmontel, Moral Tales , selected and translated by 
G. Saintsbury.” This, strange though such an admission 
may seem, was, as far as I could remember, my first 
conscious knowledge of Marmontel as a French writer. 

So ends the record of the obtaining of the script. 
The sentence in the first portion “ She will surely 
remember this” is a characteristic sotto vote remark 
which is not infrequent in these scripts,—having the 
same sort of signification as the terminal sentence of the 
second portion. It means that Mrs. Verrall herself will 
surely remember having obtained the writing, when at 
some future time the incident described is referred to. 

Now begins the verification by quite unexpected 
means. 

In January 1902 Mrs. Verrall happened to write to a 
friend of hers named Mr. Marsh, asking him to come for 
a week-end visit; and he replied fixing March 1st. She 
had had no recent communication with him since June 

Chap, x] 

PREVISION 

157 

1901. On February 23rd she sent him a post card to 
remind him of his visit, and he replied with a letter on 
February 24th. 

Mrs. Verral'l then reports as follows :— 

On March 1st Mr. Marsh arrived, and that evening 
at dinner he mentioned that he had been reading 
Marmontel. I asked if he had read the Moral Tales , 
and he replied that it was the Memoirs . I was interested 
in this reference to Marmontel, and asked Mr. Marsh for 
particulars about his reading, at the same time explaining 
the reasons for my curiosity. He then told me that he 
got the book from the London Library, and took the 
first volume only to Paris with him, where he read it on 
the evening of February 20th, and again on February 
21 st. On each occasion he read by the light of a candle; 
on the 20th he was in bed, on the 21st lying on two 
chairs. He talked about the book to the friends with 
whom he was staying in Paris. The weather was cold, 
but there was, he said, no frost. The London Library 
copy is bound, as most of their books are, not in modern 
binding, but the name “ Marmontel ” is on the back of 
the volume. The edition has three volumes; in Paris 
Mr. Marsh had only one volume, but at the time of his 
visit to us he had read the second also. 

I asked him whether “Passy” or “Fleury” would 
“help,” and he replied that Fleury’s name certainly 
occurred in the book, in a note; he was not sure about 
Passy, but undertook to look it up on his return to town, 
and to ascertain, as he could by reference to the book, 
what part of the first volume he had been reading in 
Paris. He is in the habit of reading in bed, but has 
electric light in his bedroom at home, so that he had not 
read “in bed or on a sofa by candlelight” for months, 
until he read Marmontel in Paris. 

On his return to town Mr. Marsh wrote to me 
(March 4, 1902), that on February 21st while lying on 
two chairs he read a chapter in the first volume of 
Marmontel’s Memoirs describing the finding at Passy of 

158 CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, hi 

a panel, etc., connected with a story in which Fleury 
plays an important part. 

It will thus be noted that the script in December, 
1901, describes (as [presumably] past) an incident which 
actually occurred two and a half months later, in 
February, 1902,—an incident which at the' time of 
writing was not likely to have been foreseen by any one. 
I ascertained from Mr. Marsh that the idea of reading 
Marmontel occurred to him not long before his visit to 
Paris. It is probable that had he not seen me almost 
immediately upon his return, when his mind was full of 
the book, I should never have heard of his reading it, 
and therefore not have discovered the application of the 
scripts of December nth and 17th. 

The description is definite, and in the main accurate. 
There are, however, errors:—Though the weather was 
cold, it does not seem to have been actually freezing 
on either of the two nights in question; the book was 
not in two volumes only, as seems implied, though only 
two volumes had been read when the incident was related 
to me ; the name Marmontel was on the back of the 
book, though not on the face of the cover; the binding, 
though not modern, can hardly be described as old 
fashioned. .But the reference to Passy and Fleury— 
names which, so far as I can discover are not together in 
any passage of Marmontel’s Memoirs except that read 
by Mr. Marsh on February 21st—is a precise and, I 
think, remarkable coincidence. 

Two other points may be noted :— 

(1) That the script on December 17th did not accept 
the suggestion that the name Marmontel had anything to 
do with Mrs. Sidgwick ; 

(2) The omission to give any name to the reader of 
Marmontel. 

This latter kind of reticence is characteristic of the 
script; and, although it may be superficially regarded 

PREVISION 

159 

from a sarcastic point of view, it is really essential to the 
verification of the prevision, because if Mr. Marsh’s name 
had been given, Mrs. Verrall would naturally have 
written to him a premature inquiry, which would have 
spoilt the whole thing. 

But inasmuch as she had no inkling of Mr. Marsh in 
connexion with it, that gentleman was left unconsciously 
to carry out the anticipation, entirely ignorant of it and 
uninfluenced by it. 

The anticipation received in December was fulfilled 
in February and was reported on in March. 

The fact that the anticipation was received in 
December is proved by the preservation of Mrs. 
Sidgwick’s letter of December 17th saying that she could 
make nothing of it, but that if the name turned up in 
some manuscripts she was then reading she would let 
Mrs. Verrall know. 

ill 

H 

Discussion of Possibility 

In his book Mr. Myers contemplated the occurrence 
of prevision, and dealt with it in many an eloquent 
passage. The following is too eloquent for the incident 
just quoted, but it serves to illustrate his view of the 
possibility of such things :— 

Few men have pondered long on these problems of 
Past and Future without wondering whether Past and 
Future be in very truth more than a name—whether 
we may not be apprehending as a stream of sequence 
that which is an ocean of co-existence, and slicing our 
subjective years and centuries from timeless and absolute® 
things. The precognitions dealt with here, indeed, 
hardly overpass the life of the individual percipient. 
Let us keep to that small span, and let us imagine that 
a whole earth-life is in reality an absolutely instantaneous 

100 CLAIRVOYANCE [Sect, m 

although an infinitely complex phenomenon. Let us 
suppose that my transcendental self discerns with equal 
directness and immediacy every element of. this pheno¬ 
menon ; but that my empirical self receives each 
element mediately, and through media involving different 
rates of retardation ; just as I receive the lightning more 
quickly than the thunder. May not then seventy years 
intervene between my perceptions of birth and death 
^ i as seven seconds between my perceptions of 
the flash apd the peal ? And may not some inter¬ 
communication of consciousness enable the wider self 
to call to the narrower, the more central to the more 
external, “ At such an hour this shock will reach you ! 
Listen for the nearing roar! ” 

But let us consider whether there is any way of 
regarding the fulfilment of a meaningless anticipation 

—such as this of the Marmontel case, just quoted_ 

without trenching on so difficult a question as the 
reality of time? 

I can only suggest something of the nature of 
hypnotic suggestion, automatically effected. An outside 
or, let us say, a subliminal intelligence gets the record 
made by Mrs. Verrall that an unspecified man will 
read Marmontel on a frosty night lying on a sofa by 
candle light, etc., and then sets to work to try and 
secure that within the next two or three months some 
man shall do it—some one who is sufficiently a friend of 
Mrs. Verrall to make it reasonably likely that in subse¬ 
quent conversation she may sooner or later hear of the 
circumstance. 

I make the suggestion for what it is worth, as the 
only way that occurs to me of avoiding still more 
difficult notions;—provided of course we do not dismiss 

the whole thing as invention—which is preposterous,_ 

or as chance, which in my judgment is put out of court 

1 

i 

Chap, x] PREVISION 161 

by the amount of detail, and by other incidents of the 
same general nature as this one which have also occurred 
in Mrs. Verrall’s script. 

It may be asked what possible object there can be 
in thus predicting a perfectly unimportant and common¬ 
place incident. 

The object, to those associated with the work of the 
Society for Psychical Research, is manifest enough. 

During the lifetime of Professor Sidgwick and Mr. 
Myers we often discussed what sort of evidence could 
be regarded as conclusive as to the existence of super¬ 
normal, even if not posthumous, intelligence. And it 
was agreed that prediction of future events of an 
insignificant kind, such as could not be inferred or 
deduced by however wide a knowledge of con¬ 
temporary events,—incidents which were outside the 
range of any amount of historical or mathematical or 
political skill,—would be conclusive, if obtained in 
quantity sufficient to eliminate chance. It did not at 
all follow that such anticipations were possible ,—so far as 
we could tell they might be beyond not only normal but 
supernormal powers,—but if possible it was realised 
that they would be singularly satisfactory. 

Accordingly it is eminently characteristic of an 
intelligence purporting to be associated in any way with 
the late Professor Sidgwick or the late Mr. Myers that 
attempts of that kind should be made. Several attempts 
have now been made with more or less success, and I 
have selected one of them. Others will be found in 
Mrs. Verrall’s paper (. Proceedings , vol. xx.) in the chapter 
called “ Future Events.” 

SECTION IV 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY 

CHAPTER XI 

AUTOMATIC WRITING AND TRANCE SPEECH 

W E now enter upon the more detailed considera¬ 
tion of a group of facts, in which of late years 
the Society has been remarkably prolific—and 
the general truth of which is accepted without hesitation 
by all the prominent members; who, though they differ 
in their interpretation, yet receive the evidence with 
practical unanimity as to its interest and importance 
receive it, that is to say, with all the unanimity that we 

desire or expect. . „ .* 

At the end of last chapter we were discussing the 

possibility of the rather vague and ill-defined hypothesis 
that vistas of unlimited information lie open to people 
in a clairvoyant state, as if during unconsciousness a 
psychical region were entered wherein the ordinary 
barriers between soul and soul, or mind and mind, are 
broken down. Even this surmise must not be rejected 
without examination, if we are driven to it, but it is not 
a known vera causa. A hypothesis of this kind is 

referred to at the end of Chapter VIII. 

Naturally it is only when all normal means of 
obtaining information have been scrupulously avoided 
that any problem arises; and the first hypothesis that 

hap. xi] 

AUTOMATIC WRITING 

must be made, whenever normal explanations thoroughly 
break down, is that telepathy of some kind is occurring 
from some living person and is influencing the sensitive 
mind or brain of the unconscious or partially unconscious 
operator, after the fashion of an objectified and sym¬ 
pathetic dream. 3 

This hypothesis is extremely elastic, and can be 
stretched to cover an immense area; indeed, to get 
beyond it, and definitely find a region which it will 
not cover, is exceedingly difficult. For twenty years 
at least members of the society have been intimately 
acquainted with excellent and astonishing examples of 
trance speaking and automatic writing, and yet they 
have hesitated to make full use of all this material, and 
have refrained from proceeding in the direction towards 
which it undoubtedly points, so long as there was a 
chance-even a remote chance—that an established 
variety of telepathy or some extension of it might 
constitute a sufficient explanation. Some of us hold 
that telepathy from living people is still sufficient—or 
at least as sufficient as it has ever been—and that no 
further step beyond it need be taken. Others are 
beginning to be impressed with the idea—not without 
qualms and surviving hesitation—that the time has 
come, or is coming, when it may be legitimate and 
necessary to take a further step, and to admit, at any 
rate as a tentative hypothesis, the view which un¬ 
doubtedly the phenomena themselves suggest_the 

view they have all the time been, as it were, forcing 
upon us. . This is the hypothesis of actual telepathic or 

telergic influence from some outside intelligence_ 

the surviving intelligence, apparently, of some of those 
who have recently lived on this planet, and who are 
now represented as occasionally, under great difficulties 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

and discouragements, endeavouring to make known the 
fact that they can communicate with us, by aid of such 
intervening mechanism as is placed at their disposal- 
namely, the brain nerve and muscle of an automatist 
or medium. The assertion made is that, during the 
temporary suspension of the normal control, discarnate 
intelligences can with difficulty make use of these 
organs for the purpose of translating their own 
thought into mechanical movement, and so pro¬ 
ducing some kind of speech or writing in the physical 
world. Such utilisation of physiological apparatus, 
by an intelligence to which it does not normally 
belong, is what is called motor automatism, or 
“ telergy,” or popularly — when of an extreme kind 
“ possession.” 

It does not by any means follow that the agent or 
intelligence, active in this unusual experience, is 
necessarily that of a departed person, but that is 
undoubtedly the form which the phenomenon often 
takes; so if we resign ourselves to be guided by it at 
all, we may as well try how far the claim openly and 
persistently made will carry us, before definitely 
discarding it. And if we are going to try it at all, I 
urge that we had better try it frankly and thoroughly: 
it had better be accepted provisionally as a working 
hypothesis and pressed as far as it will go. That is the 
way to test any provisional hypothesis. Hesitate as 
long as you like before giving a theory even provisional 
and tentative acceptance; but, once having determined 
on testing a key or theoretical solution, then utilise it to 
the utmost. Try it in all the locks; and if it continually 
fails to open them, reject it; but do not hesitate each 
time over the insertion of the key. Hesitate before 
accepting a working hypothesis, not after. If false, its 

xoj 

falseness will become apparent by its failure an rl • 
ability to fit the facts. y CS tailure and m- 

V01.T p My 2 e 5 o “ Hma * P ‘rso««lily, 

Plate su P ch ^ 

many other fartc* • . at ieas f fit m with 

t.pon y to ^“ i fj 0 *L™“7‘ 10 ” we are called 
sonality can operate i? f that se g men ‘ s of the per- 
organism '■ Such a pparent separation from the 

have be« ata^ed wlthoTmooTofl PP “““ not 
with difficulty he P° Proof of telepathy, and could 

of death^ Zt, glveT 3SthP h P pr °° f of 8 ™al 
agency, connectfd with ^ 

organism. Given survival ’ °P eratm §' apart from his 
personality-^ ” S X L ’7 P “ elem “' of his 
his organism is destroyed. There ifiiSST”* "’ h ™ 

o g Sptr“Xma£ n « tS^ 3 S 

while SrgSiSS.^ ^ ** 

once gotTmSl If we have 

—if my fixation ^ £ ° peratm S a P a « from his body 

does somehow so modlf ^ °1 ^ tWO ° f diamond s 
yards off thJ hf dfy another man ’ s brain, a few 

floating before him^there^ ^ t l 3e . two of diamonds 

on / 4 fr side S f Pf™ f bfT P 'P 

spirit, and there is nn «k • P° sse ssion by a departed 
till we come^ to ”°(- obv , 1 1 ? us baiting pJace on my side 

corresponding visibili^of IDg da ’ rv ^ ance -” with a 
persons in the scenes which ^iSua^^ t0 ?£“. 

Mind and Body 

%*« ^ -"'ofX 

■ lad" An 1 S'if 1 ‘lPt T” “■a-oaplace 

i66 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

to achieve some effect in the material world it must 
move matter. The movement or rearrangement of 
matter is all that we ourselves are able to accomplish in 
the physical universe: the whole of our direct terrestrial 
activities resolve themselves into this, the production of 
changes of motion. 

But a thought belongs to a different order of 
existence,—whatever it is, it is not material; it is 
neither matter nor force; it has no direct power over 
matter; directly and unaided it can move nothing. 
How then can it get itself translated in terms of motion ? 
How can it, from the psychical category, produce a 
physical effect ? 

Physiology informs us, not indeed of the whole 
manner of the achievement, but of part at least of the 
method. 

The thing that can move matter is called muscle. 
In muscle is located the necessary energy, which only 
requires to be stimulated into activity in order to be 
transformed into visible motion and transferred in any 
required direction. 

In a living body means are provided for stimulating 
its muscles, in the shape of an intricate arrangement of 
nerve fibres, which, when themselves excited in one of 
many ways, can cause the muscle to contract. This 
part of the process is not indeed fully understood, but 
it is familiarly known. The excitation of the nerves 
may be a mere random tweaking, or irritation, by a 
mechanical or electric goad; but in a living organism 
it can also be produced in a more meaningful and 
economical fashion, by the discharge of energy from a 
central cell, such as exists in the cortex or grey matter 
of the brain. This process may also be considered as 
comparatively though not completely understood: the 

Chap, xi] 

AUTOMATIC WRITING 

167 

central ganglion is clearly the direct means of getting 
the nerve excited, the muscle contracted, and the direct 
motion produced. But what is it that stimulates the 
brain? What is it that desires the particular motion 
and liberates energy from the appropriate brain cell ? 
In some cases it is mere reflex action: it is some 
stimulus which has arrived from the peripheral nerve- 
endings, so as to evoke response in a central ganglion— 
say, in the spine or the cerebellum ; whence the stimulus 
has proceeded to a neighbouring cell and so to the 
efferent nerve fibres. In that case no consciousness is 
involved; the psychical element is absent; there is no 
intelligence or will in the process, nor any necessary 
sensation. The wriggling of a worm, and many 
contortions of the lower animals, may be—shall we say 
may be hoped to be ?—of this order. 

But I am not taking the case of reflex and un¬ 
conscious action ; I am definitely postulating a thought or 
idea conceived in the mind—operating, so to speak, on 
the will—and determining that there shall be a response 
in the material world. By what means the stimulus 
gets out of the psychical region into the physical, and 
liberates energy from the brain centre, I have not the 
remotest idea ; nor, I venture to say, has any one. 

The operation is at present mysterious. But con¬ 
spicuously it occurs; it is evidently a rational and I 
should say an ultimately intelligible process,—a process, 
that is to say, on which discovery is possible, though at 
present there has been no discovery concerning it. 
Somehow or other the connexion is established; and 
by long habit it seems to be established in normal cases 
without difficulty—nay, rather with singular ease, as 
when a pianist executes in miraculous fashion a 
complicated sonata. 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

Things may go wrong, energy may be liberated in 
the wrong direction, the wrong muscles may be 
stimulated, so that stammering and contortion result. 
Or the mental connexion may be in a state of suspense, 
the mind may be unable to get at the right centre, so to 
speak, and may refrain from acting on any for a time ; 
in which case we have hesitation, aphasia, feebleness 
of many kinds, up to paralysis. Or these effects may 
be due to faults and dislocation in the physiological 
mechanism,—'faults which can perhaps be discovered 
and set right. If the brain centres are fatigued, also, 
the response is weak and uncertain. But when every¬ 
thing physiological is in good health, and when the 
conscious self is in good condition, with a definite 
thought that it wants to convey, then it appears to be 
able to play upon the brain, as a musician plays upon a 
keyboard, and to get its psychical content translated 
into terms of mechanical motion; so that other in¬ 
telligences, sufficiently sympathetic and suitably provided 
with receptive mechanism, can be made more or less 
aware of the idea intended to be conveyed. Which 
means that, by aid of their nerve fibres and brain centres, 
mechanical movements can be translated back into 
thought once more. 

That is the usual process, from mind to mind 
through physiological apparatus and physical mechanism. 
The physical mechanism is a neutral intermediary of 
non-living matter, belonging to nobody; or rather 
belonging equally to everybody. We can all throw 
the air into vibration ; and at some public meetings 
everybody does so, at one and the same time, with 
some resulting confusion. We can all write with ink; 
and if need be we can dip our pens into our neighbour’s 
inkstand and use his desk, though with some loss of 

!S8S^ 

-tmwM 

Chap, xi] AUTOMATIC WRITING 169 

convenience ;—we find it difficult to lay our hands upon 
his notepaper, and it is not efficacious if, on finding his 
cheque-book, we proceed to fill up and sign his cheques. 
The identity of the scribe then becomes an important 
consideration. Pretended identity in such cases may 
perturb the social conscience, and be stigmatised not 
merely as unrecognised and wrongful possession, but as 
fraud. 

Thus of all existing forms of matter there are 
certainly some which can be used intelligently though 
temporarily by people to whom they do not belong. 
But whatever may be the undiscriminating communism 
of the main part of the physical universe, the physio¬ 
logical part is undoubtedly appropriated by individuals; 
body No. x belongs definitely to operator No. 1, and 
body No. 2 to operator No. 2. And the common idea 
—I might say the common-sense idea—is that operator 
No. 1 is entirely limited to control over his own phy¬ 
siological apparatus, and has no means of getting at 
the apparatus of another person, in any direct manner, 
or otherwise than through neutral physical means. 
That is the natural prima facie notion, based upon 
ordinary experience; but it need not be exactly true or 
complete,—facts may turn up which suggest something 
different or supplementary. 

As a matter of fact, telepathy has suggested—without 
any necessary reference to the physiological part of the 
business—that mind can act directly on mind, and can 
thereby indirectly operate on the physical world through 
the organism of another person. But cases also occur 
where the mind of the second person appears to be 
left out of the process altogether; he may be thinking 
his own thoughts or doing nothing particular,—in a 
state of unconsciousness perhaps, or at any rate of 

170 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, tv 

inattention,—and yet his physiological mechanism may 
be set in action, and his physical neighbourhood affected 
in such a way as to suggest a stimulus proceeding not 
from himself at all, but from the mind of another 
person; who in this case must be conceived as operating 
not upon the second mind, but directly upon its brain. 
Or if not upon the brain, then perhaps upon some other 
portion of the nervous system,—say, upon spinal or other 
ganglia not essentially or necessarily associated with 
consciousness, and not arousing any consciousness, but 
stimulating the parts usually controlled by the sub- 
consciousness,—the parts which regulate the beating 
of the heart, the respiration of the lungs, the digestion 
or secretions of the body. 

Assuming that such a thing is possible, assuming 
that a mind can operate, not only as usual on its own 
body, not only telepathically as supposed on another 
mind, but directly and telergically upon another body, 
then that is exactly what is meant by a case of incipient 
or partial possession. 

So far, it may be said, we have no a priori reason 
to doubt its occurrence, and no a priori reason to expect 
it. We know nothing about the connexion between 
mind and body, except that the brain is the specially 
appropriate organ or instrument for the purpose; and 
accordingly we are not entitled to any a priori views. 
We know that each organism is usually appropriated 
by, and belongs to, the special psychical character or 
unit which commonly employs it; just as a violin 
belongs to a special operator, who might resent any 
other person, especially a novice, attempting to play 
upon it. The desk of an author is his private property, 
from which a certain class of literature usually emanates ; 
and he might not like to see it used for works of fiction, 

Chap, xi] 

AUTOMATIC WRITING 

m 

or scandalous gossip, or the advocacy of vaccination, or 
vegetarianism, or Christian Science, or tariff reform. 
But that proves nothing as to the impossibility of so 
utilising it. The power may exist, but may be in 
abeyance, or be recognised as inappropriate and in¬ 
convenient, or even as dangerous and illegal. 

But if the power exist, it is a fact worth knowing. 
If it is possible for the normal operator to go out for 
a walk and leave his writing mechanism open to the 
casual tramp or the enterprising visitor, it is a definite 
fact that we may as well know. 

Now as to the power of dislocation or suspension 
of the usual connexion between mind and body, it is 
supposed more or less to occur during sleep; ’ it is 
certainly supposed to occur during trance; and, incase 
of what is called travelling clairvoyance, it would appear 
to be in some sort a demonstrable fact. 

Anyhow, it is orthodox—not scientifically orthodox, 
but religiously orthodox—to maintain that the con¬ 
nexion between ourselves and our organism is only 
temporary, and that at what we call “death” we shall 
give up this material mode of manifestation for ever: 
so that the body resolves itself into its original elements. 
And it is usually supposed that, after having lost 
control of our appropriate and normally possessed bodily 
organs, even though we still persist as psychical entities, 
we have in our new state no means of operating upon 
the physical world. No more can we move pieces of 
matter; no more can we stimulate ideas in the minds 
of our friends when we are “dead.” No, not unless 
one of three things happens. 

First, the telepathic power may continue; and we 
may operate directly on their conscious or unconscious 
minds, in such a way as to cause them to produce some 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

172 

physical effect or record, by normal means, through their 
own accustomed mechanism. 

Second, a materialising power may continue, 
analogous to that which enabled us, when here on the 
planet, to assimilate all sorts of material, to digest it 
and arrange it into the organism that served us as a 
body. It is extraordinarily difficult to conceive of such 
a power, and impossible to suppose that it can be a 
direct power of a psychical agency unaided by the re¬ 
productive activity of any other unit already incarnate; 
because such a power would imply a control of mind 
over matter which by hypothesis we conceive does not 
in fact exist, save through the mechanism of a brain. 
Such action we might well consider to be miracle. 

Still something of the kind has been asserted to 
occur; though always, I believe, in the presence of some 
peculiarly disposed organism or medium. 

Thirdly , a telergic power, analogous to that which 
we have already supposed occasionally active, may 
exist; enabling the psychical unit to detect and make 
use of some fully developed physiological mechanism, 
not belonging to it—a fully developed brain, shall we 
say, with nerves and muscles complete ;—so that, during 
temporary vacation by the usual possessor, these may be 
utilised for a time, and may achieve, in an unpractised 
and more or less blundering fashion, some desired 
influence upon the physical world. In such a case the 
operator may be understood as contriving to utter in 
speech or writing something like the message which he 
intends to convey to his otherwise occupied and in¬ 
accessible but still beloved friends. 

Affection need not be the only motive, however, 
which causes a given operator to take all the trouble, 
and go through the process of using other people’s 

AUTOMATIC WRITING 

173 

Chap, xi] 

writing materials,—at the risk of rousing superstition 
and fright or being ejected by medical treatment. 
Occasionally it may be a scientific interest surviving 
from the time in this life when he was a keen and active 
member of the S.P.R.; so that he desires above all 
things to convey to his friends, engaged on the same 
quest, some assurance, not only of his continued 
individual existence,—in which, on religious grounds, 
they may imagine that they already believe, but of his 
retention of a power to communicate indirectly and 
occasionally with them, and to produce movements 
even in the material world,—by kind permission of an 
organism, or part of an organism, the temporary use 
or possession of which has been allowed him for that 
purpose. 

Identity 

The question of identity is of course a fundamental 
one. The control must prove his identity mainly by 
reproducing facts which belong to memory and not 
to that of the automatist. And notice that proof of 
identity will usually depend on the memory of. trifles. 
The objection, frequently raised, that communications 
too often relate to trivial subjects, shows a lack of 
intelligence, or at least of due thought, on the part of 
the critic. The object is to get, not something dignified, 
but something evidential: and what evidence of per¬ 
sistent memory can be better than the recollection 
trifling incidents which for some personal reason hap 
to have made a permanent impression? Do we 
ourselves remember domestic trifles more vivi 
things which to the outside world seem im 

and coronations' are affairs read of in net/ 

are v 

f!l| 

t74 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

use as evidence of persistent identity; but a broken 
toy, or a family joke, or a schoolboy adventure, has 
a more personal flavour, and is of a kind more likely 
to be remembered in old age, or after a rending 
shock. 

In fiction this is illustrated continually. Take the , 
case of identification of the dumb and broken savage, 
apparently an Afghan prowler, in The Man Who Was. 
What was it that opened the eyes of the regiment, to 
which he had crawled back from Siberia, to the fact 
that twenty years ago he was one of themselves ? 
Knowledge of a trick-catch in a regimental flower- 
vase, the former position of a trophy on the wall, 
and the smashing of a wineglass after a loyal 
toast. That is true to life: it is probably true to 
death also. 

That is the kind of evidence which we ought to 
expect, and that is the kind of evidence which not 
infrequently we get. We have not been able to hold 
jt sufficient, however. The regiment in Kipling’s tale 
never thought of unconscious telepathy from themselves, 
as spoiling the testimony to be drawn from the uncouth 1 * 
savage’s apparent reminiscence: such an explanation 
would have been rightly felt to have been too forced and 
improbable, and exaggeratedly sceptical. But when it 
comes to proof of surviving existence and of memory 
beyond the tomb, we are bound to proceed even to this 
length, and to discount the witness of anything that is 
in our own minds; or, as some think, in the mind of 
any living person. 

Thus is the difficulty of incontrovertible proof of 
identity enormously increased. Even when the evidence 
enables a hidden thing to be discovered of which no 
one living possessed the secret—as in Swedenborg’s 

Chap, xi] 

AUTOMATIC WRITING 

175 

discovery of the dead burgomaster’s private papers 
above quoted, p. 119—deferred telepathy is sometimes 
adduced as preferable to what must then seem to most, 
as it did to Swedenborg, if not to Kant, the only rational 
explanation. 

CHAPTER XII 
PERSONAL IDENTITY 

I N illustration of the remarks made at end of last 
chapter, the following is a favourable instance of 
the mode in which evidence is given to prove 
identity in cases of automatic writing: it was described 
by Mr. Stainton Moses to Edmund Gurney and F. W. H. 
Myers, while it was still fresh, on his first meeting with 
them, May 9th, 1874. It is to be understood that he 
was an automatic writer, and one of those who could, 
as it were, “converse” with the script as it emanated 
from his own unconscious hand. He was accustomed 
alternately to write a conscious question and then to 
receive an unconscious or subliminal answer—-his hand 
being apparently guided by an intelligence not his own. 
The record runs thus :— 

On the evening of April 8th, 1874, while at Bedford with his father and 
mother, Mr. Stainton Moses, who had been receiving messages 
about ancient religions during the day, began to ask a question, 

“ I should like-,” when a meaningless drawing was made in 

place of intended words. 

Q. What is all that ? And why was I stopped ? 

A. “A spirit wished to communicate, and we are commanded to 
permit her. She is not able to write with ease, but will 
communicate through us. Her name is Fanny Westoby. 
Do you know the name?” 

Q. I do not remember. 

X76 ' 

Chap, xii] PERSONAL IDENTITY iy? 

A. “Your mother knows her well. She is a cousin of hers. She 

passed from your earth May 15th last” 

Q* Was she married. 

A- “ Yes, her maiden name was Kirkham.” 

Q. Fanny Kirkham. Yes, I have a dim remembrance. She used to 
live at Markby. 

A. “She says that she was born in Alford, in the house now occupied 
by Sam Stevenson. She then lived at Markby, and, having 
married, at Belchford. She passed away at Horncastle, at 63 
years of age. You do not remember her, when, in the 
year 1845, you went to see her at Markby. Her mother, 
Elizabeth Kirkham, was then just released from a lingering 
illness, and your mother had gone to condole with her 
cousin. You were taken round the farm, and rode on a 
goat (she is anxious on this point), and she threw you in 
sport into a heap of wheat which was being threshed 
The result was that you were severely bitten by the harvest 

bug. She is very anxious that you should recall this to your 

mother.” ’ J 

Q. I will, but is it wise ? 

A • “ You Wl11 not be abl e to induce her to search into this 
matter, but you may satisfy yourself that what is said is 
true.” 

<2- Has she any message ? 

A. She says, £ I lost, much of my opportunity for progress 
through the gratification of bodily appetite, which cast me 
back. My course of progress is yet to come. I find my 
present life. not very different from yours. I am nearly the 
same. I wish I could influence Mary, but I can’t get near 
her.” 

<2- Can she assure me that she is F. W. ? 

A. “She can give you no further evidence. Stay, ask your father 
about Donnington and the trap-door.” 

Q. I have not the least idea what she means. All the better. I will 
ask. Any more? Is she happy? 

A t <( She is as happy as may be in her present state.” 

Q * How did she find me out ? 

A. “ She came by chance, hovering near her friend [/.<?. Mrs, Moses], 
and discovered that she could communicate. She will return 
now.” 

<?• Can I help her? 

i 7 8 ' AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

A. “Yes, pray. She and all of us are helped when you devote your 

talents willingly to aid us.” 

Q. What do you mean ? . # . 

A, “In advocating and advancing our mission with care and judg¬ 
ment. Then we are permeated with joy. May the Supreme 
bless you. + & ECT0R 

On this Mr. Stainton Moses comments thus:—I 
have inquired of my mother and find the particulars 
given are exactly true. She wonders how I remember 
things that occurred when I was only 5 years old[ I 
have not ventured to say how I got the information, 
believing that it would be unwise and useless. My 
father I can get nothing out of about the trap-door. He 
either does not remember, or will not say. 

April'9th, 1874. My father has remembered this 
incident. A trap-door led on to the roof in the house he 
occupied at Donnington. The house was double roofed, 
and a-good view could be had from it. F. K. on a visit 
wanted to go there, and got fixed halfway, amid great 

laughter. ... , 

[We have verified Mrs. Westoby’s death m the 

Register of Deaths.—F. W. H. M.] 

It is indeed seldom that particulars of date, place, 
and circumstance are given so glibly and fully as this. 
Communicators themselves usually appear confused about 
these more precise details; but an ostensible reporter, 
having obtained the information from them at leisure, 
can sometimes quote it through an automatist with fair 
accuracy, as in the case above. 

Another striking case is that of the lady known here 
as “ Blanche Abercromby ” ; though in this case the con¬ 
cealment of real name removes some of the interest that 
would otherwise be felt in it. When the communication 
arrived through Mr. Stainton' Moses’s hand he was not 
aware of her death—nor did he know her at all well; in 

CHAP. XIIJ 

PERSONAL IDENTITY 

1 

fact he had only met her and her husband once at some 
seance, and had been annoyed at the strongly expressed 
disbelief of her husband in the possibility of such things. 

The communicating purports to be a hasty amende, 
at the earliest, posthumous, opportunity. Mr. Myers 
examined this case carefully, being much interested in 
some features, of it. The pages of the notebook in 
which the writing occurred had been gummed down and 
marked private, ’ nor had they apparently been men¬ 
tioned to-any one at the time. But years later, after the 
death of Mr. Stainton Moses, this and other books came 
into Mr. Myers’s hands, and with the consent of the 
executors he opened this portion. 

He was surprised to find a written communication 
entirely characteristic of a lady known to him, here 
called Blanche Abercromby, who had died on a Sunday 
afternoon about twenty-five years ago at a country 
house about two hundred miles from London. He 
found that it was on the very same evening near mid¬ 
night that the supernormal intimation of the death had 
reached Mr. Stainton Moses at his secluded lodgings 
in the north of London: and that afterwards the lady 
had ostensibly written a few lines herself. The evidence 
of the handwriting, which was in one point peculiar, is 
specifically testified to, not only by Mr. Myers, but by 
a member of the family, and by an expert (see Human 
Personality, vol. ii. p. 231, or Proc. S.P.R. xi. 96 et seg.). 
It is unlikely that Mr. Moses had ever seen her writing. 

. The chances necessary to secure a verification of 
this case were more complex that can here be fully 
explained. T. his lady, who was quite alien to these 
researches, had been dead about twenty years when 
her posthumous letter was discovered in Mr. Moses’s 
private notebook by one of the very few surviving 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, vr 

180 

persons who had both known her well enough to recog¬ 
nise the characteristic quality of the message, and were 
also sufficiently interested in spirit identity to get the 
handwritings compared and the case recorded. 

The entries in the MS. book will now be quoted. 
The communications began with some obscure drawings, 
apparently representing the flight of a bird; then in 
'answer to a question as to the meaning it went on:— 

A. “ It is a spirit who has but just quitted the body. Blanche Aber- 
cromby in the flesh. I have brought her. No more. M.” 

Q, Do you mean-? 

No reply. [Sunday night about midnight. The information is 
unknown to me.] 

(On Monday morning the script continues):— 

Q t I wish for information about last night. Is that true? Was it 
Mentor ? 

A. “Yes, good friend, it was Mentor, who took pity on a spirit that 
was desirous to reverse former errors. She desires us to say 
so. She was ever an inquiring spirit, and was called suddenly 
from your earth. She will rest anon. One more proof has 
been now given of continuity of existence. Be thankful and 
meditate with prayer. Seek not more now, but cease. We do 
not wish you to ask any questions now. 

f I: S:D.x Rector ,J 

A week later some matter of what must be called 
non-evidential quality appears; but in this instance 1 
propose to quote it because this is an important case. 

Q. Can you write for me now ? 

A. “ Yes, the chief is here.” 

Q„ How was it that spirit [Blanche Abercromby’s] came to me ? 

A. “ The mind was directed to the subject, and being active, it pro¬ 
jected itself to you. Moreover, we were glad to be able to 
afford you another proof of our desire to do what is in our 
power to bring home to you evidence of the truth of what we 
say.” 

Q. Is it correct to say that the direction of thought causes the spirit 
to be present ? 

Chap, xii] 

PERSONAL IDENTITY 

181 

A, u In some cases it is so. Great activity of spirit, coupled with 
anxiety to discover truth and to seek into the hidden causes 
of things, continue to make it possible for a spirit to manifest. 
Moreover, direction of thought gives what you would call 
direction or locality to the thought. By that we mean that 
the instinctive tendency of the desire or thought causes a pos¬ 
sibility of objective manifestation. Then by the help of those 
■. who, like ourselves, are skilled in managing the elements, mani¬ 
festation becomes possible. This would not have been possible 
in >this case, only that we took advantage of what would have 
passed unnoticed in order to work out another proof of the 
reality of our mission. It is necessary that there should be a 
combination of circumstances before such a manifestation can 
be possible. And that combination is rare. Hence the infre¬ 
quency of such events, and the difficulty we have in arranging 
them: especially when anxiety enters into the matter, as in the 
case of a friend whose presence is earnestly desired. It might 
well be that so ready a proof as this might not occur again.” 

Q. Then a combination of favourable circumstances aided you. Will 
the spirit rest, or does it not require it ? 

A. “ We do not know the destiny of that spirit. It will pass out of our 
control. Circumstances enabled us to use its presence: but 
that presence will not be maintained.” 

<?• H direction of thought causes motion, I should have thought it 
would be so with our friends and that they would therefore be 
more likely to come. 

A • “ It is not that alone. Nor is it so with all. All cannot come to 
earth. And not in all cases does volition or thought cause 
union of souls. Many other adjuncts are necessary before such 
can be. Material obstacles may prevent, and the guardians 
may oppose. We are not able to pursue the subject now, 
seeing that we write with difficulty. At another time we may 
resume. Cease for the present and do not seek further. 

t I: S: D. Rector ” 

A few days later, Mr. Moses wrote :— 

Q. The spirit B. A. began by drawing. Was it herself? 

A* “ With assistance. She could not write. One day if she is able to 
return again, she will be more able to express her thoughts, . . 

(A few days later.) 

182 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

A. A spirit who has before communicated will write for you herself. 
She will then leave you, having given the evidence that is 
required. 

“ I should much like to speak more with you, but it is not 
permitted. You have sacred truth. I know but little yet. I 
have much, much to learn.— Blanche Abercromby. 

“ It is like my writing as evidence to you.” 

The statement that the writing of this particular 
message is like that of the lady’s, was long afterwards 
verified with some care and trouble by Mr. Myers, and 
is correct. The amende , and the sentence “ I have 
much, much to learn,” are characteristic. 

Attempts have been made, and are still made from 
time to time, to explain all this sort of thing—some of 
it by the recrudescence of lapsed memory, some of it 
by telepathy, and some of it by clairvoyance. If such 
attempts are regarded as successful how can it be 
possible, by any means, to get over the difficulty and to 
establish the identity of any communicator ? I reply 

(#) by gradually accumulated internal evidence, 
based on pertinacious and careful record; 

(&) by cross correspondences, or the reception of 
unintelligible parts of one consistent and co¬ 
herent message, through different mediums ; 

(c) by information or criteria specially characteristic 
of the supposed communicating intelligence ; 
and, if possible, in some sense new to the world. 

Cross-correspondence—that is, the reception of part 
of a message through one medium and part through 
another—is good evidence of one intelligence dominating 
both automatists; especially if the parts separately are 
unintelligible, so that they cannot be rationally signalled 

Chap, xii] 

PERSONAL IDENTITY 

183 

either by normal or supernormal means. And if the 
message is characteristic of some one particular deceased 
person, and is received through people to whom he was 
not intimately known, then it is fair proof of the con¬ 
tinued intellectual activity of that personality. If further 
we get from him a piece of literary criticism which is 
eminently in his vein and has not occurred to ordinary 
people—not to either of the mediums, and not even to 
the literary world, but which on consideration is appre¬ 
ciated as sound as well as characteristic criticism, showing 
a familiar and wide knowledge of the poetry of many 
ages, and unifying apparently disconnected passages in 
some definite way,—then I say the proof, already 
striking, would tend to become crucial. 

These, then, are the kinds of proof at which the 
Society is aiming. These are the kinds of proof which 
are in process of being attained. 

CHAPTER XIII 

BEGINNING OF THE CASE OF MRS. PIPER 

T HE most famous of recent thorough automatists, 
or trance speaking and trance writing mediums, 
is undoubtedly Mrs. Piper of Boston, U.S.A. 
With her an enormous amount of work has been done ; 
and the Proceedings of the Society, both in the past and 
in future years, will bear witness to the richness and 
fertility of this case, as well as to the industry with which 
it has been pursued and its various stages studie . 
To give anything like a full account of even my own 
work in this direction—the merest fraction of the whole 

_would need much more space than it would be wise 

to expend on it in this book, so I shall select only such 
small portions as will give some idea of what happens, 
and refer students who wish to pursue the matter further 
to the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical 
Rcsccircli 

As a prelude to the Report on the 1890 English 
series of sittings, which were the first that the Society 
published, Mr. Myers at that time wrote an Introduction 
from which I will make a few extracts, because they 
illustrate the kind of view which that experienced in¬ 
vestigator at that time took of these in some respects 
novel phenomena. 

584 

Chap, xiii] 

MRS. PIPER 

*85 

Mr. F. W. H. Myers’s Early Testimony 

On certain external or preliminary points, all who 
have had adequate opportunity of judgment, are de¬ 
cisively agreed ; but on the more delicate and interesting 
question as to the origin of the trance-utterances we 
cannot unite in any absolute view. We agree only in 
maintaining that the utterances show that knowledge 
has been acquired by some intelligence in some 
supernormal fashion ;—and in urging on experimental 
psychologists the duty of watching for similar cases, and 
of analysing the results in some such way as we have 
endeavoured to do. 

The study of trance-utterances, indeed, is at first 
sight distasteful; since real and pretended trance-utter¬ 
ances have notoriously been the vehicle of much 
conscious and unconscious fraud. But we urge that, 
just as the physical and psychical phenomena of hysteria 
—long neglected as a mere jungle of trickeries—are 
now analysed with adequate security against deception, 
and with most fruitful results, so also these utterances 
are now capable of being rationally studied,—thanks 
to the advance in the comprehension of automatic 
phenomena which French and English effort during 
the last few years has achieved. 

These utterances, although they often occur in 
hysterical subjects, seem to have no necessary connection 
with hysteria. Nor again have we any real ground for 
calling them morbid per se, although their excessive 
repetition may lead to morbid states. All that we can 
safely say is that they are a form of automatism ; that 
they constitute one of many classes of phenomena which 
occur in sane subjects without entering the normal 
waking consciousness or forming part of the habitual 
chain of memory. 

In previous discussions automatism has been 
divided into active and passive types ; active automa¬ 
tism consisting of such phenomena as automatic writing 

,86 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

and trance-utterance—passive, of hallucinations of sight, 
hearing, etc. “ The automatism may be called active it 
it finds a motor channel, passive if it finds a sensory 
channel, but the impulse whence it originates may be 
much the same in the one case as in the other. 

The unsubstantial character of trance-utterances in 
general is fully admitted. “ Trance - addresses are 
eminently barren of fact; they generally show little 
more than a mere power of improvisation, which may 
either be fraudulently practised, or may be a character¬ 
istic faculty of the unconscious self.” 

When, therefore, we were informed by trusted wit¬ 
nesses,—by Professor William James, who is a physician 
as well as a psychologist, and by Mr. Hodgson, whose 
acumen in the detection of imposture has been proved 
in more fields than one,—that the utterances of Mrs. 
Piper’s trance did in their view unquestionably contain 
facts of which Mrs. Piper in her waking state was wholly 
ignorant, some inquiry into the character of this trance 
seemed to fall in the direct line of our work. 

However the specific trance-utterances may be 
interpreted, the case as a whole is a rare and remarkable 
one. It is an instance of automatism of that extreme 
kind where the upheaval of sub-conscious strata is not 
merely local, but affects, so to say, the whole psychical 
area;—where a secondary consciousness not only crops 
up here and there through the primary, but for a time dis¬ 
places it;—where, in short, the whole personality appears 
to suffer intermittent change. 

These trances cannot always be induced at pleasure. 
A state of quiet expectancy or “ self-suggestion ” will 
usually bring one on; but sometimes the attempt alto¬ 
gether fails. We never attempted to induce the trance 
by hypnotism. We understand, indeed, that Mrs. Piper 
has never been deeply hypnotised, although Professor 
Richet tried on her some experiments of suggestion in 
the waking state, and found her somewhat “ suggestible.” 
On the other hand, the trance has occasionally appeared 

[Sect, iv 

; of sight, 
active if 
i sensory 
■ may be 

*ances in 
sses are 
ow little 
lich may 
haracter- 

sted wit- 
physician 
in, whose 
n proved 
: of Mrs. 
y contain 
as wholly 
lis trance 

may be 
markable 
; extreme 
ata is not 
psychical 
mly crops 
l time dis- 
.y appears 

. pleasure, 
lion” will 
:mpt alto- 
,he trance 
VI rs. Piper 
Professor 
gestion in 
ggestible.” 
! appeared 

Chap, xiii] 

MRS. PIPER 

187 

when it was not desired. The first time that it occurred 
(as lrs. Piper informs us) it came as an unwelcome 
surprise. Ari instance of this kind occurred at Cam- 

° ri ?T f ° re S oin £ to bed she had, at my request, 
says Mr. Myers, and for the first time in her life, been 
looking into a crystal, with the desire to see therein 
some hallucinatory figure which might throw light on 
the nature of the mysterious secondary personality, 
bhe saw nothing; but next morning she looked ex¬ 
hausted, and said that she thought that she had been 
entranced during the. night. The next time that she 
went into a trance Phinuit [which is the name she used 
to be known by when in the trance] said he had come 
and called, and no one had answered him. It appeared 
as though the concentration of thought upon the crystal 
had acted as a kind of self-suggestion, and had induced 
the secondary state, when not desired. 

The trance when, induced generally lasted about an 
hour. On one occasion in my house, and I believe once 
at least in America, it only lasted for about a minute, 
rhmuit only had time to say that he could not remain, 
and then the habitual moaning began, and Mrs. Piper 
came to herself. r -- 

There was often a marked difference between the 
nrst few minutes of a trance and the remaining time. 
On such occasions almost all that was of value would 
be told in the first few minutes ; and the remaining talk 
would consist of vague generalities or mere repetitions 
of what had already been given. Phinuit, as will be 
seen, always professed himself to be a spirit communi¬ 
cating with spirits ; and he used to say that he 
remembered their messages for a few minutes after 
entering into the medium,” and then became confused. 
He was not, however, apparently able to depart when 
his budget of facts was empty. There seemed to be 
some irresponsible letting-off of energy which must 
continue until the original impulse was lost in in¬ 
coherence, 

188 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

Mrs. Piper’s case has been more or less continuously 
observed by Professor James and others almost from 
the date of the first sudden inception of the trance, some 
twenty-five years ago. Dr. Hodgson was in the habit 
of bringing acquaintances of his own to Mrs. Piper, 
without giving their names; and many of these have 
heard from the trance-utterance facts about their dead 
relations, etc., which they feel sure that Mrs. Piper could 
not have known. Dr. Hodgson also had Mr. and Mrs. 
Piper watched or “shadowed ” by private detectives for 
some weeks, with the view of discovering whether Mr. 
Piper (at that time alive and employed in a large 
store in Boston, U.S.A.) went about inquiring into the 
affairs of possible “sitters,” or whether Mrs. Piper 
received letters from friends or agents conveying in¬ 
formation. This inquiry was pushed pretty closely, but 
absolutely nothing was discovered which could throw 
suspicion on Mrs. Piper,—who is now aware of the 
procedure, but has the good sense to recognise the 
legitimacy—I may say the scientific necessity—of this 
kind of probation. 

It was thus shown that Mrs. Piper made no dis¬ 
coverable attempt to acquire knowledge even about 
persons whose coming she had reason to expect. Still 
less could she have been aware of the private concerns 
of persons brought anonymously to her house at Dr. 
Hodgson’s choice. 

We took great pains, continues Mr. Myers, to avoid 
giving information in talk; find a more complete security 
is to be found in the fact that we were ourselves 
ignorant of many of the facts given as to our friends’ 
relations, etc. In the case of Mrs. Verrall, for instance, 
no one in Cambridge except Mrs. Verrall herself could 
have supplied the bulk of the information given; and 

Chap, xml 

some of th< 
know. As 
have not th 

statements 3 

hand; since 
one of her 
an aunt, 
Come,” mi 
think that 
sources. B 
of such ac< 

r:i 

average sitt 
of those sul 
made by d 
the other l 
other sitter 

from a fri 
mentioning 
have been 
discovered. 

duct has n 

Chap, xiii] 

MRS. PIPER 

189 

some of the facts given Mrs. Verrall herself did not 
know. As regards my own affairs, says Mr. Myers, I 
have not thought it worth while to cite vtt exfenso such 
statements as might possibly have been got up before¬ 
hand ; since Mrs. Piper of course knew that I should be 
one of her sitters. Such facts as that I once had 
an aunt, “ Cordelia Marshall, more commonly called 
Corrie,” might have been learnt,—though I do not 
think that they were learnt,—from printed or other 
sources. But I do not think that any larger proportion 
of such accessible facts was given to me than to an 
average sitter, previously unknown ; nor were there any 
of those subtler points which could so easily have been 
made by dint of scrutiny of my books or papers. On 
the other hand, in my case, as in the case of several 
other sitters, there were messages purporting to come 
from. a friend who has been dead many years, and 
mentioning circumstances which I believe that it would 
have been quite impossible for Mrs. Piper to have 
discovered. 

I am also acquainted with some of the facts given 
to other sitters, and suppressed as too intimate, or as 
involving secrets not the property of the sitter alone. 
I may say that so far as my own personal conviction 
goes, the utterance of one or two of these facts is even 
more conclusive of supernormal knowledge than the 
correct statement of dozens of names of relations, etc., 
which the sitter had no personal motive for concealing. 

On the whole, I believe that all observers, both in 
America and in England, who have seen enough of 
Mrs. Piper in both states to be able to form a judgment, 
will agree in affirming (1) that many of the facts 
given could not have been learnt even by a skilled 
detective; (2) that to learn others of them, although 
possible, would have needed an expenditure of money 
as well as of time which it seems impossible to suppose 
that Mrs. Piper could have met; and (3) that her con¬ 
duct has never given any ground whatever for supposing 

! 9 0 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

her capable of fraud or trickery. Few persons have 
been so long and so carefully observed; and she has 
left on all observers the impression of thorough 
uprightness, candour, and honesty. 

Mrs. Piper and the Press 

It may be within the knowledge of some readers 
that in the year 1901 absurdly misleading articles 
appeared in the American Press , and were copied in 
some of the English papers, to the effect that Mrs. 
Piper had “ confessed ” and exploded her whole fabric. 

The articles belong to the discreditable side of 
transatlantic newspaper enterprise, and it is discouraging 
that they should not have been more readily assessed 
at their true worth. I find that the misconception thus 
started is occasionally still found surviving, so I quote 
the critical and judicial utterance of the Editor of the 
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research on the 
subject, which set the matter completely at rest so far 
as all members of the Society were concerned. 

Since issuing the November Joiirnal, a copy of the 
article on Mrs. Piper published in the New York Herald 
of October 20th [1901] has reached us. The first 
part of this is signed by Mrs. Piper herself, the second 
part consisting of comments and opinions on her case. 
The article begins by saying that Mrs. Piper intends to 
give up the work she has been doing for the S.P.R., in 
order to devote herself to other and more congenial 
pursuits ; and it goes on to say that it was on account of 
her own desire to understand the phenomena that she 
first allowed her trances to be investigated and placed 
herself in the hands of scientific men with the under¬ 
standing that she should submit to any tests they chose 
to apply; also that now, after fourteen years’ work, the 

MRS. PIPER 

Chap, xiii] 

191 

subject not being yet cleared up, she feels disinclined 
tor further Investigation. As to her own view of the 

phenomena, she says:—“The theory of telepathy 
strongly appeals to me as the most plausible and 
genuinely scientific solution of the problem. ... I do 
not believe that spirits of the dead have spoken through 
me when I have been in the trance state. ... It may 
be that they have, but I do not affirm it.” 

The Editor of Light states in his issue of November 
30th, 1901, that he has received a letter from Mrs. Piper 
in which she “ explains that, having heard that the New 
York Herald people had, in a preliminary announcement, 
advertised her name with the word ‘ Confession ’ above 
it, she at once forbade the publication of the article 
altogether. The result was that she received a telegram 
from the Herald counselling her to ‘sleep calm!’ and 
assuring her that the word ‘ Confession ’ had only been 
used in the_ way of 1 advertising smartness’ and would 
not appear in the Herald article. This telegram Mrs. 
Piper has sent for our inspection, and we have it still.” 

Dr. Hodgson has sent us cuttings from two Boston 
papers bearing on this report. The Boston Advertiser 
of October 25th, 1901, says that Mrs. Piper dictated the 
following statement to a representative of theirs :— 

“I did not make any such statement as that 
published in the New York Herald to the effect 
that spirits of the departed do not control me. ... My 
opinion is to-day as it was eighteen years ago. Spirits 
of the departed may have controlled me and they may 
not. I confess that I do not know. I have not 
changed. ... I make no change in my relations.” 

Now, comparing all these statements together, it will 
be seen that, neither in the original report in the Herald 
nor anywhere else has any revelation been made which 
could^ in any way affect the evidential value of Mrs. 
Piper s trance phenomena. Her honesty is not in 
question, and the Herald speaks of her throughout in 
highly laudatory terms. It represents her as holding a 

I92 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect. !V 

certain view of the phenomena—a view which is really 
incompatible with the supposition that they are fraudu¬ 
lent. Mrs. Piper’s later utterances show that, althougn 
the Heralds report was garbled and post-dated, she still 
expresses a preference for the telepathic over the 
spiritistic hypothesis. It is well known to all members 
of the S.P.R., and it is hardly necessary for us to repeat, 
that these two hypotheses have always been kept before 
the minds of those investigators who have sat with her; 
and since little value would be attached to her opinion in 
favour of the spiritistic hypothesis, it cannot fairly be 
urged that her opinion on the other side should weigh 
with us. Mrs. Piper, in fact, as we have already said, is 
not in a more favourable, but even in a less favourable, 
position for forming an opinion than those who sit with 
her, since she does not afterwards remember what passes 
while she is in trance. 

On the other hand, the allegation of the Herald that 
Mrs. Piper had determined finally to discontinue her 
sittings is shown to be unfounded. The sittings had 
been suspended for some months owing to her health; 
but one was held, as Dr. Hodgson informs us, on 
October 21st (the day after the article in the Herald 
appeared), and it was then arranged to resume them 
after an interval of three months. 

To sum up, it is clear that Mrs. Piper has neither 
said nor done anything to diminish the value of evidence 
obtained through her, that the report in the New York 
Herald was misleading, and that her relations with the 
Society and Dr. Hodgson continued on the same footing 
as before. 

J 9*rc fraudu- 
hat, although 
ated, she still 
lie over the 
all members 
1 us to repeat, 
n kept before 
sat with her; 
ler opinion in 
not fairly be 

.ready said, is 
ss favourable, 

: who sit with 
r what passes 

2 Herald that 
scontinue her 
i sittings had 
o her health • 

1 the Hen 
resume th< 

r has neitl 

he New Y 

same i 

CHAPTER XIV 

PROFESSOR WILLIAM JAMES’S EARLY TESTI¬ 
MONY TO MRS. PIPER 

A LTHOUGH Mrs. Piper was brought by the 
Society to England in the autumn of 1889, 
she was of course known to members of the 
Society in America before then, and, so far as we were 
concerned, may be said to have been “ discovered ” by 
Professor William James in 1885. His early experience 
of her sittings, and his testimony as to the way in which 
his initial scepticism was broken down, are very 
interesting; and I shall here make a few quotations 
from a short paper of his which was included in the 
Proceedings of the Society along with my first Report of 
the Piper Case. 

Professor William James’s Statement 

“ I made Mrs. Piper’s acquaintance in the autumn of 
1885. My wife’s mother, Mrs. Gibbens, had been told 
of her by a friend, during the previous summer, and, 
never having seen a medium before, had paid her a visit 
out of curiosity. She returned with the statement that 
Mrs. P. had given her a long string of names of 
members of the family, mostly Christian names, together 
with facts about the persons mentioned and their 

194 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, nr 

relations to each other, the knowledge of which on her 
part was incomprehensible without supernormal powers. 
My sister-in-law went the next day, with still better 
results, as she related them. Amongst other things, the 
medium had accurately described the circumstances of 
the writer of a letter which she held against her fore¬ 
head, after Miss G. had given it to her. The letter was 
in Italian, and its writer was known to but two persons 
in this country. 

“I may add that on a later occasion my wife and I 
took another letter from this same person to Mrs. P., 
who went on to speak of him in a way which identified 
him unmistakably again. On a third occasion, two 
years later, my sister-in-law and I being again with 
Mrs. P., she reverted in her trance to these letters, and 
then gave us the writer’s name, which she said she had 
not been able to get on the former occasion. 

“ But to revert to the beginning. I remember 
playing the esprit fort on that occasion before my 
feminine relatives, and seeking to explain by simple 
considerations the marvellous character of the facts 
which they brought back. This did not, however, 
prevent me from going myself a few days later, in 
company with my wife, to get a direct personal impres¬ 
sion. The names of none of us up to this meeting had 
been announced to Mrs. P.; and Mrs. J. and I were, of 
course, careful to make no reference to our relatives who 
had preceded. The medium, however, when entranced, 
repeated most of the names of ‘ spirits ’ whom she had 
announced on the two former occasions, and added 
others. The names came with difficulty, and were only 
gradually made perfect. My wife’s father’s name of 
Gibbens was announced first as Niblin, then as Giblin. 
A child Herman (whom we had lost the previous year) 

Chap - XIy ] TESTIMONY OP WILLIAM JAMES I9S 

had his name spelt out as Herrin. I think that in no 
case were both Christian and surnames given on this 
visit. But the facts predicated of the persons named 
made it in many instances impossible not to recognise 
the particular individuals who were talked about. We 
took particular pains on this occasion to give the Phinuit 
control no help over his difficulties and to ask no leading 
questions.. In the light of subsequent experience I 
believe this not to be the best policy. For it often 
happens, if you give this trance-personage a name or 
some small fact for the lack of which he is brought to a 
standstill, that he will then start off with a copious flow 

of additional talk, containing in itself an abundance of 
‘ tests.’ 

“ My impression after this first visit was, that Mrs. P. 
was either possessed of supernormal powers, or knew 
the members of my wife’s family by sight and had by 
some lucky coincidence become acquainted with such a 
multitude of their domestic circumstances as to produce 
the startling impression which she did. My later know¬ 
ledge of her sittings and personal acquaintance with her 
has led me absolutely to reject the latter explanation, 
and to believe that she has supernormal powers. 

“ 1 also ma -de during this winter an attempt to see 
whether Mrs. Piper’s medium-trance had any community 
of nature with ordinary hypnotic trance. 

“My first two attempts to hypnotise her were 
unsuccessful. Between the second time and the third, 
I suggested to her ‘control’ in the medium-trance that 
he should make her a mesmeric subject for me. He 
agreed. (A suggestion of this sort made by the operator 
in one hypnotic trance would probably have some effect 
on the next.) She became partially hypnotised on the 
third trial; but the effecc was so slight that I ascribe it 

I9 6 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, it 

m tVipr to the effect of repetition than to the suggestion 
marie Bv the fifth trial she had become a pretty goo 
hv^aotic subject, as far as muscular phenomena and 
automatic imitations of speech and ’ h 

ronld not affect her consciousness, or otherwise get ner 
Syond tWs point Her condition in ,Us semt-hypnos 
is very different from her medium-trance. The latter 
characterised by great muscular unrest, even he*'ears 
moving vigorously in 

express manipulation and suggestion must:bei pract!s d. 
The automatic imitations I spoke of a e j_ 

instance very weak, and only become strong after repeti 
tion Her Jupils contract in the medium-trance 
Suggestions tQ P the ‘control’ that he should make 
W Recollect after the medium-trance what she had 
been^layingwere accepted, but had no result. In he 
■ hypnotic- trance such a suggestion will often make the 
™npnt remember all that has happened. 

P “No sicm of thought-transference—as tested by card 
, diagram guessin°-has been found in her, either in 
the hypnoti/condition just described, or immediately 
Srer h although her •control 1 in the medium-trance 
haf slid that he would bring them about. So far as 
tried (only twice), no right guessing of cards in t e 
medium trance. No clear signs of thought-transference, 
S tesSd by the naming of cards, during the waking 
state ' Trials of the ‘willing game,’ and attempts at 
automatic writing, gave similarly negative 
far as the evidence goes, then, her medium-trance seems 
an isolatedfeature In her psychology. This would of 
itself be an important result if it could be established and 
creneralised but the record is obviously too imperfect 
confident conclusions to be drawn from it in any 

direction. 

Chap - xiv 1 TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM JAMES 

197 

‘ Here I dropped my inquiries into Mrs. Piper’s 
mediumship for a period of about two years, having 
satisfied myself that there was a genuine mystery there, 
but being over-freighted with time-consuming duties, 
and feeling that any adequate circumnavigation of the 
phenomena would be too protracted a task for me to 
aspire just then to undertake. I saw her once, half- 
accidentally, however, during that interval, and in the 
spring of 1889 saw her four times again. In the fall of 
1889 she paid us a visit of a week at our country house 
in New Hampshire, and I then learned to know her 
personally better than ever before, and had confirmed in 
me the belief that she is an absolutely simple and 
genuine person. No one, when challenged, can give 
‘ evidence ’ to others for such beliefs as this. Yet we all 
live by them from day to day, and practically I should 
be willing now to stake as much money on Mrs. Piper’s 
honesty as on that of anyone I know, and am quite 
satisfied to leave my reputation for wisdom or folly, so 
far as human nature is concerned, to stand or fall by this 
declaration. 

And I repeat again what I said before, that, taking 
everything that I know of Mrs. P. into account, the 
result is to make me feel as absolutely certain as I am 
of any personal fact in the world that she knows things 
in her trances which she cannot possibly have heard in 
her waking state, and that the definitive philosophy of 
her trances is yet to be found. The limitations of her 
trance-information, its discontinuity and fitfulness, and 
its apparent inability to develop beyond a certain point, 
although they end by rousing one’s moral and human 
impatience with the phenomenon, yet are, from a 
scientific point of view, amongst its most interesting 
peculiarities, since where there are limits there are 

i 9 8 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

conditions, and the discovery of these is always the 
beginning of explanation.” 

The most recent utterance of Professor William James 
on the subject is published in the Proceedings of the 
S.P.R. for June 1909 (Part lvixi.), and it contains an 
account of conversations carried on through Mrs. Piper 
since Dr. Hodgson’s death with what purported to 
be Dr. Hodgson’s surviving personality—together with 
Professor James’s critical comments thereupon. I do 
not quote, since the publication can easily be obtained. 

CHAPTER XV 

THE AUTHOR’S FIRST REPORT ON MRS. PIPER 

M Y own first Report on this case appeared in 1890, 
soon after the close of Mrs. Piper’s first visit to 
England, and it ran as follows :— 

Account of Sittings with Mrs. Piper 
Formal Report 

At the request of Mr. Myers I undertook a share in 
the investigation of a case of apparent clairvoyance. 

It is the case of a lady who appears to go off into a 
trance when she pleases to will it under favourable 
surroundings, and in that trance to talk volubly, with 
a manner and voice quite different from her ordinary 
manner and voice, on details concerning which she has 
had no information given her. 

In this abnormal state her speech has reference mainly 
to people’s relatives and friends, living or deceased, about 
whom she is able to hold a conversation, and with whom 
she appears more or less familiar. 

By introducing anonymous strangers, and by cate¬ 
chising her myself in various ways, I have satisfied 
myself that much of the information she possesses in 
the trance state is not acquired by ordinary common¬ 
place methods, but that she has some unusual means of 
acquiring information. The facts on which she dis¬ 
courses are usually within the knowledge of some person 

*99 1 • : v ■ 

200 

■- . . . 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, xv 

present, though they are often entirely out of his con¬ 
scious thought at the time. Occasionally facts have 
been narrated which have only been verified afterwards, 
and which are in good faith asserted never to have been 
known; meaning thereby that they have left no trace 
on the conscious memory of any person present or m 
the neighbourhood, and that it is highly improbable that 
they were ever known to such persons. 

She is also in the trance state able to diagnose 
diseases, and to specify the owners or late owners of 
portable property, under circumstances which preclude 
the application of ordinary methods. 

In the midst of this lucidity a number of mistaken 
and confused statements are frequently made, having 
little or no apparent meaning or application. 

Concerning the particular means by which she acquires 
the different kinds of information, there is no sufficient 
evidence to make it safe to draw any conclusion. I can 
only say with certainty that it is by none of the ordinary 
methods known to Physical Science. 

Oliver J. Lodge 

May, 1890 

In order to gain experience, my wife had invited Mrs. 
Piper to our house in Liverpool between the dates 
December 18th and December 27th, 1889; and again 
between the dates January 30th and February 5th, 1890, 
when she sailed for New York. 

During these days we had twenty-two sittings, and I 
devoted my whole time to the business, being desirous 
of making the investigation as complete and satisfactory 
as possible while the opportunity lasted. 

Mrs. Piper pretends to no knowledge as to her own 
powers, and I believe her assertion that she is absolutely 
ignorant of what she has said in the trance state. She 
appears to be anxious to get the phenomenon elucidated, 
and hopes by sitting to scientific investigators to have 

201 

Chap, xv] REPORT ON MRS. PIPER 

light thrown on her abnormal condition, about which she 
expresses herself as not quite comfortable. She perfectly 
appreciates the reasonableness of withholding informa- 
tion ; assents with a smile to a sudden stop in the middle 
of a sentence, and in general is quite uninquisitive. All 
this innocency may, of course, be taken as perfection 
of acting, but it deprives her of the great advantage 
(assuming fraudulent intention for the moment) of con¬ 
trolling the circumstances after the manner of a conjurer ; 
and prevents her from being the master of her own time 
and movements. The control of the experiments was 
thus entirely in my own hands, and this is an essential 
ingredient for satisfactory testimony. 

The initial question to be satisfactorily answered, 
before anything can be held worth either investigating 
or recording, concerns the honesty of Mrs Piper herself. 

That there is more than can be explained by any 
amount of either conscious or unconscious fraud—that 
the phenomenon is a genuine one, however it is to be 
explained— I now regard as absolutely certain; and 
I make the following two statements with the utmost 
confidence:— 

(i.) Mrs. Piper's attitude is not one of deception. 

(ii.) No conceivable deception on the part of Mrs. 
Piper can explain the facts. 

[I went on to enumerate eight possibilities of impos¬ 
ture against which we were on our guard: but matters 
have advanced far beyond that now, and it is useless to 
dwell upon this discarded part of the subject.] 

Cheating being eliminated, and something which 
may briefly be described as a duplex or trance personality 
being conceded, the next hypothesis is that her trance 
personality makes use of information acquired by her 

202 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

in her waking state, and retails what it finds in 
her sub-consciousness without any ordinary effort o 
memory. 

It is an interesting question whether any tacts 
instilled into the waking Mrs. Piper can be recognise 
in the subsequent trance speech. My impression 
at one time was that the trance information is 
practically independent of what specific. facts Mrs. 
Piper may happen to know. The evidence now 
seems to me about evenly balanced on either side. 
Whether the trance speech could give, say,, scientific 
facts, or a foreign language, or anything in its nature 
entirely beyond her ken, I am unable to say. [Further 
information on these points is now accessible, but not 
anything finally conclusive. It appears that unknown 
details and incidents can certainly be obtained, but 
hardly information on some alien and recondite sub¬ 
ject,—at least without great difficulty.] So far as 
my present experience has gone, I do not feel 
sure how far Mrs. Piper’s knowledge or ignorance of 
specific facts has an appreciable influence on the com¬ 
munications of her trance personality. But certainly the 
great mass of facts retailed by this personality are wholly 
outside of Mrs. Piper’s knowledge ; in detail, though not 
in kind. 

The personality active and speaking in the trance is 
apparently so distinct from the personality of Mrs. Piper 
that it is permissible and convenient to call it by another 
name. It does not differ from her as Hyde did from 
Jekyll, by being a personification of the vicious portion 
of the same individual. There is no special contrast, 
any more than there is any special similarity. It strikes 
one as a different personality altogether; and the name 
by which it introduces itself when asked, viz., “Dr. 

|^£AJT. IV 

REPORT ON MRS. PIPER 

t finds in 
7 effort of 

any facts 
recognised 
impression 
rmation is 
facts Mrs. 
dence now 
either side, 
y, scientific 
i its nature 
[Further 
ale, but not 
at unknown 
atained, but 
aondite sub- 
So far as 
iO not feel 
ignorance of 
on the com- 
certainly the 
ty are wholly 
1 , though not 

the trance is 
of Mrs. Piper 
it by another 
yde did from 
r icious portion 
ecial contrast, 
ty. It strikes 
and the name 
:d, viz., “Dr. 

ill 

Chap, xv] 

203 

Phinuit,” is as convenient as any other, and can be used 
wholly irrespective of hypothesis. 

I would not, in using this name, be understood as 
thereby committing myself to any hypothesis regarding 
the nature of this apparently distinct and individual 
mind. At the same time the name is useful as express¬ 
ing compactly what is naturally prominent to the feeling 
of any sitter, that he is not talking to Mrs. Piper at all. 
The manner, mode of thought, tone, trains of idea, are 
all different. You are speaking no longer to a lady, but 
to a man, an old man, a medical man. All this cannot 
but be vividly felt even by one who considered the im¬ 
personation a consummate piece of acting. 

Whether such a man as Dr. Phinuit ever existed 
I do not know, nor from the evidential point of view 
do I greatly care. It will be interesting to have the fact 
ascertained if possible; but I cannot see that it will 
much affect the question of genuineness. For that he 
did not ever exist is a thing practically impossible to 
prove. While, if he did exist, it can be easily supposed 
that Mrs. Piper took care enough that her impersona¬ 
tion should have so much rational basis. 

Proceeding now on the assumption that I may speak 
henceforth of Dr. Phinuit as of a genuine individual 
intelligence, whether it be a usually latent portion of 
Mrs. Piper’s intelligence, or whether it be something 
distinct from her mind and the education to which it has 
been subjected, I go on to consider the hypotheses which 
still remain unexamined. 

And first we have the hypothesis of fishery on the 
part of Dr. Phinuit, as distinguished from trickery on 
the part of Mrs. Piper. I mean a system of ingenious 
fishing: the utilisation of trivial indications, of every 
intimation—audible, tactile, muscular—and of little shades 

204 

.AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY 

[DECT. 

of manner too indefinable to name; all these, excited in 
the^ sitter by skilful guesses and well-directed shots, and 
their nutriment extracted with superhuman cunning. 

Now this hypothesis is not one to be lightly regarded, 
or ever wholly set aside. I regard it as, to a certain 
extent, a vera causa . At times Dr. Phinuit does fish ; 
occasionally he guesses; and sometimes he ekes out the 
scantiness of his information from the resources of a 
lively imagination. 

. Whenever his supply of information is abundant there 
is no sign of the fishing process. 

. At other times il: is as if he were in a difficult posi¬ 
tion,—only able to gain information from very indistinct 
or inaudible sources, and yet wishful to convey as much 
information as possible. The attitude is then as of one 
straining after every clue, and making use of the slightest 
indication, whether received in normal or abnormal 
ways: not indeed obviously distinguishing between 
information received from the sitter and information 
received from other sources. 

,< u an ? famiIiar with muscle-reading and other simulated 
thought-transference” methods, and prefer to avoid 
contact whenever it is possible to get rid of it without 
too much fuss. Although Mrs. Piper always held some¬ 
body s hand while preparing to go into the trance, she 
did not always continue to hold it when speaking as 
Phinuit. She did usually hold the hand of the person 
she was speaking to, but was often satisfied for a time 
with some other person’s, sometimes talking right across 
a room to and about a stranger, but preferring them to 
come near. On several occasions she let go of every¬ 
body, for half-hours together, especially when fluent and 
kept well supplied with “relics;” 

I have now to assert with entire confidence that, 

Chap, xv] REPORT ON MRS. PIPER 2QS 

pressing the ingenious-guessing and unconscious-indi^ 

tion hypothesis to its utmost limit, it can only be hekh 1 - 
t0 amount for a very few of Dr. Phinuit’s statements. 

It cannot in all cases be held to account for f 
medical diagnosis, afterwards confirmed by the regular 
practitioner. It cannot account for minute and full 
details of names, circumstances, and events, given to a 
cautious and almost silent sitter, sometimes without con¬ 
tact. And, to take the strongest case at once, it cannot 
account for the narration of facts outside the conscious 
knowledge of the sitter or of any person present. 

Rejecting the fishery hypothesis, then, as insufficient 
to account for many of the facts, we are driven to the 
only remaining known cause in order to account for 
them viz., thought-transference, or the action of mind 
on mind independently of the ordinary channels of 
communication. 

I regard the fact of genuine “thought-transference” 
between persons in immediate proximity (not necessarily 
in contact) as having been established by direct and 
simple experiment; and, except by reason of paucity 
of instance, I consider it as firmly grounded as any of 
the less familiar facts of nature such as one deals with in 
a laboratory. I speak of it therefore as a known cause, 
i.e. one to which there need be no hesitation in appealing 
in order to explain facts which without it would be 
inexplicable. 

The Phinuit facts are most of them of this nature, 
and I do not hesitate to assert confidently that thought- 
transference is the most commonplace explanation to 
•which it is possible to appeal. 

I regard it as having been rigorously proved before, 
and as therefore requiring no fresh bolstering up; but 
to the many who have not made experiments on the 

206 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

subject, and are therefore naturally sceptical concerning 
even thought-transference, the record of the Phinuit 
sittings will afford, I think, a secure basis for faith in 
this immaterial mode of communication,—this apparently 
direct action of mind on mind. 

But, whereas the kind of thought-transference which 
had been to my own knowledge experimentally proved 
was a hazy and difficult recognition by one person of 
objects kept as vividly as possible in the consciousness 
of another person, the kind of thought-transference 
necessary to explain these sittings is of an altogether 
freer and higher order,—a kind which has not yet been 
experimentally proved at all. Facts are related which 
are not in the least present to the consciousnes of the 
sitter, and they are often detailed glibly and vividly 
without delay; in very different style from the tedious 
and hesitating dimness of the percipients in the old 
thought-transference experiments. 

But that is natural enough, when we consider that 
the percipient in those experiments had to preserve a 
mind as vacant as possible. For no process of inducing 
mental, vacancy can be so perfect as that of going into 
a trance, whether hypnotic or other. Moreover, although 
it was considered desirable to maintain the object con¬ 
templated in the consciousness of the agent, a shrewd 
suspicion was even then entertained that the sub-conscious 
part of the agent’s mind might be perhaps equally 
effective. 

Hence one is at liberty to apply to these Phinuit 
records the hypothesis of thought-transference in its most 
developed state: vacuity on the part of the percipient, 
sub-conscious activity on the part of the sitter. 

In this form one feels that much can be explained. If 
Dr. Phinuit tells a stranger how many children, or brothers, 

Chap, xv] 

REPORT ON MRS. PIPER 

207 

or sisters he has, and their names; the names of father 
and mother and grandmother, of cousins and of aunts ; 
if he brings appropriate and characteristic messages from 
well-known relatives deceased; all this is explicable on 
the hypothesis of free and easy thought-transference 
from the sub-consciousness of the sitter to the sensitive 
medium of the trance personality. 1 

So strongly was I impressed with this view that after 
some half-dozen sittings I ceased to feel much interest 
in being told things, however minute, obscure, and in¬ 
accessible they might be, so long as they were, or had 
been, within the knowledge either of myself or of the 
sitter for the time being. 

At the same time it ought to be constantly borne in 
mind that this kind of thought-transference, without 
consciously active agency, has never been experimentally 
proved. Certain facts not otherwise apparently explic¬ 
able, such as those chronicled in Phantasms of the Living, 
have suggested it, but it is really only a possible hypo¬ 
thesis to which appeal has been made whenever any 
other explanation seems out of the question. But until 
it is actually established by experiment, in the same way 
that conscious mind action has been established, it can¬ 
not be regarded as either safe or satisfactory; and in 
pursuing it we may be turning our backs on some truer 
but as yet perhaps unsuggested clue. I feel as if this 
caution were necessary for myself as well as for other 
investigators. 

1 For instance, in the course of my interviews, all my six brothers (adult 
and scattered) and one sister living were correctly named (two with some 
help), and the existence of the one deceased was mentioned. My father 
and his father were likewise named, with several uncles and aunts. My 
wife’s father and stepfather, both deceased, were named in full, both 
Christian and surname, with full identifying detail. I only quote these as 
examples ; it is quite unnecessary as well as unwise to attach any evidential 
weight to statements of this sort made during a sojourn in one’s house. 

208 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

On reading the record it will be apparent that while 
‘ ‘ Phinuit ” frequently speaks in his own person, relating 
things which he himself discovers by what I suppose we 
must call ostensible clairvoyance, sometimes he represents 
himself as in communication—not always quite easy and 
distinct communication, especially at first, but in com¬ 
munication—with one’s relatives and friends who have 
departed this life. 

The messages and communications from these persons 
are usually given through Phinuit as a reporter. And 
he reports sometimes in the third person, sometimes in 
the first. Occasionally, but very seldom, Phinuit seems 
to give up his place altogether to the other personality, 
friend or relative, who then communicates with some¬ 
thing of his old manner and individuality; becoming 
often impressive and realistic. 

This last I say is rare, but with one or two personages 
it occurs, subject to reservations to be mentioned directly ; 
and when it does, Phinuit does not appear to know what 
has been said. It is quite as if he in his turn evacuated the 
body, just as Mrs. Piper had done, while a third personality 
utilises it for a time. The voice and mode of address are 
once more changed, and more or less recall the voice 
and manner of the person represented as communicating. 

The communications thus obtained, though they 
show traces of the individuality of the person represented 
as speaking, are frequently vulgarised ; and the speeches 
are more commonplace, and so to say “ cheaper,” than 
what one would suppose likely from the person himself. 
It can, of course, be suggested that the necessity of 
working through the brain of a person not exceptionally 
educated may easily be supposed capable of dulling the 
edge of refinement, and of rendering messages on abstruse 
subjects impossible. 

CHAPTER XVI 

EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

A ND now mi ght follow a detailed report of the 
i 1 sittings which at that date (1889-1890) I held 
with Mrs. Piper in my house at Liverpool, all 
of which were taken down very fully; some of 
them verbatim by a stenographer introduced on those 
occasions. Tor in those days communication was con¬ 
ducted entirely by the voice; writing being quite 
exceptional and limited to a few words occasionally. 

ereas in more recent years communication is for 
1 e most part conducted by writing only, and the need 
tor stenography has practically ceased. 

My detailed report appears in the Proceedings of 
ie Society, vol. vi., but it occupies a great deal of space, 
and would be merely tiresome if reproduced in any 
quantity. Accordingly I propose to make only a few 
extracts, quoting those incidents which demonstrate one 
or other of the following powers; or which illustrate 
by way of example the general character of the sittings 
at that time, regarded rather from the dramatic than 
irom the evidential point of view. 

The powers just referred to are the following:_ 

(1) The perception of trivial events simultaneously 
occurring at a distance. 

210 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

( 2 ) The reading of letters by other than normal 

(3) The recognition of objects and assignment of 

them to their respective owners 

(.4) Perception of small and intimate fami y 

in the case of complete strangers. _ 

(5) The statement of facts unknown at the time to 

any person present; , 

(6) With perhaps a supplement illustrating apparent 
' 1 ignorance of some facts within Mrs. Pipers 

normal knowledge, and likewise - what are 
frequent—instances of erroneous statement 
concerning facts which are well-known to, 
and in the mind of, the sitter. 

Among sitters, I may mention Dr Gerald Rendall, 
late of Trinity College, Cambridge, then Prmcipa of 
University College, Liverpool. _ He was introduced as 
Mr Roberts, and a sitting was immediately commence . 
The names of his brothers were all given correctly at 
te or Tie evening sitting of the same day, with many 

soecific details which were correct. . 

He brought with him a locket, and received com¬ 
munications and reminiscences purportingtoccimerom 
the deceased friend whom it commemorated, some ot 
them at present incompletely verified by reason 0 
absence of aersons in America, some of them apparently 
incorrect, but those facts which he knew correctly stated 
in such a way as to satisfy him that chance guessing 
and all other commonplace surmises were absurdly out 

° f 1 Another sitter was Prof. E. C. K. Gonner, then 
Lecturer on Economics at University College, Liverpool, 
introduced as Mr. McCunn, another colleague with whom 
therefore he might on a fraudulent hypothesis be effused. 
He brought a book belonging to his mother, still living 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 211 

farnilTfnrl 3 and had many correct details concerning her 
tamily and surroundings related to him. g “ 

wh»!i an l° f hlS own famiIy were also mentioned - but 
whether because of the book or otherwise hS mother’s 

^raMimef^l P °u Werful than ^ ownf and! 
to rr Se y ’eider e ” ention . e ’ d '“'’Jerms 0 *'’™* reM “sh°p 

bTOther WiI1 “ 
died before I prof V C lllam W&S a , good inst ance. He had 

ttnz ;x: n S °¥t 

striHnghimon a Sehead Y ° rkShlre deCtion Hot> a&stone 

Speaking of deaths, I may also mention the case of 
my wife s father, who died when she was a fortnight old 
m a dramatic and pathetic fashion. Phinuit described 
the circumstances of his death rather vividly. The cause 

define h ? r Ste P fath F als °- which was perfect^ 
definite, was also precisely grasped The fill u ^ 

own father down thfhold of fis sS^ anJhis conseLeS 
leg-pam were clearly stated. My wife was present on 
these occasions, and of course had been told of all these 
family incidents, and remembered them. 

, f S “ n ^ s . trati on of the facility with which in those 
days Dr. Phinuit arrived at the relatives and their 
peculiarities of a complete stranger, I take the case of 
two sittings on the same day at which a medical man 
practising in Liverpool was introduced without notice 
by the false name of Dr. Jones. During the sitting the 
name, tastes, and defect of one little deaf and dumb 

3I2 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

daughter, “ Daisy,” of whom he was verywere 
vividly stated. My children are not acquainted with ha. 

1 may say that Dr. C. was almost enfrely dent 
Occasionally he assented with a grunt, but I found 
afterwards that he was assenting to wrong quite as much 
as to right statements. I hardly ever knew what was 
right and what wrong as I took the notes. 
thus an excellent though trying sitter. Phinul ^ aS ^ 
one of his most loquacious moods, or he would not ha 
nrooressed so well. Towards the end one could see he 
began to get tired of his own monologue. The following 
is a very abbreviated record: 

Sitting No. 42. Monday morning , December 2$rd 

Present: Dr. C. (introduced as Dr. Jones) and O. J. L. 

She following is an abstract of the correct, or subsequently 
corrected or otherwise noteworthy, statements. The false ones are 

similarly collected and appear later, page 215.] 

“ You have a little lame girl, lame in the thigh, aged 13; either 
second or third. She’s a little daisy. I do like her Dark eyes 
he gentlest of the lot; good deal of talent for music. She will be a 
brilliant woman ; don’t forget it. She has more sympathy, more mind, 
more—quite a little daisy. She’s got a mark, a curious little mark, 
when you look closely, over eye, a scar through forehead over left eye. 
Jhe boy’s erratic; a little thing, but a little devil. Pretty good when 
you know him. He’ll make an architect likely. Let him go to school. 
His mother’s too nervous. It will do him good. [This was a subject 
in dispute.! You have a boy and two girls and a baby; four m the 
body. It’s J the little lame one I care for. There are two mothers 
connected with you, one named Mary. Your aunt passed out with 
cancer You have indigestion, and take hot water for it. You have 
had a bad experience. You nearly slipped out once on the water. 
[Dangerous yacht accident last summer. Above statements are correct 
except the lameness. See next sitting.! 

He came again the same evening and brought his 
wife This time, unfortunately, they were admitted by 
a servant, who announced their names. Phinuit did not 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

213 

.mention it, however. The full account of these sittings 
is long, and would require a great deal of annotation to 
make the details clear. For the sake of brevity, I 
propose merely to abstract them. There are a number 
of erroneous statements, some of them to be partially 
accounted for by the fact that Dr. and Mrs. C. are 
cousins (a fact which I did not know, and which Phinuit 
did not ascertain); so he mixed their relatives at 
the second sitting. The family seems to be a very 
large one. I quote later the misstatements, but first 
I pick out the correct ones or those which require 
comment 

Sitting No. 43. Monday evenings December 23rd 

Present: Dr. and Mrs. C. and O. J. L. [Statement correct when 
not otherwise noted.] 

“How’s little Daisy? She will get over her cold. But there’s 
something the matter with her head. There’s somebody round you 
lame and somebody hard of hearing. That little girl has got music 
in her. This lady is fidgety. There are four of you, four going to 
stop with you, one gone out of the body. One got irons on his foot. 
Mrs. Allen, in her surroundings is the one with iron on leg. [Allen 
was maiden name of mother of lame one.] There’s about 400 of your 
family. There’s Kate ; you call her Kitty. She’s the one that’s kind 
of a crank. Trustworthy, but cranky. She will fly off and get married, 
she will. Thinks she knows everything, she does. [This is the nurse- 
girl, Kitty, about whom they seem to have a joke that she is a walking 
compendium of information.] (An envelope with letters written inside, 
N—H—P—O—Q, was here handed in, and Phinuit wrote down 
B — J —R—O— I —S, not in the best of tempers.) A second cousin 
of your mother’s drinks. The little dark-eyed one is Daisy. I like 
her. She can’t hear very well. The lame one is a sister’s child. [A 
cousin’s child, the one nee Allen, really.] The one that’s deaf in her 
head is the one that’s got the music in her. That’s Daisy, and she’s 
going to have the paints I told you of. [Fond of painting.] She’s 
growing up to be a beautiful woman. She ought to have a paper ear. 
[An artificial drum had been contemplated.] You have an Aunt Eliza. 
There are three Maries, Mary the mother, Mary the mother, Mary the 
mother. [Grandmother, aunt, and granddaughter.] Three brothers 
and two sisters your lady has. Three in the body. There were 

214 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

eleven in your family, two passed out small [Only know of nine.] 
Fred is going to pass out suddenly. He married a cousin. He writes. 
He has shining things. Lorgnettes, He is away. He’s got a catchy 
trouble with heart and kidneys, and will pass out suddenly.” [Not the 
least likely. I have inquired and find that the “ Fred ” supposed to 
be intended is still alive in 1909. O. J. L.] 

Note.— The most striking part of this sitting is 
the prominence given to Dr. C.’s favourite little 
daughter, Daisy, a child very intelligent and of a very 
sweet disposition, but quite deaf; although her training 
enables her to go to school and receive ordinary lessons 
with other children. At the first sitting she is supposed 
erroneously to be lame, but at the second sitting this 
is corrected and explained, and all said about her is 
practically correct, including the cold she then had. 
Mrs. Piper had had no opportunity whatever of knowing 
or hearing of the C. children by ordinary social means. 
We barely know them ourselves. Phinuit grasped the 
child’s name gradually, using it at first as a mere descrip¬ 
tion. I did not know it myself. Dr. Phinuit is lavish 
with predictions, such as the one at the end, which fre¬ 
quently, I think usually, fail. I deeply regret to say 
that his predictions regarding Daisy are likewise false, 
for she caught the influenza, and the announcement of 
her death is in to-day’s paper .—June, 1890. 

A list of particulars like this makes very dull reading, 
but evidentially it is as good as can be. No possible 
normal means can be suggested by which these things 
were obtained, nor was there any fishing or guidance 
by the sitter. 

The only normal explanation is that they were hit 
upon by chance, but that is perfectly absurd, as any one 
will realise who will go through these incidents and try 
to apply them to himself or to any friend known to him. 
As a matter of fact they do not apply, and cannot apply 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

215 

in their entirety, to anybody but the person for whom 
they were intended. 

Of course this is by no means a solitary instance of 
the detection of appropriate family details, and perhaps 
it is not so striking as some others, but it is a sound 
instance that came directly within my own observation. 

The doctor himself was characteristically sceptical 
about the whole thing, but permits me to append the 
following note of his on the case, written some time 
later :— 

“The trance state seemed natural; but had more 
voluntary movement than I had ever seen in an epileptic 
attack. The entire change in Mrs. Piper’s manner and 
behaviour is unlike an intentional effort, and it is possible 
she herself believes that the conditions mean something 
outside of herself. With regard to the result, the misses 
seem to balance the hits, and the ‘reading’ is not so 
impressive as the ‘ sitting.’ After reading over your 
notes I think they consist of a certain amount of thought¬ 
reading and a large amount of skilful guessing.” 

I find myself unable to agree with the hasty state¬ 
ment that “the misses balance the hits,” since even 
numerically they are distinctly fewer; and if the result 
were due to chance they ought to be out of all com¬ 
parison fewer. 

» The following is a summary of the false assertions 
ade during the two sittings :— 

At first sitting :— 

* “Your lady’s Fanny; well, there is a Fanny. [No.] Fred has 
light hair, brownish moustache, prominent nose. [No.] Your thesis 
was some special thing. I should say about lungs.” [No.] 

At second sitting :— 

“Your mother’s name was Elizabeth. [No.] Her father’s lame. 
[No.] Of your children there’s Eddie and Willie and Fannie or Annie 

21 6 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

and a sister that faints, and Willie and Katie (no, Katie don't count) 
[being the nurse], and Harry and the little dark-eyed one, Daisy. [All 
wrong except Daisy.] One passed out with sore throat. [No.] The 
boy looks about eight. [No, four.] Your wife's father had something 
wrong with leg; one named William. [No.] Your grandmother had 
a sister who married a Howe—Henry Howe. [Unknown.] There’s a 
Thomson connected with you [no], and if you look you will find a 
Howe too. Your brother the captain [correct], with a lovely wife, who 
has brown hair [correct], has had trouble in head [no], and has two 
girls and a boy.” [No, three girls.] 

As another Instance of the disentangling of the 
relatives of a stranger, I take the case of a shorthand 
clerk whom I had borrowed once or twice from the 
College Registrar to take down what was said verbatim. 
He sat at a distance taking notes, but Phinuit presently 
began to refer to him, told him that his brother had had 
a tooth out (which was true) and told him to inquire 
about a George Edward H. who had hurt his hand at 
a party, but who has not been recognised. Then he 
said— 

“There seems to be some of that fellow’s friends about here whom 
I can’t avoid. There’s a lot, and I can’t get things straight. You will 
have to let me talk to him and get all his influence, and then I will 
talk to the rest of you, I can’t help it. Get out. You don’t mind 
me, do you ? ” 

[Exeunt O. J. L., A. L., and M. L.] 

(Clerk now came and took one hand, taking brief notes with t'Je 
other.) J\ 

“Your relations make me get mixed ; they confuse me when Imi 
talking to the Captain, so if I mention anyone belonging to you you 
must tell me, that we may keep things straight. There’s an old lady jn 
the spirit talking to me, and her influence disturbs me. [Grandmother 
died a few years ago.] Ask your brother if he don’t know those people 
at party, and that fellow who hurt his hand, George Edward H., and 
he’s got a brother Fred. You have a cousin Charley [true] that stops 
in your home [no, his brother used to], and a cousin named Harry. 
[True.] There are six in your family, four boys and two girls. [Correct.] 

\ 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 217 

The sister is Minnie. [Correct.] She is cranky, stupid sometimes 
[true], but she will grow out of that. Your mother has a pain in her 
head sometimes. [No.] Minnie is musical. [Not particularly.] One 
brother writes a great deal [1 do myself.] Your name is Ed. [Correct.] 
Your grandmother keeps calling Ed. You ask about those people I 
told you of, and you will find it’s true. [Have made diligent inquiries 
ineffectually.] I want the Captain. See you, Captain, that fellow's 
straight. Now, then, Alfred and Marie. Got straightened out a little 
bit? That's all right Here, Alfred, I've got to talk to you. All the 
rest skip." [“ Captain ” was the nickname by which Phimiit usually 
addressed O. J. L.] 

As an Instance of reading a letter, which had indeed 
passed through my mind in the way recorded, but which 
was not read In any normal manner by the medium, I 
take the following case. 

(A chain was handed to Phinuit by O. J. L., the package having 
been delivered by hand to 0. J, L. late the previous evening. He had 
just opened the package, glanced at the contents, and hastily read a letter 
inside, then wrapped all up again and stored them. The chain had 
been sent by Mrs. John Watson from Sefton Drive; it had belonged 
to Dr. Watson's father.) 

“ This belongs to an old gentleman that passed out of the body— 
a nice old man. I see something funny here, something the matter 
with heart, paralytic something. Give me the wrappers, all of them.” 

[/.<?., The paper it came in ; a letter among them. Medium held them 
to top of her head, gradually flicking away the blank ones. She did not 
inspect them. She was all the while holding with her other hand 
another stranger, a ’Mr, Lund, who knew nothing whatever about the 1 (i , 

letter or the chain.] 

«Who's dear Lodge? Who's Poole, Toodle, Poodle? 
does that mean ? " 

"(X JVL,: “1 haven't the least idea,” 
u Is there J. N. W. here ? ’Poole. Then there's Sefton, 

Pool, hair, Wmrs truly, J, ,N. W, That's it; I send hair, Poole,- . 

J. N* W. Du j, >u understand that?” v 

0. J. L.: “ No, only partially,” . , ».. 1 .... .. ... 

/. u Who’s Mildred, Milly? something connected with it, and Alice ; 

and with him, too, I get Fanny. There's his son's influence on it” 1 1 

1 

2i8 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, it 

[Note by O. J. L.—I found afterwards that the letter began “Dear 
Dr. Lodge,” contained the words “ Sefton Drive,” and “ Cook ” 
so written as to look like Poole. It also said “ I send you some 
hair,” and finished “ yours sincerely J. B. W. the “ B ” being 
not unlike an “N.” The name of the sender was not 
mentioned in the letter, but at a subsequent sitting it was 
correctly stated by Phinuit in connexion with the chain.] 

This reading of letters in an abnormal way is very 
curious, and is a very old type of phenomenon. Kant 
and Hegel were both familiar with it: only it was then 
called “reading with the pit of the stomach.” Now it 
seems usually done with the top of the head. 

I had a few other cases—less distinct than the above 
—and I again refer here to the little experiment made 
by Mrs. Verrall as reported on page 127, as well as to 
page 133. _ 

One of the best sitters was a friend who for 
several years was my itext-door neighbour at Liverpool, 
Isaac C. Thompson, F.L.S., to whose name indeed, 
before he had been in any way introduced, Phinuit sent 
a message purporting to come from his father. Three 
generations of his and of his wife’s family, living and 
dead (small and compact Quaker families), were, in the 
course of two or three sittings, conspicuously mentioned, 
with identifying detail; the main informant representing 
himself as his deceased brother, a young Edinburgh 
doctor, whose loss had been mourned some twenty years 
ago. The familiarity and touchingness of the messages 
communicated in this particular instance were very re¬ 
markable, and can by no means be reproduced in any 
printed report of the sitting. Their case is one in 
which very few mistakes were made, the details standing 
out vividly correct, so that in fact they found it im- 

219 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

possible not to believe that their relatives were actually 
speaking to them. This may sound absurd, but it 
correctly represents the impression produced by a 
favourable series of sittings, and it is for that reason I 
mention it now. Simple events occurring elsewhere 
during the sitting were also detected by Dr. Phinuit m 
their case, better than in any other I know of. A lull 
report of this rather excellent case has had to be omitted 
for lack of space. 

There was a remarkable little incident towards the 
end of my series of sittings, when this friend of mine 
was present. A message interpolated itself to a gentle¬ 
man living in Liverpool, known, but not at all intim¬ 
ately known, to both of us, and certainly outside of our 
thoughts—-the head of the Liverpool Post-office, Mr. 
Rich. The message purported to be from a son of his 
who had died suddenly a few months ago, and whom 1 
had never seen ; though Isaac Thompson had, it seems, 
once or twice spoken to him. 

This son addressed I. C. T. by name, and besought 
him to convey a message to his father, who, he said, was 
much stricken by the blow, and who was sufferingfro 
a recent occasional dizziness in his head, so that he fe 
afraid he should have to retire from business. Other 
little things were mentioned of an identifying character , 
and the message was, a few days later, duly conveyed. 

The facts stated were admitted to be accurate, and 
the father, though naturally inclined to be scepucal 
confessed that he had indeed been more than ordinarily 
troubled at the sudden death of his eldest son, because 
of a recent unfortunate estrangement between them 
which would otherwise have been only temporary. j 

The only thought-transference explanation I _ can ,| 

reasonably ot bi£ < 

reasonably uiu-i ~~ 1 ... ■» _ 

of his own mind, operating on the sensitive br« 

mmm 

mn.aaa 

220 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

medium, of whose existence he knew absolutely nothing, 

and contriving to send a delusive message to itself! 

One thing about which the son seemed anxious was 
a certain black case which he asked us to speak to his 
father about, and to say he did not want lost I he 
father did not know what case was meant: but I have 
heard since, indirectly, that on his death-bed the son was 
calling out about a black case, though I cannot learn 
that the particular case has been securely identified. 

Contemplating these and such-like communications, 

I could not help feeling that if it be really a case of 

thought-transference at all, it is thought-transference of 
a surprisingly vivid kind, the proof of which would be 
very valuable, supposing it were the conect explanation 
of the phenomenon. 

But I felt doubtful if it were the correct explanation. 
One must not shut one’s eyes to the possibility that in 
pursuing a favourite hypothesis one may after all be on 
the wrong tack altogether. 

Every known agency must be worked to the utmost 
before one is willing to admit an unknown one^: and 
indeed to abandon this last known link of causation as 
inadequate to sustain the growing weight of facts was 
an operation not to be lightly undertaken. And yet I 
felt grave doubts whether it would really suffice to 
explain the facts,.; whether indeed it went any distance 
toward their explanation. 

Things were sometimes told to me and to others so 
entirely foreign to our conscious thought that at first 
they were not recognised as true or intelligible, and only 
gradually or by subsequent explanation was the meaning 
clearly perceived. But something of the same experi¬ 
ence is gone through in dreams; one sometimes feels 
surprised at the turn a dream conversation is taking, 

k 

Chap, xyi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

and has the feeling also occasionally of learning some¬ 
thing new. Hence this argument is not of much strength 
taken alone. 

Another argument bases itself on the mistakes which 
Dr. Phinuit sometimes unaccountably made. One note¬ 
worthy instance is called attention to by one of my 
sitters, whose father, in the midst of much that was 
correct and striking, was reported as saying that his 
name was John. Now his son, the sitter, was vividly 
conscious that his deceased father’s name was not J ohn, 
but was Peter. No knowledge of this, however, was 
shown by Phinuit; though, by subsequently several 
times quoting the name as Thomas, he seemed to show 
consciousness that there had been an error somewhere. 

The only explanation of this that I can suggest, 
beyond mere bungle and error, is that I was in the room 
also taking notes, and though I of course knew the 
surname, I was quite ignorant of the Christian name. 

Undoubtedly, therefore, the hypothesis of thought- 
transference has to be wriggled and stretched a little; 
though we may be willing to stretch it to any required 
length, so long as it does not actually snap. But feeling 
that it did not really commend itself, I endeavoured 
to apply some crucial tests. % 

And the first was a few children’s alphabet letters, 
pinched up at random, put in a pill box without look¬ 
ing, and sealed by me in the presence of Prof. Carey 
Foster a month or so previously. This box I now 
handed to “Phinuit” and asked him what was inside 
it, telling him at the same time that no one knew, and 
requesting him to do his best. 

He immediately asked for a pencil, and holding the 
box to Mrs. Piper’s forehead, shaking it a little at inter¬ 
vals, as if to disentangle the contents and bring them 

222 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

more clearly before him, wrote down some letters on a 
bit of cardboard held for him. 

I thanked him, and next morning for better security, 
asked him to try again. He did, and wrote down just 
the same letters, even to the extent of saying which way 
they happened to face in the box. 

I wrote two accounts of the contents of the box, one 
to Mr. Myers and one to Prof. Carey Foster, under seal, 
telegraphing to him to know if he were at home and 
ready to receive the box, assure himself that it had not 
been tampered with (though indeed it had not been out 
of my possession all the time), and then to open it and 
write out the letters and their aspects, in full detail, 
before opening my sealed account. He replied, “Yes,” 
and I sent him the box registered and insured. 

All the letters were wrong but two: though as it 
happens the number of letters was nearly correct. 

According to chance, if they had been pinched from 
a single alphabet, two should have been guessed right. 
The box from which they had been pinched contained 
many alphabets, but practically the conclusion of the 
experiment was utterly negative. The letters had not 
been read ( Proc . S.P.R. vi. 494). 

This experiment inclined me strongly to some 
thought-transference explanation, as distinct from what 
seemed to me the more unknown and vague region of 
clairvoyance. 

If the letters themselves could be really directly 
perceived, the fact that they existed in nobody’s mind 
could not matter. But if minds only could be read, then 
it was essential that someone somewhere should be 
cognisant of the letters. I do not mean that it would 
do to base - so clear a conclusion on the result of one 
negative experiment. It is an experiment which I want 
to repeat,—though Phinuit doesn’t much care for this 
kind of thing and says it strains him,—but it seemed to 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 223 

me to strengthen the hypothesis of thought-transference 
from some mind or other. So I set to work to try and 
obtain, by the regular process of communication which 
suits this particular medium, facts which were not only 
out of my knowledge but which never could have been 

m ll in o-iving an account of these experiments, fully 
reported at the time though now some twenty years old, 

I must enter on a few trivial details concerning my own 
relations. The occasion is the excuse. 

It happened that an uncle of mine in London, then 
quite an old man, the eldest of a surviving three out of a 
verv large family, of which my own father was one of 
The youngest, had a twin brother who died some twenty 
or more years ago. I interested him generally in the 
sublet and wrote to ask if he would lend me some 
relic of this brother. By morning post on a certain 
day I received a curious old gold ™ at ^ h ’ w kxc 
deceased brother had worn and been fond of, and that 
same morning—-no one in the house av p. 

knowing anything about it—I handed it • P 

when in a state of trance. belonged 

I was told almost immediately that it had^belonged 

to one of my uncles—one that had been mentioned 
before as having died from the effects of a fall one 
that had been very fond of Uncle Robert, the name of 
the^urvivor—thaf the watch was now in possession of 
this same Uncle Robert, with whom its late owner was 
anxious to communicate. After some difficulty and many 
wronrattempTs Dr. Phinuit caught the name, Jerry, short 
for Teremiahf and said emphatically, as if impersonating 
him ‘This’is my watch, and Robert » :my broto. 
and I am here. Uncle Jerry, my watch Ail this at 
tll . fir , t s ittino- on the very morning the watch had 
Srivef by Posh no one bu? myself and a shorthand 
rWk who 7 happened to have been introduced for the 

224 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

first time at this sitting by me, and whose antecedents 
are well known to me, being present. 

Having thus ostensibly got into communication 
through some means or other with what purported to 
be Uncle Jerry, whom I had indeed known slightly 
in his later years of blindness, but of whose early life I 
knew nothing, I pointed out to him that to make Uncle 
Robert aware of his presence it would be well to recall 
trivial details of their boyhood, all of which I would 
faithfully report. 

He quite caught the idea, and proceeded during 
several successive sittings ostensibly to instruct Dr. 
Phinuit to mention a number of little things such as 
would enable his brother to recognise him. 

References to his blindness, illness, and main facts 
of his life were comparatively useless from my point of 
view; but these details of boyhood, two-thirds of a 
century ago, were utterly and entirely out of my ken. 
My father himself had only known these brothers as 
men. 

“Uncle Jerry” recalled episodes such as swimming 
the creek when they were boys together, and running 
some risk of getting drowned; killing a cat in Smith s 
field; the possession of a small rifle, and of a long 
peculiar skin, like a snake-skin, which he thought was 
now in the possession of Uncle Robert. 

All these facts have been more or less completely 
verified. But the interesting thing is that his twin 
brother, from whom I got the watch, and with whom 
■I was thus in correspondence, could not remember 
them all. He recollected something about swimming 
the creek, though he himself had merely looked on. 
He had a distinct recollection of having had the snake- 
skin, and of the box in which it was kept, though he 
did not know where it was then. But he altogether 
denied killing the cat, and could not recall Smith’s 

field. .. 

His memory, however, was decidedly failing him, and 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 225 

he was good enough to write to another brother, Frank 
living m Cornwall, an old sea captain, and ask if he had 
any better remembrance of certain facts—of course not 
giving any inexplicable reasons for asking. The result 
of this inquiry was triumphantly to vindicate the exist¬ 
ence of Smiths field as a place near their home, where 
they used to play, in Barking, Essex; and the killing 
of a cat by another brother was also recollected; while 
of the swimming of the creek, near a mill-race, full 
details were given Frank and Jerry being the heroes 
of that foolhardy episode. 

I may say here that Dr. Phinuit has a keen “scent” 
—-shall I call it ? for trinkets or personal valuables of 
all kinds. He recognised a ring which my wife wears 
as having been given “to me for her” by a specified 
aunt just before her death; of which he at another 
time indicated the cause fairly well. He called for a 
locket which my wife sometimes wears, but had not then 
on, which had belonged to her father 40 years ago. 
He recognised my father’s watch, asked for the chain 
belonging to it, and was still unsatisfied for want of 
some appendage which I could not think of at the 
time, but which my wife later on reminded me of, and 
Phinuit at another sitting seized,—a seal which had 
been usually worn with it, and which had belonged to 
my grandfather. 

. He P ulled m y sister’s watch out of her pocket and 
said it had been her mother’s, but disconnected the 
chain and said that didn t belong, which was quite 
right. Even little pocket things, such as fruit-knives 
and corkscrews, he also assigned to their late owners; 
and once he quite unexpectedly gripped the arm of 
the chair IVfrs. Piper was sitting in, which had never 
been mentioned to him in any way, and said that 

226 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

it had belonged to my Aunt Anne. It was quite 
true * it was an old-fashioned ordinary type o 
chair which she valued and had had ^olsBred 
for us as a wedding present 12 years ago. Phmuxt, by 
the way, did not seem to realise that it was a chair 
he asked what it was, and said he took it for part 

But perhaps the best instance of a recognised object 
was one entrusted to me by the Rev. John Watson a 
that time quite a recent friend of mine, with whom I had 
been staying recently in Italy —at chnrn which bad 
belonged to his father. It is the chain referred to m 
connexion with the episode of reading a letter related on 
page 217 above. 

The package was delivered by hand one evening at 
my house, and, by good luck, I happened 
messenger and receive it direct. Next morning I 
handed it to Dr. Phinuit, saying only,, in response to 
his feeling some difficulty about it, that it did not belong 
to a relative. He said It belonged to an old man and had 
Ms son’s influence on it. He also partially read a letter 
accompanying it—as described at page 217. Next sitting 
I tried the chain again, and he very soon reported the 
late owner as present, and recognising the chain but not 
recognisffi? ml I explained that his son had entrusted 
me with if; on which Phinuit said the chain belonged 
now to John Watson, away for health, a preacher, and 
a lot of other details all known to me, and all correct. 
The old gentleman was then represented as willing to 
write his name. A name was written in the backward 
manner Phinuit sometimes affects. It was legible after¬ 
wards in a mirror as James Watson. Now, the name 
of his father I was completely ignorant of. . , . , 

I explained to the communicator that his son desired 
to hear from him, and asked him to be good enough to 
prove his identity. 

227 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

Whereupon, at intervals, a number of specific though 
trivial facts were mentioned. They were frequently 
admitted to be trivial in an apologetic way, but 
nevertheless would serve as good evidence; better 
than more conspicuous ones indeed. I took them 
down as well as I could, knowing absolutely nothing 
of the correctness or incorrectness of most of them. 
Such facts as I did know were nearly all correct. 
Hence I had good hopes of another crucial test 
here. 

If what I knew was stated correctly, while all those 
things which I did not know should turn out inaccurate 
or false, I should be forcibly impelled towards a direct 
thought-transference explanation for this entire set. But, 
on the other hand, if these things of which I had 
absolutely never heard or dreamt should turn out true, 
then some further step must be taken. 

Unfortunately the result is not so simple and crucial 
as I had expected it to be. A stranger always 
encounters some difficulty in getting at facts. The 
father’s name turned out to be not James but John—the 
same as that of the son: and although the facts stated 
concerning the son, my friend, were practically all 
correct, I learned three weeks later, when I got a reply 
from Egypt where he was travelling, that the statements 
about the father were all wrong. Thus then they 
become valueless, except as strengthening the evidence 
for thought-transference from myself; for it was the 
facts of which I was ignorant that were wrong. But 
Dr. Watson told me later that James was the name of 
his grandfather, and that the statements would have a 
truer ring if they had purported to come from the grand¬ 
father instead of from the father. And I understood 
that the chain—which was the ostensible link of con¬ 
nexion-had belonged to both. 

228 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

Perception of Events at a Distance 

As an instance of the perception of things happening 
at a distance, I take the case of what may be called 
“ Charley and the bird.” This insignificant episode was 
in nobody’s mind or knowledge in this country. It had 
happened in Canada during the time that Mrs. Piper 
was in England, and its occurrence was only ascertained 

by subsequent special inquiry. 

The message purported to come from my deceased 
Aunt Anne, of whom this “ Charley,” living in Canada, 
was the adopted son. 

She said that she was very sorry that Charley ate the bird the 
chicken-and made himself sick. He has had a trouble with his 
stomach. Her Charley. And he has been troubled for somejhtde 
time. The bird made him sick. Some kind of bird. Quite sick. I 
troubled him a good deal. You write and ask him. But it is so. You 
will find it was. He will tell you. [This message was received on 

26 Dec. 1889.] . . , , 

Sequel added September, x8 9 o.-Concemmg the episode recorded 

above: I wrote to a cousin who had emigrated last October to join her 
brother (the “Charley” referred to) in Manitoba, asking her if he had 
eaten any particular bird about Christmas time which had disagreed 
with him. Only recently have I got full information on the subject, 
the unsportsmanlike character of the act possibly, but more likely the 
difficulty of realising any sense in the inquiry, being responsible for 
some of the delay. The evidence now obtained is as follows 

“ The boys shot a prairie hen as they were coming home one night, 
near the beginning of December, out of season, when there was a fine 
for killing these birds. So we had to hide it. It was hung for abou 
a fortnight, and a few days before Christmas we ate it Charley eating 
most. The bird didn’t make him ill, but he was ill at the time, having 
the grippe. He went to town either that night or next day, and was 
certainly worse when he returned.” 

Another instance of perception of an event happening 
at a distance occurred as the result of an experiment 

which my friend Mr. Gonner had arranged at an early 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 229 

sitting. He had combined with his sister in London to 
coax their mother into doing something unusual at a 
certain hour on a certain day, for reasons to be after¬ 
wards explained. We found afterwards that the selec¬ 
tion of an unusual proceeding consisted in driving round 
Regent’s Park in a hansom cab in the wet. And this is 
what she was doing during the time her son was sitting 
at Liverpool, while the medium held a little book of 
hers. He had carefully not arranged or suggested 
anything as a suitable proceeding, but he had a presenti- 
ment that some not very striking occurrence would 
probably be deemed sufficient. It is impossible to s y 
that the idea of a possible outdoor excursion may not 

have been latent in his mind. 

We were completely ignorant of what was going on 
in London, but Dr. Phinuit described the smrounchngs 
of this lady and a younger lady who was with her 
described her as being over-persuaded to go ouJ, Ao g 
she didn’t want to, and as going clearly trough the 
operation of outdoor dressing: several minute actions, 
such as opening a box, taking up a photograph from 
dressing-table to look at, and so on.hong ««*ooed 
correctly. But there it stopped, did not get 

Regent’s Park and the cab, though that was the stage 
reached while he was speaking but IW 
short at the stage reached just about when the si g 
began; though he spoke as if he was <^ sc ^ 
present moment. More experiments of this nature are 
wanted, and very likely have been made 
do not pretend that this experiment y 
elusive, but it is useful as far as it goes. 

It was a carefully arranged experiment, 
myself in Liverpool, and carried out ,n » „ rem0 « 

the kind aid of his relations m London. The probl 

230 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, if 

thought-transference to as many orders of remoteness as possible. He 
therefore wrote to his sister, Miss Gonner, giving her full particulars 
of what was wanted. Their mother was to be requested to decide on 
and do something uncommon at a specified hour without letting Miss 
Gonner know what it was j neither was she to have any inkling 
whatever as to a reason for the request, nor to know that it was 
connected with her son. I find that all this was scrupulously 
done. With the aid of Miss Ledlie (the lady correctly described 
and named as “ Annie 55 by Phinuit), who likewise knew nothing 
whatever as to reasons, the mother was prevailed upon to accede to 
the request; and she accordingly decided to go out under perfectly 
unlikely circumstances, accompanied by Miss Ledlie, both ladies being 
very much puzzled to account for the singular and vague request on 
the part of Miss Gonner. The latter lady, who was the only one of 
the trio who had any idea of the reason, purposely absented herself 
from the house before any decision was made as to what should ^ be 
done. The driving round the park on a wet Saturday morning, 
though sufficiently incongruous to astonish even the cabman, was an 
unfortunately passive kind of performance to select; but considering 
the absence of every kind of information or clue to the reason for doing 
anything, the wonder is that anything whatever was done. Miss Ledlie 
reports that after Miss Gonner had left the house she and Mrs. Gonner 
decided what to do, and a vehicle was sent for. Just about ix she ran 
upstairs to see if Mrs. Gonner was ready, and saw her come out of her 
room to a landing cupboard, take a box out of it, put it on a ledge, 
open it and take out a muff, very much as described by Phinuit half 
an hour later. She had her cloak and things on then, and the cloak 
is troublesome to hook, so that there would be a good deal of apparently 
fixing things round the neck. The taking up and looking at the photo¬ 
graph would almost certainly be done before going out, though it was 
not actually seen. The “taking up a pencil to write, 57 and the 
“ brushing something, 55 if by “ something 55 is meant a garment, are 
unlikely actions. Although the success was far from complete, Phinuit 
distinctly left us in Liverpool with the impression that “going out 5? 
was the thing selected to be done. 

The following is the record of this part of the sitting at Liverpool. 

Present—O. J. L. as recorder and Prof. Gonner as sitter. 

0. J. L. “ Tell him about his mother and what she 5 s doing now. IPs 
very important. 55 

Pla, ha ! Fll tell you why it 5 s important, because he don 5 t 
know it himself. I read your thoughts then. I can’t generally. 

Chap, xvi] EXTRACTS FROM PIPER SITTINGS 

231 

Sitter. 

Your mother is just this minute fixing her hair, putting a 
thing through her hair (indicating) in a room with a cot in it, 
up high. Did you know she had some trouble with her 
head ? 

£C No.” 

Long. distance between you and your mother, separation 
between you. She’s in another place. [Yes, in London.] 
. . . She’s fixing something to her throat and putting on a 
wrap here, round here, and now she has lifted up the lid of a 
box on a stand. (11.30) . . . 

There’s been some news, some correspondence reached the 
large building where your mother is. She has had a cold. 
A young lady is with her, and I should think it’s her daughter; 
a very nice girl. She draws somewhat, and needlework and 
reads a great deal, a pretty girl with light hair and bluish eyes. 
She’s speaking to your mother at this minute. [This is all 
practically correct, except the relationship.] 

Sitter. “ Is her hair long or short?” 

How do you mean ? It’s fuzzy light hair. She’s a little 
pale, sort of smiling; nice teeth. Your mother is going out. 
Your mother had trouble in leg, kind of rheumatic. There’s a 
young lady, not Annie, with light hair, light complexion, good 
influence. [This is the daughter.] 

Thus Phinuit described all three ladies—all in fact 
.who were directly or indirectly concerned in the episode 
—and described them correctly. Whatever this power 
is due to, it is certainly beyond chance. 

The following are part of Professor Gonner’s 
Notes:— 

Notes by the Sitter .—In preparation for the interview I had written 
and asked my sister to persuade my mother to do something that was 
unusual for her between the hours of eleven and twelve Saturday 
morning; and to observe what she did. My mother was not to know, 
and did not know, that she was doing this at my request. Saturday 
morning, at a few minutes before eleven, she prepared herself for going 
out to take a drive in a hansom cab, this striking her as an unusual 
procedure, as it was raining. Such preparation involved touching the 
head in the putting on of her bonnet, of her neck and shoulders when 

232 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

she put on her cloak. Then she was specially observed to take her 
muff-box from her wardrobe, to place it on a table, lift the lid, and 
take her muff out. On her dressing-table there stands a small 
photograph of my father, which she very frequently takes up and looks 
at intently. Whether she did this on the occasion in question cannot 
be ascertained, as it is one of those ordinary actions the performance 
of which makes no impression. She cannot, however, be said to have 
been suffering from her head. There is a wooden half-tester in her 
room, which might conceivably be called a “ cot.” 

There is here a general correspondence' between her actions at 
three or four minutes to eleven, and those attributed to her by the 
medium at 11.25-11.30. But the stance was beginning at eleven, and 
the medium began at once with my mother. It is then an interesting 
matter to examine whether she was trying to discover what my mother 
was engaged upon at the moment or to recall her actions as she last 
perceived them. 

The episode of Miss Ledlie’s hair not having been 
cut short, when Mr. Gonner, having been told in fun 
that it had, felt dissatisfied with Phinuit’s reply implying 
that there was nothing special to say about its length— 
dissatisfaction which he expressed to me,—is likewise 
good as against ordinary thought-transference. 

Comment 

If experiments like this can be got to succeed 
definitely, we seem driven to suppose that actions can 
be detected, or the mind of a neutral unconscious person 
read, at any distance,—connexion being established by 
some link, such as a book, a bit of jewellery, an old letter, 
or a lock of hair, and sometimes no connexion being 
established at all. 

So even if the hypothesis of disembodied telepathic 
activity could be intelligently granted I do not see 
that it would explain all the facts. Not, for instance, 
Phinuit’s skill in recognising diseases, reading letters, 
and describing contemporary events. Ordinary thought- 

EXTRACTS WEB SITTINGS 233 

“for d r betKr f0r S0 " e ° f b« it does 

it seems asTwe'lhould "be f. teIe P a,bic explanation, 
Clairvoyance- Tsln^ th ^ *° P ° StulaK direct 
able Jenter a rS^T “ 3 » 

of aU kinds is readSy available 

and space are not ■ cn x, , . e > tor instance, time 

whether at a distance or dosTlt^nd ^ h f Ppened ’ 
or recently, can be seen or h nd ’ wkether lon g ago 
known letters in a hr, t .^ eard and described. Un- 
-d in “ * £ ~<^h, though not 

cf. p. no) mip-bthia ’ I . be som etimes read, 

hack til 

assume it possible tn o 1 r put m » or, if we 

forward to the time whenThey le rtenltl'T^? 

“Vi Til k ™ 1 S - 1 "S 

dimension. ’present time is very like a fourth 

as tLsT T* “ daStic hypothesis 

is it not mhe/s'"?^ everything; bu, 
sidering that an evnla , n ^ T onlni science, and con- 

a thingli^^lfi 0 " , . 11 'a aU very well to call 
as ml . -ds ius, 

to 1 ‘ ran “ S “ e **• -ess 

time cognisant of fart* h‘°u if ormat on > an d is for the 
distance^ bm the kng ago or at a 

of them. Is it bv ort* h °Z she becomes cognisant 
witnessing those actions^f ^ Stream £ ime and 
information received from ’ ° r * S k throu & h 

themselves dimly 

agatn, ,s it through the inhuel of co„tIpS“y Id 

2534 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY '[Sect, iv 

otherwise occupied minds holding stores of forgotten 
information in their brains and offering them unconsciously 
to the perception of the entranced person; or, lastly, is 
it by falling back for the time into a one Universal Mind 
of which all ordinary consciousnesses, past and present, 
are but portions ? Opinions may differ as to which is 
the least extravagant supposition. 

Possibly some hypothesis more simple than any of 
these may be invented, but at present I feel as if it were 
unlikely that any one explanation will fit all the facts. 
It rather feels as if we were at the beginning of what 
is practically a fresh branch of science ; and that to 
pretend to frame explanations, except in the most 
tentative and elastic fashion for the purpose of threading 
the facts together and suggesting fresh fields for ex¬ 
periment, is as premature as it would have been for 
Galvani to have expounded the nature of Electricity, or 
Copernicus the laws of Comets and Meteors. 

CHAPTER XVII 

DISCUSSION OF PIPER SITTINGS 

U NLESS the evidence, of which the merest sample 
has now been given, be held to constitute a 
sufficiently strong proof that the performances 
o this particular “ medium ” are neither lucky shots nor 
explicable by cunning and imposture, it is premature to 
examine further into their significance. But as soon as 
these preliminary suppositions can be unreservedly 
dismissed, the best plan is to dismiss them thoroughly 
and waste no more time over them. 

From, this point of view the next hypothesis is 
that the information is derived from the sitter’s mind 
in some way or other: e.g. (a) by question and answer; 
(o) by .muscular and other semi-occult and unconscious 
signalling; (c) by direct mind-reading, or influence of 
the sitter s thought, conscious or otherwise, acting on 
the. entranced person as percipient. I do not propose 
critically to distinguish between these three methods, 
although the first is very ancient, the second only 
recently recognised in its full development and power, 
while the third is only in process of being accepted by 
scientific men. 

A large number of instances can be easily found 
which are not explicable by either («) or (^), and to all 
those who have hitherto spent any labour over the 

236 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

records it has become clear that either (c) or some even 
less admissible hypothesis is necessary to explain a large 
portion of the results. 

Let it be clearly understood that the first question 
is whether any reading of the mind of the sitter can be 
considered sufficiently efficacious. That some mind is 
read I should think most probable; the question is not 
between mind-reading and something quite distinct; it 
is between reading the mind of the sitter and reading 
•the mind of some one else. 

There are three methods of reading the mind of 
the sitter, labelled above {a), ( 6 ), and (c). Methods 
of extracting information from distant persons are fewer. 
Correspondence is one; telepathy may, I suppose, be 
assumed to be another. The only method known to 
science of extracting information from deceased persons 
is the discovery of documents. 

. Now, in respect of correspondence and documents 
it is comparatively easy to be assured as to the use or 
non-use of these methods in any particular case. Elimin¬ 
ating them, if anything is obtained inexplicable by the 
agency of the sitter, it is to telepathy that we must look 
for a possible explanation. Telepathy from distant 
persons if that is in any way feasible, telepathy from 
deceased persons only as a last resort, but telepathy of 
some kind, as distinct from any conceivable method of 
extracting information from persons present: that seems 
to be the alternative hypothesis, to an examination 
of which we find ourselves forced by an attentive 
study of the records. 

The. question therefore largely turns upon proof 
of identity: proof of the genuineness of the identity 
claimed by the communicator. Now if you met a 
stranger in a railway-carriage who professed to have 

Chap, xvii] DISCUSSION OF PIPER SITTINGS 237 

returned from the Colonies where he had met your 
friends or relations, of whom he showed knowledge 
in some decided ways, it would not at first occur 
to you to doubt his veracity, even though he was a 
little hazy about the names of relatives, and occasion¬ 
ally mixed things up; nor would you stigmatise him 
as a deceiver if he occasionally made use of information 
supplied by yourself in course of conversation. But 
directly it was suggested that he might be a thought- 
reader, detailing to you the unconscious contents of 
your own mind, it would not be easy rigorously 
to disprove the suggestion, especially if subsequent 
access to the friends chiefly mentioned were denied 
you. This is, however, very nearly, the problem 
before us. 

Only occasionally does the question forcibly arise; 
most facts asserted are, of course, within the knowledge 
of the sitter, and none of those are of any use for the 
purpose of discrimination; but every now and then 
facts, often very trivial but not within the knowledge of 
the sitter, have been asserted, and have been more or 
less clearly verified afterwards ; and in order to assist a 
special study of these data, with the view of examining 
how far they are really valuable, I made an index to 
them, which I published in the Proceedings, vol. vi. 
p. 647, as an Appendix to the Report of the early Piper 
sittings. To that index a student may refer. 

Episodes Normally Selected for Identification 

Concerning the means of identification naturally 
adopted by living people who are communicating with 
each other at a distance by telephone, under conditions 
in which they are debarred from communicating their 

238 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect. iv. 

names, or, what is the same thing, under conditions in 
which their names might be understood as being falsely 
given, Professor Hyslop made some interesting experi¬ 
ments which are thus reported in the Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research (vol. ix.):— 

In an introduction he explains the object and the 
method of these experiments, about which there was 
nothing supernormal at all. A telegraph line was 
arranged between two buildings of the Columbia 
University, and a couple of friends or acquaintances 
were taken independently to each end of the line, only 
one of them knowing who was at the other end; and 
this one (the communicator) was to send messages, at 
first vague but increasing in definiteness, while the 
other person was.to guess until he could guess correctly 
and assuredly who it was that was at the other end of 
the line. The replies and guesses were likewise 
telegraphed by an assistant stationed with the receiver, 
for the guidance of the sender. Professor Hyslop’s 
objects in carrying out an extensive series of this kind 
of experiment are thus stated by himself 

“ I may now summarise the several objects of the 
whole series of experiments. The first of these objects 
was not intimated to any one. I was extremely careful 
not to breathe it to any one, not even to my assistants, 
so that the results might be entirely spontaneous and 
without the influence of suggestion from me. 

“I. To test the extent to which intelligent persons 
would spontaneously select trivial and unimportant 
incidents for the purpose of identification—that is, 
incidents that were not connected, or not necessarily 
connected, with the main habits of their lives. 

“ II. To test the accuracy of the identification in con¬ 
nection with both individual and collective incidents, and 
especially to test how slight or how definite the incident 

Chap, xvii] DISCUSSION OF PIPER SITTINGS 

had to be in order to suggest rightly the person it was 
intended to represent. 

“III. To test the success and personal assurance 
of the receiver of the messages in guessing who is the 
true sender, in spite of some messages that are misleading 
or even false, but the bulk of which involves sufficient 
cumulative facts to overcome the natural scepticism and 
confusion caused by incoherences and contradictions. 

“IV. To study the sources of misunderstanding that 
might arise under such circumstances when one party 
was ignorant of the intentions of the other, and the 
causes of illusion in identification which we can determine 
in my experiments, and which are likely to occur in 
the Piper case.” 

And he proceeds :— 

“ In regard to the first of these objects, it is very 
interesting to observe the uniformity with which perfectly 
intelligent persons spontaneously chose what would 
generally be considered trivial incidents in order to 
identify themselves. This seemed naturally to recom¬ 
mend itself to them, perhaps for the reason that trivial 
circumstances represent far more isolation than any 
chosen from the main trend of life, though I noticed no 
consciousness of this fact in any one. It was simply 
the instinctive method which every one tended to adopt. 
The records show very distinctly that, if left to them¬ 
selves, men will naturally select unimportant incidents 
for proof of their identity, and it is one of the most 
interesting features of this choice that the individual 
relied wholly upon the laws of association to recall what 
was wanted, after deciding on the nature of the incidents 
to be chosen. Very often there were interesting illustra¬ 
tions of those capricious revivals in memory of remote 
incidents which not only resemble so much the incidents 
in the Piper sittings in triviality, but also represent the 
caprices and incoherences of associative recall, intelligible 
to the subject on reflection, but hardly so to the outside 
pbserver, At any rate, the results in this regard com- 

I 

240 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

pletely remove all objections to the Piper phenomena 
from the standpoint of the triviality of the incidents 
chosen for identification ; and that is an accomplishment 
of some worth.” 

I may further add that though the incidents serving 
for identification sounded vague to bystanders or readers 
of the record, yet when they were explained from the 
point of view of both sender and receiver they were 
perceived to be distinct enough, and to justify the 
leap of identification taken upon them. And this fact 
is of interest in connection with the Piper record, where 
it has been often felt by readers or note-takers that 
sitters identify their relatives too easily and fancifully; 
for in Professor Hyslop’s experiments the identification is 
often performed on still slighter grounds—.often on what 
would superficially appear no legitimate ground at all— 
and yet it turns out, when both ends of the line are 
catechised (as they can not be catechised in the real 
Piper case), that these incidents are perceived to be of 
force adequate to support the conclusion based upon 
them. I have been constantly struck, while taking 
notes for a stranger at a Piper sitting, with the apparently 
meaningless incidents which were being referred to; 
and yet afterwards, when I saw the annotations, I 
realised their meaning and appropriateness. 

Further, in answer to Professor Sidgwick’s tentative 
objection that the sitters in the Hyslop experiments 
were only playing at identification, and therefore were 
naturally in a more or less frivolous mood, whereas 
on a spiritistic hypothesis the Piper communicators 
would be serious and emotional and not so likely to 
refer to trivial incidents: we may imagine the case of 
a wanderer not able to return to his home, but able to 
communicate with it for a few minutes by telephone. 

Chap, xvii] DISCUSSION OP PIPER SITTINGS 24I 

In however strenuous and earnest a spirit he might be, 
—indeed, both ends of the line might be,—yet when 
asked to prove his identity and overcome the dread of 
illusion and personation, he would instinctively try to 
think of some trifling and absurd private incident; and 
this might very likely be accepted as sufficient/ and 
might serve as a prelude to closer and more affectionate 
messages, which, previous to identification, would be out 
of place. And I feel bound to say that my own experi¬ 
ence of the Piper sittings leads me to assert that this 
kind of genuinely dignified and serious and appropriate 
message does ultimately in many cases come,—but not 
until the preliminary stages (stages beyond which some 
sitters seem unable to get) are fairly passed. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

SUMMARY OF DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

O F all men at that time living, undoubtedly Dr. 
Hodgson had more experience of Mrs. Piper’s 
phenomena than any other — for he devoted 
years of his life to the subject and made it practically 
his sole occupation. He did this because, after pre¬ 
liminary study, he recognised its great importance. He 
was by no means a credulous man—in fact he was 
distinctly sceptical, and many have been the spurious 
phenomena which he detected and exposed. In some 
respects he went, in my judgment, too far in his destruc¬ 
tive career—he disbelieved in Mrs. Thompson, for 
instance, and he practically for the time annihilated 
Eusapia Palladino, the famous “physical” medium— 
but hyper-scepticism is far more useful to the develop¬ 
ment of the subject than hyper-credulity, and when such 
a man is, after adequate study, decidedly and finally con¬ 
vinced, his opinions deserve, and from those who knew 
him received, serious attention. 

Not that we must be coerced into acceptance, any 
more than into rejection, of facts, by any critical judg¬ 
ment passed upon them by others; but undoubtedly his 
views are entitled to great weight. Accordingly I ex¬ 
tract some of them from a paper which he published in 
the Proceedings, vol. xiii., in the year 1898; and I begin 

Chap, xvm] DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 243 

with his summary of the kind of statements made by the 
ostensible communicators as to the way the phenomenon 
appeared to them—on their side—statements which I 
judge were partially accepted by him as true. (But see 
p. 263.) 

The statements of the “ communicators ” as to what occurs on the 
physical side may be put in brief general terms as follows. We all have 
bodies composed of “ luminiferous ether ” enclosed in our flesh and blood 
bodies. The relation of Mrs. Piper’s etherial body to the etherial world, 
in which the “ communicators ” claim to dwell, is such that a special 
store of peculiar energy is accumulated in connection with her organism, 
and this appears to them as “a light.” Mrs. Piper’s etherial body is 
removed by them, and her ordinary body appears as a shell filled with 
this light. Several “ communicators ” may be in contact with this 
light at the same time. There are two chief “masses” of it in her 
case, one in connection with the head, the other in connection with the 
right arm and hand. Latterly, that in connection with the hand has 
been “ brighter ” than that in connection with the head. If the “ com¬ 
municator ” gets into contact with the “light” and thinks his thoughts, 
they tend to be reproduced by movements in Mrs Piper’s organism. 
Very few can produce vocal effects, even when in contact with the 
“ light ” of the head, but practically all can produce writing movements 
when in contact with the “ light ” of the hand. Upon the amount and 
brightness of this “ light,” cceteris paribus, the communications depend. 
When Mrs. Piper is in ill-health the “light” is feebler, and the 
communications tend to be less coherent. It also gets used up 
during a sitting, and when it gets dim there is a tendency to inco¬ 
herence even in otherwise clear communicators. In all cases, coming 
into contact with this “light” tends to produce bewilderment, and 
if the contact is continued too long, or the “light” becomes very 
dim, the consciousness of the communicator tends to lapse completely. 

Then floods of excited emotion at the presence of incarnate friends 
dominant ideas that disturbed him when he was incarnate himself, the 
desire to render advice and assistance to other living friends and 
relatives, etc., all crowd upon his mind; the sitter begins to ask 
questions about matters having no relation to what he is thinking about, 
he gets more and more bewildered, more and more comatose, loses his 
“grasp" of the “light,” and drifts away, perhaps to return several 
times and go through a similar experience (pp. 400-1). 

244 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, nr 

For the several years during which the personality 
calling itself Phinuit continued to control the voice in the 
trance, after the development of the “ automatic wnting, 
the personalities controlling respectively the hand and 
the voice showed apparently a complete mdependence. 

The sense of hearing for the hand consaousness 
appears to be in the hand, and the sitter must talk 
hand to be understood. I do not profess (says Dr. 
Hodgson) to be able to give any satisfactory explanation 
of some of the processes which I am describing. _ 

The thoughts that pass through the consciousness 
controlling the hand tend to be written, and one of the 
difficulties apparently is to prevent the writing out of 
thoughts which are not intended for the sitter. Other 
“indirect communicators” frequently purport o 
present, and the “consciousness of the hand listens to 
them with the hand as though they were close by, as it 
listens to the sitters, presenting the palm of the hand, 
held in slightly different positions for the purpose by 
different “ direct communicators,” so as to bring usually 
the region of the junction between the little finger and 
the palm towards the mouth of the sitter. The writing 
at its best is liable to include occasionally remarks not 
intended to be written, words apparently addressed by 
an “ indirect communicator ” to the consciousness of the 
hand, or by the consciousness of the hand to an in¬ 
direct communicator,” or by “indirect communicators 
to one another; or, in worse cases, where the power ol 
inhibition seems to have been almost entirely wanting, 
the wandering thoughts of the “ direct communicator 
are apparently reproduced in incoherent fragments, 
mixed up with his attempts at replies to questions of the 
sitter, and bits of conversation, as it were, between him 

and other “indirect communicators.” 

Phinuit, for example, claims to have done much work, 
while the hand has been used for writing, in keeping 
back, so to speak, various other would-be communicators 
Interruptions, nevertheless, were frequent enough until 

Chap, xviii] 

DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

245 

the advent of the group connected with “W. Stainton 
Moses,” and the establishment of their supervision. 
Whatever else has been done, it seems to me that one 
result of this change has been to make the way clearer, 
and freer from interruptions and from the admixture of 
apparently foreign elements that prevailed so largely 
in earlier sittings. The new “controls” claim to have 
both the desire and the power to exclude “inferior” 
intelligences, whom they speak of as “earth-bound 
spirits,” from the use of the “light,” and, as a matter of 
fact, the perturbations referred to have practically dis¬ 
appeared. 

That the exclusion of influences that are continually 
changing—and that may be otherwise not conducive to 
the.clearest results—is a desirable thing, is also perhaps 
indicated by the methods which we have found most 
successful in forms of ordinary telepathic experiment. 
We there take into consideration the attitude of mind 
of agent and percipient; we give the percipient a chance 
to receive impressions of one object before we hurry him 
along to another; we have regard to what may be the 
extremely sensitive state of his “telepathic faculty,” 
whatever that may be, and whether it resides in his 
subliminal consciousness or not. 

Similarly, if we find a particularly good agent and a 
particularly good percipient, we should think it wise 
to .give them the best opportunity possible, in long 
series of experiments, to get better results, and, by 
varying the conditions, to ascertain if possible what are 
the limits of, and what the causes most conducive to, 
clear telepathic communication. 

And so I. think (says Dr. Hodgson) that in Mrs. 
Piper’s and similar cases, the introduction of persons 
more or less indiscriminately may not be a condition for 
general success, but a condition for perpetual blundering. 
We can all use telephones now ; but when Reis and 
Bell and Blake and others were making experiments on 
lines that eventually led to satisfactory instruments, they 

24 6 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, it 

would hardly have thought it worth while to let the 
general public spend their time in listening to more, or 
less inarticulate noises through their incipient receiving 
apparatus. 

Sometimes, shortly before the hand starts writing, 
Phinuit gives notice that some one is “going to talk 
with you himself.” Sometimes the hand is “ se’^eu,. 
and passes through its convulsive vagaries while. Phinuit 
gives no sign, but talks on with the sitter continuously, 
even after the writing has started. To give an extreme 
instance of this, at a sitting where, a lady was. engaged 
in a profoundly personal conversation with Phinuit con¬ 
cerning her relations, and where I [H.] was present to 
assist—knowing the lady and her family very intimately, 
_the hand was seized very quietly and, as it were, sur¬ 
reptitiously, and wrote a very personal communication 
to myself, purporting to come from a deceased friend of 
mine, and having no relation whatsoever to the sitter; 
precisely as if a caller should, enter a room where two 
strangers to him were conversing, but a friend of his also 
present, and whisper a special message into the ear of 
the friend without disturbing the conversation. 

In the case of a new communicator, however, 
Phinuit frequently requests the sitter, to. “ talk to him, 
i.e., to the hand-writer [who is not Phinuit but “ G. P. or 
“ Rector ” or some one else], though Phinuit is not averse 
from keeping up the oral conversation as well, if this is 
desired. Indeed he seems, to prefer this, and when the 
sitter turns to pay attention to the hand, Phinuit fre¬ 
quently makes some such enigmatical remark as 111 
help him,” or “ I’ll help to hold him up.” At other times 
Phinuit will request that an article should be given to 
himself, so that he might have something to engage his 
attention, and I have known him to blurt out something 
about the article in the middle of. the sitting, while the 
writing is still going on. At any time, apparently, under 
these circumstances, Phinuit can be. evoked from his 
silence by talking into the ear, and will at once resume 

247 

Chap, xviii] DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

the communication while the writing continues without a 
break. 

It occurred to me (continues Dr. Hodgson) that 
possibly the left hand might also write, and that it might 
be possible to get both hands writing and Phinuit 
speaking, all at the same time on different subjects with 
different persons; and I remarked to Phinuit that I 
hoped some day to get a separate “control” of each 
finger and toe of the medium’s body, while he could 
manage the voice. On February 24th, 1894, the 

“ Edmund Gurney ” control wrote in the course of some 
remarks about certain “mediums”: “In these cases 
there is no reason why various spiritual minds cannot 
express their thoughts at the same time through the 
same organism.” I then referred to my proposed 
experiment with the two hands, and said that I would 
arrange to try it some time, with “Gurney” using one 
hand and “ George Pelham ” the other, but that I was 
not prepared to make the experiment at that time. At 
my next sitting, February, 26th, 1894, when I was 
unprepared and was alone, an attempt, only very 
partially successful, was made to write independently 
with both hands at the very beginning of the sitting. 
On March 18th, 1895, another attempt, much more 
successful, was made, when I was accompanied for the 
purpose by Miss Edmunds. Her “ deceased sister 
wrote with one hand, and G. P. with the other, while 
Phinuit was talking,—all simultaneously on different 
subjects. Very little, however, was written with the 
left hand.. The difficulty appeared to lie chiefly in the 
deficiencies of the left hand as a writing-machine. 

After having endeavoured as best I could to follow 
the writing of thousands of pages with scores of 
different writers, after having put many inquiries to the 
communicators themselves, and after having analysed 
numerous spontaneously occurring incidents of all kinds, 
I have no sort of doubt whatever but that the conscious¬ 
ness producing the writing,—whatever that consciousness 

24 8 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, xv 

be, whether Mrs. Piper's secondary personality or the 
real communicator as alleged,—is not conscious of 

writing , and that the thoughts that pass through is 
mind tend to be reproduced in writing by some part 01 
the writing mechanism of Mrs. Piper’s organism. I ms 
writing mechanism is far from perfect, and it frequently 
produces words that cannot be read. This entails a 
repetition of the word and checks the thought of the 
communicator, already reduced to the necessity of 
thinking his words at the slow rate of writing, and ox 
excluding other thoughts that he does not wish written, 
in a state when he has already been steeped into a state 
of partial sleep by coming into relation with an organism 
not his own, for the purpose of manifesting in my 
physical world. 

Regarding these phenomena, then, as supernormal, 

1. may first emphasise the fact that it is much more 
difficult now to suppose that the supernormal knowledge 
exhibited has its source in the minds of living persons, 
than it was in the earlier years of Mrs. Piper s trances, 
when practically the only intermediary was the Phinuit 
personality. 

With the advent of the G. P. intelligence, the 
development of the automatic writing, and the use of 
the hand by scores of other alleged communicators, the 
problem has assumed a very different aspect. The 
r dramatic form has become an integral part of , the 
phenomenon. With the hand writing and the voice 
speaking at the same time on different subjects and 
with different persons, with the hand writing on behalf 
of different communicators at the same sitting, with 
different successive communicators using the hand at 
the same sitting, as well as at different sittings, it is 
difficult to resist the impression that there are here 
actually concerned various different and distinct and 
individually coherent streams of consciousness. To the 

Chap, xviii] 

DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

249 

person unfamiliar with a series of these later sittings, 
it may seem a plausible hypothesis that perhaps one 
secondary personality might do the whole work, might 
use the voice and write contemporaneously with the 
hand, and pretend in turn to be the friends of the 
various sitters; might in short be a finished actor with 
telepathic powers, producing the impression not only 
that he is the character he plays, but that others are 
with him also, though invisible, playing their respective 
parts. I do not, however, think it at all likely that he 
would continue to think it plausible after witnessing and 
studying the numerous coherent groups of memories 
connected with different persons, the characteristic 
emotional tendencies distinguishing such different 
persons, the excessive complication of the acting 
required, and the absence of any apparent bond of 
union for the associated thoughts and feelings indicative 
of each individuality, save some persistent basis of that 
individuality itself. 

But here objectors arise. 

“Why,” they will say, “if discarnate persons are 
really communicating, do they not give us much more 
evidence? We ourselves, if put in the witness-box here 
and cross-examined, could do vastly better even than 
G. P., and why have so few others been able to show 
even an approximation to such clearness as he exhibited ? 
Why all the incoherence and confusion and irrelevancy ? ” 

In all cases I should expect at first a confusion in 
understanding me, as well as a confusion in manifesting 
to me. If the cessation from manifestation has been 
very complete and has lasted a very long time, I should 
expect a greater bewilderment, for a short time at least, 
when it began again to manifest. These deficiencies 
and bewilderments I should expect to be much more 
marked if such a consciousness, instead of trying to 
■manifest itself once more through its own organism with 

250 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

which it had practised for years, were restricted for its 
manifestations to another organism. In such an event 
I should expect the manifestations to partake in the 
first instance of the same lack of inhibitory control, 
the same inability to appreciate my injunctions and 
questions, the same dreamy irrelevancy that characterises 
all the manifestations, in my physical world, of a con¬ 
sciousness that has temporarily ceased to manifest 
therein and begins once more to reveal itself in what 
I call the waking state,—varying in individual cases as 
I find they do in ordinary life,—whether it be after 
ordinary sleep, or prolonged coma, or anaesthetisation, 
etc.—but with a tendency for the incoherency of the 
manifestations to be much more pronounced, inasmuch 
as the consciousness is trying to regain its wakefulness 
towards me by an unwonted way. Whether such a 
consciousness could ever regain its complete former 
fulness in my world through another organism seems 
highly Improbable. What I should expect to find is 
that through another organism it could only partially 
make. Hence I must suppose that even the best of 
direct “communicators” through Mrs. Piper’s trance is 
partly asleep. This is the first point, says Dr. Hodgson, 
which I wish to emphasise. 

Again, that persons just “deceased” should be 
extremely confused and unable to communicate directly, 
or even at all, seems perfectly natural after the shock 
and wrench of death. Thus in the case of my friend 
Hart, he was unable to write the second day after death. 
In another case a friend of mine, whom I may call D., 
wrote, with what appeared to be much difficulty, his 
name and the words, “ I am all right now. Adieu,” 
within two or three days of his death. In another case, 
F., a near relative of Madame Elisa, was unable to write 
on the morning after his death. On the second day 
after, when a stranger was present with me for a sitting, 
he wrote two or three sentences, saying, “ I am too 
weak to articulate clearly; ” and not many days 

Chap, xviii] 

DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

251 

later he wrote fairly well and clearly, and dictated also 
to Madame Elisa, as amanuensis, an account of his 
feelings at finding himself in his new surroundings. 
Both D. and F. became very clear in a short time. 
D. communicated later on, frequently, both by writing 
and speech, chiefly the latter, and showed always 
an impressively marked and characteristic personality. 
Hart, on the other hand, did not become so clear till 
many months later. I learned long afterwards that his 
illness had been much longer and more fundamental 
than I had supposed. The continued confusion in his 
case seemed explicable if taken in relation with the 
circumstances of his prolonged illness, including fever, 
but there was no assignable relation between his 
confusion and the state of my own mind. 

Returning to the actual circumstances, I say that if 
the “ spirits ” of our “ deceased ” friends do communicate 
as alleged through the organisms of still incarnate 
persons, we are not justified in expecting them to 
manifest themselves with the same fulness of clear 
consciousness that they exhibited during life. We 
should on the contrary expect even the best, com¬ 
municators to fall short of this for the two main reasons : 

(1) loss of familiarity with the conditions of using a gross 
material organism at all—we should expect them to 
be like fishes out of water or birds immersed in it; 

(2) inability to govern precisely and completely the 
particular gross material organism which they are 
compelled to use. They learned when living to play 
on one very complicated speaking and writing machine, 
and suddenly find themselves set down to play on 
another of a different make. 

There are, indeed, three kinds of confusion that need 
to be distinguished by the investigator : (1) the confusion 
in the “spirit,” whether he is communicating or not, due 
primarily to his mental and bodily conditions when 
living; (2) the confusion in the “spirit” produced by 
the conditions into which he comes when in the act of 

2 5 2 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

communicating; (3) the confusion in the result due to 
the failure of complete control over the writing (or other) 
mechanism of the medium. (2) and (3) 3 ' re increased 
very much by the failures of sitters to understand the 
process. Thus when a “Mrs. Mitchell” control was 
requested to repeat words which we had difficulty in 
deciphering, she wrote :— 

No, I can’t, it is too much work and too weakening, and I cannot 
repeat—you must help me and I will prove myself to you. I cannot 
collect my thoughts to repeat sentences to you. My darling husband, 

I am not away from you, but right by your side. Welcome me as you 
would if I were with you in the flesh and blood body. [Sitter asks for 
test.] * * * I cannot tell myself just how you hear me, and it bothers 
me a little . . . how do you hear me speak, dear, when we speak 
by thought only ? Your thoughts do not reach me at all when I am 
speaking to you, but I hear a strange sound and have to half 
guess. . . . 

Of such confusions as I have indicated above I cannot 
find any satisfactory explanation in “ telepathy from the 
living ” (continues Dr. Hodgson), but they fall into a 
rational order when related to the personalities of the 
“dead.” (Cf. also pp. 305, 309, 314.) 

The persistent failures of many communicators under 
varying conditions; the first failures of other com¬ 
municators who soon develop into clearness in com¬ 
municating, and whose first attempts apparently can 
be made much clearer by the assistance of persons 
professing to be experienced communicators ; the special 
bewilderment, soon to disappear, of communicators 
shortly after death and apparently in consequence of it; 
the character of the specific mental automatisms manifest 
in the communications; the clearness of remembrance 
in little children recently deceased as contrasted with the 
forgetfulness of childish things shown by communicators 
who died when children many years before,—all present 
a definite relation to the personalities alleged to be 
communicating, and are exactly what we should expect 

DR. HODGSON’S VIEWS 

253 

Chap, xviii] 

if they are actually communicating under the conditions 
of Mrs. Piper’s trance manifestations. The results fit 
the claim. 

On the other hand these are not the results which 
we should expect on the hypothesis of telepathy from 
the living. If the hypothesis of telepathy from the 
living is acted upon in anything like the ordinary 
experimental way, the supernormal results will be 
lessened. If the investigator persistently refuses to 
regard the communications as coming from the sources 
claimed, he will not get the best results. If, on the 
other hand, he acts on the hypothesis that the com¬ 
municators are “ spirits ” acting under adverse conditions, 
and if he treats them as he would a living person in 
a similar state, he will find an improvement in the 
communications. 

And having tried the hypothesis of telepathy from 
the living for several years, and the “spirit” hypothesis 
also for several years,—says Dr. Hodgson,—I have no 
hesitation in affirming with the most absolute assurance 
that the “ spirit ” hypothesis is justified by its fruits, and 
the other hypothesis is not. 

Note added October 1909 

A book has just been sent me from America, 
published by Sherman French & Co., under the title 
Both Sides of the Veil, which contains a supplementary 
account of Mrs. Piper and her phenomena from the pen 
of Miss Robbins,—a lady who has had considerable 
experience of sittings, being very sympathetic to the 
controls, and who often acted as confidential stenographer 
for Dr. Hodgson as well as for some important Civic 
Officials in Boston. Sometimes she was allowed to sit 
alone with Mrs. Piper, especially for voice sittings, 
taking her own notes. It is a selection from these 
records of her own that she has now printed, prefacing it 

254 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

with an Introduction and Description written in an 
earnest and believing spirit Her point of view and 
mental attitude are somewhat different from ours, and 
hence her record is usefully supplementary, since she 
sets forth the obvious appearance of the phenomenon in 
a consecutive and readable manner. 

Without endorsing her estimate of value throughout, 
I can heartily commend the book to the attention of 
those who, without being too critical, feel an interest in 
the manner and the substance of communications thus 
received, and who would like to hear more of them. 

i 

CHAPTER XIX 

RECENT PIPER SITTINGS. GENERAL INFORMATION 

T HE preceding account of my own sittings dates 
from 1889-90. I saw Mrs. Piper again on 
9 Nov. 1906 at Liverpool, where she had just 
arrived from America, and was staying in, the house of 
Mrs. Isaac Thompson of Liverpool, whose acquaintance 
she had made on her previous visit to this country. 
Another series of sittings then began, but at a rate of 
only two or three per week instead of two a day, and of 
the general character of these I now propose to give an 
account. 

Since our first English experience with Mrs. Piper a 
great mass of material had been accumulated in America, 
under the management of Dr. Hodgson, and the manner 
of the sittings had somewhat changed. In the old days 
communication had always been made with the voice, 
and any writing done was only brief and occasional. 
Communications are now almost entirely in writing, 
and only under exceptional circumstances is the voice 
employed. 

The manner of preparation was as follows. A quiet 
room was selected in which interruption need not be 
feared; a fire was provided for warmth, and the 
windows were open for ventilation. A comfortable 
chair was placed near a table, on which was a pile of 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

256 

from four to six cushions or pillows, on which the 
medium sitting in the chair and leaning forward could 
securely rest the side of her head when sleep came on, 
—not burying her face in the cushions, but turning it to 
the left side so as to be able to breathe during the 
trance. If it ever happened that the pillows incommoded 
the breathing, they had to be adjusted and pressed down 
by the experimenter in charge, so that air obtained free 
access to the mouth and nose. On the right hand side 
of the pillows, either on the same or on a small sub¬ 
sidiary table, the writing materials were arranged, namely 
a large pad or block-book (io"x8") of 100 blank sheets 
all numbered in order, and four or five pencils of soft 
lead, 2 b or 3 b, properly cut and ready. 

It was the duty of the experimenter in charge to 
record all that the sitter said. This could generally be 
done sideways on the same sheet without interfering 
with the medium’s hand. He also had to arrange the 
pad so that the hand could conveniently write upon it; 
and to tear off the sheets as they were done with. No 
attempt was made to economise paper; the automatic 
writing was large and scrawling, and did not often begin 
at the top of the page.- Sometimes a good deal of 
writing was obtained on a single page, sometimes only a 
few lines, and occasionally only a few words. The 
tearing off of the old sheet was quickly done; and the 
hand waited the moment necessary ; though sometimes, 
when in the midst of an energetic message, it indicated 
momentary impatience at the interruption. 

Mrs. Piper and her daughters often had breakfast 
with the family, though occasionally she breakfasted in 
her room.' On ordinary days she went shopping or 
sight-seeing, or was otherwise ordinarily occupied; but 
on sitting days she went back after breakfast to her own 

experim 

easy as 
conditio] 

tradition 

conditioi 

it is an 
Boston i 

(Rector in 

Chap, xix] 

RECENT PIPER SITTINGS 

259 

Piper is able to let herself go off without trouble or 
delay. ; 

Great care was taken of the body of the medium, ; 
both now and previously, by the operating intelligence, j 
She was spoken of usually as “ the light,” sometimes as j 
“the machine,” though the word “machine” commonly j 
signified only the pencil. j 

If anything went wrong with the breathing, or if j 
them was insufficient air in the room, or if the cushions j 
slipped so as to make the attitude uncomfortable, the j 
hand wrote “something wrong with the machine,” or j 
“attend to the light,” or something of that sort; and the j 
experimenter amended the arrangements before the ; 
writing went on. The whole thing was as sensible and j 
easy as possible, as soon as the circumstances and j 
conditions were understood. Each experimenter, of j 
course, handed down all the information and Hodgsonian | 
tradition of this kind to the next, so that all the j 
conditions to which Mrs. Piper was accustomed could j 
be supplied beforehand, and so that no injury would 
happen to her bodily health. j 

The following illustrates the care taken of the 
physical conditions and the way they are spoken of. 

It is an extract from a sitting held by Mr. Dorr at j 
Boston in 1906. j 

(Rector interrupting a “Hodgson” communication.) Friend, you will j 
have to change the conditions a moment. 

[At the beginning of the sitting only one of the two windows in the 
room was open a very little way. A few moments previous 
to this time H. J. Jr. noticing that the room was a little close 
had opened the other window, and G. B. D. had nearly 
closed it again.] 

G. B. D. What is wrong with the conditions? Do you want more air 
or less? I 

Well, there will have to be a change in the surroundings, there 

26o AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

will have to be more strength, what is it, air, yes, air. And 
a good deal more just now. Hodgson takes a good ea 
of strength when he comes, but he is all nght, he under¬ 
stands the methods of operation very well. (The window 
was now opened wide). _ That is better. Now the light 
begins to get clear. All right, friend. 

As the time drew near to the two-hour limit, which 
has been set as a period beyond which it is undesirable 
to persist, and sometimes at the end of about an hour 
and a half, or an hour and three quarters, from the 
commencement, the experimenter in charge g ave 
hint that the sitting must terminate soon; or else the 
controls indicate the same thing, and they then begin 
to clear up and take farewell. A _ sitting usually 
concludes as it began, with the writing of a serious 
sentence invoking the blessing of the Most High upon 
the sitter and the group. 

The coming out of the trance was gradual, and 
semi-consciousness lasted for several minutes during 
which muttered sentences were uttered, and the eyes, 
if open at all, only glared in sleep-walking fashion; 
until almost suddenly they took on a natural appear¬ 
ance, and Mrs. Piper became herself. Even then 
however, for half an hour or so after the trance had 
disappeared, the medium continued slightly dazed and 
only partly herself. During this time her eldest 
daughter usually took charge of her But the trance 
itself was so familiar to them all that the daughters 
were not the least anxious, and in another room went 
on with their letters or needlework unconcerned 
After a sitting, one of them was usually called and 
took her mother for a stroll in the garden. Then 
everybody had lunch together and talked of ordinary 
topics, nothing being said about the sitting, and no 

Chap, xix] 

RECENT PIPER SITTINGS 

■ 

Sect, iv 

r. And 
>od deal 
s under¬ 
window 
he light 

which 
:sirable 
n hour 
>m the 
rave a 
Ise the 
i begin 
usually 
serious 
h upon 

al, and 
during 
e eyes, 
ashion; 
appear- 
i then, 
ice had 
:ed and 
eldest 
i trance 
lughters 
im went 
teemed, 
led and 
Then 
ordinary 
and no 

261 

ill result of any kind being experienced. It seemed a 
normal function in her case. The experimenter mean¬ 
while had collected the papers and arranged them in 
order, and had removed the pencils and other 
appliances. Subsequently it was his business to write 
out legibly all the material accumulated during the 
two hours of sitting, to annotate it sufficiently, and 
send it to a typewriter. 

The actual record is of course preserved for exact 
reference whenever necessary. A record was also 
made of the remarks of Mrs. Piper during the period 
of awaking from trance. These were more or less 
mumbled and difficult to hear, but they were often a 
continuation of what had been obtained during trance, 
and generally contained useful passages; though part 
of them nearly always consisted of expressions of 
admiration for the state or experience she was leaving, 
and of repulsion—almost disgust—at the commonplace 
terrestrial surroundings in which she found herself. 
Even a bright day was described as dingy or dark, and 
the sitter was stared at in an unrecognising way, and 
described as a dull and ugly person, or sometimes as a 
negro. Presently, however, the eyes became intelligent, 
and she recognised some one—usually Lady Lodge 
first—and then with a smile welcomed her by name, 
and speedily came to. 

Coming to ordinary social details: it is not an 
impertinence, but is justified by the special circum¬ 
stances of the case, to state that the family is an 
admirable one, and that we regard them as genuine 
friends. 

At the time of Mrs. Piper’s first visit her daughters 
were children. Now they are grown up, and are very 
useful to their mother. Nothing in any way abnormal 

202 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

or unusual is to be noticed about them, and their 
mother expresses it as her sincerest wish that they 
will not develop her power. For though she must 
realise the value of her services to science, she cannot 
but feel that it to some extent isolates her and marks 
her out as peculiar among her neighbours in New 
England, and that the time spent in the trance state 
must have made a distinct inroad on her available 
lifetime. This however is to some extent the case 
with any occupation, and it is as the duty specially 
allotted to her that she has learnt to regard her long 
service, now extending over a quarter of a century. 

In speaking of messages received from a certain 
control, it is not to be understood in general that 
that control is actually manipulating the organism ; it 
may be always, and certainly is in general, merely 
dictating through an amanuensis as it were,—the actual 
writer or speaker being either “ Rector ” or “Phinuit,” 
who again may or may not be a phase of Mrs. Piper’s 
personality. 

In the old days, undoubtedly, the appearance was 
sometimes as if the actual control was changed—after 
the fashion of a multiple personality ; whereas now I 
think it is nearly always Rector that writes, recording 
the messages given to him as nearly as he can, and 
usually reporting in the first person, as Phinuit often 
did.^ I do not attempt to discriminate between what 
is given in this way and what is given directly, because 
it is practically impossible to do so with any certainty ; 
since what appears to be direct control is liable to 
shade off into obvious reporting. That is to say, if a 
special agency gets control and writes for a few 
minutes, it does not seem able to sustain the position 
long, but soon abandons it to the more accomplished 

Chap, xix] 

RECENT PIPER SITTINGS 

and experienced personality, Rector. In the recent 
series there appeared very little evidence of direct 
control other than Rector. 

We shall speak however of the 4 'Gurney control,’ 
the " Hodgson control,” etc., without implying that 
these agents—even assuming their existence and 
activity—are ever really in physical possession of the 
organism; and, even when they are controlling as 
directly as possible, they may perhaps always be 
operating telepathically on it rather than telergically 
operating, that is to say, through some stratum of the 
mind, rather than directly on any part of the physical 
organism. It is rather soon as yet to make definite 
assertions regarding the actual method of control, there 
are too many unknown quantities about the whole 
phenomenon,—at the same time Dr. Hodgson has 
thought it worth while to report the general aspect of 
the phenomenon as it is said to appear to the 
Communicators themselves; he does this on page 4 °° 
of Proc. xiii. (A portion is quoted above on page 243). 
And in the next few pages he goes on to indicate his 
own independent view of what is occurring, giving a 
detailed description which my own smaller experience, 
as far as it goes, tends in a general way to confirm. 
Readers interested in these particulars may here con¬ 
veniently refer to further remarks on the subject in 
Chapter XI. 

Further Details 

In the old days Mrs. Piper sat upright in her chair, ^ 
with head somewhat bowed and eyes closed, and with 
both hands available for holding objects or a hand of 
the sitter. Now her head reclines throughout on a 
cushion, with her face turned away. The right hand 

W 

■ m 

aMSE: 

204 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

alone is active, being engaged nearly all the time in 
writing, with intervals of what looks like listening. 

he dramatic activity of the hand is very remarkable: 
it is full of intelligence, and can be described as 
more like an intelligent person than a hand (cf. pp. 272 
an 3 1 3)* It turns itself to the sitter when it wants 
to be spoken to by him; but for the most part, when 
not writing, it turns itself away from the sitter, as if 
receiving communications from outside, which it then 
proceeds to write down; going back to space— le. 
directing itself to a part of the room where nobody 
is or urther information and supplementary intelli- 
gemce, as necessity arises (cf. p. 134). 

When Mrs. Piper in trance wrote a name in the 
old days—as Phinuit did sometimes—the writing was 
usually mirror-writing; but sometimes she wrote a 
name on paper held to her forehead, so that the pencil 
was turned towards her face: in that case the writing 
was ordinary. If this should happen to have been so 
consistently, it is curious. But now that Rector writes, 
voluminously, the mirror-writing only crops up occa- 
siona y, and usually the only reversal consists in 
.giving the letters of a name in inverted order, e.r. 
Knarf instead of Frank. 

One other point deserves to be here mentioned.— 

In the days of Phinuit considerable facility was 
shown m dealing with strangers. Persons introduced 

f °n ym T? y had r their reIa tions enumerated, and their 
y affairs referred to, in a remarkably quick and 

thaT Sr f .. W - ay : so .™ uch so that they sometimes thought 
, f , eir Sp ^ Ial cas . e . must have been “got up” 
in ^hl an ' The facility for dealing with strangers 

duction nf 7 IS n ° W mUCh IeSS marked The intr °- 
a stranger now makes things slow and 

Chap, xix] RECENT PIPER SITTINGS 265 

laborious, and is on the whole discouraged; for 
although the old characteristics continue to some 
extent, the tests now given are mainly of a different 
kind. The early procedure was useful at the beginning, 
and it continued useful for a good many years till a 
case for investigation was firmly established; but it 
must have seemed tedious to prolong that method 
further, so the group of controls associated with Rector 
assured Dr. Hodgson that they* would take the trance 
in hand and develop it on better and higher lines. 

As to how far the change is an improvement, there 
have been at times some differences of opinion ; but in 
view of the remarkable tests recently given under 
what, though of several years’ standing, may be 
called the new rdgime,—tests which have been 
and are being dissected out by Mr. Piddington,— 
there can be but little doubt about the reality of the 
improvement now. 

CHAPTER XX 

THE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL 

I SHALL first take as an example of the present 
style of communication a continuation of the case 
of the Isaac Thompson family, which is referred 
to on pp. 218 and 225. 

Members of this family had made the acquaintance 
of Mrs. Piper, as there stated, during her stay with us 
in Liverpool in 189a. In the interim, in 1903, Isaac 
Thompson had died, and they were anxious to get into 
communication with him if possible. 

The first attempt at reaching this control through 
Mrs. Piper occurred during a business visit of the son, 
Edwin Thompson, to America in 1906; when Dr. 
Hodgson introduced him as a stranger—not by name— 
to Mrs. Piper in trance at her house near Boston. 

The effort was, I consider, not really successful; 
partly in all probability owing to the inexperience of the 
sitter. The position is a very difficult one. He had 
had no previous experience of the sittings; because in 
1889, when Mrs. Piper was in Liverpool, he was only 
eight years old. Besides, the character of the sittings 
had changed, and the writing of Rector is not at all easy 
for a novice to read. 

Suffice it therefore to say that Edwin Thompson 
was introduced anonymously by Dr. Hodgson after the 

366 

Chap, xx] THE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL 

267 

trance had begun on Monday, nth December 1905, at 
Boston. Messages purported to come from his father, 
who seemed to wonder how his son had “ managed to 
find him.” It was however a poor sitting, and evidentially 
is best treated as nearly blank. 

Undoubtedly there ought to have been another sitting 
without delay, to clear up this unsatisfactory interview, 
which clearly established nothing whatever; though I 
believe that Mr. E. Thompson is on the whole more 
satisfied with it than these remarks of mine would 
suggest; but unfortunately he had to return to England 
immediately, and at the next sitting he was not present. 
From some points of view—however unfortunate it un¬ 
doubtedly was—this absence of any connecting link at 
ensuing sittings held by Dr. Hodgson or others in 
America may be held to strengthen the evidence, pro¬ 
vided anything further was obtained—as it was; since 
now the facts could hardly be supposed to be obtained 
from the sitter; American strangers naturally knowing 
nothing about the family, and Dr. Hodgson being a 
complete stranger to them all, except E. T., whose 
slight acquaintance he had only just made. 

The sitter on 12th December 1905 was a Miss M., 
who the same evening sent a special delivery letter to 
Dr. Hodgson conveying a message entrusted to her by 
the control George Pelham. She wrote 

“ ‘There was a message for you,’ George saith. ‘Tell Hodgson 
that name the gentleman in the spirit tried to get was Agnes.’ 
They said you would know, and it was the day before.” 

This evidently refers to a name “ Anna ” attempted 
near the end of the omitted sitting. The name Agnes 
is quite appropriate—being the name of a daughter— 
and would have been jumped at by Edwin Thompson if 

268 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

it had occurred while he was present as sitter. .It is 
noteworthy that “ Agnes ” was a name that Phinuit in t e 
old days had always boggled over, pretending he could 
not pronounce it; his best attempt being something like 
Annese or Anyese, see vol. vi., p. 47 s ; k ut w ^ en 
unawares he could pronounce it well enough, though he 
quickly changed it to Adnes before repeating it. (See 
p. 509, vol. vi. Proc. S.P.R.) 

On the next day, 13th December i 905 > Hodgson 
had a sitting ; when Rector, after script relating to other 
matters had been obtained, wrote as reported below . 

Sitting with Mrs. Piper in America, i$tk December 
1905. Present — Dr. R. Hodgson alone. 

Didst thou receive the message from George ? 

R. H. Yes, last night, thank you. 

Have you the influences of the young man’s father ? 

R. H. No. 

It seems almost an injustice to us not to have met him once 
more, as it would be a great help to the communicator 
himself and all on our side. 

R. H. I have explained all to him, and he will send me some articles 
of his father after he returns to England. He had no more 
time here, and is already on his way back. He had no 
opportunity, before leaving home, to know what he ought 
to do. 

We understand, and since the spirit is now. waiting with our good 
and faithful co-worker George [Pelham] we shall after pre¬ 
liminary matters are cleared up listen to what he hath to say. 
R. H. I shall be glad. 

That young man hath some significant light himself. 

(Scrawls were now made, ending “ help me.”) 

R. H. Kindly tell me anything you wish. 

I hold this bottle in my hand for identification. . . . Bottle . . 
in my hand. 

R. H. Yes ? 

I had much to do with them when in your world. 

R. H. Who are you? 

'ITY 

[Se< 

Chap, xx] THE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL 

269 

as sitter. It l s VF* 
at Phinuit in the : 
ending he could 
f something like 
but when taken 
>ugh, though he 
mating it. (See 

5> Dr. Hodgson 
elating to other 
rted below:_ 

I2>th December 

I used to be address [sic] Dr. I got. 

[He had medical ambitions, and was partner in Thompson & 
Capper. O. J. L.] 

(G. P. communicating.) He is trying very hard, let him dream 
it out H and he will be all right 

If he says anything clearly, congratulate him help him by words 
of encouragement only, remember he has nothing or no 
one except yourself to attract him here. 

R. H. Yes. Is he the young man’s father? 

he is surely. Agnes is his daughter. 

R. H. Yes? 

So he tells me. 

R. H. Shall I talk to him ? 

Just encourage him a little by telling him who you are etc. 
what your object is etc. It will help him greatly. 

R. H. I will explain in answer to your inquiry who I am,—that I am 
an old friend of Professor Lodge. 

Lodge. 

R. H. Yes. 

ather ? 

ia?e met him once 
the communicator 

What my old neighbour in Liv. . 

(Excitement in hand which cramps and twists about.) 
calm friend (Between sp.) 

Li , . 

(Excitement stops the writing again.) 

d me some articles 
He had no more 
'ack. He had no 
ow what he ought 

iting with our good 
ve shall after pre¬ 
hat he hath to say. 

imself. 

. Bottle 

Drugs . . 

Do not go. Wait for me. 

Liverstool 
R. H. Liverpool you mean. 

I say so. 

I say say I say so I say so I say so [sic.] . . 

R. H. Yes I understand. 

'Tsayso. 

Liverstool [Livestool?] 

R. H. Liver-pool. 

Pool. R [R — Rector.] 

I live I live I had three daughters one son [true] 

(scrawls over sheet) . . 

I want to help them all all all God help me to help them to 
understand that I am alive. 

Yes? 

I am confused [confussed] No doubt but I will be better soon 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

it is so hard to understand. You look so heavy, a black 
cloud comes over you and I can scarcely see you. Do you 

know me ? . 

I do not know you personally, but I now know your son who 
came with me. Did you not see the lady m England with 
Professor Lodge through whom you are now communicat¬ 
ing? I mean the light? 

Oh I cannot tell you yet, wait until I find my way about. 

' Tefi'me"all about yourself first, I want to get acquainted with 
you. 

. Yes I will. Kindly listen. 

I’ll do my best, because I want to reach my family, very very 

much. ,, 

I am interested in psychical work and sent Mrs. Piper many 
years ago to England,—don’t you remember seeing Mrs. 

Piper ? 

Piper? 

Yes, and the . . 

(Perturbation in hand) 

Oh yes I remember Piper. Was Mrs. Piper a Medium, an 
American lady ? 

[ Yes 

' Oh yes Oh yes I do I do, but I’ll find her out and come to 
you if it is a possible thing. What is your name ? 

I. My name is Hodgson, Richard Hodgson. 

Can’t you spell it for me ? 

I. Hodgson. 

Oh he is telling me thank you greatly. 

Let me think. 

I am so anxious to understand all about this then I can talk 
with you. 

I. Well, now, Mr . . 

Where are we? I left my body some time ago. Where are 
you? 

EC. This is America where 1 am now. 

America? 

E. Yes. 

Well well that is very interesting to me. 

You are in the body ? 

2/1 

xx] THE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL' 

Well? happy? 

R. H, Yes, both, thank you. 

Splendid I begin to understand. 

R. H. Well now I will tell you more about myself and Lodge. 

My wife is better thank you I am watching over them, but 
my business will be better in time. I am trying to take 
care of it for the children. 

R. H. Yes. Mr . . did you [say] that there were three daughters 
and one son in the body ? 

Yes . . 

My wife wore glasses . . spectacles we called them I think. 

R. H. You mentioned her eye trouble. 

Oh may be so, it was on my mind. 

Who is the lady with my boy ? 

R. H. I don’t knpw anything about her. 

No . . 

Well I understand. I had a business called . . 
sounds like drugs. 

I am helping all I can [this was evidently Rector] 

(Hand to Sp. i.) 

he must rest + . . [this is the signature of Imperator] 

R. H. I shall be so pleased for you to come again and send any 
messages you wish to your family, 
he will return in a moment friend but I command him to go for 
a moment. + R. 

(Thump of hand.) 

Mrs. . kindly 

Your friend George is the very best helper we have. 

R. H. I am very grateful to him. 

Did his spirit seem any clearer ? R. 

R. H. Yes I should judge that he will probably be a very clear com¬ 
municator shortly. 

talk with him in general when he comes whether he gives you a 
chance or not. . . chance or not . . he is very earnest but 
he does not understand yet our methods 

R. H. No. 

I say I shall return and help you. 
was very very glad I came. 

R. H. Thank you very much. 

I could not understand while you were here but I could see him 
after you left. T- 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, it 

272 

R. H. I understand. 

Waking Stage 

(During the waking stage Mrs. Piper said) 

. . Thompson [sic.] . . with you all. 

[This was the first time the name had been mentioned.] 

Before I let you go . . you must take this over to Mr. Hodgson. 

Tell him . . 

R. H. “Tell him”? 

Tell Mrs. Thompson I’m very glad to be here. It is better so. 
I am grateful for all God has done to help me. 

. . the truth will find its way. 

Farewell, fare thee well . . peace . . . 

(Pause.) 

There were two gentlemen resembling each other. One was 
George, the other was another man looked something like 
him. 

This is an improvement on what had been obtained 
at the sitting before, and indicates considerable anxiety- 
on the part of the Isaac Thompson control to manifest 
himself, since this time he had to overcome the difficulty 
of talking to a complete stranger; and save for the 
mention of my name as a common friend of Hodgson 
and himself, it is doubtful if anything could have been 
got. The excitement which the hand displays, as here 
at the mention of Lodge and Liverpool, is characteristic. 
On such occasions it twists and squirms about and 
frequently breaks the point of the pencil by pressure 
against the paper. It is as if the nerves conveyed too 
strong a stimulus to the muscles, so that until the excite¬ 
ment abates no writing can go on (cf. also pp. 313 
and 314). 

The bottles and drugs mentioned are symbolic of his 
profession. (See p. 525, Proc. vol. vi., and cf. a similar 
case near foot of page 554, vol. vi.) The things said 
are all true and appropriate. 

One of the most curious episodes is the way in which 

273 

Chap, xx] THE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL 

Mrs. Piper s name is introduced. R. Hodgson says, in 
order to introduce himself, 

R- H. I am interested in psychical work and sent Mrs. Piper many 

years ago to England,—don’t you remember seeing Mrs. 
Piper? 

Piper ? 

R« H. Yes, and the . , 

(Perturbatiop in hand.) 

Oh yes I remember Piper." Was Mrs. Piper a Medium an 
American lady? 

R. H. Yes. 

Oh yes oh yes I do I do, but HI find her and come to you if 
it is a possible thing. What is your name ? 

R. H. My name is Hodgson, Richard Hodgson. 

Can’t you spell it for me ? 

R. H. Hodgson. 

Oh he is telling me thank you greatly.” 

The perturbation in hand thus begins again when 
the name Piper is remembered, and then the Thompson 
control speaks of her as a medium he had known, and 
says he will try to find her now in order to communicate. 

When it is remembered that the whole thing is being 
obtained through Mrs. Piper's body, the curiosity of the 
position is obvious. 

The sentence “oh he is telling me, thank you 
greatly” signifies that whereas the Thompson control 
had been trying to understand with difficulty what Dr. 
Hodgson was saying, he was now being told on his own 
side by G. P. or Rector, whom he thanks;—all this by¬ 
play being, now as often, automatically recorded by the 

274 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

It is quite true that Mrs. Thompson wore spectacles, 
though of course this was within Mrs. Piper’s own know¬ 
ledge. In the previous set (p. 524. voL VL ) a sister o 
Mr. Thompson’s was represented as unfamiliar with 
them and wanting them taken off. This a so was a 
correct apprehension of fact at the date referred to. 

“The lady with my boy” may well refer to his 
son’s engagement: though that was not in Mrs. Piper s 
normal knowledge, and presumably not in Dr. 0 gson s 
either. But of course this sort of thing can be guessed ; 
and E. T. in his own sitting had clearly hinted it. . 

In fact although there is nothing very much obtained, 
and little that can be called really evidential, because of 
Mrs. Piper’s previous normal knowledge,—provided any 
clue to the particular family had been conveyed during 
Edwin Thompson’s sitting, in the course of which, 
though he had certainly not given his name, I observe 
that he had mentioned the name “Theodora” and also 
spoken of “the business,”—there is nothing that is 
inapplicable or foreign to the person represented, or in 
the least untrue, as soon as communication really began ; 
and there is much in the dramatic details that I find 
distinctly interesting. 

Waking Stage 

" While coming out of trance Mrs. Piper usually speaks, 
or rather mutters, at intervals ; and her words are taken 
down, or such of them as can be heard. It is worth 
while to quote one record of these ejaculations which 
sometimes convey interesting residual information,—and 
I select the following as a fairly typical case of an 
unimportant and unevidential but characteristic coming 

Notes intruded in square brackets are added merely 

W4.xn.jr, 

XJ 1HE ISAAC THOMPSON CONTROL 

- S:idT„ d ;* ’ 1 the ■?"* sort ° f 

conscious utterances as ^recwdfr'fi'TT'* t , heSe sub_ 
, “ experience of many sittings. * hlmseIf ln 

certLn gro a u p a of !rritate a 

familiar wi* trance teeclts° of™ "T f ^ 

but in the first place I must th ^ ° r another > 
when I explain thino-s I am nr / hem . t0 . observe that 
the part of specialists Tt m assumm §‘ ignorance on 
in an explana “ fashion ^-"Possible to write 
most orthodox sdetfj r ^ ° f 

offending specialists In ordtoiv'Th”" of 

silently to assume that pvn • sub -l ects Jt is safe 

stand that their knowledge is taken^n pe ° pIe 7 ;11 “^en¬ 
trances are by no means identical - efchhL- Besides, 
features. Mrs Pi nPr 'c . , ' eacJa has distinctive 

modification in the ^ie T,he rT ^ 

first knew her; and it mav h<= r T 660 years SInce I 

of phrases employed -by he" 

a psychological study. They are °f Y as 

they have a strong family likeness He ™ but 

on an occasion after one of th ' ■ ?^ ere tben they are, 
Thompson family he SIttm ^ s wit h the Isaac 

I saw you before. It is fearful prk* 

Hkes changing from her trance stateanT^ ?“* ** dis “ 

ordinary surroundings.] and C0lmn & ^ a ck to 

They are going away. It’s awful. Too bar! S 

refers to a sensation which she ra t n ? P ' fThis 
which nearly always Dreceflpc a sna P m ^ head, 

Sometimes it heralds almost z 

always more conscious after a 1 U J and she is 
but often it takes two sna™ *- u P than she was before; 
What the snap is I do not k ° , nngIler completely to. 
thing physiological. It is not aud’hi ^ * e *P ect {t Js some- 
Kper half to 4,“”“'^ lto « h “*■ 

276 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

What are all the people doing ? 

[Probably some of the sitters were moving about and leaving 
the room, under the mistaken impression that the snap 
meant that interest was over.] 

I saw a man in the light, which looked like Mr. Thompson. 
Kept wavbg his hand. The man with the cross was 
helping him out. 

[“ The man with the cross ” is intended to signify Imperator.J 
The moon was shining [or it may have been the 1 sun.’ . It only 
signifies that her recent surroundings have been bright and 
luminous.] 

Has an old lady with him. She is helping him read something. 

I could see his face perfectly. 

Noise, [probably something going on outside.] They were 
talking to me. I came in on a cord, a silver cord. They 
were trying to tell me something about the children in the 
body. Lovely place. 

Buzzing in my head. Another snap. 

Miss Thompson. I thought you were small Looking through 

opera glasses at wrong end. You grew larger., Did you 
hear my head snap? It breaks. 

I forgot where we were sitting. 

Why Mrs. Thompson, I didn’t know you were there. My 

cold.” . . . „ 

[Mrs. Piper was troubled with a cold at this time, tier 

intelligence was now normal.] 

In further illustration of the waking stage, showing 
how similar it was in 1906 to what it is now, and as a 
further description of the curious “ snap ” sensation,. I 
subjoin an extract from the termination of a sitting with 
Henry James, Junior, and Mr. Dorr in America in 1906. 

I thought you were a stranger. 

Well, did you hear my head snap ? 

H.J.Jr. No. . 

Didn’t hear it? It is a funny sound. Don’t you hear it at 
all? Sounds like wheels clicking together and then snaps. 
There it is again. 

G. B. D. Now you are really back. 

CHAPTER XXI 

GENERAL REMARKS ON THE PIPER SITTINGS 

T^OR a further account of these sittings my paper in 
X vol. xxiii. of the Proceedings of the Society for 
Psychical Research must be referred to. It 
would take_ too much space to quote further here. I 

must be satisfied with a few comments. 

. lt is noteworthy how natural it is for a sitter to 
ignore all the normal knowledge which Mrs. Piper must 
undoubtedly possess, and to treat her as a separate 
individual when in the trance state. Her controls 
exhibit the same tendency ; and, while of course nothing 
evidential can be made to depend upon the supposition, 
it does appear to be really true that that knowledge has 
little or no influence on the knowledge shown by the 
controls. 

I surmised this at an earlier stage—as recorded on 
page 202 and subsequent experience has only con¬ 
firmed the impression. 

As a minor instance of this fact may be mentioned 
the surprise and eagerness shown by the Isaac Thompson 
control when after some delay he was told that Mrs. 
Isaac Thompson was present at the first sitting subse¬ 
quently held in her house in Liverpool. For of course 
Mrs. Piper had known perfectly well the people likely to 
be present at the sitting, and had seen them assemble; 

278 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

it was no news to her. But indeed everything tends to 
show that during thorough trance the normal conscious¬ 
ness is in abeyance. And, although it is true that we 
cannot claim anything as evidential when it comes out 
in the trance if it had ever been known to Mrs. Piper, I 
myself am unable to trace much, if any, connexion 
between the trance knowledge and her normal know¬ 
ledge. For instance, a sitter introduced by name is no 
more likely to have his name mentioned during a sitting 
than one who is introduced as an anonymous stranger. 

I make a general statement of this kind believing that 
careful analysis will bear it out, and as a challenge to 
any one who will bestow time and labour upon the work 
of analysing the records from this point of view. It 
seems to me a desirable piece of work for someone to 
undertake. 

Of course a sceptic may say that this kind of kenosis 
is due to mere cunning; but the time for suspicion of 
that kind is over with most of us investigators. It is 
a genuine piece of psychological information that we 
now desire, not anything analogous to detective work. 
Detective work is necessary in its proper time and place, 
but there are cases which have run that gauntlet, and 
require more advanced treatment. The Piper case is 
one of them. 

When I speak of “ Mrs. Piper’s normal knowledge,” 
I mean of course knowledge acquired in her ordinary 
state. Knowledge acquired while in the trance state is 
certainly reproducible when in that state, but it appears 
not to be accessible in her ordinary state ; and vice versa. 
I do not call that “normal knowledge.” 

The controls themselves feel that they have no 
direct access to the normal Mrs. Piper; so, if they want 
to communicate with her, they must utilise some other 

Chap, xxi] 

GENERAL REMARKS 

2 79 

agency,—for Instance, they send messages through her 
own daughter, with whom they occasionally communicate 
during trance. To Illustrate this, 1 extract a small 
fragment from a quantity of serious conversation which 
took place between them and Dr. Hodgson's executors 
soon after his death. Mr. Dorr was conducting the 
sitting and speaking the remarks labelled G.B.D. 

G. B. D. We are anxious that the light in the future should not go 
adrift and astray, and anxious that past relations should not 
be wholly interrupted by any change of environment or other. 
Well, no one could be more anxious about these 
things or more concerned than we ourselves are, 
and it hath disturbed us not a little to see the conditions 
on the earthly side. We are not quite pleased with them, 
because the light cannot know itself, it cannot understand 
itself. It is shut off from communication with us on our 
side and it must remain in ignorance of the methods which 
we pursue in our endeavours to reach the mortals on the 
earthly side. 

G. B. D. But through the daughter, Alta, I have felt that you might in 
a sense reach her. 

Yes, that is the only way. 

I do not adduce this as evidence, but as illustrative 
of how the phenomenon represents itself; for when it does 
so consistently it is reasonable to suppose that something 
true is indicated. 

It will be observed in many of the records how natural 
it is for a sitter, or for the experimenter in charge, to 
challenge a “ control ” to furnish some evidence of his 
identity, or to demand from him a sudden answer to a 
specific question. 

It is quite natural, and I suppose inevitable : but that 
it also is to some extent unreasonable, must be admitted. 
Trivial domestic incidents are not constantly in one’s 
thoughts, and only when in a reminiscent and holiday 

280 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, n 

mood, or under the stimulus of friendly chat, does any 
vivid recollection of such incidents normally occur. 

It is a common experience that characteristic touches, 
specific phrases and sparkling sayings, are most likely to 
come out in the give and take of lively conversation. 
Silent and solitary brooding, though it may generate 
valuable and even brilliant ideas in a few cases, does 
not as a rule lead to anything specially personal, or 
identifying; rather the contrary,—such ideas seem to 
spring up impersonally, or to be supplied from outside, so 
to speak. 

It is proverbially difficult to control thoughts to order, 
and a communicator suddenly asked to remember an 
identifying circumstance, or to send an appropriate 
message, may feel rather as a person feels when set in 
front of a phonograph and told to 4 ‘say something 
brilliant for posterity.” Under these conditions any one 
with the gift might compose some half-doggerel verse 
perhaps, or might remember some poetry more or less 
accurately,—and indeed that is what it appears the 
controls sometimes actually do—but usually there would 
be hesitation,' requests for delay, and fishing for sugges¬ 
tions,—something like what we find in the records. e 
controls unfortunately cannot be assisted by the give an 
take of friendly and stimulating conversation ; for, under 
the conditions of a sitting, the intercourse on our side is 
nearly all “take” and very little “give.’ It is 
admittedly dangerous for a sitter to talk freely, because 
the conditions then become “loose, and more may e 
inadvertently given away than was intended, so that 
thereafter nothing obtained, however otherwise good, 
can be considered evidential. But then—it must also 
be admitted—no conversation can be in the full sense 
stimulating or satisfactory if its animation is hampered by 

Chap, xxi] 

GENERAL REMARKS 

281 

a constant desire to withhold information, lurking in the 
background. 

In order to be human a conversation should be whole¬ 
hearted and free from arrives pensdes on both sides : but 
under evidential conditions that seems quite impossible. 
It is one of the many disadvantages under which the 
investigation of the subject inevitably labours. 

Trivial Recollections, and Relics 

It will by some people—who might otherwise be in 
favour of some form of spiritistic hypothesis—bethought 
absurd that reference should be made under such circum¬ 
stances to trifles like ordered but undelivered pictures, 
and to trivialities like the possession of a handkerchief or 
other relic. The usual excuse is that these things are 
mentioned for purposes of identification ; but though 
there may be some truth in that view, there is in my 
judgment more reason than that for such incidents ; and 
they are not contradictory of the notion of survival. The 
fate of objects once regarded with affection, or even 
interest, and possessing any kind of personal association, 
does not seem to have suddenly become a matter of 
indifference. Scattered through all the sittings are 
innumerable instances of this sort of curious memory of 
and interest in trifles ; so that it would be merely tedious 
to refer to pages where they occur. Every experienced 
sitter knows that such references are the commonest of 
all. What is the explanation ? I am not prepared with 
a full explanation; but, granted the most completely 
spiritistic hypothesis, it would appear that the state after 
death is not a sudden plunge into a stately, dignified, and 
specially religious atmosphere. The environment, like 
the character, appears to be much more like what it is 

282 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

here than some folk imagine. This may be due to the 
effort and process incidental to the condition of semi¬ 
return, under which alone communication is possible : it 
appears to involve something less than full consciousness. 
But it goes rather further than this, since a few of the 
controls when recently deceased (a pious old lady in 
particular is in my mind) have said that the surroundings 
were more “ secular ” than they expected ; they have 
indeed expressed themselves as if a little disappointed, 
though they nearly always say that the surroundings are 
better than they are here. Anyhow, there appears to be 
no violent or sudden change of nature ; and so any one 
who has cared for trinkets may perhaps after a fashion 
care for them still. 

But there must be more than that even. Objects 
appear to serve as attractive influences, or nuclei, from 
which information may be clairvoyantly gained. It 
appears as if we left traces of ourselves, not only on our 
bodies, but on many other things with which we have 
been subordinate^ associated, and that these traces can 
thereafter be detected by a sufficiently sensitive person. 
This opens a large subject which I have touched upon 
once or twice already in other papers—never with any 
feeling of certainty or security—and which requires 
careful handling lest its misunderstanding pave the way 
for mere superstition. 

But to return to common sense, and without assuming 
anything of this kind, even hypothetically, how do we 
know that we are right in speaking of some things as 
trifles and other things as important ? What is our scale 
or standard of value ? 

N o one expects people to be wholly indifferent as to 
the posthumous disposal of their property, provided it 
amounts to several thousand pounds. They make careful 

Chap, xxi] 

GENERAL REMARKS 

283 

wills, and would, if they knew, be perhaps displeased if 
the provisions were not adhered to, or if their final will 
was lost. 

Very well, on what scale shall we estimate property, 
and how shall we measure its value ? 

It is conceivable that, seen from another side, little 
personal relics may awaken memories more poignant than 
those associated with barely recollected stocks and 
shares. 

That at any rate is the kind of idea which naturally 
suggests itself in connexion with the subject. Our 
terrestrial estimate of the comparative importance of 
things is not likely to be cosmically sufficient or perenni¬ 
ally true. 

However that may be, it is clear that the various 
Piper controls do not estimate the importance of property 
by any standard dependent on pounds sterling. As a 
variant on old letters, old lockets, and other rubbish, in 
which Phinuit seemed to take some interest, I once gave 
him a five-pound note. It was amusing to see how at 
first he tried to read it—in his usual way by applying it to 
the top of the medium’s head;—and then on realising the 
sort of thing it was, how he crumpled it up and flung it 
into a corner with a grunt, holding out his hand for 
something of interest. Needless to say, I did not share 
in this estimate of value, and, after the sitting, was 
careful to rescue the despised piece of paper from its 
perilous position. 

CHAPTER XXII 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

N OW let us enter upon the episodes where 
F. W. H. Myers was supposed to be con¬ 
trolling, or at least communicating, while I was 
present. I shall begin, however, with communications 
received not through Mrs. Piper, but through other 
mediums. Most of the Piper-Myers messages were 
obtained, and must be dealt with, by Mr. Piddington ; 
because they often involve cross-correspondences, which 
belong to his department of the work. Moreover, in 
the recent series of sittings I had but few conversations 
with the Myers control as modified or represented by 
Mrs. Piper—what we call the “ Piper-Myers ” or Myers P . 
I fear I did not give him many chances, and one day 
was rather rebuked by Rector for not affording the 
Myersp control more opportunity for utterance. This 
was because I usually had something else ready that I 
wanted to try. So neither from Myers P nor from 
Hodgson P did I get very much in these recent 
sittings. 

And of course in the old days, 1889-90, both had 
been in full vigour of life. 

But it so happens that long before Mrs. Piper 
arrived, and very soon after Mr. Myers’s death, I had 
had a couple of unexpected and exceptional sittings 

284 ■ ■ .. 

Chap, xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

285 

with the well-known Mrs. Thompson, at that time still 
living at Hampstead. (It is hardly necessary to say 
that she has no connexion with the Mrs. Isaac Thompson 
referred to as a sitter with Mrs. Piper in previous chap¬ 
ters.) She had suspended sitting altogether; but she 
kindly allowed myself and my wife to sit twice with 
her,—she said she felt impelled to do so,—on two occa¬ 
sions when she happened to be visiting friends in or 
near Birmingham. 

Mrs. Thompson was so well acquainted with Mr. 
Myers and his family that no evidential importance can 
be attached to remarks and messages concerning that 
family, obtained through her mediumship, however 
natural they may be. These are therefore all omitted. 
Reference to trivial facts and domestic affairs are good 
as evidence only in the case of unknown strangers: in 
other cases they are only of use as contributing to the 
dramatic character and personal expression of the whole. 
From this point of view I regret some omissions, which 
nevertheless have been considered necessary. 

Mrs. Thompson’s trance is an easy trance, not so 
complete or striking as Mrs. Piper’s, but it is a state of 
suspension, or partial suspension, of ordinary consciousness, 
and is accompanied by a change of voice and manner. 

In the sitting which follows, “ Myers” was represented 
as controlling and speaking for part of the time, but the 
sittings began with the “Nelly” control, and when the 
Myers control is not manifestly intended to be speaking, 
the words may be taken as emanating either from Nelly 
or from one or other of Mrs. Thompson’s ordinary controls 
—-it does not matter which, since I am not studying 
Mrs. Thompson’s phenomena, but am giving what 
appear to be messages from or about Myers, who died 
on 17 January 1901. 

286 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

First Thompson Sitting at Edgbaston 

The first appearance of a Myers control in my 
experience was on Thursday, 19 February 1901, that is 
to say just about a month after F. W. H. Myers’s 
decease. Present, only myself and wife with Mrs. 
Thompson. At 6 o’clock the control “Nelly” began. 
She had been incredulous about his death, and indeed 
had declared that she could not find him anywhere and 
did not believe that he had come over. See J. G. P.’s 
paper, Proceedings, vol. xviii. p. 240, also 238. But now 
she was just beginning to admit the fact:— 

Tuesday, 19th February 1901. Sitting with Mrs. 

Thompson at 225 Hagley Road, Birmingham. 

Notes by 0 . J. L. and M. L. 

6.0p.m. (“ Nelly ” control speaking.) 

I was allowed to go on his birthday to see him. He will 
have plenty of work to do, for he has promised to send 
messages to 74 people. 

All the people said he was dead, but I did not believe 
it j and though I saw him, I thought he only came 
over for his birthday like in a vision. But I see him 
now. It is the truth, it is the truth (excitedly). Let 
us see if he can talk sense. He was talking on the 
platform with you. It was at a station by a racecourse. 
[I had met him at Liverpool; seen him off from the 
landing stage to America. But this is unimportant.] 
He will come when he is' more wakened up — before 
9 o’clock. You be ready at 25 minutes to 9. He will 
be awake by then. He would rather think and realise 
for a little space by himself. He is sensible, for a spirit. 

Before you came, mother was praying. She said “ Come 
and tell the truth for truth’s sake.” 

(At 6.30 Mrs. Thompson came to.) 

Then we had dinner, and at 8.30 the Control “Nelly” appeared 
again, saying 

i 

287 

Chap, xxii] . THE MYERS CONTROL 

What is the matter with the little girl’s throat? her ear 
seems to have made her throat ache. One of yours—a 
twinkle one. 

[This is of course a mere friendly interlude. One of my 
twin daughters was often troubled with ear-ache about 

this time.] 

(Here there was an incipient attempt at a Myers control, 
and an incident at a Club was referred to. Then 

another control said) 

Do you know he feels like the note-taker, not like the spirit 
that has to speak. I think he will speak presently. 

(A short interval of apparent discomfort, and then e< Myers ” 
purported to communicate) 

Lodge, it is not as easy as I thought in my impatience. 
Gurney says I am getting on first rate. But 1 am 
short of breath. 

Oh, Lodge, it is like looking at a misty picture, 1 can 
distinctly feel I ought to be taking a note of it. I do 

not feel as if I were speaking, but it is best to record 
it all 

Tell them .1 am more stupid than some of those I had to 
deal with. Oh, Lodge, what is it when I see you? 
Was it the Albemarle Club we went to when I talked 
about-- oh, it leaves off. 

Sidgwick knows I am with him. He said that he saw me 
in the morning of-- Oh dear, it always leaves off 

in the interesting places. 

I can hear myself using Rosa Thompson’s voice. 

I want to convince Sidgwick. He says “ Myers, now we 
are together, you convince me that I am sending my 
messages, and that she is not getting them from us some 
way.’’ He still wants me to show him. He says he saw 
me in the morning of the day he went to Trevelyan. 
He met Trevelyan, and he saw me first. I am trying 
to show him the way. It is funny to feel myself talking 
when it is not myself talking. It is not my whole self 
talking. When I am awake I know where I am. Do 
you remember the day I was with you here? When 
I went home that day I was ill. I had such a bad 
night. It is in my diary. It was in May, I think. I 
was very ill. [This about Trevelyan seems to refer to 

288 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY 

[Sect, iv 

an incident dealt with by Mr. Piddington. See Proc. 
vol. xviii. pp. 239, 2 4 1 *] 

[The description of the feeling of the control while engaged 
in communication agrees closely with that of Dr. Hodgson 
based upon his experience of Mrs. Piper. See for instance 
vol. xiii. pp. 366, 380, 404, 405. And the forgetfulness 
immediately following may be compared with statements 
in Chap. XVIII. above, especially p. 252.] 

O. J. L. Do you want to say anything about the Society ? 

What Society? 

O. J. L. You remember the S.P. 3 L 

Do not think that I have forgotten. But I have. I have 
forgotten just now. Let me think. You know, Lodge, 
when you have wanted a thing thirty or forty years, and 
at last got it, you do not think of much else beside. Let 
me think, and bit by bit give it you. I used to get 
better evidence when I let them say what they wanted 
to say. 

They tell me it was my best love that Society. They will 
help me. 

What did Battersea say about it ? 

0 . J. L. I do not know. 

I am going to talk to you clearly and very distinctly in 
April. I do not know my Mother’s name now. . . . 

What James gave me to make me sleep did not do me any 
good. 

There is plenty of good matter in those papers that I left 
. . . if it is gone through. You remember the dis¬ 
cussion there' was over Hyslop’s paper and its length ? 
If it is put in too much detail, there is too much of 
it; and yet if you put it fully it is there for those who 
want it full; and you can pick out the points too, . . . 

I was confused when I came here. I groped my way as if 
through passages, before I knew I was dead. I thought 
I had lost my way in a strange town, and I groped 
my way along the passage. And even when I saw 
people that I knew were dead, I thought they were 
only* visions. 

I have not seen Tennyson yet by the way. [Cf. p. 295.] 

I am going to be bold and prophesy already. I am going to 
see you in April. I am going to know who I am by then. 

289 

Chap, xxii] THE MYERS CONTROL 

O. J. L. And will you then read what you wrote in the envelope? 

What envelope ?—I shall be told. 

Ernest does not mind now. What do they mix me up with 

' “ m for? (Jocularly.) Do they think I want to shine in 

ms glory ? 

[This was evidently a reference to the Times obituary 
notice, which I had written, but to which some one in 
the Times office appended a supplementary state¬ 
ment that F. W. H. M. had been a joint translator of 
Homer together with Walter Leaf and Andrew Lang- 
whereas it is public and general knowledge that this 
was only true of his brother Ernest] (Cf. incident on 
p. 146.) 

I wanted you to do for me what I did for Sidgwick. [ is . write 
n t t t 3 not * ce * n the Society’s Proceedings-, see p. 342 below.] 

U. J. L. Iam going to; and so are Richet and James. 

Ah, RichetYes, Richet knows me; and James will do it well. 
I never finished those letters I was writing—letters to be 
published. 

[Probably meaning the book Human Personality .] 

[Then the control seemed to change, and it went on]:_ 

He says he must stay and try and help. He says, Bless him 
when he has so much to do. He says “ Brothers I have 
none excepting Lodge.” He wants Lodge to be President 
if he dare spare the work; but he says “Do not rope 
yourself, but keep the group, keep the group together. 
It will soon take care of itself.” 

0 . J. L. We are trying to get Rayleigh. 

That would be splendid, but that is too good to hope for. I 
think it will be you. (Cf. p. 341.) Thank you for being 
helpful to him. You have helped him. Man’s sympathy 
is more helpful than anything else, and with sympathy 
everything slips into place. Among the things which are 
not evidential you get things which are. They must take 
it all. Those that seek only the evidential things will 
not get them. 

There are so many he would like to help. He promised, and 

he will have to. , , 

When he comes in April he will remember a great deal more. 
He will remember what he wrote for you in the envelope. " 
(Trance ends about 10.30 p.m.) 

19 

290 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, tv 

The impersonation at this sitting was really a remark¬ 
ably vivid and lifelike one. It occurred only a month 
after the death of F. W. H. Myers, and the state of 
confusion in which the Myers control found itself seemed 
very natural. Indeed it would be difficult for me to 
invent an experience or a communication more reasonable, 
under the supposed circumstances, or more what we 
micffit suppose to be “natural,” than what we actually 

got. The necessity for still “convincing Sidgwick struck 

us as amusingly characteristic ; so did several other httle 
traits, such as that Myers “ felt as,f he ought to be 
taking notes”—a point on which F. W. H. M. was 
always specially insistent. And as to h ' s tem P° ra ^ 
forgetfulness of the existence of the S.P.R., thou h 
it will probably be pounced upon as an absurdity by 
scoffers, and though it was of course quite unexpected, 
yet even that struck us at the time as humanly natural 
and interesting. And indeed so it does now. (Compare 
Hodgson’s statement on p. 252.) With the portions 
omitted, and everything taken into account, this sitting 
seems to me about the best of the Myers sittings m 
which I have been immediately concerned. Without 
being strictly evidential, it was in fact as convincing as 
anything that could be imagined of that kind. 

This was in February 1901. A further communica¬ 
tion was promised for April, but no opportunity for 
another sitting came until May 8th, and then it came 
quite unexpectedly and without being arranged for. In 
fact at that time it was unlikely that any sitting would 
occur, since we had all been definitely told that Mrs. 
Thompson’s sittings were suspended,—or rather that 
, they were intended henceforth to cease. 

_ 

Chap, xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

291 

Second Thompson Sitting at Edgbaston 

On May 8th, 1901, Mrs. Thompson happened to 
come to Birmingham again, to see her connexions there; 
and she incidentally visited us at our temporary home in 
the Hagley Road. 

I made the following contemporary notes,' and it 
seems, to me worth while to reproduce them as a repre¬ 
sentation of the circumstances of the case at this time. 

From O.J. L.’s Note-book , 9 May, 1901 

After dinner Mrs. Thompson spontaneously asked 
Mrs. Lodge to take her up into my study, saying as 
she went upstairs that she felt only half conscious, and 
as if she were going off. 

Upstairs we three alone sat and talked for some 
time. 

At last “Nelly” appeared and notes began: Mrs. 
Lodge taking them as well as myself. Mrs. Lodge 
spoke no word during the trance from first to last. 

The sitting was dim and unsatisfactory, and in most 
respects apparently at the time a failure. It lasted about 
an hour and a half, one continuous trance, and at the 
end Mrs. Thompson was much agitated ; not exhausted, 
but .weepy; saying how much she disliked the idea of 
coming back to consciousness and leaving the conditions 
in which she had just been. She said she had no 
recollection of what had been said \ and this appeared 
to be the case. She also told me, before the sitting 
began, that of late she had been quite unconscious of any 
communications, that is to say, she could not remember 
their contents, but that she was under the impression 
that during the last month or so she had had three or 

292 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

four trances when no one was there, at different times, 
and that once she found herself waking on the floor with 
a feeling of great satisfaction and contentment. 

She further said that the sudden cutting off of all 
attempts at communication had been a great blow to 
her, and seemed to upset her physically to some extent. 
Also that she had been promised something for her 
birthday, April 22nd,—evidently connecting it with me. 
“ Nelly ” had indeed promised me a sitting in April [as 
recorded in last sitting], though not for any particular 
date. But it seems she had expected it on the 22nd. 
However I had no sitting in April—nothing till this 
May 8th. 

The difficulties of clear utterance at times rendered 
it necessary for me to help the ideas out, or anticipate 
them as far as I could. My notes aim at recording the 
sense of what was intended, and can only be of interest 
to those who understand. 

Additional Note written on ix May, 1901 

The above was dictated before copying the notes, and 
gives my contemporary impression of the sitting; but 
on reading over the notes I find them better than I 
expected; and now think that though at the time it 
seemed a bad sitting to everybody concerned, it is not 
really bad; though the utterances were so feeble and 
confused that to a novice it would have been nearly all 
gibberish. A little gibberish remains undeciphered in 
places; but is recorded in case any meaning can be 
attached to it. I do not think it is gibberish really,— 
only as heard and taken down. It probably had sense 
if it could have been heard and understood, though most 
likely not at all important sense. 

Chap, xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

293 

Second Sitting with Mrs. Thompson at 225 Hagley Road, 
Birmingham, 8 May, 1901 , from 9.0 till 10.30 p.m. 

Present — O. J. L. and M. L., both taking notes. 

(Nelly speaking.') 

P’fessor Lodge, what is that umbrella they have put up and 
made it all dark ? I wish they would take it away. 

(Further indications followed that she had tried to communi¬ 
cate but found it dark.) 

[This evidently refers to the suspension of sittings; Mrs. 
Thompson, for some private reason, had declined to 
sit for the last few months, and only did it now as 
a special favour, and because she felt internally urged 
to do so.] 

I have not seen Mr. Myers, not once; I have not seen him since 
they put that umbrella up. 

Nelly then appealed to me to try and believe her and receive her 
statements sympathetically and not with an undercurrent of suspicion, 
explaining that such undercurrent befogged her, and that she could 
give me better things if I was sympathetic. I asked her not to regard 
me as in any way hostile, and she said “ No, I don’t feel like that to 
any of the Marshall family.” This remark was not amplified, nor did 
it seem understood by Nelly herself. 

It is perhaps worth noting incidentally that my grandmother and 
my wife’s father were both Marshalls, though no relation whatever to 
each other, nor to Frederic Myers’s relations of that name. 

Nelly then sent a few messages to Mr. Piddington, and incidentally 
remarked that she felt as if in a pound in the middle of a field, and 
as if she could not see clearly the people on the other side of the en- 
' closure, and that communication was very difficult and not clear to-day. 

Then followed some convulsive movements and a sort of internal 
colloquy of which only fragments were audible. They appeared 
however to indicate a confused conversation between Nelly and Mr. 
Myers, Nelly asking him to "come in,” and Mr. Myers saying that 
he had been told not,—that he had understood the communications 
were suspended for a time. 

But this was only an impression gathered from the confused 
mutterings. A further impression was that Mr. Myers mistrusted the 

294 AUTOMATISM AND. LUCIDITY [Sect, tv 

presence of a third person, and was being reassured by Nelly that it 
was only Mrs. Lodge 

It’s only Mrs. Lodge whom you love. 

No I don’t love her. 

It’s only Lodge’s wife, who will help. 

More than I anticipated much more. 

With other barely intelligible fragments of internal colloquy. 

Ultimately the conversation with me began again, but in a very 
halting and indistinct fashion—no marked personality at all— somewhat 
as if Nelly were half giving messages and half personating Mr. Myers, 
and doing both badly and with difficulty. 

The following however are my notes of what was said 

Mr, Myers is worrying about something connected with Mr. 
Sidgwick, something that was not understood or that was 
not put down. He [H. S.] had some Jews in College .and 
he could not do it on a Saturday. 

Tell. Fielding that he is doing something that is waste of 
time. The Times said something about it and said it was 
valuable. 

[But I understood the communicator to mean that it was 
not. I do not know what work is being referred to,] 

The first shock to my dearest hopes. 

So stupid not to tell them what I wished 

The time was gradually passing. 

You know Sidgwick and I had many disappointments like this 
[when communications would not come clear ?] 

I thought I should do better, but I cannot. 

We had many, a year, a hundred, at Newcastle. Bitter 
disappointments. 

But when I can give pound [muddle] 

Given a grain and found as much as would have been, for 
Sidgwick, in that hundred, 

Mrs. Sidgwick was cold on a brick floor. 

A hundred results nil. 

It is true Lodge it is true. 

I tried on the Sunday with— 

I saw the receptacle, but not this one. It was Hodgson and 
Smith and I. We were all in my room together and I 
told him, ’ 

I told him I would find no difficulty, if he were in difficulty in 
putting things straight ; 

Chap, xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

295 

But it is. 

[Meaning that it was much harder than he thought.] 

1 thought I knew better than be such a miserable failure. I 
thought I would come and read it. 

[Apparently or possibly meaning the sealed letter,] 

1 had gone away. I thought I was not to communciate now. 
It is not the time now. 

I wished you would all write to me. I was so far away. I 
pined to hear from you all 

My philosophy did not help me much. 

I feel just as lonely. Lodge, it is just as they say, you grope 
in fog and darkness. 

I do not know, when I come to talk to you, about the other 
side. 

But I must do as I promised. 

I feel I am selfish still. 

I wanted it for my own' satisfaction. 

Further indications that the conditions under which he was were 
not altogether to his liking, not at least when trying to communicate; 
and also further statements that he could not very clearly realise the 
conditions on that side when he was trying to communicate, and that 
now he was wishful to pass on and up and not stay to redeem his 
promises. 

Is the typhoid better? 

What are you doing in this place ? 

[Apparently meaning strange and unfamiliar surroundings, 
the temporary house in Birmingham which I had taken, 
and which he had never seen.] 

I had plenty of this kind of unsatisfactory experience [meaning 
bad sittings.] 

James went with me. 

I seemed to be taken from all my pain and suffering into 
light. 

I hardly like to tell you what I wanted to do, it seems so 
selfish now, but I wanted to go and talk to Tennyson, 
whom I idolised. (Cf. p. 2 88.) But I was told that I must 
suffer for my promises, and then I could have what I 
wanted. , ' 1 , , 1 

I wish I had not been taken so far; it makes it difficult to 
communicate. 

296 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

Then—referring as I thought at the time, to Mrs. Thompson’s 
unexpected and undesired trance which she had told me of, when she 
woke up and found herself on the floor, but perhaps more probably 
referring to one of the incidents mentioned by Mr. Piddington in Proc . 9 
vol. xviii. pp. 147, 148—the control went on, 

I did not throw her on the floor. 

It was Talbot—Talbot Forbes. 

It was not I. I wanted her to know I was there, but Talbot 
only wanted her to tell his Mother. 

Why does she [meaning apparently the Medium] pray to me 
and beg me to come, when she knows I want to be 
cleansed from earth first? I do not want her to fetch 
me back at all times. 

They keep on calling me. I am wanted everywhere. I hear 
them calling, and I cannot tell who it is at first. 

They tell me I am wanted. But I want to concentrate in a 
few places, or in one place, and not to be split up. 

Do appeal to them not to break me up so, and leave me not 
clear in one spot. 

I am only one now, and the noise of you all calling makes me 
feel I cannot. Someone is calling me now. 

What did Miss Edmunds want with me ? On Friday she 
called. 

[A letter from America referring to this, May 3rd, arrived 
later.] 

Tell Richet I shall meet him in Rome. I shall speak to him 
in Rome on the third day of the Congress. 

I heard them describing how I died, and I could not stop 
them. 

[Referring apparently to some unpublished Piper sittings 
in America.] 

I could not say it, but they were translating like a schoolboy 
does his first lines of Virgil—so terribly confused and 
inaccurate. But somehow I could not help it. It was 
not me communicating, yet I saw it going on. They 
had something from me on the 15th. 

I tried to communicate on a 15th. 

[These things are referred to in Mrs. VerralFs report. Proc., 
vol. xx. pp. 207-9. See also notes below.] 

I tried by writing. 

Moses—Stainton Moses. 

[Sect* tv 

Chap* xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

ompsorfs 
when she 
probably 
in Pmc , 

t Talbot 

.y to me 
it to be 
to fetch 

1 hear 

rate- in a 

i me not 

takes me 

iday she 

, arrived 

i to him 

mi stop 

sitting! 

hoolboy 

led and 

It was 

They 

Pm* f 

297 

They mixed the deaths up—his death and my death. It 
applies to him and not to me. 

[Apparently referring to some unpublished and to me un¬ 
known account of the death-bed.] 

How easy to promise and how difficult to fulfil 
Make one appeal to them to let me be at rest for two or three 
weeks after they get the note. After Hodgson hears that 
I have tried, however badly, ask him not to call me, 
and tell him that if he does, they will not let me hear 
him. I have gone back from where I was that night. I 
could hear what she (the Medium) was saying, and keep 
a check on it, but now I cannot hear what is being said: 
I can only think the things, and false things may creep 
in without my knowing it. 

Have you ten days work in a week ? I cannot protect you 
from the calls upon you as they may protect me. 

Do you not think, Mrs. Lodge, he has ten days work a 
week? 

(Then the Nelly Control reappears.) 

P’fessor Lodge, do you know I have seen such a funny 
thing. I have seen Mr. Myers talking as if to a stick 
right through Mother’s body; and while he was talk¬ 
ing to it some one came up and touched it, and it all 
got confused, and he could not think why it went 
funny. 

He seems to have to talk through this stick, and yet it keeps 
on being interfered with by other people. 

I wish Mother was not so wicked; because when Mr. Myers 
wants to go to sleep and be quiet, Mother will not 
let him. She will call him. You must tell her not 
to. Tell her it is wicked to call him. When he wants 
to go to sleep and be quiet she keeps him back. She 
must not do it. 

[I promised to give her the message; which I did after 
the trance, and she then admitted that she thought of 
him frequently and urgently, but that she would try to 
refrain.] 

(Nelly went on,) 

Do you know last Monday when I went to Dr. Van Eeden’s 
house; he called for me and we went. Mr. Myers came 

298 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

and told me he was calling. We both went, yes, on | 
Monday. He has got an impression that Mr. Myers ; 
helped him to call me. Mr. Myers said te Let us go 
and see ‘old Whiskers 7 in his little bed and laugh at 
him.” He is much more lively when he is talking to me, 
and much more wakened up than when he is talking down 
that stick. [Cf. Proc. S.P.R., vol. xviii. p. 201. See also 
chapter IX. above.] 

But he does seem worried, he gets no rest. Some one has 
called him in a glass bottle—yes, a crystal. 

Oh yes, and he said it was not he that wrote when Miss 
Rawson wrote and said he told her. But it was not he 
that was writing. You know when; Miss Rawson wrote two 
very full sheets in the middle of a Gurney letter. He said 
it was not he, but neither was it fraud. He does not 
want you to stop the phenomenon. He wants to study 
it. You are not to say that it was wrong and get it 
stopped. He likes to watch the somnambulistic thing ' 

at work. It is not he that is doing it, and yet he is ( 

looking on. 

He does not see how it is worked, but he finds this more 
interesting than the genuine communications. 

He did not rattle the curtains either. Eva—now do not 

think I am talking about Mrs. Myers, but Mrs. Eva; 
they had a shaking of the curtain, and thought it was he. 

It was not he, but it was not cheating, and he does not 
want you to make them think that they are cheats. He , 

does not know how it is worked, but he is studying, 

and he thinks it will help a great deal if he can under¬ 
stand how the cheating things that are not cheats are 
done. It is not cheating, and yet it is not him doing 
it. . . . There was no stick that went through any one’s 
body there. 

He says that others tell him it was just the same with them. 

Sometimes when he thought they were communicating they 
were not, and yet they knew about it. 

He says he is * finding out how honest non-phenomena are 
to be accounted for. 

Apparently dishonest phenomena are phenomena of extreme 
[interest ?] apart from the spirit which purports to be 
communicating. 

Chap, xxn] THE MYERS CONTROL m 

[This last part was slowly recited by Nelly, like a lesson not 

understood by her.] 

I can’t help what he says. 

I must go now. 

(End of sitting, 10.30 p.m.) 

Af otes on this Sitting 

o 

Some of the remarks reported above seem to indicate 
a connexion with statements made in Mrs. VerralTs auto¬ 
matic writing of the same period, about which Mrs. 
Thompson knew nothing. Thus there appears a certain 
similarity between the remark “ Mr. Myers is worrying 
about something connected with Mrs. S.” and the 
attempts—-misunderstood at the time—in Mrs. VerralTs 
script between April 19 and May 8, as related in 
Proceedings ,, vol. xx. pp. 195-198, to describe where 
Mrs. Sidgwick was to look for something of the nature 
of a book. Again “ I tried on the Sunday with—I saw 
the receptacle but not this one ” may perhaps be con¬ 
nected with the sudden impulse on Sunday, March 17th 
{Proceedings, vol. xx. p. 221), which induced Mrs. Verrall 
to write automatically and which produced the first 
reference to Mrs. Forbes in what eventually became a 
long series of cross-correspondences between those two 
automatists. 

hinally, there seems a close correspondence between 
the above remarks as to difficulties produced by simul¬ 
taneous efforts at communication and similar observations 
m Mrs. VerralTs script of the same day and approximately 
the same hour (. Proceedings , vol. xx. pp. 207-209). Thus 
in Mrs. Thompson’s sitting the Myers control speaks of 
* the noise of you all calling makes me feel I cannot. 
Someone is calling me now ”; he also says “false things 
may creep in ”; and the Nelly control describes how, 

300 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

just before, “ someone came up and touched ” the stick 
through which communication was being made, “and 
it all got confused.” While Mrs. Verrall’s automatic 
script of Monday, May 8th, 10-10.30 p.m., concludes as 
from the Myers control with the words: “ falsehood is 
never far away. What do you want with me. I 
cannot ... No power, doing something else to-night. 

. hour. The initial u H ” with which the message 
is there reported as signed was a substitution for the real 
initial, because that purported to represent F.W.H.M.; 
and in those early days of Mrs. Verrall’s writing it was 
thought safer, and at any rate less sensational, to treat 
this as mere impersonation. 

The correspondence can be shown by a statement 
m parallel columns, as follows (see also p. 306) 

May 8, 1901 

Mrs. Thompson 
Birmingham 
9-10.30 p.m. 

Mrs. Verrall 
Cambridge 
io-xo.30 p.m. 

1. “ I cannot.” 

2. “Some one is calling 

me now.” 

3- “ Let me be at rest.” 

4. “False things may 
creep in.” 

1. “Non possum (I cannot).” 
“No power.” 

2. “Doing something else 

to-night.” 

3. “Desine (leave of!).” 

4. “Falsehood is never far 

away.” 

The utterances of Mrs. Thompson were not known 
to Mrs. Verrall when she wrote the script reported in 
her paper , Proc., vol. xx.; but the correspondence is 
mentioned in her paper on pages 207 st seq. 

Char xxii] 

THE MYERS CONTROL 

301 

Further Notes on the Thompson Myers Sittings 

The rather strikingly worded complaints and re¬ 
quests recorded above (p. 296 and 297), as received 
through Mrs. Thompson— 

“ They keep on calling me. I am wanted everywhere. . . . Do 
appeal to them not to break me up so. . . . 

How easy to promise and how difficult to fulfil. Make one 
appeal to them to let me be at rest for two or three 
weeks.” 

also correspond with something to the same effect Inde¬ 
pendently received through another lady, called Miss 
Rawson, three months earlier; and constitute what 
may be fairly considered a very simple kind of cross¬ 
correspondence. This message, received on Feb. 7th, 
1901, purported to come from Edmund Gurney, who 
was represented as speaking through Miss Rawson as 
follows:— 

a I have come to warn you for my friend to implore you not 
to let them call him. He gets no rest day or night. 
At every sitting ‘Call Myers! Bring Myers’; there’s 
not a place in England where they don’t ask for him; 
it disturbs him, it takes away his rest. For God’s sake 
don’t call him. It is all right for him to come of his own 
accord. . . . What we want for him now is to rise, and to 
forget the earthly things. He can’t help any more. His 
life was given to it, and that must be the help. He was 
allowed just to say that he continued. That was his great 
desire, but it will help nobody that he should be called 
back, and made to hover near the earth. In fact it will 
only make him earthbound. 

I am tempted to quote here, from page 213 of Proc. f 
vol xxl, a different though not altogether dissimilar 
extract from the script of Mrs. Holland In India which 
was written on January 5th and 6th, 1904, by the 

Myers a control;— 

302 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

“Oh if I could only get to them—could only leave you the 
proof positive that I remember—recall—know—continue. . . . 
I have thought of a simile which may help you to realise the 
‘ bound to earth condition ’ which persists with me. It is a 
matter very largely of voluntary choice—I am, as it were, 
actuated by the missionary spirit; and the great longing to 
speak to the souls in prison—still in the prison of the flesh— 
leads me to ‘ absent me from felicity awhile.’ ” 

This clearly expresses the idea of “ service ” which I 
wish to emphasise, and it is a reverberation and later 
expansion of the thought in the extracts already quoted, 
which had not been published and were not known to 
Mrs. Holland. But the long post-dating of this last 
communication destroys any claim to consideration as a 
cross-correspondence. Besides it was only an explana¬ 
tion of why' the messages still willingly continued; 
whereas the other two—so soon after the death—are 

full of earnestness and anxiety. 

1 

General Remarks, Addressed to Religious 
Objectors 

Good and earnest though moderately intelligent 
religious people sometimes seek to pour scorn upon*the 
reality' of any of these apparent communications—not 
for any scientific reason, but for reasons born of 
prejudice. They think that it is not a worthy occupation 
for “just men made perfect” “who have entered into 
felicity” to be remembering trivial and minute details, 
under circumstances of exceptional difficulty, for the 
purpose of proving to those left behind the fact of 
survival and the continuance of personal identity. It 
is taken for granted that saints ought to be otherwise 
occupied in their new and lofty and favoured conditions. 

What may or may not be possible to saints, it is 

Chap, xxn] THE MYERS CONTROL 303 

hardly for me or other gropers among mere terrestrial 
facts to surmise: nor am I anxious to imagine that all 
our communicators belong to the category of “perfected 
and glorified saints,”—it seems to me, I confess, singu¬ 
larly unlikely; nor is it necessary to suppose that such 
exercises as we report—even if they are fully and 
entirely what they pretend to be—constitute any large 
proportion of the activity of the people who are pro¬ 
fessedly concerned in their production*—people who are 
confessedly far from perfection and who have still much 
to learn. And as regard dignity and appropriateness,— 
does it not sometimes happen that an Archbishop or a 
Savant is found willing to play a frivolous childish 
game, and otherwise to disport himself, in spite of his 
being on the brink of eternity, in a world of sorrow and 
sin ? 

But seriously, is it not legitimate to ask these good 
people whether, if an opportunity of service to brethren 
arises, an effort to seize it may not be made even by a 
saint ? W hether this notion of perennial service is not 
in accordance with their own doctrines and beliefs ? and 
whether they are not impressed by that clause in the 
creed of most Christians which roundly asserts that 
their Master descended into Hades ? for purposes 
which in another place are suggested. Whereby they 
may learn that, even after* such a Life and Death as 
that, Felicity was not entered into save after an er%of 
further personal service of an efficient kind. Those 
who interpret the parables in such a way as to imagine 
that dignified idleness is the occupation of eternity— 
that there will be nothing to do hereafter but Idly to 
enjoy the beatific contemplation and * other rewards 
appropriate to a well-spent life or to well-held creeds,— 
free from remorse of every kind, and without any call 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

304 

for future work and self-sacrifice,—such people will 
probably some day find themselves mistaken, and will 
realise that as yet they have formed a very inadequate 
conception of what is meant by that pregnant phrase 
“the Joy of the Lord.” 

Further Comments 

Those who think that there is anything sensational 
or specially emotional in these communications are 
mistaken. The conversation is conducted on the same 
lines as a telephonic conversation: it is liable to the 
same sort of annoying interruptions, and likewise to the 
same occasional surprising gleams of vividness, a happy 
turn of phrase, for instance, a tone of the voice, 
and other unmistakable and unexpected revelations of 
identity—forged or real—such as may be conveyed by 
an appropriate nickname or by some trivial reminiscence. 
When this happens, and when relatives are present, 
their emotions are certainly perturbed. 

These remarks are general, and are applicable to this 
whole group reported on by me: they are not limited in 
their application to any one particular series. 

I have not the slightest interest in attempting to 
coerce belief of any kind. The facts will make different 
kinds of appeal to different people, and to some they 
will not appeal at all. These will regard the whole 
business with contempt and pity. They are within their 
rights in doing so if they have conscientiously read this 
and the other records. As a rule however that is where 
they are apt to fail; and when a person’s knowledge of 
a subject is small, we may be pardoned for holding his 
opinion concerning it in light esteem. 

Among the messages the most interesting to me are 

Chap, xxii] THE MYERS CONTROL 305 

the concluding observations, part of which were carefully 
and laboriously reported by the “ Nelly ” control,—the 
words (repeated below) sounding odd in a childish voice. 

(Myers) “ I could not say it, but they were translating like a schoolboy 
does his first lines of Virgil—so terribly confused and in- 
accurate.. But somehow I could not help it It was not me 
communicating, yet I saw it going on. ... I can only think 
the things, and false things may creep in without my knowing 

(Nelly) “ He said it was not he, but neither was it fraud. He does not 
want you to stop the phenomenon, he wants to study it. You 
■ are not to say it was wrong and get it stopped. He likes to 
watch the somnambulistic thing at work. It is not he that is 
doing it, and yet he is looking on. He does not see how it is 
worked, but he finds this more interesting than the genuine 
communications. He did not rattle the curtains either . . . 
but it was not cheating, and he does not want you to make 
them think that they are cheats. He does not know how it 
is worked, but he is studying and he thinks it will help a 
great deal if he can understand how the cheating things that 
are not cheats are done. . . . 

[And then came the laborious sentence] 

He says he is finding out how honest non-phenomena are to be 
accounted for. Apparently dishonest phenomena are phe¬ 
nomena of extreme [interest] apart from the spirit which 
purports to be communicating.” 

Whatever their origin, these words do, in my judg¬ 
ment, represent the truth about a good many of these 
phenomena—that is to say, that they are not precisely 
what their surface-aspect implies, yet neither are they 
fraud. They are attempts at doing something rather 
beyond the power of the operators,—who arrive approxi¬ 
mately at their aim without achieving what they want 
exactly. They are trying to get something definite 
through, let us say, and something like it comes. • 
Occasionally they hardly know how it comes, it is a 
puzzle to them as to us, and often they don’t know what 

3 o6 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

it is that we have got; but sometimes they too seem to 
be spectators, aware of the result, and to e w 
the misconception and misunderstanding ^ hlch th ^ 
see will arise, but which they are powerless to preve , 
except, as here, by trying to instruct us and ° 

intelligences into a condition m which we toocan und 
stand and grapple with the unavoidable difficulties of 

the situation. likfdv 

“I can only think the things : seems to me likey 

to be an accurate description of the method. is 

telepathic method, and the reproduction by^ voice or pen 

is a supplementary and only barely controllable process 

(Cf ‘ ftwif characteristic ^ also of Myers to feel as if he 
were the note-taker, not the communicator, and that 
he ought to be putting it all down (P- 28 7)- A n other 
amusing episode was the persistence of Prof. 
incredulity (p. 287), so that he was represented as asking 
to Wo^Ld that he was himself communicating, 
and that the medium was not “getting it out of him 
omehow v 

he coincidence in time between the termination of 

this sitting at Birmingham and some ol ^ ta1 ^ 

bv Mrs. Verrall at Cambridge, as exhibited in the 

analytical statement above, on p. 300, i s very remar 
able and worth careful notice—especially when the 
unexpected character of the Thompson sitting is 
taken into account. It really makes an effective 

cross-correspondence. 

These observations terminate this account of com 
munitions received through the mediumship of Mrs 
Thompson. An immense mass has_ been obtained 
through her in the past (see Reports in vols. xvn. an 

Chap, xxnj THE MYERS CONTROL 3 0 7 

xviii. of Proceedings, S.P.R.), but so far as I know these 
two sittings are among the last which she has given. 
We owe her thanks for the time and opportunity which 

. , r s freeI y accorded to members of the Society for 

scientific purposes. 

In concluding this chapter, which I regard as an 
important one, I claim that these utterances represent a 
genuine psychological phenomenon, and are therefore of 
interest to students of psychical matters, from any point 
of view. It is just possible that a hostile critic may here 
find part of the pabulum necessary for making every 
effort at studying matters of the kind appear ridiculous. 
Whether this portion, or the subsequent commonplace 
dialogue carried on through Mrs. Piper, or such few of the 
“unverihable” communications as have been reported 
in our Proceedings (such, for instance, as that on 181 
above) will appear the more humorous when regarded 
from the scoffer’s point of view, I am unable to judge. 
JNor need the question deeply concern us. 

THE MYERS AND HODGSON CONTROLS IN 
RECENT PIPER SITTINGS 

A S to Myers and Hodgson controls through Mrs. 
Piper—like the Gurney control in the old days 
—I do not propose to report the communications 
I received. They were not so good as some of those 
received by others, partly because I did not give these 
controls much chance. Indeed “Rector” complains of 
this as follows :— 

Myers has had very little opportunity or encouragement 

to prove his identity. 

O. J. L, Yes, that is fairly true so far. 

And now if the opportunity can be given him, no one 
on our side is more desirous of proving his identity, 
than Myers, Understand ? j 

O. J. L. Yes, 1 quite understand. 

He understands, and wishes very much to communicate 
with a few of his real friends. R. It should be 
given him in any case, as he is intelligent, clear, and 
understands the necessity of so doing. 

In Mrs. Holland’s script of 16th April 1907 a de¬ 
scription is given by the Myers H control of one of the 
difficulties of communication. 

“ I want you to understand me but I have so few chances to 
speak—it's like waiting to take a ticket and I am always 
pushed away from the pigeon-hole before I can influence. 
her mind—No the scribe’s- 

308 

Chap, xxm] MYERS AND HODGSON CONTROLS 309 

• Only one of the English sittings in 1907 was con¬ 
ducted on similar lines to those in the old days,—that 
is to say, as a voice sitting,—a talking, not a writing, 

, sitting: and it was less unlike those of the old Phinuit 
days than I had expected. 

In fact there was distinct recurrence of what in the 
old days used to be called “fishing,” when Phinuit was 
groping in tentative fashion for a name and hoping for 
help from the sitter. 

But in truth I have long wanted to exonerate 
Phinuit from most of the blame in this matter. The 
fishing ’ procedure had to be admitted, and indeed 
emphasised, like all other weak spots; and Phinuit 
had not been trained to eschew normal help and to take 
precautions against it, as Mrs. Thompson’s “Nelly” 
had been trained; but I always felt that his haziness 
and tentative approach to things probably represented 
a genuine difficulty, and was part of the phenomenon 
which needed study; so I am interested in reading in 
Dn Hodgson’s Report, p. 382, vol. xiii., the following 
judicial pronouncement:— 

“ It was out of the automatic dreameries of persons 
m some such conditions as those which I have illus¬ 
trated above, that Phinuit in my present view so often 
had to fish his facts; and I think that assent to correct 
statements, and other clues from the sitters—besides 
helping the ‘communicator’—were probably of great 
service to Phinuit, enabling him to ‘cast his line’ for 
those mental automatisms that specially concerned the 
sitter. , . . .. 

. “ Much }‘ght seems to me to have been thrown upon *■ 
Phmuit’s mistakes and obscurities and general method 
of trying to get at facts, in what were on the whole 
bad sittings, by comparison of the results obtained 
from the various communicators writing directly or 

3io 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

using G.P. as amanuensis; and I feel pretty sure that 
much of Phinuit’s ‘ fishing ’ was due to the confusions 
of the more or less comatose communicators, whose 
minds had let loose, so to speak, a crowd of earthly 
memories.” 

Manner of the Stainton Moses Group 

It will be of interest to those familiar with the script 
of Stainton Moses to see the names of his old controls 
cropping up. Not only Imperator and Rector, but 
“ Prudens ” also, who appears to act as an accomplished 
messenger. I conjecture, however, that whatever rela¬ 
tionship may exist between these personages and the 
corresponding ones of Stainton Moses, there is little or 
no identity. For instance, a “Doctor” is represented 
as communicating or controlling, but he appears neither 
to have, nor to claim, any connexion with the non-medical 
“Doctor” of Stainton Moses; sometimes at any rate 
this Piper one is called “ Dr. Oliver,” and is probably 
intended to represent a deceased medical man of Boston. 
It is rather a puzzle to me why Mrs. Piper’s personalities 
should have assumed the same set of names. In general 
characters they are similar; but I see no very close 
resemblance in detail. And hitherto the Piper “ Imper¬ 
ator ” has not given to us the same old earth-name as 
did the original “Imperator” to Stainton Moses. So 
that it would appear as if they did not very seriously 
pretend to be identical. 

It is seldom nowadays that there is any marked 
change of control, such as occurred with Phinuit some¬ 
times. The utterances appear to consist of first-person¬ 
reporting on the part of Rector, who speaks or writes 
after the fashion of a dignified and gentle old man. 

It may be noted that in America, with the advent 

sitting sometimes became rather markedly “religious. 
This can be illustrated by the following close of an 
American Voice-Sitting in 1906, reported to me by Mr. 
Dorr 

(“ Hodgson ” terminating his communication) 

Well, 1 will be off. Good-bye for the present 

(Rector resumes.) All right. That is first-rate. Took him a 
long time to turn round and get out. He dislikes to go 
more than anybody I ever saw. The last moment he kept 
talking to me and talking to me. He could not give it up. 

Prayer 

Father, in Thy kindness guide Thy children of earth, bestow 
Thy blessings on them, teach them with Thy presence and 
Thy power to receive suffering, pain, illness and sorrow, 
teach them to know that Thy presence is always with them. 
May Thy grace and everlasting love be and abide with them 
now and evermore. 

Farewell. We depart, friends, and may the blessings of God 
be bestowed on you. Farewell 

Manner of the Hodgson Control 

The atmosphere of a sitting is always serious, but 
only occasionally solemn; usually it is of an even tenor, 
and sometimes it is hearty and jovial. The following 
is a characteristic Hodgson greeting extracted from a 
sitting with Mr. Dorr and Henry James, Jr., at Boston 
in 1906:— 

Ha! Well, I did not expect to see you so soon. 

Good morning, Harry ! 

I am delighted to see you. 

H. J. Jr. Is that you, Mr. Hodgson ? 

Yes, it is a great delight to me to see your face once more. 

How is everything with you, first rate? 

312 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

H. J. Jr. Very well 

Why, I feel as though I was one among you. Hello, 
George! 

G. B. D. Hello ! 

You people don’t appreciate my spirit of fun! But I am 
Hodgson, and I shall be Hodgson to the end of all eternity, 
and you cannot change me no matter what you do. 

H. J. Jr. I think we appreciate it, Mr. Hodgson. 

Well, I hope you do—if you don’t, you have lost something, 
because I am what I am, and I shall never be anything else, 
and of all the joyous moments of my whole existence, the 
most joyful is when I meet you all. 

This sort of thing is of course not in the least 
evidential, and yet if I were asked to invent some 
scheme of salutation more natural and characteristic of 
Hodgson’s personality I should not be able to improve 
upon it. 

To illustrate the manner of the Hodgson control 
in my own experience the following brief extract must 
serve:— 

At the Eighth Sitting on 23 Nov . 1906 (present; O.f L . 
alone ), u Isaac Thompson ” wrote a good deal\ but the 
following came from Hodgson P 

I am Hodgson* but I cannot take Rector’s place to-day. 
However I will make a poor attempt to speak through him. 

O. J, L. Very glad to see you. 

Here’s ditto. Do I understand that Mrs. Piper is in England ? 
G* J. L. Yes, she is, and is staying in my house. 

Capital. If I were in the body it would not be so, 

However I am glad it is so. 

O. J. L. She is here, well and happy, with Alta and Minerva. 

Good, first rate* I am glad. 

Will you take a message to Billie Newbold for me, safe? 

O. J. L. Yes, I will send it through William James. 

Do you wish me to take a message for you ? 

Ask slowly; remember we cannot hear as well as you can. 

r 

Chap, xxiii] MYERS AND HODGSON CONTROLS 313 

I am so glad to be on this side. 

O. J. L. Well, Hodgson, I do want to ask yon something. You know 
when 1 am talking to yon I am talking to the hand; but I 
want to know whether it is through the hand you hear. 
Suppose I stopped up your medium’s ears with cotton wool, 
would it make any difference ? Would the message still 
come ? 

I think it would, try it. 

O. J. L. Very well, I will another time. 

First rate, I permit it; first rate. 

But after all I did not try the experiment ; for it 
is exceedingly difficult to secure complete deafness by 
plugging the ears—even with putty. Moreover the 
necessary manipulation of the medium’s head during 
trance seemed rather repellent. It is an experiment 
worth trying, however, if we could be sure of a clear 
result. If I could have been sure of a crucial test I 
would have had it done; but hyperesthesia would have 
to be allowed for in the positive direction—possibly also 
inhibitory suggestion in the negative,—and on the 
whole I felt that no definite deduction could be made, 
whatever the result. Nevertheless the experiment 
ought to be made by some competent person. 

Manner of the Impersonation Generally 

As illustrating the dramatic activity of the hand in 
an extreme case—though it is always very marked, for 
the hand is full of “ personality ” (p. 264)—I quote the 
following contemporaneous note made by Mrs. Sidgwick 
during a sitting in which the Myers P control, at length 
after much effort, had just succeeded in giving Abt 
Vogler as the name of a poem he was referring to. 

“The hand is tremendously pleased and excited and 
thumps and gesticulates. The impression given is like 

314 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

that of a person dancing round the room In delight at 
having accomplished something.” 

But Indeed the writing i which Immediately followed 
this success is worth quoting. The record runs thus :— 

“ (Rector communicating) 

He pronounced it for me again and again just as you did, 
and he said Rector get her to pronounce it for you and 
you will understand, he whispered it in my ear. 

E. M. S. Just as you were coming out? 

Just as I left the light. 

Voglor, yes. 

E. M. S. Good. 

(Myers communicating) 

Now dear Mrs. Sidgwick in future have no doubt or fear of 
so-called death as there is none as there is certainly 
intelligent life beyond it.” 

With regard to the misspelling which occurs here 
and elsewhere, the difficulty is readily imaginable, but It 
is thus expressed by Rector, later, when he is repeating 
the name of a poem. The record runs thus ;— 

“ Abt ABT. Volg. 

(Hand expresses dissatisfaction with this.) 

Vogler. 

(Rector communicating) 

You see I do not always catch the letters as he repeats them. 

R. 

E. M. S. No, I see. 

Therefore when I am registering I am apt to misspell. 

E. M. S. I see. 

But if you ask me to correct it of course I can. R.* J 

With regard to “fishing” and making use of indica¬ 
tions given by the sitter, it seems likely that with the 
most transparent honesty this would be likely to happen ; 
because Rector, or any other scribe, is evidently in the 
position of receiving ideas by a sort of dictation, and 

Chap. xxiiiJ MYERS AND HODGSON CONTROLS 315 

need not always be able clearly to discriminate their 
source, whether from the ultra-material or from the 
material side. For instance, the Myers P control 
attempted to speak about the Odes of Horace, and 
did so; but Rector, after writing “Odes” without diffi¬ 
culty, appeared doubtful about the word, and wrote 
Odessus, Odesesis, etc., and finally half accepted Mrs. 
Sidgwick’s suggestion “ Odyssey ” a good instance of 
how ready Rector is to accept a misleading suggestion, 
even when what he has independently written is right; 
and also of discontinuity of consciousness between Rector 
and the real communicator, who in this case was 
obviously trying to talk about the Odes of Horace in 
order to connect them with the quotations from Abt 
Vogler just previously made. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

BRIEF SUMMARY OF OTHER EXPERIENCES 
AND COMMENT THEREUPON 

S OME rather striking sittings were held by a lady 
named Mrs. Grove, whose deceased friends, a 
Mr. Marble and some others, sent many appro¬ 
priate messages, which were in many respects akin 
to those which had been received by the same sitter 
through other mediums. 

Her friends were perfectly obscure people, totally 
unknown to Mrs. Piper, and unknown in any district in 
which Mrs. Piper had been; hence these utterances 
have an importance of their own, more akin to that of 
the time when Phinuit showed himself able to deal with 
the concerns of miscellaneous strangers. They are 
reported in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical 
Research (Part lviii.), but I do not repeat them here, 
though I repeat an experiment made in connexion with 
them:— 

Experiment on the Recognition of a Photograph 

OF ONE OF THE CONTROLS 

The waking stages of the last sitting of the first 
Edgbaston series, in December 1906, and of the first of 
the second series, in May 1907,—with an interval between 

Chap, xxiv] 

OTHER EXPERIENCES 

3*7 

them of five months,—are worth recording because of an 
experiment I made in connexion with the likeness of 
a person supposed to have been communicating during 
the trance (in this case Mr. Marble): the point being 
to see whether there would be any recognition of a 
photograph by the automatist before her state had 
become. entirely normal,—that is during the sort of 
period in- which it is customarily possible dimly to 
remember dreams (see page 275). This stage is referred 
to by Dr. Hodgson on page 40x of vol. xiii.—where he 
calls it Mrs. Piper’s subliminal stage, and says that it is 
a condition in which she frequently has visions of the 
distant or departing “ communicators.” 

On the first occasion I waited rather a long time 
before trying the experiment,—something more than an 
hour,—and the recognition was uncertain; but faint as 
it was, it seemed to be a residual effect of the trance ; 
since it was not permanent, and by next day had entirely 
disappeared. 

On the second occasion I tried directly after the 
waking stage was complete; and then the recognition 
was immediate and certain. But in a few minutes it 
had become vague and dim, and before the end of the 
day it had again completely ceased. 

Sequel to sitting No. 13, which had lasted from 
11.10 to 1.10 on $rd December 1906 

After lunch I took eleven photographs of men, and asked Mrs. 
Piper if she had ever seen any of them. She looked over them, 
hesitating on the one representing Mr. Joseph Marble for some time, 
and then picked that out and said she had seen that man somewhere, 
but she could not remember where. Nothing was said by me during 
the process, of course. 

Next day, in the evening, I tested Mrs. Piper again with another 
set of photographs of men, partly the same and partly different, 

318 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, it 

but containing among others the critical one. This time, however, 
it was looked at without comment and without interest, and no remem¬ 
brance of the appearance seemed to persist. She remembered the fact 
of having recognised one before; but when asked to do it again, she 
picked out, after much hesitation, a different one as a possibility, and 
said that she thought it had been found in America that the memory 
evaporated in time, and that it was strongest within an hour of the 
sitting. The test made the day before had been made about an hour 
and a half after a sitting at which “ Mr. Marble ” had been one of the 
communicators. 

Seqttel to Waking Stage of No. 14 on 19 th May 1907 

(A number of men’s photographs were placed in a row before 
her as soon as she had come to: she immediately 
pounced on one without the slightest hesitation.) 

That is the man I saw. I saw him. That is the man I saw. 

I saw him up there: such a nice face. I could see him. 

I could see Mr. Hodgson pushing him up to the front. 

[The selection was correct ; the photograph was one of the 
person she calls Joe, Le, of the late Mr. Joseph Marble.] 
& tiour or so later, I again put the photographs in front 

of her. She looked at them as if for the first time, and 
said) 

I do not know the photographs. 

(She then hesitated long over the right one, saying she had 
“ seen him somewhere,” but finished up by saying) 

No, I do not know. 

Comment 

The result of this experiment, ...with other experiences 
relating to the description of the personal appearance of 
a person spoken of in the trance, has satisfied me that— 
whatever may be the cause—a visual likeness of the 

people supposed to be communicating In the trance Is 
sometimes really Impressed at the time upon the sub¬ 
conscious mind of Mrs. Piper. A veridical dream 
impression seems to be caused in these cases; but like 
other dream impressions it fades. The visual impression 

Chap, xxiv] 

OTHER EXPERIENCES 

319 

is merely an extension of the impression of character and 
of speech, which is also impressed upon the same stratum 
of her subconsciousness, and is of a similarly evanescent 
character. 

During trance undoubtedly her subconsciousness is 
thus, at least occasionally, in touch with a simulacrum or 
hallucinatory representation of a deceased person,— 
whatever be the cause,—a telepathic impression received 
from the sitter perhaps, or, as appears more likely, 
from the surviving influence of the deceased person. 

That much is certain ; and to deny that, is merely to 
refuse to be informed by facts of experience. But of 
what nature this evanescent but for a time vivid impres¬ 
sion of appearance and character and personality really 
is, is a more difficult question, on which at present I do 
not feel competent to express an opinion. For what it 
is worth, however, my instinct leads me to judge that it 
is not solely due to a telepathic impulse from the sitter— 
in spite of the fact that the sympathy and understanding 
of the sitter is a great help, and indeed a determining 
cause why one set of impressions is produced and not a 
totally different set. Undoubtedly the existence of real 
interest and affection on the part of a person present is 
an awakening cause of a particular veridical impression. 
It is that which determines the selection, out of the 
infinite multitude of other impressions which otherwise 
might equally well be produced. But although sympathy 
of this kind is the selective and determining cause, I do 
not feel that it is the creative or constructive cause. It 
appears to me that there is an agency or energy lying 
ready, which is capable of arousing in the subconscious¬ 
ness of an entranced person, or of persons endowed with 
automatic faculty, a vast multitude of impressions—good 
bad and indifferent; and that out of this multitude of 

320 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

possible impressions some are selected with more or less 
discrimination as appropriate to a particular case, e 
presence of a sitter being the detent or trigger which 
liberates or guides the energy in one direction and not 

in another. . « 

On the whole, these experiences, with many others 

which are omitted, tend to render certain the existence 
of some outside intelligence or control, distinct from the 
consciousness, and as far as I can judge from t e su 
consciousness also, of Mrs. Piper or other medium. 
And they tend to render probable the working hypo¬ 
thesis, on which I choose to proceed, that that version 
of the nature of the intelligences which they themselves 
present and favour is something like the truth. . In other 
words, I feel that we are in secondary or tertiary touch 
_at least occasionally—with some stratum of the surviv¬ 
ing personality of the individuals who are represented as 

sending messages. _ , , 

I call the touch secondary, because it is always through 

the medium and not direct; and I call it generally 
tertiary, because it represents itself as nearly always 
operating through an agency or medium on that side 
also-an agency which calls itself “ Rector or ‘ Phmmt. 
That these latter impersonations are really themselves 
individuals, I do not venture either to assert or deny ; 
but it is difficult or impossible to bring them to book, 
and an examination of their nature may be deferred : it 
is the impersonation of verifiable or terrestrially known 
individuals to which it behoves us in the first instance to 

pay attention. , _ 

From this point of view the sittings m the Mrs. 

Grove case—at some of which I was present must be 
regarded as among the most strictly evidential of all; for 

a decided unity of character and of message is preserved. 

OTHER EXPERIENCES 

321 

Chap, xxiv] 

no matter through what medium the communication 
comes. Similar messages had come when Mrs. Grove 
had sat with Mrs. Thompson and other mediums. 

Deductions 

A careful analysis and examination of the facts, both 
for and against the genuine activity of deceased Com¬ 
municators, has been made by Dr. Hodgson, and will be 
found in his Report in Proceedings, vol. xiii. pages 357- 
412. (Extracts are quoted above in Chapter XVIII.) 
He is led distinctly to countenance, and indeed to 
champion, a cautious and discriminating form of spirit¬ 
istic theory,—not as a working hypothesis only, but as 
truly representing part of the facts. His experience was 
so large, and his critical faculty so awake, that such a 
conclusion of his is entitled to the gravest consideration. 
If I had to pronounce a prematurely decided opinion, 
my own view would agree with his. 

The old series of sittings with Mrs. Piper convinced 
me of survival, for reasons which I should find it hard to 
formulate in any strict fashion, but that was their distinct 
effect. They also made me suspect—or more than 
suspect—that surviving intelligences were in some cases 
consciously communicating,—yes, in some few cases 
consciously; though more usually the messages came 
in all probability from an unconscious stratum, being 
received by the medium in an inspirational manner 
analogous to psychometry. 

The hypothesis of surviving intelligence and person¬ 
ality,—not only surviving but anxious and able with 
difficulty to communicate,—is the simplest and most 
straightforward, and the only one that fits all the facts. 
But the process of communication is sophisticated by 

OTHER EXPERIENCES 

321 

Chap, xxiv] 

no matter through what medium the communication 
comes. Similar messages had come when Mrs. Grove 
had sat with Mrs. Thompson and other mediums. 

Deductions 

A careful analysis and examination of the facts, both 
for and against the genuine activity of deceased Com¬ 
municators, has been made by Dr. Hodgson, and will be 
found in his Report in Proceedings , vol. xiii. pages 357- 
412. (Extracts are quoted above in Chapter XVIII.) 
He is led distinctly to countenance, and indeed to 
champion, a cautious and discriminating form of spirit¬ 
istic theory,—not as a working hypothesis only, but as 
truly representing part of the facts. His experience was 
so large, and his critical faculty so awake, that such a 
conclusion of his is entitled to the gravest consideration. 
If I had to pronounce a prematurely decided opinion, 
my own view would agree with his. 

The old series of sittings with Mrs. Piper convinced 
me of survival, for reasons which I should find it hard to 
formulate in any strict fashion, but that was their distinct 
effect. They also made me suspect—or more than 
suspect—that surviving intelligences were in some cases 
consciously communicating,—yes, in some few cases 
consciously; though more usually the messages came 
in all probability from an unconscious stratum, being 
received by the medium in an inspirational manner 
analogous to psychometry. 

The hypothesis of surviving intelligence and person¬ 
ality,—not only surviving but anxious and able with 
difficulty to communicate,—is the simplest and most 
straightforward, and the only one that fits all the facts. 
But the process of communication is sophisticated by 

322 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

many influences, so that it is very difficult, perhaps at 
present impossible, to disentangle and exhibit clearly the 
part that each plays- 

One thing that conspicuously suggests itself is that 
we are here made aware, through these trivial but 
illuminating facts, of a process which by religious people 
has always been recognised and insisted on, viz. the 
direct interaction of incarnate with discarnate mind,— 
that is to say an intercourse between mind and mind in 
more than one grade of existence, by means apart from, 
and independent of, the temporary mechanism of the 
body. 

The facts indeed open the way to a perception of the 
influence of spirit generally, as a guiding force in human 
and terrestrial affairs>—active not under the exceptional 
circumstances of trance alone, but always and constantly 
and normally,—so uniformly active in fact that by 
ordinary people the agency is undetected and unper¬ 
ceived. Most people are far too busy to attend : they 
are too thoroughly occupied with what for the time are 
certainly extremely important affairs. A race of inspired 
people would be hopelessly unpractical,—though Society 
is usually grateful f° r the existence and utterance of a 
few individuals of this type. 

The fact that these communications are obtained 
through subconscious agency is sometimes held to 
militate against their importance as a subject of study. 
But have not men of genius sometimes testified that 
brilliant ideas do surge up into their consciousness from 
some submerged stratum, at a time when they are in¬ 
completely awake to the things of this world ? And 
ordinary people are aware that a brown study favours 
the conscious reception of something presumably akin to 
inspiration, by relegating ordinary experience to the 

[Sect, iv 

OTHER EXPERIENCES 

323 

t, perhaps at 
it clearly the 

itself is that 
: trivial but 
igious people 
on, viz. the 
late mind,— 
and mind in 
is apart from, 
anism of the 

:eption of the 
>rce in human 
e exceptional 
i.nd constantly 
fact that by 
cl and unper- 
■ attend: they 
r the time are 
ice of inspired 
hough Society 
itterance of a 

Chap, xxiv] 

background, and thereby enabling new and unfamiliar 
ideas to enter or germinate in the mind. 

A trance, or any state of complete unconsciousness, 
renders the normal though obscure activity of an un¬ 
familiar psychical region still more manifest. Not indeed 
to the patient—who is unaware of the whole phenomenon, 
or remembers it only after the indistinct and temporary 
fashion of a dream—but to an observer or experimenter, 
who is allowed to enlarge his experience and to receive 
impressions by deputy; thereby attaining, at second 
hand, some of the privileges of intuition or clairvoyance, 
or even of genius, while he himself remains in an 
ordinary and business-like condition. His experience in 
fact may be regarded as an undeserved, and therefore 
only moderately valuable, kind of vicarious inspiration. 

are obtained 
:imes held to 
ibject of study. 

; testified that 
sciousness from 
in they are in¬ 
world ? And 
i study favours 
iumably akin to 
ierience to the 

CHAPTER XXV 

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF CROSS¬ 
CORRESPONDENCE 

T HE subject of cross-correspondence is so large and 
complicated that any one who wishes to form an 
opinion on it is bound to study the detailed 
publications by Mr. Piddington, Mrs. Verrall, Miss 
Johnson, and others, in recent volumes of the 
Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research. It 
would be impossible otherwise to give the critical and 
substantial study which the elaborate literary references 
demand. Whatever else they are, they are eminently 
communications from a man of letters, to be interpreted 
by scholars, and they are full of obscure classical 
allusions. And parenthetically I may here state, as a 
noteworthy fact, that nowadays even through Mrs. Piper 
such scholarly allusions are obtained,—not obvious and 
elementary ones, but such as exhibit a range of reading 
far beyond that of ordinary people—beyond my own for 
instance—and beyond that of anyone present at the time. 
The facts on which this statement is based have not yet 
(October 1909) been published. 

Returning to the general subject of cross¬ 
correspondence,— the main feature of this kind of 
communication is that we are required to study, not the 
phenomena exhibited by a single medium actuated by a 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCE 

325 

Chap, xxv] 

number of ostensible controls, as heretofore, but 

conversely the utterance of one ostensible control 

effected through the contributory agency of several 
different mediums;—who write automatically quite 
Independently of each other, who are at a distance from 
each other, who are sometimes unknown to each other, 
and who at first were unaware that any kind of corre¬ 
spondence was going on. 

In many cases, moreover, the messages as separ- 
ately obtained were quite unintelligible, and only 
exhibited a meaning when they were subsequently 
put together by another person. So that the con¬ 
tent of the message was in no living mind until the 
correspondences were detected by laborious criticism 
a year or two later; then at last the several parts 
were unified and the whole message and intention 
made out. 

The object of this ingenious and complicated effort 

clearly is to prove that there is some definite intelligence 
underlying the phenomena, distinct from that of any of 
the automatists, by sending fragments of a message or 
literary reference which shall be unintelligible to each 
separately—so that no effective mutual telepathy is 
possible between them,—thus eliminating or trying to 
eliminate what had long been recognised by all members 
of the Society for Psychical Research as the most 
troublesome and indestructible ‘ of the semi-normal 
hypotheses. And the further object is evidently to 
prove as far as possible, by the substance and quality 
of the message, that It Is characteristic of the one 
particular personality who Is ostensibly communicating, 
and of no other. 

That has clearly been the aim of the communicators 

themselves. Whether or not they'have been successful 

326 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

is a question which it may take some time and study 
finally and conclusively to decide. 

If a student is to form a first hand judgment of any 
value on this subject, he must, as I have said, read in full 
the elaborate papers of Mr. Piddington and Miss Johnson 
and Mrs. Verrall in the important recent volunjes of the 
Proceedings of the Society ; which is no light task. 

Discovery of Cross-correspondences 

But as giving the best introductory and purely initial 
account of this large and evidently growing subject, I 
will quote from the paper of our Research Officer, Miss 
Johnson, her Chapter VII. called “The Theory of 
Cross-correspondences,” since it was through her patient 
care and perspicacity that the existence of such things, 
on the way to something like their present striking form, 
was first demonstrated. 

It opens with a quotation from the writings of 
F. W. H. Myers, which illustrates his attitude to the 
subject when living :— 

“ It is not we who are in reality the discoverers here. The experi¬ 
ments which are being made are not the work of earthly skill. All that 
we can contribute to the new result is an attitude of patience, attention, 
care ; an honest readiness to receive and weigh whatever may be 
given into our keeping by intelligences beyond our own. Experiments, 
I say, there are; probably experiments of a complexity and difficulty 
which surpass our imagination; but they are made from the other side 
of the gulf, by the efforts of spirits who discern pathways and possi¬ 
bilities which for us are impenetrably dark .”—{Human Personality , 
vol. ii. p. 275.) 

And then it continues :— 

In Human Personality Mr. Myers hints more than 
once at a favourite theory of his that the influence of 
science on modern thought is not confined to this life 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY 

[Sect, iv 

correspondences between her script and the script or 
automatic speech of other automatists. 

In studying these Jn proof Jn thg ear]y part of i9q6 
says Miss Johnson, our Research Officer—I was struck 
y e act that m some of the most remarkable instances 
the statements in the script of one writer were by no 
means a simple reproduction of statements in the script 
ot the other, but seemed to represent different aspects 
nlw S xi l , e ld - 6a ’ ° ne supplementing or completing the 

niimnrt' f S ’ m one r case (p- 22 3 )> Mrs. Forbes’s script, 
purportmg to come from her son Talbot, stated that he 

ust now leave her, since he was looking for a sensitive 
who wrote automatically, in order that he might obtain 
corroboration of her own writing. Mrs. Verrall, on the 
same day, wrote of a fir-tree planted in a garden, and 

Th/nS* WaS Slgned With a sword and suspended bugle. 

F T P f bad ^ e of the ^ent to which 
her ^ard^n rbeS ^ bd ° nged ’ and Mrs. Forbes had in 

bv hlr s d nn Th fr0m Seed Sent t0 her 

oy ner son. 1 hese facts were unknown to Mrs. Verrall 

summaS?^ Cas , e ,(PP- 2 4 r - 2 45)—too complicated to 

26th and oJth re ~ MrS ' f° rbeS P rodu ced, on November 

to herself In a Ip ° 2 ’ re ^ e . ren( : es ’ absolutely meaningless 

Verrall h*A h* P as ^S e m the Symposium which Mrs. 

lo f nlfed fn readm f ° n thGSe da ^ These references 
also applied appropriately to an obscure sentence in Mrs 

° f N ? vember 2 dth; and on Decembe^ 
18th, attempts were made in Mrs. Forbes’s script to give 
a certain test word, “ Dion ” or “ Dy,” which it was 

stated, “ will be found in Myers’own. . . ” Mrs'Verrall 

the ’ and , a description of the same part of 

occu^ntf ’ lacIudln g. the mention of Diotima, did 

three momhTht/^Tu ^’ which was P ublished about 
to L ? h ’ m Februar y 1 903. Further references 
to Symposium appeared in Mrs. Forbes’s script in 
the early part of 1903 (see Mrs. Verrall’s Report, p 246) 

Chap, xxv] 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCE 

329 

In another case (pp. 269-271), October 16th, 1904, 
Mrs. Verrall’s script gave details, afterwards verified, of 
"what Mrs. Forbes was doing ; and immediately afterwards 
Mrs. Verrall had a mental impression of Mrs. Forbes 
sitting in her drawing-room, with the figure of her son 
standing looking at her. Mrs. Forbes’s script of the 
same day, purporting to come from her son, stated that 
he was present and wished she could see him, and that 
a test was being given for her at Cambridge. 

I became convinced through the study of these cases 
that there was some special purpose in the particular form 
they took,'—all the more because in Mrs. Verrall’s script 
statements were often associated with them, apparently 
to draw attention to some peculiar kind of test,—described, 
e.g. as superposing certain things on others, when all 
would be clear. 

1 he characteristic of these cases—or at least of some 
of them—is that_ we do not get in the writing of one 
automatist anything like a mechanical verbatim repro¬ 
duction of phrases in the other; we do not even get the 
same idea expressed in different ways,—as might well 
result from direct telepathy between them. What we 
get is a fragmentary utterance in one script, which seems 
to have no particular point or meaning, and another 
fragmentary utterance in the other, of an equally pointless 
character; but when we put the two together, we see 
that they supplement one another, and’ that there is 
apparently one coherent idea underlying both, but only 
partially expressed in each. 

It occurred to me, then, that by this method, if by 
any, it might be possible to obtain evidence more con¬ 
clusive than any obtained hitherto of the action of a 
third intelligence, external to the minds of both auto- 
matists. If we simply find the same idea expressed— 
even though in different forms—by both of them, it may, 
as I have just said, most easily be explained by telepathy 
between them; but it is much more difficult to suppose 
that the telepathic perception of one fragment could lead 

330 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

to the production of another fragment which can only, after 
careful comparison, be seen to be related to the first. 

The weakness of all well-authenticated cases of 
apparent telepathy from the dead is, of course, that 
they can generally be explained by telepathy from the 
living. If the knowledge displayed by the medium is 
possessed by any person certainly existing,—that is, any 
living person,—we must refer it to that source rather 
than to a person whose existence is uncertain,—that is, 
a dead person. To do otherwise would be to beg the 
whole question at issue, for the very thing to be proved 
is the existence of the dead person. 

Hitherto the evidence for survival has depended on 
statements that seem to show the control’s recollection of 
incidents in his past life. It would be useless for him to 
communicate telepathically anything about his present 
life, because there could be no proof of the truth of the 
communication. This is the fundamental difference 
between the types of evidence for telepathy from the 
living and for telepathy from the dead. 

Now, telepathy relating to the present, such as we 
sometimes get between living persons, must be stronger 
evidentially than telepathy relating to the past, because 
it is much easier to exclude normal knowledge of events 
in the present than of events in the past. But it has 
been supposed impossible that we could ever get this 
kind of evidence for telepathy from the dead; since 
events in the present are either known to some living 
person,—in which case we could not exclude his telepathic 
agency,—or they are unknown to any living person, in 
which case it would be difficult or impossible to prove 
that they had occurred. 

In these cross-correspondences, however, we find 
apparently telepathy relating to the present,—that is,- 
the corresponding statements are approximately con¬ 
temporaneous,-—and to events in the present which, to 
all intents and purposes, are unknown to any living 
person; since the meaning and point of her script is 

Chap, xxv] 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCE 

331 

often uncomprehended by each automatist until the 
solution is found through putting the two scripts together. 
At the same time we have proof of what has occurred 
\i.e. some special indication that a correspondence is 
being attempted] in the scripts themselves. Thus it 
appears that this method is directed towards satisfying 
our evidential requirements. 

Now, granted the possibility of communication, it 
may be supposed that within the last few years a certain 
group of persons have been trying to communicate with 
us, who are sufficiently well instructed to know all the 
objections that reasonable sceptics have urged against 
the previous evidence, and sufficiently intelligent to 
realise to the full all the force of these objections. It 
may be supposed that these persons have invented a 
new plan,—the plan of cross-correspondences,—to meet 
the sceptics’ objections. There is no doubt that the 
cross-correspondences are a characteristic element in the 
scripts that we have been collecting in the last few 
years,—the scripts of Mrs. Verrall, Mrs. Forbes, Mrs. 
Holland, and, still more recently, Mrs. Piper. And the 
important point is that the element is a new one. We 
have reason to believe, as I have shown above, that the 
idea of making a statement in one script complementary 
of a statement in another had not occurred to Mr. Myers 
in his lifetime,—for there is no reference to it in any of 
his written utterances on the subject that I have been 
able to discover. Neither did those who have been 
investigating automatic script since his death invent 
this plan, if plan it be. It was not the automatists 
themselves that detected it, but a student of their 
scripts; it has every appearance of being an element 
imported from outside; it suggests an independent 
invention, an active intelligence constantly at work in 
the present, not a mere echo or remnant of individu¬ 
alities of the past. 

Yes, it suggests an independent invention —an active 

332 

AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

intelligence constantly at work in the present, not a mere 
echo or remnant of individualities of the past. 

And so the matter has gone on developing, and a 
still further and more elaborate system of evidently 
experimental and designed cross-correspondence has 
now been discovered by Mr. Piddington in the scripts 
of the automatists mentioned, when independently com¬ 
pared together; with veiled statements in those same 
scripts which symbolically but definitely claim that such 
correspondences are to be found if looked for. Those 
so far discovered are reported in the Society’s Proceed¬ 
ings —a series of documents upon a consideration of 
which I do not propose to enter, since at this stage they 
are not capable of effective abridgement. 

Summary 

Summarising once more our position as regards 
cross-correspondence—we have in the course of the last 
few years been driven to recognise that the controls 
are pertinaciously trying to communicate now one 
now another definite idea by means of two or more 
different automatists, whom at the same time they are 
trying to prevent from communicating telepathically 
or unconsciously with one another ; and that in order to 
achieve this deliberate aim the controls express the 
factors of the idea in so veiled a form that each writer 
indites her own share without understanding it. Yet 
some identifying symbol or phrase is often included 
in each script, so as to indicate to a critical examiner 
that the correspondence is intended and not accidental; 
and, moreover, the idea thus co-operatively expressed is 
so definite that, when once the clue is found, no room 
is left for doubt as to the proper interpretation. 

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCE 

Chap, xxv] 

That is precisely what we have quite recently again 
and again obtained. We are told by the communicators 
that there are other correspondences not yet detected 
by us; and by more careful collation of the documents 
this has already been found true. The evidence needs 
careful and critical study; it is not in itself sensational, 
but it affords strong evidence of the intervention of a 
mind behind and independent of the automatist. 

If this be so—says the present President of the 
Society for Psychical. Research, Mrs. Sidgwick—the 
question what mind this is becomes of extreme interest 
and importance. Can it be a mind still in the body? 
or have we got into relation with minds which have 
survived bodily death and are endeavouring by means 
of the cross-correspondences to produce evidence of their 
operation? If this last hypothesis be the true one, it 
would mean that intelligent co-operation between other 
than embodied human minds and our own, in experi¬ 
ments of a new kind intended to prove continued 
existence, has become possible; and we should be 
justified in feeling that we are entering on a new and 
very important stage of the Society’s work. 

Consider for a moment the purport and full bearing 
of a judgment which, though still in form hypo¬ 
thetical, I hold for my own part to be fully justified :_ 

Intelligent co-operation between other than embodied 
human minds than our own . . . has become possible. 

It is surely difficult to over-estimate the importance 
of so momentous an induction when it can finally be 
made. 

Man’s practical outlook upon the universe is entering 
upon a new phase. Simultaneously with the beginning 
of a revolutionary increase in his powers of physical 
locomotion—which will soon be extended into a third 

33| 4 A UTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sbct. iv 

. a n o longer limited to a solid or liquid 

dim f ^" 10n h . power of reciprocal mental intercourse also 
surface—his p en jjL ed . f or there are signs that 

is in process f ° longer limited to contemporary 

„ will some day ^ ^ of k 

f'r H oowers superior to his own, even to the 
exrent “f ultimately attaining trustworthy information 

♦ ntTisr conditions of existence. 

concerning otnei 

' liquid 
sc also 
is that 
tporary 
know- 
to the 
mation 

CHAPTER XXVI 

< 

< 

i 

i\ 
a | 

v 

a 

r't 

TENTATIVE CONCLUSION 

I F we now tty to summarise once more the position 
at which we have so far arrived—which I have 
endeavoured to express in the concluding para¬ 
graph of the preceding chapter—we shall represent it— 
somewhat as follows :— 

The evidence for the survival of man, that is f 
the persistence of human intelligence and individ 
personality beyond bodily death, has always b 
cumulative; and now, through recent developmen 
the ancient phenomenon of automatic writing, 
beginning to be crucial. 

The fame of Mrs. Piper has spread into all 1 
and I should think the fame of Mrs. Verrall also 
these recent cases of automatism the Society has 
singularly fortunate, for in the one we have a Me 
who has been under strict supervision and comp 
management for the greater part of her psychical 
and in the other we have one of the sanest and ac 
of our own investigators fortunately endowed with 
power herself,—some power of acting as translate 
interpreter between the psychical and the physical 
There are also other ladies to some extent concerned 
the recent unsensational but most intelligent phenom ; 

own as Mrs. Holland,—wF" 

... '""l#" 1 " ' • , , ' 

53 6 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect, iv 

likewise above any suspicion of duplicity. But ’ 1 ^ e ^’ 
the whole thing has been so conducted that no duplicity, 
either conscious or unconscious, can rationa y 
peoted : everything has been deposited at the time with 
responsible persons outside the sphere of influence an 
we are at liberty to learn what we can from the record 
of the phenomena, unperturbed by any moral suspicions, 
i And what do we find ? 

i We find deceased friends-some of them well known 
to us and active members of the Society while alive 
•specially Gurney, Myers, and Hodgson—constantly pur- 
jortino- to communicate, with the express purpose of 
oatiently proving their identity and giving us cross- 
;orrespondences between different mediums. We also 
"nd them answering specific questions^ in a manner 
haracteristic of their known personalities and giving 
idence of knowledge appropriate to them. . _ 

Not easily or early do we make this admission. In 
■ of long conversations with what purported to be 
surviving intelligence of these friends and in- 
gators, we were by no means convinced of their 
ity by mere general conversation,—even when of 
endly and intimate character, such as in normal 
. would be considered amply and overwhelmingly 
-ient for the identification of friends speaking, let us 
through a telephone or a typewriter. We required 
ite and crucial proof—a proof difficult even to 
ine as well as difficult to supply. _ 

'he ostensible communicators realise the need of 
;h proof just as fully as we do, and have done their 
jt to satisfy the rational demand. Some of us think 
[y have succeeded, others are still doubtful. 
eiThe following is Mrs. Verrall’s conclusion after 
/- • of first-hand experience and careful testing :— 

still s 
that < 
best 
legitii 
with ( 
—ami 
under 
sublin 
Tl 

and tl 
thin i 
a turn- 
other 
the sti 
side. 

Sc 
the lig 
incred 
We e 
doubtl 
stale ii 
of the 
our lal 
Agile 
over, 
arrivei 
we, lik 
and w< 

Chap, xxvi] TENTATIVE CONCLUSION 

It cannot be denied that the “ communicator ” of the 

Piper sittings and of my own script presents a consistent 

personality dramatically resembling that of the person 
whom he claims to be. 

I entirely acquiesce in this judgment. In fact, I am 
of those who, though they would like to see further and 
still stronger and more continued proofs, are of opinion 
that a good case has been made out, and that as the 
best. working hypothesis at the present time it is 
legitimate to grant that lucid moments of intercourse 
with deceased persons may in the best cases supervene; 

amid a mass of supplementary material, quite natural 
under the circumstances, but mostly of a presumably 
subliminal and less evidential kind. 

The boundary between the two states—the known 
and the unknown—is still substantial, but it is wearing 
thin in places; and like excavators engaged in boring 
a tunnel from opposite ends, amid the roar of water and 
other noises, we are beginning to hear now and again 

the strokes of the pickaxes of our comrades on the other 
side. 

So we presently come back out of our tunnel into 
the light of day, and relate our experience to a busy and 
incredulous, or in some cases too easily credulous, world. 
We expect to be received with incredulity; though 
doubtless we shall be told in some quarters that it is all 
stale news, that there has been access to the other side 
of the mountain range from time immemorial, and that 
our laboriously constructed tunnel was quite unnecessary. 
Agile climbers may have been to the top and peeped 
over. Flying messages from the other side may have 
arrived; pioneers must have surveyed the route. But 
we > the navvies, are unprovided with wings, we dig 
work on the common earth, our business is to pierce 

! 

338 AUTOMATISM AND LUCIDITY [Sect. *v 

the mountain at some moderate elevation, and con¬ 
struct a permanent road or railway for the service of 

humanity. . . 

What we have to announce, then, is no striking 

novelty, no new method of communication, but only the 
reception, by old but developing methods, of carefully 
constructed evidence of identity more exact and more 
nearly complete than perhaps ever before. Carefully 
constructed evidence, I say. The constructive ingenuity 
exists quite as much on the other side of the partition 
as on our side: there has been distinct co-operation 
between those on the material and those on the im¬ 
material side; and we are at liberty, not indeed to 
announce any definite conclusion, but to adopt as a 
working hypothesis the ancient doctrine of a possible 
intercourse of intelligence between the material and 
some other, perhaps ethereal, order of existence. 

Some people have expected or hoped to communicate 
with Mars; it appears likely that recognised communica¬ 
tion may some day occur with less removed, and indeed 
less hypothetical, dwellers in (or perhaps not in) the 

realm of space. _ 

But let us not jump to the conclusion that the idea 
of “ space ” no longer means anything to persons removed 
from the planet. They are no longer in touch with 
matter truly, and therefore can no longer appeal to our 
organs of sense, as they did when they had bodies for 
that express purpose; but, for all we know, they may 
exist in the ether and be as aware of space and of the 
truths of geometry, though not of geography, as we are. 
Let us not be too sure that their condition and sur¬ 
roundings are altogether and utterly different from 
those of mankind. That is one of the things we may 
gradually find out not to be true. 

1 

Cha,. xxv,] TENTATIVE CONCLUSION 33g 

‘ S there an 5' thin « tlmt provisionally and 
temanvely we can say that is earnestly taught to those 
who are wtlhng to make the hypothesis that the com- 

mumcations arc genuine ? 

The first thing we learn, perhaps the only thing we 
clearly learn in the first instance, is continuity. There 

asmavh "I' 611 ^ " thG C ° nditi0nS of existence 
ds mayhave been anticipated; and no break at all in 

he continuous and conscious identity of genuine 

character and personality. Essential bdongingl, such 

lkT m0r \ eduCadon> habits ’ character, and 

ffection,—all these, and to a certain extent tastes 

Terrest M ’ '***' /° r Worse > are retained 

rerrestnal accretions, such as worldly possessions 

boddy pam and disabilities, these for the most part 

naturally drop away* ** 

Meanwhile it would appear that knowledge is not 
suddenly advanced—it would be unnatural if it were — 
we are not suddenly flooded with new information 
nor do we at all change our identity; but powers and 
faculties are enlarged, and the scope of our outlook on 
he universe may be widened and deepened, if effort 
ere has rendered the acquisition of such extra insight 
legitimate and possible. . s 

On the other hand, there are doubtless some whom 
the removal of temporary accretion and accidents of 
existence will leave in a feeble and impoverished 
condition ; for the things are gone in which they trusted 
and they are left poor indeed. Such doctrines have 
been taught, on the strength of vision and revelation- 
qmte short of any recognised Divine revelation-for 
more than a century. The visions of Swedenborg 
divested of their exuberant trappings, are not wholly 
unreal, and are by no means wholly untrue. There is 

340 AU 

a general consistency in the doctrines that have ^ 
beL taught through cStter of the 

“ ^ Turv" diverse indicated by Myers in 
his great and eloquent work. 

automatism and lucidity 

[Sect, tv 

CHAPTER XXVII 

IN MEMORY OF MYERS 

I T behoves me who have learnt so much from the 
Pioneers and Founders of the Society for Psychical 
Research not to conclude this book,—which 
attempts to set forth in some detail an outline of the 
less orthodox facts by which among other things I 
have been led to my views concerning • the universe,— 
without emphasising the debt I owe to those who have 
immediately preceded me in this study; and I can 
discharge the debt most compactly by quoting here 
the Address which I gave to the Society for Psychical 
Research shortly after the death of its President of 
1900 on the occasion when it fell to my lot to succeed 
him in the Chair. 

In Memory of F. W. H. Myers 

’Apvvfievos tjv re ical vocrrov eralpoov 

Who would have thought a year ago, when our 
Secretary and joint Founder at length consented to be 
elected President, that we should so soon be lamenting 
his decease ? 

When Henry Sidgwick died, the Society was 
f orphaned; and now it is left desolate. Of the original 
chief founders, Professor Barrett alone remains; for 

342 

IN MEMORY OF MYERS [Chap, xxvji 

Mr. Podmore, the only other member of the first 
Council still remaining on it, was not one of the actual 
founders of the Society. Neither the wisdom of 
Sidgwick nor the energy and power of Myers can by 
any means be replaced. Our loss is certain, but the 
blow must not be paralysing. Rather it must stimulate 
those that remain to fresh exertions, must band us 
together, determined that a group of workers called 
together for a pioneering work, for the founding and 
handing on to posterity of a new science, must not 
be permitted to disband and scatter till their work is 
done. That work will not be done in our lifetime; it 
must continue with what energy and wisdom we can 
muster, and we must be faithful to the noble leaders 
who summoned us together, and laid this burden to 
our charge. 

I, unworthy, am called to this Chair. I would for 
every reason that it could have been postponed ; 
but it is the wish of your Council; I am told that it 
was the wish of Myers, and I regard it as a duty from 
which I must not shrink. 

The last communication which my predecessor 
made was in memory of Henry Sidgwick: my own 
first communication must be in memory of Frederic 
Myers. 

To how many was he really known? I wonder. 
Known in a sense he was to all, except the unlettered 
and the ignorant. Known in reality he was to very 
few. But to the few who were privileged to know 
him, his is a precious memory: a memory which will 
not decay with the passing of the years. I was 
honoured with his intimate friendship. I esteem it one 
of the privileges of my life. 

To me, though not to me alone, falls the duty of 

Chap, xxvii] 

IN MEMORY OF MYERS 

343 

doing some justice to his memory. I would that I 
might be inspired for the task. 

I was not one of those who knew him as a youth, 
and my acquaintance with him ripened gradually. Our 
paths in life were wide apart, and our powers were 
different: our powers, but not our tastes. He could 
instruct me in literature and most other things, I could 
instruct him in science ; he was the greedier learner of 
the two. I never knew a man more receptive, nor 
one with whom it was a greater pleasure to talk. His 
grasp of science was profound: I do not hesitate to 
say it, though many who did not really know him will 
fail to realise that this was possible; nor was he fully 
conscious of it himself. Even into some of the more 
technical details, when they were properly presented, 
he could and did enter, and his mind was in so prepared 
a state that any fact once sown in it began promptly 
to take root and bud. It was not a detailed knowledge 
of science that he possessed, of course, but it was a 
grasp, a philosophic grasp, of the meaning and bearing 
of it all,—not unlike the accurately comprehending 
grasp of Tennyson. And again and again in his writings 
do we find the facts, which his mind had thus from many 
sources absorbed, utilised for the purpose of telling and 
brilliant illustrations, and made to contribute each its 
quota to his Cosmic scheme. 

For that is what he was really doing, all through 
this last quarter of a century: he was laying the 
foundation for a cosmic philosophy, a scheme of 
existence as large and comprehensive and well founded 
as any that have appeared. 

Do I mean that he achieved such a structure? I 
do not. A philosophy of that kind is not to be 
constructed by the labour of one man, however 

344 IN MEMORY OF MYERS [Chap, xxvii 

brilliant; and Myers laboured almost solely on the 
psychological side. He would be the first to deprecate 
any exaggeration of what he has done; but he himself 
would have admitted this,—that he strenuously and 
conscientiously sought facts, and endeavoured to con¬ 
struct his cosmic foundation by their aid and in their 
light, and not in the dark gropings of his own unaided 
intelligence. 

To me it has seemed that most philosophers suffer 
from a dearth of facts. In the past necessarily so, for 
the scientific exploration of the physical universe *is, 
as it were, a thing of yesterday. Our cosmic outlook 
is very different from that of the ancients, is different 
even from that of philosophers of the middle of last 
century, before the spectroscope was invented, before 
Darwin and Wallace wrote, before many discoveries 
connected with less familiar household words than 
these: in the matter of physical science alone the 
most recent philosopher must needs have some 
advantage. But this is a small item in his total outfit, 
mental phenomena must contribute the larger part of 
that; and the facts of the mind have been open—it is 
generally assumed—from all antiquity. This is in 
great degree true, and philosophers have always 
recognised and made use of these facts, especially those 
of the mind in its normal state. Yet in modern science 
we realise that to understand a thing thoroughly it 
must be observed not only in its normal state but under 
all the conditions into which it can be thrown by experi¬ 
ment,—every variation being studied and laid under 
contribution to the general understanding of the 
whole. 

And, I ask, did any philosopher ever know the facts 
of the mind in health and in disease more profoundly, 

345 

Chap, xxvii] in MEMORY OF MYERS 

with more detailed and intimate knowledge, drawn from 
personal inquiry, and from the testimony of all the 
savants of Europe, than did Frederic Myers? He 
Iaid . under contribution every abnormal condition 
studied in the Salpetriere, in hypnotic trance, in 
delirium, every state of the mind in placidity and in 
excitement. He was well acquainted with the curious 
facts of multiple personality, of clairvoyant vision, of 
hallucinations, automatisms, self-suggestion, of dreams, 
and of the waking visions of genius. 

It will be said that Hegel, and to some extent Kant 
also, as well as other philosophers, recognised some 
ultra-normal mental manifestations, and allowed a place 
for clairvoyance in their scheme. All honour to those 
great men for doing so, in advance of the science of 
their time; but how could they know all that we know 
to-day? Fifty years ago the facts even of hypnotism 
were not by orthodox science accepted; such studies as 
were made, were made almost surreptitiously, here and 
there, by some truth-seeker clear-sighted enough to out¬ 
step the fashion of his time and to look at things with 
his own eyes. But only with difficulty could he publish 
his observations, and doubtless many were lost for 
fear of ridicule and the contempt of his professional 
brethren. 

But now it is different: not so different as it ought 
to be, even yet; but facts previously considered occult 
are now investigated and recorded and published in 
every country of Europe. The men who observe 
them are too busy to unify them; they each contribute 
their portion, but they do not grasp the whole: the 

IN MEMORY OF MYERS [Chap, xxvii 

348 

adapted to the needs of an emancipated spirit, a wider 
field of service,—a gradual opportunity of re-uniting with 
the many who have gone before. So he believed, on 
what he thought a sure foundation of experience, and 
in the strength of that belief he looked forward hopefully 
to perennial effort and unending progress : 

“Say, could aught else content thee? which were best, 

After so brief a battle an endless rest, 

Or the ancient conflict rather to renew, 

By the old deeds strengthened mightier deeds to do?” 

Such was his faith : by this he lived, and in this he 
died. Religious men in all ages have had some such 
faith, perhaps a more restful and less strenuous faith; 
but to Myers the faith did not come by religion: he 
would have described himself as one who walked by 
sight and knowledge rather than by faith, and his eager 
life-long struggle for knowledge was in order that he 
might by no chance be mistaken. 

To some, conviction of this kind would be impossible 
—they are the many who know not what science is. To 
others, conviction of this kind seems unnecessary—they 
are the favoured ones who feel that they have grasped all 
needed truth by revelation or by intuition. But by a few 
here and there, even now, this avenue to knowledge 
concerning the unseen is felt to be open. Myers believed 
that hereafter it would become open to all. He knew 
that the multitude could appreciate science no more, 
perhaps less, than they can appreciate religion; but he 
knew further that when presently any truth becomes 
universally accepted by scientific men, it will penetrate 
downwards and be accepted by ordinary persons, as they 
now accept any other established doctrine,—such as the 
planetary position of the earth in the solar system, or the 
evolytion of species,—not because they have really made 

Chap, xxvii] IN MEMORY OF MYERS 349 

a study of the matter, but because it is a part of the 
atmosphere into which they were bom. 

If continuity of existence and intelligence across the 
gulf of death really can ever be thus proved, it surely is 
a desirable and worthy object for science to aim at. 
There be some religious men of little faith who resent 
this attempted intrusion of scientific proof into their 
arena; as if they had a limited field which could be en¬ 
croached upon. Those men do not realise, as Myers 
did, the wealth of their inheritance. They little know 
the magnitude of the possibilities of the universe, the 
unimagined scope of the regions still, and perhaps for 
ever, beyond the grasp of what we now call science. 

There was a little science in my youth which prided 
itself upon being positive knowledge, and sought to pour 
scorn upon the possibility, say, of prayer or of any mode 
of communication between this world and a purely 
hypothetical other. Honest and true and brilliant though 
narrow men held these beliefs and promulgated these 
doctrines for a time: they did good service in their day 
by clearing away some superstition, and, with their 
healthy breezy common-sense, freeing the mind from 
cant,—that is, from the conventional utterance of phrases 
embodying beliefs only half held. I say no word against 
the scientific men of that day, to whom were opposed 
theologians of equal narrowness and of a more bitter 
temper. But their warlike energy, though it made them 
effective crusaders, left their philosophy defective and 
their science unbalanced. It has not fully re-attained 
equilibrium yet. With Myers the word Science meant 
something much larger, much more comprehensive: it 
meant a science and a philosophy and a religion com¬ 
bined. It meant, as it meant to Newton, an attempt 
at a true cosmic scheme. His was no purblind outlook 

350 

IN MEMORY OF MYERS [Chap, xxvit 

on a material universe limited and conditioned by our 
poor senses. He had an imagination wider than that 
of most men. Myers spoke to me once of the possibility 
that the parts of an atom move perhaps inside the atom 
in astronomical orbits, as the planets move in the solar 
system, each spaced out far away from others and not 
colliding, but altogether constituting the single group or 
system we call the atom,—a microcosm akin to the 
visible cosmos; which again might be only an atom of 
some larger whole. I was disposed at that time to 
demur. I should not demur now; the progress of 
science within the last few years of the nineteenth 
century makes the first part of this thesis extremely 
probable. On the latter part too there is more to be 
said than is generally known. Physics and astronomy 
are rapidly advancing in this direction. 

Nor was-it only upon material things that he looked 
with the eye of prescience and of hope. I never knew 
a man so hopeful concerning his ultimate destiny. He 
once asked me whether I would barter—if it were 
possible—my unknown destiny, whatever it might be, 
for as many seons of unmitigated and wise terrestrial 
happiness as might last till the secular fading of the sun, 
and then an end. 

He would not! No limit could satisfy him. That 
which he was now he only barely knew,—for tojjjm not 
the whole of each personality is incarnate in this mortal 
flesh, the subliminal self still keeps watch and ward 
beyond the threshold, and is in touch always with another 
life,—but that which he might come to be hereafter he 
could by no means guess : ovirco e<f>avepai>6i} rt icrofieda. 
Gradually and perhaps through much suffering, from 
which indeed he sensitively shrank, but through which 
nevertheless he was ready to go, he believed that a 

Chap, xxvii] IN MEMORY OF 

being would be evolved out of him,—“even,” as he 
would say, “out of him” —as much higher in the scale 
of creation as he now was above the meanest thing- 
that crawls. 

Nor yet an end. Infinity of infinities—he could 
conceive no end, of space or time or existence, nor yet 
of development: though an end of the solar system and 
therefore of mankind seemed to him comparatively 
imminent— 

“ That hour may come when Earth no more can keep 
Tireless her year-long voyage thro 5 the deep ; 

Nay, when all planets, sucked and swept in one, 

Feed their rekindled solitary sun;— 

Nay, when all suns that shine, together hurled, 

Crash in one infinite and lifeless world:— 

Yet hold thou still, what worlds soe’er may roll, 

Naught bear they with them master of the soul; 

In all the eternal whirl, the cosmic stir, 

All the eternal is akin to her; 

She shall endure, and quicken, and live at last, 

When all save souls has perished in the past . 55 

Infinite progress, infinite harmony, infinite love,— 
these were the things which filled and dominated his 
existence. Limits for him were repellent and impossible. 
Limits conditioned by the flesh and by imperfection,— 
by rebellion, blindness, and error,—these are obvious, 
these he admitted and lamented to the full; but ultimate 
limits, impassable barriers, cessation of development, a 
highest in the scale of being beyond which it was im¬ 
possible to go,—these he would not admit, these seemed 
to him to contradict all that he had gleaned of the essence 
and meaning of existence. 

Principalities and Powers on and on, up and up, 
without limit now and for ever,—this was the dominant 
note of his mind ; and if he seldom used the word God 
except in poetry, or employed the customary phrases, it 

352 IN MEMORY OF MYERS [Chap, xxvn 

was because everything was so supremely real to him ; 

ff. dG °d>” the personified totality of existence, too 

blinding a conception to conceive. 

For practical purposes something less lofty served, 
and he could return from cosmic speculations to the 
simple everyday life, which is for all of us the immediate. 
business in hand, and which, if patiently pursued, seemed 

to him to lead to more than could be desired or 

deserved— 

Live thou and love! so best and only so 
Can thy one soul into the One Soul flow,- 
Can thy small life to Life’s great centre flee, 
And thou be nothing, and the Lord in thee.” 

This is an expression of himself: it was not so much 
his creed as himself. He with his whole being and 
personality—at first slowly and painfully, with many 
rebuffs and after much delay and hesitation, but in the 
end richly and enthusiastically—rose to this height of 

and of serenity; though ^ 

“Either we cannot or we hardly dare 
Breathe forth that vision into earthly air • 
And if ye call us dreamers, dreamers then 
Be we esteemed amid you waking men ; 

Hear us or hear not as ye choose; but we 
Speak as we can, and are what we must be » 

his f a ° 1, “ bd “ v ' d eastly: let no man think that 
his faith came eastly and cost him nothing. He has 

himself borne witness to the struggle, the groanings that 
could not be uttered. His was a keenly emotional 
nature What he felt, he felt strongly; what he believed 
hebeheved in no half-hearted 

When he doubted, he doubted fiercely; but the pain of 
the doubt only stimulated him to effort, to struggle; to 

4 * 

Chap, i 

know 
conten 
must Is 
that he 

is a Um 
runs in 
doubtle; 
in a mi 
fore-fror 
infreque. 
a sense 
strength 
a line w 
my merr 
comrades 
But t 
end ampl 
power to; 
something 
one berea 

“W1 

Sti 

Or 

Co 

Or 

De 

Kn 

Cat 

No 

As 

To hoi 
brought he 
will one < 
behind his 

*3 

Chap, xxvn] IN MEMORY OP MYERS 

. 353 

know at least the worst, and doubt no longer. He was 

mustT Wlth u° half knowled g e > no clouded faith he 
^ ^ SU ^ ^ believed 

Seeker after Truth and Helper of his comrades 

is a hne m his own metre, though not a quotation, which 

fL fr Tr / hlS OWn request ’ 1 have placed in the 
fore-front of this essay. For he speaks of himself m an 

nfrequent autobiographical sentence as having “often 

strength ^.^ e . at . ^ of a, effort b^ond ^ 
gth striving,—as Homer says of Odvsseu<? in 

a Ime which 1 sh »oH wish graven on some table, n 

Z m r?7’~' Strivh « '° ownTnl and nty 

comrades homeward way/” :7 

pn ,® l ' t ( he years of draggle and effort brought in the 
end ample recompense, for they gave him a magnificent 

so°;:Cof V r diStreSS - He abk *» —ts 

omethmg of his assurance to others, so that more than 
one bereaved friend learned to say with him_ 

What matter if thou hold thy loved ones prest 
Sbll with close arms upon thy yearning breast, 

Or with purged eyes behold them hand in hand 
Come m a vision from that lovely land — 

Or only with great heart and spirit sure 
Deserve them and await them and endure • 

Knowing well, no shocks that fall, no years that flee 
Can sunder God from these, or God from thee ■ 
Nowise so far thy love from theirs can roam 
As past the mansions of His endless home.” 

To how many a sorrowful heart his words have 
brought hope and comfort, letters, if ever published 

Tv Zu- day pr ° Ve ' The dee P P ers °nal conviction 
behind his message drove it home with greater force, 

2 

354 

IN MEMORY OE MYERS [Chap, xxvii 

nor did it lose influence because it was enfranchised 
from orthodox traditions, and rang with no hollow pro¬ 
fessional note. 

There are those who lament that with his undoubted 
powers as a man of letters he to some extent deserted 
the sunny fields of pure literature for the rugged tracts 
of scientific inquiry; but indeed the two were closely 
blended. It is, as Dr. Walter Leaf has said, im¬ 
possible to appreciate Myers without, insisting on this 
interfusion:— 

The essay on his best-beloved Virgil is perhaps that 
of all his utterances which gives us most of his literary 
self. And the very heart of Virgil was to him m the 
famous speech of Anchises to ^Eneas in Elysium 
{jEn. vi. 724-7 =5s'), where the poet “who meant, as we 
know, to devote to philosophy the rest of his life after 
the completion of the ‘ neid ’ ’ propounds an answer 
to the riddle of the universe in an unexpectedly definite 

^his ultimate subordination of form to substance, of 
art to thought, is the whole story of Myers’s literary 
work. His art gained all the more because it was not 
pursued as a primary aim, and the obvious rewards 
of it were little sought. Those only who followed the 
working of his aspirations will adequately recognise his 
mastery, and see how for him style was but the ex¬ 
pression of his inmost soul. In his wonderful fragments 
of Virgilian translation he reached his height. _ The 
poet who was ever his truest ideal is transfused till the 
Roman and the Englishman blend in one passion, 
human and divine, and the triumphant song is taken up 
and proclaimed again after two thousand years 

“To God again the enfranchised soul must tend, 

He is her home, her Author is her end; 

No death is hers; when earthly eyes grow dim 
Starlike she soars and Godlike melts in Him.” 

Abt Vogle 
Accessorie 

Action at i 
Agent and 

Aim of S* I 

: Albemarle 

Anticipatio 
Apparition* 
Apparition* 
t Archbishop 

Automatic i 

i Bacon, Fra? 

' Bacon, Hog 

, Barrett, Pro 

Battersea, I 
Beethoven,< 
Birchall, Mr 
“ Blanche A 
Body and M 
Brown Studj 

Charley and 
| Clairvoyance 

‘ ' m 

Clairvoyance 
* Clothes of Gl 

Columbus, 2I 
Commtmieaft 

m m 

Communicate 
Comte and S< 
; Confusion, 25 

i : ' Contact, Bffi* 

Continuity, 33 
’ Criminals, $9 
^ Cro»-CorreHf« 

’ Crystal Vfrfom. 

..HAP. XXVII 

ranchised 
dIIow pro- 

indoubted 
t deserted 
ged tracts 
re closely 
said, im- 
g on this 

rhaps that 
ris literary 
lim in the 

1 Elysium 
sant, as we 
s life after 
‘ an answer 
dly definite 

abstance, of 
rs’s literary 

2 it was not 
jus rewards 
bllowed the 
■ecognise his 
but the ex- 
ul fragments 
leight. The 
ifused till the 
one passion, 
ir is taken up 
:ars-— 

tead, : 

i dim 
liin.” ' 

INDEX 

Abt Vogler, 314 
Accessories in Visions, 99 
Action at a distance, 34 
Agent and Percipient, 44 
Aim of S.P.R., 37 
Albemarle Club, 287 
Anticipation of Future, 150, 154 
Apparitions, 97, 99-105 
Apparitions, Experimental, 90, 103 
Archbishop or Savant, 303 
Automatic intelligence, 108, 129 

Bacon, Francis, 14, 17 
Bacon, Roger, 15 
Barrett, Professor, 38, 70, 341 
Battersea, Lord, 288 
Beethoven, 93 
Birchall, Mr., 46 

“ Blanche Abercromby ” case, 178 
Body and Mind, 165 
Brown Study, 109, 322 

Charley and Bird case, 22S 
Clairvoyance, 123, 134, 162, 222, 228, 
233 

Clairvoyance of the Dying, 144, 147 
Clothes of Ghosts, 97, 99 
Columbus, 28 

Communication, Process of, 113, 168, 
244, 305 

Communicators, Statements of, 243, 263 

Comte and Socrates, 23 

Confusion, 250 

Contact, Effect of, 66 

Continuity, 339 

Criminals, 29 

Cross'Correspondence, 182, 265, 306, 326 
Crystal Vision, 92 

355 

Death, 347 

“ Descent into Hell,” 303 
Detectives, 188 

Difficulties of Communication, 249, 252 

276, 30& 308 

Diotima, 328 
<f Doctor,” 310 
Dorr, Mr., 279, 311 
Double Object for Thought-Transference 
41, 48, 51 

Dream lucidity, 101, 135, 142 
Dying, Clairvoyance of, 144, 147 
Dying, Phantasms of, 101 

Ether of space, 80 
Evidence, 338 

Experimental Apparitions, 90, 103 

“Fishing,” 309, 314 
Forbes, Mrs., 299, 328 
Foreign languages, 149 
Forth Bridge, 12 
Future, Anticipation of, 150, 154 
Future Service, 303 

Garibaldi’s dream, 77 
Ghosts, 105 

Ghosts, Clothes of, 97, 99 
Gonner, Professor, 211, 231 
Grove, Mrs., 316, 320 
Gurney, Edmund, 247 
Guthrie, Malcolm, 39, 48, 74 

Habitability, 1x7 
Hades, 303 

Hallucination, 97, 99, 101, 105 
Hand, Activity of, 244, 247, 272, 3x3 
Hauntings, 93, 105 

THE SURVIVAL OF MAN 

356 

Heliograph, 81, 92 
Herdman, Dr., 40, 55 
« Hodgson Control,” 312 
Hodgson, Dr., 186, 247 
Holland, Mrs., in, 302, 33 L 335 
Hyslop, Professor, 238, 240, 288 

Identity, 169, 173 . 282, 236, 240, 338 

Image, 97 

“Imperator,” 310 

Infinity, 351 

Influence of Sitter, 319 

Inspiration, 109, 322 

Inspiration, Vicarious, 323 

Investigation, Object of, 25 

Isaac Thompson, 218 

Isaac Thompson case, 269, 273 

James, Professor William, 186, 193, 288, 
289 

Johnson, Miss, 326 
“Joy of the Lord,” 304 

Kant, 119, 175 , 345 

Kenosis , 278 

Kepler, Newton, and Tycho, 26, 28 
Kipling, 174 
Kirkham case, 176 

Leaf, Dr. Walter, 354 
Lessons to be learnt, 339 
Letters, Posthumous, 121 
Lodge, Fredk., case, 74 
Lunatics, 30 
Lyro, Count von, 58, 68 

Man who was , 174 
Marble, Mr., 316, 320 
Materialisation, 172 
Marmontel case, 155 
Marsh, Mr., 159 
Mathematical Problem, 131 
Miles, Miss, 69, 116 
Mind and Body, 165 . 

Movement, 166 
Myers, Mr. Ernest, 289 
Myers, 18, 161, 186, 341 
Myers on Time, 139 

“ Myers Control,” 284, 301, 305, 308, 
3 H 

Navvies, 337 

“Nelly” Control, 286, 305 
Newton, Tycho, and Kepler, 26, 28 
Nineteenth Century, 27 
Novum Organon, 17 

“ Old Master,” 94 
Opposition to S.P.R., 6 

Pain and Taste experiments, 74 
Paquet case, 102 
Pelham, George, 247, 267, 271 
Percipient, Agent and, 44 
Phantasms, 99, 101, 103 
Phantasms of the Living, 88, 100 
Phinuit, in, 203, 257, 262, 309, 320 
Phinuit case, 147 
Photographs, Recognition of, 317 
Photography, 97 
Physical phenomena, 98, I 7 2 
Piddington, Mr., 265, 332 
Piper, Mrs., ill, 184, I 9 2 > 2 5 ^> 2 ^L 
273, 335 

Piper, Normal knowledge of Mrs., 278 

Planchette, 129 

Podmore, Mr., 1x9 

Pole, Miss, 129 

“ Possession,” 170 

Posthumous letters, 121 

Postmarks, 152, 153 

Prayer, 322 

Precautions, 33 

Preparations for Sitting, 256 

Press, American, 190 

Prisoners, 29 

Professional exhibitions, 83 
Programme of S.P.R., 9 

Ramsden, Miss, 69, 116 
Rawson, Miss, 298 
Rayleigh, Lord, 289 
Reading, Unseen, 134, 217, 221, 233 
Recognition of Photographs, 3x7 
Records, Exactness of, 31 
“ Rector,” m, 257, 262, 309, 311, 
320 

Redmayne, Professor (case), 76 
Reflex action, 167 
) Relics, 94, 225, 281, 283 

INDEX 

Religion, Influence on, 36 
Religious objectors, 7, 302 
Rendall, Dr., 210 
Rich, Mr., 219 

Richet, Professor, 186, 289, 296 
Robbins, Miss, 253 
Royal Society, 12 
Ruskin, Mr., 75 

Savant, Archbishop or, 303 
Science, Dislike of, 16 
Scylla and Charybdis, 18 
Semaphore, 92 
Service, Future, 303 
Severn case, 75 
Sharpe, Mr., 132 
Shears, Dr., 46 

Sidgwick, Prof. Henry, 3, 161, 240, 
34 i 

Sidgwick, Mrs., 314, 333 
Sitter, Influence of, 319 
Sitting, Preparations for, 256 
“Snap” in head, 275, 276 
Socrates and Comte, 23 
Spiritistic hypothesis, 164, 173, 
333 > 337 ? 348 
“Spirits in Prison,” 303 
Spiritual influence, 322 
S.P.R., Aim of, 37 
S.P.R., Opposition to, 6 
S.P.R., Programme of, 9 
Stainton, Moses, 118, 133, 176, 310 
Stranger, Identity of, 237 
Superstitions, Ancient, 78, 95 
Swedenborg, 175, 339 
Swedenborg case, 119 
Sympathetic connexion, 79 

Taste and Pain experiments, 74 
Telegraphy and Telepathy, 89, 91, 

125 

Telephones, 80, 238, 304 
Telergy, 164, 170, 172 
Tennyson, 288, 295, 343 
Tests, 238, 280 
Thompson, Mr. Edwin, 267 
Thompson, Isaac, 218 
Thompson, Mrs., 285, 291, 301, 306, 
327 

Thought - Transference, Double Object 
for, 41, 48, 51 
Time, Myers on, 159 
Trance, 323 
Trevelyan, G. M., 77 
Trevelyan, Sir George, 287 
306, Trifles, 239, 241 

Trifles and Relics, 281, 283 
Tunnel, 337 

Tycho, Kepler, and Newton, 26, 28 

“ Uncle Jerry ” case, 223 
Unseen reading, 134, 217, 221, 233 

2 53 ? 

Veridical, 97, 101 

Verrall, Mrs., m, 127, 155, 161, 300, 
306? 335, 336 
Vicarious inspiration, 323 
Virgil, 354 

Visions, 99, 102, 105, 145, H 7 

Waking stage, 261, 274 
Watson, Rev. John, 226 

Zancigs, The, 86 

jc .jr*. 1 . v„* t f? ;, 

Ace. N o. 

Class No. 

3 772 

Al. '/3 

Book No. 

Printed by 

Morrison & Gibb Limited, 

Edinburgh
