The Ether of Space (Oliver Lodge, 1909)
=======================================
Oliver Lodge — The Ether of Space (London, 1909). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (etherspace00lodggoog).

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



Harper's Library of Living Thought



i UK i-:'riii:K oi



KV



';; OLIVKK LJ:iiwi:, I I



Lj>'ii-. .'.i.\i iJ ^ . i ' .' K. f.' i lit



.'. 'r..' - /• .' ' ' . '. j\


/ . I iin


. .f-


i



o



Cv>



C



1^



s: ^_


7:



K-*



THE ETHER OF

SPACE



BY

SIR OLIVER LODGE, F.R.S.

D.Sc. Lond.^ Hon. D.Sc. Oxon. et Vict.

LL.D. St. Andrew'' Sf Glasgow ^ and Aberdeen

Vice-President of the Institution of Electrical Engineer m

Rumford Medallist of the Royal Society

Ex-President of the Physical Society of London

Late Professor of Physics in the University College of Liverpool

Honorary Member of the A merican Philosophical Society of Philadelphia ;

of the Manchester Philosophical Society ; of the Baiavian

Society of Rotterdam ; and of the Academy of Sciences of Bologna

Principal of the University of Birmingham



ILLUSTRATED



"new YORK AND LONDON

HARPER 6- BROTHERS

1909



r



"fiV^yi ^ 4 i.a*7 -



H


t



1^



•xi



/■ >-



< • > \JJ<JL ^^^ ^ iA. IV



(L



V



Copyright, 1909, by Harper & Brothers.

Aii rights reserved.
Published May, 1909.



TO THE FOUNDERS OF

UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LIVERPOOL,
ESPECIALLY TO THOSE BEARING THE NAMES

OF RATHBONE AND OF HOLT

THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED



PREFACE

INVESTIGATION of the nature and proper-
ties of the Ether of Space has long been for
me the most fascinating branch of Physics, and
I welcome the opportimity of attempting to
make generally known the conclusions to which
I have so far been led on this great and perhaps
inexhaustible subject.

OLIVER LODGE.

University of Birmingham,
March, 1909.



CONTENTS

CHAPTBR PAGE

Introduction. General and His-
torical XV

I. The Luminifbrous Ether and the Mod-

ern Theory op Light i

II. The' Interstellar Ether as a Connect-

ing Medium 13

III. Influence of Motion on Various

Phenomena 30

IV. Experiments on the Ether .... 46

V. Special Experiment on Etherial

Viscosity 70

VI. Etherial Density 88

VII. Further Explanations Concerning

THE Density and Energy of the
Ether 95

VIII. Ether and Matter 107

IX. Strength of the Ether 124

X. General Theory of Aberration . . 136

Appendix i. On Gravity and Etherial

Tension 153

Appendix 2. Calculations in^ Connection

WITH Ether Density 156

Appendix 3. Frbsnbl's Law a Special Case

of a Universal. Potential Function . 163



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



Illustrations of Aberration

FIG.

1. Cannon shots

2. Boats or Waves

3. Lighthouse beams

4. Ray through a moving stratum

5. Wave-fronts in moving medium

6. Normal reflection in moving medium



PAGB

36

37
38
41
43
44



Experiments on Ether drip

7. Interference Kaleidoscope 53

8. Hoek's experiment 56

9. Experiment of Mascart and Jamin ... 57

10. Diagram of Michelson's experiment ... 64

Illustrations of Ether Machine (Lodge)

11. Diagram of course of light 72

12. General view of whirling part of Ether

Machine 76

13. General view of optical frame 79

14. Drawing of optical details .... Facing p. 80

15. View of Ether Machine in action . . Frontispiece

16. Appearance of interference bands and mi-

crometer wires 80

17. Iron mass for magnetisation 84

18. Appearance of bands 83

19. Arrangement for electrification 85



INTRODUCTION

ETHER or ^Ether (aWiip probably from
aiOia I bum,) a material substance of a
more subtle kind than visible bodies, supposed
to exist in those parts of space which are ap-
parently empty.'* cxft^

So begins the article, " Ether,*' written for the y/
ninth edition of the Encyctopcsdia Britannica, by
James Clerk-Maxwell.

The derivation of the word seems to indicate
some connection in men's minds with the idea of
Fire: the other three "elements," Earth, Water,
Air, representing the solid, liquid, and gaseous
conditions of ordinary matter respectively. The
name ^Ether suggests a far more subtle or pene-
trating and ultra-material kind of substance.

Newton employs the term for the mediimi
which fills space — not only space which appears
to be empty, but space also which appears to be
full; for the luminiferous ether must undoubtedly

XV



r



INTRODUCTION



penetrate between the atoms — ^must exist in the
pores so to speak — of every transparent sub-
stance, else light could not travel through it.
The following is an extract from JiewtQTLS
^'^ ' ^ ' surmises concerning this medium :—

**Qu. i8. If in two large tall cylindrical
Vessels of Glass inverted, two little Thermo-
meters be suspended so as not to touch the
Vessels, and the Air be drawn out of one of
these Vessels, and these Vessels thus pre-
pared be carried out of a cold place into a
warm one; the Thermometer in vacuo will
grow warm as much and almost as soon as
the Thermometer which is not in vacuo.
And when the Vessels are carried back into
the cold place, the Thermometer in vclcuo
will grow cold almost as soon as the other
Thermometer. Is not the Heat of the warm
Room conveyed through the Vacuum by the
Vibrations of a much subtiler Mediimi than
Air, which after the Air was drawn out re-
mained in the Vacuum? And is not this
Medium the same with that Meditmi by
which Light is [transmitted], and by whose

xvi



INTRODUCTION



Vibrations Light communicates Heat to
Bodies? . . . And do not the Vibrations of
this Meditim in hot Bodies contribute to the
intenseness and duration of their Heat?
And do not hot Bodies communicate their
Heat to contiguous cold ones by the Vibra-
tions of this Medium propagated from them
into the cold ones ? And is not this Meditmi
exceedingly more rare and subtile than the
Air, and exceedingly more elastick and
active? And doth it not readily pervade
all bodies? And is it not (by its elastick
force) expanded through all the Heavens?*'
**Qu. 22. May not Planets and Comets,
and all gross Bodies, perform their motions
more freely, and with less resistance in this
^Ethereal Meditim than in any Fluid, which '
fills all Space adequately without leaving
any Pores, and by consequence is much
denser than Quick-silver and Gold? And
may not its resistance be so small, as to be
inconsiderable ? For instance ; if this Mtker
(for so I will call it) should be supposed
700000 times more elastick than our Air,
and above 700000 times more rare; its

xvii



INTRODUCTION



resistance would be above 600000000 times
less than that of Water. And so small a
resistance would scarce make any sensible
alteration in the Motions of the Planets in
ten thousand Years."

That the ether, if there be such a thing in

«

space, can pass readily into or through matter is
often held proven by tilting a mercury barom-
eter; when the mercury rises to fill the trans-
parent vacuum. Everything points to its uni-
versal permeance, if it exist at all.

But these, after all, are antique thoughts.
Electric and Magnetic information has led us
beyond them into a region of greater certainty
and knowledge; so that now 1 am able to advo-
cate a view of the Ether which makes it not only
uniformly present and all-pervading, but also
massive and substantial beyond conception. It
is turning out to be by far the most substantial
thing— perhaps the only substantial thing— in
the material universe. Compared to ether the
densest matter, such as lead or gold, is a filmy
gossamer structure; like a comet's tail or a milky
way, or like a salt in very dilute solution.

■

xviii



f



INTRODUCTION



To lead up to and jtistify the idea of the real-
ity and substantiality, and vast though as yet
largely unrecognized importance, of the Ether of
Space, the following chapters have been written.
Some of them represent the expanded notes of
lectures which have been given in various places
— chiefly the Royal Institution; while the first
chapter represents a lecture before the Ashmo-
lean Society of the University of Oxford in Jtme,
^1889/^ One chapter (viz,. Chap. II) has already
beecTprinted as part of an appendix to the third '' ^
edition of Modern Views of Electricity, as well as
in the Fortnightly and North American Reviews;
but no other chapters have yet been published,
though parts appear in more elaborate form in
Proceedings or Transactions of learned societies.

The problem of the constitution of the Ether,
and of the way in which portions of it are modi-
fied to form the atoms or other constituent units
of ordinary matter, has not yet been solved.
Much work has been done in this direction by
various mathematicians, but much more re-
mains to be done. And until it is done, some
scepticism is reasonable — perhaps laudable.
Meanwhile there are few physicists who will

xix



INTRODUCTION



dissent from Clerk-Maxweirs penultimate sen-
tence in the article "Ether," of which the be-
ginning has already been quoted : —

- "Whatever difficulties we may have in
forming a consistent idea of the constitution
of the aether, there can be no doubt that the

I

interplanetary and interstellar spaces are
not empty, but are occupied by a material
substance or body, which is certainly the
largest, and probably the most uniform
body of which we have any knowledge.'*



THE ETHER OF SPACE



THE ETHER OF SPACE



f:^'



THE LUMINIFEROUS ETHER AND THE [^
MODERN THEORY OF LIGHT p^'r/^^



THE oldest and best known function for an
ether is the conveyance of light, and hence
the name "Iximiniferous" was applied to it;
though at the present day many more functions
are known, and more will almost certainly be
discovered.

To begin with, it is best to learn what we can
concerning the properties of the Interstellar
Ether from the phenomena of Light.

For now well-nigh a century we have had
a wave theory of light; and a wave theory of
light is quite certainly true. It is directly
demonstrable that light consists of waves of some
kind or other, and that these waves travel at a
certain well-known velocity, achieving a distance
equal to seven times the circumference of the
earth every second; from New York to London



jo^-



THE ETHER OF SPACE

and back in the thirtieth part of a second; and
taking only eight minutes on the journey from
the sun to the earth. This propagation in time
of an undulatory disturbance necessarily in-
volves a medium. If waves setting out from
the sun exist in space eight minutes before
striking our eyes, there must necessarily be in
space some medium in which they exist and
which conveys them. Waves we cannot have,
imless they be waves in something.

No ordinary matter is competent to transmit
waves at anything like the speed of light: the
rate at which matter conveys waves is the veloc-
ity of sound — a speed comparable to one-
millionth of the speed of light. Hence the
luminiferous medixmi must be a special kind of
substance; and it is called the ether. The
luminiferous ether it used to be called, because
the conveyance of light was all it was then known
to be capable of; but now that it is known to do
a variety of other things also, the qualifying
adjective may be dropped. But, inasmuch as
(the term "ether" is also applied to a familiar
! organic compound, we may distinguish the ultra-
' material luminiferous meditun by calling it the
Ethfir_Qf _S{iace^

Wave motion in ether, light certainly is; but
what does one mean by the term wave? The
popular notion is, I suppose, of something heav-
ing up and down, or perhaps of something break-

2



L



THEORY OF LIGHT



ing on a shore. But if you ask a mathematician
what he means by a wave, he will probably reply
that the most general wave in such a function
of X and y and % as to satisfy the differential
equation

dt» ~ dx» *
while the simplest wave is

y=.a sin {x - vt) .

And he might possibly refuse to give any other
answer.

And in refusing to give any other answer than
this, or its equivalent in ordinary words, he is
entirely justified; that is what is meant by the
term wave, and nothing less general would be
all-inclusive.

Translated into ordinary English, the phrase
signifies, with accuracy and comprehensive com-
pleteness, the full details of **a disturbance
periodic both in space and time.** An)rthing thus
doubly periodic is a wave; and all waves —
whether in air as sound waves, or in ether as
light waves, or on the surface of water as ocean
waves — can be comprehended in the definition.

What properties are essential to a medium
capable of transmitting wave motion ? Roughly,
we may say two : elasticity and inertia. Elasticity
in some form, or some equivalent of it, in order



THE ETHER OF SPACE

to be able to store up energy and effect recoil;
inertia, in order to enable the disturbed sub-
stance to overshoot the mark and oscillate be-
yond its place of equilibrium to and fro. Any
medium possessing these two properties can
transmit waves, and unless a medium possesses
these properties in some form or other, or some
equivalent for them, it may be said with
moderate security to be incompetent to transmit
waves. But if we make this latter statement,
one must be prepared to extend to the terms
elasticity and inertia their very Argest and
broadest signification, so as to include any
possible kind of restoring force, and any possible
kind of persistence of motion, respectively.

These matters may be illustrated in many
ways, but perhaps a simple loaded lath, or
spring, in a vise will serve well enough. Pull it
to one side, and its elasticity tends to make it
recoil; let it go, and its inertia causes it to over-
shoot its normal position. That is what inertia
is : power of overshooting a mark, or, more
accurately, power of moving for a time even
against driving force — power to rush up hill.
Both causes together make it swing to and fro
till its energy is exhausted. This is a disturb-
ance simply periodic in time. A regular series
of such springs, set at equal intervals and started
vibrating at regular intervals of time one after
the other, would be periodic in space too; and

4



THEORY OF LIGHT



so they wotild, in disconnected fashion, typify
a wave. A series of pendulums will do just as
well, and if set swinging in orderly fashion will
furnish at once an example and an appearance of
wave motion which the most casual observer
must recognise as such. The row of springs
obviously possesses elasticity and inertia; and
any wave-transmitting medium must similarly
possess some form of elasticity and some form
of inertia.

But now proceed to ask what is this Ether
which in the case of light is thus vibrating?
What corresponds to the elastic displacement
and recoil of the spring or pendulum? What
corresponds to the inertia whereby it overshoots
its mark? Do we know these properties in the
ether in any other way?

The answer, given first by Clerk-Maxwell, and
now reiterated and insisted on by experiments
performed in every important laboratory in the
world, is: —

The elastic displacement corresponds to
electrostatic charge — roughly speaking, to
electricity.
The inertia corresponds to magnetism. ]
This is the basis of the modem electromagnetic
theory of light.

Let me attempt to illustrate the meaning of
this statement, by reviewing some fundamental
electrical facts in the light of these analogies: —

S



THE ETHER OF SPACE

The old and familiar operation of charging a
Leyden jar — the storing up of energy in a
strained dielectric— any electrostatic charging
whatever — is qiiite analogous to the drawing
aside of our flexible spring. It is making use of
the elasticity of the ether to produce a tendency
to recoil. Letting go the spring is analogous to
permitting a discharge of the jar — permitting
the strained dielectric to recover itself — the
electrostatic disturbance to subside.

In nearly all the experiments of electrostatics
etherial elasticity is manifest.

Next consider inertia. How would one illus-
trate the fact that water, for instance, possesses
inertia — the power of persisting in motion
against obstacles — the power of possessing
kinetic energy? The most direct way would
be to take a stream of water and try suddenly
to stop it. Open a water-tap freely and then
suddenly shut it. The impetus or momentum
of the stopped water makes itself manifest by a
violent shock to the pipe, with which everybody
must be familiar. This momentum of water is
utilised by engineers in the ** water-ram,**

A precisely analogous experiment in Electricity
is what Faraday ca led '*the extra current."
Send a current through a coil of wire roimd a
piece of iron, or take any other arrangement for
developing powerful magnetism, and then sud-
denly stop the current by breaking the circuit.

6



(



THEORY OF LIGHT



A violent flash occurs if the stoppage is sudden
enough — a. flash which means the bursting of
the insulating air partition by the accumulated
electromagnetic momentum. The scientific name
for this electrical inertia is ** self-induction."

Briefly we may say that nearly all electro-
magnetic experiments illustrate the fact of
etherial inertia.

Now return to consider what happens when a
charged conductor (say a Ley den jar) is dis-
charged. The recoil of the strained dielectric
causes a current, the inertia of this current causes
it to overshoot the mark, and for an instant the
charge of the jar is reversed; the current now
flows backward and charges the jar up as at
first; back again flows the current; and so on,
charging and reversing the charge, with rapid
oscillations, until the energy is all dissipated into
heat. The operation is precisely analogous to
the release of a strained spring, or to the pluck-
ing of a stretched string.

But the discharging body, thus thrown into
strong electrical vibration, is imbedded in the all-
pervading ether; and we have just seen that the
ether possesses the two properties requisite for
the generation and transmission of waves — viz.,
elasticity, and inertia or density; hence, just as
a tuning-fork vibrating in air excites aerial waves,
or sound, so a discharging Ley den jar in ether
excites etherial waves, or light.



THE ETHER OF SPACE

Etherial waves can, therefore, be actually pro-
duced by direct electrical means. I discharge
here a jar, and the room is for an instant filled
with light. With light, I say, though you can
see nothing. You can see and hear the spark,
indeed; but that is a mere secondary disturbance
we can for the present ignore — I do not mean
any secondary disturbance. I mean the true
etherial waves emitted by the electric oscillation
going on in the neighbourhood of the recoiling
dielectric. You pull aside the prong of a ttining-
fork and let it go: vibration follows and soimd is
produced. You charge a Leyden jar and let it
discharge: vibration follows and light is ex-
cited.

It is light, just as good as any other light. It
travels at the same pace, it is reflected and re-
fracted according to the same laws; every ex-
periment known to optics can be performed with
this etherial radiation electrically produced —
and yet you cannot see it. Why not ? For no
fault of the light; the fault (if there be a fault)
is in the eye. The retina is incompetent to
respond to these vibrations — they are too slow.
The vibrations set up when this large jar is dis-
charged are from a hundred thousand to a
million per second, but that is too slow for the
retina. It responds only to vibrations between
400 billion and 700 billion per second. The
vibrations are too quick for the ear, which re-

8



THEORY OF LIGHT



spends only to vibrations between 40 and 40,000
per second. Between the highest audible and
the lowest visible vibrations there has been
hitherto a great gap, which these electric oscilla-
tions go far to fill up. There has been a great
gap simply because we have no intermediate
sense organ to detect rates of vibration between
40,000 and 400,000,000,000,000 per second. It
was therefore an imexplored territory. Waves
have been there all the time in any quantity,
but we have not thought about them nor at-
tended to them..

It happens that I have myself succeeded in
getting electric oscillations so slow as to be
audible — the lowest I had got in 1889 were 125
per second, and for some way above this the
sparks emit a musical note; but no one has yet
succeeded in directly making electric oscillations
which are visible — though indirectly everyone
does it when they light a candle.

It is easy, however, to have an electric os-
cillator which vibrates 300 million times a
second, and emits etherial waves a yard long.
The whole range of vibrations between musical
tones and some thousand million per second is
now filled up.

With the large condensers and self-inductances
employed in modem cable telegraphy, it is easy
to get a series of beautifully regular and gradu-
ally damped electric oscillations, with a period of



THE ETHER OF SPACE

two or three seconds, recorded by an ordinary
signalling instrument or siphon recorder.

These electromagnetic waves in space have
been known on the side of theory ever since
1865, but interest in them was immensely quick-
ened by the discovery of a receiver or detector
for them. The great though simple discovery
by Hertz, in 1888, of an ** electric eye,*' as Lord
Kelvin called it, made experiments on these
waves for the first time easy or even possible.
From that time onward we possessed a sort
of artificial sense organ for their appreci-
ation — an electric arrangement which can vir-
tually '*see*' these intermediate rates of vibra-
tion.

Since then Branly discovered that metallic
powder could be used as an extraordinarily sensi-
tive detector; and on the basis of this discovery,
the ** coherer*' was employed by me for distant
signalling by means of electric or etheric waves,
until now when many other detectors are avail-
able in the various systems of wireless teleg-
raphy.

With these Hertzian waves all manner of
optical experiments can be performed. They can
be reflected by plain sheets of metal, concen-
trated by parabolic reflectors, refracted by
prisms, and concentrated by lenses. I have
made, for instance, a large lens of pitch, weigh-
ing over three hundredweight, for concentrating

10



THEORY OF LIGHT



them to a focus/ They can be made to show
the phenomenon of interference, and thus have
their wave-length accurately measured. They
are stopped by all conductors, and transmitted
by all insulators. Metals are opaque; but even
imperfect insulators, such as wood or stone, are
strikingly transparent; and waves may be re-
ceived in one room from a source in another,
the door between the two being shut.

The real nature of metallic opacity and of
transparency has long been clear in Maxwell* s
theory of light, and these electrically produced
waves only illustrate and bring home the well-
known facts. The experiments of Hertz are, in
fact, the apotheosis of Maxwell's theory.

Thus, then, in every way, Clerk-Maxwell* s bril-
liant perception or mathematical deduction, in
1865, of the real nature of light is abtindantly
justified; and for the first time we have a true
theory of light — ^no longer based upon analogy
with sound, nor upon the supposed properties of
some hypothetical jelly or elastic solid, but
capable of being treated upon a substantial basis
of its own, in alliance with the sciences of
Electricity and of Magnetism.

Light is an electromagnetic disturbance of the
ether. Optics is a branch of electricity. Out-

* See Lodge and Howard, Philosophical Magazine for
July, 1889. See also Phil. Mag., August, 1888, page 229.

II



THE ETHER OF SPACE

standing problems in optics are being rap-
idly solved, now that we have the means of defi-
nitely exciting light with a full perception of
what we are doing, and of the precise mode of
its vibration.

It remains to find out how to shorten down the
waves — to htirry up the vibration vmtil the light
becomes visible. Nothing is wanted but quicker
modes of vibration. Smaller oscillators must be
used — very much smaller — oscillators not much
bigger than molecules. In all probability — one
may almost say certainly — ordinary light is the
result of electric oscillation in the molecules or
atoms of hot bodies, or sometimes of bodies not
hot — as in the phenomenon of phosphorescence.

The direct generation of visible light by
electric means, so soon as we have learnt how
to attain the necessary frequency of vibration,
will have most important practical consequences;
and that matter is initially dealt with in a sec-
tion on the Manufacture of Light, § 149, in
Chapter XIV of Modern Views of Electricity.
But here we abandon further consideration of
this aspect of our great subject.



I



II



THE INTERSTELLAR ETHER AS A
CONNECTING MEDIUM

SO far I have given a general idea of the
present condition of the wave theory of
light, both from its theoretical and from its
experimental sides. The waves of light are not
anything mechanical or material, but are some-
thing electrical and magnetic — they are, in fact,
electrical disturbances periodic in space and
time, and travelling with a known and tremen-
dous speed through the ether of space. Their
very existence depends upon the ether, and their
speed of propagation is its best known and most
certain quantitative property.

A statement of this kind does not even initially
express a tithe of our knowledge on the subject;
nor does our knowledge exhaust any large part
of the region of discoverable fact; but the state-
ment above made may be regarded as certain,
although the absence of mechanics or ordinary
dynamics about it removes it, or seems to remove
it, from the category of the historically soundest

13



THE ETHER OF SPACE

and best worked department of Physical Science
— viz.y that explored by the Newtonian method.
Though in truth there is every reason to suppose
that we should have had Newton with us in
these modem developments.

There is, I believe, a general tendency to under-
rate the certainty of some of the convictions to
which natural philosophers have gradually, in
the course of their study of nature, been im-
pelled; more especially when those convictions
have reference to something, intangible and
occult. The existence of a continuous space-
filling medium, for instance, is probably regarded
by most educated people as a more or less fanciful
hypothesis, a figment of the scientific imagina-
tion — a mode of collating and welding together
a certain number of observed facts, but not in
any physical sense a reality, as water and air are
realities.

I am speaking purely physically. There may
be another point of view from which all material
reality can be denied, but with those questions
physics proper has nothing to do; it accepts the
evidence of the senses, regarding them as the
tools or instruments wherewith man may hope
to understand one definite aspect of the uni-
verse; and it leaves to philosophers, equipped
from a different armory, the other aspects which
the material universe may — nay, must — possess.

By a physical ** explanation" is meant a clear

14



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

statement of a fact or law in terms of something
with which daily life has made us familiar. We
are all chiefly familiar, from our youth up, with
two apparently simple things, motion and force.
We have a direct sense for both these things. We
do not understand them in any deep way, prob-
ably we do not understand them at all, but we
are accustomed to them. Motion and force are
our primary objects of experience and con-
sciousness; and in terms of them all other less
familiar occurrences may conceivably be stated
and grasped. Whenever a thing can be so
clearly and definitely stated, it is said to be ex-
plained, or understood; we are said to have **a
dynamical theory" of it. Anything short of
this may be a provisional or partial theory, an
explanation of the less known in terms of the more
known, but Motion and Force are postulated in
physics as the completely known: and no at-
tempt is made to press the terms of an explana-.
tion further than that. A dynamical theory is
recognized as being at once necessary and
sufficient.

Now, it must be admitted at once that of very
few things have we at present such a dynamical
explanation. We have no such explanation of
matter, for instance, or of gravitation, or of
electricity, or ether, or light. It is always con-
ceivable that of some such things no purely
dynamical explanation will ever be forthcoming,

IS



THE ETHER OF SPACE

because something more than motion and force
may perhaps be essentially involved. Still,
physics is bound to push the search for an ex-
planation to its furthest limits; and so long as it
does not hoodwink itself by vagueness and mere
phrases — a feebleness against which its leaders
are mightily and sometimes cruelly on their
guard, preferring to risk the rejection of worthy
ideas rather than permit a semi-acceptance of
anything fanciful and obscure — so long as it
vigorously probes all phenomena within its
reach, seeking to reduce the physical aspect of
them to terms of motion and force — so long it
must be upon a safe track. And, by its failure
to deal with certain phenomena, it will learn— it
already begins to suspect, its leaders must long
have surmised — the existence of some third, as
yet tmknown, category, by incorporating which
the physics of the future may rise to higher
flights and an enlarged scope.

I have said that the things of which we are
permanently conscious are motion and force,
but there is a third thing which we have likewise
been all our lives in contact with, and which we
know even more primarily, though perhaps we
are so immersed in it that our knowledge realises
itself later — viz., life and mind. I do not now
pretend to define these terms, or to speculate as
to whether the things they denote are essentially
one and not two. They exist, in the sense in

i6



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

which we permit ourselves to use that word, and
they are not yet incorporated into physics. Till
they are, they may remain more or less vague;
but how or when they can be incorporated, is
not for me even to conjecture.

Still, it is open to a physicist to state how the
universe appears to him, in its broad character
and physical aspect. If I were to make the
attempt, I should find it necessary, for the sake
of clearness, to begin with the simplest and most
fimdamental ideas; in order to illustrate, by
facts and notions in universal knowledge, the
kind of process which essentially occurs in con-
nection with the formation of higher and less
familiar conceptions — in regions where the com-
mon information of the race is so slight as to be
useless.

Primary Acquaintance with the External World,

Beginning with our most fundamental sense, I
should sketch the matter thus: —

We have muscles and can move. I cannot
analyze motion — I doubt if the attempt is wise —
it is a simple immediate act of perception, a
direct sense of free imresisted muscular action.
We may indeed move without feeling it, and
that teaches us nothing, but we may move so
as to feel it, and this teaches us much, and leads
to our first scientific inference — viz., space; that
is, simply, room to move about. We might

17



THE ETHER OF SPACE

have had a sense of being jammed into a full
or tight-packed universe; but we have not: we
feel it to be a spacious one.

Of course we do not stop at this baldness of
inference : our educated faculty leads us to realise
the existence of space far beyond the possibility
of direct sensation ; and, further, by means of the
direct appreciation of speed in connection with
motion — of uniform and variable speed — we be-
come able to formulate the idea of **time,*' or
uniformity of sequence; and we attain other
more complex notions — acceleration, and the
like — upon a consideration of which we need
not now enter.

But our muscular sense is not limited to the
perception of free motion: we constantly find it
restricted or forcibly resisted. This "muscular
action impeded" is another direct sense, that of
** force*'; and attempts to analyze it into any-
thing simpler than itself have hitherto resulted
only in confusion. By ** force" is meant pri-
marily muscular action not accompanied by
motion. Our sense of this teaches us that
space, though roomy, is not empty: it gives us
our second scientific inference — what we call
** matter. '*

Again we do not stop at this bare inference.
By another sense, that of pain, or mere sensa-
tion, we discriminate between masses of matter
in apparently intimate relation with ourselves,

i8



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

and other or foreign lumps of matter; and we
use the first portion as a measure of the extent
of the second. The human body is our standard
of size. We proceed also to subdivide our idea
of matter — according to the varieties of resist-
ance with which it appeals to our muscular
sense — into four different states, or ** elements, "
as the ancients called them — viz., the solid, the
liquid, the gaseous, and the ethereal. The
resistance experienced when we encotmter one
or other of these forms of material existence
varies from something very impressive — the
solid ; through something nearly impalpable —
the gaseous ; up to something entirely imagina-
tive, fanciful, or inferential — viz,, the ether.

The ether does not in any way affect our sense
of touch (i.e., of force) ; it does not resist motion
in the slightest degree. Not only can our bodies
move through it, but much larger bodies, planets
and comets, can rush through it at what we are
pleased to call a prodigious speed (being far
greater than that of an athlete) without showing
the least sign of friction. I myself, indeed, have
designed and carried out a series of delicate
experiments to see whether a whirling mass of
iron could to the smallest extent grip the ether
and carry it rotind, with so much as a thousandth
part of its own velocity. These shall be de-
scribed further on, but meanwhile the result
arrived at is distinct. The answer is, jio; I

19



THE ETHER OF SPACE

cannot find a trace of mechanical connection
between matter ,and ether, of the kind known
as viscosity or friction.

Why, then, if it is so impalpable, should we
assert its existence? May it not be a mere
fanciful speculation, to be extruded from physics
as soon as possible? If we were limited for our
knowledge of matter to our sense of touch, the
question would never even have presented itself;
we should have been simply ignorant of the
ether, as ignorant as we are of any life or mind
in the tmiverse not associated with some kind
of material body. But our senses have attained
a higher stage of development than that. We
are conscious of matter by means other than its
resisting force. Matter acts on one small por-
tion of our body in a totally different way, and
we are said to taste it. Even from a distance it
is able to fling off small particles of itself sufficient
to affect another delicate sense. Or again, if it
is vibrating with an appropriate frequency, an-
other part of our body responds; and the uni-
verse is discovered to be not silent but eloquent
to those who have ears to hear. Are there any
more discoveries to be made? Yes; and already
some have been made. All the senses hitherto
mentioned speak to us of the presence of or-
dinary matter — gross matter, as it is sometimes
called — though when appealing to our sense^ of
smell, and more especially to a dog's sense of

20



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

smell, it is not very gross; still, with the senses
hitherto enumerated we should never have be-
come aware of the ether. A stroke of lightning
might have smitten otir bodies back into their
inorganic constituents, or a torpedo-fish might
have inflicted on us a strange kind of torment;
but from these violent tutors we should have
learnt little more than a school-boy learns from
the once ever-ready cane.

But it so happens that the whole surface of oiir
skin is sensitive in yet another way, and a small
portion of it is asstotmdingly and beautifully
sensitive, to an impression of an altogether dif-
ferent character — one not necessarily associated
with any form of ordinary matter — one that will
occur equally well through space from which all
solid, liquid, or gaseous matter has been removed.
Hold your hand near a fire, put your face in the
stmshine, and what is it you feel ? You are now
conscious of something not arriving by ordinary
matter at all. You are now as directly conscious
as you can be of the ethereal medium. True the
process is not very direct. You cannot apprehend
the ether as you can matter, by touching or
tasting or even smelling it; but the process is
analogous to the kind of perception we might
get of ordinary matter if we had the sense of
hearing alone. It is something akin to vibra-
tions in the ether that our skin and our eyes feel.

It may be rightly asserted that it is not the

21



THE ETHER OF SPACE

ethereal disturbances themselves, but other dis-
turbances excited by them in our tissues, that our
heat nerves feel; and the same assertion can
be made for our more highly developed and
specialised sight nerves. All nerves must feel
what is occurring next door to them, and can
directly feel nothing else; but the ** radiation,'*
the cause which excited these disturbances,
travelled througi the ether— not through any
otherwise known material substance.

It should be a commonplace to rehearse how
we know this. Briefly, thus: Radiation con-
spicuously comes to us from the sun. If any
free or ordinary matter exists in the intervening
space, it must be an exceedingly rare gas. In
other words, it must consist of scattered par-
ticles of matter, some big enough to be called
lumps, some so small as to be merely atoms, but
each with a considerable gap between it and its
neighbor. Such isolated particles are absolute-
ly incompetent to transmit light. And, paren-
thentically, I may say that no form of ordinary
matter, solid, liquid, or gaseous, is competent
to transmit a thing travelling with the speed
and subject to the known laws of light. For
tha conveyance of radiation or light all ordinary
matter is not only incompetent, but hopelessly
and absurdly incompetent. If this radiation
is a thing transmitted by anything at all, it must
be by something sui generis.

22



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

But it is transmitted; for it takes time on the
journey, travelling at a well-known and definite
speed; and it is a quivering or periodic disturb-
ance, falling under the general category of
wave-motion. Nothing is more certain than
that. No physicist disputes it. ffewton hjm-
self, who is commonly and truly asserted to
have promulgated a rival theory, felt the ne-
cessity of an ethereal medium, and knew that
light consisted essentially of waves.

Sight.

A small digression here, to avoid any possible
confusion due to the fact that I have purposely
associated together temperature nerves and sight
nerves. They are admittedly not the same,
but they are alike in this, that they both afford
evidence of radiation; and, were we blind, we
might still know a good deal about the sun, and
if our temperature nerves were immensely in-
creased in delicacy (not all over, for that would
be merely painful, but in some protected region),
we might even learn about the moon, planets,
and stars. In fact, an eye, consisting of a pupil
(preferably a lens) and a sunken cavity lined
with a surface sensitive to heat, could readily be
imagined, and might be somewhat singularly
effective. It would be more than a light recorder ;
it could detect all the ethereal quiverings caused

23



THE ETHER OF SPACE

by surrounding objects, and hence would see
perfectly well in what we call "the dark.** But
it would probably see far too much for con-
venience, since it would necessarily be affected
by every kind of radiation in simple proportion
to its energy; unless, indeed, it were provided
with a supply of screens with suitably selected
absorbing powers. But whatever might be the
advantage or disadvantage of such a sense-
organ, we as yet do not possess one. Our eye
does not act by detecting heat; in other words,
it is not affected by the whole range of ethereal
quiverings, but only by a very minute and
apparently insignificant portion. It wholly
ignores the ether waves whose frequency is
comparable with that of soimd; and, for thirty
or forty octaves above this, nothing about us
responds; but high up, in a range of vibration
of the inconceivably high pitch of four to seven
hundred million million per second — a range
which extremely few accessible bodies are able
to emit, and which it requires some knowledge
and skill artificially to produce — ^to those waves
the eye is acutely, surpassingly, and most in-
telligently sensitive.

This little fragment of total radiation is in
itself trivial and negligible. Were it not for
men, and glow-worms, and a few other forms of
life, hardly any of it would ever occur, on such a
moderate-sized lump of matter as the earth.

24



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

Except for an occasional volcano, or a flash of
lightning, only gigantic bodies like the strn and
stars have energy enough to produce these high-
er flute-like notes; and they do it by sheer main
force and violence — the violence of their gravi-
tative energy — producing not only these, but
every other kind of radiation also. Glow-
worms, so far as I know, alone have learned the
secret of emitting the physiologically useful
waves, and none others.

Why these waves are physiologically useful —
why they are what is called ** light,** while other
kinds of radiation are "dark," is a question to
be asked, but, at present, only tentatively an-
swered. The answer must ultimately be given
by the Physiologist; for the distinction between
light and non-light can only be stated in terms
of the eye, and its peculiar specialised sensitive-
ness; but a hint may be given him by the
Physicist. The ethereal waves which affect the
eye and the photographic plate are of a size not
wholly incomparable with that of the atoms of
matter. When a physical phenomenon is con-
cerned with the ultimate atoms of matter, it is
often relegated at present to the field of knowl-
edge stimmarized under the head of Chemistry.
Sight is probably a chemical sense. The retina
may contain complex aggregations of atoms,
shaken asunder by the incident light vibrations,
and rapidly built up again by the living tissues



THE ETHER OF SPACE

in which they live; the nerve endings meanwhile
appreciating them in their temporarily dissoci-
ated condition. A vague speculation! Not to
be further cotmtenanced except as a working
hypothesis leading to examination of fact; but,
nevertheless, the direction in which the thoughts
of some physicists are tending — a direction
toward which many recently discovered ex-
perimental facts point.*

Gravitation and Cohesion,

It would take too long to do more than suggest
some other functions for which a continuous
mediimi of communication is necessary. We
shall argue in Chapter VIII that technical action
at a distance is impossible. A body can only
act immediately on what it is in contact with;
it must be by the action of contiguous particles
— that is, practically, through a continuous
medium, that force can be transmitted across
space. Radiation is not the only thing the
earth feels from the sun ; there is in addition its
gigantic gravitative pull, a force or tension more
than what a million million steel rods, each seven-
teen feet in diameter, could stand {see Chap. IX).
What mechanism transmits this gigantic force?
Again, take a steel bar itself: when violently

* Cf . sections 157A, 143, 187, and chap, xvi., of my
Modern Views of Electricity,

26



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

stretched, with how great tenacity its parts cling
together! Yet its particles are not in absolute
contact, they are only virtually attached to each
other by means of the universal connecting
medium — the ether — ^a medium that must be
competent to transmit the greatest stresses which
our knowledge of gravitation and of cohesion
shows us to exist.

Electricity and Magnetism,

Hitherto I have mainly confined myself to the
perception of the ether by our ancient sense of
radiation, whereby we detect its subtle and
delicate quiverings. But we are growing a new
sense; not perhaps an actual sense-organ, though
not so very unlike a new sense-organ, though the
portions of matter which go to make the organ
are not associated with our bodies by the usual
links Qf pain and disease; they are more analo-
gous to artificial teeth or mechanical limbs, and
can be bought at an instrtiment-maker's.

Electroscopes, galvanometers, telephones —
delicate instruments these; not yet eclipsing our
sense-organs of flesh, but in a few cases coming
within measurable distance of their surprising
sensitiveness. And with these what do we do?
Can we smell the ether, or touch it, or what is
the closest analogy ? Perhaps there is no useful
analogy; but nevertheless we deal with it, and

27



THE ETHER OF SPACE

that closely. Not yet do we fully realise what
we are doing. Not yet have we any dynamical
theory of electric currents, of static charges, and
of magnetism. Not yet, indeed, have we any
dynamical theory of light. In fact, the ether
has not yet been brought tmder the domain of
simple mechanics — it has not yet been reduced
to motion and force : and that probably because
the force aspect of it has been so singularly
elusive that it is a question whether we ought
to think of it as material at all. No, it is apart
from mechanics at present. Conceivably it
may remain apart; and our first additional cate-
gory, wherewith the foimdations of physics,
must some day be enlarged, may turn out to
be an ethereal one. And some such inclusion
may have to be made before we can attempt to
annex vital or mental processes. Perhaps they
will all come in together.

Howsoever these things be, this is the kind of
meaning lurking in the phrase that we do not yet
know what electricity or what the ether is. We
have as yet no dynamical explanation of either
of them; but the past century has taught us
what seems to their student an overwhelming
quantity of facts about them. And when the
present century, or the century after, lets us
deeper into their secrets, and into the secrets of
some other phenomena now in course of being
rationally investigated, I feel as if it would be

28



A CONNECTING MEDIUM

no merely material prospect that will be opening
on our view, but some glimpse into a region of
the universe which Science has never entered
yet, but which has been sought from far, and
perhaps blindly apprehended, by painter and
poet, by philosopher and saint.

Note on the Spelling of Ethereal.

The usual word ''ethereal" suggests something un-
substantial, and is so used in poetry; but for the
prosaic treatment of Physics it is unsuitable, and
etheric has occasionally been used instead. No just
derivation can be given for such an adjective, how-
ever; and I have been accustomed simply to spell
etherial with an i when no poetic meaning was intend-
ed. This alternative spelling is not incorrect; but
Milton uses the variant "ethereous," in a sense sug-

festive of something strong and substantial {Par,
fOstf vi, 473). Either word, therefore, can be em-
ployed to replace " ethereal " in physics : and in succeed-
mg chapters one or other of these is for the most part
employed.



Ill



INFLUENCE OF MOTION ON VARIOUS

PHENOMENA

NOTWITHSTANDING its genuine physical
nature and properties, the ether is singularly
intangible and inaccessible to our senses, and ac-
cordingly is a subject on which it is extremely
difficult to try experiments. Many have been
the attempts to detect some phenomena de-
pending on its motion relative to the earth.
The earth is travelling round the sun at the rate
of 19 miles a second, and although this is slow
compared with light — being, in fact, just about
iojSooth of the speed of light — yet it would seem
feasible to observe some modification of optical
phenomena due to this motion through the ether.

And one such phenomenon is indeed known *
— namely, the stellar aberration discovered by
Bradley in 1729. The position of objects not.
on the earth, and not connected with the solar
system, is apparently altered by an amount
comparable to one part in ten thousand, by the
earth's motion; that is to say, the apparent place

30



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

• ■ . - - ■ _

of a star is shifted from its true place by an angle
^^th of a ** radian,"^ or about 20 seconds of arc.

This is called Astronomical Aberration, and is
extremely well known. But a nimiber of other
problems open out in connection with it, and on
these it is desirable to enter into detail. For if
the ether is stationary while the earth is flying
through it — at a speed vastly faster than any
cannon-ball, as much faster than a cannon-ball
as an express train is faster than a saimter on
foot — it is for all practical purposes the same as
if the earth were stationary and the ether stream-
ing past it with this immense velocity in the
opposite direction. And some consequence of
such a drift might at first sight certainly be
expected. It might, for instance, seem doubtful
whether terrestrial surveying operations can be
conducted, with the extreme accuracy expected
of them, without some allowance for the violent
rush of the light-conveying medium past and
through the theodolite of the observer.

Let us therefore consider the whole subject
further.

Aberration.

Everybody knows that to shoot a bird on the
wing you must aim in front of it. Every one will

* Radian is the name given by Prof. James Thomson
to a unit angle of circular measure, an angle whose arc
equals its radius, or about 57**.

31



THE ETHER OF SPACE

readily admit that to hit a squatting rabbit from
a moving train you must aim behind it.

These are examples of what may be called
"aberration" from the sender's point of view,
from the point of view of the source. And the
aberration, or needful divergence, between the
point aimed at and the thing hit has opposite
sign in the two cases — ^the case when receiver is
moving, and the case when source is moving.
Hence, if both be moving, it is possible for the
two aberrations to neutralize each other. So to
hit a rabbit nmning alongside the train you must
aim straight at it.

If there were no air, that is all simple enough.
But every rifleman knows to his cost that
though he fixes both himself and his target
tightly to the grotmd, so as to destroy all
aberration proper, yet a current of air is very
competent to introduce a kind of spurious
aberration of its own, which may be called wind-
age; and that he must not aim at the target if
he wants to hit it, but must aim a little in the
eye of the wind.

So much from the shooter's point of view.
Now attend to the point of view of the target.

Consider it made of soft enough material to be
completely penetrated by the bullet, leaving a
longish hole wherever struck. A person behind
the target, whom we may call a marker, by
appl)dng his eye to the hole immediately after

32



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

the hit, may be able to look through it at the
shooter, and thereby to spot the successful man.
I know that this is not precisely the function of
an ordinary marker, but it is more complete
than his ordinary function. All he does usually
is to signal an impersonal hit ; some one else has to
record the identity of the shooter. I am rather
assuming a volley of shots, and that the marker
has to allocate the hits to their respective sources
by means of the holes made in the target.

Well, will he do it correctly? Asstiming, of
course, that he can do so if everything is station-
ary, and ignoring all curvature of path, whether
vertical or horizontal curvature. If you think
it over you will perceive that a wind will not
prevent his doing it correctly; the line of hole
will point to the shooter along the path of his
bullet, though it will not point along his line
of aim. Also, if the shots are fired from a mov-
ing ship, the line of hole in a stationary target
will point to the position the gun occupied at the
instant the shot was fired, though it may have
moved since then. In neither of these cases
(moving medium and moving source) will there
be any error.

But if the target is in motion, on an armoured
train for instance, then the marker will be at
fault. The hole will not point to the man who
fired the shot, but to an individual ahead of him.
The source will appear to be displaced in the

33



THE ETHER OP SPACE

direction of the observer's notion. This is com-
mon aberration. It is the simplest thing in
the world. The easiest illustration of it is that
when you run through a vertical shower, you tilt
your umbrella forward; or, if you have not got
one, the drops hit you in the face; more ac-
curately, your face as you run forward hits the
drops. So the shower appears to come from a
cloud ahead of you, instead of from one over-
head.

We have thus three motions to consider, that
of the source, of the receiver, and of the meditmi ;
and, of these, only motion of receiver is able to
cause an aberrational error in fixing the position
of the source.

So far we have attended to the case of pro-
jectiles, with the object of leading up to light.
But light does not consist of projectiles, it con-
sists of waves; and with waves matters are a
little different. Waves crawl through a medium
at their own definite pace; they cannot be flung
forward or sideways by a moving source; they
do not move by reason of an initial momentum
which they are gradually expending, as shots
do; their motion is more analogous to that of a
bird or other self-propelling animal, than it is to
that of a shot. The motion of a wave in a
moving medium may be likened to that of
a rowing-boat on a river. It crawls forward
with the water, and it drifts with the water;

34



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

its resultant motion is compounded of the two,
but it has nothing to do with the motion
of its source. A shot from a passing steamer
retains the motion of the steamer as well as that
given it by the powder. It is projected, there-
fore, in a slant direction. But a boat lowered
from the side of a passing steamer, and rowing
oflE, retains none of the motion of its source; it is
not projected, it is self-propelled. That is like
the case of a wave.

The diagram illustrates the difference. Fig. i
shows a moving cannon or machine-gun, moving
with the arrow, and firing a succession of shots
which share the motion of the cannon as well as
their own, and so travel slant. The shot fired
from position 1 has reached A, that fired from
position 2 has reached B, and that fired from
position 3 has reached C, by the time the fourth
shot is fired at D. The line A B C D is a pro-
longation of the axis of the gtm ; it is the line of
aim, but it is not the line of fire; all the shots
are travelling aslant this line, as shown by the
arrows. There are thus two directions to be
distinguished. There is the row of successive
shots, and there is the path of any one shot.
These two directions enclose an angle. It may
be called an aberration angle, because it is due
to the motion of the source, but it need not give
rise to any aberration. True direction may still
be perceived from the point of view of the receiver.

35



THE ETHER OF SPACE

To prove this let us attend to what is happening
at the target. The first shot is supposed to be
entering at A, and if the target is stationary will
leave it at Y. A marker looking along Y A will
see the position whence the shot was fired. This
may be likened to a stationary observer looking
at a moving star. He sees it where and as it was
when the light started on its long journey. He


Fig. I. — Shots or Disturbances with Momentum

from a Moving Gim.

does not see its present position, but there is no
reason why he should. He does not see its
physical state or anything as it is now. He sees
it as it was when it sent the information which
he has just received. There is no aberration
caused by motion of source.

But now let the receiver be moving at same
pace as the gun, as when two grappled ships are
firing into each other. The motion of the target
carries the point Y forward, and the shot A
leaves it at Z, because Z is carried to where Y
was. So in that case the marker looking along

36



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

Z A will see the gun, not as it was when firing,
but as it is at the present moment ; and he will
see likewise the row of shots making straight
for him. This is like an observer looking at a
terrestrial object. Motion of the earth does not
disturb ordinary vision.

Fig. 2 shows as nearly the same sort of thing as
possible for the case of emitted waves. The
tube is a source emitting a succession of disturb-
ances without momenttmi. A B C D may be
thought of as horizontally flying birds, or as crests
of waves, or as self-swimming torpedoes; or they
may even be thought of as bullets, if the gun
stands still every time it fires, and only moves
between whiles.



A


l:^««!^


Fig. a. — Waves or Disturbances without Momentum

from a Moving Source.

The line A B C D is now neither the line of fire
nor the line of aim: it is simply the locus of
disturbances emitted from the successive posi-
tions 12 3 4.

37



THE ETHER OP SPACE

A stationary target will be penetrated in the
direction A Y, and this line will point out the
correct position of the source when the received
disturbance started. If the target moves, a dis-
turbance entering at A may leave it at Z, or
at any other point according to its rate of
motion; the line Z A does not point to the
original position of the source, and so there will
be aberration when the target moves. Other-
wise there would be none.

Now, Fig. 2 also represents a parallel beam of
light travelling from a moving source, and
entering a telescope or the eye of an observer.


Fig. 3. — Beam from a Revolving Lighthouse.

The beam lies along A B C D, but this is not the
direction of vision. The direction of vision, to a
stationary observer, is determined not by the
locus of successive waves, but by the path of
each wave. A ray may be defined as the path
of a labelled disturbance. The line of vision
is Y A 1, and coincides with the line of aim;

38



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

III I I .1 I I

which in the projectile case (Fig. i) it did
not.

The case of a revolving lighthouse, emitting
long parallel beams of light and brandishing
them rapidly round, is rather interesting. Fig. 3
may assist the thinking out of this case. Suc-
cessive disturbances A, B, C, D, lie along a spiral
curve, the spiral of Archimedes ; and this is the
shape of the beams, as seen illuminating the dust
particles, though the pitch of the spiral is too
gigantic to be distinguished from a straight line.
At first sight it might seem as if an eye looking
along those curved beams would see the light-
house slightly out of its true position; but it is
not so. The true rays or actual paths of each
disturbance are truly radial ; they do not coincide
with the apparent beam. An eye looking at
the source will not look tangentially along the
beam, but will look along A S, and will see the
source in its true position. It would be other-
wise for the case of projectiles from a revolving
turret.

Thus, neither translation of star nor rotation
of sun can affect direction. There is no aberra-
tion so long as the receiver is stationary.

But what about a wind, or streaming of the
medium past source and receiver, both station-
ary? Look at Fig. i again. Suppose a row
of stationary cannon firing shots, which get
blown by a cross wind along the slant 1 A Y

39



THE ETHER OF SPACE

(neglecting the curvature of path which would
really exist) : still the hole in the target fixes the
gun's true position, the marker looking along
Y A sees the gun which fired the shot. There is
no true deviation from the point of view of the
receiver, provided the drift is uniform every-
where, although the shots are blown aside and
the target is not hit by the particular gun aimed
at it.

With a moving cannon combined with an op-
posing wind, Fig. i would become very like Fig. 2.

(N.B. — ^The actual case, even without com-
plication of spinning, etc., but merely with the
curved path caused by steady wind-pressure, is
not so simple, and there would really be an
aberration or apparent displacement of the
source toward the wind's eye: an apparent
exaggeration of the effect of wind shown in the
diagram.)

In Fig. 2 the result of a wind is much the same,
though the details are rather different. The
medium is supposed to be drifting downward,
across the field. The source may be taken as
stationary at S. The horizontal arrows show the
direction of waves in the medium; the dotted
slant line shows their resultant direction. A
wave centre drifts from D to 1 in the same time
as the disturbance reaches A, travelling down
the slant line D A. The angle between dotted
and full lines is the angle between ray and wave

40



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

normal. Now, if the motion of the medium in-
side the receiver is the same as it is outside, the
wave will pass straight on along the slant to
Z, and the true direction of the source is fixed.
But if the medium inside the target or telescope
is stationary, the wave will cease to drift as soon
as it gets inside — ^under cover, as it were; it will
proceed along the path it has been really pur-
suing in the medium all the time, and make its
exit at Y. In this latter case — of different
motion of the medium inside and outside the
telescope — ^the apparent direction, such as Y A,
is not the true direction of the source. The ray
is in fact bent where it enters the differently moving
medium (as shown in Fig. 4).



I



Y

Fig. 4. — Ray through a Moving Stratum.

A slower moving strattmi bends an oblique

ray, slanting with the motion, in the same

direction as if it were a denser meditim. A

quicker stratum bends it oppositely. If a

4 41



THE ETHER OF SPACE

medium is both denser and quicker moving, it
is possible for the two bendings to be equal and
opposite, and thus for a ray to go on straight.
Parenthetically, I may say that this is precisely
what happens, on Fresnel's theory, down the
axis of a water-filled telescope exposed to the
general terrestrial ether drift.

In a moving meditmi waves do not advance in
their normal direction, they advance slantways.
The direction of their advance is properly called
a ray. The ray does not coincide with the
wave-normal in a moving medium.

All this is well shown in Fig. 5.

S is a stationary source emitting successive
waves, which drift as spheres to the right. The
wave which has reached M has its centre at C,
and C M is its normal; but the disturbance, M,
has really travelled along S M, which is therefore
the ray. It has advanced as a wave from S to P,
and has drifted from P to M. Disturbances
subsequently emitted are found along the ray,
precisely as in Fig. 2. A stationary telescope
receiving the light will point straight at S. A
mirror, M, intended to reflect the light straight
back must be set normal to the ray, not tangen-
tial to the wave front.

The diagram also equally represents the case
of a moving source in a stationary meditmi. The
source, starting at C, has moved to S, emitting
waves as it went ; which waves, as emitted, spread

42



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

out as simple spheres from the then position of
source as centre. Wave-normal and ray now
coincide: S M is not a ray, but only the locus of
successive disturbances. A stationary telescope



Fig. 5. — Successive Wave Fronts in a
Moving Medium.

would look not at S, but along M C to a point
where the source was when it emitted the wave
M ; a moving telescope, if moving at same rate as
source, will look at S. Hence S M is sometimes
called the apparent ray. The angle S M C is the

43



THE ETHER OF SPACE

aberration angle, which in Chap. X we denote
by £.

Fig. 6 shows normal reflection for the case of
a moving medium. The mirror M reflects light
received from S, to a point S, just in time to
catch the source there if that is moving with the
meditmi.

Parenthetically, I may say that the time taken
on the double journey, S, M Sg, when the meditmi
is moving, is not quite the same as the double
journey SMS, when all is stationary; and that
this is the principle of Michelson's great experi-
ment; which must be referred to later.


Fig. 6. — ^Normal Reflection in Moving Medium.

The angle M S X is the angle in the theory of Michelson's
experiment described in Chapter IV.

The ether stream we speak of is always to be
considered merely as one relative to matter. Ab-
solute velocity of matter means velocity through

44



INFLUENCE OF MOTION

the ether — ^which is stationary. If there were
no such physical standard of rest as the ether —
if all motion were relative to matter alone — then
the contention of Copernicus and Galileo would
have had no real meaning.



IV
EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

WE have arrived at this: that a uniform
ether stream all through space causes no
aberration, no error in fixing direction. It blows
the waves along, but it does not disturb the line
of vision.

Stellar aberration exists, but it depends on
motion of observer, and on motion of observer
only. Etherial motion has no effect upon it;
and when the observer is stationary with respect
to object, as he is when using a terrestrial tele-
scope, there is no aberration at all.

Surveying operations are not rendered the least
inaccurate by the existence of a universal ethe-
rial drift ; and they therefore afford no means of
detecting it.

But observe that everything depends on the
ether's motion being uniform everywhere, inside
as well as outside the telescope, and along the
whole path of the ray. If stationary anywhere
it must be stationary altogether: there must be
no boundary between stationary and moving

46



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

ether, no plane of slip, no quicker motion even
in some regions than in others. For (referring
back to the remarks preceding Fig. 4) if the ether
in receiver is stagnant while outside it is moving,
a wave which has advanced and drifted as far as
the telescope will cease to drift as soon as it gets
inside, but will advance simply along the wave
normal. And in general, at the botmdary of
any such change of motion a ray will be bent,
and an observer looking along the ray will
see the source not in its true position, not
even in the apparent position appropriate to
his own motion, but lagging behind that po-
sition.

Such an aberration as this, a lag or negative
aberration, has never yet been observed; but if
there is any slip between layers of ether, if the
earth carries any ether with it, or if the ether,
being in motion at all, is not equally in motion
everywhere throughout every transparent sub-
stance, then such a lag or negative aberration
must occur: in precise proportion to the amoimt
of the carriage of ether by moving bodies
(cf, p. 63).

On the other hand, if the ether behaves as a
perfectly frictionless inviscid fluid, or if for any
other reason there is no rub between it and
moving matter, so that the earth carries no
ether with it at all, then all rays will be straight,
aberration will have its simple and well-known

47



THE ETHER OF SPACE

value, and we shall be living in a virtual ether
stream of 19 miles a second, by reason of the
orbital motion of the earth.

It may be difficult to imagine that a great mass
like the earth can rush at this tremendous pace
through a medium without disturbing it. It is
not possible for an ordinary sphere in an ordinary
fluid. At the surface of such a sphere there is a
viscous drag, and a spinning motion diffuses out
thence through the fluid, so that the energy of
the moving body is gradually dissipated. The
persistence of terrestrial and planetary motions
shows that etherial viscosity, if existent, is small;
or at least that the amount of energy thus got
rid of is a very small fraction of the whole. But
there is nothing to show that an appreciable layer
of ether may not adhere to the earth and travel
with it, even though the force acting on it be but
small.

This, then, is the question before us: —

Does ike earth drag some ether with it? or
does it slip through the ether with perfect free-
dom f (Never mind the earth's atmosphere;
the part it plays is known and not impor-
tant.)

In other words, is the ether wholly or partially
stagnant near the earth, or is it streaming past
us with the opposite of the full terrestrial velocity
of nineteen miles a second? Surely if we are
living in an ether stream of this rapidity we

48



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

ought to be able to detect some evidence of its
existence.^

It is not so easy a thing to detect as you would
imagine. We have seen that it produces no
deviation or error in direction. Neither does it
cause any change of colour or Doppler effect;
that is, no shift of lines in spectrtmi. No steady
wind can affect pitch, simply because it cannot
blow waves to your ear more quickly than they
are emitted. It hurries them along, but it
lengthens them in the same proportion, and the
result is that they arrive at the proper fre-
quency. The precise effects of motion on pitch
are summarised in the following table: —

Changes of Frequency due to Motion

Source approaching shortens waves.
Receiver approaching alters relative velocity.
Medium flowing alters both wave-length and
velocity in exactly compensatory manner.

What other phenomena may possibly result
from motion? Here is a list: —

Phenomena resulting from Motion

(i) Change or apparent change in direction;
observed by telescope, and called aberration.

* The word "stationary" is ambiguous. I propose
to use "stagnant," as meaning stationary with respect
to the earth — i.e., as opposed to stationary in space,

49



THE ETHER OF SPACE

(2) Change or apparent change in frequency;
observed by spectroscope, and called Doppler
effect.

(3) Change or apparent change in time of
journey; observed by lag of phase or shift of
interference fringes.

(4) Change or apparent change in intensity;
observed by energy received by thermopile.

What we have arrived at so far is the fol-
lowing : —

Motion of either source or receiver can alter
frequency ; motion of receiver can alter apparent
direction ; motion of the mediimi can do neither.

But the question must be asked, can it not
hurry a wave so as to make it arrive out of phase
with another wave arriving by a different path,
and thus produce or modify interference effects ?

Or again, may it not carry the waves down
stream more plentifully than up stream, and
thus act on a pair of thermopiles, arranged fore
and aft at equal distances from a source, with
unequal intensity?

And once more, perhaps the laws of reflection
and refraction in a moving medium are not the
same as they are if it be at rest. Then, more-
over, there is double refraction, colours of thin
plates and thick plates, polarisation angle, ro-
tation of the plane of polarisation; all sorts of
optical phenomena that need consideration.

SO



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

It may have to be admitted, perhaps, that in
empty space the effect of an ether drift is dif-
ficult to detect, but will not the presence of
dense matter — especially the passage through
dense transparent matter — make the detection
easier? So a great number of questions arise,
all of which have been, from time to time, seri-
ously discussed.

Interference.

As an instance of such discussion, consider
No. 3 of the phenomena tabulated above. I
expect that every reader imderstands inter-
ference, but I may just briefly say that two
similar sets of waves "interfere" whenever and
wherever the crests of one set coincide with and
obliterate the troughs of the other set. Light
advances in any given direction when crests in
that direction are able to remain crests, and
troughs to remain troughs. But if we contrive
to split a beam of light into two halves, to send
them rotmd by different paths, and make them
meet again, there is no guarantee that crest will
meet crest and trough trough; it may be just
the other way in some places, and wherever that
opposition of phase occurs there there will be
local obliteration or "interference." Two re-
united half-beams of light may thus produce
local stripes of darkness, and these stripes are
called interference bands.

SI



THE ETHER OF SPACE

It is not to be supposed that there is any
destruction of light, or any dissipation of energy :
it is merely a case of redistribution.

The bright parts are brighter just in propor-
tion as the dark parts are darker. The screen is
illuminated in stripes and no longer uniformly,
but its total illimiination is the same as if there
were no interference.

Projection op Interference Bands.

It is not easy to project these interference
bands on a screen so as to make them visible
to an audience, partly because the bands or
stripes of darkness are exceedingly narrow;
indeed, I had not previously seen the experiment
attempted. But by means of what I call an
interference kaleidoscope, consisting of two
mirrors set at an angle with a third semi-trans-
parent mirror between them, it is possible to
get the bands remarkably clear and bright, so
that they can readily be projected : and I showed
these at a lecture to the Royal Institution of
Great Britain in 1892.

Each mirror is mounted on a tripod with
adjustable screw feet, which stand on a thick
iron slab, which again rests on hollow india-
rubber balls. Looking down on the mirrors the
plan is as in the diagram Fig. 7, which indicates
sufficiently the geometry of the arrangement,

52



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER



and shows that the two half beams, into which
the semi-transparent plate divides the light, will
each travel round the same contour A B C in
opposite directions, and will then reimite and
travel together toward the point of the arrow.



A



/*^/fi


Fig. 7. — Plan of Interference Kaleidoscope with three

mirrors.

The arrow-feather ray is bifurcated at A by a semi-transparent
mirror of thinly silvered glass; and the two halves reunite along
the arrow-head after traversing a triangular contour A B C in
opposite directions. The simple geometrical relations which permit
this are sufficiently indicated in the figtire. The arrangement
would suit Fizeau's experiment.

53



THE ETHER OF SPACE

A parallel beam from an electric lantern, when
thus treated, depicts bright and broad inter-
ference bands on a screen. And the arrangement
is very little sensitive to disturbance, because
the paths of the two halves of the beam are
identical, and because of the moimting. A
piece of good glass can be interposed without
disturbance, and the table can be struck a heavy
blow without confusing the bands.

The only regular and orderly way of causing a
shift of the bands is to accelerate one half of the
beam and to retard the other half by moving a
transparent substance along the contour. For
instance, let the sides of the triangle A B C, or
one of them, consist of a tube of water in which
a rapid stream is maintained; then the stream
has a chance of accelerating one half the beam
and retarding the other half, thereby shifting
the fringes from their normal position by a
measurable amount. This is the experiment
made in 1859 by Fizeau. (Appendix 3.)

Now that most interesting and important, and
I think now well-known, experiment of Fizeau
proves quite simply and definitely that if light
be sent along a stream of water, travelling inside
the water as a transparent medium, it will go
quicker with the current than against it.

You may say that is only natural; a wind
assists sotmd one way and retards it the opposite
way. Yes, but then sotmd travels in air; and

54



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

wind is a bodily transfer of air; hence, of course,
gives the sound a ride. Whereas light does not
really travel in water, but always in ether; and
it is by no means obvious whether a stream of
water can help or hinder it. Experiment decides,
however, and answers in the affirmative. It
helps it along with just about half the speed of
the water; not with the whole speed, which is
curious and important, and really means that
the moving water has no effect whatever on
the ether of space, though we must defer ex-
plaining how this comes about. Suffice for
present purposes the fact that the velocity
of light inside moving water, and therefore
presumably inside all transparent matter, is
altered to some extent by motion of that
matter.

Does not this fact afford an easy way of de-
tecting a motion of the earth through the ether ?
Every vessel of stagnant water is really travel-
ling along through the ether at the rate of nine-
teen miles a second. Send a beam of light
through it one way, and it will be hurried; its
velocity, instead of being 140,000 miles a second,
will be 140,009 miles. Send a beam of light the
other way, and its velocity will be 139,991 ; just
as much less. Bring these two beams together;
surely some of their wave-lengths will interfere.
M. Hoek, Astronomer at Utrecht, tried the ex-
periment in this very form; here is a diagram of

55



THE ETHER OF SPACE

his apparatus (Fig. 8). Babinet had tried an-
other form of the experiment previously. Hoek
expected to see interference bands from the two
half-beams which had traversed the water, one


Fig. 8. — Hoek's arrangement.

The light from source S is reflected so as to travel half throtigh
stagnant water and half through air on its direct journey, the path
being inverted on the return journey, after whch it enters the eye.

in the direction of the earth's motion and the
other against it. But no interference bands
were seen. The experiment gave a negative
result.

An experiment, however, in which nothing is
seen is never a very satisfactory form of a nega-
tive experiment ; it is, as Mascart calls it, ** doubly
negative," and we require some guarantee that
the conditions were right for seeing what might
really have been in some sort there. Hence
Mascart and Jamin*s modification of the experi-
ment is preferable (Fig. 9). The thing now
looked for is a shift of already existing inter-
ference bands, when the above apparatus is
turned so as to have different aspects with re-

S6



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

spect to the earth's motion; but no shift was
seen.

Interference methods all fail to display any
trace of relative motion between earth and ether.

Try other phenomena, then. Try refraction.
The index of refraction of glass is known to de-
pend on the ratio of the speed of light outside to
the speed inside the glass. If, then, the ether be
streaming through glass, the velocity of light
will be different inside according as it travels
with the stream or against it, and so the index of
refraction may be different. Arago was the first
to try this experiment by placing an achromatic


Fig. 9. — ^Arrangement of Mascart and Jamin.

A modification of Fig. 8, with the beam split definitely into two
halves by reflection from a thick glass plate and reunited before
observation. The two half beams go through stagnant water in
opposite directions.



prism in front of a telescope on a mural circle

and observing the deviation it produced on stars.

Observe that it was an achromatic prism,

^ 57



THE ETHER OF SPACE

treating all wave-lengths alike; he looked at the
deviated image of a star, not at its dispersed
image or spectnmi — else he might have detected
the change-o£- frequency-effect due to motion of
source or receiver first actually seen by Sir W.
Huggins. I do not think Arago would have seen
it, because I do not suppose his arrangements
were delicate enough for that very small effect;
but there is no error in the conception of his
experiment, as Professor Mascart has inadver-
tently suggested there was.

Then Maxwell repeated the attempt in a much
more powerful manner, a method which could
have detected a very minute effect indeed, and
Mascart has also repeated it in a simple form.
All are absolutely negative.

Well, then, what about aberration? If one
looks through a moving stratum, say a spinning
glass disk, there ought to be a shift caused by
the motion {see Fig. 4). That particular ex-
periment has not been tried, but I entertain no
doubt about its result, though a high speed and
considerable thickness of glass or other meditim
would be necessary to produce even a microscopic
apparent displacement of objects seen through it.

But the speed of the earth is available, and the
whole length of a telescope tube may be filled
with water; surely that is enough to displace
rays of light appreciably.

Sir George Airy tried it at Greenwich on a star,

S8



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

with an appropriate zenith-sector full of water.
Stars were seen through the water-telescope
precisely as through an air telescope. A nega-
tive result again! (The theory is fully dealt
with in Chapter X and Appendix 3.)

Stellar observations, however, are un-
necessarily difficult. Fresnel had pointed out
that a terrestrial source of light would do just
as w^ell. He had also (being a man of exceeding
genius) predicted that nothing would happen.
Hoek has now tried it in a perfect manner and
nothing did happen.

But these facts are not at all disconcerting;
they are just what ought to be anticipated, in the
light of true theory. The absence of all effect
caused by stagnant dense matter inserted in the
path of a beam of light, that is of dense transpar-
ent matter not artificially moved with reference
to the earth — or rather with reference to source
and receiver — is explicable on Fresners theory
concerning the behaviour of ether inside matter.

If the index of refraction of the matter is called
|i, that means that the speed of light inside it is
- th of the speed outside or in vacuo. And that
is only another way of saying that the virtual
etherial density inside it is represented by /4^,
since the velocity of waves is inversely as the
square root of the density of the medium which
conveys them; the elasticity being reckoned as
constant, and the same inside as out.

59



THE ETHER OF SPACE

But then if the ether is incompressible its
density must really be constant, so how can it
be denser inside matter than it is outside ? The
answer is that presumably the ether is not really
extra dense, but is, as it were, loaded by the
matter. The atoms of matter, or the constituent
electrons, must be presumed to be shaken by the
passage of the waves of light, as they obviously
are in fluorescent substances; and accordingly
the speed of propagation will be lessened by the
extra loading which the waves encounter. It
is not a real increase of density, but a virtual
increase, which is really due to the addition of a
certain fraction of material inertia to the inertia
of the ether itself. The density of ether out-
side being 1, and that of the loaded ether inside
being /u^, the effect of the load is expressible as
p? — 1, while the free ether is the same inside as out.

Suppose now that the matter is moved along.
The extra loading, being part of the matter, of
course travels with it, and thereby affects the
speed of light to the extent of the load — that is
to say, by an amount proportional to /*^— 1 as
contrasted with ^*.

This is Fresnel's predicted ratio (/z^— l):/i^,

or I—;:?; and in Fizeau's experiment with run-
ning water — especially as repeated later, with
modem accuracy, by Michelson — this represents
exactly the amount of observed effect upon the
light.

6o



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

But if, instead of running water, stagnant
water is used — that is stationary with respect
to the earth, though still moving violently
through the ether — then the (ji^—1) effect of
the load will be fixed to the matter, and can pro-
duce no extra or motile effect. The only part
that could produce an effect of that kind would
be the free ether, of density i. But then this —
on the above view — ^is absolutely stationary, not
being carried along by the earth at all; hence this
can give no effect either. Consequently the
whole effect of an ether-drift past the earth is
zero, on optical experiments, according to the
theory of Fresnel ; and that is exactly what all
the experiments just described have confirmed.

Since then Professor Mascart, with great per-
tinacity, has attacked the phenomena of thick
plates, Newton's rings, double refraction, and
the rotatory phenomenon of quartz; but he has
fotmd absolutely nothing attributable to a
stream of ether past the earth.

The only positive result ever supposed to be
attained was in a very difficult polarisation
observation by Fizeau in 1859. Unless this has
been repeated, it is safest to ignore it; but I
believe that Lord Rayleigh has repeated it, and
obtained a negative result.

Fizeau also suggested, but did not attempt,
what seems an easier experiment, with fore and
aft thermopiles and a source between them, to

61



THE ETHER OF SPACE



observe the drift of a medium by its convection
of energy; but arguments based on the law of
exchanges* tend to show, and do show as I think,
that a probable alteration of radiating power
due to motion through a medium would just
compensate the effect otherwise to be expected.
We may summarise most of these statements
as follows: —

Sumtnary.

A real and apparent change of
wave-length.

A real but not apparent error
in direction.

No lag of phase or change of
intensity, except that ap-
propriate to altered wave-
length.

No change of frequency.

No error in direction.

A real lag of phase, but un-
detectable without control
over the medium.

A change of intensity corre-
sponding to different dis-
tance, but compensated by
change of radiating power.



Source alone
moving pro-
duces . .



Meditim alone
moving, or
source and
receiver mov-
ing together,
produces . . .



* Lord Rayleigh, "Nature," March 25, 1892.

62



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

An apparent change of wave-
length.

Receiver alone \ An apparent error in direction,
moving pro- ( No change of phase or of in-
duces • . . J tensity, except that appro-
priate to different virtual
velocity of light.

I may say, then, that not a single optical phe-
nomenon is able to show the existence of an ether
stream near the earth. All optics go on precise-
ly as if the ether were stagnant with respect to
the earth.

Well, then, perhaps it is stagnant. The ex-
periments I have quoted do not prove that it is
so. They are equally consistent with its perfect
freedom and with its absolute stagnation,
though they are not consistent with any in-
termediate position. Certainly, if the ether
were stagnant nothing could be simpler than
their explanation.

The only phenomena then difficult to explain
would be those depending on light coming from
distant regions through all the layers of more or
less dragged ether. The theory of astronomical
aberration would be seriously complicated; in its
present form it would be upset (p. 47) . But it is
never wise to control facts by a theory; it is bet-
ter to invent some experiment that will give a

63



THE ETHER OF SPACE

different result in stagnant and in free ether.
None of those experiments so far described are
really discriminative. They are, as I say, con-
sistent with either hypothesis, though not very
obviously so.

B



7^



Fig. 10. — ^The cotirse of the light and of the two half
beams in Michelson's most famous experiment.

The light is split at A, one half sent toward B and back, the other
half to C and back. (Compare with Fig. 7.)



Michelson Experiment.

Mr. Michelson, however, of the United States,
invented a plan that looked as if it really would
discriminate; and, after overcoming many diffi-
culties, he carried it out. It is described in the
Philosophical Magazine for 1887.

Michelson's famous experiment consists in
looking for interference between two half beams
of light, of which one has been sent to and fro
across the line of ether drift, and the other has
been sent to and fro along the line of ether drift.

64



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

A semi-transparent mirror set at 45^ is em-
ployed to split the beam, and a pair of normal
and ordinary mirrors, set perpendicular to the
two half beams, are employed to return them
back whence they came, so that they can enter
the eye through an observing telescope.

It differs essentially from the interference
kaleidoscope, Fig. 7, inasmuch as there is now
no limiinous path B C, and no contour enclosed
by the light. Each half beam goes to and fro
on its own path, and these paths, instead of
being coincident, are widely separate — one north
and south, for instance, and the other east
and west.

Under these conditions the bands are much
more tremulous than they were in the arrange-
ment of Fig. 7, and are subject to every kind of
disturbance. The apparatus has to be ex-
cessively steady, and no fluctuation even of
temperature must be permitted in the path of
either beam. To secure this, the source, the v^^
mirrors, and the observing telescope were all
mounted upon a massive stone slab; and this
was floated in a bath of mercury.

The slab could then be slowly turned round,
so that sometimes the path A B and sometimes
the path A C lay approximately along or
athwart the direction of the earth's motion in
space.

And inasmuch as the motion along would take

65



THE ETHER OF SPACE

a little longer than the motion across, though
everjrthing else was acctirately the same, some
shift of the interference bands might be expected
as the slab rotated.

But whereas in all the experiments previously
described the effect looked for was a first-order
effect, of magnitude one in ten or twenty thou-
sand — depending, that is to say, on the first
power of the ratio of speed of earth to speed of
light — ^the effect now to be expected depends
on the square of that same ratio, and therefore
cannot be greater, even in the most favourable
circumstances, than i part in a hundred million.

It is easy to realise, therefore, that it is an
exceptionally difficult experiment, and that it
required both skill and pertinacity to perform
it successfully.

That it is an exceptionally difficult experi-
ment will be realised when I say that it would
fail in conclusiveness tmless one part in 400
millions could be clearly detected.

Mr. Michelson reckons that by his latest ar-
rangement he could see i in 4000 millions if it
existed (which is equivalent to detecting an

error of i^h of an inch in a length of 60
miles); but he saw nothing. Everything be-
haved precisely as if the ether was stagnant;
as if the earth carried with it all the ether in its
immediate neighbourhood. And that was his
conclusion.

66



ammmm^t



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER

Theory of Michelson Experiment

The theory of the Michelson experiment can
be expressed thus: its optical diagram being the
same as is expressed geometrically in Fig. 6.

If a relatively fixed source and receiver move
through the ether with velocity u, such that
u/v=-a the aberration constant; then the time
of any to-and-fro journey S M, inclined at angle
6 to the direction of the drift, is increased,
above what it wz)uld be if there were no drift,
in the ratio

y (1 - a»sin»^)

This follows from merely geometrical consider-
ations.

Hence if a ray is split, and half sent so that
6 =(7 while the other half is sent so that 0=90
(as in Fig. 10), the one will lag behind the other
by a distance \(j? times the distance travelled;
which, though very small, may be a perceptible
fraction of a wave-length, and therefore may
cause a perceptible shift of the bands.

But when the experiment is properly per- ^
formed, no such shift is observed.

The experiment thus seems to prove that .
there is no motion through the ether at all, that
there is no etherial drift past the earth, that the
ether immediately in contact with the earth is

67



THE ETHER OF SPACE

stagnant — or that the earth to that extent
carries all neighbouring ether with it.

If we wish to evade this conclusion, there is no
easy way of doing so. For it depends on no
doubtful properties of transparent substances,
but on the straightforward fundamental prin-
ciple underlying all such simple facts as that —
It takes longer to row a certain distance and
back, up and down stream, than it does to row
the same distance in Stillwater; or that it takes
longer to nm up and down a hill than to run
the same distance laid out flat; or that it costs
more to buy a certain number of oranges at
three a penny and an equal ntmiber at two a
penny than it does to buy the whole lot at five-
for twopence.

Hence, although there may be some way of
getting roimd Mr. Michelson's experiment, there
is no obvious way ; and if the true conclusion be
not that the ether near the earth is stagnant, it
must lead to some other important and unknown
fact.

That fact has now come clearly to light. It
was first suggested by the late Prof. G. F. Fitz-
Gerald, of Trinity College, Dublin, while sitting
in my study at Liverpool and discussing the
matter with me. The suggestion bore the im-
press of truth from the first. It independently
occurred also to Prof. H. A. Lorentz, of Leiden,
into whose theory it completely fits, and who has

68



EXPERIMENTS ON THE ETHER



brilliantly worked it into his system. It may
be explained briefly thus: —

Electric charges in motion constitute an electric
current. Similar charges repel each other, but cur-
rents in the same direction attract. Consequently
two similar charges moving in parallel lines will
repel each other less than if stationary — less also
than if moving one after the other in the same line.
Likewise two opposite charges, a fixed distance
apart, attract each other less when moving side
by side than when chasing each other. The modi-
fication of the static force, thus caused, depends
on the squared ratio of their joint speed to the
velocity of light.

Atoms of matter are charged; and cohesion is a
residual electric attraction {see end of Appendix i).
So when a block of matter is moving through the
ether of space its cohesive forces across the line of y
motion are diminished, and consequently in that
direction it expands, by an amount proportioned to
the square of aberration magnitude.

A light journey, to and fro, across the path of a
relatively moving medium is slightly quicker than
the same journey, to and fro, along (see p. 67).
But if the journeys are planned or set out on a block /
of matter, they do not remain quite the same when
it is conveyed through space : the journey across the
direction of motion becomes longer than the other
journey, as we have just seen. And the extra dis-
tance compensates or neutralises the extra speed; '
so that light takes the same time for both.

69



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT ON ETRERIAL

VISCOSITY

THE balance of evidence at this stage seems
to incline in the sense that there is no ether
drift, that the ether near the earth is stagnant,
that the earth carries all or the greater part of
the neighbouring ether with it — a view which,
if true, must singularly complicate the theory
of ordinary astronomical aberration: as is
explained at the beginning of the last chapter.

But now put the question another way. Can
matter carry neighbouring ether with it when
it moves? Abandon the earth altogether; its
motion is very quick but too imcontrollable,
and it always gives negative results. Take a
lump of matter that you can deal with, and see
if it pulls any ether along.

That is the experiment which I set myself to
perform, and which in the course of the years
1891-97 I performed. It may be thus described
in essence: —

Take a steel disk, or rather a couple of large
steel disks a yard in diameter clamped together

70



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



with a space between. Mount the system on a
vertical axis, and spin it like a teetotum as fast
as it will stand without flying to pieces. Then
take a parallel beam of light, split it into two
by a semi-transparent mirror, M, a piece of glass
silvered so thinly that it lets half the light through
and reflects the other half, somewhat as in Fig.
7; and send the two halves of this split beam
round and round in opposite directions in the
space between the disks. They may thus travel
a distance of 20 or 30 or 40 feet. Ultimately
they are allowed to meet and enter a telescope.
If they have gone quite identical distances
they need not interfere, but usually the dis-
tances will differ by a hundred-thousandth of an
inch or so, which is qtdte enough to bring about
interference.

The mirrors which reflect the light round and
rotmd between the disks are shown in Fig. 11.
If they form an accurate square the last two
images will coincide, but if the mirrors are the
least inclined to one another at any unaliquot
part of 360^ the last image splits into two, as in
the kaleidoscope is well known, and the in-
terference bands may be regarded as resulting
from those two sources. The central white band
bisects normally the distance between them, and
their amoimt of separation determines the width
of the bands. There are many interesting op-
tical details here, but I shall not go into them.

71



THE ETHER OF SPACE

The thing to observe is whether the motion of
the disks is able to replace a bright band by a
dark one, or vice versa. If it does, it means



Fio. It. — Diagrammatic Plan of Optical Frame for
Ether Machine; with Steel Disks, one yard in diameter,
inside the frame. (The actual apparatus is shown in
Figs. 13 and 14 and Pig. 13.)

then reunite. It is an eKWnsion of tlie idea of Fig. 1.

that one of the half beams — viz., that which is
travelling in the same direction as the disks — is
helped on a trifle, equivalent to a shortening of
journey by some quarter millionth of an inch
or so in the whole length of 30 feet; while the
other half beam — viz., that travelling against the
7a



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



motion of the disks — ^is retarded, or its path vir-
tually lengthened, by the same amount.

If this acceleration and retardation actually
occur, waves which did not interfere on meeting
before the disks moved, will interfere now; for
one will arrive at the common goal half a length
behind the other.

Now a gradual change of bright space to dark,
and vice versa, shows itself, to an observer
looking at the bands, as a gradual change of
position of the bright stripes, or a shift of the
bands. A shift of the bands, and especially
of the middle white band, which is much more
stable than the others, is what we look for. The
middle band is, or should be, free from the
** concertina "-like motion which is liable to in-
fect the others.

At first I saw plenty of shift. In the first
experiment the bands sailed across the field as
the disks got up speed imtil the crosswire had
traversed a band and a half. The conditions
were such that had the ether whirled at the full
speed of the disks I should have seen a shift of
three bands. It looked very much as if the light
was helped along at half the speed of the moving
matter, just £is it is inside water.

On stopping the disks the bands returned to
their old position. On starting them again in
the opposite direction, the bands ought to have
shifted the other way too, if the effect was

« 73



THE ETHER OF SPACE

genuine; but they did not; they went the same
way as before.

The shift was therefore wholly spurious; it
was caused by the centrifugal force of the blast
of air thrown off from the moving disks. The
mirrors and frame had to be protected from this.
Many other small changes had to be made, and
gradually the spurious shifts have been reduced
and reduced, largely by the skill and patience of
my assistant, Mr. Benjamin Davies, imtil pres-
ently there was barely a trace of them.

But the experiment is not an easy one. Not
only does the blast exert pressure, but at high
speeds the churning of the air makes it quite
hot. Moreover, the tremor of the whirling
machine, in which from four to nine horse-
power is sometimes being expended, is but too
liable to communicate itself to the optical part
of the apparatus. Of course elaboriate pre-
cautions are taken against this. Although the
two parts, the mechanical and the optical, are
so close together, their supports are entirely in-
dependent. But they have to rest on the same
earth, and hence communicated tremors are not
absent. They are the cause of most of the slight
residual trouble.

The whole experiment is described in fairly
full detail in the Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society for 1893 and 1897. And there also
are described some further modifications where-

74



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



by the whirling disks are electrified — likewise
without optical effect, and are also magnetised;
or rather a great iron mass, strongly magnetised
by a current, is used to replace the steel disks.

The effect was always zero, however, when
spurious results were eliminated; and it is clear
that at no practicable speed does either electri-
fication or magnetisation confer upon matter any
appreciable viscous grip upon the ether. Atoms
must be able to throw it into vibration, if they
are oscillating or revolving at sufficient speed;
otherwise they would not emit light or any kind
of radiation; but in no case do they appear to
drag it along, or to meet with resistance in any
uniform motion through it. Only their accelera-
tion is effectual.

In the light of Larmor*s electron theory, we
know now that acceleration of atoms, or rather
of a charge upon an atom, necessarily generates
radiation, proportional in amoimt to the square
of the acceleration — ^whether that be tangential
or normal. There is no theoretical reason for
assuming any influence on uniform velocity. And
even the influence on acceleration is exceedingly
small imder ordinary circumstances. Only dur-
ing the violence of collision are ether waves free-
ly excited. The present experiment, however,
has nothing to do with acceleration: it is a test
of viscosity. An acceleration term exists in
motion through even a perfect fluid.

75



Fig. la. — General view of whirling part of Ether
machine, with pair of steel disks, and motor.



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



The conclusion at which I arrived in 1892 and
1893 is thus expressed (p. 777 of vol. 184 Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society) :
**I feel confident either that the ether between
the disks is quite tinaffected by their motion,
or, if affected at all, by something less than
the thousandth part. At the same time, so far
as rigorous proof is concerned, I should prefer
to assert that the velocity of light between two steel
plates moving together in their own plane an inch
apart is not increased or diminished by so much as
the ^th part of their velocity.

That was the conclusion in 1893; but since
then observations have been continued, and it is
now quite safe to change the goo^h into i^th.
The spin was sometimes continued for three
hours to see if an effect developed with time;
and many other precautions were taken, as briefly
narrated in the Philosophical Transactions for
1897.

The following illustrations give an idea of the
apparatus employed :

Fig. 12 shows a photograph of the whirling
machine before being bolted down to its stone
pier; with the pair of disks at top ready to be
whirled by an armature on the shaft, which is
supplied with a current sometimes of nine horse-
power. The armature winding was of low re-
sistance, and was specially braced, so as to give
high speed without flying out, and without

77



THE ETHER OF SPACE

generating too much back-E M F. The ampere-
meter and volt-meter and the carbon rheostat
(in armature circuit), for regulating the speed,
are plainly seen. The smooth pulley on the
shaft is for applying a brake. The small disk
above it is perforated to act as a syren for es-
timation of speed; but other arrangements for
this purpose were subsequently added. The
two large disks at top were of the best circular-
saw steel; they are somewhat thicker at middle
than at edge, and are strongly bolted up be-
tween iron cheeks, which are attached to the
shaft. The lower end of the shaft is a step-
bearing of hardened steel in a vessel of oil. The
upper collar is elastic, so as to allow for a steady-
ing teetotum action at high speeds.

Fig. 13 is a photograph of the optical square,
which was ultimately to be placed in position
surrotmding the disks. The slit and collimator
are shown ; the micrometer end of the observing
telescope is out of the picture.

The mirrors on the sides of the square are
accurately plane; they are adjustable on geo-
metric principles, and are pressed against their
bearings by strong spiral springs. They were
made by Hilger.

A drawing of the arrangement is given in Fig.
14, and here the double micrometer eyepiece is
visible.

In Fig. 15 the whole apparatus is shown

78



°5



S8

-I



THE ETHER OF SPACE

mounted. The whirling machine strongly bolt-
ed down to a stone pier independent of the floor;
the optical frame independently supported by a
gallows frame from other piers. The centrifugal
mercury speed-indicator is visible in front, and
Mr. Davies is regulating the speed. At the back
is seen a boiler-plate screen for the observer with
his eye at the telescope. {See Frontispiece.)

The expense of the apparatus was borne by
my friend, the late Geoi^e Holt, shipowner, of
Liverpool.

Fig. i6 exhibits something like the appearance
seen in the eye-piece, with the interference bands
on each side of the middle band, and with the



Fig. i5. — Approximate appearance of the inter-
ference bands and micrometer Tires as seen in the
eye-piece of the telescope of the Ether machine.

micrometer wires set in position — each moved by

an independent micrometer head. The straight

vertical wire was usiially set in the centre of the

So



;:S':u:^':i.-Siz


c-r>


T— t


■O O:


s;.~_":r — ,__.



siTSssFSCSSa'



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



middle white band, and the X wire on the yellow
of the first coloured band on one side or the other.

The method of observation now consists in
setting a wire of the micrometer accurately in
the centre of the middle band, while another
wire is usually set on the first band to the left.
Then the micrometer heads are read, and the
setting repeated once or twice to see how closely
and dependably they can be set in the same
position. Then we begin to spin the disks, and
when they are going at some high speed, meas-
ured by a siren note and in other ways, the
micrometer wires are reset and read — reset
several times and read each time. Then the
disks are stopped and more readings are taken.
Then their motion is reversed, the wires set and
read again; and finally the motion is once more
stopped and another set of readings taken. By
this means the absolute shift of middle band,
and its relative interpretation in terms of wave-
length, are simultaneously obtained; for the
distance from the one wire to the other, which is
often two revolutions of a micrometer head, rep-
resents a whole wave-length shift.

In the best experiments I do still often see
something like a fiftieth of a band shift; but it is
caused by residual spurious causes, for it repeats
itself with sufficient accuracy in the same direc-
tion when the disks are spun the other way round.

Of real reversible shift, due to motion of the

8i



THE ETHER OF SPACE

ether, I see nothing. I do not believe the ether
moves. It does not move at a five-hundredth
part of the speed of the steel disks. Further
experience confirms and strengthens this es-
timate, and my conclusion is that such things as
circular-saws, fl)rwheels, railway trains, and all
ordinary masses of matter do not appreciably
carry the ether with them. Their motion does
not seem to disturb it in the least.

The presumption is that the same is true for
the earth ; but the earth is a big body — it is con-
ceivable that so great a mass may be able to act
when a small mass would fail. I would not like
to be too sure about the earth — at least, not on
a strictly experimental basis. What I do feel
sure of is that if moving matter disturbs ether in
its neighbourhood at all, it does so by some
minute action, comparable in amount perhaps
to gravitation, and possibly by means of the
same property as that to which gravitation is
due — not by anything that can fairly be likened
to etherial viscosity. So far as experiment has
gone, our conclusion is that the viscosity or fluid
friction of the ether is zero. And that is an en-
tirely reasonable conclusion.

Magnetisation.

For testing the effect of magnetism, an oblate
spheroid was made of speciall)'' selected soft iron,

82



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT

3 feet in diameter, weighing nearly a ton. Its
section is shown in Fig. 17. It had an annular
channel or groove, half an inch wide and i foot
deep, round the bottom of which was wound a
kilometer of insulated wire to a depth of 4J
inches; the tenninals of which were brought out
to sliding contacts on the shaft, so that the
whole could be very highly magnetised while it
was spinning. Everything was arranged so as
to be symmetrical about the central axis.

To the coil of wire, whose resistance was 30
ohms, no volts was ordinarily, and 220 volts
exceptionally, applied. The magnetic field with
no volts was about 1800 c.g.s., on the average,
all over the main region through which the beam
of light circulated.



Fig. 18. — Appearance of the interference bands tn
the channel of the iron spheroid. They wer; reflected
ia the upper ircm as shown.

This light-bearing space, or gap in the mag-
netic circuit, was only half an inch wide; and ac-
83



11

i Is

i If

8 ■S.l
J -o »

® a 8 J

lii
ill

111



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



cordingly in the eyepiece the iron surfaces could
be seen, above and below, as well as the inter-
ference bands in the luminous gap. The whole
appearance is depicted in Fig. i8.

Electrification.

For the electrification experiment, a third and
insulated disk was clamped between the two steel
disks and kept electrified to sparking tension.
The arrangement is shown diagrammatically on
a smaller scale in Fig. 19.


Fig. 19. — Arrangement for electrifying a third or mid-
dle steel disk to sparking potential while spinning.

The electrification test was exceptionally easy
to apply by connecting the insulated charging
pin to a Voss machine in action: because when
the disks were spinning and the bands in good
condition, the electrification could be instan-
taneously applied, taken off, reversed, or what-
ever was desired; and the effect of the sudden
lowering of potential by sparks passing between
the revolving plates could be exactly looked for.

The conclusion of my second Philosophical
Transactions paper — ^that of 1897 — is that neither

8s



THE ETHER OF SPACE

an electric nor a magnetic transverse field confers
viscosity upon the ether, nor enables moving matter
to grip and move it rotationally.

Question op a Possible Longitudinal

Magnetic Drift.

Later I tried a longitudinal magnetic field also;
arranging a series of four large electric bobbins or
long coils along the sides of a square inscribed at
45^ in the optical square (Figs. 1 1 and 13), so that
the light went along their axes.

The details of this experiment have been only
partially recorded, but the salient points are to
be found stated in the Philosophical Magazine
for April, 1907, pages 495-500.

The result was again negative; that is to say,
a magnetic field causes no perceptible accelera-
tion in a beam of light sent along the lines of
force. The extra velocity that could have been
observed would have been jth of a millimeter per
second, or 16 miles per hour, for each c.g.s.
unit of field intensity.

Another mode of expressing the result is that
the difference of magnetic potential applied,
namely, a drop of two million c.g.s. units of
magnetic potential, does not hurry light along
it by so much as 65-th part of a wave-length.

There may be reasons for supposing that
some much slower drift or conveyance than this

86



SPECIAL EXPERIMENT



is really caused in the ether by a magnetic field;
but if so, the ether must be regarded as so ex-
cessively dense that the amount of such a drift
for any practicable magnetic field seems almost
hopelessly beyond experimental means of de-
tection.



VI

ETHERIAL DENSITY

THIS leads us to enter upon the question of
whether it is possible to determine with any
approach to accuracy the actual density or mas-
siveness of the ether of space, compared with
those forms of matter to which our senses have
made us accustomed.

The arguments on which an estimate may be
made of the density or massiveness of the ether
as compared with that of matter depend on the
following considerations, the validity of which
again is dependent upon an electrical theory of
matter. In this theory, or working hypothesis,
an assumption has to be made: but it is one for
which there is a large amount of justification, and
the reasons for it are given in many books —
among others in my book on Electrons, and like-
wise at the end of the new edition of Modern
Views of Electricity y also in my Romanes Lecture,
published by the Clarendon Press in 1903. Put
briefly, the assumption is that matter is com-
posed, in some way or other, of electrons; which

88



ETHER DENSITY



again must be considered to be essentially pe-
culiarities, or singularities, or definite structures,
in the ether itself. Indeed, a consideration of
electrons alone is sufficient for the argument,
provided it be admitted that they have the mass
which experiment shows them to possess, and the
size which electrical theory deduces for them:
the basis of the idea — ^which, indeed, is now ex-
perimentally proved — ^being that their inertia is
due to their self-induction — i.e., to the magnetic
field with which they must be surroxmded as long
as they are in motion.

The mass, or inertia, of an electron is com-
parable to the thousandth part of that of the
atom of hydrogen. Its linear dimension, let us
say its diameter, is comparable to the one hun-
dred thousandth part of what is commonly
known as molecular or atomic dimensions; which
itself is the ten-millionth part of a millimeter.

Hence, the mass and the bulk of an electron
being known, its density is determined, provided
we can asstmie that its mass is all dependent on
what is contained within its periphery. But
that last assumption is one that quite definitely
cannot be made: its mass is for the most part
outside itself, and has to be calculated by mag-
netic considerations. {See Appendix 2.)

These details are gone into in my paper in the
Philosophical Magazine for April, 1907, and in
Chapter XVII of Modern Views of Electricity,

9 89



THE ETHER OF SPACE

But without repeating arguments here, it will
suffice to say that although the estimates may
be made in various ways, differing entirely from
each other, yet the resulting differences are only
slight; the calculated densities come out all of
the same order of magnitude — ^namely, some-
thing comparable to lo" c.g.s. tinits; that is to
say, a million million grammes per cubic centi-
meter, or, in other words, a thousand tons to
the cubic millimeter.

But, throughout, we have seen reason to assert
that the ether is incompressible; arguments for
this are given in Modern Views of Electricity^
Chapter I. And, indeed, the fundamental
medium filling all space, if there be such, must,
in my judgment, be ultimately incompressible;
otherwise it would be composed of parts, and
we should have to seek for something still more
fimdamental to fill the interstices.

The ether being incompressible, and an elec-
tron being supposed composed simply and solely
of ether, it follows that it cannot be either a con-
densation or a rarefaction of that material, but
must be some singularity of structure, or some
portion otherwise differentiated. It might, for
instance, be something analogous to a vortex
ring, differentiated kinetically — i.e., by reason of
its rotational motion, from the remainder of the
ether; or it might be differentiated statically,
and be something which would have to be called

90



ETHER DENSITY



a strain-centre or a region of twi&t, or something
which cannot be very clearly at present imagined
with any security; though various suggestions
have been made in that direction.

The simplest plan for us is to think of it some-
what as we think of a knot on a piece of string.
The knot differs in no respect from the rest of the
string, except in its tied-up structure; it is of the
same density with the rest, and yet it is differ-
entiated from the rest ; and, in order to cease to
be a knot, would have to be imtied — a process
which as yet we have not yet learned how to
apply to an electron. If ever such a procedure
becomes possible, then electrons will thereby be
resolved into the general body of the tmdif-
ferentlated ether of space — that part which is
independent of what we call ** matter."

The important notion for present purposes is
merely this: that the density of the tmdiffer-
entiated or simple ether, and the density of
the tied-up or beknotted or otherwise modified
ether constituting an electron, are one and the
same. Hence the argument above given, at
least, when properly worked out, tends to es-
tablish the etherial density as of the order lo^^
times that of water.

There ought to be nothing surprising (though
I admit that there is something very surprising)
in such an estimate ; inasmuch as many converg-
ing lines of argtmient tend to show that ordinary

9?



THE ETHER OF SPACE

matter is a very porous or gossamer-like sub-
stance, with interspaces great as compared with
the spaces actually occupied by the nuclei which
constitute it. Our conception of matter, if it is
to be composed of electrons, is necessarily rather
like the conception of a solar system, or rather
of a milky way; where there are innumerable
dots here and there, with great interspaces be-
tween. So that the average density of the whole
of the dots or material particles taken together —
that is to say, their aggregate mass compared with
the space they occupy — is excessively small.

In the vast extent of the Cosmos, as a whole,
the small bulk of actual matter, compared with
the volume of empty space, is striking — as we
shall show directly; and now on the small scale,
among the atoms of matter, we find the con-
ditions to be similar. Even what we call the
densest material is of extraordinarily insignificant
massiveness as compared with the tmmodified
ether which occupies by far the greater propor-
tion of its bulk.*

When we speak of the density of matter, we
are really though not consciously expressing the
group-density of the modified ether which con-
stitutes matter — not estimated per tmit, but
per aggregate; just as we might estimate the
group or average density of a cloud or mist.
Reckoned per unit, a cloud has the density of
water; reckoned per aggregate, it is an impal-

92



ETHER DENSITY



pable filmy structure of hardly any density at all.
So it is with a cobweb, so perhaps it is with a
comet's tail, so also with the Milky Way, with
the cosmos — and, as it now turns out, with
ordinary matter itself.

For consider the average density of the
material cosmos. It comes out almost incred-
ibly small. In other words, the amount of
matter in space, compared with the voltmie of
space it occupies, is almost infinitesimal. Lord
Kelvin argues that ultimately it must be really
infinitesimal (Philosophical Magazine y Aug.,
1901, and Jan., 1902); that is to say that the
volume of space is infinitely greater than the
total bulk of matter which it contains. Other-
wise the combined force of gravity — or at least
the aggregate gravitational potential — on which
the velocity generated in material bodies ulti-
mately depends, would be far greater than ob-
servation shows it to be.

The whole visible universe, within a paral-
lax of rsio second of arc, is estimated by Lord
Kelvin as the equivalent of a thousand million
of our suns; and this amoimt of matter, distrib-
uted as it is, would have an average density of
1.6 X 10-23 grammes per c.c. It is noteworthy
how exceedingly small is this average or aggre-
gate density of matter in the visible region of
space. The estimated density of 10-" c.g.s.
means that the visible cosmos is as much rarer



93



THE ETHER OF SPACE

than a "vacuum" of a hundred millionths of an
atmosphere, as that vacuum is itself rarer than
lead.

It is because we have reason to assert that any
ordinary mass of matter consists, like the cosmos,
of separated particles, with great intervening
distances in proportion to their size, that we are
able to maintain that the aggregate density of
ordinary stuff, such as water or lead, is very
small compared with the continuous medium in
which they exist, and of which all particles are
supposed to be really composed. So that lead
is to the ether, as regards density, very much as
the " vacuum'* above spoken of is to lead. The
fundamental medium itself must be of uni-
form density ever3rwhere, whether materialised
or free.



VII



FURTHER EXPLANATIONS CONCERNING
THE DENSITY AND ENERGY OF THE ETHER

A READER may suppose that in speaking of
the immense density or massiveness of
ether, and the absurdly small density or specific
gravity of gross matter by comparison, I intend
to signify that matter is a, rarefaction ot the ether.
That, however, is not my intention. The view
I advocate is that the ether is a perfect con-
tinuum, an absolute plenum^ and that, therefore,
no rarefaction is possible. The ether inside
matter is just as dense as the ether outside, and
no denser. A material unit — say, an electron —
is only a peculiarity or singularity of some kind
in the ether itself, which is of perfectly uniform
density everywhere. What we "sense" as mat-
ter is an aggregate or grouping of an enormous
number of such units.

How, then, can we say that matter is millions
of times rarer or less substantial than the ether
of which it is essentially composed ? Those who
feel any difficulty here, should bethink them-

95



THE ETHER OF SPACE

selves of what they mean by the average or ag-
gregate density of any discontinuous system,
such as a powder, or a gas, or a precipitate, or a
snow-storm, or a cloud, or a milky way.

If it be urged that it is unfair to compare an
obviously discrete assemblage like the stars, with
an apparently continuous substance like air or
lead, the answer is that it is entirely and accu-
rately fair; since air, and every other known
form of matter, is essentially an aggregate of
particles, and since it is always their average
density that we mean. We do not even know
for certain their individual atomic density.

The phrase " specific gravity or density of a
powder" is ambiguous. It may mean the
specific gravity of the dry powder as it lies, like
snow ; or it may mean the specific gravity of the
particles of which it is composed, hke ice.

So also with regard to the density of matter ;
we might mean the density of the fundamental
material of which its units are made — which
would be ether; or we might, and in practice do,
mean the density of the aggregate lump which
we can see and handle; that is to say, of water or
iron or lead, as the case may be.

In saying that the density of matter is small —
I mean, of course, in the last, the usual, sense.
In saying that the density of ether is great — I
mean that the actual stuff of which these highly
porous aggregates are composed is of immense, of

96



DENSITY AND ENERGY

well-nigh incredible, density. It is only another
way of saying that the ultimate units of matter
are few and far between — i.e,, that they are ex-
cessively small as compared with the distances
between them ; just as the planets of the solar
system, or worlds in the sky, are few and far
between — the intervening distances being enor-
mous as compared with the portions of space
actually occupied by lumps of matter.

It may be noted that it is not unreasonable to
argue that the density of a continuum is necessa-
rily greater than the density of any disconnected
aggregate: certainly of any assemblage whose
particles are actually composed of the material
of the continuum. Because the former is "all
there,*' everywhere, without break or inter-
mittence of any kind; while the latter has gaps
in it — ^it is here and there, but not everywhere.

Indeed, this very argument was used long ago
by that notable genius Robert Hooke, and I
quote a passage which Professor Poynting has
discovered in his collected posthumous works
and kindly copied out for me: —

" As for matter, that I conceive in its essence to
be immutable, and its essence being expatiation
determinate, it cannot be altered in its quantity,
either by condensation or rarefaction; that is,
there cannot be more or less of that power or
reality, whatever it be, within the same expatia-
tion or content; but every equal expatiation

97



THE ETHER OF SPACE

contains, is filled, or is an equal quantity of
materia; and the densest or heaviest, or most
powerful body in the world contains no more
materia than that which we conceive to be the
rarest, thinnest, lightest, or least powerful body
of all; as gold for instance, and CBther^ or the
substance that fills the cavity of an exhausted
vessel, or cavity of the glass of a barometer above
the quicksilver. Nay, as I shall afterwards prove,
this cavity is more full, or a more dense body of
aether, in the common sense or acceptation of the
word, than gold is of gold, bulk for bulk; and
that because the one — viz.y the mass of aether, is
all aether: but the mass of gold, which we con-
ceive, is not all gold ; but there is an intermixture,
and that vastly more than is commonly sup-
posed, of aether with it; so that vacuity, as it is
commonly thought, or erroneously supposed,
is a more dense body than the gold as gold.
But if we consider the whole content of the one
with that of the other, within the same or equal
quantity of expatiation, then are they both
equally containing the materia or body.** —
From ike Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke,
M.D.y F.R.S., 1705, pp. 171-2 {as copied in
Memoir of Dalton, by Angus Smith).

Newton's contemporaries did not excel in
power of clear expression, as he' himself did; but
Professor Poynting interprets this singular at-
tempt at utterance thus: **A11 space is filled

98



DENSITY AND ENERGY

with equally dense materia. Gold fills only a
small fraction of the space assigned to it, and
yet has a big mass. How much greater must
be the total mass filling that space.'*

The tacit assumption here made is that the
particles of the aggregate are all composed of one
and the same continuous substance — practically
that matter is made of ether; and that assump-
tion, in Hooke's day, must have been only a spec-
ulation. But it is the kind of speculation which
time is justifying, it is the kind of truth which
we all feel to be in process of establishment now.^

We do not depend on that sort of argtmient,
however; what we depend on is experimental
measure of the mass, and mathematical estimate
of the volume, of the electron. For calculation
shows that however the mass be accounted for —
whether electrostatically, or magnetically, or hy-
drodynamically — ^the estimate of ratio of mass to
effective voliune can differ only in a numerical
coefficient, and cannot differ as regards order of
magnitude. The only way out of this conclu-
sion would be the discovery that the negative
electron is not the real or the main matter-

^ It does not seem to have been noticed that in Query
22, quoted in the Introduction to the present book,
Newton seems to throw out a curious hint in this same
direction, though he immediately abandons it again.
He does not appear to have carefully edited his queries;
probably they were published posthumously.

99



THE ETHER OF SPACE

tinit, but is only a subsidiary ingredient; where-
as the main mass is the more bulky positive
charge. That last hypothesis, however, is at
present too vague to be useful. Moreover, the
mass of such a charge would in that case be un-
explained, and would need a further step ; which
would probably land us in much the same sort of
etherial density as is involved in the estimate
which I have based on the more familiar and
tractable negative electron. {See Appendix 2.)
It may be said, Why assume any definite density
for the ether at all ? Why not assimie that, as it
is infinitely continuous, so it is infinitely dense
— whatever that may mean — and that all its
properties are infinite? This might be possible
were it not for the velocity of light. By trans-
mitting waves at a finite and measurable speed,
the ether has given itself away, and has let in
all the possibilities of calculation and ntunerical
statement. Its properties are thereby exhibited
as essentially finite — however infinite the whole
extent of it may turn out to be. Parenthetically,
we may remark that "gravitation" has not yet
exhibited any similar kind of finite property;
and that is why we know so little about it.

Etherial Energy.

Instead, then, of saying that the density of the
ether is great, the clearest mode of expression

100



DENSITY AND ENERGY

is to say that the density of matter is small.
Just as we can say that the density of the visible
cosmos is small, although in individual lumps
its density is comparable to that of iron or
rock.

At the risk of repetition, I have explained this
over again, because it is a matter on which con-
fusion may easily arise. The really important
thing about ether is not so much its density,
considered in itself, as the energy which that
density necessarily involves, on any kinetic
theory of its elasticity. For it is not impossible
— ^however hopeless it may seem now — that a
modicum of that energy may some day be par-
tially utilised.

Lord Kelvin's incipient kinetic theory of elas-
ticity is a complicated matter, and I will only
briefly enter upon it. But before doing so,
I want to remove an objection which is some-
times felt, as to the fluid and easily permeable
character of a medium of this great density — -
that is to say, as to the absence of friction or
viscosity — ^the absence of resistance to bodies
moving through it. As a matter of fact there
is no necessary connection whatever between
density and viscosity.

"Density" and "Viscosity" are entirely dif-
ferent things; and, if there is no fluid friction, a
fluid may have any density you please without
interposing any obstacle to constant velocity.

xoz



THE ETHER OF SPACE

To acceleration it does indeed oppose an obstacle,
but that appears as essentially a part of the in-
ertia or massiveness of the moving body. It
contributes to its momentum; and, if the fluid is
everywhere present, it is impossible to dis-
criminate between, or to treat separately, that
part of the inertia which belongs to the fluid
displaced, and that part which belongs to the
body moving through it — except by theory.

As for the elasticity of the ether, that is ascer-
tainable at once from the speed at which it tiansx
mits waves. That speed — the velocity of light
— is accurately known, 3X10** centimeters per
second. And the ratio of the elasticity or rigid-
ity to the density is equal to the square of this
speed; that is to say, the elasticity must be
9 X 10'® times the density; or, in other words,
lo"* c.g.s. imits. That is an immediate con-
sequence of the estimate of density and the fact
of the velocity of light; and if the density is ad-
mitted, the other cannot be contested.

But we must go on to ask, To what is this
rigidity due? If the ether does not consist of
parts, and if it is fluid, how can it possess the
rigidity appropriate to a solid, so as to transmit
transverse waves 1 To answer this we must fall
back upon Lord Kelvin's kinetic theory of
elasticity: that it must be due to rotational
motion — intimate fine-grained motion through-
out the whole etherial region — motion not of



DENSITY AND ENERGY

the nature of locomotion, but circulation in
closed curves, returning upon itself — vortex
motion of a kind far more finely grained than
any waves of light or any atomic or even elec-
tronic structure.

Now if the elasticity of any medium is to be
thus explained kinetically, it follows, as a neces-
sary consequence, that the speed of this internal
motion must be comparable to the speed of wave
propagation; that is to say that the internal
squirming circulation, to which every part of the
ether is subject, must be carried on with a
velocity of the same order of magnitude as the
velocity of light.

This is the theory then — this theory of elas-
ticity as dependent on motion — ^which, in combi-
nation with the estimate of density, makes the
internal energy of the ether so gigantic. For in
every cubic millimeter of space we have, accord-
ing to this view, a mass eqxiivalent to what, if it
were matter, we should call a thousand tons,
circulating internally, every part of it, with a
velocity comparable to the velocity of light, and
therefore containing — stored away in that small
region of space — ^an amount of energy of the
order lo'* ergs, or, what is the same thing, 3 x
10" kilowatt centuries; which is otherwise ex-
pressible as equal to the energy of a million horse-
power station working continuously for forty
million years.

103



THE ETHER OF SPACE

Summarised Brief Statements Concerning

THE Ether

(As communicated by the author to the British
Association at Leicester^ 1907.)

1. The theory that an electric charge must
possess the equivalent of inertia was clearly
established by J. J. Thomson in the Philo-
sophical Magazine for April, 1881.

2. The discovery of masses smaller than
atoms was made experimentally by J. J. Thom-
son, and conmiunicated to Section A at Dover
in 1899.

3. The thesis that the corpuscles so discovered
consisted wholly of electric charges was sustained
by many people, and was clinched by the ex-
periments of Kaufmann in 1902.

4. The concentration of the ionic charge, re-
quired to give the observed corpuscular iner-
tia, can be easily calculated; and consequently
the size of the electric nucleus, or electron, is
known.

5. The old perception that a magnetic field is
kinetic has been developed by Kelvin, Heaviside,
FitzGerald, Hicks, and Larmor, most of whom
have treated it as a flow along magnetic lines;
though it may also, perhaps equally well, be
regarded as a flow perpendictdar to them and
along the Poynting vector. The former doctrine
is sustained by Larmor, as in accordance with the

104



\



DENSITY AND ENERGY

principle of Least Action, and with the ab-
solutely stationary character of the ether as a
whole; the latter view appears to be more con-
sistent with the theories of J. J. Thomson.

6. A charge in motion is well known to be sur-
rounded by a magnetic field; and the energy of
the motion can be expressed in terms of the
energy of this concomitant field — ^which again
must be accounted as the kinetic energy of
ethereous flow.

7. Putting these things together, and consider-
ing the ether as essentially incompressible — on
the strength of the Cavendish electric experi-
ment, the facts of gravitation, and the general
idea of a connecting continuous meditmi — the
author reckons that to deal with the ether
dynamically it must be treated as having a
density of the order 10" grammes per cubic
centimeter. (See Appendix 2.)

8. The existence of transverse waves in the
interior of a fluid can only be explained on gyro-
static principles — t.e,, by the kinetic or rotational
elasticity of Lord Kelvin. And the internal
circulatory speed of the intrinsic motion of such
a fluid must be comparable with the velocity
with which such waves are transmitted.

* 9. Putting these things together, it follows
that the intrinsic or constitutional vortex energy
of the ether must be of the order 10" ergs per
cubic centimeter.

8 IDS



THE Either of SI^acb

Conclusion, — Thus every cubic milliiiieter of
the universal ether of space must possess the
equivalent of a thousand tons, and every patt
of it must be squirming internally with the
velocity of light.



VIII

BTHER AND MATTER

THE MECHANICAL NECESSITY FOR A CONTINUOUS

MEDIUM FILLING SPACE

IN this chapter I propose to siimm£(,ris0 in
simple an4 consecutive form most of the
argu^i^nts already used. Thirty years ago
Clerk-Maxwell gave to the Royal Institution of
Great Briton a remarkable address on ** Action
at a Distance. ** It is reported in the Journal
R.I., Vol. VII, and to it I would direct atten-
tion. Most natural philosophers hold* and have
held, that action at s^ distance across empty
space is impossible; in other words, that matter
cannot act where it is not, but only where it is,
The question "Where is it?** is a further ques-
tion that may demand attention and require
more than a superficial answer. For it can be
argued on the hydro-dynamic or vortex theory
of matter, as well as on the electrical theory,
that every atom of matter has a imiversal tho\igh
nearly infinitesimal prevalence, and extends
everywhere; since there is no definite sharp

J07



THE ETHER OF SPACE

boundary or limiting periphery to the region
disturbed by its existence. The lines of force
of an isolated electric charge extend throughout
illimitable space. And though a charge of op-
posite sign will curve and concentrate them,
yet it is possible to deal with both charges, by
the method of superposition, as if they each
existed separately without the other.

In that case, therefore, however far they reach,
such nuclei clearly exert no "action at a dis-
tance" in the technical sense.

Some philosophers have reason to suppose
that mind can act directly on mind without in-
tervening mechanism — and sometimes that has
been spoken of as genuine action at a distance;
but no proper conception or physical model can
be made of such a process, nor is it clear that
"space" and "distance" have any particular
meaning in the region of psychology. The links
between mind and mind may be something quite
other than physical proximity; and in den)ning
action at a distance across empty space I am not
denying telepathy or other activities of a non-
physical kind. For although brain disturbance
is certainly physical, and is an essential con-
comitant of mental action whether of the send-
ing or receiving variety, yet we know from the
case of heat that a material movement can be
excited in one place at the expense of correspond-
ing movement in another, without any similar

io8



ETHER AND MATTER



kind of transmission or material connection be-
tween the two places: the thing that travels
across vacuum is not heat.

In all cases where physical motion is involved,
however, I would have a medixmi sought for. It
may not be matter, but it must be something;
there must be a connecting link of some kind, or
the transference cannot occur. There can be no
attraction across really empty space. And even
when a material link exists, so that the connection
is obvious, the explanation is not complete; for
when the mechanism of attraction is tmderstood,
it will be found that a body really only moves
because it is pushed by something from behind.
The essential force in nature is the vis a tergo.
So when we have found the "traces," or dis-
covered the connecting thread, we still run up
against the word "cohesion"; and we ought to
be exercised in our minds as to its ultimate
meaning. Why the whole of a rod should
follow, when one end is pulled, is a matter re-
quiring explanation; and the only explanation
that can be given involves, in some form or other,
a continuous mediiun connecting the discrete
and separated particles or atoms of matter.

When a steel spring is bent or distorted, what
is it that is really strained? Not the atoms —
the atoms are only displaced; it is the connect-
ing links that are strained — ^the connecting
medium — ^the ether. Distortion of a spring is

109



THE ETHEft OF SPACE

really distortidn of the ether. All stress exists
ih the ether. Mattet can only be moved. Con-
tact does not exist between the itoms of matter
as we know them; it is doubtful if a piece of
matter ever touches another piece, any more
than a comet touches the sun when it appears to
reboimd from it; but the atoms are connected, £ts
the comet ahd the siiil are connected, by a con-
tinuous plenum Without break or discontinuity
of any kind. Matter acts on matter only
through the ether. But whether mattet is a
thing uttelrly distinct and separate from the
ether, or whether it is a specifically modified
portion of it — ^modified in such a way as to be
susceptible of locomotioh and yet cotitinuoud
with all the rest of the ether, which can be said
to extehd ever3rwhere far beyond the boimds of
the modified and tangible portion — are ques-
tions detnanding, and I may say in process of
receiving, answers.

Every such arisWer involved some view of
the universal slttd possibly infinite uniform om-
nipresent connecting medium, the Ether of
Space.

It has been said, sottlewhat sarcastically, that
the ether was made in England. The statement
is only an fexaggeration of the truth. I might
even urge that it has been largely constructed in
the Royal Institution; for, I will summarise
now the chief lines of evidence on which its

tio



ETHER ANP MATTER



existence is believe4 in* ^nd out knowledge pf
it is based.

First of all, Newton recognised the need of a
medium for explaining gravitation, Jn his
** Optical Queries'* he shows that if the pressure
of thi? meditqn is less it^ the neighbourhood of
den^e l)odies th^.n at great distai^ces froiri them,
densp bodies will be driven toward each qther;
and th^t if the din^inution of pressure is inversely
as the distance from the dense body, the law of
force will be the inverse sqv^are law of gravita-
tion.

All th^t is required, therefore, to explain
gravity, is a diminution of pressure, or increase
of tension, caused by the formation of a matter
tmit — that is to say pf an electron or corpuscle.
And although we 4p not yet kt^ow what an elec-
tron is — whether it be a str^n centre, or what
kind of singularity in tlie ether it may be — tjiere
is no difficulty in supppsing that a sUght, almost
infinitesimal, strain or attempted rarefaction
should be produced in the ether whenever an
electrpn comes into being — to be relaxed ^gaifi
only on its resolution an4 destruction. Strictly
speaking it is not a real strain, but only a
** stress'*; since there can be no actual yield, but
only ^ pull or tension, extendiiig in all directipng
toward infinity.

The tension required per tmit of matter is
almost ludicrously small, and yet in the aggre-

m



THE ETHER OF SPACE

gate, near such a body as a planet, it becomes
enormous.

The,force with which the moon is held in its
orbit would be great enough to tear asimder a
steel rod four htmdred miles thick, with a tenac-
ity of 30 tons per square inch; so that if the
moon and earth were connected by steel instead
of by gravity, a forest of pillars would be
necessary to whirl the system once a month
round their common centre of gravity. Such
a force necessarily implies enormous tension or
pressure in the medium. Maxwell calctdates
that the gravitational stress near the earth,
which we must suppose to exist in the invisible
medium, is 3000 times greater than what the
strongest steel could stand; and near the sim it
should be 2500 times as great as that.

The question has arisen in my mind, whether,
if the whole sensible universe — estimated by
Lord Kelvin as equivalent to about a thousand
million suns — were all concentrated in one body
of specifiable density,^ the stress would not be
so great as to produce a tendency toward etherial
disruption; which would result in a disintegrat-
ing explosion, and a scattering of the particles
once more as an enormous nebula and other
fragments into the depths of space. For the

* On doing the arithmetic, however, I find the neces-
sary concentration absurdly great, showing that such a
mass is quite insufficient. {See Appendix i.)

112



ETHER AND MATTER



tension would be a maximum in the interior of
such a mass; and, if it rose to the value lo**
dynes per square centimeter, something would
have to happen. I do not suppose that this can
be the reason, but one would think there must
be sotne reason, for the scattered condition of
gravitative matter.

Too little is known, however, about the
mechanism of gravitation to enable us to adduce
it as the strongest argtunent in support of the
existence of an ether. The oldest valid and
conclusive requisition of an ethereous medium
depends on the wave theory of light, one of the
founders of which was the Royal Institution
Professor of Natural Philosophy at the be-
ginning of last century. Dr. Thomas Yoimg.

No ordinary matter is capable of transmitting
the undulations or tremors that we call light.
The speed at which they go, the kind of undula-
tion, and the facility with which they go through
vacuum, forbid this.

So clearly and tmiversally has it been per-
ceived that waves must be waves of something
— something distinct from ordinary matter —
that Lord Salisbury, in his presidential address
to the British Association at Oxford, criticised
the ether as little more than a nominative case
to the verb to undulate. It is truly that, though
it Is also truly more than that; but to illustrate
that luminiferous aspect of it, I will quote a

113



THE ETHER OF SPACE

paragraph from the lecture of Clerk-Maxwell's
to which I have already referred: —

"The vast interplanetary and interstellar
regions will no longer be regarded as waste places
in the universe, which the Creator has not seen
fit to fill with the symbols of the manifold order
of His kingdom. We shall find them to be
already full of this wonderful mediimi; so full,
that no htunan power can remove it from the
smallest portion of space, or produce the slight-
est flaw in its infinite contintiity. It extends
imbroken from star to star; and when a molecule
of hydrogen vibrates in the dog-star, the pie-
ditun receives the impulses of these vibrations,
and after carrying them in its immense bosom
for several years, delivers them, in due course,
regular order, and full tale, into the spectroscope
of Mr. Huggins, at Tulse Hill."

This will suffice to emphasise the fact that the
eye is truly an etherial sense-organ — the only
one which we possess, the only mode by which
the ether is enabled to appeal to us; and that the
detection of tremors in this medium — %he per-
ception of the direction in which they go, and
some inference as to the quality of the object
which has emitted them — cover ajl that we
mean by "sight" and "seeing."

I pass, then, to another function: the electric
and magnetic phenomena displayed by the ether;
and on this I will only permit myself a very short

114



•MriBMMftMHIhaHMM



ETHER AND MATTER



quotation from the writings of Faraday, whose
whole life may be said to have been directed tow-
ard a better understanding of these ethereous
phenomena. Indeed, the statue in the entrance
hall of the Royal Institution, Albemarle Street,
may be considered as the statue of the discoverer
of the electric and magnetic properties of the
Ether of Space.

Faraday conjectured that the same medium
which is concerned in the propagation of light
might also be the agent in electromagnetic phe-
nomena. "For my own part," he says, "con-
sidering the relation of a vacuum to the magnetic
force, and the general character of magnetic
phenomena external to the magnet, I anl much
more inclined to the notion that in the trans-
mission of the force there is such an action, ex-
ternal to the magnet, than that the effects are
merely attraction and repulsion at a distahce.
Such an action may be a function of the aether;
for it is not unlikely that, if there be an aether,
it should have other uses than simply the con-
veyance of radiation.**

This conjecture has been amply strengthened
by subsequent investigations.

One more function is now being discovered;
the ether is being found to constitute matter —
an immensely interesting topic, on which there
are many active workers at the present time.
I will make a brief quotation from Prof. Sir J. J.

IIS



THE ETHER OF SPACE

Thomson, where he summarises the conclusion
which we all see looming before us, though it has
not yet been completely attained, and would not
by all be similarly expressed: —

"The whole mass of any body is just the mass
of ether surroimding the body which is carried
along by the Faraday tubes associated with the
atoms of the body. In fact, all mass is mass of
the ether; all momentum, momentum of the
ether; and all kinetic energy, kinetic energy of
the ether. This view, it should be said, reqtdres
the density of the ether to be immensely greater
than that of any known substance."

Yes, far denser — so dense that matter by com-
parison is like gossamer, or a filmy imperceptible
mist, or a milky way. Not unreal or unimpor-
tant — a cobweb is not unreal, nor to certain creat-
ures is it unimportant, but it cannot be said to
be massive or dense; and matter, even platintun,
is not dense when compared with the ether. Not
till last year, however, did I realise what the
density of the ether must really be,* compared
with that modification of it which appeals to our
senses as matter, and which for that reason en-
grosses our attention.

Is there any other function possessed by the
ether, which, though not yet discovered, may lie
within the botmds of possibility for future dis-

* See Lodge, Philosophical Magazine^ April, 1907.
Also Appendix 2, below.

116



ETHER AND MATTER



covery ? I believe there is, but it is too specula-
tive to refer to, beyond saying that it has been
urged as probable by the authors of The Un-
seen Universe, and has been thus tentatively
referred to by Clerk-Maxwell: —

"Whether this vast homogeneous expanse of
isotropic matter is fitted not only to be a medium
of physical interaction between distant bodies,
and to ftdfil other physical functions of which,
perhaps, we have as yet no conception, but also
... to constitute the material organism of beings
exercising functions of life and mind as high or
higher than ours are at present — is a question far
transcending the limits of physical speculation."

And there for the present I leave that aspect of
the subject.

Ether and Matter.

I shall now attempt to illustrate some relations
between ether and matter.

The question is often asked. Is ether material ?
This is largely a question of words and con-
venience. Undoubtedly, the ether belongs to
the material or physical universe, but it is not
ordinary matter. I should prefer to say it is
not "matter" at all. It may be the substance
or substratum or material of which matter is
composed, but it would be confusing and incon-
venient not to be able to discriminate between
matter on the one hand and ether on the

117



/



THE ETHER OF SPACE

other. If you tie a knot on a bit of string, the
knot is composed of string, but the string ip not
composed of knots. If you have a spioke or
vortex ring in the air, the vortex-ring is made of
air, but the atmosphere is not a vortex-ring;
^nd it would be only confusing to say that it was.

The essential distinction between matter 3.n(J
ether is that matter moves, in the sense that it
has the property of locomotion and can effect im-
pact and bombardment; while ether is strained,
and has the property of exerting stress and
recoil. All potential energy exists in the ether.
It may vibrate, and it may rotate, but as regards
locomotion it is stationary — the most stationary
body we know: absolutely stationary, so to
speak; our standard of rest.

All that we ourselves can effect, in the material
universe, is to alter the motion and configura-
tion of masses of matter; we can move matter
by our muscles, and that is all we can do directly :
everything else is indirect.

But now comes the question, How is it possible
for matter to be composed of ether? How is it
possible for a solid to be made out of fluid? A
solid possesses the properties of rigidity, impene-
trability, elasticity, and such like; how can these
be imitated by a perfect fluid such as the ether
must be?

The answer is. They can be imitated by a -flnid
in motion; a statement which we make with

ii8



ETHER AND MATTER



confidence as the result of a great part of Lord
Kelvin's work.

It may be illustrated by a few experiments.

A wheel of spokes, transparent or permeable
when stationary, becomes opaque when revolv-
ing, so that a ball thrown against it does not go
through, but rebotmds. The motion only
affects permeability to matter; transparency
to light is unaffected.

A silk cord hanging from a pulley becomes
rigid and viscous when put into rapid motion;
and pulses or waves which may be generated
on the cord travel along it with a speed equal to
its own velocity, whatever that velocity may be,
so that they appear to stand still. This is a
genuine case of kinetic rigidity; and the fact that
the wave-transmission velocity is equal to the
rotatory speed of the material, is typical and
important, for in all cases of kinetic elasticity
these two velocities are of the same order of
magnitude.

A flexible chain, set spinning, can stand up on
end while the motion continues.

A jet of water at sufficient speed can be struck
with a hammer, and resists being cut with a sword.

A spinning disk of paper becomes elastic like
flexible metal, and can act like a circular saW.
Sir William White tells me that in ilaval construc-
tion steel plates are cut by a rapidly revolving
disk of soft iron.



119



THE ETHER OF SPACE



A vortex-ring, ejected from an elliptical orifice,
oscillates about the stable circtdar form, as an
india-rubber ring would do; thus furnishing a
beautiftd example of kinetic elasticity, and show-
ing us cleariy a fluid displa)dng some of the
properties of a solid.

A still further example is Lord Kelvin's model
of a spring balance, made of nothing but rigid
bodies in spinning motion.* This arrangement
utilises the processional movement of balanced
gyrostats — concealed in a case and supporting a
book — to imitate the behaviour of a spiral spring,
if it were used to support the same book.

If the ether can be set spinning, therefore, we
may have some hope of making it imitate the
properties of matter, or even of constructing
matter by its aid. But how are we to spin the
ether? Matter alone seems to have no grip of it.
As already described, I have spim steel disks, a
yard in diameter, 4000 times a minute, have sent
light rotmd and round between them, and tested
carefully for the slightest effect on the ether.
Not the slightest effect was perceptible. We can-
not spin ether mechanically.

But we can vibrate it electrically; and every
source of radiation does that. An electrical
charge, in sufficiently rapid vibration, is the
only source of ether-waves that we know; and

* Address to Section A of British Association at
Montreal, 1884.

120



ETHER AND MATTER



if an electric charge is suddenly stopped, it
generates the pulses known as X-rays, as the
result of the collision.. Not speed, but sudden
change of speed, is the necessary condition for
generating waves in the ether by electricity.

We can also infer some kind of rotary motion
in the ether; though we have no such obvious
means of detecting the spin as is furnished by
vision for detecting some kinds of vibration.
Rotation is supposed to exist whenever we put
a charge into the neighbourhood of a magnetic
pole. Round the line joining the two, the ether
is spinning like a top. I do not say it is spinning
fast: that is a question of its density; it is, in
fact, spinning with excessive slowness, but it is
spinning with a definite moment of momentimi.
J. J. Thomson's theory makes itp moment of
momentum exactly equal to e m, the product
of charge and pole; the charge being measured
electrostatically and the pole magnetically.

How can this be shown experimentally ? Sup-
pose we had a spinning top enclosed in a case, so
that the spin was imrecognisable by ordinary
means — it could be detected by its gyrostatic
behaviour to force. If allowed to "precess" it
will respond by moving perpendicularly to a
deflecting force. So it is with the charge and the
magnetic pole. Try to move the charge sud-
denly, and it immediately sets off at right
angles. A moving charge is a current, and the

9 121



THE ETHER OF SPACE

pole and the current try to revolve round one
another — a, fact which may be regarded as ex-
hibiting a true gyrostatic action due to the other-
wise unrecognisable etherial spin. The fact
of such magnetic rotation was discovered by
Faraday.

I know that it is usually worked out in another
way, in terms of lines of force and the rest of the
circuit; but I am thinking of a current as a
stream of projected charges; and no one way of
regarding such a matter is likely to exhaust the
truth, or to exclude other modes which are
equally valid. Anyhow, in whatever way it is
regarded, it is an example of the three rec-
tangular vectors.

The three vectors at right angles to each other,
which may be labelled Current, Magnetism, and
Motion respectively, or more generally E, H, and
V, represent the quite fundamental relation be-
tween ether and matter, and constitute the link
between Electricity, Magnetism, and Mechanics.
Where any two of these are present, the third is
a necessary consequence. This principle is the
basis of all dynamos, of electric motors, of light,
of telegraphy, and of most other things. Indeed,
it is a question whether it does not underlie
everything that we know in the whole of the
physical sciences; and whether it is not the basis
of our conception of the three dimensions of space.

Lastly, we have the fundamental property of

132



ETHER AND MATTER



matter called inertia, which can, to a certain
extent, be explained electromagnetically, pro-
vided the ethereous density is granted as of the
order lo^^ grammes per cubic centimeter. The
elasticity of the ether would then have to be of
the order lo^ c.g.s. ; and if this is due to intrinsic
turbulence, the speed of the whirling or rotation-
al elasticity must be of the same order as the
velocity of light. This follows hydrodynamic-
ally; in the same sort of way as the speed at
which a pulse travels on a flexible running end-
less cord, whose tension is entirely due to the
centrifugal force of the motion, is precisely
equal to the velocity of the cord itself. And
so, on our present view, the intrinsic energy
of constitution of the ether is incredibly and
portentously great; every cubic millimeter of
space possessing what, if it were matter, would
be a mass of a thousand tons, and an energy
equivalent to the output of a million-horse-
power-station for 40 million years.

The tmiverse we are living in is an extraor-
dinary one; and our investigation of it has only
just begim. We know that matter has a psy-
chical significance, since it can constitute hraifiy
which links together the physical and the
psychical worlds. If any one thinks that the
ether, with all its massiveness and energy, has
probably no psychical significance, I find my-
self unable to agree with him.

123



IX
STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

TO show that the ether cannot be the slight
and rarefied substance which at one time,
and indeed until quite lately, it was thought to
be, it is useful to remember that not only has it to
be the vehicle of light and the medium of all elec-
tric and magnetic influence, but also that it has
to transmit the tremendous forces of gravitation.

Among small bodies gravitational forces are
slight, and are altogether exceeded by magnetic
and electric or chemical forces. Indeed, gravita-
tional attraction between bodies of a certain
smallness can be more than counterbalanced even
by the pressure which their mutual radiation
exerts — almost infinitesimal though that is; so
that, as a matter of fact, small enough bodies of
any warmth will repel each other unless they are
in an enclosure of constant temperature — i.e.,
imless the radiation pressure upon them is uni-
form all roimd.

The size at which radiation repulsion over-
balances gravitational attraction, for equal

124



STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

spheres, depends on the temperature of the
spheres and on their density; but at the ordinary
temperature to which we are accustomed, say
60° Fahrenheit or thereabouts, equality between
the two forces will obtain for two wooden
spheres in space if each is about a foot in
diameter; according to Professor Poynting's
data (Philosophical Transactions , Vol. 202, p.
541). For smaller or hotter bodies, radiation-
repulsion overpowers mutual gravitation; and it
increases with the fourth power of their absolute
temperature. The gravitational attractive force
between particles is exceedingly small; and that
between two atoms or two electrons is negligibly
small, even though they be within molecular
distance of each other.

For instance, two atoms of, say, gold, at
molecular distance, attract each other gravita-
tionally with a force of the order

IO-" X IO-" 10-** .- ^^ J

y (,o-«)' = irr« ^ ^^ ' = 'o*-dyne;

which would cause no perceptible acceleration
at all.

The gravitational attraction of two electrons
at the same distance is the forty-thousand-
millionth part of this, and so one would think
must be entirely negligible. And yet it is to the
^gg^egate attraction of myriads of such bodies
that the restdtant force of attraction is due —



THE ETHER OF SPACE

a force which is felt over millions of miles. The
force is not only felt indeed, but must be reck-
oned as one of prodigious magnitude.

When dealing with bodies of astronomical size,
the force of gravitation overpowers all other
forces; and all electric and magnetic attractions
sink by comparison into insignificance.

These immense forces must be transmitted by
the ether, and it is instructive to consider their
amotmt.

Some Astronomical Forces which the Ether

HAS TO Transmit.

Arithmetical Calculation of the Pull of the Earth

on the Moon.

The mass of the earth is 6000 trillion (6 X 10'^)
tons. The mass of the moon is -g^th that of the
earth. Terrestrial gravity at the moon's dis-
tance (which is 60 earth radii) must be reduced
in the ratio i : 60^; that is, it must be -ffiWth of
what it is here.

Consequently the pull of the earth on the
moon is

_14JJL tons weight.
80 X 3600 ^

A pillar of steel which could transmit this force,
provided it could sustain a tension of 40 tons to
the square inch, would have a diameter of about
400 miles; as stated in the text, page 112.

126



STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

If this force were to be transmitted by a forest
of weightless pillars each a square foot in cross-
section, with a tension of 30 tons to the square
inch throughout, there would have to be 5
million million of them.

Arithmetical Calculation of the Pull of the Sun

on the Earth,

The mass of the earth is 6x 10^^ tons. The
intensity of solar gravity at the sun's surface is
25 times ordinary terrestrial gravity.

At the earth's distance, which is nearly 200
solar radii, solar gravity will be reduced in the
ratio of i : 200 squared.

Hence the force exerted by the sim on the
earth is

-^—7 rs tons weight.

(200)'

That is to say, it is approximately equal to the
weight of 3 7 X 10" ordinary tons upon the earth's
surface.

Now steel may readily be found which can
stand a load of 37 tons to every square inch of
cross-section. The cross-section of a bar of such
steel, competent to transmit the sun's pull to the
earth, would therefore have to be

10*' square inches;

or, say, 700 x 10" square feet,

127



THE ETHER OF SPACE

And this is eqtiivalent to a million million round
rods or pillars each 30 feet in diameter.

Hence the statement in the text (page 26) is
well within the mark.

The Pull of the Earth on the Sun.

The pull of the earth on the stm is, of course,
equal and opposite to the pull of the sim on the
earth, which has just been calculated; but it
furnishes another mode of arriving at the result,
and may be regarded as involving simpler data —
i.e., data more generally known. All we need
say is the following: —

The mass of the Stm is 316,000 times that of
the Earth.

The mean distance of the sun is, say, 23,000
earth radii.

Hence the weight or pull of the sun by the

earth is

^16000 , „ ^ ...

■r r* X 6 X 10'* tons weight.

(23000)'

In other words, it is approximately equal to
the ordinary commercial weight of 36x10^^ tons,
as already calculated.

The Centripetal Force acting on the Earth.

Yet another method of calculating the sun's
pull is to express it in terms of the centrifugal
force of the earth; namely, its mass, multiplied

128



STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

by the square of its angtdar velocity, multiplied
by the radius of its orbit; that is to say,

where T is the length of a year.

The process of evaluating this is instructive,
owing to the manipulation of imits which it
involves : —

1? X w 11 4. w 4«^ X o2 X lo* miles

F = 6 X io»» tons X , ^ , ^ rr

(3 6 si days)'

which of course is a mass multiplied by an
acceleration. The acceleration is —

40 X 02 X lO* ., ,

^——-p — r^ miles per hour per hour

133300 ^ (24)' ^

3680 X lo* X 5280 - ^

= — ^ ^ / ^ — r, feet per sec. per sec.

133300 X 576 X (3600)' ^ ^

115 X 5280 ^ - .

= ^-- 2 ^32 leet per sec. per sec.

133300 X 576 X 12.96 o f f

_ g
1640

Hence the Force of attraction is that which,
applied to the earth's mass, produces in it an
acceleration equal to the raWth part of what
ordinary terrestrial gravity can produce in falling
bodies; or

P = 6 X 10" tons X -4-

1640

= —z — X 10'* tons weight;
1640

129



THE ETHER OF SPACE

which is the ordinary weight of 37 x lo" tons, as
before.

The sHght numerical discrepancy between the
above results is of course due to the approximate
character of the data selected, which are taken
in roimd nimibers as quite sufficient for purposes
of illustration.

If we imagine the force applied to the earth by
a forest of round rods, one for every square foot
of the earth's surface — i.e., of the projected
earth's hemisphere or area of equatorial plane —
the force transmitted by each would have to be
2700 tons; and therefore, if of 30- ton steel, they
would each have to be eleven inches in diameter,
or nearly in contact, all over the earth.

Pull of a Planet on the Earth.

While we are on the subject, it seems interest-
ing to record the fact that the pull of any planet
on the earth, even Neptune, distant though it is,
is still a gigantic force. The pull of Neptime is
^Trfcirth of the sim's pull; i.e., it is 18 billion tons
weight.

Pull of a Star on the Earth.

On the other hand, the pull of a fixed star,
like Sirius — say a star, for example, which is 20
times the mass of the sun and 24 light years
distant — is comparatively very small.

130



STRENGTH OP THE ETHER

It is easily found by dividing 20 times the
sun's pull by the squared ratio of 34 years to 8
minutes; and it comes out as 30 million tons
weight.

Such a force is able to produce no perceptible
effect. The acceleration it causes in the earth
and the whole solar system, at its present speed
through space, is only able to curve the path
with a radius of ctirvature of length thirty
thotisand times the distance of the star.

Force required to hold together the Components

of some Double Stars,

But it is not to be supposed that the trans-
mission of any of these forces gives the ether the
slightest trouble, or strains it to anywhere near
the limits of its capacity. Such forces must be
transmitted with perfect ease, for there are plenty
of cases where the force of gravitation is vastly
greater than that. In the case of double stars,
for instance, two suns are whirling roimd each
other; and some of them are whirling remark-
ably fast. In such cases the force holding the
components together must be enormous.

Perhaps the most striking case, for which we
have substantially accurate data, is the star
/3 Aurigae; which, during the general spectro-
scopic survey of the heavens tmdertaken by
Professor Pickering, of Harvard, in connection

131



THE ETHER OF SPACE

with the Draper Memorial, was discovered to
show a spectrum with the lines some days double
and alternate days single. Clearly it must con-
sist of a pair of luminous objects revolving in a
plane approximately containing the line of
vision; the revolution being completed every
four days. For the lines will then be optically
displaced by the motion during part of the
orbit — those of the advancing body to the right,
those of the receding body to the left — while in
that part of the orbit which lies athwart the
direction of vision, the spectriun lines will return
to their proper places, opening out again to a
maximum, in the opposite direction, at the next
quadrant.

The amount of displacement can be roughly
estimated, enabling us to calculate the speed
with which the sources of light were moving.

Professor Pickering, in a brief statement in
Nature, Vol. XLI, page 403, 1889, says that the
velocity amounts to about 150 miles per second,
and that it is roughly the same for both com-
ponents.
Taking these data: —

Equality and imiformity of speeds,
150 miles per second each.
Period 4 days —
we have all the data necessary to determine the
masses; and likewise the gravitative pull be-
tween them. For the star must consist of two

132



STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

equal bodies, revolving about a common centre
of gravity midway between them, in nearly
circular orbits.

The speed and period together easily give the
radius of the circular orbit as about 8 million
miles.

Equating centrifugal and centripetal forces

m v' _ m'
r ~^(2r)"

and comparing the value of 4r*/T* so obtained
with the r*/T^ of the earth, we find the mass of
each body must be about 30,000 times that of
the earth, or about iVth that of the sun.

(This is treating them as spheres, though they
must really be pulled into decidedly prolate
shapes. Indeed it may seem surprising that the
further portions can keep up with the nearer
portions as they revolve. If they are of some-
thing like solar density their diameter will be
comparable to half a million miles, and the
natural periods of their near and far portions
will differ in the ratio (-fj)*/" =1.1 approximate-
ly. Tenacity could not hold the parts together,
but gravitational coherence would.)

This, however, is a digression. Let us con-
tinue the calculation of the gravitative pull.
We have masses of 3 x io*x 6x 10" tons, re-

133



THE ETHER OP SPACE

volving with angtilar velocity 2 ir -r- 4 days, in a
circle of radius 8x 10* miles.
Consequently the centripetal acceleration is

:^ miles per day per day; which comes

out — ft. per sec. per sec, or nearly half or-
dinary terrestrial gravity.

Consequently the pull between the two com-
ponents of the double star /3 Aiuigae is

-^ X 18 X io» tons,
2.2

or equal to the weight of

80 X lo*^ tons on the earth,

which is more than twenty million times as great
as is the pull between the earth and our stm.

Simple calculations such as these could have
been made at any time; there is nothing novel
about them, as there is about the estimate of the
ether's density and vast intrinsic energy, in
Chapters VI and VII. But then there is noth-
ing hypothetical or imcertain about them either;
they are certain and definite: whereas it may be
thought there is something doubtftd about the
newer contentions which involve consideration
of the mass and size of electrons and of the tmi-
form and incompressible character of ethereal
constitution. Even the idea of *'massiveness"

134



STRENGTH OF THE ETHER

as applied to the ether involves an element of un-
certainty or of figurativeness; because until we
know more about ether's peculiar nature (if it is
peculiar), we have to deal with it in accordance
with material analogies, and must specify its
massiveness as that which would have to be
possessed by it if it fulfilled its functions and yet
were anything like ordinary matter. It cannot
really be ordinary matter, because ordinary
matter is definitely differentiated from it, and
is presumably composed of it; but the inertia of
ordinary matter, however it be electrically or
magnetically explained, must in the last resort
depend on something parentally akin to inertia
in the fundamentar substance which fills space.
And this it is which we have attempted in
Chapters VI and VII to evaluate and to express
in the soberest terms possible.



GENERAL THEORY OF ABERRATION

IN Chapter III the subject of Aberration was
treated in a simple and geometrical manner,
but it is now time to deal with it more generally.
And to do this compactly I must be content in
the greater part of this chapter to appeal chiefly
to physicists.

The following general statements concerning
aberration can be made: —

1 . A ray of light in clear space is straight, what-
ever the motion of the medium, unless eddies
exist; in other words, no irrotational disturbance
of ether can deflect a ray.

2. But if the observer is in motion, the ap-
parent ray will not be the true ray, and his line of
vision will not truly indicate the direction of an
object.

3. In a stationary ether the ray coincides with
wave-normal. In a moving ether the ray and
wave-normal enclose an aberration angle 6, such
that sin e = z;/^> the ratio of the ether speed to
the light speed.

136



ABERRATION THEORY



4. In all cases the line of vision depends on
motion of the observer, and on that alone. If
the observer is stationary, his line of vision is a
ray. If he moves at the same rate as the ether,
his line of vision is a wave-normal.

5. Line of vision depends not at all on the
motion of the ether, so long as it has a velocity-
potential. Hence, if this condition is satisfied
the theory of aberration is qtiite simple.



General Statement as to Negative Results in the

Subject,

It is noteworthy that almost all the observa-
tions which have been made with negative
results as to the effect of the earth's orbital
motion on the ether are equally consistent with
complete connection and complete indepen-
dence between ether and matter. If there is
complete connection, the ether near the earth
is relatively stagnant, and negative terrestrial
results are natural. If there is complete inde-
pendence, the ether is either absolutely station-
ary or has a velocity-potential, and the negative
results are, as has been shown, thereby explained.
Direct experiment on the subject of etherial
viscosity proves that that is either really or
approximately zero, and substantiates the "in-
dependence" explanation.

10 137



THE ETHER OF SPACE

Definition of a Ray.

A ray signifies the path of a definite or iden-
tical portion of radiation energy — the direction
of energy-flux. In other words, it may be con-
sidered as the path of a labelled disturbance ; for
it is some special feature which enables an eye to
fix direction : it is that which determines the line
of coUimation of a telescope.

Now in order that a disturbance from A may
reach B, it is necessary that adjacent elements
of a wave front at A shall arrive at B in the
same phase; hence, the path by which a disturb-
ance travels must satisfy this condition from
point to point. This condition will be sat-
isfied if the time of journey down a ray and
down all infinitesimally differing paths is the
same.

The equation to a ray is therefore contained in
the statement that the time taken by light to
traverse it is a minimum; or

B

ds , .
Y= mmimtiin

A

If the meditmi, instead of being stationary, is
drifting with the velocity v, at angle 6 to the
ray, we must substitute for V the modified
velocity V cos e+v cos d; and so the function

138



ABERRATION THEORY



that has to be a minimum, in order to give the
path of a ray in a moving medium, is



B

Time of 1 ds



-J



journey | V ( cos t + o cos 0)

A



I



>B
I V COS t-V COS ^ j.._^;«;-v.«*«

= I — d5 = minimum

V* (i - a')

A



where a is the ratio v/Y.

Path of Ray, and Time of Journey, through an
Irrotatiofiully Moving Medium,

Writing a velocity - potential ^ in the above
equation to a ray, that is putting

V cos = T^,

and ignoring possible variations in the minute
correction factor i—a^ between the points A
and B, it becomes



fB
cos t . ds ipB- fftK ^. .
• ^7 ~ yv=— 7 — - — iv = mimi
I - a' V V (i-a*)



Time __ . . __ , ,

journey = ' '- ^ " — - = "ii^^imum.



Now the second term depends only on end
points, and therefore has no effect on path. The

139



THE ETHER OF SPACE

first term contains only the second power of
aberration magnitude; and hence it has much
the same value as if everything were stationary.
A ray that was straight will remain straight in
spite of motion. Whatever shape it had, that it
will retain.

Only cos c, and variations in a*, can produce
any effect on path; and effects so produced must
be very small, since the value of cos € is

y/ (i-a«sin»0).

A second-order effect on direction may there-
fore be produced by irrotational motion, but not
a first-order effect. A similar statement applies
to the time of journey roimd any closed
periphery.

Michelson's Experiment.

We conclude, therefore, that general etherial
drift does not affect either the path of a ray, or
the time of its journey to and fro, or rotmd a
complete contour, to any important extent.
But that taking second-order quantities into
account, the time of going to and fro in any
direction inclined at angle to a constant drift
is, from the above expression,

T + T = 2 T cos e _ V (i-a'sin'g) *p
* * "~ I - a' ~ i-a'

where 2T is the ordinary time of the double
journey without any drift.

140



ABERRATION THEORY



Hence some slight modification of interference
effects by reagon of drift would seem to be pos-
sible; since the time of a to and fro light-joumey
depends subordinately on the inclination of ray
to drift.

The above expression applies to Michelson's
remarkable experiment^ of sending a split beam
to and fro, half along and half across the line of
the earth's motion; and is, in fact, a theory of it.
There ought to be an effect due to the difference
between 0=o and 6=90®. But none can be
detected. Hence, either something else happens,
or the ether near the earth is dragged with it so
as not to stream through our instrtunents.

Alternative Explanation.

But if the ether is dragged along near moving
matter, it behaves like a viscous fluid, and all
idea of a velocity-potential must be abandoned.
This would complicate the theory of aberration
(pp. 47 and 64), and moreover is dead against the
experimental evidence described in Chapter V.

The negative result of Mr. Michelson*s is, how-
ever, explicable in another way — namely, by the
FitzGerald-Lorentz theory that the linear dimen-
sions of bodies are a function of their motion
through the ether. And such an effect it is
reasonable to expect; since, if cohesion forces are

^Philosophical Magazine ^ December, 1887.

141



THE ETHER OF SPACE



electrical, they must be affected by motion, to a
known and calculable amount, depending on the
square of the ratio of the speed to the velocity of
light. (See end of Chap. IV.)

The theory of Prof. H. A. Lorentz, accord-
ingly, shows that the shape of Michelson's stone
supporting block will be distorted by the mo-
tion; its dimensions across and along the line
of ether drift being affected differently. And
the amoimt of the change will be such as pre-
cisely to compensate and neutralise the optical
effect of motion which might otherwise be per-
ceived. This theory is now generally accepted.

It is this neutralising or compensatory effect —
which acts equally on to and fro motion of light,
to and fro motion of electric currents, and on
the shape of material bodies — that renders any
positive result in experiments on ether-drift so
difficult or impossible to obtain ; so that, in spite
of the speed with which we are rushing through
space, no perceptible influence is felt on either
electrical or optical phenomena, except those
which are due to relative motion of source and
observer.

Some Details in the Theory of the Doppler Ejfect,

or Effect of Motion on Dispersion

by Prism or Grating.

When light is analysed by a prism or grating
into a spectrum, the course of each ray is de-

142



ABERRATION THEORY



fleeted — refracted or diffracted — by an amount
corresponding to its frequency of vibration or
wave-length.

Motion of the medium, so long as it is steady,
affects neither frequency nor wave-length, and
accordingly is without influence on the result.
It produces no Doppler effect except when
waxing or waning.

Motion of the source alone crowds the waves
together on the advancing side and spreads them
out on the receding side. An observer, therefore,
whom the source is approaching receives shorter
waves, and one from whom the source is reced-
ing receives longer waves, than normal. At any
fixed point waves will arrive, therefore, with
modified frequency.

So long as a source is stationary the wave-
lengths emitted are quite normal, but motion of
an observer may change the frequency with
which they are received, in an obvious way; they
are swept up faster if the receiver is approaching,
they have a stem chase if it is receding.

All this is familiar, and was geometrically illus-
trated in Chapter III, but there are some minor
and rather curious details which are worthy of
brief consideration.

Grating Theory.

For suppose a ** grating " is used to analyse the
light. Its effect can depend on nothing kinetic;

M3



THE ETHER OF SPACE

it must be regulated by the merely geometric
width of the ruled spaces on it. Consequently it
can only directly apprehend wave-lengths, not
frequencies.

In the case of a moving source, therefore, when
the wave-length is really changed, a grating will
appreciate the fact, and will show a true Doppler
effect. But in the case of a moving observer,
when all the waves received are of normal length,
though swept up with abnormal frequency, the
grating must still indicate wave-length alone,
and accordingly will show no true Doppler effect.

But inasmuch as the telescope or line of vision
is inclined at the angle of disperson to the direc-
tion of the incident ray, ordinary aberration
must come in, as it always does when an ob-
server moves athwart his line of vision; and so
there will be a spurious or apparent Doppler
effect due to common aberration. That is to
say a spectrum line will not be seen in its true
place, but will appear to be shifted by an amount
almost exactly imitative of a real Doppler effect
— the imitation being correct up to the second
order of aberration magnitude. The slight out-
standing difference between them is calculated
in my Philosophical Transactions paper, 1893,
page, 787. It is too small to observe.

It is not an important matter, but as it is
rather troublesome to work out the diffraction
observed by a grating advancing toward the

144



ABERRATION THEORY



source of light, it may be as well to record the
result here.

The following are the diffracted rays which
require attention — ^with the inclination of each to
the grating-normal specified: —

The diffracted ray if all were stationary, 60;

The real diffracted ray when grating is
advancing, 0;

The ray as perceived, allowing for aberration, ;

The equivalent diffracted ray if all were
stationary and the wave-length really
shortened, d^

As an auxiliary we use the aberration angle c,
such that sin c = a sin 6, where a = v/V,

Among these four angles the following relations
hold; so that, given one of them, all are known.



1



sinO, = (i - a) sin 0©

sin ^ = (i - a vers f) sin $q



Whence and di are very nearly but not ab-
solutely the same. 6, is the ray observed by
an instrument depending primarily on fre-
quency, like a prism; is the ray observed by
an instrument depending primarily on wave-
length, like a grating.

Prism Theory.

Now let a prism be used to analyse the light;
its dispersive power is in most theories held to f^

MS



THE ETHER OF SPACE

depend directly upon frequency — i.e., upon a
time relation between the period of a light vibra-
tion and the period of an atomic or electronic
revolution or other harmonic excursion.

Let us say, therefore, that prismatic dispersion
directly indicates frequency. It cannot depend
upon wave-length, for the wave-length inside
different substances is different, and though
refractive index corresponds to this, dispersive
power does not.

In the case of a prism, therefore, no distinction
can be drawn between motion of source and
motion of receiver; for in both cases the fre-
quency with which the waves are received will
be altered — either because they are really shorter,
though arriving at normal speed, or because they
are swept up faster, although of normal length.

Achromatic Prism.

It must be noticed that the observation of
Doppler effect by a prism depends entirely on
dispersion — i.e., on waves of different length
being affected differently. But prisms can be
constructed whose dispersion is corrected and
neutralised. Such achromatic prisms, if per-
fectly achromatic, will treat waves of all sizes
alike; and, accordingly, the shortening of the
waves from a moving source will not produce
any effect. Achromatic prisms will therefore

146



ABERRATION THEORY



behave to terrestrial and to extra-terrestrial
sources — i.e., to relatively stationary and re-
latively moving sources, in the same way.

This must be recollected in connection with
several of the negative results rightly obtained
by some observers; such as Arago, for instance,
who applied an achromatic prism to a star which
the earth was approaching, without observing
any effect. A Doppler effect should have been
observed by a dispersive prism, but not by an
achromatic one : for the refractive index of a sub-
stance is not affected by any motion of the earth.

It is not reasonable to expect that refractive
index would be affected, since it depends in
simple geometrical fashion on retarded velocity —
i.e., on optical etherial loading or apparent extra
internal density.

An achromatic grating, however, is (rashly
speaking) an impossibility.

Effect of Transparent Matter.

But when a ray is travelling through trans-
parent matter, will not motion of that matter
affect its course?

If the matter is moved relatively to source and
receiver, as in Fizeau's experiment with running
water, most certainly it will ; to the full effect of
the loading or extra or travelling density, (^^- 1),
compared with the total density /i^.

M7



THE ETHER OF SPACE

This fraction of the velocity of the material
medium must directly influence the velocity of
light, for the waves will be conveyed in the sense
of the material motion w, with the additional
speed u (ji^—i)fi^. {See also Appendix 3.)

But if the transparent matter through which
the light is going is stationary with respect to
source and receiver, only sharing with them the
general planetary motion — i.e., being subject to
the opposite all-pervading ether drift — ^then no
influence due to the drift can be experienced ; for
the free ether of space behaves just as it would if
the matter were not there. This can be shown
more elaborately by the following calculation.

Optical Effect of Ether Drift through Dense

Stationary Bodies.

The calculation of the lag in phase caused by
Fresners etherial motion may proceed thus: A
dense slab of thickness 0, which would naturally
be traversed with the velocity V//u, is traversed
with the velocity (V//x) cos c+ (v/fi^) cos 0;
where v is the relative velocity of the ether in
its neighbourhood; whence the time of journey
through it is



r-, instead of fLl

cos £ + 2 cos 9\ V

148



ABERRATION THEORY



So the eqtdvalent air thickness, instead of being
Oi—i)z, is

/* ^ z = /m cos e - a cos



a

COS f H — cos 9



= / m cos t -a cos g \



(-5



or, to the first order of minutiae,

(jA—i)z-'az cos 9;

d being the angle between ray and ether drift
inside the mediiim.

So the extra equivalent air layer due to the
motion is approximately ±a z cos 6, a quantity
independent of /i.

Hence, no plan for detecting this first order
effect of motion is in any way assisted by the use
of dense stationary substances; their extra ether,
being stationary, does not affect the lag caused
by motion, except indeed in the second order of
small quantities, as shown above.

Direct experiments made by Hoek,^ and by
Mascart, on the effect of introducing tubes of
water into the path of half beams of light, are in
entire accord with this negative conclusion.

Thus, then, we find that no general motion of
the entire medium can be detected by changes in
direction, or in frequency, or in phase; for on

^Archives N^erlandaises (1869), Vol. IV, p. 443, or
Nature t Vol. XXVI, p. 500. Also Chapter IV, above.

Z49



THE ETHER OF SPACE

none of them has it any appreciable (i.e., first
order) effect, even when assisted by dense
matter.

Another mode of stating the matter is to say
that the behaviour of ether inside matter is such
as to enable a potential-fimction,



/ fAf cos 9ds,



to exist throughout all transparent space, so far
as motion of ether alone is concerned {see Ap-
pendix 3).

The existence of this potential function readily
accoimts for the absence of all effect on direction
due to the general drift of the medium, whether
in the presence of dense matter (such as water-
filled telescopes) or otherwise. Whatever may
be the path of a ray by reason of reflection or
refraction in a stationary ether, it is precisely
the same in a moving one if this condition is
satisfied, although the wave-normals and wave-
fronts are definitely shifted.

However matter affects or loads the ether in-
side it, it cannot on this theory be said either
to hold it still, or to carry it with it. The
general ether stream must remain unaffected,
not only near, but inside matter, if rays are to
retain precisely the same course as if it were
relatively stationary.



ABERRATION THEORY



But it must be understood that the etherial
motion here contemplated is the general drift of
the entire medium; or its correlative, the imiform
motion of all the matter concerned. There is
nothing to be said against aberration effects
being producible or modifiable by motion of
parts of the medium, or by the artificial motion
of transparent bodies and other partitioned-off
regions. Artificial motion of matter may readily
alter both the time of journey and the path of a
ray, for it has no potential conditions to satisfy;
it may easily describe a closed contour, and may
take part in conveying light.

But I must repeat that this conveyance of
light by moving matter is an effect due to the
material load only; it represents no disturbance
of the ether of space. FresneFs law, in fact,
definitely means that moving transparent matter
does not appreciably disturb the ether of space.
Direct experiment, as recorded in Chapter V,
shows that close to rapidly moving opaque
matter there is no disturbance either.

I regard the non-disturbance of the ether of
space by moving matter as established.

SUMMARY.

The estimates of this book, and of Modern
Views of Electricity, are that the ether of space
is a continuous, incompressible, stationary,

151



THE ETHER OF SPACE

is T^ = gR, or for different planets is proportional to
oR».

The velocity of free fall from infinity to such a
planet is •/ (2 T^) I *^c velocity of free fall from cir-
ctunference to centre, asstuning uniform distribu-
tion of density, is v^(To); and from infinity to
centre it is"/(3To).

Expanding all this into words: —

The etherial tension near the earth's surface,
required to explain gravity by its rate of variation,
is of the order 6x10" c.g.s. units. The tension near
the sun is 2500 times as great (p. 112). With dif-
ferent spheres in general, it is proportional to the
density and to the superficial area. Hence, near
a bvillet one inch in diameter, it is of the order lo"*;
and near an atom or an electron about lo**' c.g.s.

If ever the tension rose to equal the constitution-
al elasticity or intrinsic kinetic energy of the ether —
which we have seen is 10"' dynes per square centi-
meter (or ergs per c.c.) or 10" tons weight per
square millimeter — it seems likely that something
would give way. But no known mass of matter is
able to cause anything like such a tension*

A smaller aggregate of matter would be able to
generate the velocity of light in bodies falling
toward it from a great distance; and it may be
doubted whether any mass so great as to be able
to do even that can exist in one lump.

In order to set up a tension equal to what is here
suspected of being a critical, or presumably dis-
ruptive, stress in the ether (10** c.g.s.), a globe of
the density of the earth would have to have a raditis
of eight light years. In order to generate a

154



GRAVITATIONAL TENSION

velocity of free fall under gravity equal to the
velocity of light, a globe of the earth's density
would have to be eqtial in radius to the distance of
the earth from the sun, or say 26,000 times the
earth's radius. If the density were less, the super-
ficial area would have to be increased in proportion,
so as to keep p R' constant.

The whole visible universe within a parallax of
•Y^jsjj second of arc, estimated by Lord Kelvin as
the equivalent of lo* suns, woiald be quite incom-
petent to raise etherial tension to the critical point
10" c.g.s. unless it were concentrated to an absurd
degree; but it could generate the velocity of light
with a density comparable to that of water, if
mass were constant.

If the average density of the above visible uni-
verse (which may be taken as i .6 x io-2» grammes per
c.c.) continued without limit, a disruptive tension
of the ether would be reached when the radius was
comparable to lo" light years; and the velocity of
light would be generated by it when the radius was
10' light years. But heterogeneity would enable
these values to be reached more easily.

Gravitation is thus supposed to be the result of
a mechanical tension inherently, and perhaps in-
stantaneously, set up throughout space whenever
the etherial structure called an electric charge comes
into existence; the tension being directly pro-
portional to the square of the charge and inversely
as its linear dimensions. Cohesion is quite different,
and is due to a residual electrical attraction between
groups of neutral molecviles across molecular dis-
tances ; a variant or modification of chemical affinity.



APPENDIX 2.

CALCULATION IN CONNECTION WITH
ETHER DENSITY

JUST as the rigidity of the ether is of a purely
electric character, and is not felt mechanically
— since mechanically it is perfectly fluid — so its
density is likewise of an electro-magnetic character,
and again is not felt mechanically, because it can-
not be moved by mechanical means. It is by far
the most stationary body in existence ; though it is
endowed with high intrinsic energy of local move-
ment, analogous to turbulence, conferring on it
gyrostat ic properties.

Optically, its rigidity and density are both felt,
since optical disturbances are essentially electro-
motive. Matter loads the ether optically, in ac-

cordance with the recognised fraction — =— : and

this loading, being part and parcel of the matter, of
course travels with it. It is the only part amen-
able to mechanical force.

The mechanical density of matter is a very small
portion of the etherial density ; whereas the optical
or electrical density of matter — ^being really that
of ether affected by the intrinsic or constitutional
electricity of matter — is not so small. The relative
optical virtvial density of the ether inside matter

IS6



ETHER DENSITY



is measured by fi'; but it may be really a defect
of elasticity, at least in non-magnetic materials.
Electrical and optical effects depend upon e.
Mechanical or inertia effects depend upon e^.
Electric charges can load the ether optically, quite
appreciably; but as regards mechanical loading,
the densest matter known is trivial and gossamer-
like compared with the unmodified ether in the
same space.

Massiveness of the Ether deduced from Electrical

Principles.

Each electron, moving like a sphere through a
fltiid, has a certain mass associated with it; de-
pendent on its size, and, at very high speeds, on its
velocity also.

If we treat the electron merely as a sphere mov-
ing through a perfect liquid, its behaviour is exactly
as if its mass were increased by half that of the
fluid displaced and the surrounding fluid were
annihilated.

Ether being incompressible, the density of fluid
inside and outside an electron must be the same.
So, dealing with it in this simplest fashion, the re-
stiltant inertia is half as great again as that of the
voltune of fluid corresponding to the electron: that
is to say the effective mass is 2irpo', where p is the
uniform density. If an electron is of some other
shape than a sphere, then the numerical part is
modified, but remains of the same order of magni-
tude, so long as there are no sharp edges.

If, however, we consider the moving electron as

IS7



^^■1 Ifcfc ,, , ^^^^,^,l,„^^fc,^



THE ETHER OP SPACE

generating circular lines of magnetic induction, by
reason of some rotational property of the ether, and
if we attribute all the magnetic inertia to the mag-
netic whirl thus caused round its path — provision-
ally treating this whirl as an actual circulation of
fluid excited by the locomotion — then we shall
proceed thus: —
Let a spherical electron e of raditis a be flying at

moderate speed w, so that the magnetic field at any
point, rO, outside, is

and the. energy per tmit volume everywhere is

/iHVSir.

But a magnetic field has been thought of by
many mathematicians as a circulation of fluid along
the lines of magnetic induction — ^which are always
closed curves — at some unknown velocity w.

So consider the energy per unit volume any-
where : it can be represented by the equivalent ex-
pressions

- , uH' u e* u* sin*d

^^ 8^ Stt r* *

wherefore

fji \ e sin 9 .



5=y(



The velocity of the hypothetical circulation must
be a maximum at the equator of the sphere, where
r = a and 9 = go; so, calling this w©,



^-v/(



IS8



ETHER DENSITY



and

wherefore the major part of the circulation is
limited to a region not far removed from the stir-
face of the electron.

The energy of this motion is



iPJofa



11^ . 2flr f sine . rdO . dr,



whence, substituting the above value of w, the
energy comes out equal to Jirpa' Wq'-
Comparing this with a mass moving with speed w,



»=!"-•&)■



This agrees with the simple hydrodynamic
estimate of effective inertia if Wo = Ws.u; that is
to say, if the whirl in contact with the equator of
the sphere is of the same order of magnitude as the
velocity of the sphere.

Now for the real relation between w^ and u we
must make a hypothesis. If the two are con-
sidered equal, the effectively disturbed mass comes
out as twice that of the bulk of the electron. If
Wq is smaller than w, then the mass of the effective-
ly disturbed fluid is less even than the bulk of an
electron; and in that case the estimate of the fluid-
density p must be exaggerated in order to supply
the required energy. It is difficidt to suppose the

1 59



THE ETHER OP SPACE

eqttatorial circtdation tv^ greater than «, since it is
generated by it; and it is most reasonable to treat
them both as of the same order of magnitude. So,
taking them as equal,



e = a»y



4wp



and m = twice the spherical mass.

Hence all the estimates of the effective inertia of
an electron are of the same order of magnitude,
being all comparable with that of a mass of ether
equal to the electron in bulk. But the linear
dimension of an electron is lo"*' centimeter diam-
eter, and its mass is of the order lo"" gramme. Con-
sequently the density of its material must be of the
order lo" grammes per cubic centimeter.

This, truly, is enormous, but any reduction in the
estimate of the circulation-speed, below that of an
electron, would only go to increase it. And, since
electrons move sometimes at a speed not far below
that of light, we cannot be accused of tmder-
estimating the probable velocity of magnetic spin
by treating it as of the same order of magnitude,
at the bounding surface of the electron, as its own
speed: a relation suggested, though not enforced,
by gyrostatic analogies.

Some Consequences of this Great Density,

The amplitude of a wave of light, in a place where
it is most intense, namely near the sun where its
energy amounts to 2 ergs per c.c, comes out only
about 10"" of the wave-length. The maximum

1 60



ETHER DENSITY



tangential stress called out by such strain is of the
order lo" atmospheres.

The hypothetical luminous circulation-velocity,
conferring momentum on a wave-front, in accord-
ance with Poynting's investigation, comes out lo"'*
cm. per sec. These calculations are given in the
concluding chapter of the new edition of Modern
Views of Electricity.

The supposed magnetic ethereal drift, along the
axis of a solenoid or other magnetic field, if it exist,
is comparable to .003 centim. per sec, or 4 inches an
hour, for a field of intensity 12,000 c.g.s.

But it is not to be supposed that this hypothetical
velocity is slow everywhere. Close to an electron
the speed of magnetic drift is comparable to the
locomotion-velocity of the electron itself, and may
therefore rise to something near the speed of light;
say s^jth of that speed: but in spite of that, at
a distance of only i millimeter away, it is reduced to
practical stagnation, being less than a millimicron
per century.

In any solenoid, the ampere-turns per linear inch
furnish a meastire of the speed of the supposed
magnetic circulation along the axis — no matter
what the material of the core may be — in millimi-
crons per sec.

[i micron=io"* meter; i millimicron is lo** meter
= 10-' centimeter, or a millionth of a millimeter.]

To get up an ethereal speed of i centimeter per
second — such as might be detected experimentally
by refined optical appliances, through its effect in

161



THE BTHGR OP SPACE

accelerating or retarding the speed of light sent
along the lines of magnetic force — ^would need a
solenoid of great length, round every centimeter of
which I OOP amperes circulated 300Q times. That
is to say, a long field of four million c.g.s. units of
intensity.

In other words, any streaming along magnetic
lines of force, such as could accoxmt for the energy
of a magnetic field, m\ist be comparable, in centi-
meters per second, to one four^millionth of the
number of c.g.s. tinits of intensity in the magnetic
field.



APPENDIX 3.

FRESNEL'S LAW A SPECIAL CASE OP A
UNIVERSAL POTENTIAL FUNCTION

THE modem view of Fresnel*s Law may be
worded thus : —

Inside a region occupied by matter, in addition to
the universal ether of space, are certain modified
or electrified specks, which build up the material
atoms. These charged particles, when they move,
have specific inertia, due to the magnetic field sur-
rounding each of them. And by reason of this
property, and as a consequence of their discon-
tinuity, they virtually increase the optical density
of the ether of space, acting in analogy with weights
distributed along a flexible cord. Thus they re-
duce the velocity of light in the ratio of the re-
fractive index f« : I, and therefore may be taken
as increasing the virtual density of the ether in the
ratio i:f»'.

That is to say, their loading makes the ether be-
have to optical waves as if — ^being a homogeneous
meditim without these discontinuous loads — it had
a density m* times that which it has in space out-
side matter. Calling the density outside i, the
extra density inside must be m'- i, so as to make
up the total to m*.

163



THE ETHER OF SPACE

Thef**-i portion is that which we call "matter,"
and this portion is readily stisceptible to locomo-
tion, being subject to — ^that is, accelerated by — ^me-
chanical force. The free portion of normal density
I is absolutely stationary as regards locomotion,
whether it be inside or outside a region occupied
by ordinary matter, for it is not amenable to
either mechanical or electric forces. They are
transmitted by it, but never terminate upon it;
except, indeed, at the peculiar structtire called a
wave-front, which simulates some of the properties
of matter.

(If free or unmodified ether can ever be moved
at all, it must be by means of a magnetic field;
along the lines of which it has, in several theories,
been supposed to circulate. Even this, however,
is not real locomotion.)

Fizeau tested that straightforward consequence
of this theory which is known as Fresnel's law, and
ascertained by experiment that a beam of light was
accelerated or retarded by a stream of water, ac-
cording as it travelled with or against the stream.
And he found the magnitude of the effect precisely
in accordance with the ratio of the locomotive
portion of the ether to the whole — the fraction
(f**- i)/f*' of the speed of the water being added
to or subtracted from the velocity of light, when a
beam was sent down or up the stream.

But even if another mode of expression be adopt-
ed, the result to be anticipated from this experi-
ment would be the same.

For instead of saying that a modified portion of
the ether is moving with the full velocity of the

164



FRESNEL'S LAW



body while the rest is stationary, it is permissible
for some purposes to treat the whole internal ether
as moving with a fraction of the velocity of the body.

On this method of statement the ether outside
a moving body is still absolutely stationary, but,
as the body advances, ether may be thought of as
continually condensing in front, and, as it were,
evaporating behind; while, inside, it is streaming
through the body in its condensed condition at a
pace such that what is equivalent to the normal
quantity of ether in space may remain absolutely
stationary. To this end its speed backward rela-
tively to the body must be w//*' and accordingly
its speed forward in space must be u (i - i/m*).

For consider a slab of matter moving flatways
with velocity u; let its internal etherial density be
fi', and let the external ether of density i be sta-
tionary. Let the forward speed of the internal
ether through space be xu, so that a beam of light
therein would be hurried forward with this velocity.
Then consider two imaginary parallel planes mov-
ing with the slab, one in advance of it and the other
inside it, and express the fact that the amount of
ether between those two planes must continue
constant. The amotint streaming relatively back-
ward through the first plane as it moves will be
measured by u times the external density, while
the amount similarly streaming backward through
the second plane will be (u—xu) times the internal
density. But this latter amount must equal the
former amount. In other words,

M X X must equal (u — xu) x ^'.

165



THE ETHER OF SPACE

I- nm

Consequently x comes out a? = (/*'- j)/i*'; which
is Fresnel's incontrovertible law for the convec-
tive effect of moving transparent matter on light
inside it.

The whole subject, however, may be treated more
generally, and for every direction of the ray, on the
lines of Chapter X, thus: —

Inside a transparent body light travels at a
speed V//«; and the ether, which outside drifts at
velocity v, making an angle 9 with the ray, inside
may be drifting with velocity v' and angle 0'.

Hence the equation to a ray inside such matter is



"^=7



ds

= mm.,



(V//i)cos«' H- v'cosO'



, sm € v ,

This may be written

"y v/M(i-a'») V vy^'d-a")'

the second term alone involves the first power of the
motion, and assuming that /*H;' cos 9' = d^ /ds, and
treating a' as a quantity too small for its possible
variations to need attention, the expression becomes

cos t' _ 0^B - 0^A

^=^^7=^ V»(i-a'»),

T being the time of travel through the same space
when empty. Now, if the time of journey and
course of ray, however they be affected by the dense

j66


FRESNEL'S LAW



body, are not to be more aflFected by reason of
etherial drift through it than if it were so much
empty space, it is necessary that the difference of
potential between two points A and B shotild be
the same whether the space between is filled with
dense matter or not (or, say, whether the ray-path
is taken through or outside a portion of dense
medium). In other words (calling ^ the outside
and f' the inside potential function), in order to
secure that T' shall not differ from fiT by anything
depending on the first power of motion, it is
necessary that ^'b-^'a shall equal 0B-0a; i.e.,
that the potential inside and outside matter shall
be the same up to a constant, or that fihj' cos 9' =
vcosO; which for the case of drift along a ray is
precisely Fresnel's hypothesis.

Another way of putting the matter is to say that
to the first power of drift velocity



= ^T-Jqi



'v'cosO'-vcos0)(fc/V,



and that the second or disturbing term must
vanish.

Hence Fresners hypothesis as to the behaviour
of ether inside matter is equivalent to the as-
sumption that a potential function, f ft^v cos ds,
exists throughout all transparent space, so far as
motion of ether alone is concerned.

Given that condition, no first-order interference
effect due to drift can be obtained from stationary
matter by sending rays round any kind of closed
contotir; nor can the path of a ray be altered by

167



THE ETHER OF SPACE

etherial drift through any stationary matter.
Hence filling a telescope tube with water cannot
modify the observed amoimt of stellar aberration.
The equation to a ray in transparent matter
moving with velocity w in a direction ^, and sub-
ject to an independent ether drift of speed v in
direction 9, is



/



ds

= const.



V//» cos c + v//i' cos + t* [i - (i //*')] cos



THE END



latfe

n



BSt



WIDENER LIBRARY

Harvnd College, Cambridge, MA 02138: (617)495-2413
If the item b recalled, the borrower will be notified of


3 2044 020 259 131



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED
THE COST OF OVERDUE NOTIFICATION
IF THIS BOOK IS NOT* RETURNED TO
THE LIBRARY ON OR BEFORE THE LAST
DATE STAMPED BELOW.



W'->



WIDEN^R >


.*>



<r



f^
