The Mechanistic Conception of Life (Jacques Loeb, 1912)
==========================================================
Mechanistic biology's manifesto: tropisms and artificial parthenogenesis as proof. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cu31924000967293).

Rae 


BOOKS 


AND 
GENERAL STATIONERY 
TOKYO OSAKA KYOTO FUKUOKA 


eA Ee 7 
QF / 


a . cote 
Fa o. Ge 
LO Kee. 


A 


Library Wreee ns, 


OF THE 


Mew Work State Veterinary College 


Cornell University Library 
QH 311.L82 


The mechanistic conception of life; biolo 


3 1924 000 967 293 vet 


PRINTEDINU.S A. 


DATE DUE 


Ai 


GAYLORD 


Cornell University 


Library 


The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924000967293 


THE 
MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION 
OF LIFE 


THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 


Bgents 


THE BAKER & TAYLOR COMPANY 
NEW YORK 


THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


THE 
MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION 
OF LIFE 


BIOLOGICAL ESSAYS 


BY 
JACQUES LOEB, M.D., PH.D., SC.D. 


MEMBER OF THE ROCKEFELLER INSTITUTE 
FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH 


THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 


x 


Est 
CopyRicHT 1912 By 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 


ay ta 
& H All Rights Reserved 
2 // ; 
~ Published July 1912 
a 8 Z, Second Impression December 1912 


Ka 
lo $2 


Composed and Printed By 
The University of Chicago Press 
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A. 


PREFACE 


The essays contained in this volume were written on differ- 
ent occasions mostly in response to requests for a popular 
presentation of the results of the author’s investigations. The 
title of the volume characterizes their general tendency as an 
attempt to analyze life from a purely physico-chemical view- 
point. Since they deal to a large extent with the personal 
work of the author, répetition was unavoidable, but in view of 
the technical difficulties presented by some of the topics this 
may serve to facilitate the understanding of the subject. 

The author wishes to thank the editors and publishers who 
gave their consent to the reprinting of these essays: Professor 
J. McKeen Cattell, of Columbia University, Professor Albert 
Charles Seward, of the University of Cambridge, England, 
Ginn & Co., of Boston, G. P. Putnam’s Sons, of New York and 
London, and the J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 

THe RocKEFELLER INSTITUTE 


FoR MrEpicaL RESEARCH 
April 4, 1912 


INDEX 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


The Mechanistic Conception of Life - + = 


. The Significance of Tropisms for Psychology 


. Some Fundamental Facts and Conceptions concerning the 


Comparative Physiology of the Central Nervous Sys- 
tem 


. Pattern Adaptation of Fishes and the Mechanism of 


Vision 
On Some Facts and Principles of Physiological Morphol- 
ogy 


. On the Nature of the Process of Fertilization 


. On the Nature of Formative Stimulation (Artificial Par- 


thenogenesis) 


. The Prevention of the Death of the Egg through the Act 


of Fertilization 
The Role of Salts in the Preservation of Life 


Experimental Study of the Influence of Environment on 
Animals - - < - 5 bs 


65 


79 


85 
113 


127 


155 
169 


195 
229 


I. THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


I 
THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE} 


I. INTRODUCTORY 


It is the object of this paper to discuss the question 
whether our present knowledge gives us any hope that 
ultimately life, ie., the sum of all life phenomena, can be 
unequivocally explained in physico-chemical terms. If on 
the basis of a serious survey this question can be answered 
in the affirmative our social and ethical life will have to be 
put on a scientific basis and our rules of conduct must 
be brought into harmony with the results of scientific 
biology. 

It is seemingly often taken for granted by laymen that 
“truth” in biology, or science in general, is of the same order 
as “truth” in certain of the mental sciences; that is to say, 
that everything rests on argument or rhetoric and that what 
is regarded as true today may be expected with some proba- 
bility to be considered untrue tomorrow. It happens in sci- 
ence, especially in the descriptive sciences like paleontology or 
zoology, that hypotheses are forwarded, discussed, and then 
abandoned. Itshould, however, be remembered that modern 
biology is fundamentally an experimental and not a descrip- 
tive science; and that its results are not rhetorical, but always 
assume one of two forms: it is either possible to control a 
life phenomenon to such an extent that we can produce it at 
desire (as, e.g., the contraction of an excised muscle); or we 
succeed in finding the numerical relation between the con- 
ditions of the experiment and the biological result (e.g., 


1 Address delivered at the First International Congress of Monists at Ham- 
burg, September 10, 1911; reprinted from Popular Science Monthly, January, 
1912, by courtesy of Professor J. McKeen Cattell. 


3 


4 THE MErcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


Mendel’s law of heredity). Biology as far as it is based on 
these two principles cannot retrogress, but must advance. 


II. THE BEGINNING OF SCIENTIFIC BIOLOGY 


Scientific biology, defined in this sense, begins with the 
attempt made by Lavoisier and Laplace (1780) to show 
that the quantity of heat which is formed in the body of a 
warm-blooded animal is equal to that formed in a candle, 
provided that the quantities of carbon dioxide formed in both 
cases are identical. This was the first attempt to reduce 
a life phenomenon, namely, the formation of animal heat, 
completely to physico-chemical terms. What these two 
investigators began with primitive means has been completed 
by more recent investigators—Pettenkofer and Voit, Rubner, 
Zuntz and Atwater. The oxidation of a food-stuff always 
furnishes the same amount of heat, no matter whether it 
takes place in the living body or outside. 

These investigations left a gap. The substances which 
undergo oxidations in the animal body—starch, fat, and 
proteins—are substances which at ordinary temperature are 
not easily oxidized. They require the temperature of the 
flame in order to undergo rapid oxidation through the oxygen 
of the air. This discrepancy between the oxidations in the 
living body and those in the laboratory manifests itself also 
in other chemical processes, e.g., digestion or hydrolytic 
reactions, which were at first found to occur outside the 
living body rapidly only under conditions incompatible with 
life. This discrepancy was done away with by the physical 
chemists, who demonstrated that the same acceleration of 
chemical reactions which is brought about by a high tempera- 
ture can also be accomplished at a low temperature with the 
aid of certain specific substances, the so-called catalyzers. 
This progress is connected pre-eminently with the names of 
Berzelius and Wilhelm Ostwald. The specific substances 


THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 5 


which accelerate the oxidations at body temperature suffi- 
ciently to allow the maintenance of life are the so-called 
ferments of oxidation. 

The work of Lavoisier and Laplace not only marks the 
beginning of scientific biology, it also touches the core of the 
problem of life; for it seems that oxidations form a part, if 
not the basis, of all life phenomena in higher organisms. 


Ill. THE ‘‘RIDDLE OF LIFE” 


By the “‘riddle of life’’ not everybody will understand the 
same thing. We all, however, desire to know how life 
originates and what death is, since our ethics must be 
influenced to a large extent through the answer to this ques- 
tion. We are not yet able to give an answer to the question 
as to how life originated on the earth. We know that every 
living being is able to transform food-stuffs into living matter; 
and we also know that not only the compounds which are 
formed in the animal body can be produced artificially, but 
that chemical reactions which take place in living organisms 
can also be repeated at the same rate and temperature in 
the laboratory. The gap in our knowledge which we feel 
most keenly is the fact that the chemical character of the 
catalyzers (the enzymes or ferments) is still unknown. 
Nothing indicates, however, at present that the artificial 
production of living matter is beyond the possibilities of 
science. 

This view does not stand in opposition to the idea of 
Arrhenius that germs of sufficiently small dimensions are 
driven by radiation-pressure through space; and that these 
germs, if they fall upon new cosmic bodies possessing water, 
salts, and oxygen, and the proper temperature, give rise to a 
new evolution of organisms. Biology will certainly retain 
this idea, but I believe that we must also follow out the 
other problem: namely, we must either succeed in producing 


6 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


living matter artificially, or we must find the reasons why 
this is impossible. 


IV. THE ACTIVATION OF THE EGG 


Although we are not yet able to state how life originated 
in general, another, more modest problem, has been solved, 
that is, how the egg is caused by the sperm to develop into 
a new individual. Every animal originates from an egg and 
in the majority of animals a new individual can only then 
develop if a male sex-cell, a spermatozoon, enters into the egg. 
The question as to how a spermatozoon can cause an egg to 
develop into a new individual was twelve years ago still 
shrouded in that mystery which today surrounds the origin 
of life in general. But today we are able to state that the 
problem of the activation of the egg is for the most part 
reduced to physico-chemical terms. The egg is in the 
unfertilized condition a single cell with only one nucleus. 
If no spermatozoon enters into it, it perishes after a 
comparatively short time, in some animals in a few hours, in 
others in a few days or weeks. If, however, a spermatozoon 
enters into the egg, the latter begins to develop, i.e., the 
nucleus begins to divide into two nuclei and the egg which 
heretofore consisted of one cell is divided into two cells. 
Subsequently each nucleus and each cell divides again into 
two, and so on. These cells have, in many eggs, the tendency 
to remain at the surface of the egg or to creep to the surface, 
and later such an egg forms a hollow sphere whose shell con- 
sists of a large number of cells. On the outer surface of this 
hollow sphere cilia are formed and the egg is now transformed 
into a free-swimming larva. Then an intestine develops 
through the growing in of cells in one region of the blastula 
and gradually the other organs, skeleton, vascular system, 
etc., originate. Embryologists had noticed that occasionally 
the unfertilized eggs of certain animals, e.g., sea-urchins, 


Tue MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 7 


worms, or even birds, show a tendency to a nuclear or even a 
cell division; and R. Hertwig, Mead, and Morgan had suc- 
ceeded in inducing one or more cell divisions artificially in 
such eggs. But the cell divisions in these cases never led 
to the development of a larva, but at the best to the formation 
of an abnormal mass of cells which soon perished. 

I succeeded twelve years ago in causing the unfertilized 
eggs of the sea-urchin to develop into swimming larvae by 
treating them with sea-water, the concentration of which was 


a 


P pe 


Fie. 1 Fia, 2 


Fia. 1.—Unfertilized egg of the sea-urchin surrounded by spermatozoa. Only 
the heads of the spermatozoa are drawn, since at the magnification used the tails 
were not visible. 

Fic. 2.—The same egg immediately after the entrance of the spermatozoon. 
The egg is surrounded by a larger circle, the fertilization membrane, which is 
formed through the action of the spermatozoon. This formation of a fertilization 
membrane can be induced by a purely chemical treatment of the egg. 


raised through the addition of a small but definite quantity 
of a salt or sugar. The eggs were put for two hours into a 
solution the osmotic pressure of which had been raised to a 
certain height. When the eggs were put back into normal 
sea-water they developed into larvae and a part of these 
larvae formed an intestine and a skeleton. The same result 
was obtained in the eggs of other animals, star-fish, worms, 
and mollusks. These experiments proved the possibility 
of substituting physico-chemical agencies for the action of 
the living spermatozoon, but did not yet explain how the 
spermatozoon causes the development of the egg, since in 


8 Tur MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


these experiments the action of the spermatozoon upon the 
egg was very incompletely imitated. When a spermatozoon 
enters into the egg it causes primarily a change in the surface 
of the egg which results in the formation of the so-called 
membrane of fertilization. This phenomenon of membrane 
formation which had always been considered as a phenomenon 
of minor importance did not occur in my original method of 
treating the egg with hypertonic sea-water. Six years ago 
while experimenting on the Californian sea-urchin, Strongylo- 
centrotus purpuratus, I succeeded in finding a method of 
causing the unfertilized egg to form a membrane without 
injuring the egg. This method consists in treating the eggs 
for from one to two minutes with sea-water to which a definite 
amount of butyric acid (or some other monobasic fatty acid) 
has been added. If after that time the eggs are brought back 
into normal sea-water, all form a fertilization membrane in 
exactly the same way as if a spermatozoon had entered. 
This membrane formation or rather the modification of the 
surface of the egg which underlies the membrane formation 
starts the development. It does not allow it, however, to 
proceed very far at room temperature. In order to allow 
the development to go farther it is necessary to submit the 
eggs after the butyric acid treatment to a second operation. 
Here we have a choice between two methods. We can 
either put the eggs for about one half-hour into a hypertonic 
solution (which contains free oxygen); or we can put them for 
about three hours into sea-water deprived of oxygen. If the 
eggs are then returned to normal sea-water containing oxygen 
they all develop; and in a large number the development is as 
normal as if a spermatozoon had entered. 

The essential feature is therefore the fact that the develop- 
ment is caused by two different treatments of the egg; and 
that of these the treatment resulting in the formation of 
the membrane is the more important one. This is proved 


Tue MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 9 


Fic. 5 


Fics. 3, 4, and 5.—Segmentation of the sea-urchin egg, resulting in the 
formation of two cells (Fie. 5). The changes from Fig. 3 to Fig. 5 occur in about 
one minute or less time. This segmentation occurs after fertilization or after the 
chemical treatment of the egg described in the text. 


Fic. 6 Fic. 7 


Fies. 6 and 7.—The sea-urchin egg divided into four and eight cells 
respectively. 


10 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


by the fact that in certain forms, as for instance the star-fish, 
the causation of the artificial membrane formation may 
suffice for the development of normal larvae; although here, 
too, the second treatment increases not only the number of 
larvae, but also improves the appearance of the larvae, as 
R. Lillie found. 

The question now arises, how the membrane formation 
can start the development of the egg. An analysis of the 


bie. 8 


Fic. 8.—Blastula. First larval stage of the sea-urchin egg. At the surface 
ot ue cilia are formed and the larva begins to swim and reaches the surface 
Co) e water. 


docks gaa eee ee et Se 
process and of the nature of the agencies which cause it 
yielded the result that the unfertilized egg possesses a super- 
ficial cortical layer, which must be destroyed before the egg 
can develop. It is immaterial by what means this superficial 
cortical layer is destroyed. All agencies which cause a 
definite type of cell destruction—the so-called cytolysis— 
cause also the egg to develop, as long as their action is limited 
to the surface layer of the cell. The butyric acid treatment 
of the egg mentioned above only serves to induce the destruc- 
tion of this cortical layer. In the eggs of some animals this 
cortical layer can be destroyed mechanically by shaking the 


THe MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF . LIFE 11 


egg, as A. P. Mathews found in the case of star-fish eggs and I 
in the case of the eggs of certain worms. In the case of the 
eggs of the frog it suffices to pierce the cortical layer with a 
needle, as Bataillon found in his beautiful experiments a 
year ago.!. The mechanism by 
which development is caused 
is apparently the same in all 
these cases, namely, the de- 
struction of the cortical layer 
of the eggs. This can be 
caused generally by certain 
chemical means which play a 
réle also in bacteriology; but 
it can also be caused in special 
cases by mechanical means, 
such as agitation or piercing of 
the cortical layer. It may be 
mentioned parenthetically that 

foreign blood sera have also a hecniies uence’ * ecloton: 

D intestine. 

cytolytic effect, and I succeeded 

in causing membrane formation and in consequence the devel- 
opment of the sea-urchin egg by treating it with the blood of 
various animals, e.g., of cattle, or the rabbit. 

Recently Shearer has succeeded in Plymouth in causing a 
number of parthenogenetic plutei produced by my method to 
develop beyond the stage of metamorphosis, and Delage has 
reported that he raised two larvae of the sea-urchin produced 
by artificial parthenogenesis to the stage of sexual maturity. 
We may, therefore, state that the complete imitation of the 
developmental effect of the spermatozoon by certain physico- 
chemical agencies has been accomplished. 

I succeeded in showing that the spermatozoon causes the 
development of the sea-urchin egg in a way similar to that 


1 This method does not work with the eggs of fish and is apparently as limited 
in its applicability as the causation of development by mechanical agitation. 


12 Tue Mecuanistic ConcEPTION oF LIFE 


in my method of artificial parthenogenesis; namely, by carry- 
ing two substances into the egg, one of which acts like the 
butyric acid and induces the membrane formation, while 
the other acts like the treatment with a hypertonic solution 
and enables the full development of the larvae. In order to 
prove this for the sea-urchin egg foreign sperm, e.g., that of 
the star-fish, must be used. The sperm of the sea-urchin 
penetrates so rapidly into the sea-urchin egg that almost 
always both substances get into the egg. If, however, star- 
fish sperm is used for the fertilization of the sea-urchin egg, 
in a large number of cases, membrane formation occurs 
before the spermatozoon has found time to penetrate entirely 
into the egg. In consequence of the membrane formation 
the spermatozoon is thrown out. Such eggs behave as if 
only the membrane formation had been caused by some 
artificial agency, e.g., butyric acid. They begin to develop, 
but soon show signs of disintegration. If treated with a 
hypertonic solution they develop into larvae. In touching 
the egg contents the spermatozoon had a chance to give off 
a substance which liquefied the cortical layer and thereby 
caused the membrane formation by which the further 
entrance of the spermatozoon into the egg was prevented. 
If, however, the star-fish sperm enters completely into the 
egg before the membrane formation begins, the spermatozoon 
carries also the second substance into the egg, the action of 
which corresponds to the treatment of the egg with the hyper- 
tonic solution. In this case the egg can undergo complete 
development into a larva. 

F. Lillie has recently confirmed the same fact in the egg 
of a worm, Nereis. He mixed the sperm and eggs of Nereis 
and centrifuged the mass. In many cases the spermatozoa 
which had begun to penetrate into the egg were thrown off 
again. The consequence was that only a membrane forma- 
tion resulted without the spermatozoon penetrating into the 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 13 


egg. This membrane formation led only to a beginning but 
not to a complete development. We may, therefore, con- 
clude that the spermatozoon causes the development of the 
egg in a way similar to that which takes place in the case of 
artificial parthenogenesis. It carries first a substance into 
the egg which destroys the cortical layer of the egg in the 
same way as does butyric acid; and secondly a substance 
which corresponds in its effect to the influence of the hyper- 
tonic solution in the sea-urchin egg after the membrane 
formation. 

The question arises as to how the destruction of the corti- 
cal layer can cause the beginning of the development of the 
egg. This question leads us to the process of oxidation. 
Years ago I had found that the fertilized sea-urchin egg can 
only develop in the presence of free oxygen; if the oxygen 
is completely withdrawn the development stops, but begins 
again promptly as soon as oxygen is again admitted. From 
this and similar experiments I concluded that the spermato- 
zoon causes the development by accelerating the oxidations 
in the egg. This conclusion was confirmed by experiments 
by O. Warburg and by Wasteneys and myself in which it was 
found that through the process of fertilization the velocity 
of oxidations in the egg is increased to four or six times its 
original value. Warburg was able to show that the mere 
causation of the membrane formation by the butyric acid 
treatment has the same accelerating effect upon the oxidations 
as fertilization. 

What remains unknown at present is the way in which 
the destruction of the cortical layer of the egg accelerates the 
oxidations. It is possible that the cortical layer acts like 
a solid crust and thus prevents the oxygen from reaching 
the surface of the egg or from penetrating into the latter 
sufficiently rapidly. The solution of these problems must 
be reserved for further investigation. 


14 Tue MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


We therefore see that the process of the activation of 
the egg by the spermatozoon, which twelve years ago was 
shrouded in complete darkness, is today practically com- 
pletely reduced to a physico-chemical explanation. Con- 
sidering the youth of experimental biology we have a right 
to hope that what has been accomplished in this problem will 
occur in rapid succession in those problems which today still 
appear as riddles. 


V. NATURE OF LIFE AND DEATH 


The nature of life and of death are questions which 
occupy the interest of the layman to a greater extent than 
possibly any other purely theoretical problem; and we can 
well understand that humanity did not wait for experimental 
biology to furnish an answer. The answer assumed the 
anthropomorphic form characteristic of all explanations of 
nature in the prescientific period. Life was assumed to begin 
with the entrance of a ‘“‘life principle” into the body; that 
individual life begins with the egg was of course unknown to 
primitive or prescientific man. Death was assumed to be 
due to the departure of this ‘‘life principle” from the body. 

Scientifically, however, individual life begins (in the case 
of the sea-urchin and possibly in general) with the accelera- 
tion of the rate of oxidation in the egg, and this acceleration 
begins after the destruction of its cortical layer. Life of 
warm-blooded animals—man included—ends with the cessa- 
tion of oxidation in the body. As soon as oxidations have 
ceased for some time, the surface films of the cells, if they 
contain enough water and if the temperature is sufficiently 
high, become permeable for bacteria, and the body is 
destroyed by micro-organisms. The problem of the begin- 
ning and end of individual life is physico-chemically clear. 
It is, therefore, unwarranted to continue the statement that 
in addition to the acceleration of oxidations the beginning of 


THe MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 15 


individual life is determined by the entrance of a meta- 
physical “life principle” into the egg; and that death is 
determined, aside from the cessation of oxidations, by the 
departure of this “principle” from the body. In the case of 
the evaporation of water we are satisfied with the explanation 
given by the kinetic theory of gases and do not demand that 
—to repeat a well-known jest of Huxley—the disappearance 
of the ‘‘aquosity”’ be also taken into consideration. 


VI. HEREDITY 


It may be stated that the egg is the essential bearer of 
heredity. We can cause an egg to develop into a larva 
without sperm, but we cannot cause a spermatozoon to 
develop into a larva without an egg. The spermatozoon 
can influence the form of the offspring only when the two 
forms are rather closely related. If the egg of a sea-urchin 
is fertilized with the sperm from a different species of sea- 
urchin, the larval form has distinct paternal characters. If, 
however, the eggs of a sea-urchin are fertilized with the sperm 
of a more remote species, e.g., a star-fish, the result is a sea- 
urchin larva which possesses no paternal characters, as I 
found and as Godlewski, Kupelwieser, Hagedoorn, and 
Baltzer were able to confirm. This fact has some bearing 
upon the further investigation of heredity, inasmuch as it 
shows that the egg is the main instrument of heredity, while 
apparently the spermatozoon is restricted in the transmission 
of characters to the offspring. If the difference between 
spermatozoon and egg exceeds a certain limit the hereditary 
effects of the spermatozoon cease and it acts merely as an 
activator to the egg. 

As far as the transmission of paternal characters is con- 
cerned, we can say today that the view of those authors was 
correct who, with Boveri, localized this transmission not only 
in the cell nucleus, but in a special constituent of the nucleus, 


16 Tue Mecuanistic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the chromosomes. The proof for this was given by facts found 
along the lines of Mendelian investigations. The essential 
law of Mendel, the law of segregation, can in its simplest 
form be expressed in the following way. If we cross two 
forms which differ in only one character every hybrid resulting 
from this union forms two kinds of sex-cells in equal numbers; 
two kinds of eggs if it is a female, two kinds of spermatozoa 
ifitisamale. The one kind corresponds to the pure paternal, 
the other to the pure maternal type. The investigation of 
the structure and behavior of the nucleus showed that the 
possibility for such a segregation of the sex-cells in a hybrid 
can easily be recognized during a given stage in the formation 
of the sex-cells, if the assumption is made that the chromo- 
somes are the bearers of the paternal characters. The proof 
for the correctness of this view was furnished through the 
investigation of the heredity of those qualities which occur 
mainly in one sex; e.g., color blindness which occurs pre- 
eminently in the male members of a family. 

Nine years ago McClung published a paper which solved 
the problem of sex determination, at least in its essential 
feature. Each animal has a definite number of chromosomes 
in its cell nucleus. Henking had found that in a certain 
form of insects (Pyrrhocoris) two kinds of spermatozoa exist 
which differ in the fact that the one possesses a nucleolus 
while the other does not. Montgomery afterward showed 
that Henking’s nucleolus was an accessory chromosome. 
McClung first expressed the idea that this accessory chro- 
mosome was connected with the determination of sex. Con- 
sidering the importance of this idea we may render it in his 
own words: 


A most significant fact, and one upon which almost all investi- 
gators are united in opinion, is that the element is apportioned to 
but one-half of the spermatozoa. Assuming it to be true that the 
chromatin is the important part of the cell in the matter of heredity, 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 17 


then it follows that we have two kinds of spermatozoa that differ from 
each other in a vital matter. We expect, therefore, to find in the off- 
spring two sorts of individuals in approximately equal numbers, under 
normal conditions, that exhibit marked differences in structure. A 
careful consideration will suggest that nothing but sexual characters 
thus divides the members of a species into two well-defined groups, 
and we are logically forced to the conclusion that the peculiar chromo- 
some has some bearing upon the arrangement. 

I must here also point out a fact that does not seem to have the 
recognition it deserves; viz., that if there is a cross-division of the 
chromosomes in the maturation mitoses, there must be two kinds of 
spermatozoa regardless of the presence of the accessory chromosome. 
It is thus possible that even in the absence of any specialized element 
a preponderant maleness would attach to one-half of the spermatozoa, 
due to the “qualitative division of the tetrads.” 

The researches of the following years, especially the 
brilliant work of E. B. Wilson, Miss Stevens, T. H. Morgan, 
and others, have amply confirmed the correctness of this 
ingenious idea and cleared up the problem of sex determina- 
tion in its main features. 

According to McClung each animal forms two kinds of 
spermatozoa in equal numbers, which differ by one chromo- 
some. One kind of spermatozoa produces male animals, 
the other female animals. The eggs are all equal in these 
animals. More recent investigations, especially those of 
E. B. Wilson, have shown that this view is correct for many 
animals. 

While in many animals there are two kinds of sperma- 
tozoa and only one kind of eggs, in other animals two kinds 
of eggs and only one kind of spermatozoa are formed, e.g., 
sea-urchins and certain species of birds and of butterflies 
(Abraxas). In these animals the sex is predetermined in the 
egg and not in the spermatozoon. It is of interest that, 
according to Guyer, in the human being two kinds of sperma- 
tozoa exist and only one kind of eggs; in man, therefore, sex 
is determined by the spermatozoon. 


18 Tue MeEcuanistTic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


How is sex determination accomplished? Let us take 
the case which according to Wilson is true for many insects 
and according to Guyer for human beings, namely, that there 
are two kinds of spermatozoa and one kind of eggs. According 
to Wilson all unfertilized eggs contain in this case one so-called 


Figs. 11-16 (after E. B. Wilson).—Diagrammatic presentation of sex deter- 
mination in an insect (Protenor). aa are the nuclei of unfertilized eggs. Each 
contains one sex chromosome marked X; the other six dark spots are the chromo- 
somes which are supposed to transmit hereditary characters not connected with 
sex. 6 and c represent the two different types of sperm; 6 containing a sex 
chromosome X, c being without such a chromosome. 

d represents the constitution of the egg nucleus after it is fertilized by a 
spermatozoon of the type b containing a sex chromosome. ‘This egg now has two 
sex chromosomes and therefore will give rise to a female. e represents a fertilized 
egg after a spermatozoon of the type c (without a sex chromosome) has entered it. 
This egg contains after fertilization only one sex chromosome X and hence will 
give rise to a male. 


sex chromosome, the X-chromosome. There are two kinds 
of spermatozoa, one with and one without an X-chromosome. 
Given a sufficiently large number of eggs and of spermatozoa, 
one-half of the eggs will be fertilized by spermatozoa with 
and one-half by spermatozoa without an X-chromosome. 
Hence one-half of the eggs will contain after fertilization two 
X-chromosomes each and one-half only one X-chromosome 


THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 19 


each. The eggs containing only one X-chromosome give 
rise to males, those containing two X-chromosomes give rise 
to females—as Wilson and others have proved. This seems 
to be a general law for those cases in which there are two 
kinds of spermatozoa and one kind of eggs. 

These observations show why it is impossible to influence 
the sex of a developing embryo by external influences. If, 
for example, in the human being a spermatozoon without an 
X-chromosome enters into an egg, the egg will give rise to a 
boy, but if a spermatozoon with an X-chromosome gets into 
the egg the latter will give rise to a girl. Since always both 
kinds of spermatozoa are given off by the male it is a mere 
matter of chance whether a boy or a girl originates; and 
it agrees with the law of probability that in a large popula- 
tion the number of boys and girls born within a year is 
approximately the same.) 

These discoveries solved also a series of other difficulties. 
Certain types of twins originate from one egg after fertiliza- 
tion. Such twins have always the same sex, as we should 
expect, since the cells of both twins have the same number of 
X-chromosomes. 

In plant lice, bees, and ants, the eggs may develop with 
and without fertilization. It was known that from fertilized 
eggs in these animals only females develop, males never. 
It was found that in these animals the eggs contain only one 
sex chromosome; while in the male are found two kinds of 
spermatozoa, one with and one without a sex chromosome. 
For Phylloxera and Aphides it has been proved with certainty 
by Morgan and others that the spermatozoa which contain no 
sex chromosome cannot live, and the same is probably true 
for bees and ants. If, therefore, in these animals an egg is 

1It is stated that the number of males born exceeds that of the females by a 
slight percentage. If this statement is correct it must be due to a secondary 


cause, @.g., a greater motility or greater duration of life of the male spermatozoon. 
Further researches will be needed to clear up this point. 


20 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


fertilized it is always done by a spermatozoon which contains 
an X-chromosome. The egg has, therefore, after fertilization 
in these animals always two X-chromosomes and from such 
eggs only females can arise. 

It had been known for a long time that in bees and ants 
the unfertilized eggs can also develop, but such eggs give 
rise to males only. This is due to the fact that the eggs of 
these animals contain only one X-chromosome and from eggs 
with only one chromosome only males can arise (at least in the 
case of animals in which the male is heterozygous for sex). 

The problem of sex determination has, therefore, found a 
simple solution, and simultaneously Mendel’s law of segrega- 
tion also finds its solution. 

In many insects and in man the cells of the female have 
two sex chromosomes. In a certain stage of the history of the 
egg one-half of the chromosomes leave the egg (in the form 
of the ‘‘polar-body’’) and it keeps only half the number of 
chromosomes. Each egg, therefore, retains only one X or 
sex chromosome. In the male the cells have from the begin- 
ning only one X-chromosome and each primordial sperma- 
tozoon divides into two new (in reality into two pairs of) 
spermatozoa, one of which contains an X-chromosome 
while the other is without such a chromosome. What can be 
observed here directly in the male animal takes place in 
every hybrid; during the critical, so-called maturation divi- 
sion of the sexual cell in the hybrid, a division of the chromo- 
somes occurs, whereby only one-half of the sex-cells receive 
the hereditary substance in regard to which the two original 
pure forms differ. 

That this is not a mere assumption can be shown in those 
cases in which the hereditary character appears only, or pre- 
eminently, in one sex as, e.g., color blindness which appears 
mostly in the male. If a color-blind individual is mated with 
an individual with normal color vision the heredity of color 


THE MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 21 


blindness in the next two generations corresponds quantita- 
tively with what we must expect on the assumption that the 
chemical substances determining color vision are contained 
in the sex chromosomes. In the color-blind individual some- 
thing is lacking which can be found in the individual with 
normal color perception. The factor for color vision is obvi- 
ously transmitted through the sex chromosome. In the next 
generation color blindness cannot appear, since each fertilized 
egg contains the factor for color perception. In the second 
generation, however, the theory demands that one-half of the 
males should be color blind. In man these conditions cannot 
be verified. T. H. Morgan has found in a fly (Drosophila) a 
number of similar sex-limited characters which behave like 
color blindness, e.g., lack of pigment in the eyes. These 
flies have normally red eyes. Morgan ‘has observed a muta- 
tion with white eyes, which occurs in the male. When he 
crossed a white-eyed with a red-eyed female all flies of the 
first generation were red-eyed, since all flies had the factor 
for pigment in their sex-cells; in the second generation all 
females and exactly one-half of the males had red eyes, the 
other half of the males, however, white eyes, as the theory 
demands. 

From these and numerous similar breeding experiments of 
Correns, Doncaster, and especially of Morgan, we may con- 
clude with certainty that the sex chromosomes are the bearers 
of those hereditary characters which appear pre-eminently in 
one sex. We say pre-eminently, since theoretically we can 
predict cases in which color blindness or white eyes must appear 
also in the female. Breeding experiments have shown that this 
theoretical prediction is justified. The riddle of Mendel’s law 
of segregation finds its solution through these experiments and 
incidentally also the problem of the determination of sex which 
is only a special case of the law of segregation, as Mendel 
already intimated. 


WRISLIP oY} AQ PoxYVoIPUL OBI OY UY 4[NseI [[[M SSOUPUI[A IO[OO sasvo YoNs 
UI PUB SUISNOD 198M}0q JNO PoPIVd oq PMOD ssuYVU IETS UBUINY oy} UT 
“WIBIZBIP SIG] WoIy yOedxe PTNoYs OM FV 
TAM APABIUeND ozrUOTIIVY szNsoI oy} Ye PoMoYys UBSIOJW pus pytydosoiq 
Ul O[BOS OFIBT B UO 4NO payed eq UV SuYVU SIL “PUy[q Jooo oq pmo s£0q 
at} JO J[VY-oU0 TIA ordoosed 10[OO [VUAOU GAY POA osed B YOns UL W1Oq sys 
OY} [2 JB} SNOTAQO ST 4T “pozxVU oq PNOd UoApPTTYO osoyy FT pouyerqo oq prnos’ 
YoIyA sjMsot 049 suTVyuOD MOL STUL—wuaspjryopunsb fo s7ja0-Apog :mot Ural 


‘euLosommoIgo 
XOS B@ NOTA JOTIO oY} Pue UoNdoeosod 1JO[OO JOF JOJOVJ [eUIIOM OF surrey 
-W09 ‘OMIOSOWMIOIYO XOS @ YIM OUO JO YSISUOD oe O44 UT potu1oy ewozoyeusods Jo 
sodA4 OM} OF, “SUTHOV] ST 10JOeJ, SIT) JOY ZO OYA UT OT worydeo1ed 10,09 [euI0U 
JO uoMoNpoad oy} JOJ 10jdeJ @ ITM SavMOSOMOIYO Se 9UO 4Nq ‘oUOSOWTOITO xXOs 
@ JIA ovo s83o JO SpuIy OM} SET O[VUAF OUL ‘afdnoo [eUls10 oq} JO UsIp[Tyo 
ay} Ul PoUlLOJ sT[9d-XoS SHOLIVA oY} JO WeIseIP B suyeyUOD mot YMnof 34 


‘MOISTA JOTOO [eMI0U GAY WoIp YD 
OY} [12 ‘Worydoosed 10[Od 10J 1049eJ B TTA PaPIAOAd BUMOSOULOAYO KOS B Apealye pourey 
-W09 3399 91} saseo WOK UL soUTG ‘eMOsSOMLOIYO xos B NOTA moozozeultods @ JO 
gouvijue oy) Aq UO pu 9TIOSOTMOIYD xos @ YALA uoozozetmeds @ JO souBIqUa 
ey Aq poonpoid st ed49 ouQ = “MO SIT} UT pojusseidel 018 YOM SUIyet @ Yous 
4q poonpoid o1e UsIpTiyo Jo sodA, OM—Uuaippry9 fo 87799-Apog smoot pay y 


‘guUIOSOMIOIYO xes AUB {NOYILIM OO PU OUTOSOTIOIYD xos BATIOOJOP 
@ (IIM eu ‘eozojeuTseds JO SpULy Og Sey Te OG} ‘oUTOsOMOIYS xos [eto 
oud sey GoM JO Yoo sds Svy o[eUoF OU.L— s7vaund fo syjaa-ras :mot puovagy 


“x AST] e@ Aq poHTeu st pue uoMdeoied 
JO[OD OF LOJOR] OY} BUY] St WORM ovOsOULOIYO XOS GUO ATUO GARY seu PUTT 
10109 9} JO sp[ao-Apoq oYL “X HOT & Aq pozworput s] ourosowmomo xos [ewu0u 
ey, ‘Tewmsou st oyemoy oy) Vey} petMsse s] 4y ooUTS ‘aordeoisd s0joo [ewmI0u 
JO JUaUIdOTAAOP OT} 1OJ 1040VJ V SUTeZTOD TOMA JO Yowo ‘soulosoMIOIyo xXos Io xX 
OM UIV{UOD o[VUey 944 JO s]T[90-Apoq eUL— siuaipd fo s7ja0-Apog imos Is42y 


‘BU PUTG-1OTOO B YALA poyVUl St oTVULo] [VUIOU & 4VY} PoUINsse St 47 
‘QUIOSOWMOIYO XOS OY} UI PoYVOOT ST ‘(ppiydosotqg Ul) WOMeULIOY quow sid 10 ‘(ueuL 
ul) uondeoi1ed AOTOD [VWAOU IOJ 10ZOVJ OF VY} uomdunsse oy} UO (D71yYdos0Lgq 
Jo ofa ayy Ur yUetISId Jo Yovy 10 ‘UeUl Ul SSoUpUTTG JOTOO ‘*3°e) JoqoVIeYyS Peqyfa]y 
-xos @ JO JUS }LIOYUT OY} Sulye1ysnITT meiseiq— (WOSTIM “A “WH 199Je) ZT “Ol 


(puity 10109) 
eur] oleh 


x 


({ew40N) 
oul] epeMeg 


uerptya 
-pusid jo 
BI [90-Apog 


weIpTIya Jo 
B[[90-xKag 


WespTIT? Jo 
B[[20-Apoy 


syueiud Jo 
8[[90-xXeg 


sqyuoied jo 
s{[a0-Apog. 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 23 


The main task which is left here for science to accomplish is 
the determination of the chemical substances in the chromo- 
somes which are responsible for the hereditary transmission of 
a quality, and the determination of the mechanism by which 
these substances give rise to the hereditary character. Here 
the ground has already been broken. It is known that for the 
formation of a certain black pigment the cooperation of a 
substance—tyrosin—and of a ferment of oxidation—tyrosinase 
—is required. The hereditary transmission of the black color 
through the male animal must occur by substances carried in 
the chromosome which determine the formation of tyrosin or 
tyrosinase or of both. We may, therefore, say that the solu- 
tion of the riddle of heredity has succeeded to the extent that 
all further development will take place purely in cytological 
and physico-chemical terms. 

While until twelve years ago the field of heredity was the 
stamping ground for the rhetorician and metaphysician it is 
today perhaps the most exact and rationalistic part of biology, 
where facts cannot only be predicted qualitatively, but also 
quantitatively. 


VII. THE HARMONIOUS CHARACTER OF THE ORGANISMS 


It is not possible to prove in a short address that all life 
phenomena will yield to a physico-chemical analysis. We have 
selected only the phenomena of fertilization and heredity, since 
these phenomena are specific for living organisms and without 
analogues in inanimate nature; and if we.can convince our- 
selves that these processes can be explained physico-chemically 
we may safely expect the same of such processes for which 
there exist a-prior] analogies in inanimate nature, as, e.g., for 
absorption and secretion. 

We must, however, settle a question which offers itself 
not only to the layman but also to every biologist, namely, how 
we shall conceive that wonderful ‘adaptation of each part to the 


24 Tue MercuHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


whole” by which an organism becomes possible. In the answer 
to this question the metaphysician finds an opportunity to put 
above the purely chemical and physical processes something 
specific which is characteristic of life only: the ‘‘Zielstrebigkeit,” 
the ‘‘harmony” of the phenomena, or the ‘“dominants’’ of 
Reinke and similar things. 

With all due personal respect for the authors of such terms 
I am of the opinion that we are dealing here, as in all cases of 
metaphysics, with a play on words. That a part is so con- 
structed that it serves the ‘‘whole”’ is only an unclear expression 
for the fact that a species is only able to live—or to use Roux’s 
expression—is only durable, if it is provided with the automatic 
mechanism for self-preservation and reproduction. If, for 
instance, warm-blooded animals should originate without a 
circulation they could not remain alive, and this is the reason 
why we never find such forms. The phenomena of ‘“adapta- 
tion’”’ cause only apparent difficulties since we rarely or never 
become aware of the numerous faultily constructed organisms 
which appear in nature. I will illustrate by a concrete example 
that the number of species which we observe is only an infinitely 
small fraction of those which can originate and possibly not 
rarely do originate, but which we never see since their organiza- 
tion does not allow them to continue to exist long. Moenk- 
haus found ten years ago that it is possible to fertilize the egg 
of each marine bony fish with the sperm of practically any 
other marine bony fish. His embryos apparently lived only 
a very short time. This year I succeeded in keeping such 
hybrid embryos between distantly related bony fish alive for 
over a month. It is, therefore, clear that it is possible to cross 
practically any marine teleost with any other. 

The number of teleosts at present in existence is about 
10,000. If we accomplish all possible hybridizations 100,000,000 
different crosses will result. Of these teleosts only a very small 
proportion, namely about one one-hundredth of 1 per cent, 


THe MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 25 


can live. It turned out in my experiments that the heterogene- 
ous hybrids between bony fishes formed eyes, brains, ears, fins, 
and pulsating hearts, blood and blood-vessels, but could live 
only a limited time because no blood circulation was established 
—in spite of the fact that the heart beat for weeks—or that the 
circulation, if it was established at all, did not last long. 

What prevented these heterogeneous fish embryos from 
reaching the adult stage? The lack of the proper ‘domi- 
nants”? Scarcely. I succeeded in producing the same type 
of faulty embryos in the pure breeds of a bony fish (Fundulus 
heteroclitus) by raising the eggs in 50 c.c. of sea-water to which 
was added 2 c.c. 1/100 per cent NaCN. The latter substance 
retards the velocity of oxidations and I obtained embryos 
which were in all details identical with the embryos produced 
by crossing the eggs of the same fish with the sperm of remote 
teleosts, e.g., Ctenolabrus or Menidia. These embryos, which 
lived about a month, showed the peculiarity of possessing a 
beating heart and blood, but no circulation. This suggests 
the idea that heterogeneous embryos show a lack of ‘“‘adapta- 
tion” and durability for the reason that in consequence of the 
chemical difference between heterogeneous sperm and egg the 
chemical processes in the fertilized egg are abnormal. 

The possibility of hybridization goes much farther than we 
have thus far assumed. We can cause the eggs of echinoderms 
to develop with the sperm of very distant forms, even mollusks 
and worms (Kupelwieser); but such hybridizations never lead 
to the formation of durable organisms. 

It is, therefore, no exaggeration to state that the number of 
species existing today is only an infinitely small fraction of 
those which can and possibly occasionally do originate, but 
which escape our notice because they cannot live and reproduce. 
Only that limited fraction of species can exist which possesses 
no coarse disharmonies in its automatic mechanism of preserva- 
tion and reproduction. Disharmonies and faulty attempts in 


26 THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


nature are the rule, the harmonically developed systems the rare 
exception. But since we only perceive the latter we gain the 
erroneous impression that the ‘‘adaptation of the parts to the 
plan of the whole” is a general and specific characteristic of ani- 
mate nature, whereby the latter differs from inanimate nature. 

If the structure and the mechanism of the atoms were 
known to us we should probably also get an insight into a world 
of wonderful harmonies and apparent adaptations of the parts 
to the whole. But in this case we should quickly understand 
that the chemical elements are only the few durable systems 
among a large number of possible but not durable combinations. 
Nobody doubts that the durable chemical elements are only 
the product of blind forces. There is no reason for conceiving 
otherwise the durable systems in living nature. 


VIII. THE CONTENTS OF LIFE 


The contents of life from the cradle to the bier are wishes 
and hopes, efforts and struggles, and unfortunately also dis- 
appointments and suffering. And this inner life should be 
amenable to a physico-chemical analysis? In spite of the 
gulf which separates us today from such an aim I believe that 
itis attainable. As long as a life phenomenon has not yet found 
a physico-chemical explanation it usually appears inexplicable. 
If the veil is once lifted we are always surprised that we did 
not guess from the first what was behind it. 

That in the case of our inner life a physico-chemical explana- 
tion is not beyond the realm of possibility is proved by the fact 
that it is already possible for us to explain cases of simple mani- 
festations of animal instinct and will on a physico-chemical 
basis; namely, the phenomena which I have discussed in former 
papers under the name of animal tropisms. As the most 
simple example we may mention the tendency of certain ani- 
mals to fly or creep to the light. We are dealing in this case 
with the manifestation of an instinct or impulse which the 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 27 


animals cannot resist. It appears as if this blind instinct which 
these animals must follow, although it may cost them their life, 
might be explained by the same law of Bunsen and Roscoe, 
which explains the photochemical effects in inanimate nature. 
This law states that within wide limits the photochemical effect 
equals the product of the intensity of light into the duration 
of illumination. It is not possible to enter here into all the 
details of the reactions of these animals to light; we only wish 
to point out in which way the light instinct of the animals 
may possibly be connected with the Bunsen-Roscoe law. 

The positively heliotropic animals—i.e., the animals which 
go instinctively to a source of light—have in their eyes (and 
occasionally also in their skin) photosensitive substances which 
undergo chemical alterations by light. The products formed 
in this process influence the contraction of the muscles—mostly 
indirectly, through the central nervous system. If the animal 
is illuminated on one side only, the mass of photochemical 

reaction products formed on that side in the unit of time is 
~ greater than on the opposite side. Consequently the develop- 
ment of energy in the symmetrical muscles on both sides of the 
body becomes unequal. As soon as the difference in the masses 
of the photochemical reaction products on both sides of the 
animal reaches a certain value, the animal, as soon as it moves, 
is automatically forced to turn toward one side. As soon as 
it has turned so far that its plane of symmetry is in the direction 
of the rays, the symmetrical spots of its surface are struck by 
the light at the same angle and in this case the intensity of light 
and consequently the velocity of reaction of the photochemical 
processes on both sides of the animal become equal. There 
is no more reason for the animal to deviate from the motion in 
a straight line and the positively heliotropic animal will move 
in this line to the source of light. (It was assumed that in 
these experiments the animal is under the influence of only 
one source of light and positively heliotropic.) 


28 THE MecHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


In a series of experiments J have shown that the heliotropic 
reactions of animals are identical with the heliotropic reactions 
of plants. It was known that sessile heliotropic plants bend 


Fie. 18 


Fie. 19 


Figs. 18 and 19.—Positive heliotropism of the polyps of Eudendrium. The 
new polyp-bearing stems all grow in the direction of the rays of light which is 
indicated by an arrow in each figure. (From nature.) These animals bend in 
the same way to the light as the stems of positively heliotropic plants kept under 
similar conditions. 


their stems to the source of light until the axis of symmetry of 
their tip is in the direction of the rays of light. I found the 
same phenomenon in sessile animals, e.g., certain hydroids 
and worms. Motile plant organs, e.g., the swarm spores of 
plants, move to the source of light (or if they are negatively 


THe MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 29 


heliotropic away from it), and the same is observed in motile 
animals. In plants only the more refrangible rays from green to 
blue have these heliotropic effects, while the red and yellow 
rays are little or less effective; and the same is true for the 
heliotropic reactions of animals. 

It has been shown by Blaauw for the heliotropic curvatures 
of plants that the product of the intensity of a source of light 
into the time required to induce a heliotropic curvature is a 


Fic. 20.—Positive heliotropism of a marine worm (Spirographis). (From 
pature ir heads toward the soures of light, as the stems Of positively hebotropic 
plants would do under the same conditions. 
constant; and the same result was obtained simultaneously 
by another botanist, Fréschl. It is thus proved that the Bunsen- 
Roscoe law controls the heliotropic reactions of plants. The 
same fact had already been proved for the action of light on our 
retina. 

The direct measurements in regard to the applicability of 
Bunsen’s law to the phenomena of animal heliotropism have not 
yet been made. Butanumber of data point to the probability 
that the law holds good here also. The first of these facts is 
the identity of the light reactions of plants and animals. The 
second is at least a rough observation which harmonizes with 
the Bunsen-Roscoe law. As long as the intensity of light or 
the mass of photochemical substances at the surfaces of the 


30 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


animal is small, according to the law of Bunsen, it must take a 
comparatively long time until the animal is automatically 
oriented by the light, since according to this law the photo- 
chemical effect is equal to the product of the intensity of the 
light into the duration of illumination. If, however, the inten- 
sity of the light is strong or the active mass of the photochemical 
substance great, it will require only a very short time until the 
difference in the mass of photochemical reaction products on 
both sides of the animal reaches the value which is necessary 
for the automatic turning to (or from) the light. The behavior 
of the animals agrees with this assumption. If the light is 
sufficiently strong the animals go in an almost straight line to 
the source of light; if the intensity of light (or the mass of 
photosensitive substances on the surface of the animal) is 
small the animals go in irregular lines, but at last they also 
land at the source of light, since the directing force is not 
entirely abolished. It will, however, be necessary to ascertain 
by direct measurements to what extent these phenomena in 
animals are the expression of Bunsen-Roscoe’s law. But we may 
already safely state that the apparent will or instinct of these 
animals resolves itself into a modification of the action of 
the muscles through the influence of light; and for the meta- 
physical term ‘will’? we may in these instances safely substi- 
tute the chemical term “photochemical action of light.” 

Our wishes and hopes, disappointments and sufferings have 
their source in instincts which are comparable to the light 
instinct of the heliotropic animals. The need of and the 
struggle for food, the sexual instinct with its poetry and its 
chain of consequences, the maternal instincts with the felicity 
and the suffering caused by them, the instinct of workmanship, 
and some other instincts are the roots from which our inner life 
develops. For some of these instincts the chemical basis is at 
least sufficiently indicated to arouse the hope that their analysis, 
from the mechanistic point of view, is only a question of time. 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION oF LIFE 31 


IX. ETHICS 


If our existence is based on the play of blind forces and only 
a matter of chance; if we ourselves are only chemical mechan- 
isms—how can there be an ethics for us? The answer is, 
that our instincts are the root of our ethics and that the instincts 
are just as hereditary as is the form of our body. We eat, 
drink, and reproduce not because mankind has reached an 
agreement that this is desirable, but because, machine-like, 
we are compelled to doso. We are active, because we are com- 
pelled to be so by processes in our central nervous system; 
and as long as human beings are not economic slaves the instinct 
of successful work or of workmanship determines the direction 
of their action. The mother loves and cares for her children, 
not because metaphysicians had the idea that this was desirable, 
but because the instinct of taking care of the young is inherited 
just as distinctly as the morphological characters of the female 
body. We seek and enjoy the fellowship of human beings 
because hereditary conditions compel us todo so. We struggle 
for justice and truth since we are instinctively compelled to see 
our fellow beings happy. Economic, social, and political con- 
ditions or ignorance and superstition may warp and inhibit 
the inherited instincts and thus create a civilization with a 
faulty or low development of ethics. Individual mutants may 
arise in which one or the other desirable instinct is lost, just as 
individual mutants without pigment may arise in animals; and 
the offspring of such mutants may, if numerous enough, lower 
the ethical status of a community. Not only is the mechanistic 
conception of life compatible with ethics: it seems the only con- 
ception of life which can lead to an understanding of the source 
of ethics. 


II. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR 
PSYCHOLOGY 


II 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PSYCHOLOGY! 
I 


A mechanistic conception of life is not complete unless it 
includes a physico-chemical explanation of psychic phenomena. 
Some authors hold that even if a complete physico-chemical 
analysis of these phenomena were possible today it would leave 
the “truly psychical” unexplained. We do not need to enter 
into a discussion of such an objection since we are still too far 
from the goal. We are at least able to show for a limited group 
of animal reactions that they can be explained unequivocally on 
a purely physico-chemical basis, namely, phenomena which the 
metaphysician would classify under the term of animal “will.” 

Through the writings of Schopenhauer and E. von Hart- 
mann I became interested in the problem of will. When asa 
student I read Munk’s investigations on the cerebral cortex 
I believed that they might serve as a starting-point for an 
experimental analysis of will. Munk stated that he had 
succeeded in proving that every memory image in a dog’s 
brain is localized in a particular cell or group of cells and that 
any one of these memory images can be extirpated at desire. 
Five years of experiments with extirpations in the cerebral 
cortex proved to me without doubt that Munk had become the 
victim of an error and that the method of cerebral operations 
may give data concerning the path of nerves in the central 
nervous system but that it teaches little about the dynamics of 
brain processes. 

A better opportunity seemed to offer itself in the study 
of the comparative psychology of the lower animals in which 


1 Lecture delivered at the Sixth International Psychological Congress at 
Geneva, 1909. (After a translation in Popular Science Monthly by Miss Grace B. 
Watkinson.) Reprinted by courtesy of Professor James McKeen Cattell. 


385 


36 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the mechanism for memory is developed but slightly or not at 
all. It seemed to me that some day it must become possible 
to discover the physico-chemical laws underlying the apparently 
random movements of such animals; and that the word “animal 
will” was only the expression of our ignorance of the forces 
which prescribe to animals the direction of their apparently 
spontaneous movements just as unequivocally as gravity 
prescribes the movements of the planets. For if a savage 
could directly observe the movements of the planets and should 
begin to think about them, he would probably come to the con- 
clusion that a “will action’ guides the movements of the planets 
just as a chance observer is today inclined to assume that “will” 
causes animals to move in a given direction. 

The scientific solution of the problem of will seemed then 
to consist in finding the forces which determine the movements 
of animals, and in discovering the laws according to which 
these forces act. Experimentally, the solution of the problem 
of will must take the form of forcing, by external agencies, any 
number of individuals of a given kind of animals to move in 
a definite direction by means of their locomotor apparatus. 
Only if we succeed in this have we the right to assume that we 
know the force which under certain conditions seems to a lay- 
man to be the will of the animal. But if one part only of the 
animals moves in this definite direction and the other does not, 
we have not succeeded in finding the force which unequivocally 
determines the direction of their movement. 

One other point should be observed. If a sparrow flies 
down to a seed lying on the ground, we speak of an act of will, 
but if a dead sparrow falls upon the seed this does not appear 
to us as such. In the latter case purely physical forces are 
concerned, while in the former chemical reactions are also tak- 
ing place in the sense-organs, nerves, and muscles of the animal. 
We speak of an act of will, only when this latter complex, that 
is, the natural movement of locomotion, plays its part also, and 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLOGY 37 


it is only with this sort of reactions that we have to deal in the 
psychology of the will. 
II 

Some experiments on winged plant lice may serve as an 
introduction to the methods of prescribing to animals the 
direction of their progressive movements. 

In order to obtain the material, potted rose bushes or Cine- 
rarias infected with plant lice are brought into a room and 
placed in front of a closed window. If the plants are allowed 
to dry out, the aphids (plant lice), previously wingless, change 
into winged insects. After this metamorphosis the animals 
leave the plants, fly to the window, and there creep upward 
on the glass. They can then easily be collected by holding a 
test-tube underneath and touching one animal at a time from 
above with a pen or scalpel, which causes the animals to drop 
into the test-tube. In this manner a sufficiently large number, 
perhaps twenty-five or fifty suitable subjects for the experi- 
ment, may be obtained. With these animals it may be demon- 
strated that the direction of their movement toward the light 
is definitely determined—provided that the animals are healthy 
and that the light is not too weak. The experiment is so arranged 
that only a single source of light, e.g., artificial light, is used. 

The animals place themselves with their heads toward the 
source of light and move toward it in as straight a line as the 
imperfection of their locomotor apparatus allows, approaching as 
near to the source of light as their prison (the test-tube) permits. 
When they reach that end of the test-tube which is directed 
toward the source of light, they remain there, stationary, in a 
closely crowded mass. If the test-tube is turned 180° the 
animals again go straight toward the source of light until the 
interference of the glass stops their further progressive move- 
ments. It can be demonstrated in these animals that the 


1Loeb, Der Heliotropismus der Tiere und seine Uebereinstimmung mit dem 
Heliotropismus der Pflanzen, Wiirzburg, 1889. Translated in Studies in General 
Physiology, 1906. 


38 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


direction of their progressive movement is just as unequivocally 
governed by the source of light as the direction of the move- 
ment of the planets is determined by the force of gravity. 

The theory of the compulsory movements of aphids under 
the influence of light is as follows: Two factors govern the pro- 
gressive movements of the animals under these conditions; 
one is the symmetrical structure of the animal, and the second 
is the photochemical action of light. We will consider the 
two separately. In regard to the photochemical action of light, 
we know today that a great many chemical reactions of organic 
bodies are accelerated by light. Especially is this true of oxi- 
dations... The mass of facts is already so great that we are 
justified in assuming that the determining action of light upon 
animals and plants is in its last analysis due to the fact that the 
rate of certain chemical reactions in the cells of the retina or 
of other photosensitive regions of the organisms is modified 
by light; with increasing intensity of light the rate of certain 
chemical reactions, e.g., oxidation, increases. 

The second factor is the symmetrical structure of the ani- 
mal. As expressed in the gross anatomy of the animal, the 
right and left halves of the body are symmetrical. But it is 
my belief that such a symmetry exists in a chemical sense, as 
well as in an anatomical, by which I mean that symmetrical 
regions of the body are chemically identical and have the same 
metabolism, while non-symmetrical regions of the body are 
chemically different, and in general have a quantitatively or 
qualitatively different metabolism. In order to illustrate this 
difference it is only necessary to point out that the two retinae, 
which are certainly symmetrical, have an identical metabolism, 
while a region of the skin which is not symmetrical with the 
retina has a different metabolism. The individual points on 

1 Luther, Die Aufgaben der Photochemie, Leipzig, 1905; C. Neuberg, Biochem. 
Zeitschr., XIII, 305, 1908; Loeb, The Dynamics of Living Matter, New York, 1906. 


In addition, see the work of Ciamician, as also of Wolfgang Ostwald (Biochem. 
Zeitschr., 1907). 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGy 39 


the retina are also chemically unlike. The observations upon 
visual purple, the differences in the color sensitiveness of the 
fovea centralis, and the peripheral parts of the retina indicate 
that the points of symmetry of the two retinae are chemically 
alike, the non-symmetrical points chemically unlike. 

Now if an unequal amount of light falls upon the two 
retinae the photochemical reactions in the one which receives 
more light will also be more accelerated than those in the other. 
The same naturally holds true for every other pair of sym- 
metrical photosensitive surface elements. For it should be 
mentioned that photochemical substances are not found in 
the eyes only, but also in other places on the surface of many 
animals. In planarians, as my experiments and those of 
Parker have shown, not only the eyes, but also parts of the 
skin, are photosensitive. But if more light falls upon one 
retina than upon the other, the chemical reactions will also be 
more accelerated in the one retina than in the other, and 
accordingly more intense chemical changes will take place in 
one optic nerve than in the other. S. 8. Maxwell and C. D. 
Snyder have demonstrated, independently of each other, that 
the rate of the nerve impulse has a temperature coefficient of 
the order of magnitude which is characteristic for chemical 
reactions. From this we must conclude that when two retinae 
(or other points of symmetry) are illuminated with unequal 
intensity, chemical processes, also of unequal intensity, take 
place in the two optic nerves (or in the sensory nerves of the 
two illuminated points). This inequality of chemical processes 
passes from the sensory to the motor nerves and eventually to 
the muscles connected with them. We conclude from this 
that with equal illumination of both retinae the symmetrical 
groups of muscles of both halves of the body will receive equal 
chemical stimuli and thus reach equal states of contraction, 
while, when the rate of reaction is unequal, the symmetrical, 
muscles on one side of the body come into stronger action than’ 


40 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


those on the other side. The result of such an inequality of the 
action of symmetrical muscles of the two sides of the body is 
a change in the direction of movement on the part of the animal. 

The change in the direction of movement can result either 
in a turning of the head and, in consequence, of the whole animal 
toward the source of light, or in a turning of the head and the 
animal in the opposite direction. The structure of the central 
nervous system is segmental and the head segments generally 
determine! the behavior of the other segments with their acces- 
sory parts. 

In the winged aphids the relations are as follows: Suppose 
that a single source of light is present and that the light strikes 
the animal from one side. As a consequence the activity of 
those muscles which turn the head or body of the animal toward 
the source of light will be increased.? As a result the head, and 
with it the whole body of the animal, is turned toward the 
source of light. As soon as this happens, the two retinae 
become illuminated equally. There is therefore no longer 
any cause for the animal to turn in one direction or the other. 
It is thus automatically guided toward the source of light. 
In this instance the light is the “‘will’ of the animal which 
determines the direction of its movement, just as it is gravity 
in the case of a falling stone or the movement of a planet. The 
action of gravity upon the movement of the falling stone is 
direct, while the action of light upon the direction of movement 
of the aphids is indirect, inasmuch as the animal is caused 
only by means of an acceleration of photochemical reactions 
to move in a definite direction. 


1 Loeb, Comparative Physiology of the Brain and Comparative Psychology, New 
York and London, 1900. 


2 If two sources of light of equal intensity are at an equal distance from the 
animal, it will move in a direction at right angles to a line connecting the two 
sources of light, because in this base both eyes are similarly influenced by the light. 
Herein, as Bohn has rightly said, the machine-like heliotropic reaction of animals 
differs from the movement of a human being toward one of two sources of light 
the movement in the latter case not being determined by heliotropism. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLocy 41 


We will now designate as positively heliotropic those animals 
which are forced to turn their head or move toward the source 
of light, and as negatively heliotropic those animals which are 
oriented or compelled to move in the opposite direction. 

The aphids serve here only as an example. The same phe- 
nomena of positive heliotropism may be demonstrated with 
equal precision in a great many animals, vertebrates as well as 
invertebrates. We cannot, of course, give here an account of 
all these cases. The reader who is interested in them must look 
into the voluminous literature upon this subject. Heliotropism 
is unusually common among the larvae of marine animals and 
insects, but also not lacking in sexually mature individuals. 

Heliotropic animals are therefore in reality photometric 
machines. According to photometric laws the intensity of 
light varies with the sine of the angle at which the light strikes 
a surface element of the animal (or with the cosine of the angle 
of incidence). The animal is oriented by the light in such a 
way that symmetrical elements of its photosensitive surface 
are struck at about the same angle. In the presence of only 
one source of light this condition is fulfilled if the axis of sym- 
metry of the animal moves in the direction of the rays of light. 
In this case the velocity of photochemical reactions on both sides 
of the animal is the same and there is no reason why it should 
deviate from this direction in its progressive motions. 

Experiments on the heliotropism of plants as well as on the 
perception of light by our retina have shown that the effect of 
light equals the product of the intensity into the duration 
of illumination. This law is identical with the general law of 
Bunsen and Roscoe which states that the chemical effect 
of light is within wide limits equal to this product. We do 
not yet know whether or not Bunsen’s law holds good for the 
heliotropic animals. If it does, we shall have to substitute 


1 Whether an animal is positively or negatively heliotropic depends upon the 
fact whether the light causes an increase or a decrease in the tension of the muscles. 
Why light should have these opposite effects is as yet unknown. 


42 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


this law for what the metaphysician calls the will of these 
animals. 
Til 

The winged aphids serve as an example, because they fulfil 
the above-mentioned requirement, namely, that all individuals, 
without exception, move toward the light. For mechanistic 
science it is a methodological postulate that the same law acts 
without exception, or that the exception must be satisfactorily 
explained. It was soon found, as was to be expected, that not 
all organisms in their natural condition are equally suitable 
for these experiments. Many animals show no heliotropism 
at all; many show only a slight reaction, while others show it in 
a degree as pronounced as do the winged aphids. The problem 
therefore presented itself of producing heliotropism artificially 
in animals which, under natural conditions, show no positive 
heliotropism. If small crustaceans of a fresh-water pond or 
lake are taken with a plankton net at noontime or in the after- 
noon and placed in an aquarium which is illuminated from one 
side only, it is often found that these animals move about in 
the vessel pretty much at random and distribute themselves 
irregularly. Some seem to go more toward the source of light, 
others in the opposite direction, and the majority perhaps pay 
no attention to the light. 

This condition changes instantly if we add to the water 
some acid, preferably carbonic acid, which easily penetrates the 
cells of the animal. To every 50 c.c. of the fresh water a few 
cubic centimeters of water charged with carbon dioxide are 
slowly added. If the correct amount is added all the individuals 
become actively positively heliotropic and move in as straight 
a line as the imperfection of their swimming movements per- 
mits, toward the source of light, and remain there closely 
crowded together on the illuminated side of the vessel. If the 
vessel is turned 180°, they go directly back again to the lighted 
side of the vessel. Every other acid acts like carbonic acid and 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGy 48 


alcohol acts in the same manner, only more weakly and much 
more slowly. Animals which were previously indifferent to 
light become, under carbonic acid treatment, complete slaves 
of the light. 

How does the acid produce this result? We will assume 
that it acts as a sensitizer. The light produces chemical 
changes, for instance, oxidation, on the surface of the animal, 
especially in the eye, as was suggested in the case of the aphids. 
The mass of photochemical substance which is acted upon by 
the light is often relatively small, so that even when the light 
strikes the crustacean (copepod) on one side only, the difference . 
in the chemical changes on the two sides of the body remains 
still too small to call forth a difference in tension or action in the 
muscles of the two sides of the body, sufficient to turn the ani- 
mal toward the source of light. But if we add an acid this could 
act as a catalyzer, as, for instance, in the catalysis of esters. 
In the catalysis of esters, the acid acts, according to Stieglitz, 
only to the extent of increasing the active mass of the substance 
which undergoes a chemical change. In order to fix our ideas 
provisionally we will assume that the acid makes the animal 
more strongly positively heliotropic by increasing the active 
mass of the photosensitive substance. In this way the same 
intensity of light which before produced no heliotropic reaction 
now may cause a very pronounced positively heliotropic reac- 
tion; because if now the animal is struck on one side only by 
the light, the difference in the reaction products in both retinae 
becomes rapidly large enough to cause automatically a differ- 
ence in the action of the muscles of both sides of the body and a 
turning of the head toward the source of light. 

In certain forms, for instance, in Daphnia and in certain 
marine copepods, a decrease in temperature also increases the 
tendency to positive heliotropism. If the mere addition of 
acid is not sufficient to make Daphniae positively heliotropic, 


1 Loeb, Pfliigers Archiv, CXV, 564, 1906. 


44 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


this may often be accomplished by simultaneously reducing the 
temperature. 
IV 

The animals which are strongly positively heliotropic and 
those animals which do not react at all to light offer no diffi- 
culties to the observer. Nevertheless, some zoologists seem to 
have found difficulty in explaining the behavior of those animals 
which come between the two extremes. For instance, one writer 
has ,asserted that with greater intensity of light the laws of 
heliotropic orientation hold good, while with a lessened light 
intensity the animals react to light by the method of “trial 
and error.” From a chemical standpoint the behavior of 
animals at low intensity is easily to be understood. If a posi- 
tively heliotropic animal is illuminated from one side, a com- 
pulsory turning of the head toward the source of light occurs 
only when the difference in the rate of certain photochemical 
reactions in the two eyes reaches a certain value. If the inten- 
sity of the light is sufficient and the active mass of photochemical 
substance in the animal great enough, it requires only a short 
time, for instance, the fraction of a second, before the difference 
in the mass of the reaction products formed on the two sides 
of the animal reaches the value necessary for the compulsory 
turning of the head toward the source of light. In this case the 
animal is a slave of the light; in other words, it has hardly time 
to deviate from the direction of the light rays; for if it turns 
the head even for the fraction of a second from the direction 
of the light rays, the difference in the photochemical reaction 
products in the two retinae becomes so great that the head is 
at once turned back automatically toward the source of light. 
But if the intensity of the light or the photosensitiveness of 
the animal is lessened the animal may deviate for a longer 
period from the direction of the light rays. Such animals 
do eventually reach the lighted side of the vessel, but they no 
longer go straight toward it, moving instead in zig-zag lines 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLogy 45 


or very irregularly. It is therefore not a case of a qualitative, 
but of a quantitative, difference in the behavior of heliotropic 
animals under greater or lesser illumination, and it is there- 
fore erroneous to assert that heliotropism determines the 
movement of animals toward the source of light only under 
strong illumination, but that under weaker illumination an 
essentially different condition exists. 

Still another point is to be considered. We have seen 
that acid increases the sensitiveness of certain animals to light, 
possibly by increasing the active mass of the photochemical 
substance. Every animal is continually producing acids in its 
cells, especially carbonic acid and lactic acid; and such acids 
increase the tendency in certain animals to react heliotropically.- 
It probably produces also substances which could have the 
opposite effect and which decrease the heliotropic sensitiveness 
of the animals. Fluctuations in the rate of the production of 
these substances will also produce fluctuations in the helio- 
tropic sensitiveness of the animal. If, for instance, the active 
mass of the photosensitive substance in a copepod is relatively 
small, a temporary increase in the production of carbonic acid 
can increase the photosensitiveness of the animal sufficiently 
to cause it to move for the period of a few seconds directly 
toward the source of light. Later the production of carbonic 
acid decreases and the animal again becomes indifferent to light 
and can move in any direction. Then the production of car- 
bonic acid increases again and the animal goes again, for a 
short time, toward the light. Such animals finally gather at 
the lighted side of the vessel because the algebraic sum of the 
movements in the other directions becomes zero according to 
the law of chance. But it is plain that such animals do not 
reach the source of light by a straight path. A writer who is 
not trained to interpret the variations in the behavior of such 
an animal chemically and physiologically, can naturally give 
no explanation of their significance. If he is forced to find an 


46 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


explanation he will wind up with the suggestion of ‘trial and 
error”? which is no more chemical or scientific than the explana- 
tions of metaphysicians in general. 

Some authors have, it seems, worked only with animals 
which were not pronouncedly heliotropic and whose photo- 
sensitiveness wavered about the threshold of stimulation in the 
manner described above. Such animals are not suitable for 
experiments in heliotropism and it is necessary to first increase 
their photosensitiveness if the laws of the action of light upon 
them are to be investigated. 

I also believe that observations upon animals which are 
not sufficiently photosensitive have caused many writers to 
assert that heliotropic animals do not place themselves directly 
in the line of the rays of light,! but that they first have to learn 
the right orientation. A very striking experiment contradicts 
this assertion. The larvae of Balanus perforatus develop 
entirely in the dark. If the ovary filled with mature larvae 
is placed in a watch crystal filled with sea-water in the dark, 
the larvae emerge at once and, if they are brought into the light, 
they move at once to the side of the watch crystal nearest to 
the window. They were, therefore, pronouncedly positively 
heliotropic before they came under the influence of the light. 

In experiments with winged aphids I often found that 
after having gone through the heliotropic reactions a few times 
they react much more quickly to light than at the beginning. 
This might be interpreted as a case of “learning.” In so far 
as it is not a case of a lessening of the stickiness of the feet or 
the removal of some other purely mechanical factor which 
retards the rate of movement, it may be brought about by the 
carbonic or lactic acids produced through the muscular activity 2 


1 Provided that only a single source of light is present. 

The so-called ‘‘staircase’’ phenomenon of stimulation of a muscle is ascribed, 
probably rightly, also to the formation of acid. This phenomenon, that is, the 
increase of the amount of contraction with every new stimulus, is, however, com- 
parable to or identical with the increase in the rate of reactions in the experiments 
described here. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGy 47 


Vv 


As far back as 1889 I pointed out that the photosensitive- 
ness of an animal is different in different physiological conditions 
and that, therefore, under natural conditions, heliotropism is 
found often only in certain developmental stages, or in certain 
physiological states of an animal. I have already mentioned 
that in the aphids distinct heliotropic reactions may only be 
expected when the animals have developed wings and have left 
the plant. The influence of the chemical changes which take 
place in animals upon heliotropism is much more distinct in 
the larvae of Porthesia chrysorrhoea. The larvae hatch from 
the eggs in the fall and, as young larvae, hibernate in a nest, 
The rising temperature in the spring drives them out of the 
nest, and they can also be driven out of the nest in winter by 
an increase in temperature. When driven out of the nest in 
this condition they are strongly positively heliotropic and I 
have never found in natural surroundings any animals whose 
heliotropic sensitiveness was more pronounced than it is in the 
young larvae of Chrysorrhoea. But as soon as the animals 
have once eaten, the positive heliotropism disappears and does 
not return even if they are again allowed to become hungry.! 
In this case it is clear that the chemical changes directly or 
indirectly connected with nutrition lead to a permanent dimi- 
nution or disappearance of the photochemical reaction. In 
ants and bees the influence of substances from the sexual 
organs seems to be the determining factor in the production of 
positive heliotropism. The ant workers show no heliotropic 
reactions, while in the males and females, at the time of sexual 
maturity, a distinct positive heliotropism develops, the intensity 
of which continues to increase. 

It is a well-known fact that during sexual maturity special 
substances are formed which influence various organs. For 


1 Loeb, op. cit. p. 24. (This latter fact has been overlooked by several. 
writers.) 


48 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


instance, Leo Loeb has found that the substances which are 
set free by the bursting of an egg follicle cause a special sensi- 
tiveness in the non-pregnant uterus, so that every mechanical 
stimulus causes the latter to form a decidua. In this way he 
could cause the formation of any number of deciduae in non- 
pregnant uteri, while without the circulation of follicle sub- 
stance in the blood the uterus did not react in this manner. 

It is a common phenomenon that animals in certain larval 
stages are positively heliotropic, while in others they are not 
sensitive to light or are even negatively heliotropic. I will 
- not discuss these facts further in this place, but refer my readers 
to my earlier papers. 

This change in the heliotropic sensitiveness, produced by 
certain metabolic products in the animal body, is of great biologi- 
cal significance. I pointed out in former papers that it serves 
to save the lives of the above-mentioned young larvae of Chrysor- 
rhoea. When the young larvae are awakened from their winter 
sleep by the sunshine of the spring they are positively helio- 
tropic. Their positive heliotropism leaves them no freedom 
of movement, but forces them to creep straight upward to the 
top of a tree or branch. Here they find the first buds. In this 
way their heliotropism guides them to their food. Should 
they now remain positively heliotropic they would be held fast 
on the ends of the twigs and would starve to death. But we 
have already mentioned that after having eaten they once more 
lose their positive heliotropism. They can now creep down- 
ward, and the restlessness which is characteristic of so many 
animals! forces them to creep downward until they reach a 
new leaf, the odor or tactile stimulus of which stops the pro- 
gressive movement of the machine and sets their eating 
activity again in motion. 

The fact that ants and bees become positively heliotropic 
at the time of sexual maturity plays an important réle in the 


1 The physico-chemical cause of this ‘‘restlessness'’ which is noticeable in 
many insects and crustaceans is at present unknown. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGy 49 


vital economy of these creatures. As is well known, the mating 
of these insects takes place during the so-called nuptial flight. 
I found that among the male and female ants of a nest the 
heliotropic sensitiveness increases steadily up to the time of 
the nuptial flight and that the direction of their flight follows 
the direction of the rays of the sun. I gained the impression 
that this nuptial flight is merely the consequence of a very 
highly developed heliotropic sensitiveness. The case seems to 
be similar among the bees according to the following experi- 
ment described by Kellogg. The bees were ready to swarm 
out of the opening of the box used for the experiment when 
he suddenly removed the dark covering of the box so that the 
light now entered it from above. The heliotropic sensitiveness 
of the animals was so great that they crept upward within 
the box, following the direction of the light rays, and were not 
able to make the nuptial flight. Thus, according to these obser- 
vations the bees at the time of the nuptial flight are positively 
heliotropic machines. 

These observations may serve as examples of the way in 
which the analysis of the vital phenomena of certain animals 
shows tropisms to be elements of these phenomena. Many 
observations of a similar nature are found in the papers of 
Georges Bohn, Parker, Réd],! and myself. 


VI 


Under the influence of the theory of natural selection the 
view has been accepted by many zoologists and psychologists 
that everything which an animal does is for its best interest. 
The exact doctrine of heredity, founded by Mendel and 
advanced to the position of a systematic science in 1900, 
reduces this idea to its proper value. It is only true that 
species possessing tropisms which would make reproduction 
and preservation of the species impossible must die out. 


1 Radl, Der Phototropismus der Tiere, Leipzig, 1903. 


50 Tue MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


Galvanotropism illustrates this fact in a striking manner. 
If a galvanic current is passed through a trough filled with 
water, and animals are placed in this trough, it can be observed 
that an orientation in relation to the direction of the current 
takes place in many of the animals, and that they move in the 
direction either of the positive or of the negative current. 
This phenomenon we call galvanotropism. In galvanotropism 
the current lines or the current curves play the same rdle as the 
light rays in heliotropism. At those points where the current 
curves enter the cells! a collection of ions takes place which 
influences the chemical reactions. The number of species 
which show typical galvanotropic reactions is not so great as the 
number of those showing typical heliotropism. In my opinion 
this difference is the result of the physical difference in the action 
of light and of the electric current. Light acts essentially 
upon the free surface of the animal, while the electric current 
affects all the cells and nerves. Thus the action of the current 
upon the skin becomes complicated and modified by its simul- 
taneous effect upon the nerve branches and upon the central 
nervous system. The result is thus much more complicated 
than that of the action of light where essentially only the effect 
upon the skin and retina is involved. For this reason, a dis- 
tinct galvanotropism is found more often in organisms with 
a simple structure, as, for instance, in unicellular organisms, 
than in vertebrates, although it is also demonstrable in the 
latter. 

Galvanotropism is, however, purely a laboratory product. 
With the exception of a few individuals, which have in recent 
years fallen into the hands of physiologists who happened to be 
working on galvanotropism, no animal has ever had the chance 
to come under the influence of an electric current. And yet 
galvanotropism is a remarkably common reaction among 
animals. A more direct contradiction of the view that the 


Or where the movement of the ions within the cell is retarded. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGcy 51 


reactions of animals are determined by their needs or by natural 
selection could hardly be found. 

One might be led to suppose that galvanotropism and heli- 
otropism are not comparable. They are, however, as a matter 
of fact, phenomena of the same category with the exception of 
the aforementioned fact, that light acts generally only upon the 
surface of the skin, while the electric current influences all the 
cells of the body. As already mentioned, the disturbing com- 
plications arising from this latter circumstance disappear for 
the most part when we work with unicellular organisms, and we 
should expect that galvanic and heliotropic reactions would 
more nearly resemble one another in this case, provided that 
we work with organisms possessing both forms of sensitiveness. 
And this expectation is fulfilled. The algae of the species 
Volvox show heliotropism and galvanotropism. The investi- 
gations made by Holmes and myself upon heliotropism, as well 
as those of Bancroft upon the galvanotropism of these organisms 
indicate that the mechanism of these reactions in Volvoz is 
the same and the degree of determinism of the heliotropic 
and galvanotropic reactions in Volvox is equally great. 

Claparéde raises the objection that the galvanotropic 
reactions are purely compulsory, while the heliotropic reactions 
are governed by the “‘interest of the animal.’! Such a view, 
however, is not supported by the facts. The reason why heli- 
otropism may occasionally, as we have seen, be of use, while 
galvanotropism has no biological significance, is because the 
electric current does not exist in nature. It can, however, be 
shown also that heliotropism is just as useless to many animals 
as galvanotropism. For instance, I pointed out twenty years 
ago that some varieties of animals which do not live in the light 
at all, for instance, the larvae of the goat moth, which live under 
the bark of trees, may show positive heliotropism. I found, 
moreover, that the crab, Cuma Rathkwi, which lives in the mud of 


1 Claparéde, ‘‘ Les tropismes devant la psychologie,”’ Journ. f. Psychologie und 
Neurologie, XIII, 150, 1908. 


52 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the harbor at Kiel, when brought into the light and removed 
from the mud shows positive heliotropism. It is, therefore, 
just as incorrect to assert that the heliotropic reactions are 


LITTLE 


< 


mA a 
a b ¢c 


Fic. 21.—Arrangement to prove that posi- 
tively heliotropic animals move toward the source 
of light even if by so doing they go from the sun- 
light into the shade. W W is a window through 
which sunlight S fallsinto the room. By apiece 
of board de the sunlight S is prevented from 
striking the region bc of a table near the window 
and this part of the tableis in theshade. Only the 
daylight D can reach this part of the table. 

A test-tube ac is put on this table at right 
angles to the plane of the window. At the be- 
ginning of the experiment the animals (e.g., the 
winged aphides) are all at a. The animals move 
at once toward the window, but instead of remain- 
ing at b they keep on moving from the direct 
sunlight into the shade toward the source of light 
until they all reach the end of the tube c near the 
iar (in the shade) where they remain perma- 
nently. 


governed by the bio- 
logical interests of the 
animal as that this is 
true for galvanotrop- 
ism. Wemust, there- 
fore, free ourselves at 
once from the over- 
valuation of natural 
selection and accept 
the consequences of 
Mendel’s theory of 
heredity, according 
to which the animal 
is to be looked upon 
as an aggregate of in- 
dependent hereditary 
qualities. 


VII 


The attempt has 
been made to prove 
that organisms are 
attuned to a certain 
intensity of light and 
so regulate their 
heliotropism that they 


invariably reach that intensity of light which is best suited 
to their well-being. I believe that this is also a suggestion 
forced upon the investigators by the extreme application 


of the theory of natural selection. 


I have made experi- 


ments upon a large number of animals, but, with a clear 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLosy 53 


arrangement of the physical conditions of the experiment, I 
have never found a single indication of such an adaptation. 
In every case it has been shown that positively heliotropic 
animals are positive to any intensity of light above the threshold. 
Thus winged plant lice or wingless larvae of Chrysorrhoea or 
copepods, which have been made heliotropic by acids, go toward 
the light whether the source of light is the direct sunlight or 
reflected light from the sky or weak lamp light, provided that 
the (threshold) value of the intensity of light required for the 
reaction is exceeded. Indeed, I have been able to show that 
positively heliotropic animals also move toward the source of 
light even if the arrangement is such that by so doing they go 
from the light into the shadow.1 I have never observed a 
“selection” of a suitable intensity of light. 

What probably lies behind these interpretations of the 
“selection of a suitable intensity of light”’ is the fact that under 
certain conditions reaction products formed by the photo- 
chemical action of light may inhibit the positive heliotropism. 
I found a very clear instance of this sort in the newly hatched 
larvae of Balanus perforatus, which are positively heliotropic. 
If they are placed in the light of a quartz mercury lamp (of 
Heraus), which is very rich in ultra-violet rays, the positively 
heliotropic larvae soon become negatively heliotropic. For 
these experiments the larvae should be placed only in a very 
shallow depth of sea-water. 

Even in a strong light which is not so rich in ultra-violet 
rays as the light of the mercury lamp, it is sometimes possible 
to cause positively heliotropic animals to become negatively 
heliotropic. This is the case, for instance, with the larvae of 
Polygordius. But it would be wrong in this case to speak of 
an adaptation of the animal to a certain intensity of light. 


1 Quite often without even stopping for a moment. In animals sensitive to 
differences (see next chapter) a stopping occurs in this experiment in the passing 
from the light into the shadow, but they go, nevertheless, immediately on in the 
direction of the source of light. The reader will find a further account of this 
experiment in my book on The Dynamics of Living Matter. 


54 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


In my opinion it is merely a case where a metabolic product either 
alters the photochemical action or so influences the central 
nervous system that the excitation of the retina by the light 
weakens the tonus of the muscles, instead of strengthening it. 

Some of the other mistakes have perhaps also arisen because 
the writers worked with complicated experimental conditions 
instead of with simple ones, for instance, because they used a 
hollow prism filled with ink in order to produce a gradual 
decrease in the light intensity. In the semidarkness thus pro- 
duced, the intensity of light often remains beneath or near 
the threshold of stimulation, and the writers fall victims to 
that class of errors which we have already pointed out in 
speaking of the influence of lesser intensities of light. 


VIII 


Heliotropic phenomena are determined by the relative 
rates of chemical reactions occurring simultaneously in sym- 
metrical surface elements of an animal. There is a second class 
of phenomena which is determined by a sudden change in the 
rate of chemical reactions in the same surface elements. Reac- 
tions to a sudden change in the intensity of light are shown most 
clearly in marine tube-worms, whose gills are exposed to light. 
If the intensity of the light in the aquarium is suddenly dimin- 
ished the worms withdraw quickly into their tubes. A sudden 
increase in the intensity of light has no such effect. With other 
forms, for instance, with planarians, a sudden decrease in the 
intensity of the light causes a decrease in movement. Such ani- 
mals gather chiefly in parts of the space where the intensity of 
light is relatively small. I have designated such reactions as 
the expression of sensitiveness to changes in the intensity of a 
stimulus (‘‘Unterschiedsempfindlichkeit”’) differential sensi- 
bility, in order to distinguish them from tropisms.! 


1 Loeb, ‘‘ Ueber die Umwandlung positiv heliotropischer Tiere, u.s.w.,"’ Pflugers 
Archiv, 1893. Seealso the recent investigations of Georges Bohn, La naissance de 
"intelligence, Paris, 1909; *‘ Les essais et les erreurs chez les étioles de mer,” Bull. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHOoLoGy 55 


It is hardly necessary to point out here that the effects of 
rapid changes in intensity, when they are very marked, can 
easily complicate and entirely obscure the heliotropic phe- 
nomena. In Aypotricha and other infusoria this differential 
sensibility is very pronounced in response to sudden touch or 
sudden alteration of the chemical medium, and like the tube- 
worms they thereupon draw back very quickly. Since their 
locomotor organs are not symmetrical, but are arranged in a 
peculiar unsymmetrical manner, they do not, after the next 
progressive movement, return to the former direction of move- 
ment, but deviate sideways from it, and it is therefore easy 
to understand that such animals do not furnish the best ma- 
terial for demonstrating the laws of heliotropism, especially 
since they possess only a slight photochemical sensitiveness. 
But Jennings! has with special preference used observations on 
such organisms to argue against the theory of tropisms. Just 
as the action of a constant current in muscles and nerves is 
different from that of an intermittent current, so we find an 
analogous case in the action of light. If we wish to trace all 
animal reactions back to physico-chemical laws we must take 
into consideration besides the tropisms not only the facts of the 
differential sensibility but also all other facts which exert an 
influence upon the reactions. The influence of that mechanism 
which we call “associative memory” also belongs in this cate- 
gory, but we cannot discuss this further at this place. The 
reader is referred to my book? as well as to the more recent 
works of Bohn, La naissance de l’intelligence® and La nowvelle 
psychologie animale. Let us bear in mind that “ideas” also 


Inst. gen. psychol., 1907; ‘‘Intervention des réactions oscillatoires dans les tro- 
pismes,”’ Ass. franc. d. Sciences, 1907. 


1 Jennings, The Behavior of Lower Organisms, 1906. 


2 Comparative Physiology of the Brain and Comparative Psychology, New York 
and London, 1900. 


3 Paris, ‘‘ Bibliothéque de philosophie scientifique,’’ 1909. 
4 Paris, ‘‘ Bibliothéque de philosophie contemporaine,"’ 1911. 


56 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


can act, much as acids do for the heliotropism of certain 
animals, namely, to increase the sensitiveness to certain stimuli, 
and thus can lead to tropism-like movements or actions directed 
toward a goal. 
1D.¢ 

Besides light and the electric current, the force of gravity 
also has an orienting influence upon a number of animals. 
The majority of such animals are forced to turn their heads 
away from the center of the earth and to creep upward. It was 
uncertain for a long time how the orientation of cells in relation 
to the center of gravity of the earth could influence the rate of 
the chemical reactions within, but it has been suggested that 
an enlargement or shifting of the reacting surfaces formed the 
essential connecting link. If it is assumed that in such geo- 
tropically sensitive cells two phases (for instance, two fluid 
substances which are not at all, or not easily, miscible, or one 
solid and one fluid substance) of different specific gravities are 
present, which react upon one another, a reaction takes place 
at the surfaces of contact. Every enlargement of the latter in- 
creases the mass of reacting molecules. A shifting of the surfaces 
would act in the same manner. Finally, a third possibility re- 
mains which could perhaps be realized in plant roots and stems. 
If in the geotropically sensitive elements two masses of differ- 
ent specific gravity are present, only one of which reacts to the 
flowing sap in the center or the periphery of the stem, the cells 
of the upper side of a stem which is laid horizontally will ac- 
quire a different rate of reaction from those of the lower side, 
because in the former the specifically heavier substances are 
directed toward the center of the stem, while in the latter the 
specifically lighter ones are directed toward the center. Con- 
sequently, one side will grow faster than the other, hence the 
geotropic bending.! In the frog’s egg, we can actually demon- 
strate directly the existence of two substances of different 


1 Chapter on ‘‘Tropisms”’ in Dynamics of Living Matter. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoGy 57 


specific gravity and can study their behavior, since in this case 
they are of different color. 

In animals it has been observed that orientation toward the 
center of gravity of the earth often becomes less compulsory 
when the inner ear has been removed. Mach first pointed 
out the possibility that the otoliths are responsible for this. 
He believed that they might press upon the end-organs of the 
sensory nerves and every change of pressure might cause a cor- 
rection of the position of the animal. It is generally assumed 
that this view has been verified by experiment but I cannot 
entirely agree with it although I once described experiments 
which seemed to support Mach’s otolith theory. I had found 
that when the otoliths of the inner ear of the shark are scraped 
out with a sharp spoon the normal orientation of the animal 
suffers; but if the otoliths are simply washed out from the 
inner ear by a weak current of sea-water the orientation does 
not so easily suffer. 

In the latter case, it is doubtful whether all the otolith 
powder has been removed from the ear. The problem was 
solved by experiments on flounders, which have only a single 
large otolith that can easily be removed from the ear. E. P. 
Lyon carried out these experiments, which showed that no 
disturbance of the orientation resulted from this operation. We 
may conclude, therefore, that in my experiments of scraping 
out the otoliths a disturbance of the orientation occurred, 
because in so doing the nerve endings in the ears were injured. 
We have, therefore, no right to maintain that the orientation of 
animals in relation to the center of gravity of the earth is regu- 
lated by the pressure of the otoliths upon the nerve endings, 
but that this regulation takes place in the nerve endings them- 
selves, and probably, indeed, as a result of the existence there 
of two different phases of different specific gravity which react 
upon one another. Through the change of orientation of the 
cells in relation to the center of gravity of the earth, the two 


58 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


phases undergo a shifting by means of which a change in the 
rate of reaction is brought about according to one of the ways 
described above. Since then I have looked through the litera- 
ture on the function of the otoliths or statoliths, and have 
reached the conclusion that all writers who assert that the 
removal of the otoliths disturbs the geotropic orientation of 
animals have been victims of the same fallacy as myself. They 
have injured or removed the nerve endings. In the only case 
_in which a removal of the otoliths without tearing or other 
injury of the nerve endings can be justifiably assumed, no dis- 
turbance of the orientation occurred. 

While in my own work I have aimed to trace the complex 
reactions of animals back to simpler reactions like those of 
plants and finally to physico-chemical laws, the opposite 
tendency has lately been gaining influence. Some botanists, 
namely, Haberlandt, Némec, and F. Darwin, endeavor to show 
that the relatively simpler reactions of plants may be traced 
back to the more complex relations found in animals. Instead 
of deriving the tropic reactions of plants as directly as possible 
from the law of mass action or the law of Bunsen and Roscoe, 
they try to show that “‘sense-organs” exist in the cells of 
plants and Francé even attributes to the latter a “soul” and 
“intelligence.” I believe that in order to be consistent, these 
writers ought to base the law of mass action upon the assump- 
tion of the existence of sense-organs, souls, and intelligence in 
the molecules and ions. It is probably unnecessary to empha- 
size the fact that it is better for the progress of science to derive 
the more complex phenomena from simpler components than to 
do the contrary. For all “explanation” consists solely in the 
presentation of a phenomenon as an unequivocal function of 
the variables by which it is determined, and if in nature we find 
a function of two variables, it does not, in my opinion, tend 
toward progress to assert that this is a case of functions of 
more than two variables, without furnishing sufficient proof for 
this assertion. 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TROPISMS FOR PsycHoLoay 59 


These writers explain the geotropic reactions of plants 
by saying that in certain cells starch grains are present which 
serve the purpose of the otoliths in animals. These starch 
grains are believed to press upon the sense-organs or nerve 
endings in the plant cells concerned and the “ pressure-sense”’ 
of the plant is then supposed to give rise to the geotropic curva- 
ture. I have no opposition to offer to the assumption that the 
starch grains change their position with a change in the position 
of the cells, and I am also willing to pass over for the present 
the view that the starch grains form one of the two phases in 
the cell. But I see no necessity for assuming besides this 
the existence of intracellular sense-organs which perceive the 
pressure of the starch grains. This is, in my opinion, an 
unnecessary complication of simple relations. 


x 

The progress of natural science depends upon the dis- 
covery of rationalistic elements or simple natural laws. We 
find that there are two classes of investigators in biology, 
grouped according to their attitude toward such simple laws 
or rationalistic elements. One seems to aim at the denial of 
the existence of such simple laws and every new case which 
does not fall at once under such a law offers an opportunity 
for them to point out the inadequacy of the latter. The other 
group of investigators aims to discover and not to disprove 
laws. When such investigators have discovered a simple law 
which is generally applicable, they know that an apparent 
exception does not necessarily overthrow the law, but that 
possibly an opportunity is offered for a new discovery and an 
extension of the old law. Mendel’s laws have been brilliantly 
confirmed in a number of cases. In some cases of apparent 
deviations (from these laws), however, it has not always been 
possible at once to recognize the cause. One group of investi- 
gators has recognized that these deviations do not indicate the 
incorrectness of Mendel’s laws, but that they are merely the 


60 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


result of secondary and often minor complications; the latter 
investigators have from this standpoint made further fruitful 
discoveries. The rédle of the other group of investigators in 
this case has consisted, primarily, in an attempt to minimize 
the importance of Mendel’s laws and thus to retard the progress 
of science. 

The case is similar in the realm of tropisms. Tropisms 
and tropism-like reactions are elements which pave the way 
for a rationalistic conception of the psychological reactions of 
animals and I believe, therefore, that it is in the interest of the 
progress of science to develop further the theory of animal 
tropisms. The fact that in an electric current the same animal 
often moves differently from what it does under the influence 
of light finds its explanation for the observer conversant with 
physical chemistry in the fact that the electric current causes 
changes in the concentration of ions within, as well as upon the 
surface, while the chemical action of light is essentially limited 
to the surface. Certain writers, however, leave this difference 
in the action of the two agents out of consideration and make 
use of the difference in the behavior of certain organisms in 
response to light and to the electric current, to assert that it 
is not permissible to speak of tropisms as being governed 
by general laws; in other words, they say that tropisms are 
without significance. Animals in general are symmetrically 
built and the motor elements of the right and left sides of the 
body usually act symmetrically. Consequently the heliotropic 
orientation, for instance, comes about as we have already 
described. There are animals, however, which move sideways, 
for instance, certain crabs, such as the fiddler crab. Holmes 
has found that these crustaceans also go sideways toward the 
light. Jennings draws from this fact the following conclusions: 
“The symmetrical position is an incident of the reaction, not 
its essence.” 

In other words, he uses these observations of Holmes to ~ 


SIGNIFICANCE OF TrRoPISMS FOR PsycHoLogy' 61 


indicate that the rdéle ascribed to symmetry has no importance 
for the theory of tropisms. I am, however, inclined to draw 
another conclusion, namely, that in the fiddler crabs in the 
first place there is an entirely different connection between the 
retina and the locomotor muscles from that in other crustaceans, 
and that, secondly, there is a special peculiarity in regard to 
the function of the two retinae whereby they do not act like 
symmetrical surface elements. I believe that a new discovery 
may be made here.! 


XI 


These data may suffice to explain my point of view. Tome 
it is a question of making the facts of psychology accessible 
to analysis by means of physical chemistry. In this way it is 
already possible to reduce a set of reactions, namely, the tro- 
pisms to simple rationalistic relations. Many animals, because 
their body structure is not only morphologically, but also 
chemically, symmetrical, are obliged to orient their bodies in 
a certain way in relation to certain centers of force, as, for in- 
stance, the course of light, an electric current, the center of 
gravity of the earth, or chemical substances. This orientation 
is automatically regulated according to the law of mass action. 
The application of the law of mass action to this set of reactions 
is thus made possible. I consider it unnecessary to give up 
the term “comparative psychology,” but I am of the opinion 
that the contents of comparative psychology will under the 
influence of the above-mentioned endeavors be different from 
the contents of speculative psychology. But I believe also 
that the further development of this subject will fall more to 
the lot of biologists trained in physical chemistry than to the 
specialists in psychology or zoology, for it is in general hardly 


1 From which I expect, furthermore, that they will only confirm still more 
the laws of heliotropism. This expectation is based upon analogous relations in 
the pleuronectids, which I cannot, however, discuss further here. However, 
probably no one will maintain that the existence of the pleuronectids invalidates 
all laws in regard to the symmetrical body structure. 


62 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


to be expected that zoologists and psychologists who lack a 
physico-chemical training will feel attracted to the subject of 
tropisms. 

Tn closing let me add a few remarks concerning the possible 
application of the investigations of tropisms. 

I believe that the investigation of the conditions which 
produce tropisms may be of importance for psychiatry. If we 
can call forth in an animal otherwise indifferent to light by 
means of an acid a heliotropism which drives it irresistibly into 
a flame; if the same thing can be brought about by means of a 
secretion of the reproductive glands, we have given, I believe, 
a group of facts, within which the analogies necessary for 
psychiatry can be called forth experimentally and can be 
investigated. 

These experiments may also attain a similar value for 
ethics. The highest manifestation of ethics, namely, the con- 
dition that human beings are willing to sacrifice their lives for 
an idea is comprehensible neither from the utilitarian stand- 
point nor from that of the categorical imperative. It might be 
possible that under the influence of certain ideas chemical 
changes, for instance, internal secretions within the body, are 
produced which increase the sensitiveness to certain stimuli to 
such an unusual degree that such people become slaves to cer- 
tain stimuli just as the copepods become slaves to the light 
when carbon dioxide is added to the water. Since Pawlow 
and his pupils have succeeded in causing the secretion of saliva 
in the dog by means of optic and acoustic signals, it no longer 
seems strange to us that what the philosopher terms an “idea” 
is a process which can cause chemical changes in the body. 


III. SOME FUNDAMENTAL FACTS AND CONCEP- 
TIONS CONCERNING THE COMPARATIVE PHYS- 
IOLOGY OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 


III 


SOME FUNDAMENTAL FACTS AND CONCEPTIONS CON- 
CERNING THE COMPARATIVE PHYSIOLOGY 
OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM! 

1. The understanding of complicated phenomena depends 
upon an analysis by which they are resolved into their simple 
elementary components. If we ask what the elementary com- 
ponents are in the physiology of the central nervous system, 
our attention is directed to a class of processes which are called 
reflexes. A reflex is a reaction which is caused by an external 
tismulus, and which results in a coordinated movement, the 
closing of the eyelid, for example, when the conjuctiva is 
touched by a foreign body, or the narrowing of the pupil under 
the influence of light. In each of these cases, changes in the 
sensory nerve endings are produced which bring about a change 
of condition in the nerves. This change travels to the central 
nervous system, passes from there to the motor nerves, and 
terminates in the muscle-fibers, producing there a contraction. 
This passage from the stimulated part to the central nervous 
system, and back again to the peripheral muscles, is called a 
reflex. There has been a growing tendency in physiology to 
make reflexes the basis of the analysis of the functions of the 
central nervous system, and consequently much importance 
has been attached to the processes underlying them and the 
mechanisms necessary for reflex. 

The name reflex suggests a comparison between the spinal 
cord and a mirror. Sensory stimuli were supposed to be 
reflected from the spinal cord to the muscles; destruction of the 
spinal cord would, according to this, make the reflex impossible, 


1 Reprinted from Loeb, J., Comparative Physiology of the Brain and Compara- 
tive Psychology (1899). By courtesy of G. P. Putnam's Sons of New York and 


London. 


65 


66 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


just as the destruction of the mirror might prevent the reflection 
of light. This comparison, however, of the reflex process in 
the central nervous system with the reflection of light has, 
long since, become meaningless, and at present few physiologists 
in using the term reflex think of its original significance. In- 
stead of this, another feature in the conception of the term 
reflex has gained prominence, namely, the purposeful character 
of many reflex movements. The closing of the eyelid and the 
narrowing of the pupil are eminently purposeful, for the cornea 
is thereby protected from hurtful contact with foreign bodies, 
and the retina from the injurious effects of strong light. 
Another striking characteristic in such reflexes has also been 
emphasized. The movements which are produced are so well 
planned and coordinated that it seems as though some intelli- 
gence were at work either in devising or in carrying them out. 
The fact, however, that even a decapitated frog will brush 
with its foot a drop of acetic acid from its skin, suggests that 
some other explanation is necessary. A prominent psychologist 
has maintained that reflexes are to be considered as the mechani- 
cal effects of acts of volition of past generations.1_ The ganglion- 
cell seems the only place where such mechanical effects could 
be stored up. It has therefore been considered the most 
essential element of the reflex mechanism, the nerve-fibers 
being regarded, and probably correctly, merely as conductors. 

Both the authors who emphasize the purposefulness of the 
reflex act and those who see in it only a physical process have 
invariably looked upon the ganglion-cell as the principal bearer 
of the structures for the complex coordinated movements in 
reflex action. 

I should have been as little inclined as any other physiolo- 
gist to doubt the correctness of this conception had not the 
establishment of the identity of the reactions of animals and 
plants to light proved the untenability of this view and at the 


1 A statement for which no trace of experimental proof exists. 


PuysioLoGy oF CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 67 


same time offered a different conception of reflexes. The flight 
of the moth into the flame is a typical reflex process. The 
light stimulates the peripheral sense-organs, the stimulus passes 
to the central nervous system, and from there to the muscles of 
the wings, and the moth is caused to fly into the flame. This 
reflex process agrees in every point with the heliotropic effects 
of light on plant organs. Since plants possess no nerves and no 
ganglia, this identity of animal with plant heliotropism can 
force but one inference—these heliotropic effects must depend 
upon conditions which are common to both animals and plants. 
At the end of my book on heliotropism! I expressed this view 
in the following words: “We have seen that, in the case of 
animals which possess nerves, the movements of orientation 
toward light are governed by exactly the same external condi- 
tions, and depend in the same way upon the external form of the 
body, as in the case of plants which possess no nerves. These 
heliotropic phenomena, consequently, cannot depend upon 
specific qualities of the central nervous system.” On the other 
hand, the objection has been raised that destruction of the 
ganglion-cells interrupts the reflex process. This argument, 
however, is not sound, for the nervous reflex arc in higher animals 
forms the only protoplasmic bridge between the sensory organs 
of the surface of the body and the muscles. If we destroy 
the ganglion-cells or the central nervous system, we interrupt 
the continuity of the protoplasmic conduction between the 
surface of the body and the muscles, and a reflex is no longer 
possible. Since the axis cylinders of the nerves and the 
ganglion-cells are nothing more than protoplasmic formations, 
we are justified in seeking in them only general protoplasmic 
qualities, unless we find that the phenomena cannot be explained 
by means of the latter alone. 

2. A further objection has been raised, that although these 


1 Loeb, J., Der Heliotropismus der Tiere und seine Uebereinstimmung mit dem 
Heliotropismus der Pflanzen, Wiirzburg, 1890. A preliminary note on these 
experiments appeared January, 1888 


‘68 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


reflexes occur in plants possessing no nervous system, yet in 
animals where ganglion-cells are present the very existence of 
the ganglion-cells necessitates the presence in them of special 
reflex mechanisms. It was therefore necessary to find out if 
there were not animals in which coordinated reflexes still con- 
tinued to exist after the destruction of the central nervous 
system. Such a phenomenon could be expected only in forms 
in which a direct transmission of stimuli from the skin to the 
muscle or direct stimulation of the muscle is possible, in addi- 
tion to the transmission through the reflex arc. This is the 
case, for instance, in worms and in ascidians. I succeeded! in 
demonstrating in Ciona intestinalis that the complicated reflexes 
still continue after removal of the central nervous system.? 

A study, then, of comparative physiology brings out the 
fact that irritability and conductibility are the only qualities 
essential to reflexes, and these are both common qualities of 
all protoplasm. The irritable structures at the surface of the 
body, and the arrangement of the muscles determine the 
character of the reflex act. The assumption that the central 
nervous system or the ganglion-cells are the specific bearers of 
reflex mechanisms cannot hold. But have we now to conclude 
that the nerves are superfluous and a waste? Certainly not. 
Their value lies in the fact that they are quicker and more 
sensitive conductors than undifferentiated protoplasm. Because 
of these qualities of the nerves, an animal is better able to adapt 
itself to changing conditions than it possibly could if it had no 
nerves. Such power of adaptation is absolutely necessary for 
free animals. 

3. While some authors explain all reflexes on a psychical 
basis, the majority of investigators explain in this way only a 


1 Loeb, J., Untersuchungen zur physiologischen Morphologie der Tiere, II, 
Wiirzburg, 1892. 

2 This animal closes the oral opening when we touch it. This is a reflex com- 
parable to the closing of the eyelid if we touch the cornea. The central nervous 
sytem of the animal consists of one ganglion. When the latter is removed the 
oral opening still closes upon mechanical stimulation. 


PHYSIOLOGY OF CENTRAL NERVOUS SysTEM 69 


certain group of reflexes—the so-called instincts. Instincts 
are defined in various ways, but no matter how the definition 
is phrased the meaning seems to be that they are inherited 
reflexes so purposeful and so complicated in character that 
nothing short of intelligence and experience could have produced 
them. To this class of reflexes belongs the habit possessed by 
certain insects of laying their eggs on the material which the 
larvae will afterward require for food. When we consider that 
the female fly pays no attention to her eggs after laying them, 
we cannot cease to wonder at the seeming care which nature 
takes for the preservation of the species. How can the action 
of such an insect be determined if not by mysterious structures 
which can only be contained in the ganglion-cells? How can we 
explain the inheritance of such instincts if we believe it to be a 
fact that the ganglion-cells are only the conductors of stimuli? 
It was impossible either to develop a mechanics of instincts or 
to explain their inheritance in a simple way from the old stand- 
point, but our conception makes an explanation possible. 
Among the elements which compose these complicated instincts, 
the tropisms (heliotropism, chemotropism, geotropism, stere- 
otropism) play an important part. These tropisms are identical 
for animals and plants. The explanation of them depends first 
upon the specific irritability of certain elements of the body- 
surface, and, second, upon the relations of symmetry of the 
body. Symmetrical elements at the surface of the body have 
the same irritability; unsymmetrical elements have a different 
irritability. Those nearer the oral pole possess an irritability 
greater than that of those near the aboral pole. These circum- 
stances force an animal to orient itself-toward a source of stimu- 
lation in such a way that symmetrical points on the surface 
of the body are stimulated equally. In this way the animals 
are led without will of their own either toward the source of 
the stimulus or away from it. Thus there remains nothing 
for the ganglion-cell to do but to conduct the stimulus, and 


70 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


this may be accomplished by protoplasm in any form. For 
the inheritance of instincts it is only necessary that the egg 
contain certain substances—which will determine the different 
tropisms—and the conditions for producing bilateral symmetry 
of the embryo. The mystery with which the ganglion-cell has 
been surrounded led not only to no definite insight into these 
processes, but has proved rather a hindrance in the attempt to 
find the explanation of them. 

It is evident that there is no sharp line of demarkation 
between reflexes and instincts. We find that authors prefer 
to speak of reflexes in cases where the reaction of single parts 
or organs of an animal to external stimuli is concerned; while 
they speak of instincts where the reaction of the animal as a 
whole is involved (as is the case in tropisms). 

4. If the mechanics of a number of instincts is explained 
by means of the tropisms common to animals and plants, and 
if the significance of the ganglion-cells is confined, as in all 
reflex processes, to their power of conducting stimuli, we are 
forced to ask what circumstances determine the coordinated 
movements in reflexes, especially in the more complicated ones. 
The assumption of complicated but unknown and perhaps 
unknowable structures in the ganglion-cells served formerly as 
a convenient terminus for all thought in this direction. In 
giving up this assumption, we are called upon to show what 
conditions are able to determine the coordinated character of 
reflex movements. Experiments on galvanotropism of animals 
suggest that a simple relation may exist between the orientation 
of certain motor elements in the central nervous system and 
the direction of the movements of the body which is called 
forth by the activity of these elements. This perhaps creates 
a rational basis for the further investigation of coordinated 
movements.! 


1 Since this was written von Uexkuell found alaw which will go far in explaining 
the mechanism of coordination, namely, that astretched muscle shows an increased 
irritability while the contracted muscle shows a decreased irritability. Since 


PHYSIOLOGY oF CENTRAL NERVOUS SysTEM 71 


5. We must also deprive the ganglion-cells of all specific 
significance in spontaneous movements, just as we have done 
in the case of simple reflexes and instincts. By spontaneous 
movements we mean movements which are apparently deter- 
mined by internal conditions of the living system. Strictly 
speaking, no movements of animals are exclusively determined 
by internal conditions, for atmospheric oxygen and a certain 
range of temperature are always necessary in order to preserve 
the activity beyond a short period of time. 

We must discriminate between simple and conscious spon- 
taneity. In simple spontaneity we must consider two kinds 
of processes, namely, aperiodic spontaneous processes and 
rhythmically spontaneous or automatic processes. The rhyth- 
mical processes are of importance for our consideration. 
Respiration and the heart beat belong in this category. The 
respiratory movements seem to indicate that automatic 
activity can arise in the ganglion-cells, and from this the con- 
clusion has been drawn that all automatic movements are due 
to specific structures of the ganglion-cells. Recent investiga- 
tions, however, have transferred the problem of rhythmical 
spontaneous contractions from the field of morphology into that 
of physical chemistry. The peculiar qualities of each tissue are 
partly due to the fact that it contains certain ions (Na, K, Ca, 
and others) in definite proportions. By changing these pro- 
portions, we can impart to a tissue properties which it does not 
ordinarily possess. If in the muscles of the skeleton the Na 
ions be increased and the Ca ions be reduced, the muscles are 
able to contract rhythmically like the heart. It is only the 
presence of Ca ions in the blood which prevents the muscles 
of our skeleton from beating rhythmically in our body. As the 
muscles contain no ganglion-cells, it is certain that the power of 
rhythmical spontaneous contractions is not due to the specific 


the contraction of one group of muscles necessitates the stretching of their antago- 
nists the coordinated character of locomotive action seems to become intelligible 
(1912). 


72 Tue MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


morphological character of the ganglion-cells, but to definite 
chemical conditions which are not necessarily confined to 
ganglion-cells.! 

The coordinated character of automatic movements has 
often been explained by the assumption of a ‘center of coordina- 
tion,” which is supposed to keep a kind of police watch on the 
different elements and see that they move in the right order. 
Observations in lower animals, however, show that the coordina- 
tion of automatic movements is caused by the fact that that 
element which beats most quickly forces the others to beat in 
its own rhythm. Aperiodic spontaneity is still less a specific 
function of the ganglion-cell than rhythmical spontaneity. The 
swarm spores of algae, which possess no ganglion-cells, show 
spontaneity equal to that of animals having ganglion-cells. 

6. Thus far we have not touched upon the most important 
problem in physiology, namely, which mechanisms give rise 
to that complex of phenomena which are called psychic or 
conscious. Our method of procedure must be the same as in 
the case of instincts and reflexes. We must find out the ele- 
mentary physiological processes which underlie the complicated 
phenomena of consciousness. Some physiologists and psy- 
chologists consider the purposefulness of the psychic action 
as the essential element. If an animal or an organ reacts as a 
rational human being would do under the same circumstances, 
these authors declare that we are dealing with a phenomenon of 
consciousness. In this way many reflexes, the instincts 
especially, are looked upon as psychic functions. Conscious- 
ness has been ascribed even to the spinal cord, because many of 
its functions are purposeful. We shall see in the following 
chapters that many of these reactions are merely tropisms 
which may occur in exactly the same form in plants. Plants 
must therefore have a psychic life, and, following the argument, 
we must ascribe it to machines also, for the tropisms depend 


1 Loeb, J., American Journal of Physiology, III, 327 and 383. 1900. 


PuysIoLoGy OF CENTRAL NeERvous System 73 


only on simple mechanical arrangements. In the last analysis, 
then, we would arrive at molecules and atoms endowed with 
mental qualities. We can dispose of this view by the mere fact 
that the phenomena of embryological development and of 
organization in general show a degree of purposefulness which 
may even surpass that of any reflex or instinctive or conscious 
act. And yet we do not consider the phenomena of develop- 
ment to be dependent upon consciousness. 

On the other hand, physiologists who have appreciated the 
untenable character of such metaphysical speculations have 
held that the only alternative is to drop the search for the 
mechanisms underlying consciousness and study exclusively the 
results of operations on the brain. This would be throwing 
out the wheat with the chaff. The mistake made by meta- 
physicians is not that they devote themselves to fundamental 
problems, but that they employ the wrong methods of investi- 
gation and substitute a play on words for an explanation by 
means of facts. If brain physiology gives up its fundamental 
problem, namely, the discovery of those elementary processes 
which make consciousness possible, it abandons its best possi- 
bilities. But to obtain results, the errors of the metaphysician 
must be avoided and explanations must rest upon facts, not 
words. The method should be the same for animal psychology 
that it is for brain physiology. It should consist in the right 
understanding of the fundamental process which recurs in 
all psychic phenomena as the elemental component. This 
process, according to my opinion, ts the activity of the associative 
memory, or of association. Consciousness is only a metaphysical 
term for phenomena which are determined by associative 
memory. By associative memory I mean that mechanism by 
which a stimulus brings about not only the effects which its 
nature and the specific structure of the irritable organ call for, 
but by which it brings about also the effects of other stimuli 
which formerly acted upon the organism almost or quite 


74 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


simultaneously with the stimulus in question.' If an animal 
can be trained, if it can learn, it possesses associative memory. 
By means of this criterion it can be shown that Infusoria, 
Coelenterates, and worms do not possess a trace of associative 
memory. Among certain classes of insects (for instance, ants, 
bees, and wasps), the existence of associative memory can be 
proved. It is a comparatively easy task to find out which 
representatives of the various classes of animals possess, and 
which do not possess, associative memory. Our criterion 
therefore might be of great assistance in the development of 
comparative psychology. 

7. Our criterion puts an end to the metaphysical ideas that 
all matter, and hence the whole animal world, possesses con- 
sciousness. We are brought to the theory that only certain 
species of animals possess associative memory and have con- 
sciousness, and that it appears in them only after they have 
reached a certain stage in their ontogenetic development. This 
is apparent from the fact that associative memory depends 
upon mechanical arrangements which are present only in certain 
animals, and present in these only after a certain development 
has been reached. The fact that certain vertebrates lose all 
power of associative memory after the destruction of the cere- 
bral hemispheres, and the fact that vertebrates in which the 
associative memory either is not developed at all or only slightly 
developed (e.g., the shark or frog) do not differ, or differ but 
slightly, in their reactions after losing the cerebral hemispheres, 
support this view. The fact that only certain animals possess 
the necessary mechanical arrangements for associative memory, 
and therefore for consciousness, is not stranger than the fact 
that only certain animals possess the mechanical arrangements 
for uniting the rays from a luminous point in one point on the 
retina. The liquefaction of gases is an example of a sudden 


1 Loeb, J., ‘‘Beitrige zur Gehirnphysiologie der Wiirmer,’’ Pfligers Archiv, 
LVI, 247, 1894. 


PHYSIOLOGY OF CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 75 


change of condition which may be produced when one variable 
is changed; it is not surprising that there should be sudden 
changes in the ontogenetic and phylogenetic development 
of organisms when there are so many variables subject to 
change, and when we consider that colloids easily change their 
state of matter. 

It becomes evident that the unraveling of the mechanism 
of associative memory is the great discovery to be made in the 
field of brain physiology and psychology. But at the same 
time it is evident that this mechanism cannot be unraveled by 
histological methods, or by operations on the brain, or by 
measuring reaction times. We have to remember that all life 
phenomena are ultimately due to motions or changes occurring 
in colloidal substances. The question is, Which peculiarities 
of the colloidal substances can make the phenomenon of asso- 
ciative memory possible? For the solution of this problem 
the experience of physical chemistry and of the physiology of 
the protoplasm must be combined. From the same sources 
we must expect the solution of the other fundamental problems 
of brain physiology, namely, the process of conduction of 
stimuli. 


IV. PATTERN ADAPTATION OF FISHES AND THE 
MECHANISM OF VISION 


IV 


PATTERN ADAPTATION OF FISHES AND THE MECHAN- 
ISM OF VISION! 

The mechanism of the action of the brain is entirely 
unknown to us. We are unable to look into the active brain 
and the objective results of brain action are in general so differ- 
ent in their nature from the external stimulus which leads to the 
action that we are prevented in most cases from drawing any 
conclusions concerning the nature of the processes occurring 
in the brain. 

From results obtained in experiments on dogs Munk stated 
years ago that there existed a projection of the retina on a part 
of the cortex which he had designated as the visual sphere and 
that the extirpation of definite parts of this sphere caused 
blindness in definite parts of the retina. I repeated these 
experiments but was not able to confirm his statements. 
Henschen has recently, however, furnished the proof, on the 
basis of excellent pathological observations on man, that such 
a projection after all exists, but that it is situated in another 
part of the cortex from where Munk had believed it to be, 
namely, in the area striata. Minkowski was able to confirm 
Henschen’s conclusions through experiments on dogs. These 
observations and experiments suggest the possibility that in 
vision an image is formed not only on the retina but also on the 
cortex. 

The possibility that vision is based on the formation of an 
image in the brain is supported by a group of facts which to 
my knowledge have never received any consideration in this 
connection. 


1 Reprinted from Physiologisches Centralblatt, XXV, No. 22, 1912. This 
note is given merely as a suggestion concerning the mechanism underlying certain 
brain processes. 


79 


80 THE MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


It has been known for some time that many animals, 
especially certain fishes, adapt their color and pattern to the 
ground upon which they happen to be. This fact has been 
extensively utilized for the theory of natural selection. It 
seems to me that the same facts furnish also the proof that an 
image of the objects is formed in the brain. Pouchet many 
years ago showed that the adaptation of fishes to the ground 
ceases as soon as their eyes are removed or as soon as the forma- 
tion of retinal images is prevented through the turbidity of the 
refractive media of the eye. This fact (confirmed by many 
observers) proves that the harmony between color and pattern 
of the skin of fishes with their surroundings is transmitted 
through the retinal image; in other words, that the so-called 
adaptation of fishes to their surroundings is only the trans- 
mission of the retinal image to the skin. 

It has, moreover, been shown that the destruction of the 
optic fibers and the optic ganglia in the brain acts like the extir- 
pation of the eyes; and finally it has been proved that the 
cutting of the sympathetic fibers which go to the pigment cells 
of the skin also prevents the formation of a picture of the 
ground on the skin. Hence we know the path by which the 
retinal image is transferred to the skin of fishes. One station 
is the ending of the optic fibers in the brain. Since we are able 
to prove the existence of an image of the object on the retina 
of fishes; since it is proved that the image on the skin of the 
fish is a picture of the retinal image but not of the object (in 
this case the ground) itself; since, moreover, the transmission 
of the retinal image upon the skin takes place through the 
optic nerve, it follows that the image must pass the central 
stations of the optic nerve during the transmission to the skin. 

An image consists of a number of points of different intensity 
of light, the mutual arrangement of which is definite and char- 
acteristic for the object. Sumner has shown that certain 
fishes are able to reproduce on their skin rather complicated 


PATTERN ADAPTATION OF FISHES 81 


patterns (e.g., a chess board), which form the bottom of the 
aquarium. This reproduction of the pattern is somewhat 
imperfect, but if we deduct the secondary disturbing factors the 
fact remains that the pattern on the skin is a tolerably true 
picture of the pattern of the ground. There exists, therefore, a 
definite arrangement of the images of the different luminous 
points of the ground on the retina and a similar arrangement of 
the images of the luminous points on the skin of the fishes. We 
may consider each point of the retinal image as a luminous or a 
stimulating point which produces a corresponding image point 
in the primary optic ganglia through the action of the nerve- 
fiber through which it is connected with the ganglia. Every 
image point in the primary optic ganglia may be considered 
again as a luminous or stimulating point which through the 
mediation of a special nerve-fiber influences an individual 
chromatophore or a small group of chromatophores of the skin. 
Considering the fact that the retina is a mosaic, we cannot well 
imagine the transmission of the retinal image upon the skin 
in any other way than by assuming that the relative arrange- 
ment of the individual points of the retinal image is preserved 
in the optic fibers and the end ganglia of the optic nerve. 
Under this assumption a relative distribution of the stimulating 
intensities must occur in the primary optic ganglion which cor- 
responds to the distribution of the image points on the retina 
and which again can be called an image. 

These observations in fish and the conclusions drawn in this 
note suggest the idea that vision is a kind of telephotography. 


Vv. ON SOME FACTS AND PRINCIPLES OF 
PHYSIOLOGICAL MORPHOLOGY 


Vv 


ON SOME FACTS AND PRINCIPLES OF PHYSIOLOGICAL 
MORPHOLOGY! 


I. HETEROMORPHOSIS? 


The various organs of the higher animals have a definite 
arrangement; from the shoulders arms originate, from the hips 
legs, but we never see legs growing out from the shoulders 
or arms from the hips. In the lower animals the same definite 
arrangement of organs exists. 

Fig. 22 gives a diagram of a hydroid, Antennularia anten- 
nina, which is quite common in the Bay of Naples. From a 
bundle of roots or stolons a straight stem arises to a height of 
six Inches or more. From this main stem originate, in regular 
succession, short and slender branches, which carry polyps on 
their upper sides. 

In this animal we never find a root originating at the apex, 
or in place of a branch, or polyps originating on the under side 
of a branch. 

In observing these phenomena the question arose: What are 
the circumstances which determine that only one kind of organ 
shall originate at certain places in the body? It occurred to 
me that the answer to this question might be obtained by finding 
out first of all whether or not it were possible to make any 
desired organ of an animal grow at any desired place. In case 
this could be done, the question to be decided was whether the 
same circumstances by which the arrangement of organs can 
be changed experimentally also determine the arrangement of 


1 Reprinted from Biological Lectures delivered at the Marine Biological 
Laboratory of Woods Hole, 1893, by courtesy of Ginn & Co. 

2 Untersuchungen zur physiologischen Morphologie der Tiere. I, Hetero- 
morphosis, Wiirzburg, 1891. II, Organbildung und Wachsthum, Wirzburg, 1892. 
Translated in Studies in General Physiology. 


85 


86 Tue Mercuanistic CoNcEeprion OF LIFE 


Fia. 22.—A_ piece 
of the normal stem 
of Antennularia an- 
tennina, a hydroid of 
the Bay of Naples. 
Approximately natu- 
ral size. S S, stem. 
W, stolons or roots. 


pa A 
a ao. a Py, Se, 


> 


Ww 

Fig. 23.—Diagram 
of normal regenera- 
tion if a piece a b of 
Antennularia is hung 
up vertically in the 
water. The piece 
forms roots W at the 
lower end b and anew 
stem S at the upper 
end a. The old nor- 
mal arrangement of 
organs is thus re- 
stored through the 
process of regenera- 
tion. 


oN 


Se AN AS a RAN 


Sa ee a a 


S 


Fic. 24.—Diagram 
of heteromorphic re- 
generation in Anten- 
nularia. A piece ab 
cut out of the stem 
is hung up in an in- 
verted position, i.e., 
the root end }b up- 
ward and the stem 
end a downward. In 
this case the apical 
end a forms roots W, 
and the basal end b 
forms a new stem S 
which grows upward. 


organs in the natural development. The 
hydroid, Antennularia antennina, above 


mentioned, seemed to afford a suitable sub- 
ject for experimentation in an attempt to 
solve this problem and the following simple 
experiments were performed. 

A piece ab (Fig. 23) of an Antennu- 
laria was cut out and hung up vertically in 
the water of the aquarium, the apical end 


a above and the root end 6 below. It was found that after a 
few days the root end 6b had formed little roots, W, which 


PuHyYsIoLocicaL MorPHOLOGY 87 


grew downward, and the apical end, a, had formed a new 
stem, S. 

A similar piece was cut out from another specimen and was 
hung upside down in the aquarium (Fig. 24). The root end }, 
which was now above, formed a new stem, S, and the apical 
end a, which was below, formed roots, W. In the newly 
formed stem the arrangement of the organs was the same as 
in the normal animal, namely, the branches which were growing 


ad 


“ AL mereerey 


Fic. 25.—From nature. Regeneration of a piece a b cut out from the stem 
of Antennularia and put horizontally into the water. The branches on the lower 
side which had ceased to grow, grow downward as stolons and attach themselves 
to solid bodies. On the upper side a new stem c d grows vertically upward. 


obliquely upward bore polyps on their upper side. From this 
we see that it was possible to substitute a root for a stem and 
an apex for a root. This phenomenon of the substitution of 
one organ for another I termed heteromorphosis. If the excised 
piece of an Antennularia was placed horizontally instead of 
vertically in the aquarium, something still more remarkable 
occured, namely, the branches on the lower side suddenly began 
to grow vertically downward, and these downward growing 
elements were no longer branches but roots (Fig. 25). This 
could be proved by their physiological reactions, for the roots 
attach themselves to the surface of solid bodies, e.g., the glass 


88 Tue Mecuanistic CoNcEPTION OF LIFE 


of the aquarium, while the stems never show such a reaction. 
These new parts growing out from the branches of the under 
side of the stem attached themselves to the solid bodies with 
which they came in contact. Moreover, they were positively 
geotropic (that is, they grew toward the center of the earth), 
while the branches never 
showed any positive geo- 
tropism. The branches 
on the upper side were 
-not transformed into 
roots. They either per- 
ished or gave rise to long, 
slender, perfectly straight 
stems, which grew ver- 
tically upward. These 
stems, as a rule, were too 
slender to bear branches, 
but at parts of the 
upper surface of the 
main stem there origi- 


Fie. 26.—Diagrammatic regeneration in a nated new stems (c d, 


piece a b of a stem of Antennularia put ob- 7 1 
liquely into the water. — the upper side of F 1g. 25), which grew 


the stem a b new stems S, S,,, grow verti- : 
cally upward, while at the Tae end of the vertically upward and 


ee Dee cae the new stems roots W, produced the typical 


This influence of gravitation is found only o = 
in Antennularia antennina, not in other forms little branches bearing 


of Antennularia. 
polyps. 

If we brought the stem into an oblique position (Fig. 26), 
with the apex a upward, from every element of the main stem 
new stems and roots originated, but with this difference, that 
stems always originated from the upper side of an element and 
roots from its lower side. If the stem were placed in an oblique 
position, with the root end above, the branches on the under 
side grew out as roots, and at the upper end a stem arose as 


usual. 


PuHyYsIOLoGicaL MorrHoLocy 89 


What circumstances had all these experiments in common ? 
The stems always originated from the upper end or side of an 
element, and roots always from the lower side or end of the same 
element. These facts can be explained only on the assump- 
tion that in this case gravitation determines the place of origin 
of organs. 

Now we may ask whether the action of this force, gravita- 
tion, is also responsible for the natural arrangement of the organs 
in this form, namely, that roots appear only at the base of the 
stem and never at the apex or in the place of abranch. I believe 
that this is the case. By reason of its negative geotropism, the 
stem grows vertically upward. Gravitation does not permit 
roots to arise at any place except at the under side of the 
organs, and that is, under normal conditions, at the base of the 
stem. The same force determines that polyps can originate 
only on the upper side of branches, and thus the general 
arrangement of organs is brought about by gravitation. But 
how does gravitation determine that stems grow on the upper 
and roots at the under side? This is a question to which we 
shall return later. 

Fig. 27 gives a drawing of an example of heteromorphosis 
in Margelis, a hydroid common at Woods Hole, upon which 
another set of experiments was carried on. If we cut off a stem, 
or a small piece of a stem of this hydroid, and place it in a dish 
containing sea-water, protecting it carefully from every motion, 
a curious change takes place in the organism. Almost all, and 
in some cases all, of the stems which touch the glass give rise 
to roots that spread out and very soon cover a large area of the 
glass. In this way the apical end of a stem may continue to 
grow as a totally different organ, namely, as a root. Every 
organ not in contact with some solid body gives rise to polyps. 
Even the main root, if not in contact with a solid body, no longer 
grows as a root, but gives rise to a great number of small polyps 
which appear at the end of long stems. Fig. 27, which Mr. 


90 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


Tower was kind enough to draw for me, shows a branch which 
formed roots at its apex and polyps at its roots in this manner. 


Fic. 27.—Heteromorphosis in Margelis, a hydroid. At a and b, where the 
points of stems touch the ground of the aquarium, new roots or stolons grow out. 


The stem touched the bottom of the dish with the apical ends, 
aand b. All these ends gave rise to roots. From the upper 
side of the original root, which was not in contact with the 


Fic. 28.—Heteromorphosis in Pennaria. A piece a b of this hydroid was cut 
out and put into a jar with sea-water. The ends a and 6b touched the bottom of the 
jar. At both points new roots grew out. 
glass, later on small polyps grew out. Every place which 
was in contact with solid bodies gave rise to roots, and every 
place which was in contact with sea-water gave rise to polyps. 

This is not the only species of hydroid found at Woods Hole 


PuHyYsIoLocicaL Morpyouoay 91 


in which such forms of heteromorphosis can be produced. 
Another form, Pennaria, is just as favorable. In Pennaria I 
succeeded repeatedly in producing roots at both ends of a 
small stem that bore no polyps (Fig. 28).! 

In these experiments on Margelis and Pennaria organs 
brought into contact with solid bodies continue to grow as 
roots, if they grow at all. Organs surrounded on all sides by 
water continue to grow in the form of polyps, if they grow at 
all. In Margelis, contact with a solid body plays the same role 
as did gravitation in the case of Antennularia. In what way 
the contact may have an influence shall be mentioned later on, 
but here one more point may be mentioned. In Antennularia, 
gravitation not only determines the place of origin of the various 
organs, but also the direction of their growth; the stem, 
growing upward, is negatively geotropic, the root, growing 
downward, is positively geotropic. In Pennaria, the nature 
of the contact not only determines the place of origin of the 
various organs, but also the direction of their growth. If we 
bring an outgrowing polyp of Pennaria into contact with a 
solid body, the polyp begins to grow away from the body, and 
the new stem is very soon nearly perpendicular to the part of 
the surface with which it came into contact. 

I have called this form of irritability stereotropism. We 


1In a Tubularian I was able to produce the opposite result, namely, to get 
an animal that ended at both ends in a polyp and had no root. Weismann seems 
to assume, in his Germ Plasm, that the latter result is to be explained by the 
principle of natural selection, inasmuch as an animal without polyps could not 
continue to live, and hence it would be impossible to produce roots at both ends. 
In Pennaria this supposed impossibility was realized; one may say that these 
roots in Pennaria may give rise later on to polyps. In the special case that I 
observed they did not, although as a rule they do; but the same is the case in 
Tubularia, in which polyps also arise from the roots. It might be said, perhaps, 
that the formation of roots in Pennaria is, for some reason, absolutely necessary; 
but it is just as easy to produce polyps at both ends. Even if it were possible to 
reconcile these facts with the principles of natural selection, causal or physiological 
morphology would not gain thereby, as the circumstances that determine the 
forms of animals and plants are only the different forms of energy in the sense in 
which this word is used by the physicist, and have nothing to do with natural 
selection. 


92 THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


may speak of positive stereotropism in the case of the root, and 
of negative stereotropism in the case of the polyp. 

Here, too, we may ask whether the contact with foreign 
bodies, which in these experiments determines the arrangement 
of the various organs, may not have the same effect in the 
natural development of the organism. I believe that such is 
the case. Negative stereotropism forces the polyps to grow 
away from the ground into the water, and hence parts sur- 
rounded by water form polyps only. Positive stereotropism 
forces roots in contact with the ground to hold to it, hence 
parts in contact with the ground give rise to roots only. Thus 
it happens that, under ordinary circumstances, in this animal 
we find roots only at the base where it touches the ground. In 
other hydroids the place of origin of the different organs is 
determined by light, and in others we find more complicated 
relations. 

It may appear from the foregoing that such cases of hetero- 
morphosis are confined to hydroids, but such is not the case. 
We find similar cases in Tunicates. Ciona intestinalis, a solitary 
ascidian, has eye-spots around the two openings into the 
pharyngeal cavity. If we make an incision eye-spots are 
formed on both sides of the incision. 


II. POLARIZATION 


While the foregoing experiments were in progress, I observed 
that in many animals I was unable to produce any kind of 
heteromorphism. These animals showed, in regard to the 
formation of organs, a phenomenon with which we are familiar 
in a magnet. If a magnet is broken into pieces, every piece 
has its north pole on that side which in the unbroken magnet 
was directed toward the north. Likewise, there are animals 
every piece of which produces, at either end, that organ toward 


1 Since this was written phenomena of heteromorphosis have been produced 
in many animals. Herbst found that in crustaceans an antenna could be caused 
to be formed in the place of an excised eye, Van Duyne, Bardeen, and Morgan 
observed phenomena of heteromorphosis in Planarians and so on (1912). 


PuysIoLoGcicaL MorpHoLocy 


93 


which it was directed in the normal condition. 


We may speak 


in such cases of polarization. The clearest example of this I 
found in an actinian, Cerianthus membranaceus. 


If we cut a rectangular piece, cd ef, out 
of the body-wall of Cerianthus new tentacles 
soon begin to grow out of this piece, but 
only from the side ef (Fig. 29), which was 
directed toward the oral end of the animal. 


Nothing of the sort oc- 


dc,orfd. The produc- 
tion of tentacles takes 
place before any other 
regeneration begins. 
The same polarization is 
shown in the following 
variation of the preceding 
If we make 


Fie. 29.—Diagram- 
matic. If a piececd 
ef is cut out from the 
wall of Cerianthus, a 
sea anemone, new 
tentacles are formed 
only at the upper cut 


curs in the side ce, or 
Z 
c—pb 


U 


Fig. 30.—Diagram- 
matic. Ifanincision 
acb is made into the 
body of Cerianthus 
new tentacles grow 
out only from the 
lower edge c b. 


of some minutes 
in every possible 


experiment. 
an incision, acb (Fig. 30), 
into the body-wall of the actinian, only the 
lower lip, bc, produces tentacles, while the 
upper lip, ac, produces none. The two 
ends heal together in such a way that one- 
half of a mouth, with its surrounding ten- 
tacles, b (Fig. 31), is formed. It is curious 
to see how these tentacles behave if we offer 
them bits of meat. They endeavor to force 
them into the new oral disc, where the 
mouth should be, and only after a struggle 
do they give up the futile attempt. I tried 
way to produce tentacles in the aboral end 


ef. 


of a piece which had been cut out, but without success. 
Hydra behaves, as regards polarization, a little differently 


from Cerianthus. 


If we make an incision in the stem, a 


94 THE Mecuanistic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


whole new oral pole grows out, but otherwise it too shows 
polarization. 

A good many animals, so far as we know, reproduce only 
the lost organ, but never show any heteromorphism. We see, 


Fic. 31—From nature. Formation of a second head in Cerianthus after a 
lateral incision at b. Only a fraction of the norma] number of tentacles are formed 
corresponding to the fraction of the periphery laid bare by the incision. No new 
mouth is formed, but if a piece of meat is offered to the group of tentacles at b 
they seize it and press it to the place where a mouth ought to be, showing the 
purely machine-like character of all these reactions. 
therefore, that while in some animals we are able to produce 
heteromorphosis, in others the most definite polarization exists, 
and we are able to produce regeneration of lost parts only in the 
arrangement which exists in the normal animal. In this case 
we must assume that unknown internal conditions determine 
the arrangement of limbs. 

In addition to examples of heteromorphosis or polarization 


occurring separately, we find cases in which both phenomena 


PuHyYsIoLoGicaL MorPHOLOGY 95 


are exhibited by the same animal. 


If we cut out a sufficiently 


large piece of the stem of Tubularia mesembryanthemum, and 


place it in the bottom of a dish of water, 
carefully protected from jarring, the ante- 
rior end of the piece gives rise to a new 
polyp, the posterior end to a root; but if 
we hang up the stem in such a way that the 
posterior end does not touch the surface of 
the glass, and is sufficiently provided with 
oxygen, this end, too, produces a polyp, and 
we have a true case ot heteromorphosis 
(Fig. 32). In all cases the polyp at the oral 
end is formed first, and a relatively ‘ong 
time (one or more weeks) elapses before 
the aboral polyp is formed. Under one con- 
dition, however, I could cause the stem to 
form a polyp at the aboral as quickly as at 
the oral end, namely, by inhibiting or re- 
tarding the formation of the oral polyp. 
This could be done readily by diminishing 
the supply of oxygen at the oral end. In 
such cases the aboral polyps were produced 
almost as quickly as the oral polyps.! 


III. THE MECHANICS OF GROWTH IN 
ANIMALS 

In order to arrive at an explanation 
of the phenomena of organization we must 
ask what the physical forces are that 
determine the formation of a new organ. 
We know that the ultimate sources of 
energy for all the functions of living bodies 


& 


Fie. 32. — Hetero- 
morphosis in Tubula- 
ria. From nature. 
Thenormal Tubularia 
ends at one end in a 
stolon, at the other 
in a head or polyp. 
If a piece ab is cut 
out and suspended in 
water a new head or 
polyp cand dis formed 
at both ends. We 
can thus produce an 
animal which termi- 
nates in a head at 
both ends of its body; 
while in Fig. 28 an 
animal was represent- 
ed which ended at 
both ends in a stolon 
or foot. 


1 It was found later independently by both Godlewski and myself that if we 
ligature the stem of a Tubularian the polyps at both ends are formed simultane- 


ously (1912). 


96 THe MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


are chemical processes. The question is, How can these 
chemical forces be brought into relation with the visible changes 
which take place in the formation of a new organ? The answer 
to this question is to be obtained by a knowledge of the 
mechanics of growth. It is very remarkable that the mechanics 
of growth forms almost an empty page in the history of animal 
morphology and physiology. I can refer here only to the few 
experiments I have made on this subject; but fortunately the 
subject has been worked out very carefully in plants, and as my 
experiments show that the conditions for growth in animals 
are, to a certain extent at least, the same as the conditions for 
growth in plants, we have the beginning of a basis for work. 

A brief outline of the manner of growth in plants is as 
follows: Before the cell grows it forms substances which attract 
water from the surroundings, or, as the physicist expresses it, 
it forms substances which determine a higher osmotic pressure 
within the cell than did the substances from which they originate. 
The walls of the cell, or rather the protoplasmic layer that lines 
the cell-wall, possesses peculiar osmotic properties, in conse- 
quence of which it allows molecules of water to pass through 
freely while remaining resistant to the passing through of the 
molecules of many salts dissolved in the water. The result is 
that when substances of higher osmotic pressure are formed 
inside the cell, water from the outside passes in until the pres- 
sure within again equals the pressure without. The cell-wall 
becomes stretched and, according to Traube, new material is 
precipitated in the enlarged interstices, thus rendering growth 
permanent. This method of growth is most conspicuous, 
perhaps, in the germinating seed. The rising temperature in 
spring produces in the seed substances of higher osmotic pres- 
sure (with greater attraction for water) than the substances 
from which they originate. The result is that water enters the 
seed; by the pressure of the water within the cells their walls 
are stretched out and the seed grows. The chemical and 


PHYSIOLOGICAL _MoRPHOLOGY 97 


osmotic changes are the sources for the energy which is needed 
to overcome the resistance to growth.! 

In order to ascertain whether I could determine what are 
the mechanical causes of growth in animals, I began at Naples 
some experiments on Tubularia mesembryanthemum. I chose 
long stems belonging to the same colony and distributed them 
in a series of dishes containing sea-water of different concentra- 
tions. In some of the dishes the concentration had been raised 
by adding sodium chloride, and in others it had been lowered by 
adding distilled water. According to the laws of osmosis the 
amount of water absorbed by the cells of these Tubularians 
differed with the concentration of the sea-water, the amount 
being greatest in the most diluted solution and least in the most 
concentrated solution. If now in reality the mechanics of 
growth is the same for animals as for plants, we should expect 
that the more diluted the sea-water the more rapid would be the 
growth in the Tubularian stem. Of course, finally, a limit is 
reached where the water begins to have a poisonous effect. It 
was found, indeed, that within certain limits of concentration 
the increase in the length of the stems during the same period 
was greatest in the most diluted and least in the most concen- 
trated sea-water. Itisremarkable that the maximum of growth 
took place not in sea-water of normal concentration, but in 
more diluted sea-water, though this of course may not be the 
case in all animals. The following curve (Fig. 33) will give an 
idea of the dependence of growth upon the concentration of 
the sea-water in Tubularia. The values for the amount of 
sodium chloride, in 100 cubic centimeters of sea-water, are 
represented on the axis of the abscissa, the values for the 
increase in growth on the axis of ordinates. 

These and similar experiments, which for lack of space 
cannot be mentioned here, show that growth in animals is 


1 The substance which is formed and which causes the swelling may be an 
acid. I found that acids cause a swelling of muscles and it has since been shown 
that this is a general phenomenon. 


98 Tue Mecuanistic CoNncEPTION OF LIFE 


determined by the same mechanical forces which determine 
growth in plants. An obstacle to such a conclusion seems to lie 
in the fact that many plant-cells have solid walls, while this is 
not the case in most animal cells. The solid cell-wall, however, 
does not determine the peculiar character of growth. This 
character is determined first, by chemical processes within the 
cell, which result in a higher osmotic pressure, and, secondly, by 
the osmotic qualities of the outer layer of protoplasm, which 


4 ) 6 


Fic. 33.—Curve_ representing the influence of diluted sea-water. The 
abscissae represent the concentrations, the ordinates the corresponding growth 
in the unit of time. The maximum growth is at a concentration between 2 and 3 
per cent ce ae while the normal concentration is indicated by the vertical line 

etween 3 and 4. 


allows water to pass through freely, but does not allow all salts 
dissolved in it to do the same. Both these qualities are inde- 
pendent of the solid cell-wall, and I see no reason why the animal 
cell should not agree in these two salient features with the 
plant-cell. 

In order that the foregoing explanation of the mechanism of 
growth in the animal cell might be based only upon known pro- 
cesses, it was necessary to find out whether, in case of growth, 
chemical processes of such a character take place that substances 
of higher osmotic pressure are formed than those from which 
they originate. Everyone knows that by exercise our muscles 
increase in size. No satisfactory explanation of this fact has 


PuysioLocicaL MorPHOLOGY 99 


been given. If my interpretation of the method of growth 
were correct, I must expect that during activity substances are 
formed in the muscle, which determine a higher osmotic pressure 
than those from which they originate. This is exactly the case. 
Ranke had already shown that the blood of a tetanized frog 
loses water and that this water is taken up by the muscles. 
In experiments which were carried on by Miss E. Cooke in my 
laboratory, we were able to show directly that during activity 
the osmotic pressure inside the cell-wall is raised. We deter- 
mined the concentration of a solution of NaCl, or rather of 
a so-called Ringer’s mixture, in which the gastroconemius of a 
frog neither lost nor took up water. We found that while 
this concentration for the resting gastroconemius was about 
0.75 per cent to 0.85 per cent, for the gastroconemius that 
had been tetanized from twenty to forty minutes it varied from 
1.2 per cent to 1.5 per cent.! 

This increase of osmotic pressure inside the muscle-cell leads, 
during normal activity, to a taking up of water from the blood 
and lymph, and the consequence is an increase in volume. The 
same muscle, as soon as it ceases to be active, begins to decrease 
in size. Activity, therefore, plays the same réle in the growth of 
a muscle that the temperature plays in the growth of the seed. 

I tried to ascertain whether segmentation, like growth in 
general, is influenced by the amount of water contained in the 
cell. If we decrease the amount of water in the egg of the 
sea-urchin segmentation is retarded, and if we use a sufficiently 
high conzentration of sea-water it may be stopped entirely. 
Therefore the amount of water contained in the cell plays still 
another réle in the process of organization and influences the 
process of cell-division. 


1 This increase in osmotic pressure is probably caused by the formation ot 
acid. Two years after the publication of this lecture 1 showed that the muscle 
swells in an isomotic solution if this solution is acid. The recent work of Pauli 
and Handovski indicates that the swelling is caused through a formation of salt 
between the acid and a weak base, e.g., a protein. The protein salt is more 
strongly dissociated than the protein base (1912). 


100 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


IV. THE ARTIFICIAL PRODUCTION OF DOUBLE AND MULTIPLE 
MONSTROSITIES IN SEA-URCHINS! 


The idea that the formation of the vertebrate embryo is a 
function of growth has been made the basis of the embryological 
investigations of His. In a masterly way, His has shown how 
inequality of growth determines the differentiation of organs. 
In the blastoderm of a chick, for example, the first step in the 
formation of the embryo is a process of folding. There origi- 
nates a head fold, a tail fold, a medullary groove, and the system 
of amniotic folds. According to His, all these processes of 
folding are due simply to inequalities of growth, the center of 
the blastoderm growing more rapidly than the periphery. It 
can be shown, very simply, that such a process of unequal 
growth must, indeed, lead to the formation of exactly such a 
system of folds as we find in the blastoderm of a chick. If we 
take a thin, flat plate of elastic rubber, and lay it on a drawing- 
board, we can imitate the stronger growth in the center by 
sticking two tacks into the middle of the rubber, a short 
distance apart, and then pulling them in opposite directions. 
In this way we may imitate unequal growth, the center growing 
faster than the periphery. If we then fix the tacks in the 
drawing-board, so that the rubber in the middle remains 
stretched, we get the same system of folds as that shown by the 
embryo of a chick. I mention this way of demonstrating the 
effects of unequal growth as the ideas of His are still doubted 
by some morphologists. 

His raised the question, Why is growth different in different 
parts of the blastoderm? But instead of trying to answer it 
from the physiological standpoint he answered it from the 
anatomical standpomt. According to him, the different regions 
of the unsegmented egg correspond already to the different 
regions of the differentiated embryo. But this so-called theory 


+ Another method of producing twins from one egg is discussed in the last 
chapter of this book. 


PuysioLocgicaL MorpuHouogy 101 


of preformed germ-regions gives no answer to the question, why 
some parts of the embryo grow faster than others. Neverthe- 
less, it is not necessarily in opposition to the theory of growth 
offered in the preceding chapter. Starting with the idea of His, 
we may well imagine that the different regions of the ovum 
are somewhat different chemically, and that these chemical 
differences of the different germ-regions determine the differ- 
ences of growth in the blastoderm. Thus the phenomena of 
heteromorphosis would show that, in some animals at least, the 
arrangement of preformed germ-regions may be changed by 
gravitation, light, adhesion, etc. 

It must be asked, however, what, from the standpoint of 
causal morphology, determines the arrangement of the different 
germ-regions in the egg. If we answer “heredity,” causal 
morphology can make no use of such an explanation. Our 
blood has the temperature of about 37°, but although our 
parents had the same temperature, the heat of our blood is not 
inherited, but is the result of certain chemical processes in our 
tissues. Still it may be possible that the molecular forces of 
the chemically different substances of the egg determine a 
separation of these substances and thereby give rise to the 
chief directions of the future embryo. 

Driesch has shown! that by shaking a sea-urchin’s egg in the 
four-cell stage the four cells may be separated, and each one be 
capable of giving rise to a complete embryo, which differs only 
in size from the normal embryo. If the theory of preformed 
germ-regions with its later modifications were true, we should 
expect that every one of the isolated cells would give rise to 
one-fourth of an embryo. But it has been said that the arti- 
ficial isolation of one cleavage-cell causes a process of post- 
generation or regeneration. Driesch, moreover, changed the 
mode of the first cleavage by submitting the ovum to one-sided 
pressure. In this way the nuclei were brought into somewhat 


1 Zeitschrift f. wissensch. Zoologie, LIII, LV. 


102 Tue Mecuanistic ConcEPTION OF LIFE 


different places from those they would have held in the case of 
normal segmentation. Still, normal embryos resulted. One 
might object again that the preformation of the germ-regions 
existed in the protoplasm, and not in the nucleus. I have made 
a series of experiments to the results of which these objections 
cannot be made. I shall describe these experiments somewhat 
fully, as they have not yet been published, though I cannot 
enter into details at this place. 

I brought eggs of a sea-urchin, within ten to twenty minutes 
after impregnation, into sea-water that had been diluted by the 


. 


BY 
~~ 


Fia. 34 Fig. 35 
Fic. 34.—Fertilized egg of a sea-urchin (Arbacia) put into dilute sea-water. 


Powe oar: each Gf ue Une droplets wee develep inna @ luetals, ea Wet dra 
such an egg two larvae may arise, as indicated in Fig. 35. 

addition of about 100 per cent distilled water. In this solution 
the eggs took up so much water that the membrane (m, Fig. 34) 
burst and part of the protoplasm escaped in the form of a drop 
(b, Fig. 34), which often, however, remained in connection 
with the protoplasm inside the membrane after the eggs were 
brought back into normal sea-water. These eggs gave rise 
to adherent twins, the ejected part b of the protoplasm, as well 
as the part remaining inside the membrane, developing into a 
normal and perfectly complete embryo. The part of the proto- 
plasm, which at first had connected the two drops, formed the 
part where the twins remained grown together. Of course, it 
often happened that, by accident or rapid movement, the twins 
were separated, and they then developed into perfectly normal 
single embryos. Since we cannot assume that in every case the 


PHYSIOLOGICAL MorPHOLOGY 103 


same part of the protoplasm escapes, we must conclude that 
every part of the protoplasm may give rise to fully developed 
embryos without regard to preformed germ-regions.!. In many 
eggs a repeated outflow of the protoplasm takes place. In such 
cases each of the drops of the protoplasm may give rise to an 
embryo, and I obtained not only double embryos, but triplets 
and quadruplets all grown together. 

It is remarkable that the development of these monstrosities 
goes on nearly at the same rate as that of the normal embryo, 
provided they are equally well supplied with oxygen and equally 
protected from microbes and infusoria. The development in 
most eggs takes place in so regular and typical a manner that it 
seems as if there were a prearrangement of some kind. It is, 
however, perfectly well possible that this prearrangement 
consists in a separation of different liquid substances in the 
ovum by the molecular qualities of these liquids. Such a 
separation, of course, might be called a preformation of germ- 
regions, but it would be something totally different from what 
is now understood by that term. 


V. THEORETICAL REMARKS 


1. All life phenomena are determined by chemical processes. 
This is equally the case whether we have to do with the contrac- 
tion of a muscle, with the process of secretion, or with the forma- 
tion of an embryo or a single organ. One of the steps that 
physiological morphology has to take is to show in every case 
the connecting link between the chemical processes and the 
formation of organs. I have tried to show that in a few cases 
at least this connecting link was to be sought in the changes of 
osmotic pressure determined by the chemical changes which 
take place in the growing organ. 

But this fact alone does not explain why it is that we get 


1 1n the light of more recent experiments it is possible, that after all only such 
pieces can develop into a normal embryo which contain the different germ-regions 
(1912). 


104 THe MercHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


differences in the forms of organs. In order to understand 
this we must bear in mind that the processes of growth must 
necessarily be different for different organs, as for example in 
the formation of a root, and the formation of a stem. As 
growth is a process in which energy is used up in overcoming 
the resistance to growth, differences of growth can only be 
determined either by differences in the amount of energy set free 
in the growing organ or by differences in resistance. Differ- 
ences in the energy must be the outcome of differences in the 
chemical processes which determine growth. Therefore we are 
led to the idea that differences in the forms of different organs 
must be determined by differences in their chemical constitu- 
tion, or, if the chemical constitutions be similar, by differences 
in resistance to growth. That organs which differ in shape 
are very often chemically different is a well-known fact. The 
formation of urea in the liver and the synthesis of hippuric 
acid by the kidneys are the consequences of chemical differences. 

In this way we are led through the mechanics of growth to a 
conclusion which forms the nucleus of Sachs’s theory of organi- 
zation, namely, “that differences in the form of organs are 
accompanied by differences in their chemical constitution, and 
that according to the principles of science we have to derive the 
former from the latter.’”’ According to Sachs there are at least 
as many “spezifische Bildungsstoffe” in a plant as there are 
different organs.! 

2. In adopting the theory of Sachs and applying it to animal 
morphology, we must avoid a mistake very often made even 
in the case of good theories, namely, the endeavor to explain 
special cases which are complicated by unknown conditions. 
Huyghens explained by his theory of light the phenomena of 
refraction, but he could not and did not attempt to explain the 
sensations of color. For these phenomena the wave theory of 


1J. Sachs, Stoff und Form der Pflanzenorgane, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 
II, 1893. 


PuysioLtocicaL MorPHOLOGY 105 


light remains true, but color sensations depend not only on the 
wave motion of the ether, but also on the chemical and physical 
structure of the retina. I think it perfectly safe to say that 
every animal has specific germ substances, and that the germ 
substances of different animals differ chemically. Its chemical 
qualities determine that from a chick’s egg only a chick can 
arise. But it would be a mistake to attempt at present an 
explanation of how the unknown chemical nature of the germ 
determines all the different organs and characters that belong 
to the species. For instance, the yolk sac of the Fundulus 
embryo has a tiger-like coloration. We might say that these 
markings may be due to a certain arrangement of molecules or 
complexes of molecules (determinants), which later on give rise 
to the colored places of the yolk sac, but I found that this 
coloration originates in a manner much more simple. The 
pigment cells are formed irregularly on the surface of the yolk. 
The pigment is chemically closely related to hemoglobin, and 
so its formation may from the first be connected with the 
formation of the blood corpuscles. But the arrangement of 
the pigment cells during the first days of development is not 
such as to produce any definite markings. They lie upon the 
walls of the blood-vessels as well as in the spaces between the 
capillaries (Fig. 36). Later on, however, all of the pigment 
cells have crept upon the surface of the neighboring blood- 
vessels (Fig. 38). I succeeded experimentally in showing it to 
be probable that some of the substances contained in the blood 
determine this reaction. These substances, if they diffuse from 
the blood-vessel and touch the chromatophore, make, according 
to the laws of surface tension, the protoplasm of the chroma- 
tophore flow toward and at last over the blood-vessel and form 
a sheath around it, while the gaps between the blood-vessels 
become empty of chromatophores. In this way the chroma- 
tophores are arranged in stripes, and possibly changes in the 
surface tension, and not a preformed arrangement of the germ, 


106 Tue MecHaANIsTic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


Fia. 38 


Fics. 36, 37, and 38.—From nature. The origin of the pattern on the yolk 
sac of a fish embryo (Fundulus heteroclitus). Fig. 36 is a drawing of the blood- 
vessels at the surface of the yolk sac at an early stage of development. The black 
pigment cells show no definite orientation in regard to the blood-vessels. Fig. 
37, the same egg a few days later. Here we notice that some pigment cells show 
a tendency to creep on the blood-vessels. Fig. 38, the same egg still a few days 
later. The black pigment cells have completely crept on the blood-vessels and 
tet a sheath around them. The red chromatophores are omitted in this 

awing. 

This was the first observation proving that tropisms play a réle in the arrange- 
ment of the organs in the body. 


PHYSIOLOGICAL MorPHOLOGY 107 


determine the marking. We do not know what processes 
determine the coloration of animals which owe their markings 
to interference colors, but the task of deriving such a coloration 
in the adult from a similar arrangement of molecules in the 
germ plasm would prove too much even for a genius like 
Huyghens, and without the possibility of such a derivation the 
theory is of no use. 

3. The reasons why roots grow on the under side of the 
stem of Antennularia and stems on the upper side can only be 
given when the special physical and chemical conditions inside 
the stem of Antennularia have been worked out. At present we 
can only think of possibilities. It is possible that the hypotheti- 
cal root substances of Sachs may have a greater specific gravity 
than the substances which form stems, and therefore take the 
lowest position in the cell. Since outgrowth can take place 
only at the free surface of a stem or branch, roots can on this 
assumption grow only at the under side and stems only at the 
upper side of an element. But there are still other possibilities 
which we must omit here. In the case of Margelis and other 
hydroids, it might happen that contact with solid bodies pro- 
duced an increase of surface in the touched elements in case they 
contained specific root substances, while the opposite took place 
in the case of elements containing polyp substances. The con- 
sequence would be an increase in the surface of the roots if they 
came into contact with solid bodies, while polyps only would 
grow out in the opposite direction. I found, indeed, in some 
forms at Naples that roots of hydroids which grew free in the 
water began to grow much faster and to branch off more 
abundantly when brought into contact with solid bodies. But 
in these cases we must wait with our attempts at explanation 
until the physical and chemical conditions for the form are 
worked out. For the same reasons I will not go into a discus- 
sion of the question of what determines the polarization of ani- 
mals like Cerianthus. It may suffice to suggest the possibility 


108 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


that in polarized animals the tissues or cells may have such a 
peculiar structure as to allow the specific formative substances 
to migrate or arrange themselves only in one direction, while in 
cases of heteromorphosis migration or arrangement in every 
direction or in several directions is possible. 

4. The egg of a sea-urchin under normal conditions gives 
rise to but one embryo. This circumstance is due simply to 
the geometrical shape of the protoplasm, which, under normal 
conditions, is that of a sphere. When we make the eggs burst, 
the protoplasm outside the egg membrane and that which 
remains within it assume spherical forms, by reason of the 
surface tension of the protoplasm. When this happens, as a 
rule, we get twins, if two separate segmentation cavities are 
formed, and only one embryo, if both cavities communicate 
with one another. Whether the first or the second case will 
happen depends upon the molecular condition of the part of 
the protoplasm connecting the two drops. Therefore, the 
number of embryos which come from one egg is not determined 
by the preformation of germ-regions in the protoplasm, or 
nucleus, but by the geometrical shape of the egg and the 
molecular condition of the protoplasm, in so far as these circum- 
stances determine the number of blastulae. In my experiments, 
I got double or triple embryos when the egg formed two or 
three droplets or spheres, as every sphere gives rise to a blastula. 
In Driesch’s experiments, one single cell of the four-cell stage 
necessarily formed a whole embryo after it had been isolated, 
as it assumed the shape of a single sphere or ellipsoid. Of 
course, there must be a limit to the number of embryos that can 
arise from one egg; but the limit is not due to any preformation, 
but to other circumstances, the chief one being that with too 
small an amount of protoplasm the formation of a blastula— 
from merely geometrical reasons, as there must be a minimum 
size for the cleavage-cells—becomes impossible.!. Without the 


1] stated that the minimal size is about one-eighth of the mass of the sea- 
urchin's egg and [ do not think that this is very far off the limit. 


PHuysIoLoGicaL MorPHOLOGY 109 


formation of the blastula, of course it is not possible to get the 
later stages which are determined by the blastula. 

I have chosen the name Physiological Morphology for these 
investigations, masmuch as their object has been to derive the 
laws of organization from the common source of all life phenom- 
ena, i.e., the chemical activity of the cell. In what way this 
is to be done is indicated in the chapter on the mechanics of 
growth. 

But the aim of Physiological Morphology is not solely 
analytical. It has another and higher aim, which is synthetical 
or constructive, that is, to form new combinations from the 
elements of living nature, just as the physicist and chemist 
form new combinations from the elements of non-living nature. 


VI. ON THE NATURE OF THE PROCESS OF 
FERTILIZATION 


VI 
ON THE NATURE OF THE PROCESS OF FERTILIZATION! 


I 

Experimental biology is a very recent science. Not until 
recently have biologists begun to become conscious of the 
uncertainty of conclusions which are not tested and verified by 
adequate experiments. 

Leeuwenhook demonstrated in 1677 the existence of motile 
elements in the sperm, the so-called spermatozoa. He believed 
that the spermatozoa represented the future embryo. The 
majority of his contemporaries assumed that the spermatozoa 
were parasitic organisms which had nothing to do with fertiliza- 
tion. The idea that spermatozoa are not parasites did not 
subside until it was proved about 160 years later that the 
spermatozoa originate from the cells of the testes. 

That sperm was needed to bring about fertilization of the 
egg was too obvious a fact to escape even those biologists who 
never made an experiment, but that the spermatozoa and not 
the liquid constituents were the essential element in the sperm 
was a fact which could not be established except experimentally. 
It was generally assumed that no direct contact between sperm 
and egg was necessary and that something volatile contained 
in the sperm, the imaginary “aura seminalis’” was sufficient 
for the act of fertilization. That contact between sperm and 
egg was really necessary for fertilization was at last proved 
experimentally by Jacobi (1764) who showed that fish eggs 
can only be fertilized if the sperm is brought into direct con- 
tact with the eggs; and by Spallanzani who put the males of 
frogs during the act of cohabitation into trousers and convinced 


1 Reprinted from Biological Lectures delivered at Woods Hole, 1899, by 
courtesy of (iinn & Co., Boston. 


113 


114 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


himself that under such conditions the eggs remained unferti- 
lized although the “aura seminalis’” was not prevented from 
acting upon the eggs. This ended the reign of the ‘aura 
seminalis.” 

It was reserved to two experimenters, Prevost and Dumas 
(the latter the famous chemist) to prove that the spermatozoa 
are the essential element in the sperm. They made the simple 
experiment of filtering the sperm and demonstrated that the 
sperm whose spermatozoa had been retained by the filter had 
lost its power of fertilizing the eggs. But even this did not 
convince many of the descriptive biologists and nine years later 
K. E. von Baer still expressed the opinion that spermatozoa 
had nothing to do with fertilization. In 1848 the entrance of 
the spermatozoon into the egg was directly observed by Barry 
and this fact has since been verified by an endless number of 
investigators for the egg of all kinds of animals. It is probably 
no exaggeration to say that with the general recognition of the 
experimental method in biology it would probably have taken 
about as many years as it took centuries to establish the simple 
fact that the spermatozoon is the essential element in sperm. 

The mere observation of the fact that the spermatozoon 
must enter the egg in order to bring about fertilization did not 
lead to any understanding of the mechanism of the activation of 
the egg. Nevertheless four theories or rather suggestions were 
offered. 

The first theory of fertilization is a morphological one. 
According to this theory, it is the morphological structure of the 
spermatozoon which is responsible for the process of fertiliza- 
tion. 

The second theory is a chemical one. According to this 
theory it is not a definite morphological or structural element 
of the spermatozoon, but a chemical constituent, that causes 
the development of the egg. Against this second view Miescher 
raised the objection that his investigations showed the same 


NATURE OF THE PRocESS OF FERTILIZATION 115 


compounds in the egg and the spermatozoa. I do not believe 
that this objection is valid. We know that simple variations 
in the configuration of a molecule have an enormous effect upon 
life phenomena. This is shown among others by the work of 
Emil Fischer on the relation between the molecular configura- 
tion of sugars and their fermentability. When Miescher made 
his experiments he was not familiar with such possibilities. 
Moreover, Miescher was not able to state whether the 
spermatozoa contain enzymes or not. 

A third theory was a physical theory (Bischof). This 
theory assumes that a peculiar condition of motion exists in 
the spermatozoon which is transmitted to the egg and causes 
its development. It should be said, however, that this idea 
is not so very different from the chemical conception, because 
it assumes exactly the same for the spermatozoon that Liebig 
assumes for the enzymes. Liebig thought that the enzymes 
owed their power of producing fermentation to the motions of 
certain atoms or groups of atoms. 

The fourth conception is the stimulus conception, which 
was originated by His. According to this conception the egg is 
considered as a definite machine which if once wound up will 
do its work in a certain direction. The spermatozoon is the 
stimulus which causes the egg to undergo its development. It 
is to be said in connection with this stimulus conception that 
the main point at issue is omitted as to whether the stimulus 
carried by the spermatozoon is of a physical or a chemical 
character, and in this way, of course, the stimulus conception is 
nothing but a disguised repetition of the chemical or physical 
theory of fertilization. 

All these theories are so vague that we do not need to be 
surprised that none of them has led to any further discovery. 
If we want to make new discoveries in biology, we must start 
from definite facts and observations, and not from vague 
speculations. Among these observations the most important 


116 THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


are those on parthenogenesis. It had been observed for a 
long time that the unfertilized egg of the silkworm can develop 
parthenogenetically. It was, moreover, known that plant lice 
can give rise to new generations without fertilization. The 
most impressive fact concerning the parthenogenesis of animals 
was contributed by Dzierzon, who discovered that the unferti- 
lized eggs of bees develop and give rise to males, while the 
fertilized eggs give rise to females. Similar conditions seem to 
exist in wasps. It is, moreover, certain that a few crustaceans 
show parthenogenesis. 

A beginning of parthenogenetic development had been 
observed in the case of a great many marine animals which 
develop outside of the female in sea-water. It was found that 
such eggs when left long enough in sea-water may divide into 
two or three cells, but no farther. On the other hand, in 
ovaries of mammals now and then eggs were found that were 
segmented into a small number of cells.!. These facts and the 
occurrence of a certain class of tumors in the ovary, the so-called 
teratomata, suggest the possibility of at least partial partheno- 
genesis in the eggs of mammals. But all these phenomena 
were considered to be of a pathological character. It must be, 
however, admitted that we cannot utilize these facts with any 
degree of certainty for the theory of fertilization, as in this 
case certainty can only be obtained by the experiment. It 
was not until very recently that such experiments were made. 


II 


Eight years ago I observed that if the fertilized eggs of the 
sea-urchin were put into sea-water whose concentration was 
raised by the addition of some neutral salt they were not able 
to segment, but that the same eggs, when put back after they 
had been in such sea-water for about two hours, broke up into 
a large number of cells at once instead of dividing successively 


1 Hertwig, O., Die Zelle und die Gewebe, p. 239, Jena, 1893. 


NATURE OF THE Process OF FERTILIZATION 117 


into two, four, eight, sixteen cells, etc. Of course it is neces- 
sary for this experiment that the right increase in the concen- 
tration of the sea-water be selected. The explanation of this 
fact is as follows: The concentrated sea-water brings about 
a change in the condition of the nucleus which permits a division 
and a scattering of the chromosomes in the egg.! As soon as 
the egg is put back into normal sea-water it at once breaks up 
into as many cleavage-cells as nuclei or distinct chromatin 
masses had been preformed in the egg. Morgan tried the same 
experiment on the unfertilized eggs of the sea-urchin, and 
found that the unfertilized egg, if treated for several hours with 
concentrated sea-water, was able to show the beginning of a 
segmentation when put back into normal sea-water. A small 
number of eggs divided into two or four cells, and, in a few 
cases, went as far as about sixty cells, but no larvae ever devel- 
oped from these eggs. Morgan? had used the same concen- 
tration of sea-water as Norman’ and I had used in our previous 
experiments. I had added about 2 grams of sodium chloride 
to 100 c.c. of sea-water. Norman used instead of this 34 grams 
of MgCl, to 100 c.c. of sea-water, and Morgan used the same 
concentration. Mead? made an observation somewhat similar 
to Morgan’s upon Chaetopterus. He found that by adding a 
very small amount of KCl to sea-water he could force the unfer- 
tilized eggs of Chaetopterus to throw out their polar bodies. 
The substitution of a little NaCl for KCl did not have the 
same effect. While continuing my studies on the effects of 
salts upon life phenomena, I was led to the fact that the peculiar 
actions of protoplasm are influenced to a great extent by the 
ions contained in the solutions which surround the cells. As is 


1 Loeb, J., ‘‘Experiments on Cleavage,’’ Journ. of Morph., VII, 1892. 
2 Morgan, T. H., ‘‘ The Action of Salt Solutions, etc.,"" Arch. f. Entwickelungs- 
mechanik, VIII, 1899. 
Norman, W. W.., ‘‘Segmentation of the Nucleus without Segmentation of the 
Protoplasm,”’ Arch. f. Entwickelungsmechanik, III, 1896. 
4 Mead, A., ‘‘' The Rate of Cell-Division and the Function of the Centrosome,” 
Woods Hole Biol. Lect., 1898. 


118 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


well known, if we have a salt in solution, e.g., sodium chloride, 
we have not only NaCl molecules in solution, but a certain 
number of NaCl molecules are split up into Na ions (Na atoms 
charged with a certain quantity of positive electricity) and Cl 
ions (Cl atoms charged with the same amount of negative 
electricity). When an egg is in sea-water, the various ions enter 
it in proportions determined by their osmotic pressure and the 
permeability of the protoplasm. It is probable that some of 
these ions are able to combine with the proteins of the proto- 
plasm. At any rate, the physical qualities of the proteins of 
the protoplasm (their state of matter and power of binding 
water) are determined by the relative proportions of the 
various ions present in the protoplasm or in combination with 
the proteins... By changing the relative proportions of these 
ions we change the physiological properties of the protoplasm, 
and thus are able to impart properties to a tissue which it does 
not possess ordinarily. I have found, for instance, that by 
changing the amount of sodium and calcium ions contained 
in the muscles of the skeleton we can make them contract 
rhythmically like the heart. It is only necessary to increase 
the number of sodium ions in the muscle or to reduce the num- 
ber of calcium ions or do both simultaneously.? On the basis 
of this and similar observations I thought that by changing the 
constitution of the sea-water it might be possible to cause the 
eggs not only to show a beginning of development but to 
develop into living larvae, which were in every way similar 
to those produced by the fertilized egg. 

There seemed to be three ways in which this might be 
accomplished. The first way was a simple change in the con- 
stitution of the sea-water without increasing its osmotic pres- 
sure. The second way was to increase the osmotic pressure 


1 Loeb, J., ‘‘On Ion-Proteid Compounds and Their Réle in the Mechanics of 
Life-Phenomena,”’ Amer. Journ. of Phys., III, 1900. 

2 It is due to the Ca ions of our blood that the muscles of our skeleton do not 
beat rhythmically, like our heart. 


NATURE OF THE PrRocESS OF FERTILIZATION 119 


of the sea-water by adding a certain amount of a certain salt. 
The third way was by combining both of these methods. The 
first way did not lead to the result I desired.! All the various 
artificial solutions I prepared had only the one effect of causing 
the unfertilized egg to divide into a few cells, but I was not 
able to produce a blastula. I next tried the effects of an 
increase in the sea-water by adding a certain amount of mag- 
nesium chloride. In this case I had no better results than 
Morgan. Very few eggs began to divide, but these did not 
develop beyond the first stages of segmentation. I then tried 
the combination of both methods. The osmotic pressure of 
ordinary sea-water is roughly estimated to be the same as that 
of a $n NaCl solution or a 4,2n MgCl, solution. I found, after 
a number of experiments, that by putting the unfertilized eggs 
of the sea-urchin into a solution of 60 c.c. of 22n MgCl, solu- 
tion and 40 ¢c.c. of sea-water for two hours the eggs began 
to develop when put back into normal sea-water. Such eggs 
reached the blastula stage. I do not think that anybody has 
ever seen before such blastulae as resulted from these unferti- 
lized eggs. As these eggs had no membrane, the amoeboid 
motions of the cleavage-cells led very frequently to a discon- 
nection of the various parts of one and the same egg, and the 
outlines of the egg became extremely irregular. The blastulae 
showed, as a rule, the same outline as the egg had in the morula 
stage. It was, moreover, a rare thing that the whole mass of 
the egg developed into one blastula. The disconnection of the 
various cleavage-cells led, as a rule, to the formation of more 
than one embryo from one egg. The results were in a certain 
way similar to those I had obtained when I caused the fertilized 
eggs of sea-urchins to burst. In such cases a part of the proto- 
plasm flowed out from the egg but was able to develop. These 
extraovates had no membrane, and of course showed some 
irregularity in their outlines, but the irregularity in this case 


1 Later experiments gave, however, positive results. See next chapter. 


120 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


was far less than that observed in the unfertilized eggs of my 
recent experiments. But although I had.thus far satisfied my 
desire to see the unfertilized eggs of the sea-urchin reach the 
blastula stage, I was not able to keep these eggs alive long 
enough to see them grow into the pluteus stage. They developed 
more slowly than the normal eggs, and died, as a rule, on the 
second day. 

It was my next task to find a solution which would allow 
the eggs to reach the pluteus stage. I found that this can be 
done by reducing the amount of magnesium chloride and 
increasing the amount of sea-water. By putting the unferti- 
lized eggs for about two hours into a mixture of equal parts of 
2..n MgCl, and sea-water, the eggs, after they were put back 
into normal sea-water, not only reached the blastula stage, but 
went into the gastrula and pluteus stages. The blastulae that 
originated from these eggs looked much healthier and more 
normal than those of the former solution with more MgCl,. 
Of course as these unfertilized eggs had no membrane it 
happened but rarely that the whole mass of an egg developed 
into one single embryo. Quadruplets, triplets, and twins were 
much more frequently produced than a single embryo. The 
outlines of each blastula were much more spherical than in the 
previous experiment. These eggs reached the pluteus stage on 
the second day (considerably later than the fertilized eggs do). 
Thus I had succeeded in raising the unfertilized eggs of sea- 
urchins to the same stage to which the fertilized eggs can be 
raised in the aquarium. I have not yet succeeded in raising the 
fertilized eggs in my laboratory dishes beyond the pluteus stage. 

Though I do not wish to go into the technicalities of these 
experiments, I must mention a few of the precautions that I 
took in order to guard against the possible presence of sperma- 
tozoa in the sea-water.1. The reader who is interested in this 

1 Today it may seem strange that I had to meet such objections, but when my 
first papers on artificial parthenogenesis appeared, very few biologists were willing 


to accept the correctness of my statements. The most absurd sources of error 
were suggested. 


NATURE OF THE PRocESS OF FERTILIZATION 121 


technical side of the experiments will find all the necessary data 
in my publication in the American Journal of Physiology. 
Here I wish only to mention the following points: 

1. These experiments were made after the spawning season 
was practically over. 

2. Bacteriological precautions were taken against the possi- 
bility of contamination of the hands, dishes, or instruments 
with spermatozoa. 

3. The spermatozoa contained in the sea-water lose, accord- 
ing to the investigation of Gemmill,? their fertilizing power 
within five hours if distributed in large quantities of sea-water. 

4. We have a criterion by which we can tell whether the 
egg is fertilized or not in the production of a membrane. The 
fertilized egg forms a membrane and the unfertilized egg has no 
distinct membrane. None of the unfertilized eggs that devel- 
oped artificially had a membrane.’ 

5. With each experiment a number of control experiments 
were made. Part of the unfertilized eggs were put into the 
same normal sea-water that was used for the eggs that did 
develop. None of these eggs that remained in normal sea-water 
formed a membrane or showed any development, except that a 
few of them were divided into two cells after about twenty- 
four hours. 

6. I made another set of control experiments by putting a 
lot of eggs of the same female into a solution which differed less 
from the normal sea-water than the one which caused the 
formation of blastulae or plutei from the unfertilized eggs. 


1 Loeb, J., ‘‘On the Artificial Production of Normal Larvae from the Unferti- 
lized Egg of the Sea-Urchin,”” Amer. Journ. of Phys., III. 


2 Gemmill, ‘‘The Vitality of the Ova and Spermatozoa of Certain Animals,” 
Journ. of Anat. and Phys., 1900. 

3 The method used in these experiments was primitive inasmuch as no ferti- 
lization membrane was formed. A few years later I found a method for the 
artificial production of a fertilization membrane, which is described in the next 
paper. In the earlier experiments in which no fertilization membrane was 
developed, nevertheless a change in the cortical layer of the egg was brought 
about by the combined action of the hydroxyl-ions of the solution, and the 
increased osmotic pressure. 


122 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


In this case it was shown, that although these eggs received the 
same sea-water as the ones which developed, and although 
they were injured less than the ones which developed, yet not 
one single egg formed a membrane or reached the blastula 
stage. If the sea-water had contained any spermatozoa these 
eggs should have reached the blastula stage.1 Hence, as in 
nine different series of experiments these results were confirmed, 
we may assume that by treating the eggs for two hours with a 
solution of equal parts of a 2.2n MgCl, solution and sea-water 
we can cause them to develop parthenogenetically into plutei. 


III 


What conclusions may we draw from these results? If we 
wish to avoid wild and sterile speculations, I think we should 
confine ourselves to the following question: What alterations 
can be produced in an egg by treating it for two hours 
with a solution of equal parts of 2.°n MgCl, and of sea-water ? 
Even in this regard we can only give a very indefinite answer 
which, however, will have to be in the following direction: The 
bulk of our protoplasm consists of colloidal substances. This 
material easily changes its state of matter and its power of 
binding water. It seems probable that changes of these two 
qualities are mainly responsible for muscular contraction and 
perhaps amoeboid motions. Among the agencies that. cause 
changes of these physical qualities we know of three that are 
especially powerful. The one is specific enzymes (trypsine, 
plasmase, etc.). The second is ions in definite concentration. 
The concentration varies for various ions. The third agency 
is temperature. In our experiments it is obvious that only the 
second possibility can have been active. I do not consider 
it advisable to enter into theoretical discussions beyond these 

' Through other control experiments I convinced myself that a treatment of 
eggs or spermatozoa with equal parts of a “’n MgCl, solution and sea-water 


diminishes the impregnability of the eggs and annihilates the fertilizing power of 
spermatozoa in a very short time. 


NATURE OF THE PROCESS OF FERTILIZATION 123 


statements. The next question that should be raised would be 
whether the spermatozoa act in the same way. It is true that 
the spermatozoon contains a considerable proportion of salts, 
especially K,PO,, but it may contain enzymes or it may con- 
tain substances which have similar effects upon the physical 
qualities of the colloids, like the three agencies mentioned above. 

In the last volume of these lectures I pointed out that it is 
impossible to derive all the various elements that constitute 
heredity from one and the same condition of the egg.t Our 
recent experiments suggest the possibility that different con- 
stituents of the egg are responsible for the process of fertiliza- 
tion and for the transmission of the hereditary qualities of the 
male. While we are able to produce the process of fertilization 
by a treatment of the unfertilized egg with certain salts in 
certain concentrations, we cannot hope to bring about the 
transmission of the hereditary qualities of the male by any such 
treatment. Hence, the inference must be that the transmis- 
sion of the hereditary qualities of the male and the agency that 
causes the process of fertilization are not necessarily one and 
the same thing. I consider the chief value of the experiments 
on artificial parthenogenesis to be the fact that they transfer 
the problem of fertilization from the realm of morphology 
into the realm of physical chemistry. 


1 Loeb, J., ‘‘ The Heredity of the Marking in Fish Embryos,”’ Woods Hole Biol. 
Lect., Boston, 1899. 

2 This paper was written immediately after I had succeeded in producing 
larvae from the unfertilized egg. In the following years the methods of artificial 
parthenogenesis were improved and this led to the unraveling of the mechanism 
by which the spermatozoon causes the egg to develop. Anaccount of this work 
is given in the two following papers. 


VII. ON THE NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMU- 
LATION (ARTIFICIAL PARTHENOGENESIS) 


VII 


ON THE NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 
(ARTIFICIAL PARTHENOGENESIS)! 


PREFACE 

The title of this paper was chosen in reference to Virchow’s 
paper on “Stimulation and Irritability” (Virchow’s Archiv, 
XIV, 1, 1858) in which he discriminates between three forms of 
stimulation: functional, nutritive, and formative. By formative 
stimuli he means those which give rise to nuclear and cellular 
division. He considers as the classic example for formative 
stimulation the fertilization of the egg and the parallel drawn 
by him between this process and the causation of a pathological 
process of growth is so characteristic that we may quote it in full: 

If we admit the identity between the pathological and the embry- 
onic neoformation, the egg will have to be considered as the analogue 
of the pathological mother cell and the act of impregnation as the 
analogue of pathological stimulation. This view is not essentially 
altered through the discovery of the entrance of the spermatozoon 
into the egg, since there is no reason to consider the spermatozoon as 
the direct morphological starting-point for the development of definite 
parts of the egg. If, as seems to be the case, the spermatozoa are 
dissolved in the egg, they carry into it only certain chemical substances, 
which serve as specific stimuli, by calling forth new chemical and 
morphological arrangements of the atoms. Each specific contagium 
offers the same possibilities. 

The supposition prevalent at Virchow’s time, that the 
spermatozoon is entirely dissolved in the egg was not correct; 
but his view, that the spermatozoon carries chemical substances. 
into the egg, which form the stimulus for its development, is 
perfectly correct; and likewise the analogy between the causa- 
tion of the development of the egg by a spermatozoon and the 
causation of a pathological growth seems correct. I therefore 

1 Address delivered at the International Medical Congress at Budapest, 1909. 

127 


128 Tur MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


believe that it may be of interest to the medical profession 
to follow me in a brief survey of my experiments on artificial 
parthenogenesis and the causation of the development of the 
egg by a spermatozoon. 


I 


Cellular physiology has shown that tissues and organs 
develop only from cells through nuclear and cellular division. 
The conditions which cause cells to divide and to develop into 
new normal or pathological tissues have, since Virchow, been 
called formative stimuli. It is the task of modern biology to 
ascertain first what is the nature of these stimuli, and second, 
which change occurs in the cell in the process of formative 
stimulation. Virchow already emphasized the fact that the 
fertilization of the egg is the model of all phenomena of forma- 
tive stimulation and that the spermatozoon may be considered 
as the formative stimulus in this case. 

Pathologists have not yet succeeded in determining what 
the physico-chemical nature of the formative stimulus in the 
case of a tumor is, or what changes a cell undergoes in such a 
process. This task has, however, been accomplished to a high 
degree in the animal egg, and it may therefore interest the 
pathologist and the physician in general to become familiar 
with the essential features of the data thus obtained. 

It is known that aside from a few exceptions the animal egg 
can only develop if a spermatozoon enters into it. If no‘sperma- 
tozoon enters, as a rule no segmentation of the egg takes place 
and it perishes after a comparatively short period of time. The 
questions which I tried to solve were the following: By which 
physico-chemical agencies does the spermatozoon cause the 
egg to divide and to develop into an embryo; and second, which 
changes does the egg undergo in this formative stimulation by 
aspermatozoon? Or in other words, what is the mechanism by 
which the unfertilized egg is caused to segment and to develop? 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 129 


Two ways were open to find an answer to this question: 
first to try to cause the development of the unfertilized egg 
with extracts from sperm. I have spent a good deal of time in 
trying to succeed in this task, but met at first with only negative 
results for the reason that I used at first only extracts from the 
sperm of the same species of animals from which the eggs were 
taken. Only recently have I found that the extract of sperm is 
effective only if it is taken from a foreign species. We shall 
return to this curious fact later on and show that it has a 
bearing upon the problem of the immunity of our cells to the 
lysins of our body. 

The second way which could lead to a decision of the ques- 
tion concerning the nature of formative stimulation lay in the 
direction of artificial parthenogenesis, i.e., of the causation of 
the development of the animal egg, not by extracts of sperm 
but directly by physico-chemical agencies. This method of 
procedure has a special advantage. Since in this case we know 
the nature of the agencies we employ, it is easier to get an 
insight into the mechanism by which they cause the development 
of the egg; while if we work with extracts of sperm we are in 
the dark as to the chemical character of the active substances. 


I 


We will begin with a description of the method of artificial 
parthenogenesis in the egg of the Californian sea-urchin, 
since here this method has been worked out most completely. 
It may be mentioned that in the eggs of many animals the effect 
of the entrance of the spermatozoon manifests itself almost 
instantly by a characteristic change, namely, the formation 
of the so-called membrane of fertilization. Briefly stated this 
process may possibly consist in the entrance of sea-water 
between the surface film and the protoplasm of the egg, where- 
by the former is lifted up from the protoplasm of the egg and 
separated from it by a more or less wide, clear space. Figs. 1 


130 Tur MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


and 2 (page 7) show these changes in the sea-urchin egg. Fig. 
1 represents the unfertilized egg, Fig. 2 shows the same egg 
after the entrance of the spermatozoon. 

In 1905 I succeeded in finding a method by which it is 
possible to call forth the formation of a membrane of fertiliza- 
tion without apparent injury to the egg. This method consists 
in putting the eggs for about two minutes (at a temperature 
of 15°) into a mixture of 50 c.c. of sea-water+3 c.c. of an n/10 
lower monobasic fatty acid, e.g., acetic, propionic, butyric, or 
valerianic acid. In this mixture no membrane formation 
takes place; if, however, the eggs are transferred into normal 
sea-water all the eggs form a perfect fertilization membrane. 
The experiments showed that this process of membrane forma- 
tion is the essential condition which causes the egg to develop. 
In all these eggs in the course of the next hours after the mem- 
brane formation those changes begin which lead to a cell- 
division. If the temperature is very low not only cell-divisions 
begin but the egg may develop into a swimming larva; it 
reaches the so-called blastula stage. At room temperature, 
however, the artificial production of a membrane in the egg 
by fatty acid only calls forth a nuclear and possibly a cell- 
division; after this the egg slowly begins to disintegrate. 

We therefore see that the artificial membrane formation 
by a fatty acid induces the developmental process, but that 
at ordinary temperature the latter does not go far. In order 
to cause a complete development, a second influence is needed, 
as we shall see later. 

Before we describe this second influence, another question 
has to be settled, namely, how we know that the membrane 
formation and not any other action of the acid, e.g., a catalytic, 
is the formative stimulus in this case. The answer is, that if 
we apply the acid but prevent the changes leading to a mem- 
brane formation, divisions of the nucleus and of the cell do not 
occur. On the other hand, we shall see later on that we can 


NaTUuRE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 131 


call forth the membrane formation not alone by fatty acids 
but by a number of different agencies and that all these means 
act as formative stimuli. 

The causation of the membrane formation by a fatty acid 
starts, therefore, the development in the sea-urchin egg, but 
this development is abnormal and the egg is sickly and perishes 
the more rapidly the higher the temperature. The question 
arises, how can we inhibit this sickliness and grant a normal 
development to the egg? 

I found that two different means are at our disposal for 
this purpose. The one which never fails consists in putting 
the eggs about twenty minutes after the artificial membrane 
formation into hypertonic sea-water (or any other hypertonic 
solution, e.g., sugar solution), i.e., into sea-water or any other 
solution the osmotic pressure of which has been rendered 
50 per cent higher than that of the sea-water. In this solution 
the eggs remain from twenty to sixty minutes—according to 
the temperature and the concentration of hydroxyl-ions in the 
solution. If after this time the eggs are transferred into normal 
sea-water they develop at room temperature in a way similar to 
the eggs which are fertilized by sperm.! 

The second method of causing the eggs to develop normally 
at room temperature after the artificial causation of the mem- 
brane formation consists in putting these eggs for three hours 
in sea-water free from oxygen or into sea-water to which a 
trace of KCN has been added. After the eggs are transferred 
into normal sea-water they develop often but not always. This 
method is, therefore, not quite as reliable as the other method 
mentioned previously. 

We see, therefore, that the formative stimulus in the artificial 
activation of the egg of the sea-urchin consists of two phases, 


1 The larvae originating from eggs fertilized by sperm live no longer than those 
originating from eggs which develop parthenogenetically, if the larvae are not fed. 
The feeding of these larvae is a tedious process and for this reason I have not 
undertaken the task. Delage has, however, raised two such larvae until they were 
sexually mature. 


132 THE MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


namely, first the artificial causation of the membrane formation 
and second the subsequent short treatment of the egg with a 
hypertonic solution; (or a longer treatment with an isotonic 
solution free from oxygen or containing KCN). 

We may add that these observations do not hold good for 
the sea-urchin egg only. Similar observations were made on 
the eggs of annelids (Polynoe) and of star-fish (Asterina). 
In Polynoe and star-fish the artificial membrane production is 
often sufficient to allow the eggs to develop into larvae. But 
the number of eggs which reach the larval stage and the type 
of segmentation is improved if the eggs are treated subsequently 
with one of the above-mentioned methods, as R. Lillie found for 
Asterias and I for Polynoe. The experiments on annelids and 
star-fish, therefore, confirm the fact, that the calling forth of 
the membrane is the essential feature in formative stimulation 
and that the subsequent treatment of the eggs with a hyper- 
tonic solution (or an isotonic solution free from oxygen) has 
merely a corrective effect; it probably counteracts a secondary 
detrimental effect connected with the membrane formation. 


Ill 


We will now try to gain some insight into the mechanism of 
these two agencies. How can the fatty acid cause the formation 
of a membrane? In order to get an answer to this question 
we must find out whether there are other agencies which 
act like fatty acids. It was noticed that all the agencies 
which cause cytolysis also cause membrane formation, namely, 
first the specifically cytolytic agencies like saponin, solanin, 
digitalin, bile salts, and soaps. Experiments with these agencies, 
especially with saponin, solanin, and digitalin, yielded a curious 
result. If the unfertilized eggs are put into a weak solution of 
saponin in sea-water we notice as the first effect on the eggs 
the formation of a fertilization membrane. Then ensues a pause 
of sometimes several minutes and after this pause a sudden 


Nature OF FoRMATIVE STIMULATION 133 


cytolysis of the whole egg follows. If we take the eggs during 
this pause (i.e., after the membrane is formed, but before the 


Fia. 40 Fia. 41 


Fig. 42 Fia. 43 


Fics. 39-43.—Membrane formation and subsequent_cytolysis of the sea- 
urchin egg in a weak solution of saponin in sea-water. Camera drawings from 
nature. Fig. 39, unfertilized egg at the beginning of the experiment. In this 
condition the egg was put into sea-water containing a small amount of saponin. 
The following figures show the changes it underwent in this solution. Fig. 40, 
membrane formation under the influence of saponin, eight minutes later. If the 
egg is taken out of the saponin-sea-water in this stage, washed and put into a 
hypertonic solution for about one half-hour, it will develop into a larva, after it is 
put back into normal sea-water. If, however, it is left in the saponin solution it 
undergoes the rapid cytolysis represented in Figs. 41,42, and 43. In the above 
drawing of the egg, cytolysis began at G, Fig. 41, five minutes after the membrane 
poration The stages represented in Figs. 42 and 43 were reached a few minutes 

ater. 


cytolysis of the egg occurs) out of the sea-water containing 
saponin and free them from all traces of saponin by wash- 
ing them repeatedly with sea-water, they behave as if the 


134 THe MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


membrane formation had been called forth by a fatty acid. 
Such eggs begin to develop, but do not go beyond the first 
nuclear division at room temperature. If, however, the eggs 
are treated for half an hour with hypertonic sea-water they 
can develop to normal plutei, i.e., larvae with skeletons. 

The second group of cytolytic agencies is formed by the 
specific fat solving hydrocarbons like amylen, benzol, toluol, 
and in a much lesser degree chloroform, etc. Hertwig had 
already observed that chloroform calls forth the membrane 
formation and Herbst had seen the same effect brought about 
by benzol and toluol. But these substances act so violently 
that the membrane formation is followed almost immediately 
by a cytolysis of the egg, and for this reason these authors could 
not notice that the membrane formation was followed by the 
development of the egg. I have, however, been able to con- 
vince myself that if amylen or benzol are allowed to act only 
for one moment and if the eggs are then quickly transferred 
into normal sea-water a membrane formation can be produced in 
some of them without subsequent cytolysis. If such eggs were 
afterward treated with hypertonic sea-water they developed 
into larvae. 

A further group of cytolytic agencies is ether or alcohols. 
Cytolysis of the eggs by these agencies is also preceded by a 
membrane formation. If the eggs are taken out from such 
solutions immediately after membrane formation they can be 
saved from cytolytic destruction (Figs. 44-47). 

Bases can also call forth membrane formation, but their 
action is rather slow and depends on the presence of free oxygen. 
One gains the impression as if the alkali acted in this case only 
as an accelerator of oxidations and as if a product of oxidation 
was the proper cause for the membrane formation. The 
membrane formation usually becomes manifest only if one 
treats the eggs afterward for a short time with a hypertonic 
solution; such a treatment causing them to develop into larvae. 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 135 


An increase in temperature can also produce a cytolytic 
effect. I have observed that at 34° or 35° the eggs of Strongylo- 
centrotus purpuratus form often but not always a membrane 


Fic. 44 Fie. 45 


Fie. 46 Fie.47 | 


Frias. 44-47.—Membrane formation and subsequent cytolysis of the egg 
under the influence of the addition of a minute quantity of salicylaldehyde to 
sea-water. Camera drawings. Fig. 44, unfertilized egg at tho beginning of the 
experiment. Fig. 45, membrane formation in the salicylaldehyde-sea-water. 
Fig. 46, beginning of the cytolysis. Fig. 47, cytolysis completed. The cytolyzed 
egg has in this case an entirely different appearance from that of an egg cytolyzed 
in saponin. 


of fertilization. Such a temperature kills these eggs almost 
instantly and consequently they are no longer able to develop 


after this treatment. The eggs of the star-fish Asterias for- 
besii are, however, not killed so rapidly after the membrane 


136 THe MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


formation, and R. Lillie was able to show that such eggs can 
develop into larvae if the membrane formation is called forth 
by raising the temperature. Von Knaffl has shown that if a 
high temperature acts for some time on these eggs they perish 
by cytolysis and are transformed into “ghosts.” 

We have been able to convince ourselves, therefore, that all 
the agencies which cause cytolysis also call forth the membrane 
formation; while the agencies which do not call forth cytolysis 
do not cause a membrane formation. We find in addition that 
the cytolytic power of these agencies runs parallel with their 
power of causing membrane formation. 

From this we draw the inference that the membrane forma- 
tion depends upon the cytolysis of the surface layer of the egg. 
We shall see later on that we must discriminate between a 
cortical layer and the core of the unfertilized egg. This 
superficial cortical layer of the egg is very thin. The essential 
feature of the developmental stimulus consists in the cytolysis 
of this cortical layer of the egg and this cytolysis is caused by 
the spermatozoon. 

IV 

We have already mentioned that the cytolysis which under- 
lies the membrane formation causes the development of the 
egg, but that the egg is as a rule sickly after this membrane 
formation. To fix our ideas provisionally we assume that 
through the membrane formation a substance is formed which 
must be abolished or destroyed before the egg is able to develop 
normally. If we permit the egg to begin its development while 
it still contains this hypothetical detrimental substance in a 
sufficient quantity it is sickly and dies prematurely. The 
destruction of this hypothetical substance can be brought about 
in two ways: first, by treating the egg for a short time with a 
hypertonic solution. When I discovered this fact there was no 
analogue known which allowed us to draw an inference concern- 
ing the mode of action of a hypertonic solution. I succeeded 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 137 


in showing that such a solution is only effective in artificial 
parthenogenesis if it contains free oxygen. If the hypertonic 
solution is deprived of oxygen it remains without any effect. It 
remains also inefficient if a trace of KCN is added to it. Since 
KCN inhibits the oxidations in the cell it is obvious that the 
hypertonic solution only acts by a modification of the process 
of oxidation. 

The second method of saving the life of the egg consists in 
putting it after the membrane formation for about three hours 
into sea-water which is practically free from oxygen, or contains 
a trace of KCN whereby the oxidations in the egg are suppressed. 
If these eggs are transferred after this time into normal sea- 
water containing free oxygen they are often able to develop 
normally.? 

Vv 


Thus far we have dealt only with artificial parthenogenesis. 
We are now about to take up the causation of development by 
a spermatozoon. Is the formative stimulation of the egg by 
spermatozoon of the same character as that in artificial partheno- 
genesis? This question can be answered in the affirmative. 
It is possible to show that the spermatozoon also calls forth the 
normal development of the egg by at least two substances and 
that one of these substances acts like butyric acid or saponin 
in artificial parthenogenesis, inasmuch as it causes the cytolysis 
of the thin cortical layer of the egg; while the second substance 
has an effect similar to that of the hypertonic solution. The 
correctness for this view is proved by the fact that I succeeded 
in separating these two effects of the spermatozoon. 

If we wish to bring about a separation of these two agencies 
in the spermatozoon we cannot use the spermatozoa of the 
same species of sea-urchins from which the egg is taken; for 
in this case the spermatozoon penetrates at once into the 


1 A further discussion of the facts in this chapter is contained in the next paper 
on ‘The Prevention of the Death of the Egg through the Act of Fertilization.” 


138 THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


protoplasm of the egg as soon as it comes in contact with it. 
In this way almost simultaneously both substances of the 
spermatozoon become effective, the cytolytic substance, which 
causes the membrane formation, and the “corrective” substance. 
The experiments, however, result differently when we add the 
spermatozoa of a foreign species, e.g., star-fish, to the egg of 
thesea-urchin. Under ordinary conditions sperm of the star-fish 
cannot cause the egg of the sea-urchin to develop; it becomes 
effective, however, in sea-water which has been rendered a little 
more alkaline through the addition of some NaHO. If 0.6 c.c. 
n/10 NaHO is added to 50 ¢.c. of sea-water all the eggs of the 
sea-urchin form fertilization membranes in such a mixture if 
only a trace of living sperm of a star-fish (Asterias ochracea) is 
added. It takes, however, some time, mostly from ten to fifty 
minutes, until the living star-fish sperm brings about this effect; 
while after the addition of sea-urchin sperm this result is 
obtained in one minute. 

If the sea-urchin eggs, all of which have formed membranes 
upon the addition of living star-fish sperm, are put back into 
normal sea-water and if we watch their further fate, we soon 
notice that we are dealing with two groups of eggs. The one 
group acts as if only one of the two agencies, namely, the 
cytolytic one, had taken effect. These eggs show at room 
temperature only the beginning of nuclear division and then 
disintegrate, while at a lower temperature they may develop a 
little farther. If we treat them, however, after the membrane 
formation by star-fish sperm for from thirty to fifty minutes 
with a hypertonic solution they all develop at room temperature 
mostly into normal larvae. The other eggs develop without 
any subsequent treatment with a hypertonic solution into 
normal larvae. 

What causes this difference in the behavior of both groups 
of eggs? A histological examination of these eggs decides this 
point. My assistant, Mr. Elder, found that a spermatozoon 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 139 


haa entered into those eggs which develop after the addition 
of star-fish sperm without subsequent treatment with a hyper- 
tonic solution into normal larvae; while the eggs which behave 
as if only an artificial membrane formation had taken place 
do not contain any spermatozoon. 

This behavior of the eggs under the influence of foreign 
sperm is comprehensible under the assumption that. the 
spermatozoon also causes the development of the egg through 
two agencies; one of these agencies is a cytolytic substance, 
a so-called lysin. This substance is probably situated at the 
surface of the spermatozoon. This lysin only calls forth 
the membrane formation and it acts like the butyric acid in 
the method of artificial parthenogenesis. The second agency 
seems to be more in the interior of the spermatozoon and it 
exercises an influence similar to the short treatment of the egg 
with a hypertonic solution. A normal development will result 
only if the spermatozoon enters the egg since in this case only 
both agencies, the cytolytic and the corrective, get into the 
egg. We have already mentioned that foreign spermatozoa 
penetrate only slowly into the egg. If a spermatozoon pene- 
trates partially through the surface of the egg without entirely 
penetrating into the protoplasm, enough of the lysin sticking 
to the surface of the spermatozoon can be dissolved to cause 
the cytolysis of the surface film of the egg which gives rise to the 
membrane formation. Such eggs receive from the spermato- 
zoon only the lysin, and they act therefore as if only the mem- 
brane formation had been called forth in them by the treatment 
with butyric acid, since in the formation of the membrane 
the spermatozoon is thrown out. 

In the eggs of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus the mem- 
brane formation can in general only be called forth by living 
star-fish sperm while the extract of dead star-fish sperm in the 
same concentration remains without effect. This fact is of im- 
portance to disprove the possibility that the membrane formation 


140 Tue Mecuanistic Conception oF LIFE 


in these experiments was caused by star-fish blood which was 
added with the sperm. 

That it is possible to separate a lysin from the sperm can 
be proved for the eggs of another species of sea-urchins, namely, 
Strongylocentrotus franciscanus, the eggs of which are very 
sensitive to lysins. In these eggs it is possible to call forth the 
membrane formation with a very dilute watery extract of the 
sperm of star-fish which was killed by heating it to 60° C., or 
more. Such eggs can be caused to develop into plutei by treat- 
ing them after the membrane formation for a short time with 
hypertonic sea-water. In the place of star-fish sperm the 
sperm of other foreign species can be used. I have called forth 
the membrane formation in the sea-urchin egg with the living 
sperm of sharks or even roosters. Such eggs act as if only the 
membrane formation with the aid of butyric acid had been 
caused. At room temperature they begin to develop but they 
are sickly and soon perish. If, however, they are treated 
afterward with a hypertonic solution they develop into normal 
plutei. In this case only the lysin entered the egg but not the 
spermatozoon. It was, therefore, necessary to treat such eggs 
subsequently with hypertonic sea-water in order to cause them 
to undergo normal development at room temperature. 


VI 


The idea that a lysin contained in the spermatozoon is the 
formative stimulus which causes the egg to develop can be 
tested experimentally. We know that blood contains lysins 
which destroy the blood corpuscles of foreign species, while 
it does not destroy the cells of the same species. If the idea is 
correct that the spermatozoon acts upon the egg through a 
lysin which calls forth the membrane formation it should be 
possible to call forth the membrane formation in the unferti- 
lized egg of the sea-urchin by foreign blood and such is the case. 
I was able to show three years ago that the blood of certain 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 141 


worms, namely Sipunculides, can call forth the membrane 
formation in the sea-urchin egg even if it is diluted a hundred 
times or more with sea-water. This effect is not produced 
in the eggs of every female sea-urchin but of only about 20 
per cent of the females. I think the difference is caused by 
differences in the permeability of the eggs for lysins; and the 
degree of permeability seems to vary slightly for the eggs of 
different females. 

Instead of wasting time on an examination of the effects of 
the blood of invertebrates! I examined the effects of the blood 
serum of warm-blooded animals. I succeeded in causing 
membrane formation in the sea-urchin egg (purpuratus) with the 
blood serum of cattle, sheep, pigs, and rabbits; and such eggs 
behaved like the eggs which had been treated with the living 
sperm of roosters or with butyric acid. They began to develop, 
but they became sickly at room temperature and soon disinte- 
grated. If, however, they were treated after the membrane 
formation for a short time with a hypertonic solution they 
developed at room temperature. The blood, therefore, contains 
the lysin, but not the second substance necessary for the 
full development. It is, therefore, necessary to substitute for 
the action of the latter the treatment with a hypertonic solu- 
tion if we wish to call forth a normal development of the egg 
treated with serum. 

The lysin of the blood is like that of the spermatozoon 
relatively resistant to heat. The blood does not lose its power 
to call forth membrane formation by heating it for some time to 
60° or 65° C2 It is curious that SrCl, and Babl, increase the 
membrane-forming power of the blood. 

Not only blood but also the extracts of the organs of foreign 

1 Since this was written the blood and the extracts of organs of a number of 


invertebrates were used successfully to produce the membrane formation and 
development of the egg of the sea-urchin. 


2 The substance which causes membrane formation can be precipitated with 
acetone (Loeb, Pfliigers Archiv, OXXIV, 37, 1908). 


142 THe MeEcHANISTIC CoNcEPTION OF LIFE 


species call forth membrane formation in the sea-urchin egg. 
An extract of the coecum of the star-fish was very effective. 

We have already mentioned the fact that the extract of 
dead sperm of foreign species, e.g., of star-fish, certain mollusks, 
certain worms, sharks, fowl, causes membrane formation in the 
eggs of franciscanus. Experiments with the extract of dead 
sperm of their own species on the egg of franciscanus or purpura- 
tus fail; and the same is true for extracts from the tissues of 
these species! What causes this difference in the action of 
the lysins from their own and a foreign species? We know 
that the lysins of our own blood do not hurt our cells while 
they hurt the cells of foreign species. There exists, therefore, 
an immunity of the eggs as well as of the rest of the cells against 
the lysins of their own blood or tissues. 

Our experiments throw a light upon the nature of this 
immunity. If the lysins contained in our blood do not injure 
our cells it can only be due to one of two facts: The lysins of 
our own blood can either not diffuse into our cells, while they 
can diffuse into the cells of foreign forms, or the cells contain 
antibodies against the lysins of their own body, but not against 
those of foreign species. As far as the lysins of the blood are 
concerned we cannot decide between the two possibilities. 
We can, however, reach a decision for the lysins of the sperma- 
tozoa. ‘The extract from the dead sperm of the sea-urchin is 
ineffective for the eggs of the sea-urchin solely for the reason 
that it cannot diffuse into the sea-urchin egg. For if the sea- 
urchin lysin is carried by the living sea-urchin spermatozoon 
(which acts as a motor for the lysin) into the sea-urchin egg, 
the lysin is very active and probably more active than the 
lysin of foreign species. If the sea-urchin egg contained an 
antibody against the lysin of the sea-urchin sperm, the sea- 
urchin sperm should not be able to call forth membrane 
formation when it enters the sea-urchin egg. 


1If eggs were sensitized with SrOl, they could be caused to develop by 
extracts from the coecum of the sea-urchin, though this was true only exceptionally. 


NatTuRE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 143 


We now understand the paradoxical fact, that by foreign 
sperm we can cause membrane formation and development of 
the sea-urchin egg in two different ways: namely, first by the 
living sperm and second by the extract from the dead sperm; 
while the sperm of the same species can only cause the eggs to 
develop when it is alive. We now understand the fact alluded 
to at the beginning of this chapter that my first experiments 
to cause the development of the egg with extract of sperm did 
not succeed, since I took it for granted that it was necessary 
to use the extract of the sperm of the same species from which 
the eggs were taken. The lysins in this case were not able to 
diffuse into the egg. 

The further unraveling of the nature of the immunity of the 
egg-cell against the dissolved lysins of the blood and the tissues 
of the same species depends upon the explanation of the fact. 
that the lysins of a species cannot diffuse into the egg of the 
same species. It would be of interest if the same principle 
formed for the immunity of the egg-cell would hold also for the. 
immunity of the body-cells against the lysins in the blood of 
their own species. 

We may, therefore, say that the substance to which the 
sperm owes its fertilizing power is a lysin and we may express 
the suspicion that the lysins which we have thus far known 
only as protective agencies against bacteria play a great physio- 
logical réle in the mechanism of life phenomena. We may call 
our theory of the developmental action of the spermatozoon 
the lysin theory; thereby designating that the impulse for the 
development of the egg is given by a lysin contained in the 
spermatozoon. In artificial parthenogenesis we substitute for 
the natural lysin a cytolytic substance. Aside from the lysin 
action the normal development demands, as a rule (but not 
always), a second corrective influence which in artificial par- 
thenogenesis may be given by a hypertonic solution. 


144 THe MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


VII 

The experiments on the artificial parthenogenesis of other 
forms of animals show that the eggs of different animals possess 
a varying tendency for parthenogenetic development. There 
are eggs which can easily be induced to develop, so easily in 
fact, that the experimenter cannot always be sure whether he 
has caused the development by a substance applied by him or 
whether some accidental condition of the experiment was 
responsible. The eggs of the silkworm, of the star-fish, and 
of certain worms belong to this class. In working with star- 
fish eggs we can observe that occasionally a few of them develop 
in normal sea-water, apparently without any demonstrable 
cause, into swimming larvae. The eggs of the Californian 
sea-urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, on the other hand, 
show not the slightest tendency to segment parthenogenetically; 
only the above-mentioned very specific and quantitative method 
causes them to develop. For this reason I selected these eggs 
for the investigation of the nature of the experimental stimulus, 
since I could always be sure that the same stimulus gave the 
same results; while, e.g., in the star-fish eggs we can never be 
perfectly certain that some internal condition in the egg or some 
overlooked unimportant secondary condition in the experiment 
may not have caused the development. Although eggs with 
such a strong tendency for spontaneous development as the 
star-fish eggs are not the best material for the study of the 
nature of the developmental stimulus yet we have to answer 
the question how it happens that some eggs have a greater 
tendency for parthenogenetic development than others. 

Mathews has observed that by gently shaking the star-fish 
eggs the number of eggs which develop “spontaneously” can 
be increased. I made a similar observation in the eggs of 
Amphitrite, an annelid. In the eggs of the sea-urchin nobody 
has ever been able to obtain such a result. I am inclined to 
believe that if a sea-urchin should be found, the eggs of which 


Nature OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 145 


possess a greater tendency to develop spontaneously, it might 
also be found that the number of eggs developing spontaneously 
might be increased by agitation. 

I tried whether it is possible to cause the eggs to cytolyze 
also mechanically. If we exercise only a slight pressure with 
a finger upon the ovary of a star-fish we find that many of 
the eggs which afterward leave the ovary are cytolyzed. This 
cytolysis is not caused by a bursting of the egg membrane; on 
the contrary, in this case the cytolysis of the egg is, as usual, 
preceded by the formation of a membrane of fertilization and 
this membrane remains intact in the star-fish egg which is 
caused to cytolyze by mechanical pressure. In the sea-urchin 
egg, however, it is impossible to produce cytolysis by a slight 
pressure. 

The eggs of the star-fish which develop spontaneously first 
form a membrane. Shaking causes a development of the star- 
fish eggs only if the shaking first leads to a membrane formation. 
The greater tendency of the star-fish to develop spontaneously 
is, therefore, due to the greater ease with which cytolysis can 
be produced in this egg. 

How can mere agitation or pressure call forth membrane 
formation or cytolysis? It seems to me that this fact is most 
easily understood under the assumption, first suggested by 
Biitschli, that the cytoplasm is an emulsion. It would then 
follow that the membrane formation as well as the cytolysis 
depends upon the destruction of this emulsion. We know that 
different emulsions have a different degree of durability. The 
eggs which upon gentle pressure undergo cytolysis have an 
emulsion with a lesser degree of durability than the eggs in which 
pressure has no such effect. Let us assume that membrane 
formation as well as cytolysis depends upon the destruction 
of an emulsion; in this case the membrane formation depends 
upon the destruction of the emulsion in the cortical layer of the 
egg only. The lysin of the egg destroys only the emulsion in 


146 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the cortical layer of the egg and thereby causes development. 
The greater tendency of the eggs of certain animals for spon- 
taneous parthenogenetic development thus depends upon the 
relatively small degree of durability of the emulsion which 
constitutes the cortical layer of the egg. But it should be 
stated that this hypothesis is not essential for the lysin theory 
of the activation of the egg. 


VITI 


The assumption that the membrane formation is only a 
superficial cytolysis of the egg presupposes that the cortical 
layer of the egg is different from the rest of the cytoplasm. 
Biitschli had already reached such a conclusion on the basis 
of histological observations. I am inclined to accept this view 
on the basis of my observations on the action of cytolytic 
agencies on the unfertilized egg. The action of these agencies 
on the unfertilized egg always occurs in two stages which are 
often separated from each other by a considerable interval of 
time. The first stage is the cytolysis of the superficial layer; 
the second stage is the cytolysis of the rest of the egg. This 
is most obvious in experiments with weak solutions of saponin 
or solanin in sea-water. In this case first a membrane forma- 
tion occurs, then a pause ensues, often of several minutes, and 
then cytolysis of the whole egg follows. If instead of saponin 
benzol is used a pause can also be observed between membrane 
formation and cytolysis of the whole egg but this pause is short, 
often only a fraction of a second, or at the best a few seconds. 

It can also be shown directly that there is a qualitative 
difference between the cortical layer of the protoplasm and the 
rest. If for the artificial membrane formation the lower fatty 
acids, from the formic to the capronic acid, are used, cytolysis 
of the cortical layer only is observed, i.e., membrane formation 
follows but no cytolysis of the whole egg. If, however, the 
higher fatty acids of the same series from the heptylic acid on 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 147 


and upward are applied the membrane formation is always 
followed after a short pause by a cytolysis of the whole egg. 

The lysins contained in the blood and the spermatozoon 
act according to my present experience only upon the cortical 
layer of the cytoplasm but not on the rest of the egg. We geta 
membrane formation and development but not a cytolysis of 
the whole egg. 

If we go back to the idea of Biitschli that protoplasm has 
the structure of an emulsion we are led to the view that the 
emulsion of the cortical layer of the egg differs from that of the 
rest of the egg. There are certain cytolytic agencies which 
destroy only the cortical layer; while all general cytolytic 
agencies destroy the cortical layer as well as the rest of the egg. 


IX 

How can the cytolysis of the cortical layer of the egg lead 
to a membrane formation? Von Knaffl has expressed the 
following view on this point: ‘‘Protoplasm is rich in lipoids, 
it is probably mainly an emulsion of these and of proteins. 
Every physical and chemical agency which is able to liquefy 
lipoids calls forth a cytolysis of the egg. The protein of the 
egg can only swell or be dissolved if the state of the lipoids is 
altered by chemical or physical means. The mechanism of 
cytolysis consists in the liquefaction of the lipoids and the 
subsequent swelling or liquefaction of proteins by absorption 
of water..... This confirms Loeb’s view that membrane 
formation is caused by the liquefaction of lipoids.” 

We can accept this with a slight modification which refers 
to the nature of the emulsion. An emulsion requires not only 
two substances or phases as von Knaffl assumes but in addition 
a third substance. The third substance serves the purpose of 
making the emulsion more durable (Lord Rayleigh’s theory). 
The droplets of the emulsion are surrounded by a thin layer 
of a substance which lessens the surface tension between the 


148 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


droplet and the second phase of the emulsion. I assume that 
only this stabilizing substance consists of lipoids, especially 
cholesterin. The two other phases which constitute the 
emulsion need not be lipoids. To fix our ideas provisionally 
we may assume that these phases are first protein with little 
water and second water with little protein. The existence of 
these two phases has been established by Hardy. The emulsion 
at the surface of the egg consists, according to this view, of a 
system of protein droplets poor in water surrounded by a 
stabilizing film of a lipoid (cholesterin or lecithin). If the sea- 
urchin egg is treated with a lipoid solvent like benzol the 
stabilizing film of cholesterin is dissolved and the protein drop- 
let can absorb water. If we use saponin the film is destroyed 
by the precipitation of cholesterin by saponin. The absorp- 
tion of water leads to the lifting up of the surface film which 
surrounds the egg.t 

We wish to add a few remarks concerning the nature of this 
surface film, although this does not belong to our problem. 
According to Overton and Koeppe the surface film of cells 
consists of lipoids, and according to Koeppe cytolysis is deter- 
mined by the solution or tearing of this fim. This view is not 
tenable, since the surface film which is lifted off in the form of 
the fertilization membrane does not consist of a lipoid but of 
protein. This is suggested by the fact that this membrane is 
absolutely insoluble in any lipoid solvent. Moreover, this 
membrane remains perfectly intact when the egg is transformed 
into a “ghost.” 

x 

Since we can cause the formation of a membrane of fertili- 

zation in the star-fish egg by gentle agitation or mere pressure, 


1 We have assumed here that the fertilization membrane is preformed in the 
unfertilized egg and lifted up in consequence of the cytolysis of the layer beneath 
it. As I stated in my book on Die chemische Entwicklungserregung des tierischen 
Eies, itis also possible that the fertilization membrane is a membrane of precipita- 
tion formed through the reaction of a constituent of the liquefied cortical layer 
with a constituent of the sea-water (Ca?). It is immaterial for the problem 
discussed in this paper which view we adopt temporarily. 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 149 


this membrane is apparently preformed in the unfertilized egg; 
and if this be true the process of membrane formation must 
consist in the lifting up of a preformed film from the underlying 
cytoplasm through the entrance of sea-water between this film 
and the cytoplasm. In this process the surface film undergoes 
a change, since the spermatozoon can enter into the egg before 
but not after the membrane formation. That merely a change 
in the nature of the surface film prevents the entrance of a 
spermatozoon into the egg after the membrane formation can 
be proved by the fact that if we tear the membrane mechanically 
a spermatozoon can penetrate into the egg. This proves that 
the surface film, even if it is already preformed in the unferti- 
lized egg, has different qualities or a different structure when it is 
in close contact with the cytoplasm than when it is lifted off 
from the cytoplasm by a layer of sea-water. 

We have assumed that the membrane formation is deter- 
mined by the action of a lysin or cytolytic agency upon the 
cortical layer of the egg, whereby a protein in this layer absorbs 
sea-water, and is thereby dissolved. This assumption leads to 
two consequences: first it must be possible to show that the 
fertilization membrane is permeable for sea-water and crystal- 
loid substances but impermeable for colloids. The correctness 
of this view can be proved. If we add to the sea-water, con- 
taining eggs with a fertilization membrane, a certain quantity 
of dissolved white of egg, tannin, or blood serum, the membrane 
collapses and closes tight around the cytoplasm. The reason 
is that almost all the liquid which existed between the mem- 
brane and the cytoplasm diffused into the surrounding sea- 
water. If the eggs are brought back into normal sea-water 
(free from protein) it diffuses again into the space between 
the membrane and the cytoplasm, and the fertilization mem- 
brane resumes its former distance from the cytoplasm and 
its round shape. The membrane is, therefore, impermeable 
for the colloids dissolved in sea-water. 


150 Tue Mecuanistic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


If salts are added to the sea-water or if it is diluted by 
the addition of distilled water the tension and the diameter 
of the membrane do not change. This proves that the 
membrane is permeable for salts, but not for colloids, and that 
the lifting up of the fertilization membrane is determined by 
the swelling and subsequent liquefaction of a colloid. This 
dissolved colloid exercises an osmotic or colloidal pressure and 
sea-water must diffuse from the outside under the fertilization 
membrane of the egg until the tension of this membrane equals 
the osmotic or colloidal pressure of the dissolved colloid. This 
explains also why it is that the fertilization membrane as a rule 
assumes a spherical shape. 

We now can understand why not in all cases of fertilization 
a distinct fertilization membrane is formed. This may be due 
to the fact that the degree of swelling of the colloid of the cortical 
layer varies under different conditions. 


XI 

We now possess a pretty complete picture of what happens 
to the egg in the case of “formative stimulation,” i.e., when it 
is caused to develop. Through a lysin or some other cytolytic 
agency a certain substance of the cortical layer, presumably a 
lipoid, is dissolved or precipitated, whereby a protein substance 
of that layer is able to absorb water and swell. Formerly it 
was thought that the spermatozoon caused the development 
of the egg by carrying a ferment or enzyme into it and that this 
ferment set the mechanism of development into action. Others 
expressed the opinion that the entrance of the sperm nucleus or 
of a centrosome was responsible for the development. We see, 
however, that it suffices to call forth the artificial membrane 
formation in the unfertilized sea-urchin egg, in order to observe 
after two or three hours the formation of normal astrospheres or 
spindles. This disproves the suggestion that the fusion of egg 
and sperm nucleus is essential for the development of the egg. 


1 The fusion of the nuclei is of course of importance for the transmission of 
paternal qualities. 


NATURE OF FORMATIVE STIMULATION 151 


The ferment theory of the activation of the egg by the sperma- 
tozoon is also wrong. If it were correct the velocity of develop- 
ment should be accelerated if not doubled if two spermatozoa 
enter the egg instead of one; or if fertilization by sperm and 
artificial parthenogenesis are superposed in the same egg. But 
this is not the case. In neither case is a shortening of the 
time which elapses between two successive periods of segmen- 
tation observed. 

The further development will be connected with the ques- 
tion how can the cytolysis of the cortical layer of the egg lead 
to its development? I may mention the possibility that the 
cytolysis of the cortical layer facilitates the diffusion of oxygen 
or of HO ions (bases) or other substances, necessary for the 
development, into the egg. 


XU 


Let us summarize our results concerning the activation or 
formative stimulation of the egg. For the normal development 
at least two agencies are required: the one is the cytolysis of 
the thin cortical layer of the egg. Any agency which causes 
this cytolysis (without causing the cytolysis of the rest of the 
egg) induces development. The spermatozoon as well as the 
blood and the tissues contain a substance (lysin) which causes 
only cytolysis of the cortical layer. The lower fatty acids, 
from formic to capronic, cause only the cytolysis of the cortical 
layer. Since most cytolytic agencies cause a cytolysis of the 
whole egg they can be used only if the eggs are withdrawn 
from their influence after the cortical layer is destroyed but 
before the rest of the egg has undergone destruction. 

Cytolysis of the cortical layer leads often but not always to 
the formation of the membrane of fertilization. 

Since all cytolytic substances are lipoid soluble (or destroy 
lipoids) it is probable, but not proved, that the formative 


1 Another reason is that the velocity of segmentation is purely determined 
by the egg, no matter what is the nature of the spermatozoon. 


152 THE MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


stimulus in the activation of the egg consists in a liquefaction 
or precipitation or some other modification of the lipoids of the 
cortical layer of the egg which results in an imbibition or solu- 
tion of a colloidal substance of the cortical layer. If the cyto- 
plasm has the structure of an emulsion it is possible that lipoids 
form the stabilizing envelope for the droplets which, according 
to Lord Rayleigh, is necessary for the durability of the emulsion. 

The cytolysis of the cortical layer of the egg causes its 
development, but this development is often abnormal and comes 
prematurely to a standstill. In order to induce a more normal 
type of development a second agency is often required, the 
mode of action of which is not yet so clearly understood as that 
of the cytolytic agency, namely, a short treatment of the egg 
with a hypertonic solution containing oxygen or a longer inhi- 
bition of the development of the egg in normal sea-water which 
is free from oxygen. The spermatozoon carries in addition 
to the lysin a second substance into the egg, which acts 
similarly to the hypertonic solution in our method of artificial 
parthenogenesis. 


VIII. THE PREVENTION OF THE DEATH OF THE 
EGG THROUGH THE ACT OF FERTILIZATION 


Vill 


THE PREVENTION OF THE DEATH OF THE EGG 
THROUGH THE ACT OF FERTILIZATION! 


I 


The unfertilized egg dies in a comparatively short time, 
while the act of fertilization gives rise to a series of generations 
which, theoretically at least, is of infinite duration. The act 
of fertilization is, therefore, a life-saving act for the egg. The 
question arises, in which way can the spermatozoon save the 
life of the egg? 

If the ovaries of a star-fish are put into sea-water the eggs 
are shed. They are generally immature, and in this condition 
they cannot be fertilized, either by spermatozoa or by chemical 
means. If they remain, however, for some time in sea-water, 
all or anumber of them gradually become mature; that is to say, 
their nuclear mass is diminished by the extrusion of the two 
so-called polar bodies. If immediately after the extrusion of 
the polar bodies sperm is added, the eggs develop. They can 
at that period likewise be caused to develop by certain chemical 
and physical agencies. 

Ten years ago I made the following observations. If the 
eggs are not caused to develop by sperm or by physico-chemical 
agencies, they perish very rapidly. At summer temperature 
they may die in from four to six hours. The death of the egg 
manifests itself morphologically in a darkening and blackening 
of the otherwise clear egg. I found that the death of the egg 
can be prevented by withdrawing the oxygen, or by diminish- 
ing the rate of oxidations in the egg through the addition of a 
trace of potassium cyanide. The life-saving action of lack of 


1 Reprinted from the Harvey Lectures, 1911, by courtesy of Messrs. J. B. 
Lippincott & Co. 


155 


156 THe MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


oxygen can be shown in various ways. The maturation of the 
egg itself depends upon oxidations. If the oxygen is withheld 
from the immature eggs, or if the oxidations in the immature 
eggs are inhibited by potassium cyanide, the process of matura- 
tion does not take place. Maturation is, therefore, also a 
function of oxidations. The eggs of a female, which were 
unripe, were divided into two groups: the one group remained 
in sea-water in contact with oxygen; the other was put into 
sea-water whose oxygen -had been removed by a current of 
hydrogen. The eggs of the second group remained alive; the 
eggs of the first group perished in a few hours. 

It is not even necessary to drive out the air by hydrogen; 
the life of the unfertilized eggs can also be preserved by putting 
large masses of them into a narrow glass tube which is sealed 
at the bottom. “The eggs sink to the bottom of the tube, and 
those which are lying near the bottom receive no oxygen, since 
the oxygen which diffuses from the air through the sea-water 
is consumed by the uppermost layer of the eggs. On account 
of this lack of oxygen the eggs at the bottom of the tube do not 
mature and do not perish; hence by withholding oxygen from 
the immature eggs their maturation and death are prevented. 

If the oxygen is withheld from the eggs immediately after 
they become mature their life is also saved. A. P. Mathews 
has repeated this experiment and obtained the same results. 
This proves that the death of the mature but unfertilized egg is 
determined by oxidations. If these oxidations are inhibited 
death does not occur. When these experiments were first 
published they caused opposition. This opposition was based 
on the fact that potassium cyanide was used in part of the 
experiments. The objection was raised that the potassium 
cyanide in these experiments acted only by preventing the 
development of bacteria. The authors, however, who raised 
this objection, overlooked the fact that lack of oxygen acts in 
exactly the same way as the addition of potassium cyanide, 


PREVENTION OF DEATH BY FERTILIZATION 157 


and that it’is entirely immaterial how lack of oxygen is pro- 
duced, whether the oxygen is driven out by carefully purified 
hydrogen or whether the eggs are put together in a large heap, 
whereby only those lying on the surface of the heap receive 
sufficient oxygen. 

It is, however, easy to show directly that the above- 
mentioned objection is incorrect. The eggs of the star-fish can 
easily be put into sterilized sea-water without bacterial infec- 
tion. The following experiment was tried. The eggs of a 
star-fish were separated into three parts: one part was put 
aseptically into a series of flasks with sterilized sea-water; the 
second part was put into ordinary sea-water without asepsis; 
the third part was put into sea-water to which a large quantity 
of a putrid culture of bacteria had been added that had 
developed on the dead eggs of the star-fish. It was found that 
in all three cases the mature eggs died within the same period of 
time. The sterilization of the eggs of the first group was 
complete, as was shown by the fact that the eggs although dead 
preserved their form for two months, while the dead eggs in the 
normal sea-water were completely destroyed in a few days by 
the action of the bacteria. 

It is, therefore, certain that the death of the star-fish eggs 
which are not fertilized is not caused by bacteria, but by the 
process of oxidation in the egg. If no spermatozoon enters the 
egg, or if the egg is not caused to develop by chemical treatment 
it perishes very rapidly. If, however, a spermatozoon enters 
the egg, the latter remains alive in spite of the fact that the 
entrance of the spermatozoon causes an acceleration of the 
oxidations in the egg. Warburg found for the eggs of the sea- 
urchin at Naples that fertilization raises the velocity of the 
process of oxidations to six times their original value, while 
Wasteneys and I found that fertilization caused an increase 
in the velocity of oxidations of Arbacia in Woods Hole to three 
or four times the rate found in the unfertilized eggs. 


158 Tue Mecuanistic CoNCcEPTION OF LIFE 


How can we explain the fact that fertilization saves the life 
of the egg? Let us make the following preliminary assumption: 
The unfertilized egg contains a poison, or some faulty combina- 
tion of conditions which, if oxidations take place, causes the 
death of the egg. In the unfertilized but mature egg oxidations 
take place. The spermatozoon carries into the egg among 
other substances something which protects the egg against the 
fatal effects of the oxidations, and allows them even to carry on 
oxidations at an increased rate without suffering. We might 
say that the mature but unfertilized egg is comparable to an 
anaerobic being for which oxidations are fatal, and that the 
spermatozoon transforms the egg into an aerobic organism. 

If we compare the eggs of different animals, we find great 
differences in regard to the above-mentioned conditions. The 
eggs of certain annelids (Polynoe) also perish rapidly if they 
become mature without being caused to develop, while the 
eggs of the sea-urchin remain alive for a longer period of time 
after they have become mature. The problem as to what 
determines this difference has not yet been investigated. 


I 


The analysis of the process of fertilization by the spermato- 
zoon shows that we must discriminate between two kinds of 
effects, the hereditary effect and the activating or develop- 
mental effect. The experiments on artificial parthenogenesis 
make it very probable that the two groups of substances, the 
substances which determine the heredity of paternal characters 
and the substances which cause the egg to develop, are entirely 
different. In this paper we are concerned only with the 
second group of substances, namely, those which cause the 
development of the egg. 

The analysis of the causation of development of the egg 
by a spermatozoon has shown that the latter acts by carrying 
at least two substances or groups of substances into the egg. 


PREVENTION oF DeatH BY FERTILIZATION 159 


The first of these substances causes the formation of a mem- 
brane; the second serves the purpose of rendering the egg 
immune against the fatal action of oxidations. 

I have shown in a number of papers that the essential 
feature in the causation of the development of the egg is a 


Fia. 50 


Fies, 48-50.—Disintegration of the sea-urchin egg after the membrane for- 
mation with butyric acid or with foreign serum or with the extract of sperm or of 
foreign cells; if the eggs are not treated after the membrane formation with a 
hypertonic solution or a suppression of oxidations. A indicates the area where 
the disintegration begins. 
modification of its surface, which in many cases leads to the 
formation of amembrane. If we cause membrane formation in 
an unfertilized sea-urchin egg by artificial means, it begins to 
develop, but very soon perishes; much more rapidly than 


if it is not exposed to any treatment. I was able to show that 


160 THE MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


this rapid death of the sea-urchin egg, after artificial membrane 
formation, can be prevented either by withdrawing the oxygen 
from the egg or by inhibiting the oxidations in the egg by the 
addition of a trace of potassium cyanide. The membrane 
formation, therefore, causes the rapid death of the egg through 
an acceleration of oxidations. Warburg has recently shown 
that the artificial membrane formation in the unfertilized sea- 
urchin egg causes the same increase in the rapidity of oxidations 
as the entrance of a spermatozoon. 

If we wish to cause the unfertilized eggs to develop to the 
pluteus stage after the membrane formation, we have to subject 
them to a second treatment. This may consist in putting them 
about fifteen minutes after the membrane formation into a 
hypertonic solution of a certain osmotic pressure (for instance, 
50 c.c. of sea-water+8 c.c. n/2% NaCl) for one-half to one hour. 
If, after this time, they are put back into normal sea-water they 
no longer perish, but develop into normal larvae. I ventured 
the hypothesis that the artificial membrane formation causes 
a rapid increase of the oxidations in the egg and in this way 
causes it to develop, but that these oxidations lead to the rapid 
decay of the eggs at room temperature for the reason that the 
egg contains a toxic substance, or a toxic complex of conditions, 
which in the presence of oxidations leads to the rapid death of 
the egg. The second treatment serves the purpose of rendering 
the egg immune against the toxic effects of the oxidations. 

If we first cause the artificial membrane formation in the 
unfertilized egg by any of the various means which I have 
described in former papers, and if we afterward treat the eggs 
for a short time with a hypertonic solution, they develop after 
being transferred to normal sea-water in the same way as if a 
spermatozoon had entered them. They reach the successive 
larval stages, develop into a blastula, gastrula, and pluteus, and 
live as long as the larvae produced from eggs fertilized by a 
spermatozoon. 


PREVENTION OF DeEatTH BY FERTILIZATION 161 


Hence the physico-chemical activation of the unfertilized 
egg of the sea-urchin consists of two kinds of treatment. The 
one is a change in the surface of the egg which may or may 
not result in the so-called formation of the membrane. This 
change causes the acceleration of oxidations which in my opinion 
is the essential feature of the process of fertilization. The 
second treatment consists in abolishing the faulty condition 
which makes oxidations fatal to the egg. This second treat- 
ment may consist in exposing the eggs for about half an hour 
or a little more to a hypertonic solution. We can substitute, 
however, for this treatment another treatment, namely, the 
deprivation of the egg for three hours from oxidations, either 
by removing the oxygen from the solution or by adding a trace 
of potassium cyanide to the solution. If, after the treatment 
with the hypertonic solution for half an hour, or the treat- 
ment with lack of oxygen for about three hours, the eggs are 
put back into normal sea-water they can develop into normal 
larvae. 

We can show that the spermatozoon also causes the develop- 
ment of the egg by two different agencies comparable in their 
action to the agencies used in the methods of chemical fertiliza- 
tion which we have just described. 

For this purpose we must fertilize the egg of the sea-urchin 
with a sperm different from its own, and for the following 
reason: The spermatozoon of the sea-urchin enters so rapidly 
into the egg that it is impossible to show that it causes the 
development of the egg by two different substances. 

If, however, we fertilize the sea-urchin egg with the sperm 
of star-fish, it takes from ten to fifty minutes to cause the 
membrane formation in the eggs, the reason being that the 
star-fish sperm can penetrate only very slowly into the egg of 
the sea-urchin. 

It is, as a rule, not possible to fertilize the egg of the sea- 
urchin by star-fish sperm in normal sea-water. But I found 


162 Tur MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


eight years ago that if we make the sea-water slightly more 
alkaline than it naturally is the eggs of the sea-urchin can be 
fertilized by the sperm of the star-fish. For the fertilization 
of the Californian sea-urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, 
with the sperm of Asterias, the best results were obtained when 
0.6 c.c. of n/10 NaOH were added to 50 ¢.c. of sea-water. In 
this case, with active sperm, in about fifty minutes all the eggs 
form the typical fertilization membrane. 

If we watch the further development of sea-urchin eggs 
fertilized by star-fish sperm we notice very soon that there are 
two different kinds of eggs present; the one kind of eggs 
behave as if they had been fertilized with sperm of their own 
kind. That is to say, they segment regularly and develop into 
swimming blastulae and gastrulae. The other kind of eggs, 
however, act as if they had been treated with one of the agencies 
which cause the membrane formation in the unfertilized sea- 
urchin egg; these eggs begin to segment, but at room tempera- 
ture they slowly perish by cytolysis. If, however, these eggs 
are treated for half an hour with a hypertonic solution they 
develop into larvae. 

If we examine the eggs of a sea-urchin which have been 
treated in an alkaline medium with the sperm of the star-fish, 
we find that only a certain percentage of these eggs contain 
the sperm nucleus, and this percentage seems to be identical 
with the percentage of the eggs which develop into larvae. 
As far as the other eggs are concerned, which form only a 
membrane and then disintegrate, no sperm nucleus can be 
found inside of them. I am inclined to draw the following 
conclusion from these observations: The spermatozoon of the 
star-fish penetrates very slowly through the surface film of 
the sea-urchin egg. When it lingers for some time partially 
imbedded in the surface film, one of the substances of the 
spermatozoon is dissolved in the superficial layer of the egg 
and causes the membrane formation. Through the act of 


PREVENTION OF DEATH BY FERTILIZATION 163 


membrane formation the further entrance of the spermatozoon 
into the egg is prevented, since the fertilization membrane is 
impermeable to sperm. This membrane formation leads to an 
increase in the rate of oxidations and the beginning of the de- 
velopment of the egg. The latter, however, contains a toxic 
substance, or a faulty complex of conditions which has to be 
abolished, before the oxidations necessary for development can 
take place without the egg being destroyed by them. The 
spermatozoon carries a second substance into the egg which 
renders it immune against the fatal actions of the oxidations. 
While the membrane-forming substance of the spermatozoon 
may be situated at its surface, or superficially at least, the 
second substance which transforms the egg from an anaerobe 
into an aerobe must be situated in the interior of the sperma- 
tozoon; since it can only act if the spermatozoon penetrates 
into the egg. We see in these observations, concerning the 
fertilization of the sea-urchin egg by the star-fish sperm, a 
proof that the activation of the egg by the spermatozoon is 
also caused by two different substances, one of which causes 
the membrane formation, while the second renders the egg 
immune against the toxic action of the oxidations. These 
data support the assumption made above that the life-saving 
action of the spermatozoon is due to the fact that it carries a 
substance into the egg which renders the latter immune against 
the toxic action of oxidations. 


Il 


Seven years ago I found that a number of agencies destroy 
the fertilized egg much more rapidly than the unfertilized egg. 
Thus, for instance, while in a pure sodium chloride solution the 
unfertilized egg of the Californian sea-urchin may be kept alive 
for several days, the fertilized egg is destroyed in such a solu- 
tion in less than twenty-four hours. If we use slightly alka- 
line solutions of sodium chloride the greater resistance of the 


164 THe MercHANIsTic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


unfertilized egg is perhaps still more striking. The egg of the 
Atlantic form of sea-urchin, Arbacia, is cytolyzed in a neutral 
sodium chloride solution in a few hours, while the unfertilized egg 
may live for a considerably longer period of time. When we 
put fertilized and unfertilized eggs into hypertonic solutions, 
we find also that the fertilized eggs suffer much more than the 
unfertilized. What causes this difference of sensitiveness 
between fertilized and unfertilized eggs? It is possible that 
the permeability of the fertilized eggs is greater than that 
of the unfertilized. While this is probably to some extent 
true, yet it is not the whole explanation of the difference in the 
behavior of the two kinds of eggs. I have been able to show for 
a number of toxic solutions that their effect can be either com- 
pletely annihilated or at least diminished if we take the oxygen 
away from the solution. Thus, for instance, fertilized eggs of 
the sea-urchin which perish very rapidly in pure salt solutions, 
or a solution of sodium-+calcium, or a solution of sodium-+ 
barium, can be kept alive for a considerable period of time in 
the same solutions if we either carefully remove the oxygen from 
the solutions, or if we diminish the rate of the oxidations in the 
eggs by adding a trace of sodium cyanide. In this case we have 
the direct proof that solutions which are fatal for the egg when 
the oxidations are allowed to go on are rendered completely, or 
at least partially, harmless if we stop the oxidations in the egg. 
Not only the toxic action of salt solutions upon the fertilized 
egg could be inhibited by the suppression of the oxidations in the 
egg, but also the toxic action of sugar solutions, or of solutions of 
alcohol in the sea-water, or of a solution of chloral hydrate.! 
These observations prove directly that in the presence 
of certain toxic substances or mixtures of substances the 
oxidations in the egg lead to its rapid destruction; while a 
suppression of the oxidation saves the life of the egg. 


1 Or of phenylurethane. This observation does not agree very well with the 
assumption that the narcotic action of these substances is due to a retardation of 
oxidation. 


PREVENTION OF DEATH BY FERTILIZATION 165 


We therefore believe that we may conclude that the rapid 
death of the unfertilized egg of certain species is caused by the 
oxidations which take place in these eggs; and that the life- 
saving action of the spermatozoon consists in the fact that the 
latter, in addition to the membrane-forming substance, carries 
a second substance, or group of substances, into the egg which 
renders it immune against the harmful effect or consequences 
of oxidations. 


IX. THE ROLE OF SALTS IN THE PRESERVATION 
OF LIFE 


Ix 
THE ROLE OF SALTS IN THE PRESERVATION OF LIFE! 


I 


Less is known of the réle of the salts in the animal body 
than of the réle of the three other main food-stuffs, namely, 
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. As far as the latter are con- 
cerned, we know at least that through oxidation they are 
capable of furnishing heat and other forms of energy. The 
neutral salts, however, are not oxidizable. Yet it seems to be a 
fact that no anima] can live on an ash-free diet indefinitely, 
although no one can say why this should be so. We have a 
point of attack for the investigation of the réle of the salts in 
the fact that the cells of our body live longest in a liquid which 
contains the three salts, NaCl, KCl, and CaCl, in a definite 
proportion, namely, 100 molecules NaCl, 2.2 molecules KCl, 
and 1.5 molecules of CaCl,. This proportion is identical with 
the proportion in which these salts are contained in sea-water; 
but the concentration of the three salts is not the same in both 
cases. It is about three times as high in the sea-water as in our 
blood serum. 

Biologists have long been aware of the fact that the ocean 
has an incomparably richer fauna than fresh-water lakes or 
streams and it is often assumed that life on our planet originated 
in the ocean. The fact that the salts of Na, Ca, and K exist in 
about the same proportion in our blood serum as in the ocean 
has led some authors to the conclusion that our ancestors were 
marine animals, and that, as a kind of inheritance, we still carry 
diluted sea-water in our blood. Statements of this kind have 


1 Carpenter lecture delivered at the Academy of Medicine of New York, 
October 19, 1911. Reprinted from Science, N.S., XXXIV, No. 881, 653-65, 
November 17, 1911, by courtesy of Professor James McKeen Cattell. 


169 


170 THE MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


mainly a metaphorical value, but they serve to emphasize the 
two facts, that the three salts, NaCl, KCl, and CaCl, exist in 
our blood in the same relative proportion as in the ocean and that 
they seem to play an important réle in the maintenance of life. 

I intend to put before you a series of experiments which 
seem to throw some light on the mechanism by which the 
solutions surrounding living cells influence their duration of life. 


II 


In order to give a picture of the extent to which the life of 
many animals depends upon the cooperation of the three salts I 
may mention experiments made on a small marine crustacean, 
Gammarus, of the Bay of San Francisco. If these animals are 
suddenly thrown into distilled water, their respiration stops 
(at a temperature of 20° C.) in about half an hour. If they are 
put back immediately after the cessation of respiration into 
sea-water, they can recuperate. If ten minutes or more are 
allowed to elapse before bringing them back into the sea-water, 
no recuperation is possible. Since in this case death is caused 
obviously through the entrance of distilled water into the 
tissues of the animals, one would expect that the deadly effect 
of distilled water would be inhibited if enough cane sugar were 
added to the distilled water to make the osmotic pressure of 
the solution equal to that of the sea-water. If, however, the 
animals are put into cane-sugar solution, the osmotic pressure 
of which is equal to that of sea-water, the animals die just 
about as rapidly as in distilled water. The same is true if the 
osmotic pressure of the sugar solution is higher or lower than 
that of the sea-water. The sugar solution is, therefore, about 
as toxic for these animals as the distilled water, although in the 
latter case water enters into the tissues of the animal, while 
in the former case it does not. 

If the sea-water is diluted with an equal quantity of distilled 
water in one case, and of isotonic cane-sugar solution in the 


ROLE or Sats IN PRESERVATION oF LirE 171 


other, in both cases the duration of life is shortened by practi- 
cally the same amount. 

If the crustaceans are brought into a pure solution of NaCl, 
of the same osmotic pressure as the sea-water, they also die in 
about half an hour. If to this solution a little calcium chloride 
be added in the proportion in which it is contained in the sea- 
water the animals die as rapidly as without it. If, however, 
both CaCl, and KCl are added to the sodium chloride solution, 
the animals can live for several days. The addition of KCl 
alone to the NaCl prolongs their life but little. 

If KCl and CaCl, are added to a cane-sugar solution isotonic 
with sea-water, the animals die as quickly or more so than in the 
pure cane-sugar solution. 

If other salts be substituted for the three salts the animals 
die. The only substitution possible is that of SrCl, for CaCl.,. 
We find also that the proportion in which the three salts of 
sodium, calcium, and potassium have to exist in the solution 
cannot be altered to any extent. All this leads us to the con- 
clusion, that in order to preserve the life of the crustacean 
Gammarus, the solution must not only have a definite concentra- 
tion or osmotic pressure but that this osmotic pressure must be 
furnished by definite salts, namely, sodium chloride, calcium 
chloride, and potassium chloride in the proportion in which 
these three salts exist in the sea-water (and in the blood); this 
fact could also be demonstrated for many other marine animals. 
The relative tolerance of various cells and animals for abnormal 
salt solutions is, however, not the same, a point which we shall 
discuss later on. 

Ill 

What is the réle of the salts in these cases? The botanists 
have always considered salt solutions as nutritive solutions. 
It is a well-known fact that plants require definite salts, e.g., 
nitrates and potassium salts, for their nutrition, and the ques- 
tion now arises whether the three salts NaCl, KCl, and CaCl,, 


172 Tue Mercuanistic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


which are needed for the preservation of animal life, play the 
role of nutritive salts. Experiments which I made on a small 
marine fish, Fundulus, proved beyond question that this is not 
the case. If the young, newly hatched fish are put into a pure 
solution of sodium chloride of the concentration in which this 
salt is contained in sea-water, the animals very soon die. If, 
however, KCl and CaCl, be added to the solution in the right 
proportion, the animals can live indefinitely. These fish, 
therefore, behave in this respect like Gammarus and the tissues 
of the higher animals, but they differ from Gammarus and the 
majority of marine animals inasmuch as the fish can live long, 
and in some cases, indefinitely, in distilled and fresh water, 
and certainly in a very dilute solution of sodium chloride. 
From this fact I drew the conclusion that KC] and CaCl, do not 
act as nutritive substances for these animals, that they only 
serve to render NaCl harmless if the concentration of the latter 
salt is too high. J succeeded in showing that as long as the 
sodium chloride solution is very dilute and does not exceed the 
concentration of m/8, the addition of KCl and CaCl, is not 
required. Only when the solution of NaCl has a concentration 
above m/8 does it become harmful and require the addition of 
KCl and CaCl.. 

The experiments on Fundulus, therefore, prove that amixture 
of NaCl+KCl+CaCl, does not act as a nutritive solution, but 
as a protective solution. KCl and CaCl, are only necessary in 
order to prevent the harmful effects which NaCl produces if 
it is alone in solution and if its concentration is too high. We 
are dealing, in other words, with a case of antagonistic salt 
action; an antagonism between NaCl on the one hand and KCl 
and CaCl, on the other. The discovery of antagonistic salt 
action was made by Ringer, who found that there is a certain 
antagonism between K and Ca in their action on the heart. 
When he put the heart of a frog into a mixture of NaCl+KCl 
he found that the contractions of the heart were not normal, 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LiFE 173 


but they were rendered normal by the addition of a little CaCl,. 
A mixture of NaCl+CaCl, also caused abnormal contractions 
of the heart, but these were rendered normal by the addition 
of KCl. Ringer drew the conclusion that there existed an 
antagonism between potassium and calcium, similar to that 
which Schmiedeberg had found between different heart poisons, 
e.g., atropin and muscarin. Biedermann had found that alka- 
line salt solutions cause twitchings in the muscle and Ringer 
found that the addition of Ca inhibited these twitchings. 
Since these experiments were made many examples of the 
antagonistic action of salts have become known. 

It had generally been assumed that the antagonistic action 
of two salts was based on the fact that each salt, when applied 
singly, acted in the opposite way from that of its antagonist. 
We shall see that in certain cases of antagonistic salt action at 
least this view is not supported by fact. 


IV 


What is the mechanism of antagonistic salt action? I 
believe that an answer to this question lies in the following 
observations on the eggs of Fundulus. If these eggs are put 
immediately after fertilization into a pure sodium chloride 
solution which is isotonic with sea-water, they usually die 
without forming an embryo. If, however, only a trace of a 
calcium salt, or of any other salt with a bivalent metal (with 
the exception of Hg, Cu, or Ag) is added to the m/2 NaCl 
solution, the toxicity of the solution is diminished or even 
abolished. Even salts which are very poisonous, namely, salts 
of Ba, Zn, Pb, Ko, Ni, Mn, and other bivalent metals, are able 
to render the pure solution of sodium chloride harmless, at 
least to the extent that the eggs can live long enough to form 
an embryo. The fact that a substance as poisonous as Zn or 
lead can render harmless a substance as indifferent as sodium 
chloride seems so paradoxical that it demanded an explanation, 


174 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


and this explanation casts light on the nature of the protective 
or antagonistic action of salts. For the antagonistic action of 
a salt of lead or zine against the toxic action of sodium chloride 
can only consist in the lead salt protecting the embryo against 
the toxic action of the NaCl. But how is this protective 
action possible ? 

We have mentioned that if we put the young fish, imme- 
diately after hatching, into a pure m/2 solution of sodium 
chloride the animals die very quickly, but that they live 
indefinitely in the sodium chloride solution if we add both 
CaCl, and KC]. How does it happen that for the embryo, as 
long as it 1s in the egg shell, the addition of CaCl, to the NaCl 
solution suffices, while if the fish is out of the shell the addition 
of CaCl, alone is no longer sufficient and the addition of KCl 
also becomes necessary? Moreover, if we try to preserve the 
life of the fish after it is taken out of the egg in an m/2 sodium 
chloride solution by adding ZnSO,, or lead acetate, to the solu- 
tion we find that the fish die even much more quickly than 
without the addition.! 

If we look for the cause of this difference our attention 
is called to the fact that the fish, as long as it is in the egg, is 
separated from the surrounding solution by the egg membrane. 
This egg membrane possesses a small opening, the so-called 
micropyle, through which the spermatozoon enters into the egg. 
I have gained the impression that this micropyle is not closed 
as tightly immediately after fertilization as later on, since the 
newly fertilized egg is killed more rapidly by an m/2 solution of 
NaCl than it is killed by the same solution one or two days 
after fertilization. One can imagine that the micropyle con- 
tains a wad of a colloidal substance which is hardened gradually 
to a leathery consistency if the egg remains in the sea-water 


1R. Lillie has found that in the larvae of Arenicola a slight antagonism 
between NaCl and ZnSO, can be proved. This shows that the general laws of 
antagonism between two salts differ in degree but not in principle in the living 
organism and the dead envelope of the fish egg. 


Roxie or Sauts IN PRESERVATION OF LiFe 175 


With the process of hardening, or tanning, it becomes more 
impermeable for the NaCl solution. This process of hardening 
is brought about apparently very rapidly if we add to the m/2 
NaCl solution a trace of a salt of a bivalent metal like Ca, Sr, 
Ba, Zn, Pb, Mn, Ko, and Ni, etc. It is also possible that similar 
changes take place in the whole membrane. The process of 
rendering the m/2 Na solution harmless for the embryo of the 
fish, therefore, depends apparently upon the fact that the addi- 
tion of the bivalent metals renders the micropyle or perhaps 
the whole membrane of the egg more impermeable to NaCl 
than was the case before. 

But these are only one part of the facts which throw a light 
upon the protective or antagonistic action of salts. Further 
data are furnished by experiments which I made together with 
Professor Gies, also on the eggs of Fundulus. Gies and I were 
able to show that not only are the bivalent metals able to render 
the sodium chloride solution harmless, but that the reverse is 
also the case, namely, that NaCl is required to render the solu- 
tions of many of the bivalent metals, for instance ZnSO,, harm- 
less. (That the SO, ion has nothing to do with the result was 
shown before by experiments with Na,SQ,.) 

If the eggs of Fundulus are put immediately after fertiliza- 
tion into distilled water, a large percentage of the eggs develop, 
often as many as 100 per cent, and the larvae and embryos 
formed in the distilled water are able to hatch. If we add, 
however, to 100 c.c. of distilled water that quantity of ZnSO, 
which is required to render the NaCl solution harmless, all the 
eggs are killed rapidly and not a single one is able to form an 
embryo. If we add varying amounts of NaCl we find that, 
beginning with a certain concentration of NaCl, this salt 
inhibits the toxic effects of ZnSO, and many eggs are able to 
form an embryo. This can be illustrated by the following 
table: 


176 Tue MeEcuHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


TABLE I 
Percentage of 
Nature of the Solution the Eggs Forming 

an Embryo 
100:¢.¢. distilled water .s.:s¢4cse00ieseuessees de esges as 49 
100 c.c. distilled water+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOy.............. 0 
100 c.c. m/64 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOQ.........22-2---- 0 
100 c.c. m/32 NaCl+8 ¢e.c. m/32 ZnSOy.............04. 3 
100 c.c. m/16 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOQ,................ 8 
100 c.c.m/8 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSQy................ 44 
100 c.c. m/4 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOy.............04. 38 
100 c.c. 3/8 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSO.............008. 37 
100 c.c. m/2 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSO,................ 34 
100 c.c. 5/8 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOQy................ 29 
100 c.c. 6/8 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOy..... 0.0.0.0 00. 8 
100 c.c. 7/8 NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSOy............0.0. 6 
100 c¢.c.m NaCl+8 c.c. m/32 ZnSQy................ 1 


This table shows that the addition of NaCl, if its concentra- 
tion exceeds a certain limit, namely, m/8, is able to render the 
ZnSO, in the solution comparatively harmless. 

If we now assume that ZnSO, renders the 5/8 m NaCl solu- 
tion harmless by rendering the egg membrane comparatively 
impermeable for NaCl we must also draw the opposite conclu- 
sion, namely, that NaCl renders the egg membrane compara- 
tively impermeable for ZnSO,. We therefore arrive at a new 
conception of the mutual antagonism of two salts, namely, 
that this antagonism depends, in this case at least, upon a 
common, cooperative action of both salts on the egg membrane, 
by which action this membrane becomes completely or com- 
paratively impermeable for both salts. And from this we must 
draw the further conclusion that the fact that each of these 
salts, if it is alone in the solution, is toxic, is due to its com- 
paratively rapid diffusion through the membrane, so that it 
comes into direct contact with the protoplasm of the germ. 

As long as we assumed that each of the two antagonistic 
salts acted, if applied singly, in the opposite way from its 
antagonist, it was impossible to understand these experiments 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LiFE 177 


or find an analogue for them in colloid chemistry. But if we 
realize that NaCl alone is toxic because it is not able to render 
the egg membrane impermeable; and that ZnSO, if alone in 
solution is toxic for the same reason; while both combined are 
harmless (since for the “tanning” of the membrane the action 
of the two salts is required) these experiments become clear. 

We may, for the sake of completeness, still mention that 
salts alone have such antagonistic effects; glycerin, urea, and 
alcohol have no such action. On the other hand, ZnSO, was 
not only able to render NaCl harmless, but also LiCl, NH,Cl, 
CaCl,, and others; and vice versa. 

These experiments on the egg of Fundulus are theoretically 
of importance, since they leave no doubt that in this case at 
least the “antagonistic” action of salts consists in a modification 
of the egg membrane by a combined action of two salts, whereby 
the membrane becomes less permeable for both salts. 


Vv 


It is not easy to find examples of experiments in the litera- 
ture which are equally unequivocal in regard to the character 
of antagonistic salt action; but I think that some recent experi- 
ments by Osterhout satisfy this demand. 

It has long been a question whether or not cells are at all 
permeable for salts. Nobody denies that salts diffuse much 
more slowly into the cells than water; but some authors, 
especially Overton and Hoeber, deny categorically that they 
can diffuse at all into the cells. Overton’s view is based partly 
on experiments on plasmolysis in the cells of plants. If the 
cells of plants, for example, those of Spirogyra, are put into a 
solution of NaCl or some other galt of sufficiently high osmotic 
pressure, the volume of the contents of the cell decreases 
through loss of water and the protoplasm retracts, especially 
from corners of the rigid cellulose walls. Overton maintains 
that this plasmolysis is permanent, and concludes from this 


178 Tue MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


that only water but no salt can diffuse through the cell-wall; 
since otherwise salt should gradually diffuse from the solution 
into the cell, and through this increase in the osmotic pressure 
of the cell the water should finally diffuse back into the cell and 
restitute the normal volume of the cell. According to Overton 
this does not happen. 

Osterhout has recently shown that Overton’s observations 
were incomplete in a very essential pomt and that in reality 
the plasmolysis, which occurs in this case when the cell is put 
into the hypertonic solution, disappears again in a time which 
varies with the nature of the salt in solution. This stage of 
reversion of plasmolysis had been overlooked by Overton. If 
the cell, however, remains permanently in the hypertonic 
sodium chloride solution, a shrinking of the contents of the 
cell takes place again, which superficially resembles plasmolysis, 
but which in reality has nothing to do with plasmolysis, but 
is a phenomenon of death. That this second “false plas- 
molysis,’’ as Osterhout calls it, has nothing to do with the hyper- 
tonic character of the solution was proved by the fact that 
hypotonic solutions of toxic substances may produce the same 
phenomenon. 

In one experiment which Osterhout describes, 

a portion of a Spirogyra filament was plasmolyzed in .2 m CaCl, 
but not in .195m CaCl. A .29m NaCl solution has approximately 
the same osmotic pressure as a .2 m CaCl, solution. But on placing 
another portion of the same Spirogyra filament in a .29 m NaCl solu- 


tion the expected plasmolysis does not occur and it is impossible to 
plasmolyze the cells until they are placed in .4 m NaCl. 


Osterhout explains this difference in the concentration of the 
two salts required for plasmolysis by the assumption that NaCl 
diffuses more rapidly into the cell than CaCl,, a conclusion which 
T reached also on the basis of my earlier experiments on animals. 

Osterhout’s experiments also show that the antagonism of 
NaCl and CaCl, depends partly on the facts that the two salts 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LIFE 179 


inhibit each other from diffusing into the cells, and this conclu- 
sion is based among others upon the following experiment. 


By dividing a Spirogyra filament into several portions it was found 
that it was plasmolyzed in .2 m CaCl, and in .38 m NaCl, but neither 
in .195 m CaCl; nor in .875 m NaCl. On mixing 100 c.c. .875 m 
NaCl with 10 c.c. .195 m CaCl, and placing other portions of the same 
filament in it, prompt and very marked plasmolysis occurred. 


The explanation for this observation lies in the fact that in 
the mixture of NaCl and CaCl, the two salts render their 
diffusion into the cell mutually more difficult. After a longer 
period of time the plasmolyzed cells can expand again in a 
mixture of NaCl and CaCl,, but that occurs much later than if 
they are in the pure NaCl solution. 

These experiments are the analogue of the observation on the 
embryo of the eggs of Fundulus in which a pure solution of 
ZnSO, diffused rapidly through the membrane or micropyle, 
while, if both salts were present, the diffusion was inhibited 
or considerably retarded. 

While the observations of Osterhout show that Overton was 
not justified in using the experiments on plasmolysis to prove 
that the neutral salts cannot diffuse into the cells, yet they do 
not prove that these salts diffuse into the cell under normal con- 
ditions. In Osterhout’s experiments the cells are in strongly 
hypertonic solutions and it does not follow that such solutions 
act like isotonic, perfectly balanced solutions. 


VI 


Wasteneys and I have recently shown that the toxic action 
of acids upon Fundulus can be annihilated by salts. If we 
add 0.5 c.c. n/10 butyric acid to 100 c.c. of distilled water these 
fish die in 24 hours or less. In solutions which contain 0.4 ¢.c. 
or less acid they can live for a week or more. If we add, 
however, 0.5 c.c. of butyric acid to 100 c.c. of solutions of NaCl 
of various concentration, we find that above a certain limit 


180 Tue MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the NaCl can render the acid harmless. It is needless to 
say that the NaCl used in these experiments was strictly 
neutral and that the amount of acid present in the mixture of 
acid and salt was measured. The following experiment may 
serve as an example. Six fish ‘Were put into 500 c.c. of each 
of the following seven mixtures, namely, 


1) 100 c.c. H.0 +0.5 c.c. n/10 butyric acid 
2) 96 cc. H,O+ 4 ¢.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 ¢.c. n/10 butyric acid 
3) 94¢.c. H.0+ 6c¢.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 c.c. n/10 butyric acid 
4) 92¢.c.H,O+ 8c.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 ¢.c. n/10 butyric acid 
5) 90 ¢.c. H.O+10 c.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 ¢.c. n/10 butyric acid 
6) 88 ¢.c. H,O+12 c.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 ¢.c. n/10 butyric acid 
7) 85¢.c. H,0+15 c.c. m/2 NaCl+0.5 ¢.c. n/10 butyric acid 


After certain intervals the number of surviving fish was 
ascertained. The result is given in Table IT. 


TABLE II 


Number of Surviving Fish in 0.5 c.c. n/10 Butyric Acid 


After +0 | 4.0 | 60 | 8.0 | 10.0 | 12.0 | 15.0 
c.c. m/2 NaClin 100 c.c. of the Solution 
2 hours...... 0 0 0 2 3 3 6 
4 hours...... ie i Si 0 2 5 
1 day: eines vs 4 Br < 1 1 5 
2 days. 1 0 5 
3 days....... 1 ia 5 
4 days. 1 5 


If the amount of acid was increased, the amount of NaCl 
also had to be increased to render the acid harmless. In order 
to render 0.5 c.c. n/10 butyric acid pro 100 ¢.c. solution harm- 
less, 10 c.c. m/2 NaCl had to be added; while 0.8 c.c. butyric 
acid required 20 c.c. and 1.0 ¢.c. butyric acid required about 
28 c.c. m/2 NaCl in 100 c.c. of the solution. 

Not only butyric acid, but any kind of acid, could be 
rendered harmless by neutral salts, e.g., HCl by NaCl. 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF Lire 181 


Wasteneys and I could show that the rate of the absorption 
of acid by the fish is the same in solutions with and without salt. 
This proves that the action of the salts consisted in this case 
not in preventing the diffusion or absorption of the acid, but in 
modifying the deleterious effect of the absorbed acid. 

We can state a little more definitely the cause of death by 
acid. If we put the fish into a weak acid solution in distilled 
water just strong enough to kill the fish in from one to two hours 
(e.g., 500 c.c. H,O+2.0 ¢.c. n/10 HCl), we notice that the acid 
very soon makes the normally transparent epidermis of the 
fish opaque, and a little later the epidermis falls off in pieces 
and shreds. This, however, is probably not the direct cause 
of the death, but I am inclined to assume that the fish die 
from suffocation caused by a similar action of the acid upon 
the gills. 

The action of the acid upon the epidermis of the body as 
well as upon the gills is prevented through the addition of 
neutral salts. 

It is well known that the action of acids upon proteins can 
be inhibited by neutral salts.!. Thus the internal friction of 
certain protein solutions is increased by acids while the addition 
of neutral salts inhibits this effect (Pauli). The swelling of 
gelatin caused by acid is inhibited by salts (Procter).? 

It is possible that in the experiments with acid the fish is 
killed in the following way. The acid causes certain proteins 
in the surface layer of the epithelial cells of the gills and of the 
skin to swell, whereby this surface layer becomes more perme- 
able for the acid. The acid can now diffuse into the epithelial 
cells and act on the protoplasm, whereby the cells are killed. 
If salts are present in the right concentration, the combined 
action of acid and salt causes a dehydration of the surface film 


1It seems that the first experiments on the antagonism between acids and 
salts were published by the author in Pfliigers Archiv, Vol. LX XV, p. 308, 1899. 

2 The beautiful osmometric experiments of R. Lillie should also be mentioned 
“in this connection. 


182 THe MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


of these cells, as it does in the experiments on gelatin or as in 
the cases of tanning of hides by the combined action of acids 
and salt solutions. This combined dehydrating or “tanning” 
action of acid and salts on the surface of the epithelial cells of the 
gills diminishes the permeability of this layer for the acids and 
prevents them from diffusing into the cells and thus destroying 
the protoplasm. In this way the gills are kept intact and the 
life of the fish is saved. 

As long as the amount of acid is small the amount absorbed 
is not essentially diminished by the presence of salts; but while 
in the presence of salts the acid is consumed in the tanning 
action of the surface layer of the cells, or is absorbed in this 
layer; if no salt is present part of the acid diffuses into the 
epithelial cells and kills the latter. 


VII 


We have thus far considered the cases of antagonism between 
two electrolytes only. The case of the antagonism between three 
electrolytes is a little more complicated. 

We choose as an example the antagonism between NaCl, 
KCl, and CaCl,—the antagonism which is most important in 
life phenomena. If the mechanism of the antagonism between 
NaCl, on the one hand, and KCl and CaCl,, on the other, is of 
the same nature as that between NaCl and ZnSO, in the case of 
the eggs of Fundulus, it must be possible to show that not only 
is NaCl toxic if it is alone in solution, and that it is rendered 
harmless by the two other salts, but that the reverse is true 
also. This can be proved in the case of KCl. To demonstrate 
it, we have again to experiment on organisms which are, in wide 
limits, independent of the osmotic pressure of the surrounding 
solution since the concentration of the KCl in sea-water is very 
low. The experiments were carried out by Mr. Wasteneys 
and myself on Fundulus. The method consisted in putting six 
fish, after washing them twice with distilled water, into 500 c.c. 


ROuE or Sats IN PRESERVATION OF LiFE 183 


of the solution. It was ascertained from day to day how many 
fish survived. 

When the fish were put into pure solutions of KCl of the 
concentration in which this salt is contained in the sea-water 
(2.2 c.c. m/2 KCl in 100 c.c. of the solution) they died mostly 
in less than two days. This is not due to the low concentration 
of the KCl solution, which is only 1/50 of that of the sea-water, 
since the fish can live indefinitely in a pure NaCl solution of the 
same concentration as that in which the KCl exists in the sea- 
water. 

If we add to the toxic quantities of KCl increasing quantities 
of NaCl, we find that as soon as the solution contains 17 or more 
molecules of NaCl to one molecule of KCl, the toxic action of 
KCl is considerably diminished, if not completely counteracted. 
The following table may serve as an example: 


TABLE III 


NoumBeEr or SurRVIVING FisH 1N 2.2 c.c. M/2 KCl 1n 100 c.c. 


AFTER Days 
H:0 |m/100} m/20} m/8 m/4 |3m/8/ m/2 | NaCl 


2 1 3 4 
0 0 0 0 


BOT OTOL OT OD 
WWWWWPEOD 
OR RODD 


More accurate determinations showed that already a 3/16 m 
NaCl solution renders the solution of 2.2 ¢.c.m/2 KCl in 100 ¢.c. 
of the solution harmless. 

It was next determined whether different concentrations of 
KCl required different concentrations of NaCl. It was found 
that the coefficient of antagonization KCl/NaCl has an approxi- 
mately constant value, namely, about 1/17, as the following 
table shows. 


184 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


TABLE IV 
Coefficient 
of Antago- 
nization 


6 c.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 3/64 m NaCl...1/16 
7 c.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 4/64 m NaCl...1/18 
.9 c.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 5/64 m NaCl...1/17 
0 c.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 5/64-6/64 m 

TUM ied eehecruoaa aa an ae eee ace 1/16-1/19 
1.1 ¢.c. m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 6/64 m NaCl...1/17 
1.65 c.c. m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 5/32 m NaCl: ..1/19 
2.2 e.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 ¢c.c. 6/32 m NaCl...1/17 
2.75 c.c. m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 7/32 m NaCl...1/16 
3.3 c.c.m/2 KCl rendered harmless in 100 c.c. 9/32 m NaCl...1/17 

What happens if we vary this ratio? If we add too little 
NaCl to the KCl solution, namely, only 1 to 10 molecules NaCl 
to 1 molecule of KC], the solution becomes more harmful than 
if KCl is alone in solution; if we add considerably more than 17 
molecules NaCl, e.g., 50 molecules to one molecule of KCl, the 
solution becomes toxic again; and the more so the higher the 
concentration of NaCl. This indicates that the antagonistic 
effect requires a rather definite ratio of the two salts. This 
furnishes the reason why an m/2 solution of NaCl can, as a rule, 
not be rendered completely harmless by the mere addition of 
KCl, but that in addition CaCl, is needed. 

If we add to 100 c.c. m/2 NaCl enough KCl to make the 
ratio KCl: NaCl =1/17 we find that the antagonization of KCI: 
NaCl becomes incomplete. If the amount of KCl in 100 e.c. 
of the solution exceeds 2.2 c.c. m/2 KCl, antagonization is still 
to some extent possible, but it becomes more incomplete the 
higher the concentration of KCl. For this reason it is not 
possible to render an m/2 solution of NaCl harmless by the 
mere addition of KCI. 

CaCl, acts upon KCl similarly as does NaCl, but it 
acts more powerfully; ie., the coefficient of antagonization, 
KCl/CaCl,, is several hundred or a thousand times as great 
as that of KCl/NaCl, as the following table shows. : 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LIFE 185 


TABLE V 


Coefficient of Antago- 
nization KCl/CaChL 


1.1 ec. m/2 KCl in 100 c.c. H.O require 0.1 m/100 CaCl... .550 
1.65 ¢.c. m/2 KCl in 100 ¢.c. H.0 require 0.5 m/100 CaCl... .165 
2.2 ¢.c.m/2 KCl in 100 c.c. H.O require 0.3 m/100 CaCl... . .366 
2.75 ¢.c. m/2 KCl in 100 e.c. H.O require 1.0 m/100 CaCh....137.5 
3.3 ¢.c.m/2 KCl in 100 c.c. H.0 require 1.6 m/100 CaCl... .103 

The coefficients are not as regular as in the case of antagoni- 
zation of KCl by NaCl. This is due to the fact that the minimal 
value of CaCl, at which it renders the KCl harmless cannot 
be determined as sharply as the limit for NaCl. Why is less 
CaCl, required than NaCl? We can only answer with a sug- 
gestion first offered by T. B. Robertson, namely, that CaCl, 
produces its protective effect through the formation of a com- 
paratively insoluble compound (in this case on the gills or the 
rest of the surface of the animal) while NaCl acts through the 
formation of a compound which is more soluble. This view 
is corroborated by the observation which we made, that Sr is 
just as effective to antagonize KCl as CaCl,, but that Mg 
is much less efficient. This would correspond with the well- 
known fact that many strontium salts are just as insoluble, if 
not more insoluble, than the calcium salts, while the magnesium 
salts are often incomparably more soluble, for instance, in the 
case of the sulphates. BaCl, antagonizes KCl also powerfully, 
but, probably, in consequence of the fact that the substances 
formed at the surface of the animal or the gills, diffuse slowly 
into the cells, the fish do not remain alive as long if Ba is used as 
if the more harmless Ca and Sr are used. 

It is very remarkable that CaCl, renders harmless any given 
concentration of KCl below 6.6 c.c. m/2 KCl in 100 c.c. of the 
solution, but not above this limit. This limit is exactly the 
same which we found in the case of antagonization of KCl by 
NaCl. Even the combination of NaCl and CaCl, does not 
permit us to render harmless more than 6.6 c.c. m/2 KCl in 
100 c.c. of the solution. 


186 Tue MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


If we try to render NaCl harmless by KCl and CaCl, we 
find that CaCl, can antagonize even a 6/8 m and a 7/8 m solu- 
tion of NaCl, while KCl ceases to show any antagonistic effect 
if the NaCl solution exceeds m/2 or 5/8 m. 

Experiments with pure CaCl, solutions give the result that 
this substance is harmless in a solution of that concentration in 
which this salt is contained in the sea-water. Fundulus can 
live indefinitely in a solution of 1.5 ¢.c. m/2 CaCl, in 100 c.c. 
Botanists have also found that weak solutions of CaCl, are 
comparatively little toxic. This gives us the impression that 
the effect upon the surface film of protoplasm produced by 
CaCl, is especially important for the protection of the proto- 
plasm. This conclusion receives an indirect support by the 
well-known experiments of Herbst, who found that in sea-water 
deprived of calcium the segmentation cells of a sea-urchin 
embryo fall apart through the disintegration or liquefaction of 
a film which surrounds the embryo and keeps the cells together. 
If such eggs are brought back into solution containing calcium 
the film is restored and the cells come into close contact again. 

It is therefore not impossible that the mechanism of the 
antagonism between KCl and NaCl is similar to that found 
between NaCl and ZnSO,. It seems only due to the high con- 
centration of the NaCl in the sea-water and in the blood that, 
in addition to KCl and NaCl, CaCl, is needed. But the case 
is not so unequivocal as the previously mentioned cases of 
antagonism between only two electrolytes. 


VIIT 


It is necessary for our understanding of the life-preserving 
action of salts that we do not depend merely on conclusions 
drawn from experiments, but that we must be able to see 
directly in which way abnormal salt solutions cause the death 
of the cell. Such an opportunity is offered us through the 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LIFE 187 


observation of the eggs of the sea-urchin. If we put the ferti- 
lized eggs of the sea-urchin into an abnormal salt solution, a 
destruction of the cell gradually takes place. The destruction, 
as a rule, begins on the surface of the protoplasm, and consists 
very often in the formation and falling off of small granules or 
droplets. This process gradually continues from the periphery 
toward the center until the whole egg is disintegrated. For 
different salt solutions the picture of the disintegration is a little 
different, but sufficiently characteristic for a given solution, so 
that if one become familiar with these pictures, one is able to 
diagnose to some extent the nature of the solution from the way 
in which the cell disintegrates. 

This process of disintegration can be observed if the eggs 
are put into a pure solution of sodium chloride, or in a mixture of 
sodium chloride and calcium chloride, or in a mixture of sodium 
chloride and potassium chloride. If, however, all three salts 
are used in the proportion in which they occur in the sea-water 
no disintegration takes place and the surface of the egg remains 
perfectly smooth and normal. One gains the impression as if 
the protoplasm of the egg were held together by a continuous 
surface film of a definite texture. If we put the egg into an 
abnormal solution this surface film is modified and changed, 
and the change of the surface film is often followed by a gradual 
process of disintegration of the rest of the cell. 

These observations on the sea-urchin egg, therefore, sug- 
gest the possibility that the combination of the three salts in 
their definite proportion and concentration has the function of 
forming a surface film of a definite structure or texture, 
around the protoplasm of each cell, by which the protoplasm 
is kept together, protected against and separated from the 
surrounding media. 

The previously mentioned observation of Herbst again 
shows the important réle of calcium in this process. 


188 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


IX 

The objection might be raised that the beneficial action of 
the three salts could only be proved on marine animals or on 
tissues of higher animals, which are said to be ‘‘adapted”’ to a 
mixture of NaCl, KCl, and CaCl, in definite proportions. 
Experiments on fresh-water organisms, for which “adaptation”’ 
to a mixture of NaCl, KCl, and CaCl, in these definite propor- 
tions cannot be claimed, show that this objection is not valid. 
Ostwald worked with fresh-water crustaceans which he put into 
mixtures of various salts. It was found that these animals 
live longer in a mixture of NaCl+KCl+CaCl, than in a solu- 
tion of NaCl, or NaCl+KCl, or NaCl++CaCl, of the same 
osmotic pressure. 

Osterhout was able to show that the spores of a certain 
variety of Vaucheria die in a pure 3/32 m solution of NaCl in 
10 to 20 minutes, while they live in 100 c.c. 3/32 m NaCl+1 e.c. 
3/32 CaCl, 2 to 4 weeks, and in 100 c.c. 3/32 m NaCl+1 c.c. 
3/32 m CaCl,+2.2 ¢.c. 3/32 m KCl 6 to 8 weeks. The reac- 
tion of the solution was strictly neutral and the NaCl the purest 
obtainable. The results remained the same after the NaCl 
had been recrystallized six times. Experiments with Spirogyra 
gave a similar result. The solutions were all 3/32 m. In 
NaCl the Spirogyra died in 18 hours; in NaCl+KCl in two 
days; in NaCl+KCl+CaCl, they lived 65 days. Osterhout 
caused wheat grains to develop in such solutions and measured 


the total length of the roots formed. 
Total Length of 


Nature of the Solution Roots after 40 Days 
ETS) nisiacattatetlas tue teavinsciantere att ataed ins Macs ecole banana & 740 mm 

100nG:0:.38/25: NaC ice shepese sprees daha heey eee wucee wees 3 59 mm. 
100 c.c. 3/25 NaCl+2.0 3/25 CaCl.....................254 mm. 


100 c.c. 3/25 NaCl+2.0 3/25 CaCl.+2.2 3/25 m KCl...... 324 mm. 


These cases, to which many other similar observations might 
be added, prove that the life-preserving effect of the combina- 
tion of NaCl+KCl+CaCl, in definite proportions is not due 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF LiFE 189 


to the fact that organisms are “adapted” to this mixture but 
to a specific protective effect of the combination of the three 
salts upon the cells. 

x 

It seems, therefore, to be a general fact that wherever tissues 
or animals require a medium of a comparatively high osmotic 
pressure—like our tissues—their life lasts much longer in a 
mixture of NaCl+KCl+CaCl, in the proportion in which these 
salts exist in the blood and in the ocean, than in any other 
osmotic solution, even a pure solution of NaCl. But the reader 
has noticed that there are considerable differences in the resist- 
ance of various organisms toabnormal solutions. While a marine 
Gammarus dies in half an hour in an isotonic solution of NaCl or 
cane sugar, red blood corpuscles or even the muscle of a frog can 
be kept for a day or longer in such a solution (of course even 
the muscle of a frog lives longer if the NaCl solution contains in 
addition KCl or CaCl,). What causes this difference ? 

Six years ago I found that the unfertilized eggs of the sea- 
urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) can keep alive and 
remain apparently intact in a pure neutral solution of CaCl, 
or of NaCl for several days at a temperature of 15°, while the 
fertilized eggs of the same female are killed in a pure neutral 
solution of CaCl, in a few hours. The same difference is found 
for other salts also. What causes this difference? Several 
authors have suggested that it is due to the fact that the 
fertilized egg is more permeable to salts than the unfertilized 
egg. But recent experiments by Warburg, which were con- 
firmed and amplified by Harvey, make it doubtful whether the 
salts which are not soluble in fats can enter the fertilized egg 
at all. I believe that the explanation of the difference is much 
more simple. The unfertilized egg is surrounded by a cortical 
layer and this layer is destroyed or modified in the process of 
fertilization. One result of this modification is the formation 
of the fertilization membrane, for which I have been able to 


190 THe MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


show that it is readily permeable for salts. As long as the 
cortical layer of the unfertilized egg is intact, it prevents the 
surrounding salt solution from coming in contact with the pr oto- 
plasm or at least it retards this process. If, however, the 
cortical layer is destroyed by fertilization the surrounding 
salt solution comes directly in contact with the protoplasm and 
if the solution is abnormal it can cause the disintegration of the 
surface layer of the protoplasm. 

I am inclined to believe that differences in the resisting 
power of various cells or organisms to abnormal salt solutions are 
primar'ly due to differences in the constitution of the protective 
envelopes of the animals or the cells. Microorganisms which 
can live in strong organic acids or salt solutions of a high 
concentration probably possess a surface layer which shuts off 
their protoplasm from contact with the solution. For the 
protoplasm of muscle the rather tough sarcolemma forms not 
an absolute but nevertheless an effective wall against the 
surrounding solution. 

But aside from differences of this kind there are other condi- 
tions which influence the degree of resistance of cells to various 
solutions. I have found that the fertilized eggs of the sea- 
urchin will live longer in abnormal salt solutions if the oxida- 
tions in the egg are stopped, either by the withdrawal of oxygen 
or the addition of KCN or NaCN. Warburg and Meyerhof 
have drawn the conclusion that in a pure NaCl solution the 
rate of oxidations of the egg of Strongylocentrotus is increased 
and that it is this crease in the rate of oxidations which kills 
the eggs. But this increase of oxidations cannot be observed 
in the eggs of Arbacia when they are put into a pure NaCl solu- 
tion and, moreover, lack of oxygen prolongs the life of the 
fertilized egg just as well in solutions of NaCl+CaCl, or of 
NaCl+BaCl,, for which salts these authors do not claim that 
they can raise the rate of oxidations of the egg. I am inclined 
to believe that during or previously to cell-division, besides 


ROLE oF SALTS IN PRESERVATION OF Lire 191 


phenomena of streaming inside the cell, changes in the surface 
film of the protoplasm occur, whereby this film is more easily 
injured by the salts. If we suppress the oxidations we suppress 
also the processes leading to cell-division and thereby retard 
the deleterious action of the abnormal salt solution upon the 
surface layer of the protoplasm of the egg. 


XI 


If we now raise the question as to why salts are necessary 
for the preservation of the life of the cell we can point to a 
number of cases in which this answer seems clear. Each cell 
may be considered a chemical factory, in which the work can 
only go on in the proper way, if the diffusion of substances 
through the cell-wall is restricted. This diffusion depends on 
the nature of the surface layer of the cell. Overton and others 
assume that this layer consists of a continuous membrane of 
fat or lipoids. This assumption is not compatible with two 
facts, namely, that water diffuses very rapidly mto the cell, 
and second, that life depends upon an exchange of water- 
soluble and not of fat-soluble substances between the cells 
and the surrounding liquid. The above-mentioned facts of the 
antagonism between acids and salts suggest the idea that the 
surface film of cells consists exclusively or essentially of certain 
proteins. 

The experiments mentioned in this paper indicate that the 
role of salts in the preservation of life consists in the “tanning” 
effect which they have upon the surface films of the cells, 
whereby these films acquire those physical qualities of dura- 
bility and comparative impermeability, without which the cell 
cannot exist. 

On this assumption we can understand that neutral salts 
should be necessary for the preservation of life although they 
do not furnish energy. 

As far as the dynamical effects of salts are concerned it is 


192 Tut MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


not impossible that some of them belong also to the type of 
those mentioned in this paper. The fact that the addition of 
calcium to an NaCl solution prevents the twitchings of the 
muscle, which occur in the pure NaCl solution, suggests the 
possibility that the CaCl, merely prevents or retards the diffu- 
sion of NaCl through the sarcolemma. But other effects of 
salts, e.g., the apparent dependence of contractility of the 
muscle upon the presence of NaCl, or the rdle of PO,, do not 
find their explanation in the facts discussed here. 


X. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE INFLUENCE 
OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 


x 


EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE INFLUENCE OF 
ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS! 


I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 


What the biologist calls the natural environment of an 
animal is from a physical point of view a rather rigid combina- 
tion of definite forces. It is obvious that by a purposeful and 
systematic variation of these and by the application of other 
forces in the laboratory, results must be obtainable which do 
not appear in the natural environment. This is the reasoning 
underlying the modern development of the study of the effect 
of environment upon animal life. It was perhaps not the least 
important of Darwin’s services to science that the boldness of 
his conceptions gave to the experimental biologist courage to 
enter upon the attempt of controlling at will the life phenomena 
of animals, and of bringing about effects which cannot be 
expected in nature. 

The systematic physico-chemical analysis of the effect of 
outside forces upon the form and reactions of animals is also 
our only means of unraveling the mechanism of heredity 
beyond the results which can be obtained by a mere cytological 
investigation. The manner in which a germ cell can force upon 
the adult certain characters will not be understood until we 
succeed in varying and controlling hereditary characteristics; 
and this can only be accomplished on the basis of a systematic 
study of the effects of chemical and physical forces upon living 
matter. 

Owing to limitation of space this sketch is necessarily very 
incomplete, and it must not be inferred that studies which are 


1 Reprinted from Darwin and Modern Science (1909), by courtesy of Professor 
A. C. Seward, of the University of Cambridge, England. 


195 


196 THe MercHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


not mentioned here were considered to be of minor importance. 
All the writer could hope to do was to bring together a few 
instances of the experimental analysis of the effect of environ- 
ment, which indicate the nature and extent of our control 
over life phenomena and which also have some relation to the 
work of Darwin. In the selection of these instances preference 
is given to those problems which are not too technical for the 
general reader. 

The forces, the influence of which we shall discuss, are in 
succession chemical agencies, temperature, light, and gravita- 
tion. We shall also treat separately the effect of these forces 
upon form and instinctive reactions. 


II. THE EFFECTS OF CHEMICAL AGENCIES 


a) Heterogeneous hybridization —It was held until recently 
that hybridization is not possible except between closely related 
species and that even among these a successful hybridization 
cannot always be counted upon. This view was well supported 
by experience. It is, for instance, well known that the majority 
of marine animals lay their unfertilized eggs in the ocean and 
that the males shed their sperm also into the sea-water. The 
numerical excess of the spermatozoa over the ova in the sea- 
water is the only guaranty that the eggs are fertilized, for the 
spermatozoa are carried to the eggs by chance and are not 
attracted by the latter. This statement is the result of numer- 
ous experiments by various authors, and is contrary to common 
belief. As arule all or the majority of individuals of a species in 
a given region spawn on the same day, and when this occurs the 
sea-water constitutes a veritable suspension of sperm. It has 
recently been shown by experiment that in fresh sea-water the 
sperm may live and retain its fertilizing power for several days. 
It is thus unavoidable that at certain periods more than one kind 
of spermatozoa is suspended in the sea-water and it is a matter 
of surprise that the most heterogeneous hybridizations do not 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 197 


constantly occur. The reason for this becomes obvious when 
we bring together mature eggs and equally mature and active 
sperm of different families. When this is done no egg is, as a 
rule, fertilized. The eggs of a sea-urchin can be fertilized by 
sperm of their own species, or, though in smaller numbers, by 
the sperm of other species of sea-urchins, but not by the sperm 
of other groups of echinoderms, e.g., star-fish, brittle-stars, 
holothurians, or crinoids, and still less by the sperm of more 
distant groups of animals. The consensus of opinion seemed 
to be that the spermatozoon must enter the egg through a 
narrow opening or canal, the so-called micropyle, and that the 
micropyle allowed only the spermatozoa of the same or of a 
closely related species to enter the egg. 

It seemed to the writer that the cause of this limitation of 
hybridization might be of another kind and that by a change 
in the constitution of the sea-water it might be possible to 
bring about heterogeneous hybridizations, which in normal 
sea-water are impossible. This assumption proved correct. 
Sea-water has a faintly alkaline reaction (in terms of the physi- 
cal chemist its concentration of hydroxy] ions is about 10—* n 
at Pacific Grove, California, and about 10~° n at Woods Hole, 
Massachusetts). If we slightly raise the alkalinity of the sea- 
water by adding to it a small but definite quantity of sodium 
hydroxide or some other alkali, the eggs of the sea-urchin 
can be fertilized with the sperm of widely different groups of 
animals. In 1903 it was shown that if we add from about 0.5 
to 0.8 c.c. n/10 sodium hydroxide to 50 ¢.c. of sea-water, the 
eggs of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (a sea-urchin which is 
found on the coast of California) can be fertilized in large 
quantities by the sperm of various kinds of star-fish, brittle- 
stars, and holothurians; while in normal sea-water or with 
less sodium hydroxide not a single egg of the same female could 
be fertilized with the star-fish sperm which proved effective 
in the hyperalkaline sea-water. The sperm of the various forms 


198 Tur MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


of star-fish was not equally effective for these hybridizations; 
the sperm of Asterias ochracea and A. capitata gave the best 
results, since it was possible to fertilize from 50 per cent to 
100 per cent of the sea-urchin eggs, while the sperm of Pycno- 
podia and Asterina fertilized only 10 or 2 per cent respectively 
of the same eggs. 

Godlewski used the same method for the hybridization of 
the sea-urchin eggs with the sperm of a crinoid (Antedon 
rosacea). Kupelwieser afterward obtained results which seemed 
to indicate the possibility of fertilizing the eggs of Strongylo- 
centrotus with the sperm of a mollusk (Mytilus). Recently, the 
writer succeeded in fertilizing the eggs of Strongylocentrotus 
franciscanus with the sperm of a mollusk—Chlorostoma. This 
result could only be obtained in sea-water. the alkalinity of 
which had been increased (through the addition of 0.8 c.c. n/10 
sodium hydroxide to 50 c.c. of sea-water). We thus see that 
by increasing the alkalimity of the sea-water it is possible to 
effect heterogeneous hybridizations which are at present impos- 
sible in the natural environment of these animals. 

It is, however, conceivable that in former periods of the 
earth’s history such heterogeneous hybridizations were possible. 
It is known that in solutions like sea-water the degree of alkalin- 
ity must increase when the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere is diminished. If it be true, as Arrhenius assumes, 
that the Ice age was caused or preceded by a diminution in the 
amount of carbon dioxide in the air, such a diminution must also 
have resulted in an increase of the alkalinity of the sea-water, 
and one result of such an increase must have been to render 
possible heterogeneous hybridizations in the ocean which in the 
present state of alkalinity are practically excluded. 

But granted that such hybridizations were possible, would 
they have influenced the character of the fauna? In other 
words, are the hybrids between sea-urchin and star-fish, or better 
still, between sea-urchin and mollusks, capable of development, 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 199 


and if so, what is their character? In all cases of heterogeneous 
hybridization the vitality of the egg or the embryo seems 
weakened and it is still doubtful whether any heterogeneous 
hybrid can reach maturity. The number of experiments is still 
limited and this statement is therefore not yet final. 

So far as the question of heredity is concerned, all the 
experiments on heterogeneous hybridization of the egg of 
the sea-urchin with the sperm of star-fish, brittle-stars, crinoids, 
and mollusks have led to the same result, namely, that the larvae 
have purely maternal characteristics and differ in no way from 
the pure breed of the form from which the egg istaken. By way 
of illustration it may be said that the larvae of the sea-urchin 
reach on the third day or earlier (according to species and 
temperature) the so-called pluteus stage, in which they possess 
a typical skeleton (Fig. 10, p. 11); while neither the larvae 
of the star-fish nor those of the mollusk form a skeleton at the 
corresponding stage. It was, therefore, a matter of some 
interest to find out whether or not the larvae produced by the 
fertilization of the sea-urchin egg with the sperm of star-fish 
or mollusk would form the normal and typical pluteus skeleton. 
This was invariably the case in the experiments of Godlewski, 
Kupelwieser, Hagedoorn, and the writer. These hybrid larvae 
were exclusively maternal in character. 

It might be argued that in the case of heterogeneous hybridi- 
zation the sperm nucleus does not fuse with the egg nucleus, and 
that, therefore, the spermatozoon cannot transmit its hereditary 
substances to the larvae. But these objections are refuted 
by Godlewski’s experiments, in which he showed definitely that 
if the egg of the sea-urchin is fertilized with the sperm of a 
crinoid the fusion of the egg nucleus and sperm nucleus takes 
place in the normal way. 

b) Artificial parthenogenesis.—Possibly in no other field of 
biology has our ability to control life phenomena by outside 
conditions been proved to such an extent as in the domain of 


200 THE MecuHanistic CoNCEPTION OF LIFE 


fertilization. The reader knows that the eggs of the over- 
whelming majority of animals cannot develop unless a sperma- 
tozoon enters them. In this case a living agency is the cause of 
development and the problem arises whether it is possible to 
accomplish the same result through the application of well- 
known physico-chemical agencies. This is, indeed, true, and 
during the last ten years living larvae have been produced by 
chemical agencies from the unfertilized eggs of sea-urchins, 
star-fish, holothurians, and a number of annelids and mollusks; 
in fact this holds true in regard to the eggs of practically all 
forms of animals with which such experiments have been tried 
long enough. In each form the method of procedure is some- 
what different and a long series of experiments is often required 
before the successful method is found. 

The facts of artificial parthenogenesis, as the chemical 
fertilization or activation of the egg is called, have, perhaps, 
some bearing on the problem of evolution. If we wish to form 
a mental image of the process of evolution we have to reckon 
with the possibility that parthenogenetic propagation may have 
preceded sexual reproduction. This suggests also the possi- 
bility that at that period outside forces may have supplied the 
conditions for the development of the egg which at present the 
spermatozoon has to supply. For this, if for no other reason, a 
brief consideration of the means of artificial parthenogenesis 
may be of interest to the student of evolution. 

It seemed necessary in these experiments to imitate as 
completely as possible by chemical agencies the effects of the 
spermatozoon upon the egg. When a spermatozoon enters the 
egg of a sea-urchin or certain star-fish or annelids, the immediate 
effect is a characteristic change of the surface of the egg, namely, 
the formation of the so-called membrane of fertilization (Figs. 
1 and 2). The writer found that we can produce this mem- 
brane in the unfertilized egg by certain acids, especially the 
monobasic acids of the fatty series, e.g., formic, acetic, propionic, 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 201 


butyric, etc. Carbon dioxide is also very efficient in this 
direction. It was also found that the higher acids are more 
efficient than the lower ones, and it is possible that the sperma- 
tozoon induces membrane formation by carrying into the egg a 
higher fatty acid, namely oleic acid or one of its salts or esters. 

The physico-chemical process which underlies the formation 
of the membrane seems to be the cause of the development of the 
egg. In all cases in which the unfertilized egg has been treated 
in such a way as to cause it to form a membrane it begins to 
develop. For the eggs of certain animals membrane formation 
is all that is required to induce a complete development of the 
unfertilized egg, e.g., in the star-fish and certain annelids. 
For the eggs of other animals a second treatment is necessary. 
Thus the unfertilized eggs of the sea-urchin Strongylocentrotus 
purpuratus of the Californian coast begin to develop when 
membrane formation has been induced by treatment with a 
fatty acid, e.g., butyric acid; but the development soon ceases 
and the eggs perish in the early stages of segmentation, or after 
the first nuclear division. But if we treat the same eggs after 
membrane formation, for from thirty-five to fifty-five minutes 
(at 15° C.) with sea-water the concentration (osmotic pressure) 
of which has been raised through the addition of a definite 
amount of some salt or sugar, the eggs wil] segment and develop 
normally, when transferred back to normal sea-water. If care 
is taken, practically all the eggs can be caused to develop into 
plutei, the majority of which may be perfectly normal and may 
live as long as larvae produced from eggs fertilized with sperm. 

It is possible that the sea-urchin egg is injured in the process 
of membrane formation. The nature of this injury became 
clear when it was discovered that all the agencies which cause 
hemolysis, i.e., the destruction of the red blood corpuscles, also 
cause membrane formation in unfertilized eggs, e.g., fatty acids 
or ether, alcohols or chloroform, etc., or saponin, solanin, 
digitalin, bile salts, and alkali. It thus happens that the 


202 THe MEeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


phenomena of artificial parthenogenesis are linked together with 
the phenomena of hemolysis which at present play so important 
a role in the study of immunity. The difference between 
cytolysis (or hemolysis) and fertilization seems to be this, that 
the latter is caused by a superficial cytolysis of the egg, while if 
the cytolytic agencies have time to act on the whole egg the 
latter is completely destroyed. If we put unfertilized eggs of a 
sea-urchin into sea-water which contains a trace of saponin we 
notice that, after a few minutes, all the eggs form the typical 
membrane of fertilization. If the eggs are then taken out of the 
saponin solution, freed from all traces of saponin by repeated 
washing in normal sea-water, and transferred to the hypertonic 
sea-water for from thirty-five to fifty-five minutes, they develop 
into larvae. If, however, they are left m the sea-water con- 
taining the saponin they undergo, a few minutes after membrane 
formation, the disintegration known in pathology as cytolysis. 
Membrane formation is, therefore, caused by a superficial or 
incomplete cytolysis. It is possible that the subsequent treat- 
ment of the egg with hypertonic sea-water is partly needed to 
overcome the destructive effects of this cytolysis of the cortical 
layer. 

Many pathologists assume that hemolysis or cytolysis is 
due to a liquefaction of certain fatty or fat-like compounds, 
the so-called lipoids, in the cell. If this view is correct, it 
would be necessary to ascribe the fertilization of the egg to the 
same process. 

The analogy between hemolysis and fertilization throws, 
possibly, some light on a curious observation. It is well known 
that the blood corpuscles, as a rule, undergo cytolysis if injected 
into the blood of an animal which belongs to a different family. 
The writer found last year that the blood of mammals, e.g., the 
rabbit, pig, and cattle, causes the egg of Strongylocentrotus to 
form a typical fertilization membrane. If such eggs are after- 
ward treated for a short period with hypertonic sea-water they 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 203 


develop into normal larvae (plutei). Some substance contained 
in the blood causes, presumably, a superficial cytolysis of the 
egg and thus starts its development. 

We can also cause the development of the sea-urchin egg 
without membrane formation. The early experiments of the 
writer were done in this way and many experimenters still use 
such methods. It is probable that in this case the mechanism 
of fertilization is essentially the same as in the case where the 
membrane formation is brought about, with this difference 
only, that the cytolytic effect is less when no fertilization 
membrane is formed. This inference is corroborated by 
observations on the fertilization of the sea-urchin egg with ox 
blood. It very frequently happens that not all of the eggs form 
membranes in this process. Those eggs which form membranes 
begin to develop, but perish if they are not treated with hyper- 
tonic sea-water. Some of the other eggs, however, which do not 
form membranes, develop directly into normal larvae without 
any treatment with hypertonic sea-water, provided they are 
exposed to the blood for only a few minutes. Presumably some 
blood enters the eggs and causes the cytolytic effects in a less 
degree than is necessary for membrane formation, but in a 
sufficient degree to cause their development. The slightness 
of the cytolytic effect allows the egg to develop without treat- 
ment with hypertonic sea-water. 

Since the entrance of the spermatozoon causes that degree 
of cytolysis which leads to membrane formation, it is probable 
that, in addition to the cytolytic or membrane-forming sub- 
stance (presumably a higher fatty acid), it carries another 
substance into the egg which counteracts the deleterious effects 
underlying or following membrane formation. 

The question may be raised whether the larvae produced 
by artificial parthenogenesis can reach the mature stage. This 
question may be answered in the affirmative, since Delage has 
succeeded in raising several parthenogenetic sea-urchin larvae 


204 THe MercuHANIstTic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


beyond the metamorphosis into the adult stage and since in all 
the experiments made by the writer the parthenogenetic plutei 
lived as long as the plutei produced from fertilized eggs. 

c) On the production of twins from one egg through a change 
in the chemical constitution of the sea-water—The reader is 
probably familiar with the fact that there exist two different 
types of human twins. In the one type the twins differ as 
much as two children of the same parents born at different 
periods; they may or may not have the same sex. In the second 
type the twins have invariably the same sex and resemble each 
other most closely. Twins of the latter type are produced from 
the same egg, while twins of the former type are produced 
from two different eggs. 

The experiments of Driesch and others have taught us that 
twins originate from one egg in this manner, namely, that the 
first two cells into which the egg divides after fertilization 
become separated from each other. This separation can be 
brought about by a change in the chemical constitution of 
the sea-water. Herbst observed that if the fertilized eggs of the 
sea-urchin are put into sea-water which is freed from calcium, 
the cells into which the egg divides have a tendency to fall 
apart. Driesch afterward noticed that eggs of the sea-urchin 
treated with sea-water which is free from lime have a tendency 
to give rise to twins. The writer has recently found that twins 
can be produced not only by the absence of lime, but also 
through the absence of sodium or of potassium; in other words, 
through the absence of one or two of the three important 
metals in the sea-water. There is, however, a second condition, 
namely that the solution used for the production of twins must 
have a neutral or at least not an alkaline reaction. 

The procedure for the production of twins in the sea-urchin 
egg consists simply in this: the eggs are fertilized as usual in 
normal sea-water and then, after repeated washing in a neutral 
solution of sodium chloride (of the concentration of the sea- 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 205 


water), are placed in a neutral mixture of potassium chloride 
and calcium chloride, or of sodium chloride and potassium 
chloride, or of sodium chloride and calcium chloride, or of 
sodium chloride and magnesium chloride. The eggs must 
remain in this solution until half an hour or an hour after they 
have reached the two-cell stage. They are then transferred 
into normal sea-water and allowed to develop. From 50 to 90 
per cent of the eggs of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus treated in 
this manner may develop into twins. These twins may remain 
separate or grow partially together and form double monsters, 
or heal together so completely that only slight or even no 
imperfections indicate that the individual started its career as a 
pair of twins. It is also possible to control the tendency of such 
twins to grow together by a change in the constitution of the 
sea-water. If we use as a twin-producing solution a mixture 
of sodium, magnesium, and potassium chlorides (in the propor- 
tion in which these salts exist in the sea-water) the tendency 
of the twins to grow together is much more pronounced than if 
we use simply a mixture of sodium chloride and magnesium 
chloride. 

The mechanism of the origin of twins, as the result of alter- 
ing the composition of the sea-water, is revealed by observation 
of the first segmentation of the egg in these solutions. This 
cell-division is modified in a way which leads to a separation 
of the first two cells (see Figs. 55 to 57). If the egg is afterward 
transferred back into normal sea-water, each of these two cells 
develops into an independent embryo. Since normal sea-water 
contains all three metals, sodium, calcium, and potassium, and 
since it has besides an alkaline reaction, we perceive the reason 
why twins are not normally produced from one egg. These 
experiments suggest the possibility of a chemical cause for the 
origin of twins from one egg or of double monstrosities in mam- 
mals. If, for some reason, the liquids which surround the 
human egg a short time before and after the first cell-division 


206 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


are slightly acid, and at the same time lacking in one of the 
three important metals, the conditions for the separation of 


Fig. 51 Fig. 52 Fic. 53 Fig. 54 


‘Fies. 51-54.—Cell-division in a sea-urchin egg, Strongylocentrotus purpura- 
tus, in normal sea-water. This type of cell-division leads to the formation of one 
embryo from an egg. JM is the fertilization membrane, P a layer of colloidal 
supseanee which seems to serve the purpose of keeping all the cells of an egg 

ogether. 


the first two cells and the formation of identical twins are 
provided. 


Fie. 55 Fie. 56 Fic. 57 Fie. 58 


Fics. 55-58.—Cell-division in the egg of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus 
which leads to the formation of twins. This cell-division can be observed if the 
egg is put after fertilization into a neutral mixture of salts in which either KCl, 
or CaCl,, or NaCl is lacking. 

In such a neutral solution the substance which forms the elastic layer (PM, 
Fig. 51) is dissolved. During the segmentation the protoplasm of the egg spreads 
until its long axis touches the fertilization membrane. The two daughter-cells 
formed (Fig. ou) are separated from each other, instead of remaining connected 
as in the normal cell-division (Fig. 53). If about one hour later the eggs are put 
back into normal sea-water each of the two cells develops into an embryo (Fig. 58), 
and the egg thus gives rise to two instead of to one embryo. 


In conclusion it may be pointed out that the reverse result, 
namely, the fusion of normally double organs, can also be 
brought about experimentally through a change in the chemical 
constitution of the sea-water. Stockard succeeded in causing 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 207 


the two eyes of a fish embryo (Fundulus heteroclitus) to fuse into 
a single cyclopean eye through the addition of magnesium 
chloride to the sea-water. When he added about 6 grams of 
magnesium chloride to 100 c.c. of sea-water and placed the 
fertilized eggs in the mixture, about 50 per cent of the eggs gave 
rise to one-eyed embryos. 

When the embryos were studied the one-eyed condition was found 
to result from the union or fusion of the ‘“‘Anlagen” of the two eyes. 
Cases were observed which showed various degrees in this fusion; it 
appeared as though the optic vesicles were formed too far forward 
and ventral, so that their antero-ventro-median surfaces fused. This 
produces one large optic cup, which in all cases gives more or less 
evidence of its double nature.! 

We have confined ourselves to a discussion of rather simple 
effects of the change in the constitution of the sea-water upon 
development. It isa priori obvious, however, that an unlimited 
number of pathological variations might be produced by a 
variation in the concentration and constitution of the sea-water, 
and experience confirms this statement. As an example we 
may mention the abnormalities observed by Herbst in the 
development of sea-urchins through the addition of lithium to 
sea-water. It is, however, as yet impossible to connect in a 
rational way the effects produced in this and similar cases with 
the cause which produced them; and it is also impossible to 
define in a simple way the character of the change produced. 


III]. THE INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE 


a) The influence of temperature upon the density of pelagic 
organisms and the duration of life—It has often been noticed 
by explorers who have had a chance to compare the faunas in 
different climates that in the polar seas such species as thrive 
at all in those regions occur, as a rule, in much greater density 
than they do in the moderate or warmer regions of the ocean. 
This refers to those members of the fauna which live at or near 

1 Stockard, Archio f. Entwicklungsmechanik, XXIII, 249, 1907. 


208 Tue MercHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the surface, since they alone lend themselves to a statistical 
comparison. In his account of the Valdivia expedition, Chun! 
calls especial attention to this quantitative difference in the 
surface fauna and flora of different regions. ‘In the icy water 
of the Antarctic, the temperature of which is below 0° C., we 
find an astonishingly rich animal and plant life. The same 
condition with which we are familiar in the Arctic seas is 
repeated here, namely, that the quantity of plankton material 
exceeds that of the temperate and warm seas.’’ And again, in 
regard to the pelagic fauna in the region of the Kerguelen 
Islands, he states: “The ocean is alive with transparent jelly 
fish, Ctenophores (Bolina and Callianira) and of Siphonophore 
colonies of the genus Agalma.” 

The paradoxical character of this general observation lies 
in the fact that a low temperature retards development, and 
hence should be expected to have the opposite effect from that 
mentioned by Chun. Recent investigations have led to the 
conclusion that life phenomena are affected by temperature in 
the same sense as the velocity of chemical reactions. In the 
case of the latter van’t Hoff had shown that a decrease in 
temperature by 10 degrees reduces their velocity to one-half 
or less, and the same has been found for the influence of tempera- 
ture on the velocity of physiological processes. Thus Snyder 
and T. B. Robertson found that the rate of heart beat in the 
tortoise and in Daphnia is reduced to about one-half if the 
temperature is lowered 10° C., and Maxwell, Keith Lucas, and 
Snyder found the same influence of temperature for the rate 
with which an impulse travels in the nerve. Peter observed 
that the rate of development in a sea-urchin’s egg is reduced 
to less than one-half if the temperature (within certain limits) 
is reduced by 10 degrees. The same effect of temperature upon 
the rate of development holds for the egg of the frog, as Cohen 
and Peter calculated from the experiments of O. Hertwig. 


1 Chun, Aus den Tiefen des Weltmeeres, p. 225, Jena, 1903. 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 209 


The writer found the same temperature coefficient for the rate 
of maturation of the egg of a mollusk (Lottia). 

All these facts prove that the velocity of development of 
animal life in Arctic regions, where the temperature is near the 
freezing point of water, must be from two to three times smaller 
than in regions where the temperature of the ocean is about 
10° C., and from four to nine times smaller than in seas the 
temperature of which is about 20°C. It is, therefore, exactly 
the reverse of what we should expect when authors state that 
the density of organisms at or near the surface of the ocean in 
polar regions is greater than in more temperate regions. 

The writer believes that this paradox finds its explanation 
in experiments which he has recently made on the influence 
of temperature on the duration of life of cold-blooded marine 
animals. The experiments were made on the fertilized and 
unfertilized eggs of the sea-urchin, and yielded the result that 
for the lowering of temperature by 1°C., the duration of life 
was about doubled. Lowering the temperature by 10 degrees 
therefore prolongs the life of the organism 2", i.e., over a thou- 
sand times, and a lowering by 20 degrees prolongs it about one 
million times. Since this prolongation of life is far in excess 
of the retardation of development through a lowering of 
temperature, it is obvious that, in spite of the retardation 
of development in Arctic seas, animal life must be denser 
there than in temperate or tropical seas. The excessive 
increase of the duration of life at the poles will necessitate 
che simultaneous existence of more successive generations of 
the same species in these regions than in the temperate or 
tropical regions. 

The writer is inclined to believe that these results have 
some bearing upon a problem which plays an important réle 
in theories of evolution, namely, the cause of natural death. 


1 The high coefficient of temperature of the duration of life may possibly only 
be found near the upper temperature limit for the life of organisms. But this is 
sufficient for our theory. 


210 THe MercHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


It has been stated that the processes of differentiation and 
development lead also to the natural death of the individual.! 
If we express this in chemical terms it means that the chemical 
processes which underlie development also determine natural 
death. Physical chemistry has taught us to identify two chemi- 
cal processes even if only certain of their features are known. 
One of these means of identification is the temperature 
coefficient. When two chemical processes are identical, their 
velocity must be reduced by the same amount if the tempera- 
ture is lowered to the same extent. The temperature coefficient 
for the duration of life of cold-blooded organisms seems, how- 
ever, to differ enormously from the temperature coefficient for 
their rate of development. For a difference in temperature of 
10° C., the duration of life is altered five hundred times as much 
as the rate of development; and, for a change of 20°C., it is 
altered more than a hundred thousand times as much. From 
this we may conclude that, at least for the sea-urchin eggs and 
embryo, the chemical processes which determine natural 
death are certainly not identical with the processes which 
underlie their development. TT. B. Robertson has also arrived 
at the conclusion, for quite different reasons, that the process 
of senile decay is essentially different from that of growth and 
development. 


1 Weismann showed that infusorians or unicellular organisms in general are 
immortal, while he assumed that all the other organisms with the exception of their 
germ-plasm are mortal. Leo Loeb first called attention to the fact that the 
transplantation of a cancer can be repeated to an unlimited series of generations, 
and since it is the originally transplanted cancer-cell and the cells derived from it 
by multiplication that survive, he pointed out that this proved that the principle 
of immortality must also be granted to cancer-cells (1901). Later he generalized 
this idea and stated that other cells may be considered immortal in the same 
sense in which Weismann claimed this for the unicellular organisms. One can 
indeed well imagine that the same piece of skin might be transplanted through an 
indefinite series of generations of mice and that such a transplanted piece might 
outlive an indefinite number of generations of mice in exactly the same way as a 
cancer cell does. 

The natural death of the metazoa is perhaps a secondary phenomenon due 
to the cessation of respiratory motions or of the heart beat. This leads to the 
death of the cells through lack of oxygen. If respiratory motions and circulation 
could be maintained indefinitely even the metazoa might be found to be immortal. 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 211 


b) Changes in the color of butterflies produced through the 
influence of temperature—The experiments of Dorfmeister, 
Weismann, Merrifield, Standfuss, and Fischer on seasonal 
dimorphism and the aberration of color in butterflies have so 
often been discussed in biological literature that a short refer- 
ence to them will suffice. By seasonal dimorphism is meant 
the fact that species may appear at different seasons of the year 
in a somewhat different form or color. Vanessa prorsa is the 
summer form, Vanessa levana the winter form of the same 
species. By keeping the pupae of Vanessa prorsa several 
weeks at a temperature of from 0° to 1° Weismann succeeded 
in obtaining from the summer chrysalids specimens which 
resembled the winter variety, Vanessa levana. 

If we wish to get a clear understanding of the causes of 
variation in the color and pattern of butterflies, we must direct 
our attention to the experiments of Fischer, who worked with 
more extreme temperatures than his predecessors, and found 
that almost identical aberrations of color could be produced 
by both extremely high and extremely low temperatures. This 
can be seen clearly from the following tabulated results of his 
observations. At the head of each column the temperature 
to which Fischer submitted the pupae is given, and in the 
vertical column below are found the varieties that were pro- 
duced. In the vertical column A are given the normal forms: 


oto- 20°C. 4 To%.| Axa” | $3e | TE | Fee 

ichnusoides | polaris urticae ichnusa polaris ichnusoides 
(nigrita) (nigrita) 

antigone fischeri TOR) | th) caitechescieys fischeri antigone 
(iokaste) (iokaste) 

testudo dixeyi poly- erythrome-| dixeyi testudo 

chloros las 

hygiaea artemis antiopa epione artemis hygiaea 

elymi wiskotti} cardui | ...... wiskotti | elymi 

klymene merri- atalanta |  ...... merri- klymene 

fieldi fieldi 
weismanni | porima prorsa | ...... porima weismanni 


212 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


The reader will notice that the aberrations produced at a 
very low temperature (from 0° to —20°C.) are absolutely 
identical with the aberrations produced by exposing the pupae 
to extremely high temperatures (from 42° to 46° C.). Moreover 
the aberrations produced by a moderately low temperature 
(from 0° to 10° C.) are identical with the aberrations produced 
by a moderately high temperature (from 36° to 41° C.). 

From these observations Fischer concludes that it is errone- 
ous to speak of a specific effect of high and of low temperatures, 
but that there must be a common cause for the aberration found 
at the high as well as at the low temperature limits. This cause 
he seems to find in the inhibiting effects of extreme temperatures 
upon development. 

If we try to analyze such results as Fischer’s from a physico- 
chemical point of view, we must realize that what we call life 
consists of a series of chemical reactions, which are connected 
in a catenary way; inasmuch as one reaction or group of reac- 
tions (a) (e.g., hydrolyses) causes or furnishes the material for 
a second reaction or group of reactions, (0) (e.g., oxidations). 
We know that the temperature coefficient for physiological 
processes varies slightly at various parts of the scale; as a rule 
it is higher near 0° and lower near 30°. But we know also that 
the temperature coefficients do not vary equally for the various 
physiological processes. It is, therefore, to be expected that 
the temperature coefficients for the group of reactions of the 
type (a) will not be identical through the whole scale with the 
temperature coefficients for the reactions of the type (b). If, 
therefore, a certain substance is formed at the normal tempera- 
ture of the animal in such quantities as are needed for the 
catenary reaction (5), it is not to be expected that this same 
perfect balance will be maintained for extremely high or 
extremely low temperatures; it is more probable that one group 
of reactions will exceed the other and thus produce aberrant 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 213 


chemical effects, which may underlie the color aberration 
observed by Fischer and other experimenters. 

It is important to notice that Fischer was also able to produce 
aberrations through the application of narcotics. Wolfgang 
Ostwald has produced experimentally, through variation of 
temperature, dimorphism of form in Daphnia. 


IV. THE EFFECTS OF LIGHT 


At the present day nobody seriously questions the statement 
that the action of light upon organisms is primarily one of a 
chemical character. While this chemical action is of the 
utmost importance for organisms, the nutrition of which 
depends upon the action of chlorophyll, it becomes of less 
importance for organisms devoid of chlorophyll. Nevertheless, 
we find animals in which the formation of organs by regenera- 
tion is not possible unless they are exposed to light. An 
observation made by the writer on the regeneration of polyps 
in a hydroid, Eudendrium racemosum, at Woods Hole, may be 
mentioned as an instance of this. If the stem of this hydroid, 
which is usually covered with polyps, is put into an aquarium the 
polyps soon fall off. If the stems are kept in an aquarium 
where light strikes them during the day, a regeneration of 
numerous polyps takes place in a few days. If, however, the 
stems of Eudendrium are kept permanently in the dark, no 
polyps are formed even after an interval of some weeks; but 
they are formed in a few days after the same stems have been 
transferred from the dark to the light. Diffused daylight 
suffices for this effect. Goldfarb, who repeated these experi- 
ments, states that an exposure of comparatively short duration 
is sufficient to produce this effect. It is possible that the light 
favors the formation of substances which are a prerequisite 
for the origin of polyps and their growth. 

Of much greater significance than this observation are the 


214 Tue MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


facts which show that a large number of animals assume, to 
some extent, the color of the ground on which they are placed. 
Pouchet found through experiments upon crustaceans and fish 
that this influence of the ground on the color of animals is 
produced through the medium of the eyes. If the eyes are 
removed or the animals made blind in another way these 
phenomena cease. The second general fact found by Pouchet 
was that the variation in the color of the animal is brought 
about through an action of the nerves on the pigment cells of 
the skin; the nerve action being induced through the agency 
of the eye. 

The mechanism and the conditions for the change in colora- 
tion were made clear through the beautiful investigations of 
Keeble and Gamble, on the color change in crustaceans. 
According to these authors the pigment cells can, as a rule, be 
considered as consisting of a central body from which a system 
of more or less complicated ramifications or processes spreads 
out in all directions. As a rule, the center of the cell contains 
one or more different pigments which under the influence of 
nerves can spread out separately or together into the ramifica- 
tions. These phenomena of spreading and retraction of the 
pigments into or from the ramifications of the pigment cells 
form on the whole the basis for the color changes under the 
influence of environment. Thus Keeble and Gamble observed 
that Macromysis flexuosa appears transparent and colorless 
or gray on sandy ground. On a dark ground their color 
becomes darker. These animals have two pigments in their 
chromatophores, a brown pigment and a whitish or yellow 
pigment; the former is much more plentiful than the latter. 
When the animal appears transparent all the pigment is con- 
tained in the center of the cells, while the ramifications are free 
from pigment. When the animal appears brown both pigments 
are spread out into ramifications. In the condition of maximal 
spreading the animals appear black. 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 215 


This is a comparatively simple case. Much more compli- 
cated conditions were found by Keeble and Gamble in other 
crustaceans, e.g., in Hippolyte cranchii, but the influence of the 
surroundings upon the coloration of this form was also satis- 
factorily analyzed by these authors. 

While many animals show transitory changes in color under 
the influence of their surroundings, in a few cases permanent 
changes can be produced. The best examples of this are those 
which were observed by Poulton in the chrysalids of various 
butterflies, especially the small tortoise-shell. These experi- 
ments are so well known that a short reference to them will 
suffice. Poulton! found that in gilt or white surroundings the 
pupae became light colored and there was often an immense 
development of the golden spots, ‘‘so that in many cases the 
whole surface of the pupae glittered with an apparent metallic 
luster. So remarkable was the appearance that a physicist, 
to whom I showed the chrysalids, suggested that I had played a 
trick and had covered them with goldleaf.”” When black sur- 
roundings were used, ‘“‘the pupae were as a rule extremely dark, 
with only the smallest trace, and often no trace at all, of the 
golden spots which are so conspicuous in the lighter form.” 
The susceptibility of the animal to this influence of its surround- 
ings was found to be greatest during a definite period when the 
caterpillar undergoes the metamorphosis into the chrysalis stage. 
As far as the writer is aware, no physico-chemical explanation, 
except possibly Wieners’ suggestion of color photography by 
mechanical color adaptation, has ever been offered for the 
results of the type of those observed by Poulton. 


V. EFFECTS OF GRAVITATION 


a) Experiments on the egg of the frog —Gravitation can only 
indirectly affect life phenomena; namely, when we have in a 
cell two different non-miscible liquids (or a liquid and a solid) 


1 Poulton, E. B., Colours of Animals (‘‘International Scientific Series’), 
London, 1890, p. 121. 


216 Tut MEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


of different specific gravity, so that a change in the position of 
the cell or the organ may give results which can be traced to a 
change in the position of the two substances. This is very 
nicely illustrated by the frog’s egg, which has two layers of very 
viscous protoplasm one of which is black and one white. The 
dark one occupies normally the upper position in the egg and 
may therefore be assumed to possess a smaller specific gravity 
than the white substance. When the egg is turned with the 
white pole upward a tendency of the white protoplasm to flow 
down again manifests itself. It is, however, possible to prevent 
or retard this rotation of the highly viscous protoplasm, by 
compressing the eggs between horizontal glass plates. Such 
compression experiments may lead to rather interesting results, 
as O. Schultze first pointed out. Pfliiger had already shown 
that the first plane of division in a fertilized frog’s egg is vertical 
and Roux established the fact that the first plane of division is 
identical with the plane of symmetry of the later embryo. 
Schultze found that if the frog’s egg is turned upside down at the 
time of its first division and kept in this abnormal position, 
through compression between two glass plates for about twenty 
hours, a small number of eggs may give rise to twins. It is 
possible, in this case, that the tendency of the black part of the 
egg to rotate upward along the surface of the egg leads to a 
separation of its first cells, such a separation leading to the 
formation of twins. 

T. H. Morgan made an interesting additional observation. 
He destroyed one-half of the egg after the first segmentation 
and found that the half which remained alive gave rise to only 
one-half of an embryo, thus confirming an older observation of 
Roux. When, however, Morgan put the egg upside down after 
the destruction of one of the first two cells, and compressed the 
eggs between two glass plates, the surviving half of the egg gave 
rise to a perfect embryo of half-size (and not to a half-embryo 
of normal size as before). Obviously in this case the tendency 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 217 


of the protoplasm to flow back to its normal position was 
partially successful and led to a partial or complete separation 
of the living from the dead half; whereby the former was 
enabled to form a whole embryo, which, of course, possessed 
only half the size of an embryo originating from a whole egg. 

b) Experiments on hydroids.—A striking influence of gravita- 
tion can be observed in a hydroid, Antennularia antennina, 
from the Bay of Naples. This hydroid consists of a long, 
straight, mam stem which grows vertically upward and 
which has at regular intervals very fine and short bristle- 
like lateral branches, on the upper side of which the polyps 
grow. The main stem is negatively geotropic, i.e., its apex 
continues to grow vertically upward when we put it obliquely 
into the aquarium, while the roots grow vertically downward. 
The writer observed that when the stem is put horizontally 
into the water the short lateral branches on the lower side 
give rise to an altogether different kind of organ, namely, to 
roots, and these roots grow indefinitely in length and attach 
themselves to solid bodies; while if the stem had remained in its 
normal position no further growth would have occurred in the 
lateral branches. From the upper side of the horizontal stem 
new stems grow out, mostly directly from the original stem, 
occasionally also from the short lateral branches. It is thus 
possible to force upon this hydroid an arrangement of organs 
which is altogether different from the hereditary arrangement. 
The writer had called the change in the hereditary arrange- 
ment of organs or the transformation of organs by external 
forces heteromorphosis. We cannot now go any farther into 
this subject, which should, however, prove of interest in rela- 
tion to the problem of heredity. 

If it is correct to apply inferences drawn from the observa- 
tion on the frog’s egg to the behavior of Antennularia, one might 
conclude that the cells of Antennularia also contain non-miscible 
substances of different specific gravity, and that wherever 


218 Tue MeEcHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


the specifically lighter substance comes in contact with the 
sea-water (or gets near the surface of the cell) the growth of a 
stem is favored; while contact with the sea-water of the 
specifically heavier of the substances, will favor the formation 
of roots. 


VI. THE EXPERIMENTAL CONTRO! OF ANIMAL INSTINCTS 


a) Experiments on the mechanism of heliotropic reactions in 
animals.—Since the instinctive reactions of animals are as 
hereditary as their morphological character, a discussion of 
experiments on the physico-chemical character of the instinctive 
reactions of animals should not be entirely omitted from this 
sketch. It is obvious that such experiments must begin with 
the simplest type of instincts, if they are expected to lead to 
any results; and it is also obvious that only such animals must 
be selected for this purpose, the reactions of which are not 
complicated by associative memory or, as it may preferably be 
termed, associative hysteresis. 

The simplest type of instincts is represented by the purpose- 
ful motions of animals to or from a source of energy, e.g., light; 
and it is with some of these that we intend to deal here. When 
we expose winged aphides (after they have flown away from the 
plant), or young caterpillars of Porthesia chrysorrhoea (when 
they are aroused from their winter sleep), or marine or fresh- 
water copepods and many other animals, to diffused daylight 
falling in from a window, we notice a tendency among these 
animals to move toward the source of light. If the animals are 
naturally sensitive, or if they are rendered sensitive through the 
agencies which we shall mention later, and if the light is strong 
enough, they move toward the source of light in as straight a 
line as the imperfections and peculiarities of their locomotor 
apparatus will permit. It is also obvious that we are here 
dealing with a forced reaction in which the animals have no 
more choice in the direction of their motion than have the iron 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 219 


filings in their arrangement in a magnetic field. This can be 
proved very nicely in the case of starving caterpillars of Por- 
thesia. The writer put such caterpillars into a glass tube the 
axis of which was at right angles to the plane of the window: 
the caterpillars went to the window side of the tube and 
remained there, even if leaves of their food plant were put into 
the tube directly behind them. Under such conditions the 
animals actually died from starvation, the light preventing 
them from turning to the food, which they eagerly ate when the 
light allowed them to doso. One cannot say that these animals, 
which we call positively heliotropic, are attracted by the light, 
since it can be shown that they go toward the source of light 
even if in so doing they move from places of a higher to places 
of a lower degree of illumination. 

The writer has advanced the following theory of these 
instinctive reactions. Animals of the type of those mentioned 
are automatically oriented by the light in such a way that 
symmetrical elements of their retina (or skin) are struck by 
the rays of light at the same angle. In this case the intensity 
of light is the same for both retinae or symmetrical parts of the 
skin. 

This automatic orientation is determined by two factors, 
first a peculiar photosensitiveness of the retina (or skin), and 
second a peculiar nervous connection between the retina and 
the muscular apparatus. In symmetrically built heliotropic 
animals in which the symmetrical muscles participate equally 
in locomotion, the symmetrical muscles work with equal energy 
as long as the photochemical processes in both eyes are identi- 
cal. If, however, one eye is struck by stronger light than the 
other, the symmetrical muscles will work unequally and in 
positively heliotropic animals those muscles will work with 
greater energy which brings the plane of symmetry back into 
the direction of the rays of light and the head toward the source 
of light. As soon as both eyes are struck by the rays of light 


220 Tue MercuHanistic CoNCcEPTION OF LIFE 


at the same angle, there is no more reason for the animal to 
deviate from this direction and it will move in a straight line. 
All this holds good on the supposition that the animals are 
exposed to only one source of light and are very sensitive to 
light. 

Additional proof for the correctness of this theory was 
furnished through the experiments of G. H. Parker and 8. J. 
Holmes. The former worked on a butterfly, Vanessa antiope, 
the latter on other arthropods. All the animals were in a 
marked degree positively heliotropic. These authors found 
that if one cornea is blackened in such an animal, it moves 
continually in a circle when it is exposed to a source of light, 
and in these motions the eye which is not covered with paint is 
directed toward the center of the circle. The animal behaves, 
therefore, as if the darkened eye were in the shade. 

b) The production of positive heliotropism by acids and other 
means and the periodic depth migrations of pelagic animals.— 
When we observe a dense mass of copepods collected from a 
fresh-water pond, we notice that some have a tendency to go to 
the light while others go in the opposite direction and many, 
if not the majority, are indifferent to light. It is an easy matter 
to make the negatively heliotropic or the indifferent copepods 
almost instantly positively heliotropic by adding a small but 
definite amount of carbon dioxide in the form of carbonated 
water to the water in which the animals are contained. If the 
animals are contained in 50 c.c. of water it suffices to add from 
3 to 6 c.c. of carbonated water to make all the copepods energeti- 
cally positively heliotropic. This heliotropism lasts about 
half an hour (probably until all the carbon dioxide has again 
diffused into the air). Similar results may be obtained with 
any other acid. 

The same experiments may be made with another fresh- 
water crustacean, namely Daphnia, with this difference, how- 
ever, that it is as a rule necessary to lower the temperature of 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 221 


the water also. If the water containing the Daphniae is cooled 
and at the same time carbon dioxide added, the animals which 
were before indifferent to light now become most strikingly 
positively heliotropic. Marine copepods can be made posi- 
tively heliotropic by the lowering of the temperature alone, or 
by a sudden increase in the concentration of the sea-water. 

These data have a bearing upon the depth migrations of 
pelagic animals, as was pointed out years ago by Theo. T. Groom 
and the writer. It is well known that many animals living 
near the surface of the ocean or fresh-water lakes, have a 
tendency to migrate upward toward evening and downward 
in the morning and during the day. These periodic motions 
are determined to a large extent, if not exclusively, by the 
heliotropism of these animals. Since the consumption of carbon 
dioxide by the green plants ceases toward evening, the tension 
of this gas in the water must rise and this must have the effect 
of inducing positive heliotropism or increasing its intensity. 
At the same time the temperature of the water near the surface 
is lowered and this also increases the positive heliotropism in the 
organisms. 

The faint light from the sky is sufficient to cause animals 
which are in a high degree positively heliotropic to move 
vertically upward toward the light, as experiments with such 
pelagic animals, e.g., copepods, have shown. When, in the 
morning, the absorption of carbon dioxide by the green algae 
begins again and the temperature of the water rises, the animals 
lose their positive heliotropism, and slowly sink down or become 
negatively heliotropic and migrate actively downward. 

These experiments have also a bearing upon the problem 
of the inheritance of instincts. The character which is trans- 
mitted in this case is not the tendency to migrate periodically 
upward and downward, but the positive heliotropism. The 
tendency to migrate is the outcome of the fact that periodically 
varying external conditions induce a periodic change in the 


222 Tue MercuHaNniIstic CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


sense and intensity of the heliotropism of these animals. It 
is of course immaterial for the result, whether the carbon 
dioxide or any other acid diffuse into the animal from the out- 
side or whether they are produced inside in the tissue-cells of 
the animals. Davenport and Cannon found that Daphniae, 
which at the beginning of the experiment react sluggishly to 
light, react much more quickly after they have been made to 
go to the light a few times. The writer is inclined to attribute 
this result to the effect of acids, e.g., carbon dioxide, produced 
in the animals themselves in consequence of their motion. 
A similar effect of the acids was shown by A. D. Waller in the 
case of the response of a nerve to stimuli. 

The writer observed many years ago that winged male and 
female ants are positively heliotropic and that their heliotropic 
sensitiveness increases and reaches its maximum toward the 
period of nuptial flight. Since the workers show no heliotropism 
it looks as if an internal secretion from the sexual glands were 
the cause of their heliotropic sensitiveness. V. Kellogg has 
observed that bees also become intensely positively heliotropic 
at the period of their wedding flight, in fact so much so that by 
letting light fall into the observation hive from above, the bees 
are prevented from leaving the hive through the exit at the 
lower end. 

We notice also the reverse phenomenon, namely, that 
chemical changes produced in the animal destroy its heli- 
otropism. The caterpillars of Porthesia chrysorrhoea are very 
strongly positively heliotropic when they are first aroused from 
their winter sleep. This heliotropic sensitiveness lasts only as 
long as they are not fed. If they are kept permanently without 
food they remain permanently positively heliotropic until 
they die from starvation. It is to be inferred that as soon as 
these animals take up food, the formation of a substance or 
substances in their bodies takes place, diminishing or annihilat- 
ing their heliotropic sensitiveness. 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 223 


The heliotropism of animals is identical with the heli- 
otropism of plants. The writer has shown that the experiments 
on the effect of acids on the heliotropism of copepods can be 
repeated with the same result in Volvox. It is, therefore, 
erroneous to try to explain these heliotropic reactions of animals 
on the basis of peculiarities (e.g., vision) which are not found 
in plants. 

We may briefly discuss the question of the transmission 
through the sex-cells of such instincts as are based upon heli- 
otropism. This problem reduces itself simply to that of the 
method whereby the gametes transmit heliotropism to the larvae 
or to the adult. The writer has expressed the idea that all 
that is necessary for this transmission is the presence of a pho- 
tosensitive substance in the eyes (or in the skin) of the animal. 
For the transmission of this the gametes need not contain 
anything more than a catalyzer or ferment for the synthesis 
of the photosensitive substance in the body of the animal. 
What has been said in regard to animal heliotropism might, 
if space permitted, be extended, mutatis mutandis, to geotropism 
and stereotropism. 

c) The tropic reactions of certain trssue-cells and the 
morphogenetic effects of these reactions.—Since plant-cells show 
heliotropic reactions identical with those of animals, it is not 
surprising that certain tissue-cells also show reactions which 
belong to the class of tropisms. These reactions of tissue-cells 
are of special interest by reason of their bearing upon the 
inheritance of morphological characters. An example of this 
is found in the tiger-like marking of the yolk sac of the embryo 
of Fundulus and in the marking of the young fish itself. The 
writer found that the former is entirely, and the latter at least 
in part, due to the creeping of the chromatophores upon 
the blood-vessels. The chromatophores are ‘at first scattered 
irregularly over the yolk sac and show their characteristic 
ramifications (Fig. 36, p. 106). There is at that time no definite 


224 Ture MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


relation between blood-vessels and chromatophores. As soon 
as a ramification of a chromatophore comes in contact with 
a blood-vessel the whole mass of the chromatophore creeps 
gradually on the blood-vessel (Fig. 37) and forms a complete 
sheath around the vessel, until finally all the chromatophores 
form a sheath around the vessels and no more pigment cells 
are found in the meshes between the vessels (Fig. 38). Nobody 
who has not actually watched the process of the creeping of 
the chromatophores upon the blood-vessels would anticipate 
that the tiger-like coloration of the yolk sac in the later 
stages of development was brought about in this way. Similar 
facts can be observed in regard to the first marking of 
the embryo itself. The writer is inclined to believe that we 
are here dealing with a case of chemotropism, and that the 
oxygen of the blood may be the cause of the spreading of the 
chromatophores around the blood-vessels. Certain observa- 
tions seem to indicate the possibility that in the adult the 
chromatophores have, in some forms at least, a more rigid 
structure and are prevented from acting in the way indicated. 
It seems to the writer that such observations as those made on 
Fundulus might simplify the problem of the hereditary trans- 
mission of certain markings. 

Driesch has found that a tropism underlies the arrangement 
of the skeleton in the pluteus larvae of the sea-urchin. The 
position of this skeleton is predetermined by the arrangement 
of the mesenchyme cells, and Driesch has shown that these 
cells migrate actively to the place of their destination, possibly 
led there under the influence of certain chemical substances. 
When Driesch scattered these cells mechanically before their 
migration, they nevertheless reached their destination. 

In the developing eggs of insects the nuclei, together with 
‘some cytoplasm, migrate to the periphery of the egg. Herbst 
pointed out that this might be a case of chemotropism, caused 
by the oxygen surrounding the egg. The writer has expressed 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 225 


the opinion that the formation of the blastula may be caused 
generally by a tropic reaction of the blastomeres, the latter 
being forced by an outside influence to creep to the surface of 
the egg. 

These examples may suffice to indicate that the arrangement 
of definite groups of cells and the morphological effects resulting 
therefrom may be determined by forces lying outside the cells. 
Since these forces are ubiquitous and constant it appears as if 
we were dealing exclusively with the influence of a gamete; 
while in reality all that is necessary for the gamete to transmit 
is a certain form of irritability. 

d) Factors which determine place and time for the deposition 
of eggs.—For the preservation of species the instinct of animals 
to lay their eggs in places in which the young larvae find their 
food and can develop is of paramount importance. A simple 
example of this instinct is the fact that the common fly lays 
its eggs on putrid material which serves as food for the young 
larvae. When a piece of meat and of fat of the same animal are 
placed side by side, the fly will deposit its eggs upon the meat 
on which the larvae can grow, and not upon the fat, on which 
they would starve. Here we are dealing with the effect of a 
volatile nitrogenous substance which reflexly causes the peri- 
staltic motions for the laying of the egg in the female fly. 

Kammerer has investigated the conditions for the laying of 
eggs in two forms of salamanders, e.g., Salamandra atra and 
S. maculosa. In both forms the eggs are fertilized in the body 
and begin to develop in the uterus. Since there is room only 
for a few larvae in the uterus, a large number of eggs perish 
and this number is the greater the longer the period of gestation. 
It thus happens that when the animals retain their eggs a long 
time, very few young ones are born; and these are in a rather 
advanced stage of development, owing to the long time which 
elapsed since they were fertilized. When the animal lays its eggs 
comparatively soon after copulation, many eggs (from twelve to 


226 THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


seventy-two) are produced and the larvae are of course in an 
early stage of development. In the early stage the larvae possess 
gills and can therefore live in water, while in later stages they 
have no gills and breathe through their lungs. Kammerer 
showed that both forms of Salamandra can be induced to lay 
their eggs early or late, according to the physical conditions 
surrounding them. If they are kept in water or in proximity 
to water and in a moist atmosphere they have a tendency to 
lay their eggs earlier and a comparatively high temperature 
enhances the tendency to shorten the period of gestation. If 
the salamanders are kept in comparative dryness they show a 
tendency to lay their eggs rather late and a low temperature 
enhances this tendency. 

Since Salamandra atra is found in rather dry alpine regions 
with a relatively low temperature and Salamandra maculosa in 
lower regions with plenty of water and a higher temperature, 
the fact that S. atra bears young which are already developed 
and beyond the stage of aquatic life, while S. maculosa bears 
young ones in an earlier stage, has been termed adaptation. 
Kammerer’s experiments, however, show that we are dealing 
with the direct effects of definite outside forces. While we 
may speak of adaptation when all or some of the variables 
which determine a reaction are unknown, it is obviously in the 
interest of further scientific progress to connect cause and 
effect directly whenever our knowledge allows us to do so. 


VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS 


The discovery of DeVries, that new species may arise by 
mutation and the wide if not universal applicability of Mendel’s 
law to phenomena of heredity, as shown especially by Bateson 
and his pupils, must, for the time being, if not permanently, 
serve as a basis for theories of evolution. These discoveries 
place before the experimental] biologist the definite task of pro- 
ducing mutations by physico-chemical means. It is true that 


INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS 227 


certain authors claim to have succeeded in this, but the writer 
wishes to apologize to these authors for his inability to convince 
himself of the validity of their claims at the present moment. 
He thinks that only continued breeding of these apparent 
mutants through several generations can afford convincing 
evidence that we are here dealing with mutants rather than 
with merely pathological variations. 

What was said in regard to the production of new species by 
physico-chemical means may be repeated with still more 
justification in regard to the second problem of transformation, 
namely, the making of living from inanimate matter. The 
purely morphological imitations of bacteria or cells which 
physicists have now and then proclaimed as artificially produced 
living beings, or the plays on words by which, e.g., the regenera- 
tion of broken crystals and the regeneration of lost limbs by 
a crustacean were declared identical will not appeal to the 
biologist. We know that growth and development in animals 
and plants are determined by definite although complicated 
series of catenary chemical reactions, which result in the synthesis 
of a definite compound or group of compounds, namely, nucleins. 

The nucleins have the peculiarity of acting as ferments or 
enzymes for their own synthesis. Thus a given type of nucleus 
will continue to synthesize other nuclein of its own kind. This 
determines the continuity of a species; since each species has, 
probably, its own specific nuclein or nuclear material. But it 
also shows us that whoever claims to have succeeded in making 
living matter from inanimate will have to prove that he has 
succeeded in producing nuclear material which acts as a ferment 
for its own synthesis and thus reproduces itself. Nobody has 
thus far succeeded in this, although nothing warrants us in taking 
it for granted that this task is beyond the power of science. 


1Since this was written the beautiful experiments of Kammerer as well as 
those of Tower seem to have furnished proof that external conditions can cause 
hereditary changes in animals. 


INDEX 


Abrazas, 17. 

Acid poisoning, 18 ff. 

Acids, influences of, on heliotropism, 
a 220 oe and salts, antagonism, 
0: 

Action of potassium cyanide, 156 ff. 

Activation of the egg, 6 ff. 

Agalma, 208. 

Amphitrite, 144. 

ey Anette experimental control 

of, 

Antagonism of acids and salts, 179 ff. 

Antagonism of three salts, 182 ff. 

Antagonistic salt action, 172 ff. 

Antedon rosacea, 198. 

Antennularia antennina, 85, 91, 107, 


17. 

Ants, 47, 48. 

Aphides, 19, 37 ff., 41 ff., 46. 

Arabacia, 157, 164, 190. 

Area striata, 79. 

Arrhenius, 5, 198. 

Artificial Causation of positive heliotro- 
pism, 43, 

Artificial parthenogenesis, 7, 116 ff., 
127 ff., 199 ff. 

Artificial production of double and 
multiple monstrosities in sea-urchins, 


00 ff. 
Artificial production of living matter, 5. 
Ascidians, 
Associative memory, 55, 73. 
Asterias capitata, 198. 
Asterias forbesit, 135. 
Asterias ochracea, 138, 162, 198. 
Asterina, 132, 198. 
Atwater, 4. 
‘Aura seminalis,’’ 113. 


Baer, K. E. von, 114. 

Balanus Eeotara, 46, 53. 

Baltzer, 1 

Bancroft, 51. 

Bardeen, 92. 

Barry, 114. 

Bases as  membrane-forming 
stances, 134. 

Bataillon, 11. 

Bateson, 226. 

Bees, 49. 

Beginning of scientific biology, 4 

Berzelius, 4. 

Biedermann, 173. 

Biology, beginning of scientific, 4. 

Bischof, 115. 

Blaauw, 29. 

Bohn, 40, 49, 54, 55. 

Bolina, 208. 

Boveri, 15. 

Biitschii, 145, ao 147. 

Bunsen, 27, 29, 30, 41, 58. 

Bunsen-Roscoe nee 27, 28 ff., 40, 58. 

Butyric acid, treatment of egg, 10. 


sub- 


Callianira, 208. 

Cannon, 222. 

Catalysis of esters, 43. 

Oatalyzer, 4, 5 

“Center of coordination,”’ 72. 

Cerianthus membranaceus, 93. 

Chaetopterus, 117. 

Ohange in intensity of light, 54 ff. 

Changes in color of butterflies pro- 
Suced | eee influence of tempera- 

e, fi 

Chemical agencies, effects of, 196 ff. 

Chemical symmetry, 38, 39. 

Chemotropism, 224. 

Chlorostoma, 198. 

Chromosomes, 16 ff. 

Chun, 208. 

Ciamician, 38. 

Cinerarias, 37. 

Ciona intestinalis, 68, 92. 

Claparéde, 51. 

Cohen, 208. 

Color, changes in, of butterflies, 
through influence of temperature, 
211; color adaptation, 80 ff., 213 ff.; 
color blindness, 16. 

Compulsory movements, 38. 

Consciousness, 72. 

Contents of life, 26 ff. 

Cooke, 99. 

Cooperative action of salts causing 
impermeability of the egg mem- 
brane, 176 ff. 

Coordinated movements in reflexes, 


70. 

Copepod, 43, 62. 

Correns, 21. 

Cortical layer, of unfertilized egg, 10, 
89; mechanical destruction of, 


10, 11. 
Cosine law of illumination, 41. 
Crabs, fiddler, 60. 

Ctenolabrus, 25. 

Cuma Rathkii, 51. 

Cytolysis, of the egg, 146; mechanical 

causation of, 145. 

Cytolytic agents, 10, 132ff., 136, 
144 02. 


De Vries, 226. 

Daphnia, 43, 208, 213, 220. 

Darwin, Charles, 195, 196. 

Darwin, F., 58. 

Davenport, 222. 

Death and development, 
chemical processes, 209 ff. 

Delage, 11, 131, 203. 

Depth migration, 220. 

Development, death and, different 
chemical processes, 209 ff. 

Difference of salt permeability of 
various membranes, 189 ff. 

Diffusion of salts, 177 ff. 


different 


229 


230 


Tue MecuHanistic ConcEepTion OF LIFE 


Doncaster, 21. 
Dorfmeister, 211. 

Driesch, 101, 108, 204, 224. 
Drosophila, 21. 

Dumas, 114. 

Dzierzon, 116. 


Ear, otoliths of, and orientation to 
center of gravity of the earth, 57. 
Effect of retarded oxidations on 

poisonous salt action, 190 ff. 

Effects of chemical agencies, 196 ff.; 
of gravitation, 215; of light, 213. 
Egg, activation of, 6 ff.; butyric acid, 
treatment of, 10; cortical layer of 
unfertilized, 10, 189; increased 
sensitiveness of unfertilized, to 
cytolytic agents, 163 ff.; produc- 

tion of twins from, 204 ff. 

Eggs, factors which determine time 
and place for the deposition of, 225; 
immunity of, to body extracts of 
same species, 142; varying sus- 
ceptibility of, 144. 

Emulsion theory of membrane forma- 
tion, 145, 147 ff. 

Enzymes, 5, 122, 123. 

Esters, catalysis of, 43. 

Ethics, 3, 5, 31 ff., 62 

Eudendrium racemosum, 213. 


Experimental control of animal 
instincts, 218. 

Experiments, on hydroids, 217; on 
the egg of the frog, 216; on the 


mechanism of heliotropic reactions, 
218; localization, 35. 


Factors which determine time and 
phce for the deposition of eggs, 


Ferments of oxidation, 5. 

Fertilization, 6; fertilization mem- 
brane, 8, 148 ff. 

Fiddler crabs, 60. 

Fischer, 211, 212, 213. 

Fischer, Emil, 115. 

Fovea centralis, 39. 

Francé, 58. 

Froschl, 29. 

Fundulus heteroclitus, 25, 105, 172 ff., 
175, 179 ff., 223. 

Fusion of normally double organs, 207. 


Galvanotropism, 50 ff. 

Gamble, 214, 215. 

Gammarus, 170ff., 189; poisonous 
action of distilled water on, 170 ff. 

Gemmill, 121. 

Geotropism, 56 ff., 89, 217, 223. 

Gies, 175. 

Godlewski, 15, 95, 198, 199. 

Goldfarb, 213. 

Gravitation, effects of, 215. 

Groom, 221. 

Growth, 96 ff., 100 ff.; mechanics of, in 
animals, 95. 

Growth and light, 213. 

Guyer, 17 18. 


Haberlandt, 58. 
Hagedoorn, 15, 199. 
Handovski, 99. 
Hardy, 148. 


Hepmouieus character of organisms, 
2. 


Hartmann, E. von, 35. 

Harvey, 189. k 

Heliotropic animals, 41; heliotropic 
reactions, experiments on the mech- 
anism of, 218. i 

Heliotropism, 27 ff., 220ff.; artificial 
causation of positive, 43, 220; influ- 
ence of acids on, 42, 220. 

Henking, 16 

Henschen, 79. 

Herbst, 92, 134, 186, 187, 204, 207, 224. 

Heredity, 4, 15 ff., 49, 52, 101. 

Hertwig, O., 116, 134, 208. 

Hertwig, R., 7. 

Heterogeneous hybridization, 24, 25, 


Heteromorphosis, 85 ff., 217 ff. 
Hippolyte cranchii, 215. 
His, 100, 101, 115. 


Huxley, 15. 
Huyghens, 104, 107. 
Habe ceaon, heterogeneous, 24, 25, 


ff. 
Hybrids, maternal character of hetero- 
geneous, 199. 
Hydra, 93 ft. 
Hydroids, Experiments on, 217. : 
Hypertonic sea-water, 7, 116 ff., 131 ff. 
Hypotricha, 55. 


Illumination, Cosine law of, 41; inten- 
sity of, 44. 

Immunity, 142. 

Immunity of eggs to body extracts 
of same species, 142. 

Increased sensitiveness of unfertilized 
egg to cytolytic agents, 163 ff. 

Influence of membrane formation in 
causing the egg to develop, 150 ff. 

Influence of temperature, 207 ff. 

Infusoria Coelenterates, 74. 

Instincts, 69. 

Intensity of illumination, 44. 


Jacobi, 113. 
Jennings, 55, 60. 


Kammerer, 225, 226, 227. 

Keeble, 214, 215. 

Kellogg, V., 49, 222. 

Knaffl, von, 136, 147. 

Koeppe, 148. 

Kupelwieser, 15, 21, 125, 198, 199. 


Laplace, 4, 5. 

Lavoisier, 4, 5. 

Law of segregation, 16, 20 ff. 

Leeuwenhook, 113 

Liebig, 115. 

Life, contents of, 26 ff. 

“Life principle,”’ 14, 15. 

Light, change in intensity of, 54 ff.; 
effects of, 213; growth and, 213; 
photochemical action of, 30, 36; 
Sone of intensity of, by animals, 
52 ff. 

Lillie, F., 12. 

Lillie, R., 10, 132, 136, 174, 181. 


INDEX 


231 


Living matter, artificial production 


Poca oiioe experiments, 35. 
Loeb, Leo, 48, 210. 

Lottia, 209. 

Lucas, 208. 

Pavlina toe 

Lyon 

ryan theory," 143. 
Lysins, 139 ff. 


McClung, 16, 17. 

Mach, 57 

Macromysis fezuosa, 214, 

Margelis, 89, 107. 

Maternal character of heterogeneous 
hybrids, 199. 


Mathews, A. P., 11, 144, 156. 
Maxwell, S. S., 39, 208. 
Mead, 7, 117. 


Mechanical causation of cytolysis, 145, 

Mechanical destruction of cortical 
layer, 10, 11. 

Mechanics of growth in animals, 95. 

Membrane of fertilization, 8, 148 ff.; 
membrane-forming substances, bases 
as, 134; membrane formation, emul- 
sion theory of, 145, 147 ff.; membrane 
formation, influence of, in causing egg 
to develop, 150 ff. 

Memory, associative, 55, 73. 

Mood els 4, 16, 20, 21, 49, 52, 59, 60, 


26 
Mendel’s laws, 4, 15 ff., 20, 49, 52, 
59 ff., 226. 


Menidia, 25. 
Merrifield, 211. 
Meyerhof, 190. 
Miescher, 114, 115. 
Minkowski, 79. 


Monstrosities, artificial production of, 
in sea-urc. 

Montgomery, 16. 

Morgan, 7, 17, 19, 21, 92, 117, 119, 216. 

Morphology, physiological, 109. 

Movements, compulsory, 38. 

Munk, 35, 79. 

Muscles, osmotic phenomena in, 99. 

Mytilus, 198. 


Natural selection, 50 ff. 
Némec, 58, 

Nereis, 12. 

Neuberg, C., 38. 
Norman, 117. 


i aaa harmonious character of, 
3 


Organs, fusion of normally double, 207. 
Osmotic phenomena in muscles, 99. 
Osterhout, 177, 178, 179, 188. 
Ostwald, Wilhelm, 4. 

Ostwald, Wolfgang, 38, 213. 

Otoliths of ear and orientation to 
center of gravity of the earth, 57. 

Overton, 148, 177, 178, 179, 191. 

Oxidation, ferments of, 5. 

Oxidations, and_ their relation to the 
egg after fertilization, 13,157, 160 ff., 
164; in their relation to life and 
death, 14, 15; effect of retarded, on 
poisonous salt action, 190 ff 


Parker, 39, 49, 220. 
Parthenogenesis, 117 ff.; 
116 ff., 127 ff., 199 ff. 
Parthenogenetic development, varying 

suscep ibrity of eggs to, 144. 
Pauli, 99, 181. 
Pawlow, 62. 
Pennaria, 91. 
Peter, 208. 
Pettenkofer, 4. 
Pfliiger, 216. 
Photochemical action of light, 30, 36. 
Photochemical, effects, 27, 38, 39, 
substances, 39. 
Photosensitive surfaces, 39. _ J 
Photosensitiveness, varying, in animals, 


45. 
Phyllozera, 19. 
Physiological morphology, 109. 
Planarians, 39, 54. 
Plasmolysis, 177. 
Poisoning, acid, 18 ff.; salt, 186 ff. 
Poisonous action of distilled water on 
Gammarus, 170 ff 
Polarization, 92 ff. 
Polygordius, 53. 
Polynoe, 132, 158. 
ea chrysorrhoea, 47, 48, 218 ff., 


artificial, 7 


Potassium cyanide, action of, 156 ff. 

Pouchet, 80, 214. 

Poulton, 215. 

Prevost, 114. 

Procter, 181. 

Production of twins from one egg 
through a change in the chemical 
constitution of the sea-water, 204 ff. 

Protective solution, 172. 

Purposeful character of reflexes, 66. 

Pycnopodia, 198. 

Pyrrhocoris, 16. 


Radi, 49. 


Ranke, 99. 

Rayleigh, 147, 152. 

Reflex, 65 ff 

Reflexes, coordinated movements in, 
70; purposeful character of, 66. 


Ringer, 172, 173. 

Robertson, T. B., 185, 208, 210. 
Role of water in segmentation, 99. 
Roscoe, 27, 29, 30, 41, 58 

Roux, 24, 216 

Rubner, 4 


Sachs, 104, 107. 

Salamandra atra, 225. 

Salamandra maculosa, 225. 

Salt poisoning, 186 ff.; difference of 
permeability of various membranes, 
189 ff. 

Salts, antagonism of acids and, 179 ff.; 
antagonism of three salts, 182 ff.; 
cooperative action of, causing im- 
permeability of egg ELAN, 
176 ff.; diffusion of, 177 ff 

Schmiedeberg, 173. 

Schopenhauer, 35. 

Schultze, 216. 

Sea-water, hypertonic, 7, 116 ff., 131 ff. 

Segregation, law of, 16, 50 ff. 


232 


THE MECHANISTIC CONCEPTION OF LIFE 


Selection, of intensity of light by ani- 
mals, 52 ff.; natural, 50 ff. 

Sex determination, 16. 

Shearer, 11. 

Sipunculides, 141. 

Snyder, C. D., 39, 208. 

Solution, protective, 172. 

Spallanzani, 113. 

Spermatozoa, 113 ff. 

Spermatozoon, twofold action of, in 
fertilization, 12 ff., 132 ff., 161 ff. 

“Spezifische Bildungsstoffe,”’ 104. 

Spirogyra, 177 ff., 188. 

ieee easier movements, 71. 

Standfuss, 211. 

Stereotropism, 91 ff., 223. 

Stevens, 17. 

Stieglitz, 43. 

Stockard, 206, 207. 

Strongylocentrotus 140, 
198. 

Sironguiocentrolus purpuratus, 8, 139 ff., 

44, 162, 189, 197, 201, 205. 
Sumner, 80. 
Symmetry, ‘chemical, 38, 39. 


franciscanus, 


Temperature as a cytolytic agent, 
135 ff., ff. 

Tower, $0, ee 

Traube, 96. 

APOE e yay 36 ff., 54, 55, 60, 62, 

Tubularia mesembryanthemum, 95, 97. 

Tunicates, 92. 

Twin formation, 19, 205. 

Twins, peedaenon of, from egg, 204 ff. 

Twofold action of spermatozoon in 
fertilization, 12 ff., 132 ff., 161 ff. 


Tyrosin, 23. 


Uexkuell, 
“ Gorereeh {eduarapindlichiveit, "" 54, 


Van Duyne, 92. 

van’t Hoff, 208. 

Vanessa antiope, 220. 

Vanessa levana, 211. 

Vanessa prorsa, 211. 

Verne photosensitiveness in animals, 


Varying susceptibility of eggs of 
different species to parthenogenetic 
development, 144, 

Vaucheria, 188. 

Virchow, 127, 128. 

vious 79 ff. 


Voi 
Tae 51, 223. 


Waller, A. D., 222. 

Warburg, 13, 157, 160, 189, 190. 

Wasteneys, 13, 157, 181, 182. 

Water, distilled, poisonous action of 
distilled water on, 170ff.; réle of, 
in segmentation, 99. 

Weismann, 91, 210, 211. 


5. 
“ Will,”’ 35 ff., 40. 
Wilson, 17, 18, 19. 


X-chromosomes, 18 ff. 


“ Zielstrebigkeit,’’ 24. 
Zuntz, 4. 


