The Gospel and the Church (Alfred Loisy, 1908)
==========================================================
Loisy's 1908 Gospel and the Church — the French modernist's reply to Harnack; the book that defined Catholic modernism. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Theology Libra Py 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


THE 
GOsPCUL AND THE CHURCH 


THE GOSPEL AND 
PX THE CHURCH 


/ 

/ 

—_ —™ 
é VAS 


629 BY 


ALFRED LOISY 


TRANSLATED BY 


CHRISTOPHER HOME 


NEW YORK 
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS 
1904 


org? 


of 


7 


CONTESTS 


SECTION PAGS 
INTRODUCTION 3 ‘ ; : 2 1 

I. Tue Sources oF THE GOSPELS ., <3 
II. Tue Kiyepom or Heaven . 4 5 = oe 


III. Twe Son or Gop. 4 5 5 : 88 
IV. Tue CuHurcH 5 fi , ; - 139 
VY. Tue Curistian Dogma 5 « 180 


VI. Tue CatHotic WorsHIP 3 J 5 BOE 


tir GOSPEL. AND THE 
CHURCH 


INTRODUCTION 


TuHE lectures of Herr A. Harnack on the essence 
of Christianity! have made considerable stir in 
the Protestant world, particularly in Germany. 
Embodying the profession of a personal faith in 
the form of a historical review, they answered 
without doubt to the needs of many minds, and 
summarized a whole group of ideas in such a way 
as to make a satisfactory meeting-ground for 
several forms of belief. But the votes of the 
theologians have been divided. Some have 
formulated reservations, others have criticized 
sharply a definition of Christianity which elimi- 
nates from its essence almost everything that is 
regarded ordinarily as Christian belief. 

No doubt this work would have attracted more 

1 “Das Wesen des Christentums.” Leipzig, 1900. 
B 


2 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


attention in France and even among Catholics, 
had it not followed the “Esquisse d’une philo- 
sophic de la réligion” of M. A. Sabatier, a book 
strongly resembling it in point of view and in 
conclusions. However, a French translation has 
recently been published, and already some of the 
Catholic reviews have drawn the attention of 
their readers to it, giving analyses of its contents 
while insisting on the need of certain amend- 
ments. The originality of such a_ theologico- 
historical synthesis strikes the intelligence, at a 
time when science is becoming erudite and dis- 
trustful of generalizing theories, when religious 
problems are discussed from a point of view that 
may be called purely phenomenal, when many 
think theology a vain thing, whilst others, on the 
contrary, regard it still as too divine to be con- 
cerned with all that rash investigators relate of 
its past. It may possibly be of some use to 
examine this work attentively, not so much with 
the object of refuting it, as of determining its 
exact historical position. 

The aim of the work, as a matter of fact, is 
just to catch the point of view of history. In no 
sense is it an attempt to write an apologia for 
Catholicism or traditional dogma. Had it been 
so intended, it must have been regarded as very 


INTRODUCTION 3 


defective and incomplete, especially as far as 
concerns the divinity of Christ, and the authority 
of the Church. It is not designed to demonstrate 
the truth either of the gospel or of Catholic 
Christianity, but simply to analyze and define 
the bonds that unite the two in history. He who 
reads in good faith will not be misled. 

Since the learned professor announces his work 
as historical, it shall be discussed solely according 
to the data of history. M. Sabatier sets down 
psychology, side by side with history, as the 
source of his religious philosophy. Herr Harnack 
appeals, above all, to facts; he sets forth less a 
religious philosophy, than a religion, or rather 
the religion, in the sole and unchangeable principle 
he deems to constitute it; this principle he 
extracts from the gospel, and uses as a touch- 
stone to test the whole Christian development, 
which is held of worth only in so far as this 
precious essence has been preserved in it. The 
whole doctrine of the book is based on this 
fundamental point; that the essence of the gospel 
consists solely in faith in God the Father, as 
revealed by Jesus Christ. On the validity or 
insufficiency of this principle depends the value of 
the judgments delivered on the Evolution of the 
Church, of Her dogmas, and of Her worship, from 


4 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the beginning, and in all the different forms of 
creed’ that are founded on the gospel and the 
name of Jesus. It is not surprising therefore, 
that from the first a certain anxiety should be 
felt, to see a movement as far reaching as 
Christianity, based on a single idea or a solitary 
sentiment. Is this really the definition of a 
historical reality, or merely a systematic method 
of consideration? Can a religion that has filled 
such a place in history, and renewed, so to speak, 
the conscience of humanity, take its origin and 
derive its whole value from a single thought? 
Can this great force be made up of one element ? 
Can such a fact be other than complex? Is the 
definition of Christianity, put forward by Herr 
Harnack, that of a historian or merely that of a 
theologian who takes from history as much as 
suits his theology? The theory set forth in the 
lectures on the essence of Christianity, is the same 
theory that dominates the author’s learned history 
of dogma.’ But is the theory actually deduced 
from history? Is not history rather interpreted by 
the light of the theory ? 

It will be remembered that Renan,? with some 
lack of reverence, compared the liberal theologian 


1 “Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte,” i.-ii., 1894; iii., 1897, 
2“ Vie de Jésus,” 13, ix._x 


INTRODUCTION 5 


to a bird whose wings have been clipped; as long 
as it remains at rest, its attitude is natural, but 
when it attempts to fly, its movements are 
hampered. This comparison of the author of 
“Origines du Christianisme,” was directed not 
against Catholic theologians, who, like orthodox 
Protestants, resemble caged birds, but against 
certain rationalist professors, who unite the most 
absolute and daring theories to a criticism so 
minute, that one would expect their general con- 
clusions to be founded on experience. The remark 
of Renan is not an axiom beyond discussion. There 
is no fundamental incompatibility between the 
professions of theologian and historian. Possibly, 
there have already existed theologians who could 
be also historians, that is, could deal with facts as 
they appear from evidence intelligently investi- 
gated, without introducing their own conceptions 
into the texts they explored, and able to take 
account of the change that the ideas of past times 
inevitably undergo when adapted to modern 
thought. But it must be admitted that there 
have been, and always will- be, a far greater 
number, who, starting from a general system, 
furnished by tradition, or elaborated by them- 
selves under the influence of tradition, uncon- 
sciously, or perhaps sometimes consciously, bend 


v 


6 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the texts and the facts to the needs of their doctrine, 
though often honestly believing they avoid the 
danger. It must be added that the adversaries 
of the theologians have often brought to the 
discussion of these matters of religious history, 
prejudices acquired before the examination of the 
facts, prejudices that can interfere with calm and 
just investigation, fully as muchas any theological 
bias. 

At bottom, M. Sabatier and Herr Harnack have 
wished to reconcile Christian faith with the claims 
of science and of the scientific spirit of our time, 
The claims must indeed have become great, or be 
believed to be great, for the faith has become very 
small and modest. What would Luther have 
thought of his doctrine of salvation by faith, had 
it been presented to him with the amendment, 
“independently of creeds,” or with this other— 
“Faith in a merciful Father, for faith in the Son 
is no part of the gospel of Jesus”? Religion is 
thus reconciled with science, because it no longer 
encounters it. This trust in the goodness of God 
either exists in a man or it does not; but it 
seems impossible for a sentiment to contradict 
any conclusion of biblical or philosophical criti- 
cism. 

However, this negative reconciliation is perhaps 


a 


INTRODUCTION 7 


less solid than it seems. Every absolute assertion 
that defies the control of the intelligence can 
become, at one moment or another, an obstacle 
to the free and legitimate course of thought. 
Although this minimum of faith, extracted from 
the Bible, seems to authorize a complete and 
unlimited liberty in biblical criticism, it would 
nevertheless prove an obstacle to the exercise of 
that liberty, and an obstacle the more serious just 
where the exercise is most indispensable, namely, 
in regard to the gospel, if by chance this mini- 
mum were not to be found in the gospel, or not 
in the sense in which the gospel is understood. 
Those who would compel themselves to see it 
there, would be forced no longer to take the 
gospel as it stands. It has been said for a long 
time, and with reason, that the dogma of biblical 
inspiration, in so far as it presented the Bible as 
a book whose truth knew no limit, nor imperfec- 
tion, nor shades of meaning, and as a book full of 
the absolute science of God, prevented the per- 
ception of the real and historical sense of the 
Scriptures; but as much might be said of the 
conviction, arrived at before examination of 
the facts, or from motives other than historical, 
that a certain religious system, that is believed 
to be true, must have been the gospel of Christ. 


8 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


The gospel has an existence independent of us ; 
let us try to understand it in itself, before we 
interpret it in the light of our preferences and 
our needs. 

In seeking to determine historically the essence 
of the gospel, the rules of a healthy criticism 
forbid the resolution to regard as non-essential all 
that to-day must be judged uncertain or unaccept- 
able. That which has been essential in the 
gospel of Jesus, is all that holds the first and 
most considerable place in His authentic teaching, 
the ideas for which He strove and for which He 
died, not only such part of them as is held to be 
vital to-day. In the same way, to define the 
essence of primitive Christianity, we must seek 
the dominant preoccupation of the early Chris- 
tians, and all that their religion lived by. After 
applying the same analytical procedure to all 
epochs successively, and comparing the results, 
we can determine if Christianity has remained 
faithful to the law of its origin; if the basis of 
Catholicism to-day is that which supported the 
Church of the Middle Ages, or the early centuries, 
and if that basis is substantially identical with 
the gospel of Jesus; or if, on the other hand, 
the clear light of the gospel was soon obscured, 
to be freed from the darkness in the sixteenth 


INTRODUCTION 9 


century, or only in our own time. If any common 
features have been preserved or developed in the 
Church from its origin till to-day, these features 
constitute the essence of Christianity. At least, 
the historian can take account of no others; he 
has no right to apply to Christianity a method 
that he would not apply to any other religion 
whatsoever. To decide the essence of Maho- 
metanism, we should take from the teaching of 
Mahomet and the Mussulman tradition not what 
we judge to be true and fruitful, but all that 
seemed most important to the prophet and his 
followers in matters of faith, morality, and 
worship. Otherwise, with a little good will, 
the essence of the Koran could readily be dis- 
covered to be identical with the essence of the 
gospel—faith in a benign and merciful God. 
Further, there would be little logic in taking 
for the whole essence of one religion the points 
that differentiate it from another. The monothe- 
istic faith is common to Judaism, Christianity, and 
Mahometanism; but we are not therefore to con- 
clude that the essential features of these three 
religions must be sought apart from the mono- 
theistic conception. No Jew, no Christian, no 
Mussulman will admit that his faith in one God 
is other than the first and principal article of his 


{e) THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


belief. Each will criticize the particular form 
that the idea receives in the creed of his neighbour, 
but none will deny that monotheism is an element 
of his own religion on the ground that it belongs 
also to the religion of others. The essential dis- 
tinction between religions lies in their differences, 
but it is not solely of their differences that they 
are constituted. 

It is, therefore, in the highest degree arbitrary 
to decide that Christianity in its essence must be 
all that the gospel has not borrowed of Judaism, 
as if all that the gospel has retained of the Jewish 
tradition must be necessarily of secondary value. 
Herr Harnack finds it quite natural to place the 
essence of Christianity in the faith in God the 
Father, because he supposes, somewhat hastily by 
the way, that this element of the gospel is foreign 
to the Old Testament. Even if the hypothesis 
were well founded the conclusion drawn from it 
would not be legitimate. It might present itself 
to the mind of a Protestant theologian, for whom 
the word “ tradition ” is synonymous with “ Catho- 
licism ” and “ error,’ and who rejoices to think 
that the gospel was the protestantism of the law. 
But the historian can see in it only an assertion, 
whose proof is still to seek. Jesus has claimed 
not to destroy the law, but to fulfil. We should, 


INTRODUCTION II 


therefore, expect to find in Judaism and in 
Christianity elements common to both, equally 
essential to both, the difference between the two 
religions lying in that “fulfilment” which is the 
special feature of the gospel, and should form 
with the common elements the whole essence of 
Christianity. The importance of these elements 
depends neither on their antiquity nor on their 
novelty, but on the place they fill in the teaching 
of Jesus, and on the value Jesus himself attached 
to them. 

The essence of the gospel can only be deter- 
mined by a critical discussion of the gospel texts, 
the most sure and most clearly expressed texts, 
and not those whose authenticity or whose mean- 
ing may be doubtful. To build a general theory 
of Christianity on a small number of texts of 
moderate authority, neglecting the mass of incon- 
testable texts of clear significance, would be to 
sin against the most elementary principles of 
criticism. Following such a method, a more or 
less specious doctrinal synthesis might be offered 
to the public, but not the essence of Christianity 
according to the gospel. Herr Harnack has not 
avoided this danger, for his definition of the 
essence of Christianity is not based on the totality 
of authentic texts, but rests, when analyzed, on a 


12 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


very small number of texts, practically indeed on 
two passages :—“ No man knoweth the Son, but 
the Father: neither knoweth any man the Father, 
save the Son,”! and “The kingdom of God is 
within you,’? both of them passages that might 
well have been influenced, if not produced, by 
the theology of the early times. This critical pre- 
possession might thus have exposed the author 
to the misfortune, supreme for a Protestant theo- 
logian, of having founded the essence of Chris- 
tianity upon data supplied by Christian tradition. 

No great harm would be done, from the point 
of view of history, if it were not that these texts 
are isolated by having preference given to them 
over the others. It must be admitted that it is 
often difficult to distinguish between the personal 
religion of Jesus and the way in which His dis- 
ciples have understood it, between the thought of 
the Master and the interpretations of apostolic 
tradition. If Christ had Himself drawn up a 
statement of His doctrine, and a summary of His 
prophecy, a detailed treatise on His work, His 
mission, His hopes, the historian would submit it 
to a most attentive examination, and would deter- 
mine the essence of the gospel, according to 
irrefutable testimony. But no such treatise has 

e Matt. xis 2s 2 Luke xvii. 21, 


INTRODUCTION 13 


ever existed, and nothing can take its place. In 
the Gospels there remains but an echo, necessarily 
weakened and a little confused, of the words of 
Jesus, the general impression He produced upon 
hearers well disposed towards Him, with some of 
the more striking of His sentences, as they were 
understood and interpreted; and finally there 
remains the movement which He initiated. 
Whatever we think, theologically, of tradition, 
whether we trust it or regard it with suspicion, 
we know Christ only by the tradition, across the 
tradition, and in the tradition of the primitive 
Christians. This is as much as to say that Christ 
is inseparable from His work, and that the 
attempt to define the essence of Christianity 
according to the pure gospel of Jesus, apart from 
tradition, cannot succeed, for the mere idea of the 
gospel without tradition is in flagrant contra- 
diction with the facts submitted to criticism. 
This state of affairs, being natural in the highest 
degree, has nothing in it disconcerting for the 
historian: for the essence of Christianity must 
be in the work of Jesus, or nowhere, and would 
be vainly sought in scattered fragments of His 
discourse. If a faith, a hope, a feeling, an im- 
pulse of will, dominates the gospel and is per- 
petuated in the Church of the earliest times, there 


14 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


will be the essence of Christianity, subject to 
Such reservations as must be made on the literal 
authenticity of certain words, and on such more 
or less notable modifications that the thought of 
Jesus must of necessity have endured in trans- 
mission from generation to generation. 

“The essences of things are unchangeable,” 
said the ancient philosophy, when considering the 
eternal types of contingent realities. To deter- 
mine such an essence in Christianity, it must be 
transformed into a metaphysical entity, into a 
logical quintessence, into something resembling 
the scholastic notion of species, that certain theo- 
logians still fear to corrupt by admitting the idea 
‘of evolution. Herr Harnack seems also to fear 
that his essence of Christianity might be spoiled 
if he introduced into it any idea of life, of move- 
ment and development. On the other hand, he 
distrusts abstract essences, and has taken care not 
to give any theoretical definition of religion, 
which should be at the same time a definition of 
Christianity, although he maintains the Hegelian 
proposition that Christianity is the one absolute 
religion. He finds the essence of Christianity 
in a sentiment—filial confidence in God, the 


1 Cf. E. Caird, “Christianity and the Historical Christ,” 
The New World, vi. 21 (March, 1897), pp. 7, 8. 


INTRODUCTION 15 


merciful Father. Therein is to lie all religion 
and all Christianity. The identity of this senti- 
ment in Jesus and in all Christians, is to consti- 
tute the continuity of the religion and the 
unchangeableness of its essence. 

But is this essence, even in these reduced pro- 
portions, actually unchangeable, and why should 
it be? Has the Divine mercy been understood 
in absolutely the same way by the apostles and 
by Herr Harnack? The apostles had a concep- 
tion of the world, and even of God the merciful, 
somewhat different from the idea that is suggested 
in the peroration of “ The Essence of Christianity.” 
Now, sentiment is not independent of thought; 
if the idea change, the form of the sentiment 
will also change, though the sentiment retains its 
first direction, because of the spirit that sustains 
it; and if on this point (the Divine merciful 
Fatherhood) the attitude of Christianity is held 
to be unchanged, because it retains the direction 
and the impulse of Christ, why should not its 
attitude towards other points be held unchanged 
for the same reason? What, for instance, of the 
hope of an eternal kingdom, constantly preached 
by Christ, and never allowed to perish by the 
Christian Church? What of the mission of the 
apostles charged to propagate this hope? What 


16 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of Christ Himself, Whose place as Messiah 
belongs to the Primitive Church, and has never 
ceased to occupy the thought of the Church from 
the beginning? What of all the different themes 
of evangelical teaching, of which not one has 
been regarded during the Christian centuries as 
accessory? All these elements of Christianity, 
in all the forms in which they have been pre- 
served, why should they not be the essence of 
Christianity ? Why not find the essence of Chris- 
tianity in the fulness and totality of its life, 
which shows movement and variety just because 
it is life, but inasmuch as it is life proceeding 
from an obviously powerful principle, has grown 
in accordance with a law which affirms at every 
step the initial force that may be called its physi- 
cal essence revealed in all its manifestations ? 
Why should the essence of a tree be held to be 
but a particle of the seed from which it has 
sprung, and why should it not be recognized as 
truly and fully in the complete tree as in the 
germ? Are the processes of assimilation by 
which it grows to be regarded as an alteration of 
the essence present potentially in the seed, and 
are they not rather the indispensable conditions 
of its being, its preservation, its progress in a life 
always the same and incessantly renewed ? 


INTRODUCTION 17 


The historian cannot but refuse to regard as 
the essence of living Christianity a germ that 
multiplies without growing. Rather he should 
return to the parable of the mustard seed, com- 
paring the new-born Christianity to a little grain. 
The grain was small, for the new religion was 
without the prestige of antiquity enjoyed by the 
ancient religions, still surviving, of Egypt and 
Chaldea; it was less, in external power, than 
Greco-Roman paganism : it was even less, appa- 
rently, than Judaism, of which it must have 
seemed a variety, with no future, since Judaism 
rejected it. This grain, nevertheless, enclosed the 
germ of the tree that we now see; charity was 
its sap: its life impulse was in the hope of its 
triumph ; its expanding force was in its apostle- 
ship, its pledge of success in sacrifice: for its 
general form this budding religion had its faith in 
the unity and absolute Sovereignty of God, and for 
its particular and distinctive feature that faith in 
the Divine mission of Jesus, which earned it its 
name of Christianity. All this was in the little 
seed, and all this was the real essence of the 
Christian religion, needing only space to grow to 
reach its present point, still living after all its 
growth. 

To understand the essence of Christianity we 

0 


18 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


must look to those vital manifestations which 
contain its reality, its permanent quintessence, 
recognizable in them, as the principal features of 
primitive Christianity are recognizable throughout 
their development. The particular and varied forms 
of the development, in so far as they are varied, are 
not of the essence of Christianity, but they follow 
one another, as it were, in a framework whose 
general proportions, though not absolutely constant, 
never cease to be balanced, so that if the figure 
change, its type does not vary, nor the law that 
governs its evolution. The essence of Christianity 
is constituted by the general features of this figure, 
the elements of this life and their characteristic 
properties ; and this essence is unchangeable, like 
that of a living being, which remains the same 
while it lives, and to the extent to which it lives. 
The historian will find that the essence of Chris- 
tianity has been more or less preserved in the 
different Christian communions: he will not 
believe it to be compromised by the development 
of institutions, of creeds, and of worship, so long 
as this development has been ruled by the prin- 
ciples verified in the first commencement. He 
will not expect this essence to have been abso- 
lutely and definitely realized at any point of past 
centuries ; he will believe that it has been realized 


INTRODUCTION. 19 


more or less perfectly from the beginning, and 
that it will continue to be realized thus more 
and more, so long as Christianity shall endure. 
Herr Harnack does not conceive Christianity 
as a seed, at first a plant in potentiality, then a 
real plant, identical from the beginning of its 
evolution to the final limit and from the root 
to the summit of the stem, but as a fruit, ripe, 
or rather overripe, that must be peeled, to reach 
the incorruptible kernel; and Herr Harnack 
peels his fruit with such perseverance, that the 
question arises if anything will remain at the end. 
This method of dismembering a subject does not 
belong to history, which is a science of observa- 
tion of the living, not of dissection of the dead. 
Historical analysis notices and distinguishes, it 
does not destroy what it touches, nor think all 
- movement digression, and all growth deformity. It 
is not by stripping Christianity leaf by leaf that 
the law of its life will be found. Such a dissec- 
tion leads of necessity to a special theory, of 
philosophical value doubtless, but of little account 
from the positive standpoint of history. It is 
not for the theologian (unless in quite a personal 
exercise of his intelligence), and still less is it for 
the critic, to seize religion on the wing, dismember 
it, extract a something and declare it unique, by 


20 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


saying, “This is the essence of Christianity.” 
Let us regard the Christian religion in its life, 
observing by what means it has lived from the 
beginning and is still sustained ; let us note the 
principal features of this venerable existence, con- 
vinced that they lose nothing in reality or im- 
portance, because to-day they are presented to 
us under colours that are not those of a former 
time. 

To reduce Christianity to a single point, a 
solitary truth that the conscience of Jesus has 
perceived and revealed, is to protect religion 
against all attacks far less than might be 
expected, because it is thus almost put out of 
touch with reality, and deprived of historical 
support, and of every defence against the reason- 
ing faculty. Christ is presented as a man who 
had but one true thought among many false ones, 
and those that are now held erroneous and value- 
less are not those that occupied His attention the 
least. If the sole truth that He revealed fails to 
make its appeal, there is nothing else to look for 
from Him; and to feel this incomparable truth, 
to find it more true than the rest of His concep- 
tions, the only truth in fact among them, to see 
in it absolute religion, it is not enough merely to 
contemplate it, but a kind of intellectual and moral 


INTRODUCTION 21 


enthusiasm is also demanded, prepared to see only 
this and be content. 

It might be said that the God of Herr Harnack, 
driven from the domain of Nature, driven also 
from history, in so far as history is made of facts 
and play of thoughts, has taken refuge on the 
heights of human conscience, and is now only to 
be seen there by those who have keen perception. 
Is it so certain that He cannot be seen elsewhere, 
or that if not seen elsewhere, He will be infallibly 
found there? Is it not possible, if no effort is 
made to keep Him, that He will be driven also 
from this last retreat, and identified as one of 
“the category of the Ideal,” or as “Imperfect 
activity aspiring to Perfection,’ phantoms of 
divinity with which the reason plays when 
wandering to find the explanation of itself, 
phantoms of no account for religion? Can the 
conscience keep for long a God that science 
ignores, and will science respect for ever a God 
that it does not know? Can God be goodness if 
He is not first—Lifeand Truth? Is it not as easy 
and as necessary to conceive Him as the Source 
of Life and Truth as of indulgent goodness? Shall 
we have need of Him to reassure the conscience, 
if we have no need of Him to strengthen the in- 
telligence? Is it not with all his soul and all 


22 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


his might, that man should search after God to 
find him? Must not God live in Nature and in 
man, and must not the integral formula of true 
religious philosophy be “God everywhere,” as 
the integral formula of Christianity is “ Christ in 
the Church, and God in Christ.” 

But this is not the place to examine Herr 
Harnack’s theology. Our aim is only to de- 
termine if his “ Essence of Christianity,” instead 
of being absolute religion, absolute Christianity, 
entities that have little chance of taking a place 
in history, does not rather mark a stage in 
Protestant development, or form merely a basic 
formula of Protestantism. 


SECTION I 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 


INTRODUCTION 


PRACTICALLY all our knowledge of the life and 
preaching of Jesus is contained in the Gospels. 
The testimony of Paul confirms rather than com- 
pletes that of the evangelists, and the scanty 
indications found in the pagan historians are 
hardly worth consideration. But the Gospels are 
not strictly historical documents, and before using 
them for his definition of the essence of Christianity 
Herr Harnack was bound to express an opinion 
upon their general character and value. It was 
known beforehand that his opinion was com- 
paratively temperate, but not necessarily there 
fore impervious to criticism. 


CHAPTER I 


Ir is beyond question that the synoptic Gospels 
“supply first a clear image of the teaching of 
Jesus, both in its principle and its detailed 
application; that they then relate the end of His 
life, sacrificed to His work, and that they show 
us the impression made by Him upon His 
disciples, and communicated to the world by 
them.” ! But one would rather see more clearly 
the motive of these conclusions, and form a 
more definite idea of their object. In the present 
case, it is not sufficient to treat the origin of 
the Gospels simply as a literary problem. The 
question concerns the tradition itself, and the 
nature of the tradition must be analyzed and 
its progress outlined. 

It will be readily conceded that the Fourth 
Gospel shall be set aside and the synoptic texts 
regarded as “the books of the gospel teaching.” ? 


+ “ Wesen des Christentums,” p. 20. =? Ibid., p. 14. 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 25 


It is as well to add that “they are not partisan 
pamphlets,” and that it was an error of former 
times to attribute to them certain general 
tendencies which would have made them actual 
manifestoes on behalf of Peter or Paul, or of the 
reconciliation between the two apostles. But it is 
a very summary and inexact statement concerning 
the composition of the Gospels, to represent that of 
Mark asa work at first hand ; those of Matthew and 
Luke as having been composed later than Mark’s 
and from another source;} and that of John, as 
founded on a special tradition, though one very 
difficult to recognize.? Is the primitive character 
of Mark established beyond discussion? Must 
not at least a third source be admitted for the 
Gospel of Luke? And does not the special 
tradition of the Fourth Gospel gradually disap- 
pear, as the sense of this mysterious book is better 
comprehended ? 

When the texts and their relations to one 
another are examined, without attention or regard 
to the life of ideas, or the development of beliefs 
and institutions, there is a temptation to restrain 
history within the limits that literary analysis 
imposes on documentary criticism. As the 


1 “ Wesen des Christentums,” p. 15. 
2 Thid., p. 13. 


26 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


second Gospel has passed almost in its entirety 
into the other two synoptic Gospels, it is there- 
fore concluded that Mark is the primitive text. 
It is, certainly, in regard to the Gospels known to 
us, but no one can say that it is absolutely. 
Beyond the fact that its relation to Matthew and 
to Luke is not clearly defined on all points, 
there is little difficulty in seeing that it is not 
a book of simple growth and homogeneous editing. 
It is held to be both, because it cannot be collated 
with an edition or a document more ancient 
than the traditional text we possess. 

‘The existence of a source other than Mark’s 
Gospel is deduced from such portions of Christ’s 
discourses as are common to Matthew and Luke, 
but not present in Mark, and hypothetically this 
source is identified with the Hebrew Gospel by 
Matthew and the “Logia” spoken of by Papias 
of Hierapolis. It begins now to be evident that 
Matthew and Luke must have worked from dif. 
ferent revisions of these “ Logia.” The collection 
of discourses, therefore, underwent certain modi- 
fications before assuming the forms made per- 
manent in our Evangelists. Why should not 
similar changes have happened to the Gospel 
according to Mark ? 

As Luke declares that he knows of several 


THE VS OCRCES (OP THEAGOSPELS  °27 


Gospels, and the critics can verify only two, 
Mark and the “ Logia,” they readily suppose that 
a part at least of the matter that is special to 
the third Gospel comes from another source. 
There is nothing to show that it does not come 
from two sources or more, or from special 
revisions of the two principal ones. Criticism 
prefers the minimum number of hypotheses 
and rightly; but it must at least be said that 
the reality appears to have been much more com- 
plex than these suppositions. As for John, the 
existence of a special tradition is an expedient 
as convenient as it is popular, to explain the 
divergences between the Fourth Gospel and the 
synoptic versions. 

These results of critical labours may be thought 
meagre enough, unless they are looked on as 
indispensable preliminaries to a deeper considera- 
tion, which shall pass upwards from words to 
things, and explain the history of the gospel 
literature, by that of the religious movement of 
which this literature was the partial expression. 
The old school of Tiibingen was right in its wish 
to realize the Christian books by the aid of the 
evolution of Christianity, only it should have 
been more circumspect and less artless in its 
conjectures, and have discussed its texts, ideas, 


28 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


and facts more minutely, before formulating its 
conclusions. 

Were the criticism of Mark followed out accord- 
ing to the purely literary method employed hither- 
to, a method somewhat superficial and mechanical, 
it would not be difficult to discover the same 
phenomena of combinations, superpositions and 
union of different materials in the second Gospel, 
as are recognized in Matthew and in Luke. The 
discussion with the Pharisees concerning Beclze- 
bub,! is as it were interpolated into the narrative 
of the attempt of the kinsmen of Jesus to per- 
suade Him to return home.? In the chapter of 
the parables, three stages can be distinguished of 
tradition and revision: the parables themselves,’ 
quite straightforward, needing no explanation; 
the interpretation* desired by the disciples after 
the first parable; the general reflections® on the 
object of teaching by parable, which come as an 
addition to the explanation of the allegory of the 
Sower. It is hardly credible that both descrip- 
tions ® of the miracle of feeding the multitude 
should be due to one tradition: one must have 
been added by a reviser—who had come across a 

1 Mark iii. 22, 30. 2 Mark iii. 21, 31-25. 


3 Mark iv. 2-9, 21-32. * Mark iv. 10, 13-20. 
5 Mark iv, 11, 12. 6 Mark vi. 30, 44; viii. 1-9, 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 29 


second version of the miracle. The prediction of 
the suffering and death of the Son of man? 
appears to be intercalated between the confession 
of Peter * and the promise of the early coming of 
the Kingdom of God In the same way, a phrase 
concerning the sufferings of the Son of man4 
divides what is said of the coming of Elias in the 
person of John the Baptist. The parable of the 
wicked husbandmen * has been introduced between 
the reply made by Jesus in the temple to the 
chief priests, who questioned him as to the 
authority he claimed,® and the retreat of the 
questioners discomfited by the demand addressed 
by Jesus to them.” The prophecy of the appear- 
ance of Christ in Galilee after His resurrec- 
tion,® comes with little fitness between the saying 
of Jesus as to the confusion His Passion will 
cause among His disciples,? and Peter's reply 
protesting his fidelity.1° It appears, therefore, 
incontestable that the second Gospel has been 
composed by the same means as the first and 
third; though one of the sources of them, it is 


1 Mark viii. 31-38. 2 Mark viii. 27-30. 
3 Mark ix. 1. 4 Mark ix, 12. 
6 Mark xii. 1-12. 6 Mark xi. 27-33. 
7 Mark xii. 12. 8 Mark xiv. 28. 


8 Mark xiv. 27. 10 Mark xiv. 29. 


30 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


none the less itself derived from more than one 
source, and did not acquire its final form in one 
effort. 

Would not a critical examination demonstrate 
further, with equal facility, that the greater part 
of those elements of the Fourth Gospel, that are 
held to show a special tradition, happen to be 
symbolic, and represent not the memories, but the 
personal conceptions of the author? The illusion 
springs from the precision of some of the infor- 
mation, notably the chronological indications, 
which do not agree with those of the first Gospels, 
and could not apparently have been derived from 
them, nor imagined by the evangelist. Thus it 
is to be noted, first, that the ministry of Jesus 
includes three,! or more probably four? Easters— 
that is to say, a duration of three years and some 
months, with a stay at Jerusalem on several occa- 
sions; while a study of the chronology of the 
synoptic Gospels would suggest that the preach- 
ing in Galilee lasted some months, and the 
preaching in Jerusalem, at the end, merely a few 
days. 

The arguments derived from the first Gospel to 
confirm the chronology of the fourth are very 


1 John ii. 13; vi. 4; xiii. 1. 2 John v. 1. 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 341 


weak,’ and the indications of this chronology 
seem subordinated to the didactic and polemical 
purpose of the book. If the author had wished 
to give a historical account of the life of Jesus, he 
would not have put the Galilean ministry in the 
background, and he would probably have described 
the preaching at Jerusalem differently. It is 
universally admitted that his aim was to show 
Christ upon the theatre assigned by prophetic 
tradition to the Messiah, and to give the impres- 
sion that Christ’s evengelical manifestations took 
place, not in an obscure corner of Palestine, but 
in the capital of Judaism. Viewed as history, 
the point of view of the Gospel of John is in- 
compatible with that of the other Gospels, and 
a choice has to be made. ‘The apparent precision 
of John does not alone authorize a preference, 
- seeing that the question lies not only between two 
systems of chronology, but between two present- 
ments of the Saviour, two accounts of Christ and 
His work. The account that is most faithful in 
regard to the discourses and historical appearance 
of Jesus, is probably also the most to be trusted 
in point of chronology. 

It seems inconceivable that Jesus should have 

1 Matt. xxiii. 37 (Luke xiii. 34) is generally cited; but 
the passage is possibly a quotation. C/. infra, p. 96. 


32 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


preached at Jerusalem, declaring Himself the 
Messiah, on several occasions, during several 
years, without being arrested. He can but have 
done so once, and paid the forfeit with His life. 
' The enormous gaps in the narration make the 
reality of its framework a matter of suspicion. 
It is clear they have not been left to be filled 
from the contents of the other three gospels. 
The discourses conceal the gaps in the narrative. 
In the process of exhausting his doctrinal thesis, 
and fulfilling the intention of his “ Apologia,” 
the author of the Gospel of John has found it 
sufficient to bring Christ to Jerusalem for the 
two first Easters,! to connect the miracle of the 
feeding of the multitude with the third,? and 
to bring the Saviour to the feast of Tabernacles 3 
and the feast of the Dedication,t while awaiting 
the last.© If the last year includes three 
journeys and three sojourns at Jerusalem, while 
the previous period of more than two years 
includes only two journeys and two sojourns, 
the reason is that it was more suitable to reserve 
to the last months and the last days the greater 
part of the teaching. 


1 John ii. 13; v. 1 2 John vi. 4. 
8% John vii. 2-10. * John x. 22. 
5 John xii. 1; xiii. 1. 


PEN SOURCES: OF - THE GOSPELS 33 


It is useless to object that the evangelist 
would not have so far enlarged the framework 
of the synoptic Gospels, unless he had material 
to fill the space thus gained. Another considera- 
tion, equally important for the didactic purpose 
of the book, intervened to determine its chrono- 
logical schema. Three years and a half, make 
half of a week of years, the Messianic number 
par excellence, and a number which plays a great 
part in the prophecies of Daniel’ and in the 
Apocalypse.2 The schema would conform to 
that needed by those passages of Scripture that 
suggest that the temple, which was forty-six years 
in building, was a type of the body of Jesus, 
and that Jesus Himself was not yet fifty years 
old in the year that preceded His Passion.* It 
is known that St. Irenzeus bears witness to this 

tradition, and maintains that he found it in the 
Fourth Gospel. The terrestrial life of the Saviour 
would be thus held to correspond to a perfect 
number, seven weeks of years,° a half week at 
the end being reserved for the manifestation of 
Christ, the Word made flesh. Jesus would have 


1 Dan. xii. 7-11. 2 Rev. xii. 6-14; xi. 2, 3; xiii. 5. 
3 John ii. 20,21. The allusion is quite inadmissible to the 

Herodian buildings, though received by many commentators. 
4 John viii. 57. 5 Dan. ix. 25-27. 


D 


34 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


lived presumably forty-six years when He drove 
the money-changers from the temple; and the 
fiftieth year, the year of Jubilee, would coincide 
with His entry into Eternal Glory after His 
Resurrection. 

This allegorical chronology then, conforming 
to the spirit of the book, in all likelihood is not 
founded on a genuine traditional memory; it 
may well be no more actual than the Davidic 
genealogies of the Saviour in Matthew and in 
Luke, and have the same signification, to wit, 
that Jesus is The Christ. Similar comments 
might be made on the date assigned by John to 
the death of Jesus; the coincidence of His death 
with the immolation of the Paschal Lamb, 
which, according to the synoptic Gospels, was 
eaten the day before,? is probably part of that 
system of symbolic adaptations that governs 
all this particular narrative of the Passion. 

All these hypotheses, more or less probable, 
which could readily be multiplied, have only 
one result, to raise before the theologians an inter- 
minable series of difficulties, because criticism, 
giving most of its attention to the literary facts, 
too often leaves the history unexplained, not 
only the history of nascent Christianity, but 


1 Cf. John xviii. 28. 3 Cf. Mark xiv. 12; Luke xxii. 7-15, 


TEES SOTRCE SOL THE GOSPELS "35 


even the history of the composition of the 
Gospels. The points on which the synoptic 
Gospels differ from one another, and the differ- 
ences between John and the synoptics, have 
been carefully accumulated, and thus limits 
have been set to the historical authority of 
the Gospels that believers cannot fail to find 
exceedingly narrow. The meaning of all that 
cannot be taken as literal history with regard 
to Christ escapes them, because to some extent 
it has escaped the critics themselves, and they 
have therefore failed to make it clear to believers. 
Faith is disquieted by conclusions and scientific 
conjectures that do not entirely satisfy the 
intelligence. They would have given rise to 
less trouble if they could have been understood. 
But to render the development and character 
‘of the evangelical literature quite intelligible, 
the Gospels must not only be studied in them- 
selves and in their relations as literary works and 
as simple historical documents, but must also 
be regarded as a partial expression of the great 
movement that proceeded from the preaching of 
Jesus. The literary tradition of the gospel has 
followed the evolution of primitive Christianity. 
The two explain one another; and if the critical 
analysis of the Gospels necessarily precedes 


36 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the reconstitution of evangelical and apostolic 
history, it is none the less true that, by a sort 
of reciprocity, it is the primitive history of 
Christianity that explains the composition of 
the Gospels, and throws light on those particular 
points that are most disconcerting for minds 
unused to criticism. Once understood and 
presented as a product and a witness of an 
ancient faith, the Gospels, however critically 
analyzed, will no longer be a dangerous trial 
to the faith of our contemporaries. 


CHAPTER II 


At the bottom of all traditions concerning the 
life of Christ, there is this simple statement, set 
forth in some of the discourses in the Acts, where 
are to be found specimens of the earliest Christian 
preaching : Jesus passed through the world, doing 
good, healing, because God was with Him, all 
those held by various maladies in subjection to 
the devil. Denounced by the priests, and crucified 
by order of Pontius Pilate, He rose on the third 
‘day from the dead, and thus became Christ and 
Lord. Jesus became Christ by His resurrection ; 
that was the proof of His dignity as Messiah ; 
and His glory is to shine forth in His approaching 
Second Advent. Thus His teaching and His works 
remain still what they actually were, and as they 
appeared to those who witnessed them, a first 
introduction to the kingdom of God and works 
of pity, not a formal attestation of the Heavenly 


1 Acts ii, 22-30; x. 38-40. 


38 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH. 


kingdom, nor a direct argument in favour of 
Jesus as the Messiah. 

The mission of Christ is not presented in the 
Gospels in this primitive form. Tradition must 
follow its natural tendency, and was soon to dis- 
cover, in the ministry of Jesus, characteristic 
features and indubitable proofs of His Messianic 
dignity. The glory of the risen Lord threw new 
light on the memories of His earthly career. 
Thence arose a kind of idealization of His dis- 
courses and His acts, and a tendency to syste- 
matize them. If the parables, which were really 
tales concerned in their application only with the 
economy of the Kingdom of Heaven, are supposed 
to be full of mysteries, it is because a Divine 
teaching is now seen in them. If the miracles 
are held to prove that Jesus is the Christ, it is 
because they are now regarded as acts of Divine 
Omnipotence, beyond all comparison with those 
that God might permit a pious man to do for the 
succour of his equals. If those possessed of 
devils hail Jesus as the Son of God, their tes- 
' timony acquires a special value, coming from 
Satan, who thus salutes his conqueror. If heaven 
opens above the head of Jesus at His baptism, it 
is to hallow the Messiah.! If Jesus is tempted 

4 Mark. i. 9-11. 


THETSOURCEHS OF THE GOSPELS 39 


in the wilderness, it is that He may triumph from 
the first over him whose kingdom He comes to 
destroy... If He gives bread to a hungering 
multitude, it is to signify the salvation of men by 
faith and in the Christian communion.? If He is 
transfigured on the mountain-top, between Moses 
and Elias, it is to show that the Law and the 
Prophets bear witness to Him as the Messiah.3 
If He predicts His Passion and resurrection, it is 
because He knows His future with certainty of 
prevision. If darkness falls over the earth, when 
He is on the cross, it is because the earth mourns 
over the expiring Christ. If the veil of the 
temple is rent at the moment of His death,® it 
is that the new covenant, now accomplished, 
destroys the old and reveals its mystery. Thus 
everything assumes, as it were, a relation to the 
Messiah, and all contributes to prove that Jesus 
was the Christ. 

Nevertheless all these arguments are not the 
simple expression of increasing faith. They are, 
for the most part, an interpretation of actual facts 
and occurrences, which assume a new aspect in 
the full glory of the Messiah, as though they now 
adapted themselves to the condition of the Eternal 


1 Matt iv. 1-11. 2 Cf. 1 Mark viii. 14-21. % Mark ix, 2-8. 
4 Mark xv. 33. © Mark xv. 38. 


40 THE GOSPEL, AND THE CHURCH 


Christ. Jesus did really make Himself known 
to His disciples as the Messiah, and the general 
tendency of His doctrine as to the Kingdom of 
Heaven implied the part that was His by right in 
the coming reign of God. The miracles of healing 
are incontestable, however they may be explained ; 
and if the Saviour did not perform them to 
demonstrate His Divine mission, none the less 
they prove it in a sense, since they reveal at 
once the extent of His power and the goodness of 
His heart. The unhappy demoniacs did well to 
salute Jesus as the Son of God, since He came, 
confident in faith and charity, to bring peace to 
their troubled spirits. The baptism by John may 
well have been a decisive moment in the life 
of the Saviour. The picture of the temptation 
presents, in a symbolic and abbreviated form, the 
psychology of Jesus and the manner in which He 
looked upon His mission. He regarded His 
position as the narrative of the transfiguration 
suggests, and understood the relation between His 
Kingdom of Heaven and the Law in the sense that 
the incident of the rent veil of the temple indicates, | 
He admitted for Himself, as much as for His 
followers, the necessity of losing His life to find ita 

If the point of view is new, and differs from 

1 Matt. x. 39, 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 41 


that of the immediate witnesses of the teaching 
and the occurrences of the Gospels, it conforms 
none the less to the rule in these matters. 
It is in the nature of human affairs, that the 
work, the genius, and the character of the 
greatest of mankind can only be appreciated at 
a certain distance, and when the actors them- 
selves have disappeared. Christ, in so far as He 
belongs to human history, has not escaped this 
law. His grandeur was not perceived till after 
His death, and is it not a fact that it is more and 
more appreciated as the centuries pass by, that 
the present is ameliorated by the influence of the 
gospel, and the past illumined by all the ex- 
periences of humanity as it advances in age? It 
need only be added that this inevitable and 
legitimate idealization of Christ, arising sponta- 
‘neously in the Christian consciousness, and not 
by the aid of rigorous observation and methodical 
reflection, must have affected, to a certain extent, 
the form of legendary development, and presents 
itself at the first glance of criticism as legendary 
development, although actually it is nothing but 
an expansion of faith, and an attempt, though an 
insufficient one, to set Jesus on the height that is 
His rightful place. 

Looked at from this point of view, the question 


42 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of the gospel miracles, always so confusing for 
the critic, and bristling with difficulties for the 
apologist, is cleared up, at any rate in part, and 
ceases to be a dangerous and alarming theme of 
controversy. Herr Harnack discusses it a little 
pedantically,! and goes so far as to divide the 
miracles into five categories: those which are 
exaggerations of natural occurrences, though strik- 
ing ones: those that are external and material 
realizations of sayings and parables, or of pheno- 
mena of intimate religious life: those that have 
been imagined in order to mark the accomplish- 
ment of Old Testament prophecies: the miracles 
of healing performed by the spiritual power of 
Jesus: and those whose explanation is not 
obvious. 

It would be difficult to distribute the gospel 
narratives among these categories. A certain ex- 
aggeration of fact appears everywhere. It results 
from the presentation as a miracle of the Christ, 
of an incident which appeared first as a grace 
of God, till its miraculous character assumed a 
special significance in the Messianic perspective. 
It may be doubted if such a miraculous narrative, 
for instance, as that of the withered fig tree, or 
the feeding of the multitude, is really to be 

1 Pages 16-19. 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 43 


explained as the materialization of a parable, as has 
been suggested; but it seems incontestable that 
the evangelists were always ready to see in the 
miracles a direct teaching of Christ, as they saw 
a proof of His omnipotence, and that their 
account has been influenced by this allegorizing 
tendency, as it has been in their narratives of the 
parables. The influence of the Old Testament is 
felt a little throughout, because of the preoccu- 
pation with the Messiah, and it would no doubt 
be more accurate to say that it colours the 
majority of the narratives, rather than that it 
has created any one of them. Finally, there is 
a mysterious and inexplicable residue in the most 
solidly guaranteed miracles. It is better not to 
follow a rigorous classification, which does not 
correspond to the reality, and assert simply the 
substantial truth of the tradition of the beneficent 
activity of Christ, while recognizing the elabora- 
tion of early memories, an elaboration more or 
less considerable, as the case may be, but always 
governed by the same principle, the faith that 
seeks and finds the Messiah in all the works and 
all the wanderings of His earthly pilgrimage. 


CHAPTER III 


At this stage in its development, evangelical 
tradition is still kept within the limits assigned 
by the Book of Acts to the testimony of the 
apostles.' It includes the time between the 
Baptism of Jesus by John and the Resurrection 
of the Saviour, and it still clings to the idea of 
the Messiah promised to Israel, though already 
it tends to go beyond this idea in interpretation 
of the prophecies and their fulfilment. The 
Gospel according to Mark, which, taken broadly, 
represents this stage of faith, nevertheless 
contains traces of a more complicated doctrine, 
of a spirit of speculation already busy on the 
life and death of Christ, interpreting them to 
suit a more learned theology. Already there 
can be felt a presentiment that the framework 
of the Christian faith has been enlarged. From 
henceforward the enlargement will continue, and 


1 Cf. Acts i. 21, 22, 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 45 


the historical framework will extend also to 
include the whole life of Jesus. 

The first theory of Christ was formulated 
by St. Paul. This apostle, who had not known 
Jesus, yet became by the vicissitudes of his 
career the evangelist of the nations, was the 
first, or one of the first, to feel the need of form- 
ing an idea of Christ, a definition of Him as the 
Saviour, since he was compelled to explain, and 
could not simply narrate. Starting from his 
own religious experience, and from the Jewish 
beliefs, modified by his faith, and interpreted so 
as to be intelligible to the Gentiles, he affirms the 
eternal pre-existence of the Messiah, and formu- 
lates the theory of the Redemption. In his last 
epistles he comes to identify Christ, more or less, 
with Eternal Wisdom, attributing to Him a cos- 
mological function, as the theory of the Redemp- 
tion attributes to Him a function in regard to 
humanity. The author of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews does the same, using slightly different 
terms and symbols. This double theory of Christ, 
in His relations to the universe and to humanity, 
could not fail to enter into the evangelical 
tradition, and did in fact enter. The doctrine 
of the Redemption appears in Mark ;! that of the 

1 Mark x. 45; xiv. 24. 


46 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Eternal Christ, Wisdom of the Father, agent 
of all Divine Works, creeps into Matthew and 
Luke,! and finds its definite statement in the 
Gospel of John. 

Thus, little by little, there is formed in the 
atmosphere of faith, beyond what can be called the 
historical reality of the gospel, beyond even its 
idealization to suit the Messiah, the dogma which 
aims at determining its providential meaning, its 
universal scope, its transcendent efficacy. It 
must be said, however, that the Messianic 
element, dominant in Mark, is still the element 
most in evidence in Matthew and in Luke; the 
theory of universal salvation, expressed in the 
synoptics, only enters into and appears beside 
the traditional matter that the doctrine of the 
Messiah has influenced more profoundly; and 
the theory of the Eternal Christ, of Divine 
Wisdom revealed in Jesus, appears still more 
discreetly. It is only in the Fourth Gospel that 
the doctrine of Christ as the intermediate agent 
of creation and the Saviour of mankind, after 
being clearly defined in the prologue,? is freely 
set forth in the discourses which are substituted 
for the traditional sentences the gospel desires 
to interpret, and in the symbolic narratives that 

1 Matt. xi. 27; Luke x. 22. 2 Jobn i, 1-18. 


THEMSOURCES OF THE (GOSPELS 49 


take the place of the Messianic miracles to 
signify the illuminating and eternally vivifying 
action of the Incarnate Word. 

Nevertheless, the theological speculations of 
Paul and of John do not venture beyond the 
historical framework of the Primitive Gospel. It 
would even appear that Paul straitened its 
limits, since, while he recognized in Jesus the 
earthly manifestation of the eternal Christ, he 
invariably considers the Passion and Resurrection 
of the Saviour as acts of the Messiah. As for 
John, he limits the ministry of Jesus to the 
manifestation of the Word, Whose incarnation 
seems to be dated from the Baptism, and has no 
other purpose than the revelation made by the 
teaching, the miracles, the death and resurrection 
of Christ. The idea underlying John’s Gospel is 
always a vision of faith, a faith which, in order 
to appreciate Jesus worthily, makes use of the 
loftiest elements of contemporary religious philo- 
sophy, and is expressed in the language of this 
mystic philosophy. Christ is the actual mani- 
festation of the Eternal Word, and the Fourth 
Gospel, being a symbolic description of this 
truth, is a kind of incarnation, or revelation by 
allegorical images, of discourses and sayings of 
Christ, the Life and Light of mankind. 


48 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


But then came the desire to know the human 
antecedents of Jesus, or rather the desire to 
represent His human origin conformably to the 
idea already formed of His dignity and Provi- 
dential office. From the point of view of Paul, 
and still more from that of Mark and John, 
the narratives of Jesus’ infancy are, so to speak, 
outside the history of Christ, and seem in the 
same way to have been foreign to the primitive 
tradition of the gospel. Herr Harnack writes :} 
“Two of the Gospels, it is true, include a pre- 
history, the history of the birth of Jesus, but 
we need not be concerned with this, for even 
were its contents more credible than they are, 
this pre-history would be almost without sig- 
nificance for the end we have in view.” As 
a matter of fact, there is no hint there that the 
essence of Christianity consists in faith in God 
the Father, without regard to the Divine Son- 
ship of Jesus. 

It is true however, that these narratives re- 
present a normal development of the history of 
Christ. The very nature of their subject, the 
critical examination of the two versions taken 
separately or compared, and an analysis of 
evangelical tradition, make it impossible to 

1 Page 20, 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 49 


regard them as a definite expression of historical 
memories ; none the less they are put forward as 
a document of Christian faith, and in this capacity 
attract the attention of the historian. The idea 
of the Immaculate Conception by the operation 
of the Holy Ghost is not merely, as is readily 
admitted, a physical explanation of the Divine 
Sonship of Jesus, but also a religious explanation, 
like that attached to the idea of the Messiah, and 
a metaphysical explanation like that that belongs 
to the idea of the Incarnation; it is of the nature 
of both, because, if the Immaculate Conception 
in a sense demonstrates the Fatherhood of God, 
the operation of the Holy Ghost has not for 
its immediate end the miraculous formation of a 
purely human being, but rather the communica- 
tion of Divine life, which makes Jesus, from the 
earliest moment of His existence, the elect of 
God, the Christ anointed by the Spirit, the only 
Son of the Heavenly Father; and thus is 
anticipated that consecration of the Messiah 
which the most ancient version of the synoptic 
Gospel referred to the Baptism. The affirmation 
of faith is addressed to faith, and appeals only to 
the judgment of faith: from the Catholic point 
of view, it is for the Church to determine its 


meaning and extent. 
E 


50) (LEE GOSPEL TAND SEE aGL CL Grd 


The narratives of the childhood of Christ are 
for the historian only an expression and an 
assertion of faith in the Messiah, that faith which 
is affirmed at the beginning of the Gospel of 
Mark, and transfigured the memories of the 
Apostles, which is also affirmed and developed in 
Paul, and then in the Fourth Gospel. This faith 
is, as it were, the reply made by the generations 
of believers in succession to the proposition of 
the gospel of Jesus ; it increases, yet remains the 
same, like an echo which, reverberating from 
mountain to mountain, becomes more sonorous 
the further it travels from its point of origin. 

The subject of this faith is at no stage of its 
development presented to the historian as an 
actual reality. Criticism has not to decide if 
Jesus is or is not the Word Incarnate, if He 
existed before His terrestrial manifestation, if 
He was consecrated Messiah from His conception, 
or from the day of His baptism, if the idea of the 
Messiah in its earliest form, and in its successive 
transformations, is a truth. Considered as belief 
this idea is addressed to faith, that is to say, to 
the man, judging with all his soul the worth 
of the religious doctrine presented to him. The 
historian as such need not constitute himself 
either apologist or adversary. He knows it 


THE SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS 51 


simply as a conception or a force whose ante- 
cedents, central manifestation and _ indefinite 
progress, he can analyze up to a point, but whose 
deep meaning and secret power are not things 
that can be deduced from simple analysis or 
critical discussion of texts and facts. 

None the less he will not deny that the 
idea of Christ is essential to Christianity,—for 
Christianity, at all times, from its first origin 
in the gospel of Jesus, will appear to him 
established on the faith in Christ. He will 
recognize the substance of this faith in the best 
authenticated words of Jesus, namely, the eternal 
and unique predestination of the Messiah. His 
unique office in the work of salvation, and His 
unique relation with God, a relation not founded 
merely on a knowledge of His goodness, but on a 
substantial communication of the Divine Spirit— 
that is to say, of God Himself—to the predestined 
Messiah. The Gospels will become for the critic 
the eloquent testimony to this living faith, whose 
source is to be found not elsewhere than in the 
soul of Jesus Himself. No page of these books 
will appear negligible on the ground that it 
does not directly represent the thought of the 
Saviour. The Gospels are the principal docu- 
ments of Christian faith, for the first period of 


52 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


its history, and none of their indications can be 
rejected as insignificant, seeing that all, without 
exception and from the beginning, have been a 
means of expressing faith and of affirming and 
extending it. 


SECTION II 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 
INTRODUCTION 


THE general theme of the preaching of Jesus was 
the reign of God, or the kingdom of Heaven. 
The greater part of the parables bear either on 
the coming of this kingdom or on the way of 
making ready for it. In the Lord’s Prayer, Christ 
makes His disciples say, “Thy Kingdom come!” 
All His teaching is given to prepare for the 
kingdom. However, as the gospel nowhere con- 
tains any express definition of its nature, there 
is room for discussion on the actual object of the 
conception, and discussion still continues. Before 
Jesus, the idea of the reign of God is above all 
concerned with the end of the world, and the 
system that is to take the place of the actual and 
imperfect order, Daniel, and the authors of 


$4 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


prophecies and visions, see in it the great mani- 
festation of Divine power, which is to inaugurate 
the eternal happiness of the Saints on a re- 
generated earth, a happiness over which God will 
rule in the New Jerusalem. Various elements 
go to make up this conception: cosmology and a 
transposition of cosmogony, in that the renewal 
is brought about by the destruction of the present 
world; national sentiment, which associates the 
cosmic renovation and general judgment with the 
restoration of Israel; and religious sentiment of 
the Divine justice, which rewards the good and 
punishes the wicked. In the gospel, the national 
element has disappeared, the nationality of Israelite 
being no longer in itself a title to the kingdom ; 
the eschatological element no longer fills the view, 
and the religious and moral element comes into 
the foreground. But the relation between these 
last two elements, which seem co-ordinated, is a 
point much debated. Several critics maintain 
that the thought of Jesus was entirely dominated 
by apocalyptic conceptions of the end of the 
world. Others think the moral point of view of 
remission of sins and reconciliation with God is 
the most important, the sole essential considera- 
tion. 


CHAPTER I 


Tus last opinion is that of Herr Harnack, and 

the eminent lecturer speaks with severity, even a 

little unfairly,’ of those who support the contrary 

view. Recognizing that the kingdom that is to 

come is actually what Jesus understood by the 

kingdom, they yield to the desire, conscious or 

unconscious, to bring everything to one level, and 

lower that which is raised. Jesus, it is said, 

would share this belief in the kingdom that is 

to come, but for Him it would not constitute | 
the whole of the reign of God; it would not 

even be the principal part, because the Saviour 

taught from the first, and was alone in teaching, 

that the kingdom of Heaven is not to be known 
by external signs, but exists already in the man | 
who trusts God. 

A problem of this nature is not to be dismissed 
by insinuations as to the tendencies of this person 
or that, who has sustained one or the other 

1 Page 35. 


56 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


conclusion. The expositors accused of belittling 
Christ might easily reply that, to attribute to 
Him the ideas that seem to one’s self to be the 
nearest to truth is perhaps to honour Him less 
than might be imagined. The gospel texts are 
at hand, and it is solely by their testimony that 
the question should be decided. 

The evangelists have summed up the preach- 
ing of Jesus at the commencement of His 
ministry in the words: “ Repent, for the kingdom 
of Heaven is at hand.”! These words might also 
stand for an abridgment of the whole teaching of 
the Saviour in Galilee and at Jerusalem. They 
express the necessity of a moral conversion, of an 
internal change, of the remission of sins, but all 
in view of the kingdom that is at hand, that is, 
in view of the end of the world, for the kingdom 
which is near is the same that John the Baptist 
had announced before Jesus. The dominant idea 
is obviously that of the kingdom which is soon 
to be, and the repentance is significant in relation 
to the kingdom, as it is the indispensable con- 
dition of admittance therein. But the entire 
gospel only develops this warning. The beati- 
tudes at the commencement of the Sermon on the 
Mount promise the kingdom to the poor and 

1 Matt. iv. 17. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 57 


afflicted, to the needy and the persecuted; it is 
promised to them as a future recompense, and is 
not supposed to be realized in them. When the 
Saviour sends His apostles out to preach, the 
evangelists represent Him as leaving repentance 
to be understood, and the message He gives them 
contains only the formula, “The kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand,”’! which, without doubt, is 
the essence of the gospel, the “good news” 
announced by Christ. When He is asked for a 
sign, Jesus replies that He will give no other 
than the sign of Jonas,2— that is to say, He refers 
His hearers to the approaching judgment of God. 
He assures His disciples that some of them shall 
be still living when the kingdom shall arrive; 
and when the disciples object that Elias must 
first come, He replies that the prophecy is ful- 
filled, and that Elias has come in the person of 
John the Baptist.2 The parable of the workers 
in the vineyard * shows that the kingdom is assured 
to all who have worked for God, no matter for 
how short a time. In the parable of the Wed- 
ding Feast,® the kingdom bears the same relation 
to the gospel as the feast to the invitation that 
precedes it. Men are warned to be on their 


1 Matt. x. 7. 2 Matt. xvi. 4; xii. 39. 
3 Matt. xvii, 12. 4 Matt.xx.1-15. © Luke xiv. 16-24, 


58 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


guard, for the kingdom will come as a thief in 
the night :1 it is necessary to await the kingdom 
as the faithful servant awaits the return of his 
lord.2 Store of merit must be provided as the 
wise virgins kept their oil, lest, when the king- 
dom shall come, the unready shall experience 
the fate of the five foolish ones who knocked 
in vain at the bridegroom’s door.? In view of 
the judgment, the gifts of God must be made 
fruitful, as the servants, in their master’s absence, 
employed the talents they had received from 
him:* by a good use of life and its present 
benefits, a part in the kingdom must be made 
sure, as the dishonest steward prepared a refuge 
for himself among his master’s debtors :° poverty 
is to be endured with resignation, in the faith 
that the future life will atone for the miseries 
of the present, as is seen in the example of 
Lazarus :® consolation for the death even of the 
Saviour is to be found in the remembrance that, 
at the last supper, when Jesus presented to His 
disciples the symbolic cup, He bade them look 


forward to the meeting at the festival of the 
kingdom of God." 


1 Matt. xxiv. 43. 2 Matt. xxiv. 45-51. 
3 Matt. xxv. 1-13. 4 Matt. xxv. 14-29, 
6 Luke xvi. 1-8. 6 Luke xvi. 19-25, 


7 Mark xiv. 25. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 59 


The idea of the celestial kingdom is then nothing 
but a great hope, and it is in this hope or no- 
where that the historian should set the essence of 
the gospel, as no other idea holds so prominent 
and so large a place in the teaching of Jesus. 
The qualities of this hope are as easy to determine 
as its object. It is in the first place collective, 
the good of the kingdom being destined for all 
who love God, and of such a nature that all can 
enjoy it in common, and so well that their happi- 
ness cannot be compared to anything so fitly as 
to a great festival. Itis objective, and consists 
not only in the holiness of the believer, nor in the 
love that unites him to God, but implies all the 
conditions of a happy life, both the physical and 
the moral conditions, the external and the internal 
conditions, so that the coming of the kingdom can 
~ be spoken of as a fact that completes history, and 
is in no way confounded with the conversion of 
those who are called to it. It regards, and can 
only regard, the future, as befits its nature of 
hope; and this future is not the fate of the 
individual in this world, but the renewal of the 
world, the restoration of humanity in eternal 
justice and happiness. 

If there is an anticipation of the kingdom in 
the teaching of the gospel and in the fruits it 


60 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


produced, it is because the view of the kingdom 
is of a thing close at hand; the gospel is the 
immediate and direct preparation for the king- 
dom, and the present looks only to this future 
and virtually contains it. If the kingdom of 
Heaven is compared to a feast, the gospel is 
the invitation of the Father, such as is made 
when the board is spread to entreat the guests 
to come. The principal guarantee of safety in 
the kingdom will be the overthrow of Satan; 
but already Satan is overwhelmed, he has found 
One stronger than he, and his house is spoiled.” 
Jesus saw in the cures He effected, especially 
the cures of those possessed by devils, the 
pledge of His final victory over the powers of 
evil, and He could say that the kingdom of God 
was come, since by the Spirit of God He cast out 
the demons. It may be that this assertion, 
which is made in support of an argument founded 
on the exorcisms practised by the Jews, and 
separates rather inappropriately the two com- 
parisons of the kingdom divided against itself 
and the strong man, may belong to a later stratum 
of evangelical tradition* If it proceeds from 


1 Matt. xxii. 4. 2 Matt. xii. 29. 3 Matt. xii. 28, 
4 Cf. Mark iii. 24-27, 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 61 


Jesus, it would set forth the kingdom as 
realized in its commencement, and not in its 
fulness, the power of Satan being not yet entirely 
overcome. 

In the same way should be understood the 
words, “from the days of John the Baptist until 
now, the kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, 
and the violent take it by force.”1 The kingdom 
of Heaven was inaugurated after John had 
finished his ministry, because it was then that 
Jesus Himself preached the gospel; but it was 
inaugurated in its preparation, not in its fulfil- 
ment; and those who seize it, the publicans and 
sinners who take possession of it, and who seem, 
as it were, to take it by force, do not enter into 
the felicity of the kingdom: they have seized it 
in promise, they have acquired a right to the 
' happiness of the just. 

The kingdom is for those God pardons, and God 
pardons all, provided they pardon themselves, 
Thus the kingdom is for those who are good after 
the example of God, and in organizing the present 
life on a basis of charity, the gospel realizes 
already the kingdom, whose full and final coming 
will only, as it were, assure the happiness and 
immortality of charitable men. But the kingdom 

1 Matt. xi. 12. 


62 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


is actually this everlasting happiness. Its root 
is within; it lies like a precious seed in the soul 
of each believer; but in this state it is hidden, 
rudimentary, imperfect, and it awaits its perfec- 
tion in the future. 


CHAPTER II 


In order to determine wherein consists the 
essence of the kingdom, of the gospel, and of 
Christianity, Herr Harnack starts from a principle 
that is far from self-evident, and is contradicted 
by the general attitude of Jesus towards the 
Mosaic religion and Israelite tradition. “Truly,” 
he writes, “it is a difficult task, and a grave 
responsibility for the historian to distinguish what 
is traditional from what is personal, the kernel 
from the husk, in the preaching of Jesus as to the 
kingdom of God.”1 Here evidently what is 
traditional is the husk; what is personal, the 
kernel; and because the eschatological idea of 
the kingdom belongs to Israelite tradition, Herr 
Harnack finds it quite natural to consider it as 
merely the husk of the gospel, while the faith in 
a merciful God is the kernel, the original element 
in the teaching of the Saviour. 

Such a conception of the essential and the 


1 Page 36. 


64 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


accessory in matters of evangelical belief is 
acceptable neither to the philosopher nor to the 
historian, whose duty is only to examine what 
importance Jesus Himself attaches to the different 
points or aspects of His doctrine, without arro- 
gating to themselves the right to decide that the 
traditional element in the gospel is either suspect 
or guaranteed merely by the fact that it is tradi- 
tional. Now Christ has never said or given it 
to be understood, that the old revelation was any 
less authorized than that of which He was the 
instrument. On the contrary, He had no other 
pretension than to fulfil the law and the prophets ; 
without doubt He wished to enlarge and perfect 
the former revelation, but, while enlarging and 
perfecting, He meant to retain it; He is not set 
before the world as the revealer of a new principle ; 
if He never gives His definition of the kingdom of 
God it is because the kingdom of which He is the 
messenger and the instrument is identified in His 
thought, as in the minds of His hearers, with that 
that the prophets have foretold. He holds to the 
hope of the kingdom as He holds to the precept 
of the love of God and faith in Him. 

These three elements of His gospel are inter- 
twined, inseparable, essential, although, or rather 
because, they are traditional; they are the 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 65 


essence of the gospel because they were the 
essence of Biblical revelation. If His way of 
understanding and realizing God, Love and the 
kingdom, is more pure, more deep, more living 
than that of the Old Testament, it perfects what 
has preceded it and does not destroy it. To seek 
in the gospel an element that shall be entirely 
new in regard to the religion of Moses and the 
prophets, is to seek a thing that Jesus had no 
desire to set there, a thing that on His own 
statement does not exist there. 

The contradiction that has been discovered 
between the conception of a kingdom that is to 
come and that of a kingdom already present 
does not exist, unless we attribute to the second 
idea an absolute character it does not possess in 
the gospel. It would be far from easy to prove 
by clear and authentic texts that the kingdom (a 
supernatural gift) is purely a religious benefit,— 
union with the living God—and the chief experi- 
ence of 4 man consisting in the remission of his 
sins! Here again the great importance attached 
by Protestant theology to the idea of sin and 
justification accounts for what, from the point of 
view of historical criticism, is nothing but a pre- 
conceived determination to find in the gospel 

1 Page 40. 


66 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


nothing but the essentials of one’s own religion. 
Christ nowhere confounds the kingdom with the 
remission of sins, which is only the condition 
of entrance into the kingdom. Nowhere does 
He identify the kingdom with God, and God’s 
power acting in the heart of the individual.t 
It is only by a very special exposition that this 
definition of the kingdom can be found in the 
parables.2_ The parable of the Sower only signi- 
fies that the kingdom is the Word of God: the 
evangelical word, which is not the kingdom, is 
compared to the grain the sower sows in his field, 
and of which only a portion bears fruit. Part of 
the seed is lost, and that is a thing that cannot 
be said of the kingdom. The part that takes 
root corresponds to the useful preaching, that 
which attracts aspirants for the kingdom, but it 
is not itself the kingdom; it bears fruit for the 
kingdom, which is the end for which the seed 
of the word is sown. In the same way the 
parables of the Pearl and the Hidden Treasure 
do not go to prove that the kingdom is God, in 
_ the secret places of the heart, but simply that the 
bliss of the everlasting kingdom is worth acquir- 
ing at the sacrifice of all earthly possessions and 
advantages, as the Pearl of great price and the 


1 Page 35. 2 Page 36. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 67 


treasure hidden in the field were worth buying at 
the price of all the wealth of those who discovered 
them. The application of these parables is not 
doubtful, and is closely related to the eschato- 
logical conception of the kingdom. The seed which 
grows without the labourer heeding,! may suggest 
the idea of a moral progress accomplished within 
the soul; but in reality the comparison bears 
on the kingdom as taught and the kingdom made 
manifest, the first corresponding to the seed, the 
second to the harvest; between the two lies the 
time while the seed germinates and the gospel 
spreads. The parables of the mustard seed and 
of the leaven, which emphasize the contrast 
between an insignificant beginning and a great 
final result, apply also to the antithesis between 
the kingdom started by the evangelizing teaching 
and the kingdom developed to its actual mani- 
festation. Everywhere the gospel is subordinated 
to the kingdom. 

Some preparation is needed to find that who- 
ever recites the Lord’s Prayer prays only to pre- 
serve the strength he already possesses, and to 
strengthen the union between himself and God.* 
The first part of the prayer is concerned with the 
coming of the kingdom, and the Christian who 


1 Mark iv. 26-29. 2 Page 42. 


68 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


says, “Thy kingdom come,” does not imagine that 
the kingdom of Heaven is realized within himself. 
The second part is subordinated to the first, as 
the gospel is subordinated to the kingdom; for it 
is in view of the near approach of the kingdom 
that men pray for daily bread, to be forgiven their 
trespasses, and to be delivered from temptation. 
The Fatherhood of God, the heart’s obedience to 
His will, the certainty of having eternal posses- 
sions, and of being protected against evil, do not 
exclude the eschatological conception of the king- 
dom, and indeed only obtain their full signifi- 
cance by their relations to that idea. It is evident 
that the terms of the prayer would be very 
different, were they not directed to guarantee the 
union already existing of the individual with his 
Heavenly Father. 

The saying, “ What shall it profit a man if he 
gain the whole world and lose his own soul,” 
does not signify precisely “the infinite value 
of the human soul,” an abstraction made of the 
destiny of man in the future kingdom. Jesus 
said that life must be lost in time to be gained in 
eternity, and that he who seeks it or gains it now 
loses it for the future. Now, the gain of every- 
thing else cannot compensate for the loss of life: 


1 Mark viii. 36. 2 Page 40. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 69 


he who should gain the whole world would have 
no advantage of it as soon as he were dead: and 
that is the position of the man who will not sacri- 
fice his life for the kingdom, from the wish to 
keep it for the world: he will lose everything 
by his death, the world he loves and has served, 
and the kingdom to which he has no right. When 
Jesus said, “Ye are of more value than many 
sparrows,’ ! it was not to exalt the value of the 
soul, but to encourage His disciples to have faith ; 
the God that watches over the sparrows watches 
even more over men. Truly the Saviour cared 
for every human soul, the souls of the poor man, 
the sinner, the woman, the child, but he did not 
consider the value of the soul in itself in order to 
sum up all religion in the actual union of each 
soul with God. He made it sufficiently clear, in 
the Parable of the Talents, that human existence 
is of value according to the fruits it produces for 
the Divine Judgment. The soul or the life has 
no worth save by its destiny, through the 
kingdom that God offers to it, and it ought to 
deserve. 

Jesus summed up all duty in the precept of 
love. But this teaching does not exhaust the 
moral of the Gospel and does not indicate its 

1 Luke xii. 7. 


70 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


final sanction. To the man who asked what he 
must do to possess eternal life, that is, to have 
a place in the kingdom of Heaven, Jesus replied 
by enumerating those commandments of the 
Decalogue that relate to the neighbour, then 
enjoined him to give all he had to the poor and 
follow Himself. Love, therefore, is not at an 
end in itself; charity leads to the kingdom, 
sacrificing the temporal to gain the eternal. It 
is vain to force the opinion that the kingdom 
is “only the treasure possessed by the soul in 
the eternal and merciful God,” ? if by this treasure 
of actual possession charity is to be understood. 
Love is demanded now to assure the possession 
of God later, when the glory of his reign shall 
appear. 

To support the idea of a kingdom purely 
personal and already present, there remains a 
text of the third Gospel, whose authenticity is 
not very certain, nor its meaning very clear. 
When asked by the Pharisees, when the kingdom 
of God should come, Jesus answered them, “ The 
kingdom of God cometh not with observation ; 
neither shall they say, Lo here! or Lo there! for 
behold the kingdom of God is within you.” 8 


1 Mark x. 17-22. 2 Page 49. 
3 Luke xvii, 20, 21. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN vA 


This statement is only found in Luke, and is 
part of the preamble that the author has drawn up 
for an eschatological discourse, whose substance 
has been preserved by Matthew.? It is highly 
probable that only this discourse belongs to the 
source common to both Gospels, and that the 
saying quoted comes from Luke or his particular 
tradition. The general style of this introduction 
is that of the evangelist, who readily invents the 
surroundings of the discourses he repeats; and 
the idea of the present kingdom does not accord 
well with the discourse itself, which concerns 
the coming of the Son of Man, unless the 
assertion, “The kingdom of God is within you,” 
is to be understood as a prophecy meaning, 
“The kingdom of God is about to become 
manifest among you.” The fact of revision 
comes out in what is said of the kingdom, “ Lo 
here! or Lo there!” a phrase which really 
applies to the Messiah, and is, as a matter of 
fact, used of Him a couple of verses later. If 
the saying was really pronounced by Jesus and 
addressed to the Pharisees, as the evangelist 
states, it cannot mean that the kingdom of 
God is in them, that is, in their souls, for these 


1 Luke xvii. 23-37. 
2 Matt. xxiv. 23, 26-27, 37-39, 17-18, 40-41, 28. 


Hen his Ie; GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Pharisees do not accept the gospel, and have 
no share in the kingdom. There would be much 
subtlety in leaving a restriction to be understood, 
as though Jesus had meant to say, “The kingdom 
of God is such that it might be realized in you, 
if you desired and were worthy of it.” The most 
natural meaning would be, “the kingdom of God 
isin the midst of you,” and it is perhaps in this 
way that the writer understands it, unless he has 
simply wished to say, that the kingdom will 
come when it is least expected, and before there . 
is time to announce that it has appeared in this 
place or in that. Before it can be maintained 
with authority that Jesus understood this saying 
in another sense than this, other texts are needed 
of undoubted meaning and authenticity, express- 
ing the internal and actual character of the 
kingdom. But it is evident that such texts are 
wanting, and as to sacrifice the rest of the 
gospel to the doubtful interpretation of a solitary 
passage would be to go contrary to the most 
elementary principles of criticism, under the 
most favourable view, and taking the authenticity 
of the saying for granted, Jesus must be held to 
have spoken of the presence of the kingdom in 
its commencement and its preparation by the 
gospel, 


CHAPTER III 


THE historian must resist the temptation to 
modernize the conception of the kingdom. If 
the theologian feels bound to supply an inter- 
pretation for the needs of the present day, no 
one will contest his right, provided he does not 
confuse his commentary with the primitive mean- 
ing of the gospel texts; and while this is true 
for the conception of the kingdom, it is also true 
for the appreciation of the relations of the gospel 
to the different aspects of human life. Nothing 
is easier than to determine historically the 
attitude of Jesus towards the world, towards 
earthly possessions, towards human law, towards 
civilization. The vision of the approaching king- 
dom must have inspired Him with a kind of 
disdain for all these things, and the texts leave 
no possible doubt as to His sentiments. But 
just as means have been found to bring back 
upon Himself and the present the regard that 
the Saviour directed towards the future, success 


74 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


is equally looked for if not in showing Him as 
positively interested in present life, social ques- 
tions, political order, and human progress, at least 
in attenuating His indifference towards them all. 
We are told} that the gospel is not the 
doctrine of renunciation of the world, but that 
it merely attacks riches, anxiety for earthly 
matters, and egoism: the proof that Jesus was 
no ascetic, is that He ate and drank like all the 
world, that He permitted His feet to be washed 
and His head to be anointed ; that He permitted 
his followers to continue their occupations and 
their way of life; that He did not organize the 
little group of disciples into a monastic order, with 
a code of laws and definite spiritual exercises ; 
that later the apostles taught that the labourer 
is worthy of his hire, and that they did not 
separate from their wives; and, finally, that the 
gospel is opposed to the world only in that its 
spirit consists in humility and faith in God, the 
remission of sins, and the love of our neighbour. 
As a matter of fact, it cannot be contested that 
Jesus preached self-denial, without establishing a 
discipline of renunciation. But the attempt to 
draw an absolute distinction between the spirit 
of detachment from the world, and the effective 
1 Pages 50-56. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 75 


renunciation of it, heowever legitimate in itself and 
useful for present-day application of gospel 
maxims, does not appear in a historical sense to 
be founded on the words of the Saviour. The 
expectation of the great event explains why 
Jesus put forward no actual disciplinary ordi- 
nance; why He submitted neither Himself nor 
His followers to any special mode of life that 
might have interfered with the preaching of the 
kingdom; why He considered the gospel as a 
message of joy, incompatible with the bodily 
privations and fasts imposed on themselves by 
the Pharisees and the disciples of John.1 But 
it is for the same reason that He exacted from 
all those who aspired to the kingdom, not a dis- 
position willing eventually to sacrifice possessions 
and family affections to the superior interest of 
salvation, but the immediate relinquishment of 
all to follow Him. A man must lose his life 
to save it; he must hate father, mother, wife, 
children, brothers, and sisters to devote himself 
to the work of the kingdom; he must sell his 
goods and give unto the poor; it is not enough 
to be free from avarice and temporal cares, he 
must abandon the riches and occupations of this 
world. The comparison of the disciples to the 
1 Mark ii. 19. 


76 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


birds of the air and the flowers of the fields shows 
that it is not only anxiety for bodily needs, but 
even work that is forbidden or discouraged, and 
though God is to be asked for daily bread, it is 
not in the least intended that the prayer should 
show anything but confidence in God without 
personal anxiety ; rather does he who prays thus 
rely entirely on God for his means of existence. 
The absolute nature of the hope for the impend- 
ing establishment of the kingdom of Heaven 
corresponds to the absolute nature of the renun- 
ciation demanded for admission therein, and the 
absolute nature of the confidence in Him Who 
cares for the birds, and will assuredly come to 
the aid of men, His children. 

It is in no way astonishing that such a dis- 
cipline could not be imposed in all its rigour 
on every one, even during the ministry of Jesus, 
or that further departures from it should have 
occurred after Him; but this is no reason for 
introducing into the thought of the Master the 
limitations that the nature of things and the 
actual conditions of existence set to its detailed 
application. It was equally necessary for the 
success of the gospel that the discipline should 
have had in the beginning this simple, unmodified 
character, and that later all those modifications 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN oh 


should have been made in it that the changing 
circumstances demanded, in order to adapt what 
had been addressed to a world believed to be near 
its end, to a world that had proved more enduring. 

Herr Harnack? does not rank himself with 
those who see in the gospel first and foremost 
a social doctrine for the relief of the oppressed, 
either from admiration of such a teaching, or 
because, on the contrary, they regard it as entirely 
chimerical and impracticable. Nor is he among 
those who represent Christ as “ conservative,” a 
respecter of the priesthood, and of acquired 
fortunes. He thinks that Jesus, while regarding 
the possession of riches as a danger for the soul, 
did not desire general poverty as the foundation 
of His heavenly kingdom, and was forced to 
battle with misery and make it disappear. Christ 
_ neither gave nor possessed an economic programme 
for the conquest of poverty: He did more, by 
indicating a new social duty in the precept of 
charity. The gospel is socialistic in so far as it 
desires “to establish among men a community as 
comprehensive as human life, and as profound as 
human misery.” Jesus appreciates the common 
needs of life—shelter, food, decent living; He 
desired that these essential possessions should be 

1 Pages 56-65. 


78 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


given to all who could not procure them ; He even 
seems to have had glimpses of a possible society 
wherein wealth should not exist as private property 
in the strict sense, but here His conception of the 
approaching end of the world must be borne in 
mind, and is it not well to consider it in regard 
to the rest? If Jesus did not desire general 
poverty as a condition of the kingdom of God, is 
it not because He conceived the kingdom inde- 
pendently of human society? It is impossible to 
say that He proposed to banish misery, in the 
sense that He was constantly preoccupied with 
remedying it by the regular means of a wise dis- 
tribution of help, recommended to the possessors 
of riches. The disappearance of poverty is only 
foreseen, perhaps only desired, as a consequence 
of the establishment of the kingdom. The com- 
plete renunciation exacted from the rich man is 
rather in his own spiritual interest than for the 
relief of the poor to whom the kingdom is pro- 
mised. The conception of a society where riches 
should be so distributed that none should lack 
food, clothing, and shelter, is not really present 
in the gospel, and it needs a certain amount of 
predisposition to find that when Jesus, the Son 
of Man, had not “where to lay His head,”1 He 
1 Matt. viii. 20. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 79 


desired for every one the shelter He Himself did 
not possess. 

The historical truth is that the idea of a society 
regularly constituted according to the principles 
of the gospel does not exist apart from the vision 
of the approaching kingdom, where there shall be 
neither rich nor poor, where there shall be no 
question of private property or collective property, 
and where Divine happiness is the common posses- 
sion of all. There remains only for the believer 
the possibility, the right, the duty to draw from 
this ideal of the kingdom, as from that of renun- 
ciation and from the precept of charity, such 
applications as are suitable to any given state of 
human society. There is no need to quarrel with 
the Franciscans on the ground that Jesus, when 
He bade His Apostles live by the gospel, did not 
authorize them to beg. 

In His relations with established authority, 
the Saviour, we are told, attacked the “ political 
Church and the Pharisees,” but took up another 
attitude towards “the real authority, that which 
bears the sword.” He recognized a definite right 
in this authority, and never set Himself against 
it. Even the prohibition against taking an oath 
should not be extended “ to include the oath taken 
before the authorities.’ Cesar has his rights in 


80 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the sphere of his purely temporal power: let his 
tribute be rendered to him. In itself, this power, 
resting as it does on force, has no moral authority. 
The true disciples of the gospel will keep them- 
selves from the exercise of this power of domina- 
tion: they are to know that the first among them 
is the servant of all. Did Jesus reject or sanction 
“human law”? He seems to have had no con- 
fidence in human justice, and exhorts His disciples 
not to claim “their rights,” to let themselves be 
robbed and beaten without attempt to exact repara- 
tion for the wrongs done to them. From this it has 
been concluded that the gospel is the negation of 
all codes, of civil law as well as of canonical law. 
Herr Harnack thinks that Jesus had only indi- 
vidual cases in His mind, and that He was not 
thinking of the possibility of attack by external 
enemies, nor of the public authority interested in 
the maintenance of order and the safeguarding of 
the existence and welfare of citizens, nor of a 
nation attacked unjustly. 

Such a gap in the teaching of Christ could not 
fail to be significant. But the manner in which 
the learned author interprets his texts lacks 
exactitude. Jesus bids His disciples, without any 
restricting phrases, love their enemies and do good 

1 Pages 65-74. 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 81 


to those who persecute them, turn the other 
cheek to blows, and abandon the coat to him who 
has wished to take the cloak. The persecutor, 
the insulter, the robber, does not belong to the 
society of the disciples, and it is not with any pre- 
vision of his possible conversion that they are 
commanded to endure him: it is always by virtue 
of that supreme indifference to human interests 
that is, historically, the form taken by the gospel. 
Why claim a right now, when eternal justice is so 
close at hand? ‘The kingdom of heaven is for the 
persecuted. What matters what one possesses, 
when nothing is needed to participate in the 
reign of God? It is in the same spirit that Jesus 
deals with constituted authority. He does not 
contest the legitimacy of the priesthood, but He 
knows that the reign of the law is about to give 
place to the era of the Messiah. He is not in 
revolt against Cesar, but He knows that the 
power of man is declining to its end. It is not 
for Him to pronounce opinion on the value of in- 
stitutions which will have no place in the king- 
dom of heaven. It is absolutely gratuitous to 
suppose that He admitted the obligation of the 
oath before authorities. When He replied to the 
adjuration of the High Priest, He Himself took 
no oath. His way of regarding all human and 
G 


82 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


temporal order is obviously inspired by the senti- 
ment of His superior vocation in a totally different 
scheme of things, to be set in place of this 
temporary and defective organization, represented 
by unjust men, who must be endured until the 
destined hour shall come. 

It follows that the gospel contains no formal 
declaration for or against the constitution of 
human society in the world as itis. The necessity 
of human law cannot be deduced from the gospel, 
nor can any foundation for it be found there: 
both exist independently of the gospel, which is 
not called upon to create them, or to replace 
them, and can only influence them by its spirit. 

For the rest, it is not evident that the gospel 
is only addressed “to the inner soul of man that 
is always the same.” The gospel of Jesus is 
addressed to the whole man, to snatch him from 
the conditions normal to his present life. This 
violent effort was indispensable for the foundation 
of Christianity, and analogous efforts may still be 
necessary to recall to men’s minds that their prin- 
cipal interest is superior to temporal advantage. 
It is certain, for the historian, that the gospel 
has rather regarded human law and political and 
social economy as abstractions, and that it had 
no formal intention of regenerating them, unless 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 83 


by the radical transformation implied in the ideal 
of the kingdom. 

Finally, observes the author,! if the gospel had 
taken any thought for science, art, or civilization, it 
would have bound itself to one particular form of 
human culture, and would have been hampered 
in its subsequent development, as the Roman 
Church is to-day through its connection with the 
philosophy, political organization, and general 
culture of the Middle Ages. Intellectual progress 
and civilization do not constitute the whole of 
man or of humanity. Moral progress is of the 
first importance, that progress that Jesus was con- 
scious of preparing and safeguarding when He 
revealed to mankind the knowledge of the true 
God. 

How far apart are the truth of history and 
the theory proposed with such ardour and convic- 
tion! The Catholic Church is only bound to the 
science and political form of the Middle Ages 
because it does not choose to detach itself from 
them. If the gospel was not bound to any form 
of science and civilization, it was by the nature of 
things bound to the lack of science and of culture, 
which was none the less inconvenient. If it has 
since been the more easily adapted to different 


1 Pages 74-78. 


84. THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


conditions of knowledge and civilization, there 
has none the less remained with it, because of 
its origin, a kind of repugnance and distrust of 
civilization and science, generally returned with 
interest. Is Protestant orthodoxy, founded on 
the gospel, less troubled by the modern movement 
than the Catholic Church? It is incontestable 
that intellectual progress. and civilization repre- 
sent neither the supreme end of life nor the most 
precious possession of humanity. But does not the 
gospel entirely ignore their secondary value? It 
should be enough to say that the gospel is the 
factor without which science and progress do not 
really elevate mankind. Suppose we were asked 
if the gospel might not have come to an end, had 
it not come in contact with Greek science? Is 
it really certain that this alliance contributed 
nothing towards the preservation of its moral 
essence ? However, from the point of view of the 
gospel, science and civilization were not even 
accessory advantages: they were nothing, and 
could be nothing, compared with the vision of 
the kingdom. 

Science and civilization on their side also have 
justification for their existence apart from the 
gospel, which is not destined to promote them, 
and cannot take their place in so far as they-are 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 85 


actually useful and beneficial for humanity. The 
independence of the gospel with regard to 
matters of intelligence is only a theoretical hypo- 
thesis. In historical reality, and among all those 
who have believed, or who do believe, evangelical 
faith is coloured by the relative ignorance or 
knowledge of its adepts. 

As to the moral revolution which it is held 
Christ wished to bring about in the world, it 
cannot be too often repeated that Jesus only 
announced. it in the kingdom about to come, and 
that He did not represent it as a work of slow 
progress. The Parables of the Workers in the 
Vineyard and of the Talents, that are quoted to 
show how the kingdom extends on the earth, 
have not this allegorical significance; the first 
means that the kingdom will be given to those 
who come late to faith and the practice of well- 
doing, as well as to those who have given all 
their lives to duty; the second signifies that the 
kingdom will only belong to those whose life has 
been productive of the fruits of virtue; the two 
complete one another, but both alike presuppose 
a kingdom that is to come, without assuming its 
existence in the present life. 

In fine, it is not precisely by the knowledge of 
God that Christ looks to save mankind; speaking 


86 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


to Jews, He supposes God to be already recog- 
nized, and does not even pretend to make Him 
known in a new aspect. The message of Jesus is 
contained in the announcement of the approach- 
ing kingdom, and the exhortation to penitence as 
a means of sharing therein. All else, though it 
is the common preoccupation of humanity, is as 
though non-existent. 

Whatever may have been the intrinsic worth and 
moral efficacy of the hope of which Christ was the 
interpreter, nothing was done, even at the time 
when this hope was made manifest, to reconcile 
it with all the realities to which it has since 
accommodated itself. The work of adaptation 
still continues, and Herr Harnack, following 
many others, has set himself to toil at it. But 
he is too ready to suppose that the agreement was 
complete from the beginning, or at any rate that 
he has only to take the gospel just as it is, to 
apply it to all possible conditions of mankind. 
As the gospel was appropriate to the very special 
circumstances under which it saw the light, it has 
first been necessary to detach it from its earliest 
connections, which were not in the least with the 
preoccupations of actual life (the anxiety to 
ameliorate human conditions in this world, social 
and political law, and the progress of culture), 


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 87 


but with a kind of violent and anarchic state far 
outside any civilization then existing. The 
gospel has not entered the world as an uncon- 
ditioned absolute doctrine, summed up in a unique 
and steadfast truth, but as a living faith, con- 
crete and complex, whose evolution proceeds with- 
out doubt from the internal force which has made 
it enduring, but none the less has been, in every- 
thing and from the beginning, influenced by the 
surroundings wherein the faith was born and has 
since developed. This faith took shape in the 
idea of the reign of God. ‘The conception of God 
the Father is only one element, traditional in its 
origin, like all the rest, and has its history, like 
all the rest, in the general development of 
Christianity. 


SECTION III 
THE SON OF GOD 


INTRODUCTION 


GIvEN a very limited conception of the kingdom 
of heaven, an equally limited conception of the 
mission of the Saviour is sure to correspond. The 
Christ of Herr Harnack! not only differs as a 
matter of fact from the Christ of tradition, but 
also from any image that the historian can derive 
from a criticism of the Gospels alone. Jesus, we 
are told, is the Son of God in so far as He reveals 
the Father, but the Father alone belongs to the 
gospel; Jesus believed Himself the Messiah, but 
this Jewish conception is not otherwise bound up 
with that of the Divine Sonship: “it was the 
condition necessary for the recognition in the his- 
tory of the Jewish religion of Him Who had 
received the inward summons ;”? the expiatory 


1 Pages 79-103. 2 Page 89. 


THE SON OF GOD 89 


death of Jesus made Him the Lord, and whatever 
is thought of the narratives of the resurrection, it 
was in the tomb of Christ that indestructible 
faith was born in the victory cf man over death 
and in an eternal life. 


CHAPTER I 


“Jzsus has explained very clearly in one of His 
discourses how and why He called Himself the 
Son of God. It is in Matthew and not in John 
that the saying occurs—‘ None knoweth the Son 
save the Father, nor the Father save the Son, and 
he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him.’ The 
knowledge of God is the sphere of the Divine 
Sonship. It is with this knowledge of God that 
Jesus has learnt to regard the Holy Being Who 
governs the heaven and the earth, as Father, as 
His Father. This is why the consciousness He 
had of being the Son of God is no more than 
the practical consequence of His knowledge 
that God was Father and His Father. Properly 
understood, all that the name of Son implies 
is a knowledge of God. But two points further 
must be noted; Jesus is convinced that He 
knows God as none before Him has known, and 
He knows that His mission is to communicate 
to all others, by His words and deeds, this 


THE SON OF GOD 9! 


knowledge of God, and in the same way His 
Divine Sonship.” } 

All this edifice of argument, with its relation to 

Herr Harnack’s conception of the heavenly king- 
dom which it is superfluous to point out, is 
founded, in the final analysis, on a solitary text, 
whose origin is carefully made prominent. It is 
a passage in the synoptics, not in John, and to 
be read not only in Matthew,” but also in Luke.’ 
But this text alone ought not to serve as the 
basis for a historical examination of the idea to be 
formed, from a study of the Gospels, of the mission 
that Jesus attributed to Himself. It is not put 
forward as an explanation of the Divine Sonship, 
but as the expression of a permanent relation 
between the Father and the Son. To say that 
this relation constitutes, properly speaking, the 
_Divine Sonship of Jesus, is a deduction of the 
theologian, not the expression of a doctrine or a 
sentiment that Jesus Himself formulated. 

More than one passage in the Gospels can be 
found without difficulty, from which the con- 
clusion is clear that the title, Son of God, was for 
the Jews, the disciples, and for the Saviour Him- 
self the equivalent of the Messiah. It is enough 


1 Page 81. 2 Matt. xi. 25-30. 
3 Luke x. 21-24. 


92 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


to recall the different versions of the confession of 
Peter in the synoptic Gospels, and the question- 
ing of Jesus by the High Priest. In Mark,’ Peter 
says to the Saviour, “Thou art the Christ.” In 
Matthew,? “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God.” In Luke,’ “Thou art the Christ of 
God.” In the second Gospel* Caiaphas says to 
Jesus, “Art Thou the Christ, the Son of the 
Blessed?” In the first Gospel,® “I adjure Thee 
by the living God to tell us if Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of God.” In the third,® the priests first 
demand of Jesus if He is the Christ, and because 
He does not reply clearly, they repeat the ques- 
tion in the form, “Art Thou then the Son of 
God?” to which Jesus replies in the affirmative, 
as in the other two synoptic Gospels. Whatever 
mental or moral experience it may have been 
which produced this consciousness of Divine Son- 
ship, it is certain that all who heard Jesus, friends 
or enemies, identified it with the consciousness of 
being the Messiah, or the pretension to that posi- 
tion. It is somewhat rash to-day to maintain 
that the essential significance of the title of Son 
of God was different for Christ Himself, and that 
1 Mark viii. 29. 2 Matt. xvi. 16. 


3 Luke ix. 20. 4 Mark xiv. 61. 5 Matt. xxvi. 63. 
6 Luke xxii. 67-70. 


THE SON OF GOD 93 


its real justification was the consciousness of God 
as Father. 

The text quoted, taken in its natural sense, has 
a meaning quite different from that sought to be 
extracted from it. It follows a prayer that Jesus 
addresses to God as “ Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth;” for in the mind of Christ the idea of 
God the Father is necessarily bound up with 
that of the sovereign Ruler of the universe. The . 
Saviour adds that “all things are delivered unto 
Him by His Father.” Taken strictly, these 
words only apply to the glorified Christ, and the 
compiler of the first Gospel presently uses a 
similar expression of the Saviour risen from the 
dead.t It is only by a forced construction that 
they can be limited to the things that Jesus has 
learnt from the Father, the revelation that He 
has been charged to bring to mankind. It is 
maintained that the principal part of this revela- 
tion is the consciousness that the Son has of a 
good God. But the text was not intended to 
support such a theory. Could it be said that the 
Father, Who alone knoweth the Son, as the 
Son alone knoweth the Father, had also received 
a revelation from the Son of which He was to 
be the interpreter, and was only the Father 


1 Cf. Matt. xxviii. 18. 


94 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHUKCH 


through His knowledge of the Son? Is there, 
then, a religion of the Son that the Father must 
teach, as the Son teaches that of the Father ? 
Obviously the text indicates a transcendental 
relationship, whence springs the lofty dignity of 
Christ, and not a psychological reality, which in 
regard to God is clearly impossible. Father and 
Son are not here simply religious terms, but have 
already become metaphysical theological expres- 
sions, and dogmatic speculation has been able to 
take possession of them, without much modifica- 
tion of their sense. There is but one Father and 
one Son, constituted in some way by the know- 
ledge they have of one another, absolute entities 
whose relationship is also absolute. The intention 
of the passage is not so much to explain how 
Jesus is the Son of God, as to give prominence 
to the Christ, by identifying Him, as the Son, 
with eternal wisdom that God alone knows 
in its entirety, although it is revealed to man- 
kind, while on its side the wisdom alone possesses 
and represents the full knowledge of God, 
although it reveals God to His creatures, 
as far as they are capable of receiving the 
revelation. The gospel saying, therefore, has 
a totally different significance to that needed 
for the theory that the Sonship of Jesus was 


THE SON OF GOD 05 


acquired on the earth by His knowledge of the 
Father. 

On the other hand, for the historian, it proves 
much less, because it is difficult to see in it the 
literal and exact expression of a declaration made 
by Christ to His disciples. It occurs in a kind 
of psalm, where the influence of the prayer that 
closes the Book of Ecclesiasticus! is evident both 
in the general scope and in several details. Both 
passages begin with the praise of God, and there 
is in both a marked preference for the name of 
Father :? the declaration concerning the mutual 
knowledge of the Father and the Son corresponds 
to the praise of wisdom: the appeal of Christ 
to the weary and heavy laden seems inspired by 
the invitation that wisdom addresses to the ignorant 

in the last part of the prayer of Ben-Sirach. These 
correspondences are not accidental, and seeing 
that it is difficult to imagine that Jesus should 
have wished to imitate a passage of Ecclesiasticus 
in an oration or discourse apparently quite un- 
premeditated; seeing that the entire passage 
possesses a rhythm distinctly analogous to that 
of the canticles reproduced in the first chapters 
1 Heel. li. 


2 Of. Eccl. li. 10. Reading “the Lord my Father,” and 
not “the Lord, Father of my Lord.” 


96 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of Luke, and seeing that another passage can 
be found in Matthew,! where Christ appears to 
be identified with Divine wisdom, it is fairly 
probable that, notwithstanding its occurrence 
in two Gospels, the portion including the text 
cited by Herr Harnack is, at any rate in its 
actual form, a product of the Christian tradition 
of the earlier times. It is always a valuable 
testimony, as far as concerns the conception of 
Christ in the early age of the Church; but a 
critic must use it with the greatest care, when it 
is a question of establishing the idea Christ in 
His teaching gave of Himself, His Divine Sonship, 
and His mission. 

Thus the text upon which Herr Harnack has 
founded his theory of the Son of God is no more 
certain in its interpretation, and favours his thesis 
no more than does the one where he finds the 
definition of the kingdom of God in the heart 
of man. The gospel conception of the Son of God 
is no more a psychological idea signifying a relation 
of the soul with God than is the gospel concep- 
tion of the kingdom. There is absolutely nothing 
to prove it; and even the text quoted does not 
say that Jesus became the Son because He was 
the first to know God as the Father, The compiler 


1 Cf. Matt. xxiii. 34-36; Luke xi. 49-51. 


THE SON OF GOD 07 


of the Gospel has not the least intention of 
indicating that God was not known as the Father, 
before the advent of Jesus: he wishes to say, 
and says very clearly, that Christ (the Son) alone 
knows perfectly God (the Father), and that because 
He is the Son, just as the Father, God, alone 
knows perfectly Christ His Son, and that because 
He is the Father, because He is God. The thought 
is fundamentally the same that inspires the 
passage of John,) “No man hath seen God at 
any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the 
bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him.” 
The special knowledge of the Son has for its 
subject God as He is, and is not merely concerned 
with the goodness of God, as though the hearers 
of Jesus needed to be taught that God was 
their Father. Such a thought is as foreign to the 
evangelists as it would have been to the Saviour 
Himself. It is an artificial and superficial 
explanation of the Divine Sonship of Jesus. 

The problem of the consciousness of the 
Messiah must be solved by other means, and that 
without keeping the idea of the Messiah in the 
background. It is truly curious to see how 
embarrassed certain Protestant theologians become 
over this “ Jewish ” conception, which they would 

1 John i. 18. 
H 


98 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


willingly eliminate from the gospel and attribute 
to apostolic tradition in order to shape themselves 
a Christ after their own heart. Some have 
already maintained that the Saviour did not 
believe Himself the Messiah, and that the faith 
of the disciples in the resurrection was the force 
that gave Him that position in their minds and 
for subsequent tradition. Herr Harnack does not 
go so far. His Christ, the Son who reveals the 
Divine Goodness, seems to assume the position 
of Messiah as a kind of costume or disguise 
suitable for dealing with the Jews; but the con- 
sciousness of being the Son of God preceded in 
Him the consciousness of being the Messiah. 

It would be well to see upon what historical 
basis this theory rests, and if it is not a pure 
hypothesis. ‘Two questions must be distinguished 
in it, of differing degrees of clearness, or rather of 
obscurity ; the question as to what Jesus believed 
Himself to be and declared that He was, and the 
question of the mental processes which led Him 
to His conclusion. For the first point a critical 
discussion of the sources of the gospel should fur- 
nish sufficiently definite indications for an answer ; 
for the second, there is only room for conjecture, 
ona basis of the knowledge discovered for the first. 

It is not without some appearance of reason 


THE SON OF GOD 99 


that the idea that Jesus regarded Himself as the 
Messiah has been contested. Side by side with 
the confused idea, frequently held both now and 
formerly, of the kingdom of Heaven, there could 
only be a conception equally vague of the 
Messiah; and just as the way out of the con- 
tradictions involved in the idea of the king- 
dom seemed to le in the denial of all that was 
least satisfying to the modern intelligence 
(namely, its eschatological character), so to escape 
from the difficulties presented by the conception 
of the Messiah, it has been thought well to 
suppress it, or at least subordinate it entirely to 
the conception formed of the Son of God. 

The gospel testimony, to say the truth, seems 
sufficiently disconcerting. The preoccupation of 

the narrators to prove that Jesus was the Messiah, 
- immediately rouses the critic to see if the point 
of view of the evangelists conforms to the facts. 
In many details an interest, either apologetic or 
simply didactic, has influenced the narration of 
discourses and occurrences; but this natural 
tendency would not fall under suspicion were 
it not that the attitude the narratives attribute 
to the Saviour seems at first sight inexplicable. 
Jesus did not, in the course of His preaching, 
announce Himself as the Messiah; He silenced 


100 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


those possessed of devils who hailed Him as the 
Son of God; further, the populace never imagined 
Him to have this mission; they made Him the 
subject of most extravagant hypotheses’ without 
suspecting the truth. The disciples alone held 
Him for the Christ and finally declared their 
faith through the mouth of Simon; but the 
Master forbade them to speak of it to others, so 
that we must look to the end of His career, 
almost to His last day, to find the public avowal 
of His dignity. Itis true that, after the Confession 
of Simon Peter, Jesus is said to have discoursed 
to His disciples several times as to the fate that 
awaited the Messiah; but as the general scope 
of His discourses is founded on the facts as they 
actually occurred and on the subject of early 
Christian preaching, and as they contain no 
sentence definitely reported as the saying of the 
Lord, such an assertion rather complicates the 
difficulty than throws light on it. May it not 
be that all that concerns Jesus as the Messiah 
belongs to tradition, and that the reserve of the 
Saviour, as narrated, was really an absolute 
silence, much easier to imagine than the equi- 
vocal situation described by the evangelists ? 

The equivocal situation does not really exist, 

1 Mark viii. 28. 


THE SON OF GOD Iol 


if it is once understood what the name of Messiah 
signified to Jesus, as to His contemporaries. There 
seems to be no doubt that the Saviour was con- 
demned to death for having put forward preten- 
sions to the throne of Israel, that is, to the position 
of Messiah, since His claim had no political 
meaning. But as far as can be determined from 
the traditional recollections, even this point can 
only be established by His avowal first before the 
High Priest, and later before Pilate. Jesus did 
not say openly in Jerusalem, any more than in 
Galilee, that He was the Christ, the Son of God. 
Only at Jerusalem He made evident the direc- 
tion whither His doctrine tended, and the place 
He claimed for Himself in the kingdom He 
announced. Therefore He possessed the con- 

sciousness of being the Messiah when He left 
| Galilee, and the confession of Peter, whose 
historical truth there is no reason in any case 
to suspect, comes to clear up the situation. The 
conviction of the disciples was doubtless of 
no long standing when it was expressed by 
Simon; but there is nothing to forbid the thought 
that Jesus Himself, when He began to preach the 
gospel, looked on Himself not only as the mes- 
senger or prophet of the kingdom, but held Him- 
self to be its principal agent and predestined head, 


102 THE GOSPELVAND THZ CHURCH 


This is the key to the singularity of His attitude. 
As the kingdom is essentially a thing of the 
future, the office of Messiah is essentially eschato- 
logical. Christ is the head of the society of the 
elect. The ministry of Jesus was only the pre- 
liminary to the kingdom of Heaven and the 
fulfilment of the office of Messiah. In one sense 
Jesus was the Messiah, in another sense He was 
presently to become the Messiah. He was, in so 
far as He was called personally to govern the 
New Jerusalem; He was not yet, since the New 
Jerusalem had no existence and the power of the 
Messiah no place in which to be exercised. 
Jesus, then, had before Him the vision of His own 
coming. The question of John the Baptist, “ Art 
thou He that should come ?” is thus easily under- 
stood, as is also the reply of Jesus, its indirect 
character and calculated reserve being due to no 
modesty of the Saviour, but imposed on Him by 
the actual conditions of the kingdom. John did 
not say, “Art Thou the Christ?” because the 
kingdom was not realized, and Jesus was not 
filling the place of the Messiah. He demands 
rather if Jesus is not about to become the Christ, 
and Jesus replies in a way to make him under- 
stand, that He who prepares effectively the coming 
1 Matt. xi. 3. 


THE SON OF GOD 103 


of the kingdom is He who must come to His 
fulfilment with the kingdom. When Peter says, 
“Thou art the Christ,’ he does not mean that 
the Saviour is already exercising His power as 
Messiah, but that He is the one designated for 
that position. It is in this way that Caiaphas 
understands the matter, and the discourse 
addressed to him by Jesus only becomes intel- 
ligible on this hypothesis. The Saviour avows 
that He is the Christ ; but, to support His assertion, 
He adds immediately, “ And ye shall see the Son 
of Man sitting on the right hand of power and 
coming in the clouds of Heaven.”! This is 
precisely the place of honour and the glorious 
coming characteristic of the Messiah. Jesus 
declares that He is the Son of Man who is to 
come. 

It is easy to understand why He did not wish 
to avow Himself till the day of His death, and 
the sense in which He makes His avowal is 
evident. It was not for Him to declare Himself 
earlier, not only because He would not have been 
believed, or because He would have been at ouce 
exposed to the vengeance of the authorities, but 
because He could not, as His preaching was not 
the duty of the Messiah, and His coming as the 

1 Mark xiv. 62. 


104 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Christ could not be till later, at the moment 
decreed by Providence. It is easy to see, too, how 
the apostolic Church should have come to teach 
that Jesus became Christ and Lord by His 
resurrection, that is, by His entry into heavenly 
glory, and how it should at the same time await 
His coming, that is, His appearance as the Christ, 
and not His retwrn, as His terrestrial ministry 
was not then looked upon as the fulfilment of 
the prophecy of the Messiah. 

As to the origin of the conviction in the mind 
of Jesus that He was the Messiah, it cannot be 
deduced with certainty from the texts. The 
oldest tradition seems to have explained or 
symbolized it by a revelation made on the 
occasion of the Baptism in the Jordan. The 
tradition may have been an after-thought arising 
from contemplation of the later history of Jesus, 
although the Baptism was a definite point of 
departure in His ministry. In any case, the dis- 
tinction that is drawn between the consciousness 
of Himself as the Son and as the Messiah is 
absolutely without foundation. The earliest tradi- 
tion had no suspicion of it; nor would modern 
criticism have dreamed of it, had there been no 
theological interests at stake. Truly the filial 
sentiment that fills the inner life of Jesus is one 


THE SON OF GOD 105 


thing, and the consciousness reflected from His 
assigned position is another. It is not the 
sentiment that makes Jesus the Son of God in 
a sense that belongs to Him alone. All men who 
say to God “Our Father,” are sons of God by 
the same right, and Jesus would be only one of 
them, if it were merely a question of knowing 
the Divine Goodness and trusting in it. The 
critic may conjecture that in Jesus the filial 
sentiment preceded and prepared the way for 
the consciousness of being the Messiah, as His 
soul was elevated by prayer, confidence and love 
to the highest degree of union with God, till the 
idea of His vocation as the Messiah came quite 
naturally to crown the travail of His Spirit; but 
in so far as the title of Son of God belongs in 
an exclusive sense to the Saviour, it is equivalent 
to that of Messiah, and takes its meaning from 
the rank of the Messiah; it belongs to Jesus not 
because of His inner disposition and His religious 
experiences, but because of His Providential func- 
tion as the sole maker of the kingdom of Heaven 
It must be recognized also that the texts permit 
no psychological analysis of the idea of the Son 
of God. Jesus named Himself the Son of God to 
the extent to which He avowed Himself the 
Messiah. The historian must come therefore to 


106 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the conclusion that He believed Himself the Son 
of God, because He believed Himself to be the 
Messiah. The idea of the Divine Sonship was 
linked to that of the kingdom: it had no definite 
signification, as far as Jesus was concerned, 
except in regard to the kingdom about to be 
established. Even for those who believe in the 
Gospel, the dignity of children of God is not un- 
related to the hope of the kingdom that the 
Father has destined for them. How much more 
when it is a question of the single ruler of the 
kingdom! He is the Son, par excellence, not 
because He has learnt to know the goodness of 
the Father, and thus revealed it, but because He 
alone is the vicar of God for the kingdom of 
Heaven. 


CHAPTER II 


To say therefore that the Father only and not 
the Son belongs to the gospel of Jesus,’ is to 
define with little exactness the teaching of the 
Saviour, and the relation between the conception 
of Sonship and that of the kingdom. If the 
gospel is only the revelation of Divine Goodness, 
it is conceivable that the rank of the Revealer 
might not be formally indicated in the gospel. 
But as the good news (as the name gospel 
implies, and the teaching of Jesus proves) is, 
properly speaking, the announcement of the 
great event, the Coming of the kingdom of 
Heaven, the Son of God is the subject of the 
gospel in so far as Christ belongs to the king- 
dom, and it cannot be maintained that the 
gospel conception of the kingdom is entirely 
defined without the Christ. 

The personality of John the Baptist remained 
outside the kingdom he preached, because John 

1 Page 91. 


1088 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


was only its prophet. The position of Jesus is 
quite different. If He speaks but little of Him- 
self in His preaching, it is because the only 
direct object of His doctrine is the moral 
preparation of those who wish to accept the 
Divine promise, and also because He never 
describes the bliss to come. None the less, 
He assigns to Himself an essential part and a 
unique place in the arrival and establishment of 
the kingdom. What is the sign of the coming of 
the Reign of God? The Son of Man appearing 
on the clouds. What is the place of Jesus in 
the kingdom? The first; and His disciples 
dispute the honour of occupying the seats that 
shall be on His right hand and His left.1_ There 
is no question of a doctrine to be put forward 
touching Himself and His office. Jesus, who 
announced no dogmatic formula of the kingdom, 
similarly announced none of Himself. None the 
less, He preached the kingdom, and, with the 
kingdom, the Messiah. Those who believed in 
His message, believed also in His mission, and 
His grandeur was to be made manifest to them 
with the promised kingdom. It was quite un- 
necessary to put forward beforehand the theo- 
retical definition of His dignity. No one reading 
1 Mark x. 35-40. 


THE SON OF GOD 109 


the gospel would doubt that Jesus demands only 
faith in the goodness of God without any further 
anxiety as to the future, or as to Himself. To 
affirm that “he who holds Jesus for the Son of 
God adds something to the gospel,” is not to put 
forward a paradox, but simply to show an entire 
misconception of the nature of Christ’s teaching. 
It is his own religion, not that of the gospel, 
which Herr Harnack expounds and defends, 
when he announces that “God and the soul, the 
soul and its God, are the whole contents of the 
gospel.”* The historical gospel has none of this 
mystic and individualistic character. The Pro- 
testant theologian must have a motive in forcing 
this form on it, or rather he has his faith, more 
powerful than any motive. The historian sees 
no reason for this violent interpretation, nor 
would he understand the tendency of an argument 
deduced from the despairing hypothesis that in 
the mind of Jesus His preaching was something 
merely provisional, its meaning bound to be 
changed after His death and resurrection, and a 
part of it certain one day to be negligible and 
held of no value.. The hypothesis, as a matter of 
fact, would have no significance for the historian ; 
but it is not the historian who requires it. It is 


1 Page 92. 2 Page 90. 


i110 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the theologian who may be tempted to make use 
of it, and Herr Harnack only escapes the 
necessity of such a conjecture by an argument 
still less acceptable. The Christ of the gospel 
did not divide His teaching into two parts, the 
one comprising all that had an absolute value, 
the other all that had only a relative value, fitted 
to the present time. Jesus spoke in order to say 
what He thought to be true, without the least 
regard to our categories of absolute and relative. 
But who then has distinguished in the concep- 
tion of the kingdom the idea of an inner king- 
dom which is to have an absolute value, and the 
idea of a kingdom that is to come whose value is 
to be held only relative? Who has found in the 
Filial consciousness of Christ an element of 
universal scope, namely, the knowledge of God the 
Father, and a Jewish element of which the sole 
advantage was to define Jesus in history, namely, 
the idea of the Messiah? From a historical point 
of view it would be a gratuitous hypothesis to 
attribute to Jesus a foreknowledge of the modi- 
fications His doctrine must endure in the course 
of centuries after the apostolic age; but it is far 
more arbitrary to limit this doctrine, in spite of 
the gospel, to a single point which is nowhere 
formally inculcated, and is not the gospel, as 


THE SON OF GOD I1t 


though this solitary point represented all that 
Jesus thought, desired and did. 

To say that individuals shall hear the good 
news of the Divine Mercy and Fatherhood, and — 
decide if they will take sides with God or with 
the world, is not to give a summary of the gospel, 
but simply to change its object, seeing that Jesus, 
as a matter of fact, promised the heavenly king- 
dom to the repentant sinner, and left it to His 
hearers to receive or reject this hope. He who 
wishes to decide historically the thoughts of the 
Saviour has not first to discover what can suit 
the mind of the man of to-day, or what can 
be held to be unchanged, but must take the texts 
and interpret them according to their natural 
meaning and the guarantees of authenticity they 
_ present. Further, it misleads the reader to give 
the impression that the idea of God the Father is 
entirely identical for the modern theologian and 
for the compilers of the gospel and that nothing 
in the teaching of Jesus can have been truthfully 
reported, except that which has not changed its 
meaning. Seeing that from the beginning all 
the mass of Christian conceptions have been 
constantly changing, it is neither possible nor 
is it true that this one idea of God the Father 
should have stood unshaken and should be the 


112 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


absolute kernel of the gospel teaching. Every 
development of the idea of God has exercised and 
will exercise an influence on the way of repre- 
senting His Fatherhood. 

There is nothing gained by employing tradi- 
tional formulas, “the Way which leads to the 
Father, the Judge established by the Father,” if 
they are emptied of their meaning. If it is 
desired to prove that Jesus is the Way, because 
He brings the knowledge of God to men and 
helps them to find the Father, it must be said 
that this is not the characteristic feature of the 
Saviour’s mission, which may have been a 
mission of teaching in its outlook on the present, 
but was a different thing in its outlook on the 
future, and at bottom, in its logical and Providen- 
tial unity, was that of the Introducer and Chief 
of the kingdom. Again, if the part played by 
Christ as Judge is understood in the sense that 
His preaching is the “critical sign” of His office 
because it “gives happiness and judges at the 
same time,”* then that which in the gospel is 
a concrete and objective hope is turned into 
a purely moral and abstract conception. It 
may be well to say that Jesus was “the personal 
realization of the gospel,’® but if by that saying 

1 Page 91. 2 Page 92. 3 Page 91, 


THE SON OF GOD 113 


it is understood that Jesus realized the perfect 
knowledge of the good God, then is His mission 
arbitrarily defined, and there is no exit from 
the same circle of systematic theology. There 
seems to be a desire to limit, at any cost, the 
office of Christ, which is universal in action as 
well as in thought, and is both objective and 
eschatological, to the measure of an individual 
initiative for the communication of a truth per- 
ceived in the soul, and producing all its beneficial 
effect to-day. 

It is perfectly true that the gospel contains 
no theoretical doctrine, but it is impossible to 
say that its only dogma is the truth of God the 
Father. Many other things are taught in the 
gospel as explicitly and as surely as the Father- 
_ hood of God, and first of all is taught the reality 
of the kingdom that is to come, the certainty of 
the gospel message concerning it, and the mission 
of Him who announces it. Faith in the goodness 
of God is not conceived apart from faith in His 
promise, in the kingdom, and in Christ, the maker 
of the kingdom. The question of Christology 
is in no way to be confounded with the question 
of faith in Christ. If Jesus did not teach the 
Christological doctrine, it does not follow that His 


1 Page 92. 


14 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


preaching and the faith it inspired had no relation 
to faith in Himself. As He did not call Himself 
the Messiah, and only announced the kingdom 
that was to come, Jesus asked no other faith in 
His mission than faith in His message, the 
promise of the kingdom ; but it was none the less 
certain that, at the fulfilment of the great event, 
all the elect would salute the Saviour with the 
salutation of the Messiah. “Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the Lord.” 

The entire gospel is bound up with a con- 
ception of the world and of history that is no 
longer ours, but it is the whole gospel and not 
only its imagined essence, which is not “ insepar- 
ably” * bound. The proof of this assertion is to 
be sought in the facts, not in abstract possibility : 
since the gospel has little by little detached 
itself from its original form, it is permissible to 
assert that the form was temporary, and that the 
gospel is not inseparably connected with the con- 
ceptions of which the form bore the trace. For 
the rest, it cannot be said that faith in God the 
Father, any more than hope in the reign of justice, 
is “without an epoch, like man.’ Man is not 
without an epoch, he is of all epochs, and changes 
with them. The gospel was not addressed to 


1 Cf Matt. xxiii. 39, 2 Page 94, 8 Page 94. 


THE SON OF GOD 115 


abstract man, without an epoch, unchangeable, 
who never existed save in the mind of theorizers, 
but to real men who followed one another in time, 
and to them it could not fail to accommodate itself. 
The saying of the goodness of God, Who provides 
for men as He provides for sparrows, is no more 
susceptible to-day of a literal interpretation than 
the saying which promised to the generation con- 
temporary with Jesus the spectacle of the great 
coming of the kingdom. Is it even so easy 
to-day to represent God pardoning the sinner in 
the way of the Father who welcomed the Prodigal 
Son? Have we not, for all our similar spirit of 
confidence, a somewhat different conception of 
Providence, Its mode of action and Its goodness ? 

It is a pitiful philosophy that attempts to fix 

the absolute in any scrap of human activity, 
intellectual or moral, The full life of the gospel 
is not in a solitary element of the doctrine of 
Jesus, but in the totality of its manifestation, 
which starts from the personal ministry of Christ, 
and its development in the history of Christiauity. 
All that has entered into the gospel of Jesus 
has entered into Christian tradition. The truly 
evangelical part of Christianity to-day, is not that 
which has never changed, for, in a sense, all has 
changed and has never ceased to change, but 


16 THE GOSPEL ANDVTHEZCHUORCH 


that which in spite of all external changes pro- 
ceeds from the impulse given by Christ, and is 
inspired by His Spirit, serves the same ideal and 


the same hope. 


CHAPTER III 


IF the essence of the gospel and of the conscious- 
ness of Divine Sonship is set in the knowledge 
of God the Father, the idea of the kingdom and 
the consciousness Jesus had of Himself as the 
Messiah, appear not only as accessories of purely 
relative value, but as sheer illusions, a debt, as 
it were, paid by the Saviour to the prejudices of 
His time. Understood in this way, the personal 
work of Christ appears as a fine transport of un- 
reflecting enthusiasm, prevented from falling into 
fanaticism by an element of pure religion, but not 
losing thereby any of its chimerical character. 

It is vain for Herr Harnack to begin by setting 
Jesus above Socrates.! If the hope that centred 
in the Messiah was inconsistent and false, then the 
philosopher, dying in the cause of Reason, was wiser 
than Christ, dying in the cause of Faith. For he 
simply accepted his destiny without promising 
himself in the future a compensation which he 

1 Page 1, 


118 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


would have failed to realize. It is in this way that 
theological rationalism, instead of explaining the 
gospel, comes to mutilate it, and under the pre- 
text of safeguarding the grandeur of Jesus, lowers 
Him beneath, not only Socrates, but every man 
endowed with common sense. The gospel and 
the Christ are, as it were, separated into two 
elements: a moral sentiment that is gladly hailed 
as admirable, and a dream that one dare not call 
ridiculous. With a more penetrating criticism and 
a wider philosophy, these two elements would be 
found in no way heterogeneous ; it would be found 
that, if tradition has never separated them, it is 
because they are inseparable, and that the religion 
of the heart and the hope of the kingdom are 
not respectively the reality and the fantasy of 
Christianity, but together make up the religion of 
Jesus. 

According to the logic of Faith, if the idea of 
the kingdom is real, the gospel is Divine, and God 
Himself is revealed in Jesus. According to the 
logic of Reason, if the idea of the kingdom is 
inconsistent with fact, the gospel as a Divine reve- 
lation falls to the ground, Jesus is no more than a 
pious man, who could not separate His piety from 
His dreams, and died the victim of error rather 
than the servant of the truth that was in Him. 


THE SON OF GOD 119 


For Jesus suffered on the cross because He avowed 
Himself, and believed Himself to be, the Messiah ; 
not because He knew the goodness of the Heavenly 
Father, nor because He wished to demonstrate it 
by His death. He died because such was the will 
of the Father, and because His death seemed to 
Him the providential condition of the definite 
fulfilment of the kingdom He had preached. He 
applied to Himself the lesson He gave to His 
disciples—“ He that saveth his life in this world 
shall lose it for eternity ; whosoever shall lose his 
life for My sake and the Gospel, the same shall 
save it for the kingdom of Heaven.”! On the eve 
of the Passion, He presented to His disciples the 
bread and the wine of the Eucharist, as a symbol 
of the death He was about to endure, and at the 
same time as a pledge of the Communion which 
should reunite His disciples and Himself in the 
' kingdom that was to be. He therefore died as 
the Messiah, filled with the idea of this kingdom, 
whose fulfilment He thought to ensure, the 
kingdom where He trusted to live again in the 
full glory of the Messiah. Such is the Christ 
of history, and the true measure of His greatness 
is to be sought in nothing but in what He believed 
and desired to be. 
1 Cf. Mark viii. 35, 


120 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Jesus, on the earth, was the great representative 
of faith. Now, the religious faith of humanity 
always has been and always will be supported by 
symbols more or less imperfect: its aspirations, 
which have infinity as their object, can only 
become definite in human thought in a finite form. 
The concrete symbol, the living image, not the 
pure idea, is the normal expression of faith, and 
the condition of its moral efficacy in man and in 
the world. The choice and the quality of the 
symbols are necessarily related to the stage of 
evolution of faith and of religion. The conceptions 
of the kingdom and of the Messiah are not merely 
the features that made it possible for Christianity 
to come forward beside Judaism, they are the neces- 
sary form in which Christianity had to be born in 
Judaism before spreading out into the world. 

Nothing could make Jesus other than a Jew. 
He was only man under condition of belonging to 
one branch of humanity. In that in which he 
was born, the branch that may well be said to 
have carried in it the religious future of the 
world, this future was known in quite a precise 
manner, by the hope of the reign of God, by the 
symbol of the Messiah. He who was to be the 
Saviour of the world could only enter on his office 
by assuming the position of Messiah, and by 


THE SON OF GOD 121 


presenting Himself as the founder of the kingdom 
come to accomplish the hope of Israel. The 
Gospel, appearing in Judea and unable to appear 
elsewhere, was bound to be conditioned by 
Judaism. Its Jewish exterior is the human body, 
whose Divine Soul is the spirit of Jesus. But 
take away the body, and the soul will vanish in 
the air like the lightest breath. Without the idea 
of the Messiah, the gospel would have been but a 
metaphysical possibility, an invisible, intangible 
essence, even unintelligible, for want of a definition 
appropriate to the means of knowledge, not a 
living and conquering reality. The gospel will 
always need a body to behuman. Having become 
the hope of Christian people, it has corrected in 
the interpretation certain parts of its Israelitish 
symbolism. None the less, it remains the shadowy 
representation of the great mystery, God and the 
providential destiny of man and of humanity, 
because it is a representation always striving after 
perfection, inadequate and insufficient. 

This is the mystery that Jesus revealed, as far 
as it could be revealed, and under the conditions 
which made revelation possible. It may be said 
that Christ lived it as much as He made it 
manifest. If He had only had in view the 
propagation of a doctrine, the organization of an 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


122. THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


earthly society, or even the foundation of a par- 
ticular religion, Christ must have been judged not 
only less wise than Socrates, but much less able 
than Mahomet. He sought no such object, and 
it was for no deceiving dream that he turned aside 
from it. His dream was His project, the realiza- 
tion of perfect happiness in perfect justice, of im- 
mortality in holiness. This realization was already 
complete in Him, by His union with God, His | 
faith in the Heavenly Father, the inner certainty 
of the eternal future guaranteed to humanity in 
His person and by His agency. The historian, as 
such, cannot appreciate the objective value of this 
persuasion: the Christian will not doubt it, and, 
beyond any question, no one is Christian who does 
not admit it. 

It may appear to some minds, in which the 
habits of abstraction and of reasoning have over- 
grown the sense of vital things, that the hope of 
the kingdom was too common, too imaginative, too 
little in accord with actual occurrence, to be 
worthy of the Saviour. Have we not already 
seen learned Catholics insinuate, if not openly 
profess, that the earliest Christians may have lent 
their Divine Master their own apocalyptic illusion, 
as though the Parousia, the advent of Christ in 
glory, were not the essential element of belief 


THE SON OF GOD 123 


in the Messiah, and as if the appearance as 
Messiah were not the only historical definition of 
the position of Jesus? It would be impossible to 
show a more paltry appreciation of a fact that 
presents itself to the historian as the greatest 
manifestation of faith ever displayed on the earth. 

Jesus died confident in the future of His work 
and in His own approaching triumph. His con- 
fidence came, not from an effort to conceal His 
present failure, or to overcome the terrors of 
death, but from the same feeling that rendered 
Him unable to suppose that the Divine life in 
Him could vanish with His last breath, or that 
the kingdom could fall with Him or He Himself 
be lost to the kingdom. No! the Messiah would 
live and the kingdom would come. It is because 
of preconceptions foreign to healthy philosophy, 
and to knowledge of men and of history, that men 
search in the gospel and in the thoughts of Christ 
for the abstract definition they judge the best 
to characterize Himself or His mission, or that 
they are scandalized not to find in His discourses 
the exact prevision of the future reserved for 
Christianity. Jesus has not considered or repre- 
sented its future under the aspects which, ac- 
cording to the law of humanity, only accompany a 
knowledge of the past. As far as the critic can 


124 THE ‘GOSPEL AND THEACHURGCH, 


judge from the clearest and most authenticated 
documents of gospel history, Christ contem- 
plated and announced the future in terms of 
the only kinds of belief suitable for such a 
purpose; He saw it and described it under the 
traditional symbol of Israelitish hope that He 
had taken possession of; it appeared to Him like 
a ray of light, as a single infinitely comprehensive 
conception, the complete and final advent of the 
reigu of God. From a really logical point of view, 
no symbol can be conceived, better adapted to the 
conditions of His ministry and the success of His 
message. The idea of the kingdom of the Mes- 
siah was the sole living form, in which he could 
conceive, could represent to others, and make 
sure to Himself, the future of faithful humanity, 
taking root in the present. 

In the gospel, then, the hope of the kingdom 
was a simple idea, or rather, bearing in mind the 
faith that it inspired, a simple reality. To the 
Christian historian it now appears as the concrete, 
rudimentary, indistinct symbol of subsequent 
events; namely, faith in the resurrection of 
Christ, in His invisible and constant presence 
among His own people, in His Eternal Glory; 
the indefinite progress of the Gospel in the 
world; the regeneration of human kind by 


THE SON OF GOD 125 


Christianity, and the anticipation of the kingdom 
of Heaven in the Church. From the point of 
view of faith, it was the certain presentiment of 
what is seen to-day and also of what is not seen, 
since the aspect presented by the reign of God, 
contemplated as eternal, the way in which, 
behind the curtain of this world, the accounts 
of the Divine justice and the Divine goodness are 
regulated, escape our experience. Let it never be 
said that Jesus only expected the reward of His 
hope, and that its fulness was never awarded to 
Him! For the faith, He is King and God to 
all eternity. As far as we can penetrate the 
economy of things in this world, Jesus lives in 
humanity to an extent and in a way never ex- 
perienced by any other human being. He, the 
Divine Liberator, has proceeded to God by the 
path of sorrow and death, sure that He was 

not deceived, whatever were the conditions it 
pleased the Father to assign to the accomplish- 
ment of the work for which His earthly life was 
sacrificed. If His hope has only been actually 
realized before the eyes of faith, the philosophical 
historian will not hesitate to find even that an 
astonishingly true fulfilment, when he notes the 
results the hope has achieved and its inexhaust- 
ible fruitfulness. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE place occupied in the teaching of Saint Paul 
by the death and resurrection of Christ is well 
known: they constitute for the apostle a veri- 
table Gospel of Salvation, because they have 
brought the kingdom of God, by obtaining for 
Jesus the glory of the Messiah, and through Jesus 
for them that believe, the spirit of God in the 
Communion with the glorified Christ. Herr 
Harnack writes:1 “We may take it as certain 
that the Apostle Paul was not the first to seize 
upon the ideas of the death and of the resurrec- 
tion of Christ, but that he ranked himself with 
the early community in attaching supreme value 
to both.” There may be something equivocal in 
this statement. The early community knew fyll 
well that Christ had died on the cross, and they 
believed, before Paul, that he had risen from the 
dead; but this death and resurrection might well 
give rise to different conceptions that must not 
1 Page 97. 


THE SON OF GOD 127 


be attributed without distinction to the early 
believers or to Jesus Himself and to the Apostle 
of the Gentiles. The passage from the Epistle to 
the Corinthians,’ “ For I delivered unto you that 
which I also received, how that Christ died 
for our sins* ... and that He rose again the 
third day ”—by no means makes it certain that 
the idea of the Atonement by death existed from 
the beginning with the distinctness that the 
teaching of Paul conferred on it, or that it con- 
tributed to lay the foundations of Christology to 
the same extent as the idea of the resurrection. 

As far as can be determined from witnesses who 
have all come more or less under the influence 
of the Pauline theology, it was the resurrection 
alone that made Jesus the Christ and established 
Him on His throne of glory; the death was only 
the Providential condition of the resurrection, 
willed by God and accepted by Jesus. Too much 
insistence must not be laid on the fact that the 
death of Christ put an end to blood sacrifices,’ for 
the idea of an atoning death did not contribute 
alone or principally to this result. The Jews 

1 1 Cor. xv. 3, 4. 

2 St. Paul says “‘according to the Scriptures,” a fact 
showing that the historical character of the tradition he 


alludes to must not be exaggerated. 
3 Page 99. 


” 


1838 JHE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


only offered up sacrifices at Jerusalem, and the 
disciples of the gospel would not have dreamed 
of sacrificing elsewhere ; their separation from the 
Jews and the destruction of the Temple have 
had a sequel for them that has also affected the 
Israelites. It may be thought that the moral 
idea underlying sacrifice ought finally to eliminate 
the reality; but the logic of facts brought about 
the consummation rather than the logic of ideas, 
and it is not strictly true to say that the moral 
idea replaced the reality. Also it is playing a 
little on the double sense of the word “ sacrifice ” 
to speak in this connection of the law which 
demands that progress shall be bought for 
humanity by the suffering and often by the death 
of those who contribute to advancement most 
effectively.1 Between the man who dies, the victim 
of his destiny, or rather of the resistance opposed 
by the force of inertia to the force of progress, 
and the lamb, the goat, or even the human being 
immolated to a Divinity to win His favour, there 
is only the analogy that explains the use of the 
same word, but should not be able to deceive the 
historian. 

As for the idea, that as evil and sin require 
punishment, there is in the suffering of the just 

1 Page 100. 


THE SON OF GOD 129 


a purifying expiation, it comes as an intermediary 
between the material notion of sacrifice and the 
purely spiritual conception, related to the first 
by the idea of expiatory satisfaction and to the 
second by the moral element it contains; it is a 
symbolic conception which should not be forcibly 
translated into the expression of an absolute 
indestructible truth, vivid in the conscience of 
mankind in this particular form. This mixed 
conception is to be found in Isaiah; there is no 
other proof that it belongs to the teaching of 
Jesus, and to the faith of the first community. 
The passage in Mark,! where it is said that Christ 
came “to give His life a ransom for many,” was 
in all probability influenced by the theology of 
Paul, and as much may be said of the narratives 
of the Last Supper. 

According to the early text of St. Luke,? Jesus 
- presents the cup and the bread to His disciples, 
in view of His imminent death, and His future 
reunion with His own in the kingdom of God, 
but without bringing out the expiatory cha- 
racter and redeeming intention of His death. 


1 Mark x. 45. 

2 Luke xxii. 18, 19, to the words “This is my body.” 
The rest of 19 and 20 have been taken from 1 Cor. (xi. 
24, 25), and seem to be an addition to the narrative. 


K 


130 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


The narrative of Mark seems founded on a 
statement very like that of Luke, and all that 
is said of the “blood of the new testament” 
must have been added after the teaching of 
Paul; “And He took the cup, and when He 
had given thanks, He gave it to them: and 
they all drank of it. And He said unto them, 
This is My blood of the new testament, which 1s 
shed for many. Verily I say unto you, I will 
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that 
day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.” ? 
The time to say “This is my blood,” was not after 
the disciples had drunk, as Matthew saw, for he 
associates these words with the presentation of 
the cup.?, But the compiler of the second Gospel 
did not wish to upset the arrangement of the early 
narrative, and contented himself with associating 
with the words said after the passing of the cup 
those that, according to St. Paul,? were spoken 
before. 

The earliest believers corrected the brutal fact of 
the death by the glory of the resurrection. Paul 
discovered in the death a meaning and an efficacy 
able to act independently of the resurrection, 
though co-ordinated with it. But if Jesus was 


1 Mark xiv. 23-25. 2 Matt. xxvi. 28, 29, 
Srl Comite: 


THE SON OF GOD 131 


proclaimed Christ and Lord by the first disciples, 
it was not because of His death, but because of 
His resurrection, which displayed Him in the 
glory of the Messiah. 

It must be granted to Herr Harnack! that the 
“message of Easter” and “the faith of Easter” 
are distinct things, although it is not easy to 
follow him in finding the distinction in the 
Gospels. The message of Easter (that is to say, 
the discovery of the empty tomb and the appear- 
ances of Jesus to His disciples, so far as these 
facts are taken for physical proofs of the resurrec- 
tion) is not an irrefutable argument from which 
the historian can conclude with entire certainty 
that the Saviour rose in the body from the dead. 
The case is not one that can supply complete 
proof. Christ risen from the dead does not 
belong to the order of the present life, which is 
that of sensible experience, and consequently the 
resurrection is not a fact that can have been 
directly and formally established. The cure of 
the sick can be verified; even the return of a dead 
man to natural life would be susceptible of proof 
were it to occur; but the entry of a dead man 
into immortal life escapes our powers of observa- 
tion. The empty tomb is only an indirect 

1 Page 101. 


1332 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


argument and not decisive, since the only estab- 
lished fact, the disappearance of the body, can be 
explained in other ways than by the resurrection. 
The appearances are a direct argument, but one 
uncertain in its significance. Before any exami- 
nation of the narratives, it is a natural thought 
that sensory impressions are not an adequate 
testimony to a purely supernatural reality. Jesus 
after His resurrection appeared and disappeared in 
the manner of a spirit; during the time of His 
appearance, He was visible, palpable, and could 
be regarded as a man in a normal state. Can this 
mixture of qualities inspire entire confidence in 
the historian who approaches the question without 
previous faith? Obviously not. The historian 
will reserve his conviction, because the objective 
reality of the appearances is not defined for him 
with sufficient precision. The critical examina- 
tion of the narratives will confirm him in his 
doubt, because it will be impossible for him to 
reconstitute with sufficient certainty, according to 
the Gospels and Saint Paul, the series of appari- 
tions, in sequence, with the circumstances under 
which they occurred. The fact of some appear- 
ances will seem to him incontestable, but he will 
be unable to decide their nature and extent with 
precision. Looked at independently of the belief 


THE SON OF GOD 133 


of the apostles, the witness of the New Testament 
only supplies a limited probability, hardly pro- 
portionate to the extraordinary importance of the 
fact attested. But is it not inevitable that every 
natural proof of a supernatural occurrence should 
be incomplete and defective ? 

The faith of the apostles is not the message of 
Easter; it comes direct from the ever-living 
Christ, and hails Him as such. Compared with 
this faith, the imaginative representation or theo- 
retical conception of the resurrection, and the 
character of the appearances, are secondary 
matters. However, the faith is not independent 
of the message. Whatever criticism may think of 
the difficulties and divergences that the narratives 
present concerning the Saviour’s resurrection, it is 
beyond question that the faith of the apostles was 
stimulated by the apparitions that followed the 
death of Jesus, and that the apostles, even St. 
Paul, had no conception of an immortality dis- 
tinct from bodily resurrection. The message of 
Easter and the faith of Easter have for them the 
same object and the same significance. “The 
history of Thomas is related solely to show that 
he ought to have had the faith of Easter, even 
without the message ;”1 but in this narrative the 


1 Loc. cit. 


134: THE GOSPEL AND THE CHORCH 


object of the message constitutes precisely the 
faith; he ought to have believed that Christ was 
risen, in the sense of the message, without having 
seen the apparition. The same thing applies to 
the disciples at Emmaus; “they were blamed in 
that faith in the resurrection was wanting, 
although they had not yet received the message 
of Easter ;” 1 but it is simply left to be understood, 
that if they had been apprehensive, the Scriptures 
would have taught them what the message 
announced, namely, that the Christ must rise 
from the dead on the third day after His death. 
The distinction between the message and the 
faith can then be founded on fact, without being 
founded on the gospel. A fundamental element 
in the faith, namely, the belief in the living 
Christ, which is the substance of the faith, can be 
distinguished from its form, which resembles the 
object of the message. There is no space 
here to discuss whether or no the form is essential 
to the preservation of the essence. Herr Har- 
nack desires to keep the essence and not the 
form, the faith without its proof, which he judges 
obsolete. Perhaps he is mistaken in taking 
for a mere proof that which in the apostolic 
writings is above all an expression of faith. 


1 Loc, cit. 


THE SON OF GOD 135 


Understood in this way the Easter message 
remains the main testimony of the faith, and the 
distinction between the faith and the message 
has only a theoretical significance of no great 
importance in religion. It is a mistake to 
oppose the faith, as an absolute thing, to the 
message and call the message relative: the faith 
has lived, and still lives, in the message, which is 
even its reality, in so far as it is an attempt to 
communicate the faith. 

There is some exaggeration in dismissing Plato, 
the religion of the Persians, and the beliefs of 
Judaism after the exile, as though they had in no 
way aided in creating the certainty of eternal life, 
and as though this certainty came once and for 
all from faith in the resurrection of Christ.1 The 
_ religious evolution of Judaism, in the time that 
immediately preceded the Christian era, con- 
- tributed not a little to prepare the soil in which 
such a belief could take root. Jesus Himself 
found among the Jews a belief in the resurrection 
of the dead, and He spoke conformably to this 
belief. The idea of His personal resurrection pre- 
supposes the acceptance of the idea of a general 
resurrection. It cannot be questioned that faith 
in the resurrection of Christ gave a decisive 

1 Page 102. 


136 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


impulse to later belief; but it is not for the 
historian to contest the relation of this faith to 
the belief that preceded it. 

Nor can it be truly said that to-day faith 
in the eternally living Christ is the sole sup- 
port of belief in immortality. It is one thing 
to say that humanity never gained this faith from 
philosophic speculations, and quite another to say 
that it derives it solely from the life and death of 
Christ, for ever one with God. The impression 
of the life and death of Jesus would be nothing 
on a humanity that had not in it the desire, more 
or less conscious, of all that Jesus brings to it, 
and did not already await what He promises. It 
is too easy to assert that the disciples, having 
conversed with the Saviour, knew well how 
intense a life He inspired, and therefore could be 
but temporarily shaken by His death. Even 
admitting this hypothesis, men who had not been 
familiarized with the idea of eternal life, as it 
was presented in the doctrine of the kingdom of 
Heaven, would have been ill prepared to believe 
that their Master had risen from the dead. Add 
that the moral vitality that radiated from Jesus 
and immortality are two quite distinct forms of 
life, however intertwined, and that the fishermen 
of Galilee would have had some difficulty in 


THE SON OF GOD 137 


deducing the one from the other, had they come 
to the question quite unaided. 

In this absolute thesis of Herr Harnack as in 
his conception of the kingdom of Heaven, his 
tendency is evident, to concentrate religion into a 
single point where the realization of the perfect is 
to be seen: this solitary point in this case would 
be the eternal life acquired now by union with 
the good God. Jesus is to be regarded as the 
sole herald of this unique revelation, which 
remains unchangeable in this pure form, with 
nothing before it to prepare the way, and itself 
unchanged through the centuries that follow. In 
place of the supernatural, which he abandons 
instead of explaining the idea at the back of it, 
the learned theologian introduces something 
equally inconsistent, a kind of revelation, human 
and absolute, sudden and unchangeable, which is 
held to have been produced in the consciousness 
of Jesus, but is unknown to the gospel. 

It is not in this way that Christianity made 
its entry into the world. If it was not (and it 
was far from being) the chance product of a com- 
bination of heterogeneous beliefs, from Chaldea, 
Egypt, India, Persia, and Greece: if it was born 
of the incomparable word and action of Jesus, it 
is none the less true that Jesus gathered up and 


438 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHAUCRCH 


vivified the best of the religious wealth amassed 
by Israel before Him, and that He transmitted 
this wealth not as a simple deposit that the faith- 
ful of all time had but to guard, but as a living 
faith in the form of a collection of beliefs, which 
had to live and grow after Him, even as they 
had grown and lived before, by the preponderating 
influence of the spirit that animated them. By 
isolating Him in history, Herr Harnack makes 
his Christ no greater, but only less intelligible 
and less real. 


1 Cf, E. Caird, art. cit., p. 6. 


SECTION IV 
THE CHURCH 
INTRODUCTION 


ONCE the essence of Christianity has been re- 
stricted to faith in God the Father, almost every- 
thing that constitutes or has constituted historical 
Christianity becomes necessarily secondary, or 
adventitious, contrary, and foreign to this pure 
essence. The whole development of the Church, 
hierarchic, dogmatic, and ritual, is thus placed 
outside true Christianity and presented as a pro- 
gressive abasement of religion. It is the Protes- 
tant and anticatholic idea pushed to its extreme 
limit. But if the foundation of this system of 
belief, the determination of the essence of Chris- 
tianity, has been fixed in despite of history, it is 
possible that the edifice it supports is no more 
solid than the foundation, and that the considera- 
tion of Christian development justifies the same 
criticism as the consideration of the Gospel. For 


1440 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the historian, everything by which the gospel 
continues to live is Christian, and the criterion 
for judging of this quality cannot be an abstract 
essence, defined to suit the principles of a par- 
ticular theology rather than to harmonize with 
the facts. 


CHAPTER I 


THE society imagined by Christ, says Herr 
Harnack, was something invisible and heavenly, 
because it concerned the inner life of man. 
Evangelical Christianity was as a soul without a 
body.’ When He had broken with Judaism, He 
was forced to create forms of life and a social 
organization first of all: hence preoccupation with 
external things occupies a place beside preoccupa- 
tion with the only essential: and once the purely 
inner sphere is left, there is no progress that has 
not reverses, and does not bring inconveniences.” 
Towards the year 200 a.D. Christianity had 
definitely evolved towards Catholicism. A great 
ecclesiastical society had been established, reject- 
ing many sects that also called themselves Chris- 
tian: it was made up of different Churches scattered 
through the Roman Empire, which, though mutu- 
ally independent, maintained constant and regular 


1 Page 113. 2 Page 114. 


142 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


relations, were organized in the same way, and 
professed a common doctrine, wherein rules of 
discipline were distinguished from rules of faith. 
Each Church regarded itself as the instrument 
of a worship which had its solemn rites, and 
whose principal acts could only be accomplished 
by priests. We are told that this means that 
formalism is introduced with fatal result into 
religions that endure, as soon as the fervour of 
euthusiasm that gave them birth is passed: it is 
in this way that “ The struggle against Gnosticism 
compelled the Church to formulate its doctrine, 
its worship, and its discipline in fixed forms and 
with fixed laws, and to exclude whomsoever did 
not submit.”? Alas for liberty! The primitive 
life had vanished, “ mediocrity laid the foundation 
of authority.” ? Nevertheless it can be seen by 
Acts of the martyrs, the writings of Clement of 
Alexandria and of Tertullian, that the Church 
“had not stifled the gospel.” 8 

The Church, Eastern as well as Western, 
organized itself as a juridical institution and 
as a political administration. In the East, 
the hierarchic development only ended with the 
establishment of national Churches, largely de- 
pendent on the civil power. Matters went very 


1 Page 119. 2 Page 130. 3 Page 135. 


CHE, CHORCH 143 


differently in the West, where the Empire had 
crumbled away by the fifth century. Our critic 
declares, in a description wherein he seems a little 
carried away by his own eloquence, that “in an 
underhand way the Roman Church substituted 
itself for the Roman Empire, which in reality sur- 
vived in her; the Roman Empire did not perish, 
it was only transformed. . . . The Roman Church 
still governs the nations: its Popes reign as did 
Trajan or Marcus Aurelius. Peter and Paul take 
the place of Romulus and Remus; archbishops 
and bishops replace proconsuls ; instead of legions 
come troops of priests and monks; instead of the 
Pretorian Guard, the Jesuits. Even into minute 
details, peculiarities of law, even details of clothing, 
the influence of the ancient Empire and its insti- 
tutions can be traced. It is not in the least a Church 
like the Gospel Communities, or like the national 
Churches of the East ; it is a political creation, as 
considerable as a universal empire because it is 
the successor of the Roman Imperium. The 
Pope, who is called ‘king’ and ‘supreme pontiff, 
is the successor of Cesar. . . . He governs 
an empire. Therefore it is a useless enterprise 
to attack him with the weapons of doctrinal 
warfare only. . . . For this Church, to govern 
is as important as to announce the Gospel... . 


144 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


He is held to have no piety who does not, first 
of all, submit to this Papal Church, gain her 
approval, and live in perpetual dependence on 
her. ... The development the Church has fol- 
lowed as a terrestrial State was bound to lead 
logically to the absolute monarchy and infallibility 
of the Pope, for infallibility in a terrestrial theo- 
cracy signifies nothing more, at bottom, than abso- 
lute sovereignty in an ordinary state.” + 

This special character of Latin Catholicism has 
had the effect of modifying greatly the features 
common to it and to Eastern Catholicism. Thus, 
Herr Harnack observes, the principle of tradition 
is proclaimed as loudly by the Roman as by the 
Greek Church ; but when it becomes irksome, the 
Church passes beyond it; the Pope becomes 
tradition. The same thing happens with orthodoxy ; 
“the politics of the Pope can modify it; by means 
of subtle distinctions many a dogma has changed 
its meaning; new dogmas are established; in 
many respects doctrine has become arbitrary.” 
The tradition of ritual is no more really unchange- 
able than that of doctrine, and the same may be 
said of religious life, the old monastical system 
having been transformed to the point of becoming, 
in great institutions, “the exact contrary of what it 


1 Pages 157-159. 


THE CHURCH 145 


was. This Church possesses in its organization a 
unique faculty for adapting itself to the course of 
history ; it remains always the ancient Church, or 
at least appears to do so, and is always new.” } 

Herr Harnack does not insist on this flexibility 
of the Roman Church, he seems to see in it a 
defect rather than a merit, and without doubt he 
does not estimate sufficiently its importance from 
the standpoint of the general philosophy of Chris- 
tianity and of its history. But there is a certain 
piquaney in meeting a liberal-minded and learned 
Protestant who is inclined to think the Church of 
Rome changes too much, and is astonished that 
She should change so frequently and so easily. 
How many others have made it a reproach to her, 
that She does not change enough! 


1 Pages 159, 160, 


CHAPTER II 


ALTHOUGH the statement has been repeatedly made 
for several centuries, it is difficult to understand, 
without the preparation of a special theological 
education, how the Society of Christ was something 
less visible and less external than the Roman 
Church. This Society, comprising those who 
accepted the gospel of Jesus, was not formed of 
pure spirits who had no other bond than a com- 
mon sentiment. They were not numerous; but 
the fewer their numbers are reckoned at, the more 
distinctly they stand out against the surrounding 
world. The Society was composed of certain 
faithful ones who persevered to the end, and met 
again after the Passion to form the nucleus of the 
first Christian community. They form a circum- 
scribed group, perfectly distinct, a very centralized, 
even a hierarchical fraternity. Jesus is the centre 
and the chief, the incontestable authority. Around 
Him the disciples are not a confused mass; the 
Saviour has distinguished among them the Twelve, 


THE CHURCH 147 


and has associated them, directly and effectively, 
with His ministry ; even among the Twelve there 
is one who stands first, not only by priority of 
conversion or the ardour of his zeal, but by a kind 
of designation by the Master, accepted by the 
apostolic community with consequences still 
evident in their history. 

It was a practical situation, apparently brought 
about by the wanderings of the Galilean ministry, 
but also evidently received and ratified by Jesus 
some time before the Passion. There is no need 
to look for formal programmes, constitutional 
charters, pompous inaugurations. Jesus provided 
for the diffusion of the gospel in the present, and 
thus prepared the kingdom to come. Neither the 
society round him, nor the kingdom, was an in- 
visible, impalpable reality, a sect of souls, but a 
society of men which carried the gospel, and was 
‘to become the kingdom. 

The Church was born and endured through the 
development of an organization whose outline is 
traced in the gospel. It was a community having 
as its basis a belief in the “good news” of the 
resurrection of Jesus; as its law, charity; as its 
end, the propagation of the great hope; as its form 
of government, the distinction between the apos- 
tolic college and the ordinary disciples. The 


148 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Twelve form a kind of directing committee, with 
Simon Peter at the head. As yet nothing can be 
seen resembling the administration of a monarchy. 
The saying of the Saviour, “ Whosoever would be 
first among you shall be the servant of all,”? is 
applied literally. The community knows but one 
Master, one Lord, who is the Christ, and knows 
no dominating authority: the hierarchy that 
exists is that of devotion. Nevertheless, a positive 
power of social order belongs to the apostles, 
that of receiving converts into the community, 
excluding the unworthy, and maintaining good 
order. 

This state of things was the result of all that 
Jesus did and willed: for the Saviour did not 
abandon the preaching of the gospel to the first 
comers, but confided it to those who left all to 
follow Him. It matters little that this first 
Christian group had as yet no consciousness that 
it formed a society distinct from Judaism: its own 
vital principle, obtained from its faith in Jesus, 
had already provided it with means of subsistence: 
its individuality was to grow in the struggle it 
had to face in order to exist and extend. The 
apostles were no more restricted to a purely inner 
sphere of action than was Jesus Himself. Their 

1 Mark x. 44, 


THE CHURCH 149 


activity tended to the formation of a religious 
society, and it was not only later that the incon- 
veniences of external action became evident. The 
gospel of Jesus has its reverse side in the absolute 
character of its formula, which is at once its 
weakness and the condition of its entry into the 
world: the gospel of the apostles has its reverse 
side in the explosion of enthusiasm, which is an 
element of its force, and a disconcerting pheno- 
menon for those who do not yet believe. Never- 
theless it is always the living gospel, not spirit 
merely, but body also from the beginning. 
Christian communities were founded among the 
Gentiles, and soon became the Church, entirely 
distinct and even separated from the Synagogue. 
In these communities the apostles and early 
missionaries established colleges of elders, or 
. superintendents, to govern the societies as they 
themselves had governed the first community at 
Jerusalem. The organization of the body of 
elders, the affirmation of their rights, the pre- 
eminence of the bishop in the body and in the 
community, the pre-eminence of the bishop of 
Rome amongst the bishops, these changes are 
only defined and established in the course of time, 
according to the needs of the evangelical work. 
The Church became, at important moments, what 


10 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


it had to become in order not to decline and 
perish, dragging the gospel down with it. Never- 
theless, it created no essential portion of its con- 
stitution. An organ which up to one moment 
seemed rudimentary, and of little vigour, took on 
the proportions and structure that an imminent 
necessity demanded: then it existed in this 
acquired form, except for accessory modifications 
produced on the occasion of other developments 
to preserve the equilibrium of the whole. This 
equilibrium was seldom established without in- 
ternal movement, having all the characters of a 
serious crisis. Such, as a matter of fact, is the 
law of all development, and the natural growth of 
living things knows similar experiences. These 
struggles do not prove a diminution of life, but 
that life is threatened: when the crisis is over, and 
the power of the organism is augmented, it is to 
be praised for its vitality, not blamed because it 
suffered or because it did not succumb. The 
Church can fairly say that, in order to be at all 
times what Jesus desired the society of His 
friends to be, it had to become what it has 
become: for it has become what it had to be to 
save the gospel by saving itself. 

The earliest communities could not have 
lasted without the rudimentary organization their 


THE CHURCH 151 


founders gave them. The college of elders main- 
tained order in the assemblies, and peace among 
the brethren, ensured the management of alms, 
and of all external relations. Just as the disciples 
of Jesus had formed a society, and as the kingdom 
of Heaven was conceived as a society, not as a 
coalition of fervent and perfect individualists, the 
Christian communities naturally formed societies, 
confraternities : they needed the preservative 
element of all society—authority. When there 
appeared in the Churches (and they appeared 
quite early) movement of ideas, tendencies more 
or less marked and more or less divergent, in- 
ternal and external difficulties more or less con- 
siderable, the necessity of a directing power 
became still more pressing, and the only hope for 
the community to hold its ground was by means 
of a perfect unity. It is certain that Christianity 
and the gospel would have gone under in the 
gnostic crisis, without the opposition that the 
ruling episcopate made to the flood of heresies, 
and the episcopate strengthened its position 
decidedly in this struggle. Does it not follow 
that the Church is as necessary to the gospel as 
the gospel to the Church, and that the two are 
really one, as the gospel and the group of 
believers were one during the ministry of Jesus ? 


132 ZHE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Surely there is nothing but a spirit of epigram 
in the reflection on “ the mediocrity ” that “founded 
authority.” Were the Christians of Lyons in the 
time of Ireneus, or those of Africa in the time of 
Tertullian, so much inferior to the believers of 
Corinth as we know them in the Epistles of Paul ? 
Does the diminution of the early acts of grace 
prove that real faith was any less strong, and is it 
a matter of regret that the whole Church was not 
given over to Montanism? Even in matters of 
religion, attacks of fever are not the normal 
conditions of life. 

In proportion as the episcopate increased, the 
preponderance of the Church of Rome became 
evident. Herr Harnack has himself shown this 
point very well in his “History of Dogma.” } 
This Church played a considerable part in the 
combat with gnosticism; the principal leaders of 
the gnostics came to Rome as to the central point 
of Christendom, where it was most important to 
have their doctrines approved, and there they 
were condemned in succession. But it is not 
only thus that the Roman community appears in 
its dignity as principal Church. Each particular 
Church had the sentiment of the general unity, 
and even anxiety for it: it held itself within this 

1 1, 439-454, 


THE CHURCH 153 


unity while superintending the maintenance of 
the standard by the others around it. But a 
central body was needed to give some kind of 
support to the force of the universal tendency, and 
to safeguard the concerted action of the Churches, 
by making its results visible and regular. This 
central point and capital of ecclesiastical unity 
was indicated at once by the grandest Christian 
memories, and by the political situation of the 
Empire. Incontestably it is owing to its rank as 
the capital that Rome owed the attraction that 
brought to it the two most important personages 
of the Apostolic Church. Peter and Paul both 
came to Rome: but whatever may have been the 
prestige of Paul, that of the prince of the apostles 
remained the greater in traditional recollection. 
Their memory was honoured, and their tombs 
_guarded. Many of the elders who»governed the 
community towards the end of the first century 
had known them, and retained full memory of 
their martydom. Fifty years later, when Irenzeus 
came to Rome, there were certainly still faithful 
to be found there who had been disciples of Peter’s 
and Paul’s disciples, and a list of bishops was 
kept, going back to Linus, the first, he who had 
taken up the government of the Roman Church 
after the death of Peter. 


34 ZHE GOSPEL AND THE CHUKCH 


Critics have noted that the bishop of Rome, 
whose position is so outstanding before the end of 
the second century, is hardly distinguished from 
the body of the elders at the end of the first, and 
that solitary episcopal rule was constituted later 
in the West than in the East. The very im- 
portance of the community, which must early 
have been divided into several groups, aided to 
maintain for long the pre-eminence of the council 
of Presbyters, which indeed always retained at 
Rome a greater effective authority, under the 
bishop, than it seems to have had in other 
Churches. No doubt all the same there was from 
the beginning at Rome, as elsewhere, a kind of 
president in the body of elders, who soon became 
the sole bishop. The Epistle of St. Clement to 
the Corinthians is written in the name of the 
Roman Church, and the personality of the writer 
does not appear: nevertheless, the letter was 
received and kept as an Epistle of Clement, who 
was the responsible author and the official 
mouthpiece of the community. This very Epistle 
makes it evident that the Roman Church inter- 
ested itself in the internal life of far-off Christian 
communities, and believed itself to have the 
right to intervene in their affairs with authority. 
Paul would not have spoken to the disunited 


THE CHURCH 155 


Corinthians with more force than Clement, al- 
though it is still from the community as the heir 
of the apostolic tradition, and not from the personal 
successor of Peter, that the word comes. This 
distinction is unimportant, for the sentiment of 
authority is identical in the case of Clement, who 
speaks in the name of the Church, whose mouth- 
piece he is, and in the case of Victor or Callixtus 
or Stephen, who speak in their own names, as 
filling the place of the apostle Peter. 

It cannot, then, be contested that the central 
position of Rome both attracted the apostles to 
it and then enabled its bishop to exercise an 
influence that no other in another place could 
have had. The importance of the town con- 
tributed to the importance of the see, but it 
cannot be said to have created it. It is possible 
to believe that the force of events, acquired experi- 
ence, the fact that Christianity was penetrating to 
Rome without them, that the Roman community 
was increasing, and that an apostolic intervention 
seemed necessary to achieve its establishment, lest 
a point that ought to radiate their influence should 
be left outside of it, that all these considera- 
tions together, led the apostles to the capital of the 
Empire. We may imagine also, that when they 
died, they little thought they were bequeathing 


156 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


a master to Cesar, or even that they had given 
a supreme chief to the Church. The thought of 
the great Advent was too strong in their minds, 
the questions of creed and of government too 
little familiar, for them to see in Rome and the 
Roman Church anything but the providential 
centre of Christian evangelization. Their death 
consecrated what their presence had signified. 
Nowhere else had the evangelical tradition been 
more solidly implanted, nowhere else had it found 
a soil more favourable to its preservation. With 
full consciousness they made Rome the capital of 
the gospel. At the same time, all unknowing, 
they made the Roman Church the mother and 
queen of the Churches of the whole world; they 
left the inheritance of the apostles in hands 
capable of making its value felt. 

The ease with which the bishops of Rome 
established their superiority over the other 
Christian communities was not a thing entirely 
unforeseen by the apostles. The head of the 
Empire, the accepted head of the world, ought to 
be also, as far as was necessary, the head of 
universal Christianity. It is not astonishing 
that this idea was never lost, and that the 
development of Christianity only gave it added 
strength as the need arose for new applications of 


THE CHURCH 157 


it. A matter still less astonishing is, that the 
consciousness of this pre-eminence, which was a 
burden rather than a privilege, should have been 
especially vivid in the town where it had its place 
of action, and whence it derived its existence. 
The necessity of union with the Church of Rome, 
a union implying a certain subordination in right 
and in fact, on the part of the other Churches, was 
as profoundly felt by the Churches of the West, 
founded by Rome, as the idea, at Rome itself, of 
a kind of general responsibility for the common 
welfare. 

It was otherwise in the East, where the 
Churches, not owing their existence to Rome, were 
less closely attached to her by tradition. It would 
seem that, as the idea of union with Rome was 
not implanted in them at their origin, it could 
never afterwards acquire strength enough to resist 
political divisions and special tendencies. The 
transference of the seat of Empire to Constanti- 
nople prepared the way for the schism, and it is 
well established that the Greek Church is, in 
itself, a political institution, whose principle is in 
no way traditional.1 With a more complete 
autonomy, and with a less vivid sentiment of all 
that the bishop of Rome owed to the succession 


1 Cf. Duchesne, “ Eglises Séparées,” 163-227. 


138 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of Peter, the Eastern Church during the early 
centuries had yet gravitated towards Rome; it 
would have continued to do so, and would have 
come more and more into the orbit of the 
Apostolic Church, if the normal development of 
ecclesiastical government had not been fettered by 
political considerations as soon as the Empire was 
converted. In proportion as the bishops of Rome 
acquire a more precise idea of their function as 
moderators, and translate it into a positive and 
Divine right, the Easterns come to understand the 
claim less and less, and finish by no longer com- 
prehending it at all: they can see only Rome’s 
pretensions, and have no feeling of what is 
demanded for the maintenance of unity beyond 
the divisions of frontiers. So completely have 
they made Christianity a State religion, that once 
Rome is lost to the Empire, it seems to them that 
the bishop of Rome has nothing to do with their 
concerns, and that the bishop of Constantinople, 
the new Rome, has ‘the same rights and powers over 
the East that the bishop of the old has over the 
Western countries that obey him. At a time when 
the Popes recognize no frontiers and ensure, in 
the spirit for which Herr Harnack praises them, 
the independence of religion before the secular 
authority, the patriarchs of Constantinople are 


THE CHURCH 159 


enclosing their Church in the fragments of the 
Empire, and in the effort to organize their own 
Papacy are making that of the Emperor. By 
bringing Christianity back to the proportions of 
a national worship, they destroyed, as far as they 
could, that conception of Catholicism that the 
Roman Church had received as a sacred charge and 
intended to keep. 

If this Church has assumed an imperial air 
it did not possess in the early days, if She has 
desired to give juridical, or rather constitutional, 
form to her pre-eminence and her actions, it is 
not only in virtue of a local and inherited tradi- 
tion of dominion, which passed from the Empire 
to the Church, from Cesar to the successor of 
Peter, but as the result of a general tendency, 
which, from the beginning, inclined the Church to 
organize herself and her government, a tendency 
felt in the East as much as in the West. The 
Church had possessions, discipline, a hierarchy, 
She could not dispense with legal rights. But 
legal rights cannot exist without an authority to 
guarantee them, and this authority, to be effi- 
cacious, must have its official representatives. 
The Popes of the fourth and fifth centuries wished 
to be, in the last resort, the judges of all Chis- 
tendom, as those of the two preceding centuries 


160 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


desired the Roman Church to be the type of all 
Churches for teaching, organization, and discipline. 
In both cases the pretension is the same, but 
applied to different situations. Rome claims no 
new power, or rather, the power is no newer than 
the situation it is designed to meet. The Church 
had to find for herself a government or cease to 
exist ; but government in a Church, one and uni- 
versal, is inconceivable without a central authority. 
A central ideal, with no real power, as conceived 
by St. Cyprian, would have been useless. Some 
final solution had to be found to important ques- 
tions. Particular councils could not have had 
sufficient prestige; general councils could never 
have been anything but a tribunal for extraordi- 
nary occasions, and experience showed that these 
assemblies had many great inconveniences. The 
superior and permanent tribunal before which all 
more important cases should naturally come, by 
which all conflicts should be finally decided, could 
be only that Church, the most apostolic of all, 
holding the tradition of Peter and Paul, whose 
chiefs did not hesitate to call themselves successors 
of the prince of the apostles. 

To the Churches maintained or established 
in barbarian lands, and to the nations them- 
selves, the Pope appears not only as the supreme 


THE CHURCH 161 


judge of all ecclesiastical causes and controversies. 
From the end of the eighth century, he acts as the 
depository of the Imperial tradition, transferring 
the title of Cesar to Charlemagne and his suc- 
cessors. Towards the close of the eleventh century, 
all authority seems vested in him, not only over 
particular Churches, but also over nations. The 
Pope has become social instructor, tutor of 
monarchies, head of the Christian Confederation, 
while he remains and becomes more and more 
supreme as the chief of the ecclesiastical hierarchy, 
the arbiter of the faith, the guardian of discipline, 
the bishop of all the Churches. His two offices 
are not distinguished one from the other. Al- 
though the first was not conferred upon him as the 
direct result of a purely religious, evangelical, 
Catholic principle, it was found to be included in 
the second by force of circumstances. In the 
chaos in which the Empire of the West foundered, 
the Church maintained her structure; she alone 
survived, and the new kingdoms arose and ad- 
vanced towards civilization in the bosom of the 
Church, and under her influence and direction. The 
Church could not accomplish the work of their 
conversion without becoming also their instructress 
in temporal order. She had to be their mistress 
in every branch of knowledge, and teach them the 
M 


162 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


elements of ancient wisdom side by side with the 
gospel of salvation ; she had even to make herself 
feared in the temporal realm, that she should not 
be overwhelmed in the spiritual. The individu- 
ality of the growing nations was scarcely beginning 
to be defined; the memory of the Roman Empire, 
of Roman unity, rested over them all, idealized in 
the sentiment of Catholic unity; a kind of great 
State grew into being, made up of States still un- 
formed, a universal republic, which was a Church, 
and whose true and only natural leader was the 
Pope, having under him the temporal sovereigns 
whether they would or no. In this confusion, 
where she must dominate or perish, the Church 
became transformed, and grew in stature contin- 
ually, grew in order to endure, because the changes 
which shaped themselves in her were the very 
conditions of her continued existence. 

Had there been any actual autonomy of the 
individual Churches, Christianity would have been 
completely submerged in superstition and Germanic 
feudalism. Reforms became possible as soon as 
Rome had full power to support them, even though 
she had not always had the initiative to propose 
them. The proud temporal position of the Popes 
of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries was only 
the safeguard of their independence in the spiritual 


UIGIE (GEM ROE 163 


sphere; and in this sphere, the Popes were per- 
force what they were and what they became, in 
order that the Church might be still the Church, 
and continue to represent Christianity and the 
religion of Jesus. What would have happened had 
the Pontiffs suddenly perceived that the essence 
of Christianity was faith in God the Father, and 
that their duty consisted in representing this 
truth to those who might be willing to make 
their religion out of this alone ? 

From the fourteenth century onwards, the 
general conditions of Catholic society were modi- 
fied. There was no longer in any truth a Christian 
republic, but Christian States, sufficiently strong 
in themselves, and never again to be united 
by a common faith or a common danger in 
a common course of action, as they had been for 
the Crusades. In fact, the authority of the Pope 
was exercised with more and more difficulty in the 
political sphere; the Church, rich and powerful in 
every State, was sapped with increasing corruption. 
A great reform became essential to free it from 
the world, and return it to its proper path. But 
at this point Church and State were so in- 
timately bound together, that the independent 
organization of religious power and political power 
could not be accomplished without difficulties, 


164 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


shocks, and forcible separations. Regarding 
events from this distance of time, after allowing 
that the Papacy of the fifteenth centuries was 
much too preoccupied with its own interests, and 
not enough with the reform that was always more 
urgent, it is evident that if by force of circum- 
stances, the political influence of the Church 
steadily decreased, the spiritual power of the Pope 
as steadily increased, and became that which it 
had to become if the Catholic Church were to 
be preserved in the midst of the revolutions 
and troubles of modern times. The Pope remains 
the father of the faithful and the head of the 
Churches. It is easy to perceive that his power 
will never again be exercised in the forms it 
assumed in the Middle ages, but this power is of 
constant importance for the preservation of the 
Church, and the preservation in the Church of the 
gospel. 


CHAPTER III 


THus to reproach the Catholic Church for the 
development of her constitution is to reproach her 
for having chosen to live, and that, moreover, when 
her life was indispensable for the preservation of 
the gospel itself. There is nowhere in her history 
any gap in continuity, or the absolute creation of 
a new system: every step is a deduction from the 
preceding, so that we can proceed from the 
actual constitution of the Papacy to the Evangel- 
ical Society around Jesus, different as they are 
from one another, without meeting any violent 
revolution to change the government of the 
Christian community. At the same time every 
advance is explained by a necessity of fact 
accompanied by logical necessities, so that the 
historian cannot say that the total extent of the 
movement is outside the gospel. The fact is, it 
proceeds from it and continues it. 

Many objections, very grave from the point of 
view of a certain theology, have little or no 


166 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


significance for the historian. It is certain, for 
instance, that Jesus did not systematize beforehand 
the constitution of the Church as that of a govern- 
ment established on earth and destined to endure 
for a long series of centuries. But a conception 
far more foreign still to His thoughts and to His 
authentic teaching is that of an invisible society 
formed for ever of those who have in their hearts 
faith in the goodness of God. We have seen that 
the gospel of Jesus already contained a rudiment 
of social organization, and that the kingdom also 
was announced as a society. Jesus foretold the 
kingdom, and it was the Church that came; she 
came, enlarging the form of the gospel, which it 
was impossible to preserve as it was, as soon as the 
Passion closed the ministry of Jesus. There is 
no institution on the earth or in history whose 
status and value may not be questioned if the 
principle is established that nothing may exist 
except in its original form. Such a principle 
is contrary to the law of life, which is movement 
and a continual effort of adaptation to conditions 
always new and perpetually changing. Chris- 
tianity has not escaped this law, and cannot be 
reproached for submission to it. It could not do 
otherwise than it has done. 

The preservation of its primitive state was 


THE CHURCH 167 


impossible, its restoration now is equally out 
of the question, because the conditions under 
which the gospel was produced have disappeared 
for ever. History shows the evolution of the 
elements that composed it. These elements have 
undergone, as they could not fail to undergo, 
many transformations; but they are always 
recognizable, and it is easy to see in the Catholic 
Church what stands to-day for the idea of the 
Heavenly kingdom, for the idea of the Messiah, 
the maker of the kingdom, and for the idea of the 
apostolate, or the preaching of the kingdom, that 
is to say, the three essential elements of the living 
gospel, which have become what they were forced 
to become in order to endure at all. The theory 
of a purely inner kingdom suppresses them and 
makes an abstraction of the real gospel. The 
tradition of the Church keeps them, interpreting 
them and adapting them to the varying condition 
of humanity. 

It would be absurd to desire that Christ should 
have determined beforehand the interpretations 
and adaptations that time would exact, since they 
had no reason to exist before the hour which 
rendered them necessary. It was neither possible 
nor useful for Jesus to reveal to His disciples the 
future of the Church. Thethought that the 


168 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Saviour left to them was that they must continue 
to wish, to prepare, to await and to realize the 
kingdom of God. The view of the kingdom has 
been enlarged and modified, the conception of its 
definite advent fills a smaller place, but the object 
of the gospel remains the object of the Church. 
As a matter of fact, it is worthy of notice that 
the Church, for all her advanced age, for all her 
apparent want of anxiety as to the imminence of 
the final judgment, and for all the long future 
she anticipates still on the earth, regards herself 
nevertheless as a provisional institution, a transi- 
tional organization. The Church of the world, 
called the Church militant, is, as it were, the 
vestibule of the Church triumphant, which is the 
kingdom of Heaven realized in eternity, still held 
to be possible in the fulness of time. If the 
dimensions of the evangelical horizon have 
changed, the point of view remains the same. 
The Church has kept the fundamental idea of 
Christ’s teaching: no terrestrial institution realizes 
the kingdom finally, and the gospel only prepares 
the way for the accomplishment. It is easy to 
divine why theologians, like Herr Harnack, 
abandon evangelical eschatology. But the question 
at issue is only to know if eschatology was not 
historically an essential element of the gospel, and 


THE CHURCH 169 


if the Church, which has retained this essential 
element, is not the veritable continuation of Christ. 
What if the gospel eschatology were at bottom the 
expressive symbol of complex and indescribable 
realities; what if the eschatology of the Church 
be also a symbol, always striving for perfection, 
of the same expected benefits, the traditional 
theologian can still support it, and so continue to 
find the essence of the gospel where Jesus desired 
to set it. It means that Jesus and the Church 
have their eyes raised always in the same direc- 
tion, towards the same symbol of hope, and that 
the Church maintains the attitude of Jesus, 
towards the kingdom of Heaven. 

In their warfare against tradition, the most 
enlightened Protestant theologians, those who, like 
Herr Harnack, recognize a kind of relative 
necessity in the Catholic development, argue none 
the less eagerly about it, as though it were not 
evident that the desire to restore Christianity to 
its primitive form and organization is really a 
desire to condemn it to death, and as if change 
were not the natural condition of its preservation 
and the expression of its vitality. They are less 
exacting for themselves, when concerned to justify 
their own religious convictions, unlikely as they 
are to be confused with the gospel of Jesus, 


170 JHE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


What else do they do but adapt the gospel to the 
needs of their special consciences? The Church 
also, from the beginning, adapts the gospel to the 
needs of the men she addresses. 

It is not the personal adaptation that continues 
the ministry of Christ, the preaching of the “ good 
news” and the preparation of the kingdom of 
Heaven. Even among Protestants, the directing 
tradition has a considerable influence on the way 
the Divine word is understood, and without this 
tradition the effect of the written gospel on 
the mass of believers would probably be very 
slight or not always salutary. In all Chris- 
tian communities there is a service of the 
gospel which ensures the transmission and appli- 
cation of the Master’s word. The Catholic Church 
is such a service formed by the centuries and 
continuous from the beginning. To be identical 
with the religion of Jesus, it has no more need 
to reproduce exactly the forms of the Galilean 
gospel, than a man has need to preserve at fifty 
the proportions, features, and manner of life of 
the day of his birth, in order to be the same 
individual. The identity of a man is not ensured 
by making him return to his cradle. 

The Church, to-day, resembles the community 
of the first disciples neither more nor less than a 


THE CHURCH 171 


grown man resembles the child he was at first. 
The identity of the Church or of the man is 
not determined by permanent immobility of 
external forms, but by continuity of existence 
and consciousness of life through the perpetual 
transformations which are life’s condition and 
manifestation. Setting aside all theological 
subtleties, the Catholic Church, as a society 
founded on the gospel, is identical with the first 
circle of the disciples of Jesus if she feels herself 
to be, and is, in the same relations with Jesus as 
the disciples were, if there is a general correspon- 
dence between her actual state and the primitive 
state, if the actual organism is only the primitive 
organism developed and decided, and if the 
elements of the Church to-day are the primitive 
elements, grown and fortified, adapted to the 
ever-increasing functions they have to fulfil. 

It is the very duration of Christianity that 
has caused this evolution. If the end of the 
world had arrived in the years that followed the 
publication of the Apocalypse, the. ecclesiastical 
development would not have taken place, and the 
Church even would hardly have existed. But the 
world did not perish: the Church retained a 
reason for existence and retains it still. Her 
history is that of the gospel in the world, and to 


72. THE GOSPEL AND THE CHUKCE 


find that the history is not that of the religion of 
Christ is only possible if the religion is placed 
outside history and the actual world. 

If the Church were entirely a political institu- 
tion, such as Herr Harnack conceives and repre- 
sents her, it is certain that she would have nothing 
in common with the gospel, and would simply have 
to be regarded as the successor of the Roman 
Empire. We have already seen in what sense 
the Church really succeeded the Empire. The 
memories and the tradition of the Empire, con- 
ditioned, so to speak, the action of the Church, 
but did not change her essential character. 
Whatever can be said, it is a long step from Leo 
XIII. to Trajan, from bishops to pro-consuls, 
from monks to legionaries, from Jesuits to the 
Pretorian Guard. The Pope is not king, in so 
far as he is Pope, and the question is still of 
the Universal Church, not of the Empire. The 
Catholics do not regard the Pope as their sovereign, 
but as their spiritual guide. Although they re- 
ceive their investiture from the Pope, the bishops 
are not simple delegates either in law or in fact; 
if the Pope is the successor of Peter, the bishops 
are the successors of the apostles, and their 
ministry is not of a political order nor purely 
administrative. It is only by way of metaphor 


THE CHURCH 173 


that the faithful can be compared to an army. 
Secular priests and monks do not preach the 
policy of the Pope, even when he has one; they 
preach first of all the gospel, with the traditional 
interpretation the Church gives, and the kingdom 
they endeavour to extend is that of the gospel, 
not that of the Pope, so far as that is distinct 
from the kingdom of Christ. Even the Jesuits, 
founded to defend the Roman Church against 
Protestant and antipapal reform, are not political 
agents, but preachers of religion and religious 
educators, whatever may be thought of their 
methods and their special tendencies. The poli- 
tical side of the great institution, Catholicism, is 
naturally the one that first strikes those who are 
outside it, but it is wholly external, even accessory. 
Seen from within, the ecclesiastical organization 
is essentially of a religious order, and has no other 
reason for its existence than the preservation and 
propagation of religion in the world. Although 
the whole Catholic development, superficially 
observed, seems to tend solely to augment the 
authority of the hierarchy, or rather of the Pope, 
the fundamental principle of Catholicism has 
never ceased to be the very principle of the gospel. 
The faithful do not exist for the sake of the 
hierarchy, but the hierarchy for the sake of the 


174. THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


faithful. ‘The Church does not exist for the sake of 
the Pope, but the Pope for the sake of the Church. 

Of course, the Church has put on in many 
respects the form of a human government, and 
has become and still remains a political power. 
None the less, she has always desired, and still 
desires, quite a different end. The fact that she is 
of political importance, and that politics must 
reckon with her, is the inevitable consequence of 
her existence, and became certain as soon as 
Christianity had spread sufficiently through the 
Roman Empire. That she should set herself up 
as a political power, treating with governments as 
an equal or as a superior, negotiating religious 
affairs with them as international treaties are 
negotiated, is a special and transitory form of her 
relations with human powers. In this sense the 
Church has not always been a political power, and 
may cease to be one. The actual situation now is 
a legacy of the past, to be dealt with only with 
precaution. But it is possible to foresee in the 
future a general comity of civilized nations, 
wherein the Church, as a spiritual power, in no 
way political in the present sense, should lose 
none of her prestige, none of her independence, 
none of her moral influence. Are not politics 
falling more and more from the hands of managers 


THE CHURCH 175 


of men, into the hands of managers of affairs, and 
will they not finally remain completely there? 
What would the Church gain by treating directly 
with such men of all that regards herself, and 
what interest would they have to occupy them- 
selves with such matters? 

We may even go further, and conjecture that the 
Church, when dealing with those who recognize her 
authority, will find a procedure more conformable 
to the fundamental equality and personal dignity 
of all Christians. In the universal levelling of 
ranks which is in prospect, the members of the 
ecclesiastical hierarchy may be less great person- 
ages in the eyes of the world, without in any way 
losing the rights of their ministry, which will 
assume again, more visibly, their essential form of 
duties. 

In any case, it is not true that ecclesiastical 
authority is, or ever was, a species of external con- 
straint repressing all personal activity of con- 
science. The Church is an educator, rather than a 
dominating mistress: she instructs rather than 
directs, and he who obeys her only does so accord- 
ing to his conscience, and in order to obey God. 
In principle, Catholicism aims, as much as Pro- 
testantism, at the formation of religious person- 
alities, souls masters of themselves, pure and free 


176 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


consciences. It is true, the danger for Catholicism 
is that of desiring too much to govern men instead 
of simply elevating their souls. It cannot be 
denied, that its tendency, reacting against Pro- 
testantism has been towards the effacement of the 
individual, towards the careful guardianship of 
men, towards a control of human activity which 
by no means makes for the development of 
initiative. But it is only a tendency. It would 
be going almost too far to say that there is in 
the Church a “ legion,” whose religious and political 
ideal is that of a society regulated in all matters 
of thought and action by a kind of military disci- 
pline. Yet the main defect of such an ideal is not 
precisely that it is contrary to the gospel, but that 
it is dangerous, and impossible to realize. 

The gospel of Jesus was neither wholly indi- 
vidualistic in the Protestant sense, nor wholly 
ecclesiastical in the Catholic sense. It addressed 
itself to the mass of mankind in order to establish 
the free society of the elect; is it possible to 
form an idea of the development of personality 
or of the form of government in the kingdom of 
Heaven? It is the life and persistence of the gospel, 
which have made of it a permanent principle of 
religious and moral education, and a spiritual 
society where the principle is put in force, The 


CUT OTE 177 


principle has no hold without the society, nor the 
society without the principle. Protestantism and 
Herr Harnack wish to keep only the principle. It 
is a conception which lacks consistence and reality. 
Catholicism stands for both principle and society. 
Historical circumstances have made the social 
organization seem to compromise the principle 
more or less, even in some sort to appear to threaten 
it still. But it is the condition of all that lives in 
this world to be subject to imperfection. What- 
ever reservations the historian may make in details 
as to the way in which the action of the Church 
is or has been exercised, he cannot deny that 
Catholicism has been, and is still, the service of the 
gospel, continued since the days of the apostles. 
The power of adaptation recognized in the Roman 
Church is its best title to the admiration of the 
impartial observer. It does not follow that the 
Church alters either the Gospel or tradition, but 
that she knows how to understand the needs of 
the time. It cannot be too often repeated that 
the gospel was not an absolute, abstract doctrine, 
directly applicable at all times and to all men by 
its essential virtue. It was a living faith, linked 
everywhere to the time and the circumstances that 
witnessed its birth. In order to preserve this faith 
in the world, a work of adaptation has been, and 
N 


178 THE GOSPEL AND THE (CHURCH 


will be, perpetually necessary. Though the 
Catholic Church has adapted, and still adapts, the 
faith, though she adapt herself continually to 
the needs of new ages, that is no proof that she 
forgets the gospel or despises her own tradition, 
but that she wishes to display the value of both, 
and has confidence that they are flexible and capa- 
ble of further perfection. 

The “reasons of superior order,” + which, accord- 
ing to Herr Harnack, caused orthodoxy to be 
corrected, ancient dogmas to be interpreted, new 
dogmas to be produced, new practices and de- 
votions to be authorized, are not to be sought in 
the caprices or calculations of an arbitrary or 
egoistic despotism. Whatever may have been the 
external circumstances surrounding any particular 
fact, all this development proceeds from the 
innermost life of the Church, and the decisions of 
authority only sanction, so to speak, or consecrate, 
the movement that arises from general thought 
and piety. If it does not please the Catholic 
Church to bury herself, immovably, in the contem- 
plation of traditional formulas, if she scrutinizes 
and explains them, it is because she employs 
activity and intelligence in the faith, If she 
modifies her discipline and modes of action, it is 

1 Page 155. 


TEEN CHORCH 179 


because she wishes to act, seeing that she lives. 
As the Church she has a collective life which, not- 
withstanding partial failures, is the universal life 
of the gospel. She is not content to make only 
Christians, she tends to create a Christian world 
state. It is easy enough to understand that 
individualist theologians have no sense of this 
collective and continuous life of the gospel in the 
Church, and do not always see it even when they 
look at it. Its reality is none the less definite, 
and its variety does not prove that the “essence 
of Christianity ” is, as it were, hidden and stifled 
there under an accumulation of foreign material, 
but that this essence dwells in it perpetually in 
action, under all the forms that display its abundant 
fruitfulness. 


SECTION V 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 
INTRODUCTION 


Past centuries regarded dogma as the expression 
and the rampart of the faith. It was believed to 
be immutable, although men were never weary of 
perfecting its formulas. Herr Harnack also teaches 
the immutability of dogma, but he finds but one 
dogma in the gospel, and the work of Christian 
thought since St. Paul is thus condemned totally, 
since its object, in the main, is other than the 
paternal goodness of God. The time-honoured 
effort to define the truth of the gospel is there- 
fore to be held entirely vain, foreign even to the 
gospel it wishes to interpret. It is a fact, that 
the development of dogma is not in the gospel, 
and could not be there. But it does not follow 
that the dogma does not proceed from the gospel, 
and that the gospel has not lived and lives still 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 181 


in the dogma as well as in the Church. Even the 
teaching and the appearance of Jesus have had 
perforce to be interpreted ; the whole question is 
to know if the commentary is homogeneous with 
the text or heterogeneous. 


CHAPTER I 


EvEN if there is unwillingness to recognize in the 
gospel the first lineaments of Christology, they 
must be admitted to be present in St. Paul. The 
apostle, who rendered the Christian religion the 
eminent service of detaching it from Judaism, 
who presented the kingdom of God as a fact 
accomplished in the Redemption through Christ, 
who conceived the gospel as the Spirit of the 
Law, also laid the foundations of Christian dogma. 
There was, we are told, a latent danger in the 
conception of an “ objective redemption,’ because 
= \ of the temptation to separate it from the inner 


ZA 
yaa 


va \ renewal of the soul. Men might be led also to 
‘count among the conditions of salvation an exact 
‘knowledge of the Saviour and of His work. Did 
hot Paul himself attribute a celestial nature to 
Christ, and notwithstanding the freedom of his 
attitude with regard to the Law, did he not retain 
the Old Testament as a source of truth? If he 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 183 


formulated no dogma, he set the Church on the 
slope of dogmatic development.! 


oe 


However, according to Herr Harnack, this \ 


development is, properly speaking, Greek, and 
the direct influence of Greek thought on Christian 
makes itself felt about the year 130. John, it 
is true, had written that Jesus was the “Logos,” 


| 


but “he had not made this proposition the basis / 
of all speculation concerning Christ.” After him / 


came the learned men who taught that Jesus. 
Christ was the corporeal appearance of the Logos, | 
and this idea replaced the unintelligible notion of 


the Messiah. “It gave a metaphysical meaning * 


to a historic fact; it introduced into cosmology, 
and into the philosophy of religion, a personality 
that had appeared in time and space.”? This 
identification brought the Greek thinkers to 
Christianity. But the gnostic crisis forced the 
Church to trace the limits of speculation that 


| 


} 


| 


could be called Christian. There, strictly speak- 
ing, begins dogma, and with it the menace it [ 
brings for religious liberty. “No one may feel ? — 


or believe himself a Christian, that is, a child of \ \ 


=_ 


God, unless he has first submitted his religious 


experience and knowledge to the control of the 
ecclesiastical confession. . . . He will never attain 
1 Page 115, 3 Page 127. 3 Page 128. 


184 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


his spiritual majority, since he must remain in 


dependence on dogma, on the priest, on ritual, and 
on the Book.” ? 

On this plane, continues our author, tradi- 
tionalism, orthodoxy, and intellectualism proceed 
together. The gospel has become “a _ great 


/ cosmo- theological philosophy, wherein enter all 
/ imaginable things.’ Men are persuaded that 


“Christianity, being absolute religion, must be 
able to reply to all questions of metaphysics, 
cosmology, or history.” Two features, however, 
separate this doctrine from Greek philosophy, 
namely, the dogma of creation, and especially the 
Christological dogma. The great factor of this 
dogma was a special conception of redemption 
which came into prominence in the third century, 
namely, that the salvation achieved by Christ 
consists in the deliverance from death, and at the 
same time an elevation to the Divine life, a 
deification of man. To obtain this benefit for 
| humanity, the Redeemer Himself must be God, 
jand become man. This is the reason that Atha- 
‘nasius fought for the consubtantiality of the 
Word and the Father, as though all Christianity 
were at stake. For the same reason, the idea of 
a simple moral union between the divinity and 
Page 131, 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 185 


the humanity of the Saviour could not be 
accepted. The dogmas of the consubstantial 
Trinity, and of the God-man, are bound up with 
this conception of the Redemption and fall with 
it. For this conception is not Christian, nor 
moral: it has hardly any connection with the 
Christ of the Gospel, to whom its formulas do not 
apply; it leads away from the real Christ, Whose 
living image it does not keep, but rather presents 
Him solely in the guise of “hypotheses expressed | 
in theoretical propositions.” + vi 
Herr Harnack regards the Augustinian doctrine 
of grace rather from the point of view of piety 
than that of dogma. “ The piety and theology of 
Augustine formed a special revival of the Pauline 
experience and doctrines of sin and of grace, of 
wickedness and justification, of Divine predestina- 
tion, and of the defect of human liberty.” “ Down 
to our own day, in Catholicism, inner living 
piety and the manner of expressing it have 
remained essentially Augustinian.” How wise is 
the theologian to note this contrast between the 
most individual piety and the Church of law and 
Imperialism! All Catholic reformers have been 
Augustinians. “It is true that the Church has 
joined to her dogma of grace, conceived essentially 
1 Pages 142-147. 


186 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


as Augustine conceived it, a practice of confession 
which threatens to make the dogma completely 
valueless, But however wide she makes her 
boundaries, so as to include all who do not rebel 
against her, she not only supports those who think 
with Augustine of sin and of grace, but she 
desires that every one, as far as possible, should 
feel as strongly as he did the gravity of sin and 
the bliss of belonging to God.” 

Great admirer of Luther as he is, Herr Harnack 
holds the Protestant Reformation to have been 
incomplete. In matters of dogma, there are a 
crowd of problems that Luther did not know, 
much less was able to solve; “he was, in conse- 
quence, unable to separate the kernel from the 


husk. . . . He not only admits in the gospel the 
ancient dogmas of the Trinity and the two natures 
of Christ, . . . he constructed new dogmas; but, 


generally speaking, did not know how to draw a 
clear distinction between dogma and the gospel. 
. .. The inevitable consequence was, that intel- 
lectualism was not destroyed, but formed a new 
scholastic dogma, considered essential to salvation, 
so that there remained two classes of Christians, 
those who understood the doctrine, and those who 
accepted it from those who understood and thus 


1 Pages 160-163, 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 187 


continued spiritually minors.” In this respect, 
Protestantism threatens to become an inferior type 
of Catholicism. Let the Evangelical Churches 
beware of becoming Catholicized! If they would 
remain truly evangelical, they must have no 
orthodoxy.} 


1 Pages 182-185. 


CHAPTER II 


CHRISTIAN thought at the commencement was 
Jewish, and could not be other than Jewish, 
although evangelical Christianity contained the 
germ of a universal religion. The first change, 
the most decisive, most important, most rapid 
also, perhaps, it ever experienced, was that which 
made out of a Jewish movement, founded on 
the idea of the reign of the Messiah, a religion 
acceptable to the Greco-Roman world and to hu- 
manity. However rapid it was, the change was 
effected in successive stages: St. Paul, the Fourth 
Gospel, St. Justin, St. Irenzeus, Origen, mark the 
steps of this progression in the evolution of ideas, 
and the adaptation of the faith to the conditions 
of intellectual culture in the first centuries of 
\\our era. The transformation was effected in spite 
of the traditional and conservative tendency 
‘inherent in every religion, and manifest from 
| the beginning in Christianity. The obligation of 
' the Mosaic Law was abrogated in spite of the 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 189 


Judaizers: the theory of the Logos triumphed in 
spite of the adversaries of the Johannic writings, 
to whom St. Epiphanes gave the name of Aloges , 
the theology of Origen was accepted, with some 
amendment, by those who contested it. Each step 
of the doctrine, taken in spite of resistance, is 
achieved by some sort of accommodation with 
those that preceded it. The thesis of St. Paul on 
the law of servitude and the gospel of liberty, the 
Johannic conception of Christ, entered into the 
tradition of the teaching Church under condition 
of adaptation to primitive Christianity. In order 
to assimilate the greater part of Origen’s theology, 
the Church cut up his system into fragments, and 
even condemned certain philosophic hypotheses 
which were not to her liking. 

In a sense, it may be said that the Hellenization 
of Christian doctrine dates from the Apologist 
Fathers, because they were the first to present 
Christianity as a philosophy, and because they 
elaborated the theory of the Logos, which was not 
enunciated in the Fourth Gospel as a speculation, 
but as a series of assertions of faith and mystical 
pictures. This opinion would be inexact if it were 
held to involve, as Herr Harnack seems to think, 
the conclusion that the idea of the Logos, or, more 
exactly, the idea of the Incarnate Word, does not 


1909 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


dominate entirely the Fourth Gospel There is 
not a single verse of the Gospel of John written 
independently of this influence. But the con- 
ception of the Logos enters, so to speak, into a 
living faith, enlarges the formula of the faith, and 
changes its own nature: it ceases to be a purely 
theoretical conception upon which are founded 
speculations of the same order, and becomes 
Christian by serving to define the Christ: it is a 
vital theology, mystical, not abstract, in no way 
scholastic, whilst the doctrine of the Fathers 
develops the cosmological point of view merely 
indicated in the prologue of John. 

The Pauline theory of salvation was indis- 
pensable in its time, if Christianity were not to 
remain a Jewish sect without a future. The 
theory of the Incarnate Logos was also necessary 
when the gospel was presented, not only to the 
proselytes of Judaism in the Empire, but to the 
whole pagan world, and to every one who had 
received a Hellenic education. The learned theo- 
logy of Origen was the synthesis of doctrine, that 
could make Christianity acceptable to the most 
cultivated minds. It was the bridge between the 
new religion and the science of antiquity. The 
Greek world would never have admitted the neces- 
sity of circumcision, nor have become converted to 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 19 


the Messiah of Israel, but it could and did become 
a convert to the God Who became man, to the 
Incarnate Word. All the development of Trini- 
tarian and Christological dogma, which, according 
to Herr Harnack and other critical theologians, 
has weighed so heavily on all Christian orthodoxies, 
binding them to an effete doctrine and to the 
science of Plato and Aristotle, long since passed by 
modern knowledge, was, in the beginning, a vital 
manifestation, a great effort of faith and intelli- 
gence, which enabled the Church to link her own 
tradition to the science of the age, to fortify one 
by the other, and transform both into a learned 
theology which believed it contained the know- 
ledge of the world and the knowledge of God. 
Philosophy could become Christian without being 
obliged to deny itself, and yet Christianity had 
not ceased to be a religion, the religion of Christ. 

This work of Christian thought must not be 
judged as a scientific achievement. It did not 
pretend to be, and had it desired to be, it must be 
confessed its method would have led to failure, 
It was not erudite research that determined its 
character and fixed its results, but the instinct of 
faith in souls otherwise saturated with the Greek 
spirit. Further, the Hellenization of Christianity 
was not anticipated by professional philosophers, 


to2 «THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


like the gnostic doctors, nor desired by skilful 
politicians, who would have carefully fostered 
every chance of success for the work of conver- 
sion, and would have taken pains to remove 
from Christianity every sign of its Jewish origin, 
that in a Greek guise it might penetrate the 
pagan world more easily. The cause of the move- 
ment lay deeper, and, so to speak, was more 
profoundly necessitated. The development of 
Christian dogma was brought about by the state 
of mind and culture of the earliest converts, 
who were Gentiles, or under Gentile influence. 
So far as they were won over to Jewish beliefs, 
they were prepared to understand and appreciate 
primitive Christianity, and to this extent they 
became attached to it. So far as they were 
imbued with Greek culture, they felt the need 
of interpreting their new faith to themselves. 
They did so, the more promptly and the more 
willingly, because some explanation was essential 
to any one who wished to speak of Christianity 
to pagans ignorant of Judaism. In this way, 
progressively, but beginning at a very early date, 
the Greek interpretation of the Christian doctrine 
of the Messiah came into being through the 
spontaneous effort of the faith to define itself, 
through the natural exigencies of propagandism, 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 193 


and thus the Christ, Son of God and Son of man, 
predestined Saviour, became the Word made 
flesh, the Revealer of God to humanity. 

All the development of Christological doctrine 
up to the end of the third century comes from 
this double impulse, which at the same time accel- 
erates its progress. Itis moderated and controlled 
by the principle of tradition which compels it to 
remain always in close relation with its point of 
departure, the monotheistic conception, and the 
real humanity and historical personality of Jesus. 
Israelitish monotheism was a doctrine much 
more religious and moral than philosophic ; to it 
is adapted the metaphysics of Plato and Philo, 
without which, faith in the one God would have 
hardly had any meaning for the Greeks, much 
more “intellectual” than religious. In the 
same way, the Divinity of Christ, the Incarna- 
tion of the Word was the only conceivable way 
of translating to Greek intelligence the idea 
of the Messiah. God does not cease to be|\ 
One, and Jesus remains Christ; but God is | 
triple without multiplication of Himself, Jesus | 
is God without ceasing to be man, and the | 
Word becomes man without losing its single/ 
identity. Each step of dogma marks the intro- 
duction of Greek philosophy into Christianity, and 

0) 


194 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


a compromise between this philosophy and Chris- 
tian tradition. . 

For philosophy was not introduced into the 
Faith as such, nor entirely, but only in so far 
as an explanation or a learned formula was bor- 
rowed, or rather stolen, from it to give value to 
tradition. The apologists may speak of philo- 
sophy in connection with Christianity, and Origen 
regard theology as a true science, a gnosis superior 
to the common faith, but the official representa- 
tives of the Church affect to know nothing but 
tradition, and do not acknowledge, having no 
consciousness of them, the loans that Christianity 
has made before them, and is making still 
through them, from Hellenic wisdom. Ortho- 
doxy is nourished by Plato, Philo, and Origen, and 
condemns them all more or less, for it does not 
always draw from them directly. The principle 
of tradition, a religious, moral, and social prin- 
ciple, a principle of government rather than of 
science, generally wins the day over the principle 
of free speculation, which is that of philosophy, 
and always wins at decisive moments. It is, 
therefore, permissible to say that Christian 
theology undertook a work of selection from 
Greek philosophy. But if it is true, in a sense, 
that it absorbed philosophy, seeing that it took 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 195 


the place of it, after assimilating a good part of 
its elements, it is certain that primitive Christian 
tradition was never exchanged for philosophy, nor 
Greek science substituted for the gospel, nor 
Plato taken for master in place of Christ and the 
apostles. From a historical point of view, it may 
be maintained that the Trinity and the Incarna- 
tion are Greek dogmas, since they are unknown to 
Judaism and Judaic Christianity, and that Greek 
philosophy, which helped to make them, also aids 
in their comprehension. None the less, they are 
not scientific dogmas transported from Pagan 
philosophy into Christian theology; they are 
religious dogmas, which owe to philosophy only 
certain theoretical elements and their formulas, 
not the spirit which penetrates elements and 
formulas, nor the special combination of concep- 
tions which constitute them. The evolution of 
the idea of the Divine life in the Trinity does not 
proceed from Israelitish monotheism without the 
influence of Hellenic speculations, but the main- 
tenance of unity, the definition of the three terms 
of the Divine life are dictated by Jewish tradition 
and Christian experience. In the conception of 
the Incarnation, the idea of the Word comes from 
Philo as much as from the Bible, but it does not 
cease to be partly Biblical, and, above all, it is 


196 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


fixed, made concrete, turned, as it were, from 
cosmology towards revelation, directed towards 
Christ in such a way as to derive an original 
significance in its relation to Him and to the 
Christian faith. 

It is not astonishing that the result of so special 
a labour seems to lack logic and rational con- 
sistency. However, it is found that this defect, 
which would be fatal to a philosophic system, is, 
in theology, an element of endurance and solidity. 
May it not be said that all heresies are born of 
deductions followed out in a special sense, start- 
ing from one principle of tradition or of science 
isolated from all the rest, erected into absolute 
truth, from which, as a result of reasoning, con- 
clusions are drawn incompatible with the general 
harmony of religion and traditional teaching ? Or- 
thodoxy seems to follow a kind of politic line, 
balanced and obstinately conciliatory, between the 
extreme conclusions that can be drawn from the 
data it preserves. When it can no longer perceive 
the logical agreement of the assertions it seems to 
set one against the other, it proclaims the mystery, 
and does not purchase unity of theory by the 
sacrifice of an important element of its tradition. 
So it acted in the case of the Trinity, when the 
principle of the consubstantiality of the three 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 197 


Divine Persons finally triumphed, and it was no 
longer possible to oscillate between Modalism, 
which admitted but one Person manifested in three 
works, creation, redemption, sanctification, and 
Subordinationism, which attributed the three works 
to three unequal Persons. So also it acted in the 
case of the Incarnation, when the dual nature was 
definitely affirmed in the one Person, and when 
it was necessary to take a stand simultaneously 
against Nestorianism and Monophysism. Christian 
tradition refused, more or less consciously, to limit 
the real nature of religious things by the rational 
nature of our conceptions ; its aim was rather to 
render to the eternal truth the only homage that 
is of value, by holding it always higher than our 
intelligence, affirmations which seem contradictory 
being, perhaps, compatible at the limit of infinity. 
There is but one eternal God, and Jesus is God— 
that is the theological dogma. The salvation of _ 
man is entirely in the hand of God, and man is 
free to save himself, or not—that is the dogma of 
grace. The Church has authority over men, and 
the Christian is only responsible to God—that is 
ecclesiastical dogma. Abstract logic would 
demand that throughout one or other of these 
strangely linked propositions should be sacrificed. 
But attentive observation shows that such a 


1988 ZTHE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


course would compromise the living equilibrium 
of religion. 

The dogmas of the Trinity and the Incarnation 
are associated with an idea of Redemption in- 
fluenced by Hellenism; but neither is the idea 
purely Hellenic, nor is its relation with the dogmas 
so close that they absolutely depend on it. If 
Herr Harnack’s judgment is that the gospel does 
not, by Redemption, intend to signify exemption 
from death, it is because he began by considering 
eternal life to be the actual possession of God 
through faith in His mercy. But we have seen 
that this hypothesis is founded on an interpretation 
of gospel teaching, which is of very doubtful 
value. Eternal life,in the teaching of Jesus, is 
not the possession of God by man through faith, 
but the possession of the kingdom in the life to 
come, the life that is unending. Thus the im- 
mortality guaranteed to those who will see the 
great advent, and those who will rise from the dead 
to partake in it, is an element in the gospel, and 
the necessary and explicitly formulated condition 
of participation in the kingdom of God. The gift 
of immortality is not yet conceived as a ransom- 
ing, a restoration of humanity; it constitutes the 
recompense promised to the righteous. The re- 
conciliation of sinners in the parables of mercy is 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 199 


not represented as a redemption. God pardons 
the repentant sinner who thus acquires a title to 
eternal life. 

But St. Paul already sets forth Christian right- 
eousness and blessed immortality as an effect of 
the mediation and sacrifice of the “ heavenly man” 
Christ, Who restored to humanity the gift it lost 
by the fault of our first parent, the “earthly man.” } 
The author of the Fourth Gospel makes little of 
the idea of propitiation; but he associates the idea 
of life in God with that of life in the kingdom, 
and thus conceives the eternal life both as to come 
and as already present. This life is a deification 
of man ; for if the deification of Jesus consisted in 
the full communication of the Divine Spirit, which 
was the Incarnation of the Word, that of man is 
realized by the partial communication which is 
made of the same Spirit to believers, united to 
God in Christ, as Christ Himself is united to His 
Father. 

The dogmatic theory of the Fathers of the 
Church is, therefore, already present in the 
New Testament. The reasoning of Athanasius, 
and the other doctors, only gave it the rigour 
of asystem. John had said that man participates 
in the Divine life and triumphs over death by 

1 1 Cor. xv. 35-57 


x00 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the gift of the Divine Spirit, which Christ, In- 
carnate God, obtains for him. The defenders of 
consubstantiality said that Christ could not thus 
deify man, unless He Himself were God. The 
reasoning of the ecclesiastical theologians is 
founded on the assertion of the evangelist, and 
all the Greek development is linked to one 
element of the teaching of Jesus, wherein the 
Messiah was already the messenger and the 
agent of immortality. On the other hand, 
the dogma of the Trinity does not rest only on 
the idea of the deification of man by Christ, but 
on the assertion of faith which first presented 
Jesus as Christ and Lord, hallowed by the Spirit 
of God, and later, as identified with the Divine 
Word, and on the assertion which, before all 
doctrinal systematization, conceived the Spirit 
which acted in the Church as a Divine Per- 
sonality, dependent and distinct from the Father 
and the Son. The Apostles’ Creed and the 
formula of baptism are of a date anterior 
to the third century, and it cannot be denied 
that they contain the essential elements of the 
dogma of the Trinity. The systematic definition 
of the dogma is in relation to the systematic 
definition of Redemption, but the ideas which sup- 
ported these definitions existed before them in 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 201 


Christian belief, and their evolution has its starting 
point in the gospel of Jesus and apostolic tradition. 

The development of the dogma of grace, and 
that of the dogma of the Church, has been effected 
under the same conditions as that of the theo- 
logical dogma. The West has never had much 
liking for the speculations wherein the genius of 
the ancient East has always delighted to wander, 
and frequently to go astray. Her religion, instead 
of being a matter of transcendental metaphysics, 
or of cosmological epic, was a wellspring of inner 
piety and an instrument of social order. At 
Rome, and in the Latin countries, religion is 
readily conceived as a discipline and a social 
duty. For the Germanic races, it is a principle of 
inner life, the poem of the sonl, where nothing 
is really visible but “God and the soul, the soul 
and its God.” The spirit of government, inherent 
in Rome, contributed to the ecclesiastical de- 
velopment, and prepared for modern times the 
development of the dogma of the Church. The 
spirit of piety was not lacking in any fraction 
of ancient Christianity; nevertheless, it gave rise 
to no special development peculiar to the Latin 
Church, except through St. Augustine and the 
influence of Augustinism, an influence that must 
not be altogether confused with the credit the 


202. THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Augustinian system of grace has enjoyed among 
theologians. As Herr Harnack has said, the 
history of Western Christianity, since the fifth 
century, is made up of the relations that have 
existed between two factors; the spirit of piety, 
which tends to make religion a personal matter, 
and the spirit of governinent, which tends to 
make it an official thing, regulated throughout 
by the sovereign authority of the Roman Pontiff. 
Religious individualism is the extreme limit of 
the first tendency, ecclesiastical absolutism of the 
second. From their equilibrium, the life of 
Christianity results, a life that will vanish 
promptly enough on the day when one of these 
tendencies fails to counterbalance the other, for 
Protestantism only exists as religion by means of 
fragments of hierarchy and traditional organiza- 
tion, and Catholicism derives its vitality at least 
as much from the intimate ardour of piety as 
from the solidity of the hierarchical bond, or the 
rigour of administrative centralization. 

St. Augustine contemplated the Christian idea 
from the point of view of individual salvation, an 
abstraction made from the cosmological gnosis, 
He does not regard salvation alone as a final end, 
but first of all in the guise of that spiritual 
regeneration, which constitutes its reality for the 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 203 


present life. The history of Christianity becomes 
a psychological drama: Adam and Eve were 
righteous and holy; they had within them the 
grace of God, and the power to do good, but never- 
theless, in such a way, that in the trial of the 
forbidden fruit, they had the faculty of obedience 
without the overwhelming compulsion to fulfil 
their duty ; they failed, the attraction of the flesh 
gaining the day over the spiritual force of grace, 
and so destroying the harmony God had estab- 
lished in His chosen creation; henceforth, the 
lust of the flesh, that is, sin, in a permanent and 
abiding form, reigns in man; all the sons of 
Adam are born sinners, because they are born 
of the lust of the flesh, and bear within them the 
deadly principle which brought them to birth; 
but as the evil, so is the remedy; the grace 
deserved through Jesus, which is essentially the 
gift of faith and love of God, is an attraction of 
another order, all-powerful and Divine, by which 
man acquires the liberty of righteousness, by 
becoming capable of resisting effectively the 
deadly attraction of lust; as long as he lives 
on the earth, the lust of the flesh is not plucked 
up by the root, it is simply combated and over- 
thrown by the superior attraction of the grace 
of God. 


204 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


The doctrine of grace is no more Roman in 
origin than the doctrine of the Incarnate Word. 
The African Church was Roman neither in race 
nor in spirit, notwithstanding its close and per- 
manent relations with the community of Rome. 
The sense of the personal dignity of the Christian 
and of Christian holiness was preserved there very 
vividly ; although they had not followed Tertullian 
into the chimerical realm of Montanism, they had, 
so to speak, the worship of the Spirit and of the 
sacraments that confer it: for a long time they 
refused to accept the baptism of repentant heretics, 
and a formidable schism, that of the Donatists, 
arose from the same cause as the error of Cyprian 
and the rebaptizers ; in the same way that baptism 
given by a heretic could not be valid, because the 
heretic, not having the Holy Spirit, could not 
communicate it, so the ordinations made by the 
“ Traditors,” those who, during the persecutions 
of Diocletian, had been so weak as to hand over the 
sacred treasure of the Scriptures to the Roman 
authorities, were necessarily void, because a 
“Traditor” bishop is deprived of his grace, and 
cannot confer what he no longer possesses. It is in 
such an atmosphere that the dogma of efficacious 
grace was sure to be born. Alexandria might be 
interested in the Divine Essence, Antioch in the 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 205 


theandric constitution of Christ, Rome in rules 
of ecclesiastical government, but Carthage and 
the Church of Africa were concerned with the 
holiness of the Church in its chiefs and in its 
members. This way of understanding religion 
was defined by Augustine in a theory, which had 
the advantage over the principle that guided 
Cyprian and the Donatists, that it did not 
disturb the constitution of the Church, since it 
accepted from common tradition both the 
theological dogma and the form of ecclesiastical 
institution. 

By presenting to each believer a scheme of 
moral redemption founded on the profound senti- 
ment of human weakness, and the mysterious 
efficacy of grace, through faith, hope, and love, 
the dogma of grace was found to be absolutely 
fitted to the spirit of the new nations the Church 
had soon to convert, who are now the Christian 
nations, Catholic and Protestant, of Western 
Europe. These nations have taken religion as 
a spiritual medicine, the condition and fruit of 
an inner struggle, the second birth of the indi- 
vidual and his progress towards moral perfection, 
liberty above all the freedom of social order, the 
principle of righteous action and of righteous life, 
and the deification of man, no longer only in the 


Se 


206 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


radiance of God, but by the life of God in himself 
and by the activity of love. 

This dogma, psychological and human, some- 
what modified by the interpretations of a. later 
tradition, is bound up with the teaching of Jesus 
neither more nor less than the theological dogma. 
It proceeds directly from St. Paul. The apostle 
considered salvation not only as a cosmological 
function, but first of all as an interest of humanity 
in general and of the individual in particular ; 
from his meditations on the relations of the Law 
and the Gospel, on Sin and Redemption, was 
derived his theory of salvation, through faith in 
Jesus and the grace of God alone, without the 
works of the Law. Man, since Adam, is inclined 
to sin—in his natural state, a sinner: far from 
serving him, the Law, by multiplying precepts, 
multiplies transgressions ; it is only an instruction, 
a guide; through the Law has no one ever been 
saved. 

Faith is the true remedy for sin; but faith igs 
founded only on Jesus Christ, Who delivers men 
from the Law, from sin, and from death, having 
left this triple burden buried in the sepulchre 
whence He ascended, free and glorious; the 
“heavenly man” made flesh has redeemed all 
sinners, the descendants of the “earthly man :” 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 207 


He has condemned sin in the flesh, He has 
crucified it; unjustly smitten in virtue of the 
Law, He has broken the Law in pieces: dying of 
His own free will, He has destroyed the empire 
of death; thus He remains a principle of justice 
and eternal life for those who believe in Him.? 
St. Augustine disentangled these ideas from their 
connection with the question of the Law, which 
was an essential matter for Paul, but had no 
significance for the Church; drew from them a 
logical system; made precise the conception of 
original sin and that of personal sin, of grace and 
of nature, and interpreted as a theologian the 
institutions and subtle polemic of the apostle. 

As the reformers made much of the Pauline 
and Augustinian theory of justification, and as 
liberal theologians readily find therein their con- 
ception of salvation or of eternal life acquired 
through faith in God the Father, it is seldom 
insisted that this dogma of grace is no more 
expressly taught in the gospel than the Christo- 
logical dogma. But the teaching of the Saviour 
would be searched in vain for a doctrine of sin 
and of justification. The Kingdom of Heaven is 
promised to him that repents, in such a way that 
the gain of eternal life seems subordinated to two 


1 Cf. Rom. v. 


208 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


conditions; one implicit, namely, faith in the 
Divine mercy and in the coming kingdom, and 
one explicit, namely, repentance; otherwise the 
conditions of salvation, which is, as a matter of fact, 
offered only to Jews, are not discussed. It is easy 
to see all that St. Paul adds to the gospel, where 
are to be found only ordinary ideas of sin, pardon, 
and eternal life, without any theory. 

Just as truly as the Christological dogma, the 
dogma of grace is an interpretation of the salva- 
tion of the Messiah and of the theology of the 
heavenly kingdom, and this interpretation also 
was made necessary by the circumstances in which 
the gospel was perpetuated, and by the problems 
presented by the conversion of pagans, problems 
which had to be resolved by drawing inspiration 
much more from the Spirit of Jesus than from 
His formal declarations. 

It is since the Reformation especially, that the 
conception even of the Church has become a 
matter of dogmatic development. Previously the 
Church grew without much speculation on the 
nature of her progress. Protestantism first threw 
doubt on her authority, thus throwing doubt on 
the Church herself. Now, the main point at issue 
between Catholic theologians and those of the 
reformed communions may be stated in these 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 209 


simple terms: Is the gospel of Jesus in principle 
individualist or collectivist ? The question which 
seemed of prime importance to past centuries, 
namely, if the object of faith is to be determined 
by Scripture alone or by tradition with Scripture, 
retires into the background; for, in spite of 
appearances, it is no longer a question of knowing 
if Scripture contains the plenitude of the revela- 
tion or no, but whether it is for the individual 
Christian himself to build up his own faith 
and all his religion with the aid of Scripture, 
or whether Christian faith and religion ought not 
to be and are not rather a perpetual and universal 
work, to which each contributes and from which 
each derives benefit. 

In opposition to Protestantism which Jeads the 
Christian religion logically to absolute indivi- 
dualism, that is, to indefinite subdivision, Catholic 
Christianity has kept a clearer consciousness of 
itself, and has declared itself a Divine institution 
as an external and visible society, with a single 
chief who possesses to the full, powers of teaching, 
of jurisdiction, of sanctification, that is to say, 
all the powers that are in the Church, powers 
which earlier centuries placed in the general 
episcopate under the hegemony of the Pope, 
without specifying whether the Pope alone 

P 


210 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


possessed them wholly. The definitions of the 
Vatican are to some extent sprung from reality ; 
but if the centralizing tendency that led to it 
seems to have reached its limit, theological re- 
flection has not yet spoken its final word on the 
subject. It is possible that the future will make 
observations on the true nature and object of 
ecclesiastical authority, which cannot fail to react 
on the manner and conditions of its exercise. 
Any one who has followed the progress of 
Christian thought from the beginning must per- 
ceive that neither the Christological dogma nor 
the dogma of grace nor that of the Church is to be 
taken for a summit of doctrine, beyond which no 
prospect opens for the believer or can ever open 
except the dazzling distance of infinite mystery ; 
it is not to be expected that these dogmas will 
remain firmer than the rock, inaccessible even to 
accidental change, and yet intelligible for all gene- 
rations, and equally applicable, without any new 
translation or explanation, to all states, and to 
every advance of science, life, and human society. 
The conceptions that the Church presents as re- 
vealed dogmas are not truths fallen from heaven, 
and preserved by religious tradition in the precise 
form in which they first appeared. The historian 
sees in them the interpretation of religious facts, 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 211 


acquired by a laborious effort of theological 
thought. Though the dogmas may be Divine in 
origin and substance, they are human in structure 
and composition. It is inconceivable that their 
future should not correspond to their past. Reason 
never ceases to put questions to faith, and tradi- 
tional formulas are submitted to a constant work 
of interpretation wherein “the letter that killeth” 
is effectively controlled by “ the spirit that giveth 
life.” * 
1 2 Cor. iii. 6, 


CHAPTER III 


It is only by starting from a scholastic conception, 
abstract and unreal, of revelation and of dogma 
that a conclusion is reached condemnatory of all 
the fruit of Christian reflection upon the object of 
Christianity. It is clear that if the unchangeable 
essence of the gospel had been only faith in God 
the Father, all Christian development of doctrine, 
as well as of ecclesiastical organization and ritual, 
would have been a vast aberration. But besides 
the fact that the gospel is not to be summed up 
in such a belief, it would be absurd to suppose 
that the statement of this faith could remain un- 
changeable, or become so if it were judged expe- 
dient for mankind to content themselves with it. 
If the attention of the first believers had not 
been directed towards the Son of God, it would 
have turned to the Father Himself, and become 
occupied with His nature and relations with the 
world, thus leading speculation back to cosmology. 
Interest would have been roused in this goodness, 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 213 


which had its essential significance in relation to 
mankind, its historical manifestations would have 
been tentatively defined, or, at any rate, its secret 
action in each believing soul, a process leading 
thought again to Christology and the economy of 
Divine Grace. Sooner or later attention would 
have been brought to bear on the normal con- 
ditions of evangelization, and the problem of 
ecclesiology would have arisen. Doctrinal Chris- 
tian development was inevitable, therefore, and in 
principle, legitimate ; on the whole, it has served 
the cause of the gospel, which could not exist as a 
pure essence, but being constantly transformed into 
living doctrines has itself lived in these doctrines, 
whose development is therefore justified in fact.? 
It is easy to say that the Catholic Church does 
not even recognize the existence of this develop- 
ment, and condemns the very idea of it. Perhaps 
it would be nearer the truth to say that she has 
never had consciousness of it, and that she has 
no official theory concerning the philosophy of 
her own history. That which is taught by Vincent 
de Lérins, modern theologians (except Cardinal 
Newman) and the Council of the Vatican, touch- 
ing the development of dogma, applies in reality 
to the definitely intellectual and theological phase 
1 Of. E. Caird, art. cit. p. 10. 


2144 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of its development, not to the first budding and 
formation of beliefs, or at least includes in an 
abstract definition, much work for which this 
definition is no adequate expression. It is just 
the idea of development which is now needed, 
not to be created all at once, but established from 
a better knowledge of the past. The acquisition 
of this new dogma will have no different effect to 
that of the old ones. These latter were not con- 
tained in primitive tradition, like a conclusion in 
the premises of a syllogism, but as a germ in a 
seed, a real and living element, which must 
become transformed as it grows, and be determined 
by discussion before its crystallization into a 
solemn formula. They existed as more or less 
conscious facts or beliefs, before they were the 
subject of learned speculations or of official 
judgments. The Christological dogma was, before 
everything, the expression of what Jesus repre- 
sented from the beginning to Christian conscious- 
ness; the dogma of grace was the expression of 
the Divine work accomplished in the souls that 
were regenerated through the gospel; the ecclesio- 
logical dogma was the expression of the per- 
manent position of the Episcopate and the Pope 
in the Church. If ever a dogmatic conclusion is 
formulated on the subject of Christian development 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 215 


it will almost certainly be an expression of the 
law of progress which has governed the history 
of Christianity from the beginning. Till now, 
Catholic theologians have been especially pre- 
occupied with the absolute character that the 
dogma derives from its source, the Divine revela- 
tion, and critics have hardly noticed the relative 
character that its history makes manifest. The 
efforts of a healthy theology should be directed 
to a solution of the difficulty, presented by the 
unquestionable authority faith demands for dogma, 
and the variability, the relativity, the critic cannot 
fail to perceive in the history of dogmas and 
dogmatic formulas. 

We have seen how the whole development of 
Christian doctrine is not outside the faith, but 
within the faith, which dominates it entirely. 
The traditional principle and the religious sense 
have always overcome the need of scientific adapta- 
tion, and have saved the originality of Christianity. 
The ancient dogmas have their root in the preach- 
ing and ministry of Christ, and in the experiences 
of the Church, and their development in the 
history of Christianity and in theological thought : 
nothing else was possible. Further, it is no less 
natural that the creeds and dogmatic definitions 
should be related to the state of general human 


216 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


knowledge in the time and under the circumstances 
when they were constituted. It follows that a 
considerable change in the state of knowledge 
might render necessary a new interpretation of 
old formulas, which, conceived in another intel- 
lectual atmosphere, no longer say what is neces- 
sary, or no longer say it suitably. In such a 
case, a distinction must be drawn between the 
material sense of the formula, the external image 
it presents, related to ideas received from an- 
tiquity, and its proper religious and Christian 
significance, its fundamental idea, which can be 
reconciled with new views of the constitution of 
the world and the nature of things in general. 
The Church still repeats every day in the creed of 
the apostles, “He descended into Hell, He has 
ascended to Heaven.” These propositions have 
for many centuries been taken literally. Genera- 
tions of Christians have followed one another 
believing Hell, the abode of the damned, to be 
beneath their feet, and Heaven, the abode of the 
elect, above their heads. Neither learned theology 
nor even popular preaching maintains this locali- 
zation to-day: and no one any longer will hold 
that he can determine the place of the soul of 
Christ in the interval between His death and His 
resurrection, nor that of His glorified humanity 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 217 


since His ascension. The real dogmatic meaning 
of these sentences remains unaltered, because by 
them is always taught a transitory relation of the 
soul of Christ with the just under the ancient 
law, and the glorification of His risen humanity. 
May we not say, looking at the transformation 
that the apparent sense of the formulas has under- 
gone, that the theology of the future will again 
construct a more spiritual idea of their content ? 
It is quite true that the Church corrects its dog- 
matic formulas by means of distinctions, sometimes 
rather subtle. But, in so acting, she continues in 
the way she has walked from the beginning, she 
adapts the gospel to the constantly changing 
condition of human life and intelligence. 

It is not indispensable to the authority of be- 
lief that it should be rigorously unchangeable in 
its intellectual form and its verbal expression. 
Such immutability is not compatible with the 
nature of human intelligence. Our most certain 
knowledge in the domains of nature and of science 
is always in movement, always relative, always 
perfectible. It is not with the elements of human 
thought that an everlasting edifice can be built. 
Truth alone is unchangeable, but not its image in 
our minds. Faith addresses itself to the un- 
changeable truth, through a formula, necessarily 


218 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


inadequate, capable of improvement, consequently 
of change. When Jesus said, in all solemnity, 
“Verily I say unto you, There be some of them 
that stand here, which shall in no wise taste of 
death, till they see the Son of man coming in His 
kingdom,” ! He put forward a dogmatic proposi- 
tion much less absolute in reality than in appear- 
ance; He demanded faith in the approaching 
kingdom, but the idea of the kingdom and of its 
proximity were two very simple symbols of very 
complex matters, and even those who were the 
first to believe must have attached their minds 
more to the spirit than to the letter of this state- 
ment, to find it always true. The dogmatic 
formulas stand in the same position as the words 
of the Saviour, and it is no demonstration that 
they are objectless, to discover at any given 
moment that the reality has passed them by. 

The singularly defective logic which seems to 
preside over the formation and growth of dogmas, 
is in no way difficult to understand, and may 
even be called normal, by the historian who con- 
siders the proofs of faith as expressions of its 
vitality rather than the real reasons of its origin. 

Nothing is more precarious, from the point of 
view of the ordinary rules of human reasoning 

1 Matt. xvi. 28. 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 219 


and textual criticism, than certain arguments by 
which the gospel is founded on the Old Testa- 
ment, and Catholic Christianity on the whole 
Bible. The work of traditional exegesis, from 
whence dogma may be said to proceed by a slow 
and continuvus elaboration, seems in permanent 
contradiction with the principles of a purely 
rational and historical interpretation. It is always 
taken for granted that the old Biblical texts and 
the witness of tradition must contain the truth of 
the present time, and the truth is found there 
because it is put there. Catholic theologians had 
a right appreciation of this state of affairs when 
they laid down the rule that the infallibility of 
the Church applies to dogmatic definitions, not to 
the preambles that stated the reasons of them, 
even when the preambles were expressed in the 
_ official declarations of Councils and Popes. A 
distinction of this kind would be useful for the 
New Testament, wherein the resurrection of the 
dead is proved by the text, “I am the God of 
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob,” + the independence of the Christian from 
the Mosaic law by the history of Hagar and 
Sarah,? and quotations from the ancient Scripture 
applied generally in a sense that did not originally 
1 Mark xii, 26. 2 Gal. iv. 21-31. 


220 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


belong to them. As for tradition, it suffices to 
recall how the Fathers and theologians prove the 
Trinity of Divine Persons by the words of Genesis, 
“Let us make man in our image, after our like- 
ness,”1 and by the three angels that visited 
Abraham ;? how the two swords that Peter is 
said to have carried at Gethsemane ® demonstrated, 
according to Boniface VIII. and the medieval 
doctors, the double power, spiritual and temporal, 
of the Popes. It is well known, also, how texts, 
in themselves perfectly clear, like the lamenta- 
tions of Job and the psalmists over the annihila- 
tion of man by death, the assertions of the Saviour 
and the apostles upon the approaching end of the 
world, the saying of Christ as reported by John, 
“The Father is greater than I,”* are not held to 
mean that which they obviously signify. 

May it not be said that, in the order of things 
moral and religious, human logic has no care for 
itself, that the effort towards improvement runs 
ahead of the reasoning that justifies it, and that 
it bears within itself a truth superior to all the 
arguments that seek to establish it? Thus the 
best apology for all that lives lies in the life 
iiself. All the scaffolding of theological and 


1 Gen. i. 26. 2 Gen. xviii. 2. 
3 Luke xxii. 38; John xviii. 10, 4 John xiv. 28. 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 221 


apologetic argument is only an attempt, and a 
necessary one, to figure the relation of the past to 
the present as well as the continuity of religion 
and religious progress from the beginning. The 
artifices of interpretation serve ceaselessly to 
enlarge and spiritualize the meaning of the sym- 
bols, to promote the development and intelligence 
of religion by the ever renewed perception of 
analogies, higher and more worthy of their mys- 
terious object. External imperfections, which are 
above all, imperfections relative to us to the critical 
knowledge of the sources of history and to the 
modern education of intelligence, do not render this 
great work vain nor prejudice the importance of its 
results. If the gospel had been a philosophical 
thesis, the thesis would have been very badly con- 
structed and developed, but as the gospel was a 
_ living religion, the theological work of Christian 
centuries testifies that this religion has really 
lived, as an infinitely powerful movement, of 
which those who supported it and whom it sup- 
ported had only a partial consciousness, the 
whole of whose depth, those who to-day attempt 
to analyze it are incapable of sounding. How 
vain it is to proclaim the end of dogma because 
the doctrinal flower of this great life appears 
withered, and to imagine that the fruitfulness of 


222 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Christian thought is definitely exhausted, and 
that the old tree can never again renew its adorn- 
ment for a new epoch, a new springtime! 

From the moment the gospel is believed, it is 
_ impossible not to think of the belief, not to work 
at the thought, and so produce a theology of faith. 
It is equally impossible to keep the faith without 
transmitting it, for it demands to be communi- 
cated, being universal hope and charity; and 
it cannot be communicated without a certain 
teaching, a dogma regularly put forward for belief. 
There is a mastership of the faith. Reasoning in 
the abstract, it is possible to say that faith springs 
up in the soul at the contact of the gospel as 
expressed in its text. But in fact, faith is born of 
Christian instruction, and the gospel is explained 
to those who are taught to believe. The distinction 
of masters and pupils is therefore inevitable. It is 
impossible that no science of religion should exist, 
or that it should be indifferent to the preservation 
of faith in cultivated society. Equally is it im- 
possible that this science should be accessible to 
all, that all should be doctors of religion. From 
the beginning all the faithful could not be apostles, 
Under the conditions which are prescribed for the 
gospel in this world, masters are needed to propa- 
gate it, and doctrines to express it. A durable 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 223 


society, a Church, can alone maintain equilibrium 
between tradition, which preserves the heritage 
of acquired truth, and the incessant toil of human 
reason to adapt ancient truth to the new needs 
of thought and knowledge. It is inconceivable 
that each individual should recommence the 
interrogation of the past on his own account, and 
reconstruct, for his own use, an entire religion. 
Here, as elsewhere, each is aided by all, and all 
by each one. 

It is no longer a matter for astonishment that 
the Church presents herself as an infallible mis- 
tress to those believers who venture forth with- 
out her. Her attitude is as easy to understand as 
that of the Protestant theologians who, seeing the 
powerlessness of the individual to formulate a 
creed for others besides himself, and knowing no 
other religious principle than individualism, take 
refuge in one solitary idea, which they wish to 
believe is alone evangelical and accessible of 
itself to all souls. But their hypothesis has the 
inconvenience of being unfounded and imprac- 
ticable, whilst the Catholic hypothesis is a real 
institution that continues the real gospel. It 
was not without reason that Luther retained a 
dogma, and that organized Protestantism tends to 
orthodoxy in spite of itself, 


224 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Is this the same thing as to say that Christian 
dogma thus becomes a ready-made belief, before 
which it is wise to bow, without too close investi- 
gation, lest contradiction be called for? Even as 
the constant flexibility of ecclesiastical teaching 
brings it about that no conflict of dogma with 
knowledge can be considered as irreducible, so 
the very character of this teaching causes the 
authority of the Church and its formulas to be not 
incompatible with individuality of faith, and 
does not necessarily bring with it that perpetual 
subserviency which seems, to Protestant theo- 
logians, the normal condition of the Catholic 
believer. The Church does not exact belief in its 
formulas as the adequate expression of absolute 
truth, but presents them as the least imperfect 
expression that is morally possible ; she demands 
that men respect them for their quality, seek the 
faith in them, and use them to transmit it. The 
ecclesiastical formula is the auxiliary of faith, the 
guiding line of religious thought: it cannot be 
the integral object of that thought, seeing that 
object is God Himself, Christ and His work ; each 
man lays hold of the object as he can, with the 
aid of the formula. As all souls and all intelli- 
gences differ one from the other, the gradations of 
belief are also of infinite variety, under the sole 


THE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 225 


direction of the Church, and in the unity of her 
creed. The incessant evolution of doctrine is 
made by the work of individuals, as their activity 
reacts on the general activity, and these individuals 
are they who think for the Church while thinking 
with her. 

This is not the place to examine whether the 
tendency of modern Catholicism has not been too 
tutelary, or if the movement of religious and even 
scientific thought has not been more or less im- 
peded by it. The object of this chapter is simply 
to show that the Catholic conception of dogma 
and of faith excludes neither the personal charac- 
ter of belief nor the vitality of dogma, 


SECTION VI 
THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 


INTRODUCTION 


\ History knows no instance of a religion without 
a ritual, and consequently the existence of a 
Christian ritual should surprise no one. But it 
is easy to conceive that, if the essence of Chris- 
tianity is such as Herr Harnack has defined it, so 
pure a Christianity must exclude all external 
forms of worship. A singular religion, designed, 
one would think, for angelic hosts, where every 
individual constitutes a separate species, rather 
than for men destined to live together on the 
earth ! 


CHAPTER I 


As the rupture with Judaism obliged the primi- 
tive community to take the form of a distinct 
society, so also it led to the establishment of 
forms of worship. “No religious movement can 
exist without a body.”! We are yet told that 
Christian ritual was the result of the struggle 
of the Church against gnosticism. The Church 
assumed forms similar to those it reproved in its 
adversaries.” By the end of the second century 
she is an organ of worship, the separation of the 
priests from the laity is an accomplished fact, and 
intermediaries are admitted between God and man. 
Just as Greek philosophy influenced Christian 
faith from the year 130 onwards, so a new era of 
Hellenization began towards the years 220 to 
230: “then Greek mysteries and Greek civiliza- 
tion, in all the fulness of their development, acted 
upon the Church, but not Greek mythology nor 
Polytheism. In the century following, pure 


1 Page 113. 2 Page 130. 


228 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Hellenism, with all its creations and acquisitions, 
is established in the Catholic Church. Here also 
there were reservations, hut they often consisted 
only in a change of label, the thing being taken 
just as it was, and in the worship of the saints a 
Christianity. of a lower order was born.” ? 

Judged by its external appearance, the Greek 
Church (and in matters of ritual the same may be 
said of the Roman Church) has collected, we are 
told, the impressions, superstitions, knowledge, 
and practices of unknown ages; with its solemn 
rites, its relics, its images, its priests, its monks, 
and its mysteries, it is connected with the Hellenic 
worship of the Neo-Platonist epoch, and not with 
the Church of the first centuries. “It appears 
not as a Christian creation with a Greek thread, 
but as a Greek creation with a Christian thread. 
The Christians of the first century would have 
fought it as they fought the worship of the Magna 
Mater or of Zeus Soter.... It is the natural 
product of the alloy made with Hellenism, split 
up by oriental influence and Christian preaching.” ? 
The worship in spirit and in truth is become a 
worship of signs, formulas, and idols, “ Jesus 
Christ gave Himself to be crucified in order to 
destroy religion of this kind.’® The Greek 

1 Page 126. 2 Pages 137, 138. 3 Page 148. 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 229 


mystery is associated in the Latin Church with 
the idea of contract, of salvation depending on 
definite conditions ; the Sacraments are means of 
union with God, conceived as obligatory acts; the 
discipline of penitence resembles a code of civil 
procedure: even as the dispenser of salvation, the 
Roman Church is a juridical institution as “ poly- 
theistic,” in any case, as the Greek Church.? 

Herr Harnack holds, with Luther, that grace is 
not given in fragments; that the only grace is 
God Himself; that all the doctrine of sacraments 
is an “outrage on the majesty of God and a 
servitude of souls.’ But he holds that the 
reformer was wrong to be led away into distress- 
ing discussions on the means of grace, on the 
communion, and the question of infant baptism, 
whereby he ran the risk of exchanging his lofty 
conception of Divine grace for the Catholic idea ; 
in this respect he has left his Church a fatal 
heritage.” 

1 Pages 155, 156. 2 Pages 175, 183, 184. 


CHAPTER II 


Ir may be said that Jesus, in the course of His 
ministry, neither prescribed nor practised any 
external rite of worship which would have charac- 
terized the gospel as religion. Jesus no more 
decided the form of Christian worship beforehand 
than He laid down the constitution and dogmas 
of the Church. The reason is that, in the gospel, 
Christianity is not yet a religion with a separate 
existence. It has taken up no independent posi- 
tion in regard to legal Judaism; the Mosaic rites, 
practised by the Saviour and His disciples, take 
the place of any other form, and satisfy the need 
that all religion feels to express itself in acts of 
worship. The gospel, as such, was only a religious 
movement within the bosom of Judaism, an 
attempt to realize perfectly its principles and 
hopes. It would therefore be inconceivable that 
Jesus should have formulated a ritual before His 
final hour. He could only have begun to think 
of it at that supreme moment when the imme- 
diate accomplishment of the reign of the Messiah 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 231 


appeared impossible in Israel, and another accom- 
plishment, mysterious in its prospect, to be 
obtained by the death of the Messiah, remained 
the last chance for the kingdom of God on the 
earth. The supper of the Eucharist, then, stands 
out as the symbol of the kingdom, that the sacri- 
fice of Jesus is to bring; and more distinctly still, 
this communion, on the day of its first celebration, 
signifies the abrogation of the ancient worship and 
the approaching advent of the kingdom, rather 
than the institution of a new ritual, as the thought 
of Jesus was bent, as always, on the idea of 
realizing the kingdom of Heaven rather than the 
direct idea of founding a new religion and a 
Church. 

However, it was the Church that came to the 
world, and by force of circumstances took shape 
-more and more outside the pale of Judaism. In 
this way Christianity became a religion, distinct, 
independent, and complete ; asa religion it needed 
a ritual, and obtained it, of such a nature as its 
origin permitted or compelled. At first the 
worship was imitated from that of the Jews, so 
far as concerned the external forms of prayer, and 
also certain important rites, such as baptism, 
anointing with oil, and laying on of hands. The 
central act of worship, the celebration of the 


232 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Eucharist, was really the creation of Jesus. It 
became, in the Church of the Gentiles, the great 
mystery, and without it Christianity would not 
have been received as a perfect religion. 

A ritual was already organized in the apostolic 
communities, and the promptitude with which 
it was established shows clearly how it responded 
to an intimate inevitable necessity of the new 
body. It would have been an absolute impos- 
sibility to gain proselytes to a religion with no 
external forms and sanctifying acts ; Christianity 
had to find a ritual, or cease to exist. For this 
reason, it was from the first the most living 
worship that can be imagined. Attempt merely 
to conceive those baptisms, with laying on of 
hands, and sensible manifestations of the Divine 
Spirit ; that breaking of bread, and the meal where 
the very presence of the Master, Who had just 
left the earth, was felt; the songs, celebrating the 
acts of grace, that burst forth from the heart, the 
signs, sometimes strange ones, of the overflowing 
enthusiasm. Is it not true that, just as there 
is there no cold and abstract belief, so there 
is no purely symbolic rite, the material ex- 
pression of such a belief? Everything is living, 
the faith and the rite, the baptism and the break- 
ing of bread; the baptism is the Holy Ghost the 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 233 


Eucharist is the Christ. There is no speculation 
about the token, no hint of physical efficacy of 
the sacrament in baptism, nor of transubstantiation 
in the Eucharist; but what is said and believed 
goes almost beyond these theological assertions. 
The worship of that primitive age might be defined 
as a kind of spiritual realism, knowing no pure 
symbols, and essentially sacramental by virtue of 
the place that rites hold in it as the vehicle of 
the Spirit, and the means of Divine life. St. Paul 
and the author of the Fourth Gospel are witnesses 
to it. 

The same necessity that presided at the birth 
of Christian ritual caused its increase. The ritual 
of the apostolic Church could respond to the 
essential needs of Christian society in all times ; 
in its special form it corresponded to the special 
conditions of nascent Christianity. As the 
Church did not attain, at one stroke, the normal 
development she still continues to pursue, her 
ritual has developed, and is developing, under 
the permanent influence that gave it birth. 

Exactly the same experience had overtaken 
Israelitish worship. It is as an effect of theo- 
logical perspective, from the point of view of 
faith, that this worship is represented in the 
Sacred Books as a homogeneous whole, proceeding 


234 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


from a Divine revelation, regulating the least 
details of liturgy and sacerdotal costume. In 
reality, Moses, as far as the historian can gather, 
only did relatively for the Israelitish ritual what 
the apostolic Church did for the Christian; he 
authorized, or instituted, the fundamental practice, 
the worship of the ark, where Jehovah, the God 
of Israel, was present without an image, All the 
rest of the forms of worship may have been 
borrowed, before Moses, or after him, from other 
religions, with certain changes affecting the mean- 
ing, rather than the form, of the rites. While 
running the risk of corruption through the ad- 
mixture of foreign elements, the Mosaic ritual 
realized successively the transformations that its 
preservation and progress demanded. The Jews 
of the captivity were descendants of the Hebrew 
companions of Moses, of Joshua, of David, and of 
the inhabitants of Canaan, who had little by little 
become assimilated to the children of Israel. 
When human groups are thus mingled, not only 
physical and racial, but also intellectual and moral 
qualities, customs and traditions are blended 
together. More than one Canaanitish rite has 
been canonized in Deuteronomy or Leviticus. 
It would have been as difficult to discern the 
features derived from Canaan in the Jewish 


ITHE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 235 


type of the fifth century B.c., as to distinguish 
the non-Israelitish contribution to the Pentateuch. 
The worship, as a whole, however diverse the 
services of its elements, was one by the spirit 
that penetrated it, the spirit of Moses and the 
Prophets, eliminating or neutralizing the spirit of 
pagan tradition. 

All that happened in the history of Israelite 
religion, happened also in that of Christianity, 
but under different, that is to say, more regular, 
and less perilous, conditions. Suppose that the 
pagan origin of a certain number of Christian 
rites can be demonstrated, these rites ceased to 
be pagan, when accepted and interpreted by the 
Church. Suppose that the great development of 
the worship of saints, of relics, of the Virgin, is 
due, in some degree, to a pagan influence, it is 
not to be condemned on the sole fact of its origin. 
if apostolic preaching had converted only Jews, 
there would not, properly speaking, have been any 
Christian ritual, any more than there would have 
been a Christian Church or Christian dogmas. 
But Christianity, by remaining Jewish, could not 
have become a universal religion, it would not 
have become Christianity; and to become universal 
it was not enough that it should lay aside its 
Jewish form. It cannot be maintained that it 


236 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


had no need to assume a Greek, a Roman, or a 
German form, but should have conquered the 
world by might of its principles alone. Principles 
are the soul of religion, but principles, without 
religious institutions and doctrines, are, in sober 
truth, a soul without a body, something which 
has neither reality nor consistence in the realm 
of present life. Now, the institutions, the ex- 
ternal and traditional forms, which are indis- 
pensable to the existence or to the preservation 
of a religion, are necessarily adapted, in one way 
or another, to the surroundings wherein they 
are established ; they even result, to some extent, 
from their surroundings, as the adaptation is made 
by virtue of a reciprocal action, since if religion 
marks with its influence the men who accept it, 
the men in their turn, as nations or as individuals, 
stamp their impression on the religion they 
receive. 

The number and variety, even to some extent 
the quality of the symbols, are things indifferent 
or unimportant in themselves; custom gives them 
their credit, and their value depends upon the 
significance attached to them. Of what value in 
itself is the rite of circumcision? Less than 
nothing, since in the abstract it may be con- 
sidered absurd and ridiculous. Nevertheless, in 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 237 


the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, when it was a 
symbol of fidelity to God, it became something 
worthy, noble, and holy. It would be puerile to 
blame the Jews for practising the rite, or the 
prophets for not condemning it. At no epoch of 
history before the great upheaval brought about 
by Christianity, and the conversion of the pagans 
to Jesus outside the Law, could the idea of dis- 
pensing with it have occurred to any pious Jew, and 
he would have been mad to wish to suppress it as a 
practice. It was the consideration of the Gentiles 
that forced the apostolic Church not to exact it. 
But the Gentiles, who thus succeeded in obtain- 
ing exemption from a Jewish custom, might well 
obtain, on the other hand, power to retain their 
own customs, on condition of imparting to them a 
Christian significance. They could in no way 
- bring themselves to Judaism; and they could 
only settle down as Christians by imparting to 
Christianity something of themselves, forms of 
thought and forms of worship. The Church has 
adopted no rite that resembles circumcision ; she 
has proscribed all the bloody and magical rites 
of ancient religions, and thereby has guaranteed, 
as far as is necessary or possible, the spiritual 
character of the Christian religion. But just as 
any way of representing God, the economy of 


238 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


salvation, redemption, the action of the glorified 
Christ, cannot fail to have some analogy or historic 
relation to philosophical or religious conceptions 
of Greco-Roman antiquity, so also the Catholic 
worship cannot fail to retain something from 
the ancient religions it has supplanted. It could 
not do otherwise, once it took their place: 
Christianity could not become the religion of 
Greeks, Romans, or Germans, unless it became 
one with them, unless it received many things 
from them, unless they themselves, as it were, 
entered into it, and made it in truth their own 
religion. In matters of worship, the religious 
feeling of the masses has always preceded the 
doctrinal definitions of the Church as to the 
object of their worship. The fact is full of signi- 
ficance ; it attests the law which demands a form 
of worship suitable to all the conditions of exist- 
ence and to the character of the people that 
believe. The real communion with Christ in the 
Eucharist was exacted by the Christian conscience 
as imperiously as the Divinity of Jesus; never- 
theless the Divinity of Christ is not a dogma 
conceived in the spirit of Jewish theology, neither 
is the Eucharist a Jewish rite; dogma and rite 
are specifically Christian, and proceed from the 
apostolic tradition, without altering the fact that 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 239 


the influence of Greek wisdom can be perceived 
in the traditional way of understanding the first, 
and in the manner of understanding the second, 
an element doubtless at bottom common to several 
religions, if not to all, but which recalls rather the 
pagan mysteries than the unadorned conception of 
sacrifice of post-exilian Judaism. If it were not 
to become Greek, Roman, or German in its form 
of worship, Christianity must have avoided the 
Greeks, Romans and Germans; the adaptation 
of Christianity was inevitable. The important 
question is whether the adaptation has served the 
spread and preservation of the gospel, or whether 
the gospel itself has been lost in it. Have the 
institution of the ecclesiastical ministry, the sac- 
rament, the worship of Christ and the Virgin, of 
saints and angels, compromised the gospel, and 
are they foreign to its spirit ? 

Since Christianity has become a religion, and, 
becoming a religion, has become a form of worship, 
it has needed ministers. No assemblies of many 
persons could take place regularly and frequently 
without chiefs, presidents, superintendents, and 
minor officers to ensure order. The college of 
elders, more or less imitated from the synagogues, 
was, in each community, what the apostolic 
college had been at first in the community of 


20 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHORCH. 


Jerusalem. The presidency was naturally an 
attribute of the elders, and it was also natural 
that one of them should occupy the leading place 
in the celebration of the Communion. The hypo- 
thesis of a rotation of officials, a presidency 
exercised by each elder in turn, set forth by some 
critics, is not authorized by any evidence, and is 
unlikely. Besides the leaders, the elders, pres- 
byters (priests) or bishops, there were inferior 
ministers, the deacons. When the extraordinary 
ministry of the apostles and the missionary 
preachers came to an end in due course, with the 
enthusiasm that stimulated the prophets, towards 
the close of the first century, the duties of instruc- 
tion and direction of the community passed 
entirely to the resident chiefs, or rather adminis- 
trators, who doubtless exercised these functions in 
part from the beginning. They alone decided the 
question of the admission of neophytes, and, 
except in exceptional cases, alone conferred 
baptism ; in proportion as a discipline of penance 
required organization for baptized Christians, they 
determined its conditions. The hierarchy of 
order, in three degrees, became constituted when 
the first of the elders was really separated from 
the presbyteral group, and reserved the title of 
bishop for himself. 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 241 


The needs of the liturgical service determined 
later on the creation of minor officers, who are 
to be regarded as a division of the diaconate: 
the Church of the East had subdeacons and 
leaders, with exorcists, fulfilling their individual 
ministry and not constituting an order of the 
clergy; the Church of the West had its sub- 
deacons, acolytes, readers, exorcists, who had all 
regular duties in the preliminary ceremonies of 
baptism, and door-keepers. In any case, the 
orders below the subdiaconate, later even the 
subdiaconate, and finally the diaconate itself, 
ended by becoming in the Latin Church no 
more than preparatory steps to the priesthood, 
which remains the only really active ministry 
below the episcopate. The liturgical functions 
of the other orders have ceased, in fact, to be 
specialized; the highest are exercised on occasion 
by priests and the lower by laics, and thus a 
special example is constituted of what may be 
called suppressed development, like a stunted 
branch on a tree that grows vigorously in another 
direction, or like the rudiment of an organ no 
longer existing actually in the living body. 

The organization of this service has been related 
to the development of the system of sacraments 
and must not be judged independently of it. The 

R 


242 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Church herself counts ordination, that is, the 
ceremony by which her ministers are invested 
with their powers, among the sacraments. As 
to their origin, it stands with the sacraments as 
with the Church and the dogmas, they proceed 
from Jesus and the gospel as living realities and 
not as expressly defined institutions. It is only 
from the twelfth century onwards that Western 
tradition has determined their number. The 
primitive Church knew but two principal: baptism, 
with which confirmation was associated, and the 
Eucharist ; the number of secondary sacraments 
was indefinite. Such indefiniteness would be 
inexplicable if Christ, in the course of His mortal 
life, had drawn the attention of His disciples to 
seven separate rites, destined to be the basis of 
Christian worship for all time. The sacraments 
are born of a thought, an intention, of Jesus, 
interpreted by the apostles and their successors, 
in the light and under the pressure of facts and 
circumstances. 

It may be by a sort of anticipation that the 
Fourth Gospel shows Christian baptism practised 
during the Saviour’s ministry. It is a fact that 
Christ gave no formal precept on the subject before 
His death. Baptism was a Jewish rite, raised to 
special honour by John the Baptist, and Jesus 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 243 


Himself received it at the hands of John. Just 
as the Saviour’s baptism served as the introduction 
to the gospel, so baptism introduced each believer 
into the evangelical society, substituted for the 
kingdom of Heaven. It was not purely a symbol 
of remission of sins and spiritual regeneration, 
but the effective sign of the reception of the 
Spirit by the faithful, and of their incorporation 
with the Church. The idea and the practice of 
baptism have undergone no important change in 
Catholic tradition. The custom of baptizing 
infants constitutes a disciplinary development, 
which makes no change in the significance of 
the Sacrament, though perhaps it has a little 
diminished it, and has contributed to redoubling 
the significance of penance.! Baptism, followed 
by confirmation and communion, was the rite of 
Christian initiation and of remission of sins; but 
the Eucharist remained the real sacrament of the 
initiated. The idea of the Christian as a recon- 
ciled sinner was not held at first, and the Church 
was slow in becoming accustomed to it. It was 
supposed that ordinary failings were atoned for by 
a kind of continuous effect of baptism, by prayer, 
by communion, and by all good works, especially 
by works of charity. Very grave and scandalous 

1 Cf. Newman, “ Essay on Development ” (1846), p. 154. 


244 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


sins set the sinners outside the Church and the 
regular economy of salvation. Soon, however, 
such sinners were admitted to a perpetual penance, 
accepted gladly, in the interest of their salvation, 
although as yet the Church did not take it on 
herself to pardon, and left the repentant sinner 
to the Divine mercy. But the multiplication of 
sins was sure to produce the indulgence, and an 
institution of pardon. It was at first in regard to 
sins of the flesh that discipline was slackened. 
Calixtus, the Bishop of Rome, decided that these 
sins could be remitted after a penitence more or 
less prolonged. Concessions were soon made in 
cases of apostasy, notably after the persecu- 
tion of Decius. The principle of temporary and 
absolving penance, with reconciliation by the 
authority of the Church, either at the moment 
of death, or after a definite lapse of time, was 
established: it exists as a second baptism, a 
plank of salvation after shipwreck. But if 
penance thus became a Christian institution, 
and the reconciliation of sinners a function of 
the Church, as yet there was no thought of em- 
ploying the name of sacrament to designate 
such a duty: it was a shameful sacrament. The 
sinner must submit to it, if he desired recon- 
ciliation, but whoever endured public penance, 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 245 


and there was no other form, was disqualified 
as a Christian; clerks were only admitted to it 
by losing their status, and a reconciled penitent 
could be no member of the clergy. The discredit 
attaching to penance gradually disappeared, 
through the multiplication of cases wherein it 
was judged necessary, through the fact that many 
Christians submitted, in a spirit of mortification 
of the body, to a life very analogous to that 
enjoined as penance, and finally through the 
fact that this rule of public penance was trans- 
formed and gave way to that of private penance. 
The fourth Council of the Lateran (1215) definitely 
consecrates and regulates private penance, and all 
mortal sins must be submitted to the proper 
pastor or priest, once a year, before the Easter 
Communion, which is declared obligatory. The 
priest will enjoin a penance proportioned to 
the faults, and will give absolution. From the 
twelfth century penance follows absolution instead 
of preceding it, a fact which tends to augment 
the character of grace in absolution, and even gives 
it the form of a sacramental grace. The develop- 
ment of discipline has had an effect upon the 
institution as a whole, upon the subject and object 
of penance, the declaration of sins, the character, 
duration and place of satisfactory penance, and 


246 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


even upon the formula of absolution, which was 
at first deprecatory, the bishop or priest asking 
of God the pardon of him whom they sought to 
reconcile, but has become imperative, the minister 
of the Church saying, “I absolve thee,’ because 
he gives a sentence and confers a sacrament. 

We know that development did not stop there, 
and that penance, instituted to deal with mortal 
sins committed after baptism, became, in fact, 
especially after the Council of Trent and in the 
Church of the latter centuries, a common practice 
of Christian perfection, whose use is only neglected 
by the real sinners. The sacrament of penance 
has assumed the character of a moral discipline, 
whose efficacy can only be equitably judged by 
those who make use of it, and they find it an aid 
and not an obstacle to piety. 

The development of the Eucharist has been 
mainly theological and liturgical. At bottom 
the belief and the rite have no more changed than 
have the belief in baptism and its rite. The 
Supper of the early Christians was a memorial of 
the Passion and an anticipation of the festival of 
the Messiah, whereat Jesus was present. There 
is no very marked difference between the Pauline 
conception of the Eucharist and the idea that 
simple Christians have of it to-day, those who 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 247 


are strangers to the speculations of theology, who 
believe that they enter into real communion with 
God in Christ by taking the consecrated bread. 
The entire Christian worship developed round the 
supper of the Eucharist. The simple blessing and 
distribution of bread and wine, detached from the 
Love feast, surrounded by readings and prayers 
and hymns, became the offering of the Mass. 
Since the death of Jesus was conceived as a 
sacrifice, the act commemorating this death 
naturally partook of the same character. The 
liturgical form helped to impart the same thing, 
by the real offering of the bread and wine, and the 
participation of all the faithful in the sanctified 
food, as in the sacrifices of the ancients. Thence 
came the idea of a commemorative sacrifice, which 
simply perpetuated that of the Cross, took nothing 
from its significance or its merit, and satisfied all the 
-aims included in the common prayer of the Church, 
interests spiritual and temporal, the salvation of 
the living and the dead. The Christian senti- 
ment which has preserved, in a sense, the Divinity 
of Jesus against certain speculations of learned 
metaphysics, has protected the Eucharist against 
speculations of abstract symbolism, and as the 
evolution of penance ended by bringing about the 
confession of the devout, the evolution of the rite 


248 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


of the Eucharist ended in private masses for the 
priests, and communions of piety for the faithful. 

Jesus seems to have commanded or permitted 
His disciples to anoint the sick with oil, and pray 
over them with a view to relieve or even to cure 
them. Possibly, He even set them the example 
of this procedure:! that is, in the gospel, the 
whole sacrament of extreme unction. The history 
of this custom in the first Christian centuries is 
obscure enough. The use of applications of oil 
has probably never ceased since primitive times, 
but the use of sacred oil was very variable. The 
anointing of the sick in danger of death, by the 
priest, was distinguished by its special significance 
and more solemn character. From a historical 
point of view, it was this use of the oil that gave 
it a place among the sacraments when the cata- 
logue was drawn up, limited to the number seven. 

Christ recognized monogamy as a Divine insti- 
tution, and declared it indissoluble: that in the 
gospel is the whole sacrament of marriage. 
Among Christians marriage was very soon the 
object of a special benediction ; nevertheless, this 
prayer of the Church was never regarded as an 
indispensable consecration of the conjugal bond. 
Marriage entered the list of sacraments by reason 

* Ct. Mark vi. 13. 


ZFHE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 249 


of those words in the Epistle to the Ephesians, 
wherein it is presented as the symbol of the union 
between Christ and the Church, and because of 
the use of the word “sacramentum” in the Latin 
Vulgate, although the word in this place has the 
meaning of allegorical mystery, and does not stamp 
marriage in itself as a sacred rite. 

The sacramental system is thus found to include 
and consecrate the hierarchical organization of the 
Church and the principal moments of Christian 
life. Without any previously constructed scheme, 
an institution became realized which surrounds 
human existence with a Divine atmosphere, and 
is, without doubt, by the intimate harmony of all 
its parts and the intensity of its influence, the 
most remarkable creation that has ever proceeded 
spontaneously from a living religion. The period 
at which the Church fixed the number of the 
sacraments, is only a special point in the develop- 
ment, and marks neither the beginning nor the 
end. The starting-point of the system is, as has 
been indicated, the baptism of Jesus and the 
Last Supper. The end is still to come, as sacra- 
mental development, continuing to follow the 
same general lines, can only end with the Church 
herself. 

1 Ephesians v. 32. 


230 ZYHE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


The importance, therefore, of the work of 
scholastic theologians must not be exaggerated, 
though they fixed the number of sacraments 
before the Council of Trent, and united in the 
same rubric actions as different as baptism and 
matrimonial contract, absolution of sins and 
extreme unction, finding in each, according to the 
Aristotelian formula, a substance and a form. 
All these things existed, more living in them- 
selves than in the studied description made of 
them, and have not ceased to surpass the descrip- 
tion, which bears the same relation to them as 
an incomplete anatomical statement to a real or- 
ganism. Regarded historically, the development 
shows a persevering effort on the part of Chris- 
tianity to penetrate with its spirit the whole 
existence of man. Is not this effort the very 
essence of a perfect religion, and is it astonishing 
that a religion that has taken to itself absolutely, 
not only its founder, but the first generations of 
its adherents, demanding the sacrifice of their 
life, should have left outside its sphere of action 
no part of man nor of human life ? 

This religion considers man wholly as its 
property. This power of possession is signified in 
a way by all the sacraments, as was necessary, 
Christianity has not escaped the need of symbol, 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 251 


the normal form of worship, as well as of religious 
knowledge. It announces its right, the right of 
God revealed in Jesus Christ, at the same time it 
acts on man by sensible signs, rites, and formulas, 
appropriate to the particular ends it has in view. 
The signs that are employed have not been chosen 
hap-hazard, but have been suggested or imposed 
by past tradition, by customs of life or by circum- 
stances. Christianity has found in them an 
indispensable refuge made to its needs, since the 
evolution of rites has been conditioned by the con- 
stant evolution of religion and piety. Christianity 
needed sacramental signs, and needed sufficient 
of them; they have been such as the conditions 
of the Christian institution indicated; they were 
sure to be modified, at least accidentally, and 
they have developed under the influence of the 
_ external and internal conditions in which Chris- 
tianity has lived. 

There is little need to show how the worship 
of Jesus was born in, or rather with, Christianity. 
In their daily intercourse with their Master, the 
disciples had no other worship for Him than a 
religious reverence. Even after the confession 
of Peter, there was no alteration of the simplicity 
that governed the relations between Christ and 
the apostles, The glory of the Messiah was still 


202 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


to come, and no homage would be rendered till 
the glory was made mani'est. But the respective 
situations of the Saviour and His followers were 
entirely changed as a result of the Passion and the 
Resurrection. Jesus had then entered, for His 
part, into the splendour of His reign; He was 
living and immortal, seated at the right hand of 
the Father, participating in His power: He was 
no longer only the Master who taught with 
authority the revelation of God, He was the Lord 
whom God had set as the governor over His 
Kingdom. “ Ye men of Israel, hear these words ; 
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God unto 
you by mighty works and wonders and signs 
which God did by Him in the midst of you, even 
as ye yourselves know. . . . God hath made Him 
both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom ye 
erucified.”! “All authority hath been given unto 
me in heaven and on earth. Go ye therefore, and 
make disciples of all the nations. ... Iam with 
you alway, even unto the end of the world.’ ? 
It was thus that Christian consciousness repre- 
sented the founder of Christianity, following all 
that Jesus had Himself proclaimed of His coming 
glory. It was therefore very natural that men 
should pray to God through Jesus, with Jesus, 
? Acts ii, 22-36. 2 Matt. xxviii. 18-20, 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 253 


in Jesus, and soon come to pray to Jesus Himself, 
if indeed they did not do so from the beginning, 
since He was always with His own, ready to hear 
and with power to grant their prayers. 

It is impossible even to conceive how Chris- 
tianity could have failed to be the worship of 
Christ, and it is a probable supposition that this 
worship preceded in some way, sustained, and in- 
spired the work of Christian thought on the person 
of the Redeemer. The intercourse of the Christian 
was in heaven with his Lord ; if he distinguished 
God from Christ, none the less he saw God in 
Christ, so close and indissoluble was the union 
of the two; praying to Christ he prayed to God, 
although the solemn prayers of the community 
were addressed to God through Christ. Jesus was, 
as it were, the countenance of God turned towards 
humanity. Christian piety continued to place 
the Saviour at an ever higher degree of glory, 
seeking God in Him and finding Him, adoring 
Him in heaven, and endeavouring to follow His 
example on earth, drawing strength from His 
double character—the Divine and the human. 
Therein has always lain the life of Christianity, 
and the principle of its moral fruitfulness. Those 
are bold indeed who believe this conduct to be 
an alteration of ils essence. It is unnecessary to 


as4 THE GOSPEL AND THE, CHURCH 


add that the same piety under different forms 
continues to exist in the numberless devotions 
that have become linked to the worship of Jesus, 
and have continued down to our own day, princi- 
pally the worship of the Eucharist and of the 
Sacred Heart, the latter more recent in appearance 
than in reality. 

The worship of martyrs is hardly less ancient 
than martyrdom itself. From the earliest times 
care was taken to preserve the remains of dead 
brethren, especially of those who died for the 
faith, because of the belief in the approaching 
resurrection of the body at the second coming of 
the Lord. This conception of resurrection had a 
more powerful influence on minds then than it 
has to-day over the most sincere believers. The 
care of dead bodies finds thus a most natural 
explanation, and this care was accompanied by a 
sense of piety, having for its object these remains 
hallowed by the spirit and by an immortal hope. 
The kingdom they had awaited, and still expected 
so eagerly, was now visibly constituted beyond 
mortal vision by all the blessed who rejoined 
Christ in His glory, and were none the less united 
in Him, even as He was, to the Church on the 
earth, the organ of evangelical preaching and of 
the preparation of the kingdom of Heaven. 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 255 


The worship of the Saints is, therefore, the 
natural complement of the worship of Jesus, and 
the worship of Jesus is the Christian worship. 
Christianity without this worship is only a 
philosophy—if it is preferred, call it a mystic 
philosophy—which would gladly take the name 
of religion, but has no right to it, having kept 
no definite religious form. It is not Israelitish 
monotheism, seeing that this religion finds its 
form in the privilege which makes the sole God 
the God of Israel alone. Christianity is a religion, 
and a universal one, because it incarnates the sole 
God in the Son of man, and adores in God Man 
the God of all humanity. 

Save for the special importance of its develop- 
ment, the worship of Mary presents itself under 
the same conditions as the worship of the saints. 
Primitive evangelical tradition was entirely filled 
with the memory of Jesus; the mother of Christ 
is barely mentioned in one situation where her 
intervention had no favourable significance. Later 
thought centred on Mary in the consideration of 
the origin of Jesus. The virginal conception, 
which tended merely to heighten the personality of 
the Saviour, and cause appreciation of His Divine 
Sonship, came to imply a special honour for the 

1 Mark iii, 31. 


236 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


Virgin Mother. It may be said that the worship 
of Mary has profited by every advance of the 
Christological dogma. Belief in the virginity 
maintained after the birth of Christ, and in the 
material virginity maintained even in the birth, 
completed the idea of the virginal conception ; 
it served to glorify Jesus, and incidentally more 
and more to glorify the mother of Jesus. It seems 
that here, too, common piety preceded learned 
theology, and that the Council of Ephesus, in 
proclaiming Mary the mother of God, far less gave 
a new direction to worship than a dogmatic con- 
secration to a very vivid sentiment of Christian 
consciousness. 

It has been remarked that Mary occupied in 
theology later than the Council of Nicza, the 
place that Arius assigned to the Word of God. 
The substitution, though unconscious, was not 
therefore accidental; it arose from a kind of 
unseen necessity, as though Catholic piety could 
not dispense with this intermediary power that 
the heresiarch desired to personify in Christ and 
orthodoxy actually personified in His Mother. 
Again, it was popular or monastic devotion that 
initiated the later progress of the worship of Mary 
and of what may be called Mariology. It is 
known that the festival of the Conception 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 257 


preceded, and in a way provoked, the doctrine of 
the Immaculate Conception. 

Thus there was formed in Catholicism a human 
ideal that has continued to grow incessantly. The 
historical justification of the assertions of faith, 
of which this ideal is composed, has never been 
sought otherwise than by the collection of testi- 
mony wherein these very assertions are formu- 
lated, testimony which is an expression of Catholic 
Christianity. It is perhaps less easy than is 
believed to show that this ideal is contrary to the 
gospel, and has in no way proceeded from it. 


CHAPTER III 


Ir, however, the moral necessity of this develop- 
ment can be proved, does it not also follow that 
it has been “natural,” as Herr Harnack calls it, 
and outside that worship of the spirit that the 
Saviour came to establish? Truly the develop- 
ment has been natural, inasmuch as it has been 
a historical fact, arising to satisfy the innate needs 
of human nature. In this sense it may just as 
well be said that confidence in God is natural to 
man, and that the gospel of Divine goodness is 
as little supernatural as the Christian ritual. If 
all movement whose sequence can be perceived is 
to be called natural, and if the nature of God’s 
action in the soul, and the confident impulse of 
the soul towards God, are to be classed as outside 
nature, then Christian worship is natural in its 
external characteristics and co-ordinated to a 
supernatural effect, in so far as it acts on the soul 
by a sensible means to aid in producing that 
which is properly supernatural in man, namely, 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 259 


life in Godt The evangelical word, the indispen- 
sable means of faith, is just as natural as a text, as 
the sacraments are as a sign, but it is none the 
less the vehicle of a supernatural good. 

The conception that Protestant theologians 
readily form of the worship in spirit is no more 
rational than evangelical. It is impossible to 
unite men in a worship that is purely an affair of 
the soul, and it would be vain to impose such 
worship on human beings, who are bound by 
their physical conditions, and can only think 
through being able to hear and to speak. Their 
religious life cannot be independent of every 
sensible element, which aids them to become 
conscious of it, to define and affirm it. Jesus 
was the first to give His disciples a formula of 
prayer; He observed the practices of Jewish 
worship ; He never recommended to His followers 
a worship without external forms, and never in- 
tended to establish such a worship. The saying 
of Christ in the Gospel of John, as to the worship 
“in spirit and in truth,”? does not oppose a 
purely inner worship to an external one ; but the 
worship that may be called inspired, spiritualized, 


1 Cf, Newman, “ Essays critical and historical,” ii. 230 


194-196. 
2 John iv. 23, 24. 


260 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


the Christian worship known to the evangelist, 
and animated by the spirit given to the faithful, 
is substituted for a worship localized at Jerusalem 
or on Mount Gerizim. 

The same evangelist who gives the formula of 
worship in spirit, gives also the formula of the 
Incarnation ; the two correspond to one another ; 
God is a Spirit, as is also His Word; the true 
worship is spiritual, since it is founded on the 
communication of the Divine Spirit. But just as 
God the Spirit is made manifest in the Incarnate 
Word, so the life of the Spirit is communicated 
and maintained by Spiritual sacraments, the water 
of baptism, the bread and wine of the Eucharist. 
The system of John is a perfect whole; neither 
the discourse to Nicodemus nor the instruction 
concerning the bread of life contradict the state- 
ment made to the woman of Samaria, and the 
whole agrees with the conception of the Incarna- 
tion, the Divine manifesting itself in the human, 
the spiritual acting in the sensible, the eternal 
reality figured in the terrestrial symbol and com- 
municated by it. Catholic worship does nothing 
but apply the theory of John, and this theory was 
the description of the evangelical fact. 

From the point of view of pure reason, the 
efficacy of the sacraments is not so very difficult 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 261 


a thing to conceive. It is with the sacraments 
as with ordinary language, the virtue of ideas 
passes into the words, acts through the words, is 
communicated really, physically, by the words, and 
only produces its effect on the mind by the aid 
of the words. Therefore it is fair to speak of 
the virtue of words, for they contribute to the 
existence and fortune of ideas. In so far as an 
idea has found no formula capable of striking 
the mind by a clearness, at least in appearance, 
by its simplicity and its vigour, it has no power 
of action. It is true that the action of the formula 
depends on the historical circumstances of its pro- 
duction, but this fact by no means lessens the 
analogy between words, the natural expression 
and indispensable means of communication of 
ideas, and the sacraments, the expression of inner 
religion and means of communication with God. 
The significance of the sacramental symbols has 
also been determined by the historical circum- 
stances connected with their establishment and 
use. Thence comes their efficacy ; they are signs 
appropriate to their end, as words can be appro- 
priate to the expression of thought; they are 
Divine signs because they are religious; they are 
Christian, because they proceed from Christ. On 
all these grounds they are efficacious, and their 


262, THE GOSPEL AND: THE CHURCH 


power comes not from him on whom they are 
conferred, but is exercised in him and upon him ; 
it is bound up with the tie that links them to 
Jesus, which makes them, as it were, actions of 
Christ living in the Church, and it is conditioned 
at once by the special application of the symbol 
to him who receives it and by the disposition it 
finds in him. 

These considerations help to make clear the 
doctrine of the Catholic Church regarding the 
sacraments, and the essential harmony of this 
doctrine with the gospel. This is not the place 
to set forth the theory of the efficacy of the 
sacrament in itself, as a definite institution of 
Christ, in its substance and its form, that cannot 
be modified without destroying its effect. The 
formulas of sacramental theology, like the greater 
number of dogmatic definitions, were conceived 
in opposition to assertions rejected by the Church 
as erroneous, namely, that sacraments have no 
real efficacy, that they do not come from Christ, 
that the choice of them is arbitrary and without 
relation to the effect. Positive doctrine, as a 
counterblast to condemned opinion, is always 
capable of explanation and of progress. It 
matters little that sacraments are held to be 
composed of form and of substance; there would 


THE CALHOLIGC WORSHIP 263 


be nothing unsuitable in abandoning these notions 
of ancient philosophy, artificially applied to the 
sacraments, and considering them in themselves, 
taking them for what they are, namely, religious 
acts, endowed with supernatural efficacy. This 
efficacy does not belong to them merely as 
religious acts, but in so far as they are the acts 
of religious Christians, related to Christ through 
the Church, men in whom Christ lives and acts, 
as He lives and acts in the Church and the 
Church’s teaching. 

The life of a religion consists not in its ideas, 
its formulas and its rites as such, but in the secret 
principle which first gave an attractive power, a 
supernatural efficacy, to the ideas and formulas and 
rites. The sacraments have no meaning for the 
Christian except through Jesus or His Spirit acting 
in the material symbol; they figure and realize 
the constant action of Christ in the Church. Jesus 
established them so far as they are a permanent 
institution proceeding from Him, powerful through 
Him. The incontestable and important changes 
undergone in the management and arrangement 
of several of them do not deprive them either of 
their character or their value as sacraments of 
Christ. The Church has always believed that she 
possesses in herself the Spirit of Jesus to direct 


264 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


her in all things. The action of the Spirit is 
linked to the forms of her government, her teach- 
ing and her worship. The sacramental institution 
is not an inert instrument, but a principle, a 
mode of action transmitted from Christ to the 
Church, susceptible of varied application, change- 
less only in itself, its general direction and 
essential form. The Church regulates its progress 
and action, regarding herself as the authorized 
interpreter of the intentions of its founder, and 
of the suitable way to execute it. The sacra- 
mental system is the historically established form 
taken by the Christian institution, the Church, 
inasmuch as it is a sanctifying organization through 
_which the immortal Christ continues to act. 

It is, perhaps, true that God is the only Grace, 
as He is the supreme good of man and his final 
end. But human life cannot be resolved into a 
simple act of union with God, to contain the 
whole of religion. It is written that the “Grace 
of God” is “manifold,” * and truly it must adapt 
itself to very varied conditions of existence, 
bringing God to them, whose inexhaustible nature 
can no longer be summed up for man in a single 
aspect. The activity of the Father is not exhausted 
by the single movement of pardon. Why should 

11 Pet. iv. 10. 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 265 


not His permanent assistance be recalled and 
guaranteed by material symbols? These symbols 
take nothing from the Divine majesty, if it is 
well understood that their efficacy is in no way 
magical, and if, instead of interposing between 
God and man, they only remind human beings 
of the constantly beneficent presence of their 
Creator. Nor does the administration of the 
sacraments come between man and his Supreme 
Master, to take the place of God. The social 
character of Christianity exacts a regulation of 
external worship and a division of duty in the 
acts which constitute it; but none the less is 
there a direct relation between God and all those 
who, under different titles, participate in the 
symbolic actions of Christian ritual. God is no 
farther from the simple believer than from the 
bishop or the priest. Clerics and laity come 
together to God, pray together, are sanctified to- 
gether. There is between them only a “ diversity 
of gifts and of ministrations,” as St. Paul says, but 
“the same Spirit” is in all. The gospel is not 
the enemy of order, and it is difficult to see how 
the regular economy of Divine service can im- 
pede the operation of the grace of God. 

Every religion is sacramental; every religion is 

11 Cor, xii. 4, 5. 


266 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


also more or less deifying, offering man a means of 
raising himself to Divinity, conceived first by 
analogy in the image of man. Perhaps it would 
not be very difficult to prove that the worship of 
man is, in all known religions, associated in some 
way with that of God. But in pagan worship 
this association is made definitely, to the detri- 
ment of Divinity, whose essential feature, that of 
remaining infinitely above humanity, is not recog- 
nized. Christianity avoided this confusion, while 
satisfying, by the worship of Jesus and the sacra- 
ments co-ordinated therewith, that need of deifica- 
tion which seems inseparable from human nature. 
It renders to Christ the worship the Jews rendered 
to the hidden God, Whom no human being could 
look on and live. It has been able to do go 
without falling into Polytheism or man-worship, 
because it distinguishes, in the object of its adora- 
tion, the Eternal God and the human nature in 
which this God was manifested on earth. Christ 
is none the less seated on the right hand of the 
Father, and humanity is raised in Him up to 
Divinity. It may be said that humanity adores 
itself in Jesus, but it must be added that, so 
doing, it forgets neither its own condition nor that 
of God. 

Herr Harnack does not expressly condemn the 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 267 


worship accorded to Christ, but he regards it all 
the same as a kind of idolatry, born of ancient 
polytheism. For him, the worship of Jesus is no 
more legitimate than the dogma of His Divinity. 
Did the apostles adore Christ even when they had 
acquired belief in His resurrection? Was Jesus 
for the first Christian generation any other than a 
Divine mediator, with Whom, and through Whom, 
men could pray to and worship the Father, instead 
of One to be worshipped? But these circum- 
stances only serve to make more evident the need 
of a worship deifying humanity, since from a 
rigorous monotheism, whose formula has been 
strengthened rather than weakened, was derived 
the worship of a human being, whose human 
character has been never denied, though His 
Divinity has been proclaimed; while, after this, 
‘Christian piety has made for itself a whole hier- 
archy of intercessors from heavenly spirits and 
spiritual ancestors, as though to aid Christ in His 
position of intercessor, and at the head of them 
has set the Virgin Mary. 

Neither the worship of Christ nor the worship 
of the saints could be part of the gospel of Jesus, 
nor does either belong to it: they arose sponta- 
neously, and have increased one after the other, 
and then together, in Christianity as it became 


268 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


established. All the same, the worship, both of 
Jesus and of the saints, proceeds from what may 
be called, in all truthfulness, the primitive revela- 
tion, the revelation that has never been specified 
in a formal doctrine, that mankind bears in the 
depths of its religious consciousness written in 
indistinct characters. The sole article that con- 
stitutes this unexplained revelation, that Jesus 
manifested in Himself and in His life as much as 
in His teaching, and was the first to show in a 
clear and intelligible manner because He realized 
it in Himself, is that God reveals Himself to man 
in man, and that humanity enters with God into 
a Divine association. Man had always believed 
it, and only understood it vaguely; Jesus made 
it intelligible, and from that moment, as it were, 
the direction of prayer was changed, and the 
mythological cloud dissipated, while at the same 
time the barrier of law and verbal revelation was 
overthrown. The most Divine thing in the world 
is not the crash of the thunder, nor the light of 
the sun, nor the unfolding of life; it is beauty of 
soul, purity of heart, perfection of love in sacrifice, 
because this is the sovereign gift of God to man, 
the grandest work and supreme manifestation of 
God in the universe. In this way Jesus revealed 
to men the secret of God and religion, because 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 269 


God was in Him revealing Himself; in this way 
men felt that in Jesus they possessed God revealed 
to them. The impression was deeper among the 
Gentiles, who knew not God, than among the 
Jews, who knew Him better, but were accustomed 
to adore Him in His redoubtable majesty. It is 
certain that the eternal principle of the passage of 
the Divine through the human then received a 
new application, very clear and very fruitful, that 
this application was the Christian religion and 
the worship of Jesus, and that it could be nothing 
else. 

This application of the principle itself refused 
to be limited to the worship of Christ. All those 
who bore witness to the revelation of God in 
Jesus, who had not feared to die rather than 
disavow their certainty, who had demonstrated its 
_ power by the practice of Christian virtues, and 
had died in the peace of the Lord, all these equally 
received on their foreheads a ray of Divinity. It 
was not the full ight, the unmeasured communi- 
cation of the Spirit and of the glory of God, but 
it was a part of this gift, to be saluted with 
reverence. 

In fact, it is as an extension of the worship of 
Jesus that, from the Catholic point of view, the 
worship of the Virgin and the saints is justified. 


270 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


The saints live, not only in the memory of the 
Church, but in her present work, by the lasting 
influence of their personal activity, and of the 
ideal signified by their name. Worship of them, 
like that of the Virgin and of Christ Himself, has 
become what it might and ought to have become 
under the circumstances and in the times where 
it has developed. The Christian spirit gave life, 
and still gives it, to practices apparently trivial, 
and easily becoming superstitious ; but the point 
at issue is whether those who follow them do not 
find Christ therein, and whether they would be 
capable of finding Him more easily elsewhere. 
From the actual point of view, the Virgin and 
saints are religious types inferior to Christ, but 
united to Him, leading to Him, acting through 
Him and for Him. From the point of view of 
theological symbolism and popular conception, 
Christ alone is the mediator, all powerful by 
reason of His Divinity; the Virgin is a sub- 
ordinate intercessor all-powerful through Christ ; 
and the power of the saints is equally subordinated 
to that of Jesus. 

It may be said that the government of this 
world, even of moral things, should not be divided 
into provinces according to specialities which 
recall a little too vividly the lesser gods of 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 271 


paganism. Yet all that ever was has an eternal life 
and action in God, wherein all things abide. He 
who suppresses intercession is on the way to 
suppress prayer. Is it not true in the strictest 
sense for the Catholic, that he goes to God 
through Jesus, to Jesus through the saints? Is 
it not true that Christianity endures by the force 
of all its past, from Jesus to the Christians of our 
own day, worthy of the name? Is it not true 
that all the fruits of the gospel in Christianity 
are still the gospel? Is it not true that to have 
recourse to the saints is to have recourse to Jesus 
—to Jesus, then to God; and that to turn to God 
with a simple faith is to rise above one’s self, to 
enter into religion and make it a personal reality ? 
Is it not true that by all those means the 
Protestant finds so vulgar and so ridiculous—by 
wearing a scapulary, by telling beads, by gaining 
indulgences on the merits of saints for this life or 
for souls in Purgatory—the Catholic places himself 
effectively in the communion of the saints, which 
is the communion of Jesus, which is the commu- 
nion of God ? 

Assuredly it would be wise to moderate this 
worship in some of its manifestations, and above 
all to make clear its real significance. The general 
considerations which allow, from the Christian 


272 THE GOSPEL AND THE CHURCH 


point of view, prayers of intercession, as a means 
of attaching the soul to God by the intermediary 
of those in whom God was especially made mani- 
fest, demand also that these prayers should be 
different in spirit from pagan superstitions, and 
should not be sustained by wild imaginations. 
After all, it will be said, if St. Antony of Padua 
has not really the power to cause the recovery of 
things that are lost, the winning of the great prize 
in the lottery, the gaining of diplomas by devout 
but lazy students, it is possible that a naive 
credulity may provide the hope of supernatural 
intervention that is solicited in these cases, so 
that the religious and moral value of such prayers 
is not superior to that of the requests commonly 
addressed to pagan deities: far better recommend 
students to deserve success by their work, advise 
all to look to their affairs and count at once on 
Providence and on themselves for the success of 
their enterprises. 

Nevertheless the apparent puerilities of devotion 
are less removed from religion than they seem. 
The face of the world is twofold. Man is placed 
between nature, where all seems inevitable, and 
consciousness, where all appears free. The universe 
for him is a gigantic mechanism, which encom- 
passes him on all sides, and will overwhelm 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 273 


him without mercy if the opportunity arise; and, 
at the same time, it is the revelation that a 
Being, good and omnipotent, gives of Himself. 
The contradiction evident in the conduct of man 
demanding to be freed from inevitability, exists 
also in the world, where necessity and liberty 
meet in opposition. No prayer is insignificant 
or ridiculous for the man of faith, so long as it 
does not misrepresent God in His goodness and 
respects His sovereignty. No prayer is justified 
as an act of pure reason and of perfect piety, save 
by the uprightness of its intentions, its applica- 
tion to duty, and submission to the Divine will. 
Taken solely in its natural and primitive signifi- 
cance, the Lord's Prayer in some respects would be 
as open to critical objection as a prayer to St. 
Antony of Padua to recover an object that has 
been lost. Would not the demand, “Give us this 
day our daily bread,” considered in its strict 
historical meaning,! be subversive of social 
economy? Practically, as a general rule, the 
adult healthy man can and should earn his bread 
with his own powers. ‘To-day, the Christian 
requests that this activity be blessed by Heaven, 
but the original sense of the words he uses was 
very different. In the same way the meaning of 
1 Cf. supra. 
7 


274° THE GOSPEL AND GHEE CLHORGE 


the request, “ Thy Kingdom come,” is very different 
for the modern Christian from the sense the first 
converts attached to it. Thus the prayer derives 
its value from the feeling that prompts it and 
determines its moral efficacy, not from the occasion 
that provokes it, not even from the good to which 
it seems directed. This efficacy of prayer is inde- 
pendent of its formal fulfilment, and is no more a 
matter of question for the Christian than the 
personal existence of God. 

It must not be imagined that sentence of con- 
demnation has been passed on the worship of 
saints, of relics, of the Virgin, and of the Saviour 
Himself because such worship appears to the 
historian as a concession to the tendencies of 
popular religion’ It is essential that every 
religion that lives should be a concession of this 
kind, though Christianity may be asked to raise 
the character of the concession by the spirit that 
informs its worship and its practices. The ten- 
dencies in question are a fundamental law of 
religion, and a condition of religious development. 
All is well so long as the forms of worship are 
not esteemed beyond and at the expense of the 
spirit that should animate them. The Church is 
unable to suppress the religious instinct, and as 

1 Cf. Newman, “ Development.” 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 275 


little disposed to leave it to itself: she sets out 
to regulate it, and devotions are to her a means 
of maintaining religion. The piety of any Catholic 
nation does not, perhaps, represent the ideal of 
Catholicism, but it is all that Catholicism can 
obtain from that nation. What can be asked of 
the Church beyond a constant effort to obtain 
more than has as yet been given? This effort 
exists. Herr Harnack recognizes? that devotions 
paid to the Sacred Heart, the Holy Virgin, and 
others, have become in the Catholic Church-a 
source of blessing and a means of reaching the 
good God. This is because the Christian spirit 
has penetrated to the depth of the devotion, and 
set the gospel there. These devotions, far from 
‘ being a hindrance to religion, are a support to it, 
just as the sacraments do not take Christ from 
the believer, but give Him. 

Protestant critics, when they express surprise 
that the Christian spirit is still found in Catholi- 
cism in spite of the Church, faith in spite of 
dogma, true piety in spite of the multiplication of 
external rites, take for obstacles the real guaran- 
tees and normal conditions of the good that the 
gospel, now become a religion, has given to 
the world, good that their own speculations on 


1 “ Dogmengeschichte,” iii. 670, n. 3. 


276. THE GOSPEL ‘AND THE CHOURCH 


the pure essence of Christianity are unable to 
procure. Does not Protestantism itself exist as 
a religion through that amount of ecclesiastical 
organization, official doctrine, and confessional 
worship that it has retained? ~ | 

It is true that as a result of the evolution, 
political, intellectual, economic, of the modern 
world, as a result of all that may be called the 
modern spirit, a great religious crisis, affecting 
Churches, orthodoxies, and forms of worship has 
arisen to a greater or less extent everywhere. The 
best means of meeting it does not appear to be 
the suppression of all ecclesiastical organization, 
all orthodoxy, and all traditional worship—a pro- 
cess that would thrust Christianity out of life and 
humanity,—but to take advantage of what is, in - 
view of what should be, to repudiate nothing of 
the heritage left to our age by former Christian 
centuries, to recognize how necessary and useful 
is the immense development accomplished in the 
Church, to gather the fruits of it and continue it, 
since the adaptation of the gospel to the changing 
conditions of humanity is as pressing a need 
to-day as it ever was and ever will be. It is no 
part of the present book to say what difficulties— 
more apparent, perhaps, than real—this work 
may encounter in the Catholic Church, nor what 


THE CATHOLIC WORSHIP 277 


incomparable resources exist for it, nor in what 
way the agreement of dogma and science, reason 
and faith, the Church and society, can be conceived 
to-day. This little volume is full enough if it has 
shown how Christianity has lived in the Church 
and by the Church, and how futile is the desire 
to save it by a search after its quintessence, 


THE END 


Ko 


AS pe ls Bs Nae a 
60 

[era 
| BR 
121 31781 
H45 Loisy, Alfred Firmin 
L63 The Gospel and the 
church. 


ISSUED TO 

7 
B: de Meng 
a iften 7 Cobol 


Loisy. 20 
Gospel... 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


(bay PRINTED IN U.S.A. 


eaten 
aveatviannahsataun 


aeenaarrte 


= ~~? rr, =F 

epsennunenen 

; isuonmntnieat 
staat a 

area 

ers el 

ianyamsaneutenetei
