The Long-Lost Friend (Hohman, 1850)
===================================
John George Hohman — The Long-Lost Friend, or Faithful and Christian Instructions (Pow-wow), 1850 edition, public domain. The classic Pennsylvania Dutch folk-magic grimoire. Scan via Internet Archive (National Library of Medicine copy).

THE 


LONG  LOST  Fllffll 

or 

Faithful  4*  Christian  Instructions 

CONTAINING 

WONDEROUS  AND  WELL-TRIED 


MAN    AS    WELL    AS    ANIMALS. 


WITH  MANY  PROOFS 

Of  their  virtue  and  efficacy  in  healing  diseases,  &c.  the  greater 

part  of  which  was  never  published  until  they  appeared  in 

print  for  the  first  time  in  the  U.  S.  in  the  year  1820. 


LITERALLY  TRANSLATED   FROM  THE  GERMAN  WORK  OF 

JOHN  GEORGE  HOHMAN, 

Near  Reading,  Jltsace  Township,  Berks  County,  Penn. 
HARRISBURG,   PA. 1850. 


PREFACE. 

TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION  OF  THIS  LITTLE  BOOK. 


THE  author  should  have  preferred  wrjtitfg  no  preface 
whatever  to  this  little  book,  were  it  not  indispensably  neces- 
sary, in  order  to  meet  the  erroneous  views  some  men  enter- 
tain in  regard  to  works  of  this  character.  The  majority, 
undoubtedly,  approve  of  the  publication  and  sale  of  such 
books,  yet  some  are  always  found  who  will  persist  in  de- 
nouncing them  as  something  wrong.  This  latter  class  I 
cannot  help  but  pity  for  being  so  far  led  astray;  and  I 
earnestly  pray  every  one  who  might  find  it  in  his  power,  to 
bring  them  from  off  their  ways  of  error.  It  is  true,  whoso- 
ever taketh  the  name  of  Jesus  in  vain,  committeth  a  great 
sin.  Yet  is  it  not  expressly  written  in  the  50th  Psalm, 
according  to  Luther's  translation:  "Call  upon  me  in  the 
day  of  trouble:  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
me."  In  the  Catholic  translation,  the  same  passage  is 
found  in  the  49th  Psalm,  reading  thus:  "Call  upon  me  in 
the  day  of  thy  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  glorify  me." 

Where  is  the  doctor  who  has  ever  banished  the  panting  or 
palpitation  of  the  heart  and  hideboundeness  ?  Where  is  the 
doctor  who  ever  banished  a  wheal  ?  Where  is  the  doctor 
who  ever  banished  the  mother-fits  ?  Where  is  the  doctor 
who  can  cure  mortification  when  it  once  seizes  a  member 
of  the  body  ?  All  these  cures,  and  a  great  many  more  mis- 
terious  things  are  contained  in  this  book  ;  and  its  author 
could  take  an  oath  at  any  time  upon  the  fact  of  his  having 
successfully  applied  many  of  the  prescriptions  on  its  pages. 


I  say :  Any  and  every  man  who  knowingly  neglects  using 
this  book  in  saving  the  eye,  or  the  leg,  or  any  other  limb  of 
his  fellow-man,  is  guilty  of  the  loss  of  such  limb,  and  thus 
committing  a  sin,  he  may  forfeit  to  himself  all  hope  of 
heaven.  Such  men  refuse  to  call  upon  the  Lord  in  then- 
trouble,  although  he  especially  commands  it.  If  men  were 
not  allowed  to  use  sympathetic  words,  nor  the  name  of  the 
Most  High,  it  would  certainly  not  have  been  revealed  to 
them  ;  and  what  is  more,  fhe  Lord  would  not  help  where 
they  are  made  use  of.  God  can  in  no  manner  be  forced  to 
intercede  where  it  is  not  his  divine  pleasure.  Another 
thing  I  have  to  notice  here  :  there  are  men  who  will  say,  if 
one  has  used  sympathetic  words  in  vain,  the  medicines  of 
doctors  could  not  avail  any,  because  the  words  did  not  ef- 
fect a  cure.  This  is  only  the  excuse  of  physicians  ;  because 
whatever  cannot  be  cured  by  sympathetic  words  can  much 
less  be  cured  by  any  doctor's  craft  or  cunning.  I  could 
name  at  any  time  that  catholic  priest  whose  horse  was  cured 
with  mere  words;  and  I  could  also  give  the  name  of  the 
man  who  done  it.  I  knew  the  priest  well ;  he  formerly  re- 
sided in  Westmoreland  county.  If  it  was  desired,  I  could 
also  name  a  reformed  preacher,  who  cured  several  persons 
of  the  fever,  merely  by  writing  them  some  tickets  for  that 
purpose  ;  and  even  the  names  of  those  persons  I  could  men- 
tion. This  preacher  formerly  resided  in  Berks  county. — 
If  men  but  use  out  of  this  book  what  they  actually  need, 
they  surely  commit  no  sin  ;  yet  wo  unto  those  who  are 
guilty  that  any  one  loses  his  life  in  consequence  of  mortifi- 
cation, or  loses  a  limb,  or  the  sight  of  the  eye!  Wo  unto 
those  who  misconstrue  these  tilings  at  the  moment  of  dan- 
ger, or  who  follow  the  ill  advise  of  any  preacher  who  might 
teach  them  not  to  mind  what  the  Lord  says  in  the  50th 
Psalm :  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me." — Wo  unto  those  who  in 
obeying  the  directions  of  a  preacher,  neglect  using  any 
means  offered  by  this  book  against  mortification,  or  inflam- 
mation, or  the  wheal.  I  am  willing  to  follow  the  preacher 
in  all  reasonable  things,  yet  when  I  am  in  danger  and  he 
advises  me  not  to  use  any  prescriptions  found  in  this  book, 
in  such  a  case  I  shall  not  obey  him.     And  wo  also  unto 


those  who  use  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain  and  for  trifling 
purposes. 

I  have  given  many  proofs  of  the  usefulness  of  this  book, 
and  I  could  yet  do  it  at  any  time.  I  sell  my  books  publicly, 
and  not  secretly,  as  other  mystical  works  are  sold.  I  am 
willing  that  my  books  should  be  seen  by  every  body,  and  I 
shall  not  secrete  or  hide  myself  from  any  preacher.  I, 
Hohman,  too,  have  some  knowledge  of  the  scriptures,  and 
I  know  when  to  call  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  assistance. 
The  publication  of  books  (provided  they  are  useful  and 
morally  right,)  is  not  prohibited  in  the  United  States,  as  is 
the  case  in  other  countries  where  kings  and  despots  hold 
tyrannical  sway  over  the  people.  I  place  myself  upon  the 
broad  platform  of  the  liberty  of  the  press  and  of  conscience, 
in  regard  to  this  useful  book,  and  it  shall  ever  be  my  mast 
heartfelt  desire  that  all  men  might  have  an  opportunity  of 
using  it  to  their  good,  in  the  name  of  Jesus. 

Given  at  Rosenthal,  near  Reading,  Berks  county,  Penn. 
on  the  31st  day  of  July,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1819. 

JOHN  GEORGE  HOHMAN, 

Author  and  original  publisher  of  this  book. 


NOTE. 

There  are  many  in  America  who  believe  neither  in  a 
hell  nor  in  heaven  ;  but  in  Germany  there  are  not  so  many 
of  these  persons  found.  I,  Hohman,  ask  :  Who  can  imme- 
diately banish  the  wheal,  or  mortification  ?  I  reply,  and  I, 
Hohman,  say:  All  this  is  done  by  the  Lord. — Therefore  a 
hell  and  a  heaven  must  exist ;  and  I  think  very  little  of  any 
one  who  dares  to  deny  it. 


TESTIMONIALS, 

Which  go  to  show  at  any  time,  that  J,  Hohman,  have  suc- 
cessfully applied  the  prescriptions  of  this  book. 


w~Ar//////^» 


Benjamin  Stoudt,  the  son  of  a  Lutheran  school-master, 
at  Reading,  suffered  dreadfully  from  a  wheal  in  the  eye. — 
In  a  little  more  than  24  hours,  this  eye  was  as  sound  as  the 
other  one,  by  the  aid  I  rendered  him  with  the  help  of  God, 
in  the  year  1817. 

Henry  Jorger,  residing  at  Reading,  brought  to  me  a  boy, 
who  suffered  extreme  pain,  caused  by  wheal  in  the  eye,  in 
the  year  1814.  In  a  little  more  than  24  hours,  I,  with  the 
help  of  God,  have  healed  him. 

John  Bayer,  son  of  Jacob  Bayer,  now  living  near  Read- 
ing, had  an  ulcer  on  the  leg,  which  gave  him  great  pain.  I 
attended  him,  and  in  a  short  time  the  leg  was  well.  This 
was  in  the  year  1818. 

Landlin  Gottwald,  formerly  residing  in  Reading,  had  a 
severe  pain  in  his  one  arm.  In  about  twenty-four  hours  I 
cured  his  arm. 

Catharine  Meek,  at  that  time  in  Alsace  township,  suffered 
very  much  from  a  wheal  in  the  eye.  In  a  little  more  than 
twenty-four  hours  the  eye  was  healed. 

Mr.  Silvis,  ol  Reading,  came  to  my  house  while  engaged 
at  the  brewery  of  my  neighbor.  He  felt  great  pain  in  the 
eye,  caused  by  a  wheal.  I  cured  his  eye  in  a  little  more 
than  24  hours. 

Anna  Snyder,  of  Alsace  township,  had  a  severe  pain  in 
one  of  her  fingers.  In  a  little  more  than  24  hours  she  felt 
relieved. 


Michael  Harlmann,  jr.  living  in  Alsace  township,  had  a 
child  with  a  very  sore  mouth.  I  attended  it,  and  in  a  little 
more  than  24  hours  it  was  well  again. 

John  Bingemann,  at  Ruscombmanor,  Berks  county,  had 
a  boy  who  burnt  himself  dreadfully.  My  wife  came  to  that 
place  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1812.  Mortification  had  already 
set  in — my  wife  used  sympathy  for  it,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  mortification  was  banished.  The  boy  was  soon  after 
pelfectly  cured,  and  became  well  again. — It  was  about  the 
same  time  that  my  wife  cured  John  Bingemann's  wife  of  the 
wild  fire,  which  she  had  on  a  sore  leg. 

Susanna  Gomber,  had  a  severe  pain  in  the  head.  In  a 
short  time  I  relieved  her. 

The  wife  of  David  Brecht,  also  felt  a  severe  pain  in  the 
head,  and  was  relieved  by  me  in  a  short  time. 

John  Junkins'i  daughter  and  daughter-in-law  both  suffered 
very  much  from  pain  in  the  head ;  and  his  wife  too,  had  a 
sore  cheek,  on  which  the  wild  fire  had  broken  out  severely. 
The  head-ache  of  the  daughter  and  the  daughter-in-law  was 
banished  by  me  ;  and  the  wild  fire  of  the  wife  was  cured  in 
some  7  or  9  hours — the  swelled  cheek  burst  open  and  heal- 
ed very  fast.  The  woman  had  been  laid  up  several  days 
already  on  account  of  it.  The  family  of  Junkins  lives  at 
Nackenmixen,  but  Brecht  and  Gomber  reside  in  and  near 
Reading.  Nackenmixen  is  in  Bucks  county.  The  four  last 
mentioned  were  cured  in  the  year  1819. 

The  daughter  of  John  Arnold  scalded  herself  with  boiling 
coffee — the  handle  of  the  pot  broke  off  while  she  was  pour- 
ing out  coffee,  and  the  coffee  run  over  the  arm  and  burnt  it 
severely.  I  was  present  and  witnessed  the  accident.  I 
banished  the  burning — the  arm  did  not  get  sore  at  all,  and 
healed  in  a  short  time.  This  was  in  the  year  1815.  Mr. 
Arnold  lived  near  Lebanon,  Lebanon  county,  Penna. 

Jacob  Stouffer,  at  Heckak,  Bucks  county,  had  a  little 
child  who  was  subject  to  convulsions  every  hour.  I  sold 
him  a  book  containing  the  25  letters ;  and  he  was  persuaded 
by  his  neighbor  Henry  Frankenfeld,  to  try  these  25  tetters. 


8 

The  result  was  that  the  child  was  instantaneously  free  from; 
convulsions,  and  perfectly  well.  These  letters  are  also  to 
be  found  in  this  book. 

%CJ*  If  any  one  of  the  above  named  witnesses,  who  have 
been  cured  by  me  and  my  wife,  through  the  help  of  God, 
dares  to  call  me  a  liar,  and  deny  having  been  relieved  by 
us,  although  they  have  confessed  that  they  had  been  cured 
by  us — I  shall,  if  it  is  at  all  possible,  compel  them  to  re-^, 
peat  their  confession  before  a  justice  of  the  peace. 

A  letter  to  cure  rheumatism  sold  at  from  one  to  two  dol- 
lars, and  did  not  even  give  directions  how  to  make  use  of  itj 
these  depending  on  verbal  communications.  John  Allgaier 
of  Reading,  had  a  very  sore  finger.  I  used  sympathy  to 
banish  the  wild  fire  and  to  cure  the  finger.  The  very  next 
morning  the  wild  fire  was  gone,  he  scarcely  felt  any  pain, 
and  the  finger  began  to  heal  very  fast.     This  was  in  1819. 

|C7»  This  Book  is  partly  derived  from  a  work  published 
by  a  Gipsey,  and  partly  from  secret  writings,  and  collected 
with  much  pain  and  trouble,  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
at  different  periods,  by  the  author,  John  George  Hohman. 
I  did  not  wish  to  publish  it ;  my  wife,  also,  was  opposed  to 
its  publication ;  but  my  compassion  for  my  suffering  fellow- 
men  was  too  strong,  for  I  had  seen  many  a  one  lose  his  en- 
tire sight  by  a  wheal,  and  his  life  or  limb  by  mortification. 
And  how  dreadfully  has  many  a  woman  suffered  from  moth- 
er-fits! And  I  therefore  ask  thee  again,  oh  friend,  male  or 
female,  is  it  not  to  my  everlasting  praise,  that  I  have  had 
such  books  printed  ?  Do  I  not  deserve  the  rewards  of  God 
for  it  ?  Where  else  is  the  physician  that  could  cure  these 
diseases  ?  Besides  that,  I  am  a  poor  man,  in  needy  circum- 
stances, and  it  is  a  help  to  me  if  I  can  make  a  little  money 
with  the  sale  of*  my  books. 

The  Lord  bless  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  this  little 
work,  and  be  with  us,  that  we  may  not  misuse  it,  and  thus 
commit  a  heavy  sin! — The  word  misuse,  means  as  much  as 
to  use  it  for  anything  unnecessary.  God  bless  us  !  Amen. 
— The  word  amen  means  as  much  as  that  the  Lord  might 
bring  to  pass  in  reality  what  had  been  asked  for  in  prayer. 

HOHMAN. 


ARTS  &  REMEDIES. 

A.  good  Remedy  for  Hysterics,  (or  Mother-Fits,)  to  be  used 
three  times. 
Put  that  joint  of  the  thumb  which  sits  in  the  palm  of  the 
hand  on  the  bare  skin  covering  the  small  bone  which  stands 
out  above  the  pit  of  the  heart,  and  speak  the  following  at 
the  same  time  : 

Matrix,  patrix,  lay  thyself  right  and  safe, 

Or  thou  or  I  shall  on  the  third  day  fill  the  grave,   t  t  t 


Another  remedy  for  Hysterics,  and  for  Colds. 

This  must  be  strictly  attented  to  every  evening,  that  is: 
whenever  you  pull  off'  your  shoes  or  stockings,  run  your 
finger  in  between  all  the  toes,  and  smell Jt.  This  will  cer- 
tainly effect  a  cure. 

A  certain  remedy  to  slop  Bleeding — which  cures,  no  matter 
how  far  a  person  be  away,  if  only  his  first  name  is  rightly 
pronounced  while  using  it. 

Jesus  Christ,  dearest  blood  ! 

That  stoppeth  the  pain,  and  stoppeth  the  blood. 

In  this  help  you,  (first  name)  God  the  Father,  God  the 
Son,  God  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

A  remedy  to  be  used  when  any  one  is  falling  away,  and 
which  has  cured  many  persons. 

Let  the  person  in  perfect  soberness  and  without  having 
conversed  with  any  one,  make  water  in  a  pot  before  sun- 
rise ;  boil  an  egg  in  this  urine,  bore  three  small  holes  in  this 
egg  with  a  needle,  and  carry  it  to  an  ant-hill  made  by  big 


10 

ants  ;  and  the  person  will  feel  relieved  as  soon  as  the  egg 
is  devoured. 


Another  remedy  to  be  applied  when  any  one  is  sick;  which 
has  effected  many  a  cure  where  doctors  could  not  help. 

Let  the  sick  person,  without  having  conversed  with  any 
one,  make  water  in  a  bottle  before  sun-rise,  close  it  up 
tight,  and  put  it  immediately  in  some  box  or  chest,  lock  it 
and  stop  up  the  key-hole;  the  key  must  be  carried  in  one 
of  the  pockets  for  three  days,  as  nobody  dare  have  it  ex- 
cepting the  person  who  puts  the  bottle  with  urine  in  the 
chest  or  box. 


A  good  remedy  for  Worms,  to  be  used  for  men  as  well  as 
for  cattle. 

Mary,  God's  Mother,  traversed  the  land, 
Molding  three  worms  close  in  her  hand  ; 
One  was  white,  the  other  was  black,  the  third  was  red. 

This  must  be  repeated  three  times,  at  the  same  time 
stroking  the  person  or  animal  with  the  hand  ;  and  at  the 
end  of  each  application  strike  the  back  of  the  person  or  the 
animal,  to  "wit :  at  the  first  application  once,  at  the  second 
application  twice,  and  at  the  third  application  three  times  ; 
and  then  set  the  worms  a  certain  time,  but  not  less  than  3 
minutes.  1^  -. 


A  good  remedy  against  Calumniation  or  Slander. 

If  you  are  calumniated  or  slandered  to  your  very  skin, 
to  your  very  flesh,  to  your  very  benes,  cast  it  back  upon 
the  false  tongues.  t  t  t 

Take  off  your  shirt,  and  turn  it  wrong  side  out,  and  then 
run  your  two  thumbs  along  your  body,  close  under  the  ribs, 
starting  at  the  pit  of  the  heart  down  to  the  thighs. 

A  good-remedy  for  the  Fever. 

Good  morning,  dear  Thursday  !  Take  away  from  (name) 
the  77-fold  fevers!  Oh  1  thou  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  take 
them  awa\  from  him  1         t  t  1" 


11 

^  This  must  be  used  on  Thursday  for  the  first  tune,  on 
"Friday  for  the  second  time,  and  on  Saturday  for  the  third 
time  ;  and  each  time  thrice.  The  prayer  of  faith  has  also 
to  be  said  each  time,  and  not  a  word  dare  be  spoken  to  any 
one  until  the  sun  has  risen.  Neither  dare  the  sick  person 
speak  to  any  one  till  after  sunrise  ;  nor  eat  pork,  nor  drink 
milk,  nor  cross  a  running  water,  for  nine  days. 

A  good  remedy  for  the  Colic. 
I  warn  ye,  ye  colic  fiends !  There  is  one  sitting  in  judg- 
ment, who  speaketh  :   just  or  unjust.     Therefore  beware, 
ye  colic  fiends!  t  t  t 


To  attach  a  Dog.  to  a  person,  provided  nothing  else  was 
used  before  to  effect  it. 

Try  to  draw  some  of  your  blood,  and  let  the  dog  eat  it 
along  with  his  food,  and  he  will  stay  with  you.  Or  scrape 
the  four  corners  of  your  table  while  you  are  eating,  ancl 
continue  to  eat  with  jthe  same  knife  after  having  scraped 
the  corners  of  the  table.  Let  the  dog  eat  those  scrapings, 
and  he  will  stay  with  you. 

To  make  a  Wand  for  searching  for  Iron,  Ore,  or  Water. 

On  the  first  night  of  Christmas,  between  11  &  12  o'clock, 
break  off  from  any  tree  a  young  twig  of  one  year's  growth, 
in  the  three  highest  names,  (Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,) 
at  the  same  time  facing  towards  sunrise.  Whenever  you 
apply  this  wand  in  searching  for  anything,  apply  it  three 
times.  The  twig  must  be  forked,  and  each  end  of  the  fork 
must  be  held  in  one  hand,  so  that  tthe  third  and  thickest 
part  of  it  stands  up,  but  do  not  hold  it  too  tight.  Strike 
the  ground  with  the  thickest  end,  and  that  which  you  de- 
sire will  appear  immediately,  if  there  is  any  in  the  ground 
where  you  strike.  The  words  to  be  spoken  when  the  wand 
is  thus  applied,  are  as  follows  : 

Archangel  Gabriel,  I  conjure  thee  in  the  name  of  God, 
.he  Almighty,  to  tell  me,  is  there  any  water  here  or  not? 
tell  mc!  ft  t 


12 

If  vou  search  for  iron  or  ore,  you  have  to  say  the  same, 
only  mention  the  name  of  what  you  are  searching  for. 

A  very  good  remedy  for  Palpitation  of  the  Heart,  and  far 

persons  who  are  Hide-bound. 
Palpitation  and  hide-bound,  be  off  (name)  ribs, 
Since  Christ,  our  Lord,  spoke  truth  with  his  lips. 


A  Precaution  against  Injuries. 
Whoever  carries  the  right  eye  of  a  wolf  fastened  inside 
of  his  right  sleeve,  remains  free  from  all  injuries. 

How  to  obtain  things  which  are  desired. 

If  you  call  upon  another  to  ask  for  a  favor,  take  care  to 
carry  a  little  of  the  firefinger-grass  with  you,  and  you  shall 
certainly  obtain  that  you  desired. 

A  sure  way  of  catching  Fish. 
Take  rose  seed  and  mustard  seed,  and  the  foot  of  a  wea- 
sel, and  hang  these  in  a  net,  and  the  fish  will  certainly 
collect  there. 


A  safe  remedy  for  various  ulcers,  biles,  and  other  defects. 

Take  the  root  of  iron-weed,  and  tie  it  around  the  neck  ; 
it  cures  running  ulcers  ;  it  also  serves  against  obstructions 
in  the  bladder  (stranguary,)  and  cures  the  piles,  if  the  roots 
are  boiled  in  water  with  honey,  and  drank  ;  it  cleans  and 
heals  the  lungs  and  effects  a  good  breath.  If  this  root  is 
planted  among  grape  veins  or  fruit  trees,  it  promotes  the 
growth  very  much.  Children  who  carry  it,  are  educated 
without  any  difficulty ;  they  become  fond  of  all  useful  arts 
and  sciences,  and  grow  up  joyfully  and  cheerfully. 

A  very  good  remedy  jor  Mortification  and  Inflammation. 

Sanctus  Itorius  res,  call  the  rest  Here  the  Mother  of 
God  came  to  his  assistance,  reaching  out  her  snow-white 
hand,  against  the  hot  and  cold  brand.         t  t  t 


13 

Make  throe  crosses  with  the  thumb.  Every  thing  which 
is  applied  in  words,  must  be  applied  three  times,  and  an  in- 
terval of  several  hours  must  intervene  each  time,  and  for 
the  third  time  it  is  to  be  applied  the  next  day,  unless  where 
it  is  otherwise  directed. 


To  prevent  wicked  or  malicious  persons  from  doing  you' an 
injury — against  whom  it  is  of  great  power. 

Dullix,  ix,  ux.  Yea,  you  can't  come  over  Pontio  ;  Pon- 
tio  is  above  Pilato.  t  t  t 

A  very  good  remedy  to  destroy  Bols#r  Worms  An  Horses. 

You  must  mention  the  name  of  the  horse, "and  say  :  "If 
you  have  any  worms,  I  will  catch  you  by  the  forehead.  If 
they  be  white,  brown,  or  red,  they  shall  and  must  now  all 
be  dead."  You  must  shake  the  head  of  the  horse  three 
times,  and  pass  your  hand  over  his  back  three  times  to  and 
fro.  t  f  t 


To  cure  the  Pollevil  in  Horses,  in  two  or  three  applications^ 

Break  off  3  twigs  from  a  cherry  tree  ;  one  towards  morn- 
ing, one  towards  evening,  and  one  towards  midnight.  Cut 
three  small  pieces  off  the  hind  part  of  your  shirt,  and  wrap 
each  of  those  twigs  in  one  of  these  pieces  j  then  clean  the 
pollevil  with  the  twigs,  and  lay  them  under  the  eaves.  The 
ends  of  the  twigs  which  had  been  in  the  wound  must  be 
turned  towards  the  north  ;  after  which  you  must  do  your 
business  on  them,  that  is  to  say,  you  must  s — t  on  them  ; 
then  cover  it,  leaving  the  rags  around  the  twigs.  After  all 
this  the  wound  must  again  be  stirred  with  the  three  twigs, 
in  one  or  two  days,  and  the  twigs  placed  as  before. 

Ji  good  remedy  for  bad  Wounds  and  Burns. 

The  word  of  God,  the  milk  of  Jesus'  Mother,  and  Christ's 
blood,  is"  for  all  wounds  and  burnings  good.  t  f  t 

It  is  the  safest  way  in  all  these  cases  to  make  the  crosses 
with  the  hand  or  thumb  three  time9  over  the  affected  "parts  ; 


14 

that  is  to  say,  over  all  those  things  to  which  the  three  cross- 
es are  attached. 


A  very  good  remedy  for  the  Wild-fire. 

Wild-fire  and  the  dragon,  flew  over  a  wagon, 
The  wild-fire  abated,  and  the  dragon  skeated. 


To  stop  pains  or  smarting  in  a  wound. 

Cut  three  small  twigs  from  a  tree — each  to  be  cut  off  in 
one  cut— rub  one  end  of  each  twig  in  the  wound,  and  wrap 
them  separately  in  a  piece  of  white  paper,  and  put  them  in 
a  warm  and  dry  place. 

To  destroy  Warts. 

Roast  Chicken-feet  and  rub  the  warts  with  them,  then 
bury  them  under  the  eaves. 


To  banish  the  Hooping  Cough. 

Cut  three  small  bunches  of  hair  from  the  crown  of  the 
head  of  a  child  that  has  never  seen  its  father  ;  sew  this  hair 
up  in  an  unbleached  rag  and  hang  it  around  the  neck  of  the 
child  having  the  hooping  cough.  The  thread  with  which  the 
rag  is  sewed  must  also  be  unbleached. 


Another  remedy  for  the  Hooping  Cough,  which  has  cured 
the  majority  of  those  who  have  applied  it. 

Thrust  the  child  having  the  hooping-cough  three  times 
through  a  black-berry  bush,  without  speaking  or  saying  any- 
thing. The  bush,  however,  must  be  grown  fast  at  the  two 
ends,  and  the  ehild  must  be  thrust  through  three  times  in 
the  same  manner,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  same  side  it  was 
thrust  through  in  the  first  place. 


A  good  remedy  to  stop  Bleeding. 

This  is  the  day  on  which  the  injury  happened.  Blood, 
wu  must  stop,  until  the  Virgin  Mary  bring  forth  another 
m. — Repeat  these  words  three  times. 


15 

To  banish  Convulsive  Fevers. 

Write  the  following  letters  on  a  piece  of  white  paper, 
sew  it  in  a  piece  of  linen  or  muslin,  and  hang  it  around  the 
neck  until  the  fever  leaves  you  : 


Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

a 

b 

a 

X 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

a 

b 

a 

X 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

a 

b 

a 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

a 

b 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

a 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

t 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

a 

Aba 

X 

a  C 

Aba 

X 

a 

Aba 

t 

Aba 

A  b 

A 

A  good  remedy  for  the  Tooth-ache. 

Stir  the  sore  tooth  with  a  needle  until  it  draws  blood  ; 
then  take  a  thread  and  soak  it  with  this  blood.  Then  take 
vinegar  and  flower,  mix  them  well  so  as  to  form  a  paste,, 
and  spread  it  on  a  rag,'  then  wrap  this  rag  around  the  root. 
of  an  apple  tree,  and  tie  it  very  close  with  the  above  thread, 
after  which  the  root  must  be  well  covered  with  ground. 

How  to  banish  the  Fever. 

Write  the  following  words  upon  a  paper  and  wrap  it  up 
in  knot-grass,  (brettett  3Bfgrid),)  and  then  tie  it  upon  the 
navel  of  the  person  who  has  the  fever  : 

Potraat  sineat, 
Potmat  sineat, 
Potmat  sineat. 


How  to  walk  and  step  securely  in  all  caws. 

Jesus  walketh  with  [name].     He  is  my  head  j  I  am  his 
imb.      Therefore  walketh  Jesus  with  [namel-     t  t  t 


16 

A  very  good  remedy  for  the  Colic. 

Take  half  a  gill  of  good  old  rye  whiskey,  and  a  pipe  full 
of  tobacco ;  put  the  whiskey  in  a  bottle,  then  smoke  the  to- 
bacco and  blow  the  smoke  into  the  bottle,  shake  it  up  well 
and  drink  it.  This  has  cured  the  author  of  this  book,  and 
many  others. — Or  take  a  white  clay  pipe  which  has  turned 
blackish  from  smoking,  pound  it  to  a  fine  powder,  and  take 
it.     This  will  have  the  same  effect. 


Jl  very  good  Plaster. 

I  doubt  very  much  whether  any  physician  in  the  United 
States  can  make  a  plaster  equal  to  this.  It  heals  the  white 
swelling,  and  has  cured  the  sore  leg  of  a  woman  who  for 
18  years  had  used  the  prescriptions  of  doctors  in  vain. 

Take  two  quarts  of  cider,  one  pound  of  bees-wax,  one 
pound  of  sheep-tallow,  and  one  pound  of  tobacco  ;  boil  the 
tobacco  in  the  cider  till  the  strength  is  out,  and  then  strain 
it  and  add  the  other  articles  to  the  liquid,  stir  it  over  a  gen- 
tle fire  till  -all  is  dissolved. 


.  To  make  a  good  Eye  Water. 

■  Take  four  cents  worth  of  white  vitriol,  four  cents  worth 
of  prepared  spicewort,  (calamus  root,)  four  cents  worth  of 
cloves,  a  gill  of  good  whiskey,  and  a  gill  of  water.  Make 
the  calamus  fine,  and  mix  all  together;  then  use  it  after  it 
has  stood  a  few  hours. 


A  very  good  remedy  for  the  White- Swelling. 

Take  a  quart  of  unslaked  lime,  and  pour  two  quarts  of 
water  on  it;  stir  it  well  and  let  it  stand  over  night.  The 
scum  that  collects  on  the  lime  water  must  be  taken  off,  and 
a  pint  of  flax-seed  oil  poured  in,  after  which  it  must  be 
stirred  until  it  becomes  somewhat  consistent ;  then  put  it 
in  a  pot  or  pan,  and  add  a  little  lard  and  wax,  melt  it  well, 
and  make  a  plaster,  and  apply  it  to  the  parts  affected — the 
plaster  should  be  renewed  every  day,  or  at  least  every  other 
day  until  the  swelling  is  gone. 


17 

A  remedy  for  Epilepsy,  provided  the  subject  had  never  fallen 
into  fire  or  ivater. 

Write  reversedly  or  backwards  upon  a  piece  of  paper: 
"IT  IS  ALL  OVER!"  This  is  to  be  written  but  once 
upon  the  paper,  then  put  it  in  a  scarlet-red  cloth,  and  then 
wrap  it  in  a  piece  of  unbleached  linen,  and  hang  it  around 
the  neck,  on  the  first  Friday  of  the  new  moon.  The  thread 
with  which  it  is  tied  must  also  be  unbleached,     t  t  t 


Remedy  for  Burns. 

"Burn,  I  blow  on  thee!" — It  must  be  blown  on  three 
times  in  the  same  breath,  like  the  fire  by  the  sun.     f  t  t 


To  stop  Bleeding. 

Count  backwards  from  fifty  inclusive  till  you  come  down 
to  three.  As  soon  as  you  arrive  at  three,  you  will  be*  done 
bleeding. 


A  remedy  to  relieve  Pain. 

Take  a  rag  which  was  tied  over  a  wound  for  the  first 
time,  and  put  it  in  water  together  with  some  copperas;  but 
do  not  venture  to  stir  the  copperas  until  you  are  certain  of 
the  pain  having  left  you. 

A  good  remedy  for  the  Tooth-ache. 

Cut  out  a  piece  of  greensword  (sod)  in  the  morning  before 
sunrise,  quite  unbeshrewedly,  from  any  place,  breathe  three 
times  upon  it,  and  put  it  down  upon  the  same  place  from 
which  it  was  taken. 

To  remove  Bruises  and  Pains. 

Bruise,  thou  shalt  not  heat ; 
Bruise,  thou  shalt  not  sweat ; 
Bruise,  thou  shalt  not  run, 
No  more  than  Virgin  Mary  shall  bring  forth 
another  son.         t  t  t 


18 

A  remarkable  passage  from  the  book  of  Albertus  Magnus. 

It  says :  If  you  burn  a  large  frog  to  ashes  and  mix  the 
ashes  with  water,  you  will  obtain  an  ointment  that  will,  if 
put  on  any  place  covered  with  hair,  destroy  the  hair  and 
prevent  it  from  growing  again. 

Another  passage  from  the  tvork  of  Alburtus  Magnus. 

If  you  find  the  stone  which  a  vulture  has  in  his  knees, 
and  which  you  may  find  by  looking  sharp,  and  put  it  in  the 
vituals  of  two  persons  who  hate  each  other,  it  causes  them 
to  make  up  and  be  good  friends. 

To  cure  Fits  or  Convulsions. 

You  must  go  upon  another  person's  land,  and  repeat  the 
following  words  :  "I  go  before  another  court — I  tie  up  my 
77-fold  fits."  Then  cut  three  small  twigs  off'  any  tree  on 
the  land,  in  each  twig  you  must  make  a  knot.  This  must 
be  done  on  a  Friday  morning  before  sunrise,  in  the  decrease 
of  the  moon,  unbeshrewedly.  f  t  t  Then  over  your  body 
where  you  feel  the  fits  you  make  the  crosses. — And  thus 
they  must  be  made  in  all  cases  where  they  are  applied. 


Cure  for  the  Head-ache. 

Tame  thou  flesh  and  bone,  like  Christ  in  Paradise  ;  and 
who  will  assist  thee,  this  I  tell  thee,  (name,)  for  your  re- 
pentance-sake, t  t  t  This  you  must  say  three  times, 
each  time  pausing  for  three  minutes,  and  your  head-ache 
will  soon  cease.  But  if  your  head-ache  is  caused  by  strong 
drink,  or  otherwise  will  not  leave  you  soon,  then  you  must 
repeat  those  words  every  minute.  This,  however,  is  not 
often  necessary  in  regard  to  head-ache. 

To  mend  Broken  Glass. 

Take  common  cheese  and  wash  it  well,  unslaked  lima 
and  the  white  of  eggs,  rub  all  these  well  together  until  it 
becomes  one  mass,  and  then  use  it.  If  it  is  made  right,  it 
Mill  certainly  hold. 


19 

How  to  make  Cattle  return  to  the  same  place. 

Pull  out  three  small  bunches  of  hair,  one  between  the 
horns,  one  from  the  middle  of  the  back,  and  one  near  the 
tail,  and  make  your  cattle  eat  it  in  their  feed. 

Another  method  cf  making  Cattle  return  home. 

Take  a  handful  of  salt,  go  upon  your  fields  and  make 
your  cattle  walk  three  times  around  the  same*  stump  or 
stone,  each  time  keeping  the  same  direction,  that  is  to  say, 
you  must  three  times  arrive  at  the  same  end  of  the  stump 
or  stone  at  which  your  started  from,  and  then  let  your  cat- 
tle lick  the  salt  from  the  stump  or  stone. 

To  prevent  the  Hessian  Fly  from  Injuring  the  Wheat. 

Take  pulverised  charcoal,  make  ley  of  it,  and  soak  the 
seed-wheat  in  it  ;  take  it  out  of  the  ley,  and  on  every  bushel 
of  wheat  sprinkle  a  quart  of  urine  ;  stir  it  well,  then  spread 
it  out  to  dry. 

To  prevent  Cherries  from  ripening  before  Martinmas. 

Engraft  the  twigs  upon  a  mulberry  tree,  and  your  desire 
is  accomplished. 


Stinging  Nettle — good  for  banishing  fears  and  fancies,  and 
to  cause  fish  to  collect. 

Whenever  you  hold  this  weed  in  your  hand  together  with 
Millifolia,  you  are  safe  from  all  fears  and  fancies  that  fre- 
quently deceive  men.  If  you  mix  it  with  a  decoction  of  the 
hemlock,  and  rub  your  hands  with  it,  and  put  the  rest  in 
water  that  contains  fish,  you  will  find  the  fish  to  collect 
around  your  hands.  Whenever  you  pull  your  hands  out  of 
the  water,  the  fish  disappear  by  returning  to  their  former 
places. 

Iltliotropc,  (sun-flower) — a  means  to  prevent  Calumniation. 

The  virtues  of  this  plant  is  miraculous,  if  it  be  collected 
in  the  sign  of  the  lion,  in  the  month  of  August,  and  wrapped 
up  iu  a  laurel  leaf,  together  with  the  tooth  of  a  wolf.   Who- 


20 


ever  carries  this  about  him,  will  never  be  addressed  harshly 
by  any  one,  but  all  will  speak  to  him  kindly  and  peaceably. 
And  if  any  thing  has  been  stolen  from  you,  put  this  under 
your  head  during  the  night,  and  you  will  surely  see  the 
whole  figure  of  the  thief.     This  has  been  found  true. 

To  heal  a  Sore  Mouth. 

If  you  have  the  scurvy,  or  quinsey  too, 
I  breathe  my  breath  three  times  into  you. 
t  t  f 


*  Swallow-wort, 
A  means  to  overcome  and  end  all  fighting  and  anger,  and 
to  cause  a  sick  man  to  weep  when  his  health  is  restored,  or 
to  sing  with  a  cheerful  voice  when  on  his  death-bed  ;  also  a 
very  good  remedy  for  dim  eyes,  or  shining  of  the  eyes.— 
This  weed  grows  at  the  time  when  the  swallows  built  their 
nests,  or  eagles  breed.  If  a  man  carries  this  about  him, 
together  with,  the  heart  of  a  mote,  he  shall  overcome  all 
fighting  and  anger.  If  these  things  are  put  upon  the  head 
of  a  sick  man,  he  shall  weep  at  the  restoration  of  his 
health,  and  sing  with  a  cheerful  voice  when  he  comes  to 
die.  When  the  swallow-wort  blooms,  the  flowers  must  be 
pounded  up  and  boiled,  and  then  the  water  must  be  poured 
off  into  another  vessel,  and  again  be  placed  to  the  fire  and 
carefully  skimmed  ;  then  it  must  be  filtered  through  a  cloth 
and  preserved,  and  whosoever  has  dim  eyes,  or  shining 
eyes,  may  bathe  his  eyes  with  it,  and  they  will  become 
clear  and  sound. 


A  good  remedy  for  Consumption. 

Consumption,  I  order  thee  out  of  the  bones  into  the  flesh, 
out  of  the  flesh  upon  the  skin,  out  of  the  skin  into  the  wilds 
of  the  forest.         f  f  f 


For  the  Hollow  Horn  in  Cows. 

Bore  a  small  hofe  in  the  hollow  horn,  milk  the  same  cow, 
and  squirt  her  milk  in  the  horn  ;  this  is  the  best  cure.  Use 
a  syringe  to  squirt  the  milk  into  the  horn. 


21 

A  very  good  and  certain  means  of  destroying  the  Wheal  in 
the  Eye. 
Take  a  dirty  plate,  if  you  have  none,  you  can  easily  dir- 
ty one,  and  the  person  for  whom  you  are  using  sympathy 
shall  in  a  few  minutes  find  the  pain  much  relieved.  You 
must  hold  that  side  of  the  plate  or  dish,  which  is  used  in 
eating,  towards  the  eye.  While  you  hold  the  plate  betore 
your  eye,  you  must  say:  ^/ 

Dirty  plate  I  press  thee, 
Wheal  in  the  eye  do  flee, 
t  t  t 


To  make  Chickens  lay  many  Eggs. 
Take  the  dung  of  rabbits,  pound  it  to  powder,   mix   it 
with  bran,   wet  the  mixture  till  it  forms  lumps,    and  feed 
your  chickens  with  it,  and  they  will  keep  on  laying  a  great 
many  eggs.  

Words  to  be  spoken  while  making  Divinatory  Wands. 
In  making  divinatory  wands,  they  must  be  broken  as  be- 
fore directed,  and  while  breaking  and  before  using  them, 
the  following  words  must  be  spoken  : 

Divining  waiid,  do  thou  keep  that  power, 
Which  God  gave  unto  thee  at  the  very  first  hour. 

How  to  destroy  a  Tape  Worm. 
Worm,  I  conjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou >  shalt 
flee  this  blood  and  this  flesh,  like  as  God  the  Lord  will  flee 
that  judge   who  judges   unjustly,   although  he  might  have 
judged  aright.  t  t  t 

A  good  remedy  for  the  Bots  in  Horses. 
Everv  time  you  use  this,  you  must  stroke  the  horse  down 
with  the  hand  three  times,  and  lead  it  about  three .times, 
holding  its  head  towards  the  sun,  saying  :  »  Hie  Ho  y  line 
MVeth  :  Joseph  passed  over  a  field  and  there  he  found  three 
Sail  worms  the  one  being  black,  another  being  brown 
and  the  third  being  red  j  thus  thou  shalt  die  and  be  dead." 


22 


How  to  cure  a  Burn. 

fbree  holy  men  went  out  walking, 
hey  did  bless  the  heat  and  the  burning  ; 
They  blessed  that  it  might  not  increase  ; 
They  blessed  that  it  might  quickly  cease  ! 
t  t  t 


To  cure  the  Bite  of  a  Snake. 
God  has  created  all  things,  and  they  were  good  ; 
Thou  only,  serpent,  art  damned, 
Cursed  be  thou  and  thy  sting, 
t  t  t 
Zing,  zing,  «ing  ! 


Security  against  Mad  Bogs. 

Dog,  hold  thy  nose  to  the  ground, 
God  has  made  me  and  thee,  hound! 
4fl»  t  t  t 

This  you  must  repeat  in  the  direction  of  the  dog  ;  and  the 
three  crosses  you  must  make  towards  the  dog,  and  the 
words  must  be  spoken  before  he  sees  you. 

To  remove  Pain  and  heal  up  Wounds  ivith  Three  Switches.. 

With  this  switch  and  Christ's  dear  blood, 

I  banish  your  pain  and  do  you  good ! 
t  t  t 
Mind  it  well  :  you   must  in  one  cut,   sever  from  a  tree, 
a  young  branch   pointing  towards  sunrise,  and  then  make 
three  pieces  of  it,  which  you  successively  put  in  the  wound. 
Holding  them  in  your  hand,  you  take  the  one  towards  your 
right  side  first. — Every  thing  prescribed  in  this  book  must 
be  used  three  times,  even  if  the  three  crosses  shoul'd  not  be 
affixed.      Words  are  always  to  have  an  interval  of  half  an 
hour,  and  between  the  second  and  third  time  should  pass  a 
whole  night,  except  where  it  is  otherwise  directed.     The 
above  three  sticks,   after  the  end  of  each  has  been  put  into 
the   wound  as  before  directed,    must  be  put  in  a  piece  of 
white  paper,  and  placed  where  they  will  be  warm  and  drv. 


Remedy  for  Fever,  Worms,  and  the  Colic. 

Jerusalem,  thou  Jewish  city, 
In  which  Christ,  our  Lord,  was  born, 
Thou  shalt  turn  into  water  and  blood, 
Because  it  is  foV  (name,)  fever,  worms,  and  colic 
good.  t  t  t 

.  How  to  cure  Weakness  of  the  Limbs. 

Take  the  buds  of  the  birch  tree,  or  the  inner  bark  of  the 
root  of  the  tree  at  the  time  of  the  budding  of  the  birch,  and 
make  a  tea  of  it,  and  drink  it  occasionally  through  the  day. 
Yet  after  having  used  it  for  two  weeks,  it  must  be  discon- 
tinued for  a  while,  before  it  is  resorted  to  again  :  and  during 
the  two  weeks  of  its  use,  it  is  well  at  times  to  use  water  for 
a  day,  instead  of  the  tea. 

Another  remedy  for  Weakness. 

Take  Bittany  and  St.  John's-wort,  and  put  them  in  good 
old  rye  whiskey.  To  drink  some  of  this  in  the  morning 
before  having  taken  any  thing  else,  is  very  wholesome  and 
good.  A  tea  made  of  the  acorns  of  the  white  oak  is  also 
very  good  for  weakness  of  the  limbs. 

A  good  method  of  destroying  Rats  andL  Mice. 
Every  time  you  bring  grain  into  your  barn,  you  must,  in 
putting  down  the  three  first  sheaves,  repeat  the  following 
words  :  "  Rats  and  mice,  these  three  sheaves  I  give  to  you, 
in  order  that  you  may  not  destroy  any  of  my  wheat."  The 
name  of  the  kind  of  grain  must  always  be  mentioned. 


To  make  Horses  that  refuse  their  Feed  to  eat  again— espe' 
daily  applicable  when  they  are  afflicted  in  this  manner  on 
the  public  roads. 
Open  the  jaws  of  the  horse,  which  refuses  his  feed,  and 

knock  three  times  on  his  palate.     This  will  certainly  cause 

the  horse  to  eat  again  without  hesitation,   and  to  go  along 

willingly. 


24 

To  cure  any  Excrescence  or  Wen  on  a  Horse. 
Take  any  bone  which  you  accidently  find,  for  you  dare 
not  be  looking  for  it,  and  rub  the  wen  of  the  horse  with  it ; 
always  bearing  in  mind  that  it  must  be  done  in  the  decreas- 
ing moon,  and  the  wen  will  certainly  disappear.  The  bone, 
however,  must  be  replaced  as  it  was  laying  before. 

How  to  prepare  a  good  Eye-Water. 

Take  one  ounce  of  white  vitriol  and  one  ounce  of  sugar  of 
lead,  dissolve  them  in  oil  of  rosemary,  and  put  it  in  a  quart 
bottle,  which  you  fill  up  with  rose  water.  Bathe  the  eyes 
with  it  night  and  morning. 

How  to  cause  male  or  female  thieves  to  stand  still,   without 
being  able  to  move  backward  or  forward. 

In  using  any  prescriptions  of  this  book  in  regard  to  mak- 
ing others  stand  still,  it  is  best  to  be  walking  about;  and 
repeat  the  following  three  times  : 

"Oh  Peter,  oh  Peter,  borrow  the  power  from  God  :  what 
I  shall  bind  with  the  bands  of  a  christian  hand,  shall  be 
bound  ;  all  male  or  female  thieves,  be  they  great  or  small, 
young  or  old,  sha.ll  be  spell-bound  by  the  power  of  God,  and 
not  be  able  to  walk  forward  or  backward,  until  I  see  them 
with  my  eyes,  and  give  them  leave  with  my  tongue,  except 
it  be  that  they  count  for  me  all  the  stones  that  may  be  be- 
tween heaven  and  earth,  all  rain-drops,  all  the  leaves  and 
all  the  grass  in  the  world.  This  I  pray  for  the  repentance 
of  my  enemies."  t  t  t  Repeat  your  articles  of  faith  and 
the  Lord's  prayer. 

If  the  thieves  are  to  remain  alive,  the  sun  dare  not  shine 
upon  them  before  their  release.  There  are  two  ways  of  re- 
leasing them,  which  will  be  particularly  stated  :  The  first 
is  this,  that  you  tell  him  in  the  name  of  St.  John  to  leave  : 
the  other  is  as  follows:  "The  words  which  have  bound 
thee,  shall  give  thee  free."         t  t  t 


To  cure  the  Sweeney  in  Horses. 
Take  a  piece  of  old  bacon,  and  cut  it  into  small  pieces, 
put  them  in  a  pan  and  roast  them  well,  put  in  a  handful  of 


25 

fish-worms,  a  gill  of  oats,  and  three  spoonsful  of  salt  into  it  j 
roast  the  whole  of  this  until  it  turns  black,  and  then  filter 
it  through  a  cloth  ;  after  which  you  put  a  gill  of  soft  soap, 
half  a  gdl  of  rye  whiskey,  half  a  gill  of  vinegar,  and  half  a 
gill  of  the  urine  of  a  boy  to  it ;  mix  it  well,  and  smear  it 
over  the  part  affected  with  Sweeney,  on  the  third,  the  sixth, 
and  the  ninth  day  of  the  new  moon,  and  warm  it  with  an 
oaken  board. 


How  to  make  Molasses. 
Take  pumpkins,  boil  them,  press  the  juice  out  of  them, 
and  boil  the  juice  to  a  proper  consistence.  There  is  noth- 
ing else  necessary.  The  author  of  this  book,  John  George 
Hohman,  has  tasted  this  molasses,  thinking  it  was  the  gen- 
uine kind,  until  the  people  of  the  house  told  him  what  it 
was. 


To  make  good  Beer. 
Take  a  handful  of  hops,  five  or  six  gallons  of  water,  about 
three  table-spoonsful  of  ginger,  half  a  gallon  of  molasses  j 
filter  the  water,  hops  and  ginger  into  a  tub  containing  the 
molasses. 


Cure  for  the  Epilepsy. 
Take  a  turtle-dove,   cut  its  throat,   and  let  the  person 
afflicted  with  epilepsy  drink  the  blood. 

Another  way  to  make  Cattle  return  home. 
Feed  your  cattle  out  of  a  pot  or  kettle  used  in  preparing 
your  dinner,  and  they  will  always  return  to  your  stable. 

A  very  good  remedy  to  cure  Sores. 
Boil  the  bulbs  (roots)  of  the  white  lilly  in  cream,  and 
put  it  on  the  sore  in  form  of  a  plaster.     Southernwort  has 
the  same  effect. 

A  good  cure  for  Wounds. 
Take  the  bones  of  a  calf,  and  burn  them  until  they  turn 
*"*'po\ver,  and  then  strew  it  into  the  wound.     This  powder 


26 

prevents  the  flesh  from  putrifying,  and  is  therefore  of  great 
importance  in  healing  the  wound. 

To  make  an  Oil  out  of  Paper,  which  is  good  for  sore  eyes. 

A  man  from  Germany  informed  me,  that  to  burn  two 
sheets  of  white  paper  would  produce  about  three  drops  of 
oil  or  water,  which  would  heal  all  sores  in  or  about  the  eye 
if  rubbed  with  it.  Any  affection  of  the  eyes  can  be  cured 
in  this  way,  as  long  as  the  apple  of  the  eye  is  sound. 

To  destroy  Crab-Lice. 

Take  capuchin  powder,  mix  it  with  hog's  lard,  and  smear 
yourself  with  it.  Or,  boil  cammock,  and  wash  the  place 
where  the  lice  keep  themselves. 

To  prevent  the  worst  kind  of  paper  from  blotting. 

Dissolve  alum  in  water,  and  put  it  on  the  paper,  and  I, 
Hohman,  would  like  to  see  who  cannot  write  on  it,  after  it 
is  dried. 


Jl  very  good  remedy  for  the  Gravel. 

The  author  of  this  book,  John  George  Hohman,  applied 
this  remedy,  and  soon  felt  relieved.  I  knew  a  man  who 
could  find  no  relief  from  the  medicine  of  any  doctor ;  he 
then  used  the  following  remedy,  to  wit :  he  eat  every  morn- 
ing seven  peach  stones  before  tasting  anything  else,  which 
relieved  him  very  much  ;  but  as  he  had  the  gravel  very  bad, 
he  was  obliged  to  use  it  constantly.  I,  Hohman,  have  used 
it  for  several  weeks.  I  still  feel  a  touch  of  it  now  and  then, 
yet  I  had  it  so  badly  that  I  cried  out  aloud  every  time  I 
had  to  make  water.  I  owe  a  thousand  thanks  to  God  and 
the  person  who  told  me  of  this  remedy. 

A  good  remedy  for  those  who  cannot  keep  their  water. 
Burn  a  hog's  bladder  to  powder,  and  take  it  inwardly. 

To  destroy  Field-Mice  and  Moles. 
Put  unslaked  lime  in  their  holes,  and  thev  will  disapj, 


27 

To  remove  a  Wen  during  the  crescent  moon. 

Look  over  the  wen  directly  towards  the  moon,  and  say  : 
"  Whatever  grows,  does  grow  ;  and  what  diminishes,  does 
diminish."  This  must  be  said  three  times  in  the  same 
breath. 


To  remove  a  Scum  or  Skin  from  the  Eye. 

Before  sunrise  on  St.  Bartholomew's  day,  you  must  dig 
up  four  or  five  roots  of  the  dandelion  weed,  taking  good  care 
to  get  the  ends  of  the  roots  ;  then  you  must  procure  a  rag 
and  a  thread  that  have  never  been  in  the  water  ;  the  thread, 
which  dare  not  have  a  single  knot  in  it,  is  used  in  sewing 
up  the  roots  into  the  rag,  and  the  whole  is  then  to  be  hanged 
before  the  eye  until  the  scum  disappears.  The  tape  by 
which  it  it  is  fastened,  must  never  have  been  in  the  water. 


For  deafness,  roaring  or  buzzing  in  the  ear,  fyfor  tooth-ache. 

A  few  drops  of  refined  camphor-oil  put  upon  cotton,  and 
thus  applied  to  the  aching  tooth,  relieves  very  much.  When 
put  in  the  ear,  it  strengthens  the  hearing,  and  removes  the 
roaring  and  whizzing  in  the  same. 

A  good  way  to  cause  children  to  cut  their  teeth  without  pain. 

Boil  the  brain  of  a  rabbit,  and  rub  the  gums  of  the  chil- 
dren with  it,  and  their  teeth  will  grow  without  any  pain  to 
them. 


For  Vomiting  and  Diarrhoea. 
Take  pulverised  cloves  and  eat  them  together  with  bread 
soaked  in  red  wine,  and  you  will  soon  find  relief.      The 
cloves  rifay  be  put  upon  the  bread. 

To  Heal  Burns. 
Pound  or  press  the  juice  out  of  male  fern,  and  put  it  on 
the  burnt  spots,  and  they  will  heal  very  fast.     Better  yet, 
however,  if  you  smear  the  above  juice  upon  a  rag,  and  put 
that  on  like  a  plaster. 


28 

J2  very  good  cure  for  weakness  of  the  limbs,  for  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  blood,  for  the  invigoration  of  the  head  8f  heart, 
and  to  remove  giddiness,  fyc.  fyc. 

Take  two  drops  of  the  oil  of  cloves  in  a  table-spoonful  of 
white  wine,  early  in  the  morning,  and  before  eating  any- 
thing else.  This  is  also  good  for  the  mother-pains,  and  the 
colic.  The  oil  of  cloves  which  you  buy  in  the  drug  stores 
will  answer  the  purpose.  These  remedies  are  also  applica- 
ble to  cure  the  cold  when  it  settles  in  the  bowels,  and  to 
stop  vomiting.  A  few  drops  of  this  oil  poured  upon  cotton 
and  applied  to  the  aching  teeth,  relieves  the  pain. 

For  Dysentery  and  Diarrhoea. 

Take  the  moss  off  of  trees,  and  boil  it  in  red  wine,  and 
let  those  that  are  affected  with  these  diseases,  drink  it. 


Cure  for  the  Tooth-Ache. 

Hohman,  the  author  of  this  book,  has  cured  the  severest 
tooth-ache  more  than  sixty  times,  with  this  remedy  ;  and 
out  of  the  sixty  times  he  applied  it,  it  failed  but  once  in  af- 
fecting a  cure.  Take  blue  vitriol  and  put  a  small  piece  of 
it  in  the  hollow  tooth,  yet  not  too  much  ;  spit  out  the  water 
that  collects  in  the  mouth,  and  be  careful  to  swallow  none. 
I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  good  for  teeth  that  are  not  hol- 
low, but  I  should  judge  it  would  cure  any  kind  of  toothache. 

Advise  to  Pregnant  Women. 

Pregnant  women  must  be  very  careful  not  to  use  any 
camphor;  and  no  camphor  should  be  administered  to  those 
women  who  have  the  mother-fits. 


Cure  for  the  Bile  of  a  Mad  Dog. 

A  certain  Mr.  Valentine  Kettering-,  of  Dauphin  County, 
has  communicated  to  the  Senate  of  Pennsylvania,  a  sure 
remedy  for  the  bite  of  any  kind  of  mad  animals.  He  says 
that  his  ancestors  had  already  used  it  in  Germany  250  years 
ago,  and  that  he  had  always  found  it  to  answer  the  purpose, 
during  a  residence  of  fifty  years  in  the  United  States.      He 


29 

only  published  it  from  motives  of  humanity.  This  remedy 
consists  in  the  weed  called  Chick-weed.  It  is  a  summer 
plant,  known  to  the  Germans  and  Swiss  by  the  names  of 
Gauchneil,  Bother  Meyer,  or  Bother  Huehnerdarm.  In  En- 
gland it  is  called  Bid  Pimpernel;  and  its  botanical  name  is 
Angelica  Phonicea.  It  must  be  gathered  in  June,  when  in 
full  bloom,  and  dried  in  the  shade,  and  then  pulverized. — 
The  dose  of  this  for  a  grown  person,  is  a  small  table-spoon- 
ful, or  in  weight  a  drachm  and  a  scruple,  at  once,  in  beer 
or  water.  For  children  the  dose  is  the  same,  yet  it  must 
be  administered  at  three  different  times.  In  applying  it  to 
animals,  it  must  be  used  green,,  cut  to  pieces,  and  mixed 
with  bran  or  other  feed.  For  hogs,  the  pulverised  weed  is 
made  into  little  balls  by  mixing  it  with  flower  and  water. 
It  can  also  be  put  on  bread  and  butter,  or  in  honey,  molasses, 
&c. — The  Rev.  Henry  Muhlenberg  says,  that  in  Germany 
SO  grains  of  the  powder  of  this  weed  are  given  four  times  a 
day,  the  first  day,  then  one  dose  a  day  for  a  whole  week  ; 
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  wound  is  washed  out  with  a  de- 
coction of  the  weed,  and  then  the  powder  strewed  in  it. — 
Mr.  Kettering  says  that  he  in  all  instances  administered 
but  one  dose,  with  the  most  happy  results.  This  is  said  to 
be  the  same  remedy  through  which  the  late  Doctor  William 
Stoy  effected  so  many  cures. 


A  very  good  means  to  increase  the  growth  of  Wool  on  Sheep, 
and  to  prevent  disease  among  them. 

William  Ellis,  in  his  excellent  work  on  the  English  man- 
ner of  raising  sheep,  relates  the  following  :  I  knew  a  tenant 
who  had  a  flock  of  sheep  that  produced  an  unusual  quantity 
of  wool.  He  informed  me,  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
washing  his  sheep  with  butter-milk  just  after  shearing  thevm, 
which  was  the  cause  of  the  unusual  growth  of  wool  5  because 
it  is  a  known  fact  that  buttermilk  does  not  only  improve  the 
growth  of  sheep's  wool,  but  also  of  the  hair  of  other  ani- 
mals. Those  who  have  no  butter-milk  may  substitute  com- 
mon milk,  mixed  with  salt  and  water,  which  will  answer 
nearly  as  well  to  wash  the  sheep  just  sheared.  And  I 
guarantee  that  by  rightly  applying  this  means,  you  will  not 


30 

only  have  a  great  increase  of  wool,  but  the  sheep-lice  and 
their  entire  brood  will  be  destroyed.  It  also  cures  all 
manner  of  scab  and  itch,  and  prevents  the  sheep  from  catch- 
ing cold. 

»  _ _ i — 

A  well-tried  Plaster  to  remove  Mortification. 
Take  six  hen  eggs  and  boil  them  in  hot  ashes  until  they 
are  right  hard,  then  take  the  yellow  of  the  eggs  and  fry  them 
in  a  gill  of  lard  until  they  are  quite  black,  then  put  a  hand- 
ful of  rue  with  it,  and  afterwards  filter  it  through  a  cloth. 
When  this  is  done,  add  a  gill  of  sweet  oil  to  it.  It  will 
take  most  effect  where  the  plaster  for  a  female  is  prepared 
by  a  male,  and  the  plaster  for  a  male  prepared  by  a  female. 

v  

A  good  remedy  for  the  Poll-Evil  in  Horses. 

Take  white  turpentine,  rub  it  over  the  poll-evil  with  your 
hand,  and  then  melt  it  with  a  hot  iron  so  that  it  runs  into 
the  wound.  After  this,  take  neatsfoot  oil  or  goose  grease, 
and  rub  it  into  the  wound  in  the  same  manner,  and  for  three 
days  in  succession,  commencing  on  the  last  Friday  of  the 
last  quarter  of  the  moon. 

'    For  the  Scurvy  and  Sore  Throat. 

Speak  the  following,  and  it  will  certainly  help  you  :  Job 
went  through  the  land,  holding  his  staff  close  in  the  hand, 
when  God  the  Lord  did  meet  him,  and  said  to  him  :  Job, 
what  art  thou  grieved  at?  Job  said  :  Oh  God,  why  should 
I  not  be  sad  ?  My  throat  and  my  mouth  are  rotting  away. 
Then  said  the  Lord  to  Job  :  In  yonder  valley  there  is  a 
well,  which  will  cure  thee,  [name]  and  thy  mouth,  and  thy 
throat,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost.     Amen. 

This  must  be  spoken  three  times  in  the  morning,  and 
three  times  in  the  evening  ;  and  where  it  reads  "  which  will 
cure,"  you  must  blow  three  times  in  the  child's  mouth. 
■.  ______ 

A  very  good  Plaster. 
Take  wormwood,  rue,  medels,  sheepripwort,  pointy  plan- 
tain, in  equal  proportions,   a  larger   proportion  ot   beeswax 


31 

and  tallow,  and  some  spirits  of  turpentine,  put  it  together 
in  a  pot,  boil  it  well,  and  then  strain  it,  and  you  have  a 
very  good  plaster. 

To  stop  Bleeding. 

I  walk  through  a  green  forest  j 
There  I  find  three  wells,  cool  and  cold  j 
The  first  is  called  courage, 
The  second  is  called  good, 
And  the  third  is  called,  stop  the  blood, 
t  t  t 


Another  way  to  stop  Bleeding,  and  to  heal  Wounds,  in  man 
as  well  as  animals. 

On  Christ's  grave  there  grows  three  roses  ;  the  first  is 
kind,  the  second  is  valued  among  the  rulers,  and  the  third 
says:  blood  thou  must  stop,  and  wound  thou  must  heal. — 
Every  thing  prescribed  for  man  in  this  book,  is  also  appli- 
cable to  animals. 


For  gaming  a  Law/id  Suit. 

It  reads,  if  any  one  has  to  settle  any  just  claim  by  way 
of  a  law  suit,  let  him  take  some  of  the  largest  kind  of  sage 
and  write  the  names  of  the  12  apostles  on  the  leaves,  anil 
put  them  in  his  shoes  before  entering  the  courthouse,  and 
he  shall  certainly  gain  the  suit. 

'For  the  Swelling  of  Cattle. 

To  Desh  break  no  Flesh,  but  to  Desh  !  While  saying  this 
run  your  hand  along  the  back  of  the  animal.         t  t  t 

Note — The  hand  must  be  put  upon  the  bare  skin  in  all 
cases  of  using  sympathetic  words. 

Jin  easy  method  of  Catching  Fish. 

In  a  vessel  of  white  glass  must  be  put :  8  grains  ui  civil 
(musk)  and  as  much  castorium  ;  2  ounces  of  eel-fat,  and  i 
ounces  of  unsalted  butter  ;  after  which  the  vessel  must  be 
well  closed,  and  put  in  some  place  where  ;t  will  keep  i 


32 

erately  warm,  for  nine  or  ten  days,  and  then  the  composition 
must  be  well  stirred  with  a  stick  until  it  is  perfectly  mixed. 

Application. — 1.  In  using  the  hooks — Worms  or  insects 
used  for  baiting  the  hooks,  must  first  be  moistened  with  this 
composition,  and  then  put  in  a  bladder  or  box,  which  may  be 
carried  in  the  pocket. 

2.  In  using  the  net — Small  balls  formed  of  the  soft  part 
of  fresh  bread  must  be  dipped  in  this  composition,  and  then 
by  means  of  thread  fastened  inside  of  the  net  before  throw- 
ing it  into  the  water. 

3.  Catching  fish  with  the  hand — Besmear  your  legs  or 
boots  with  this  composition  before  entering  the  water,  at  the 
place  where  the  fish  are  expected,  and  they  will  collect  in 
great  numbers  around  you. 

A  very  good  and  safe  Remedy  for  Rheumatism. 

From  one  to  two  dollars  have  often  been  paid  for  this  re- 
cipe alone,  it  being  the  best  and  surest  remedy  to  cure  the 
rheumatism.  Let  it  be  known  therefore":  Take  a  piece  of 
cloth,  some  tape  and  thread,  neither  of  which  must  ever 
have  been  in  water;  the  thread  must  not  have  a  single  knot 
in  it,  and  the  cloth  and  tape  must  have  been  spun  by  a  child 
not  quite  or  at  least  not  more  than  seven  years  of  age.  The 
letter  given  below  must  be.  carefully  sowed  in  the  piece  of 
cloth,  and  tied  around  the  neck,  unbeshrewedly,  on  the  first 
Friday  in  the  decreasing  moon  ;  and  immediately  after  hang- 
ing it  around  the  neck,  the  Lord's  prayer  and  the  articles  of 
faith  must  be  repeated.  What  now  follows  must  be  written 
in  the  before  mentioned  letter  : 

"•May  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  grant  it, 
Amen.  Seek  immediately,  and  seek  ;  thus  commandeth  the 
Loid  thy  God,  through  the  first  man  whom  God  did  love 
upon  earth.  Seek  immediately,  and  seek;  thus  command- 
eth the  Lord  thy  God,  through  Luke,  the  Evangelist,  and 
through  Paul,  the  Apostle.  Seek  immediately,  and  seek  ; 
thus  commandeth  the  Lord  thy  God,  through  the  twelve 
messengers.  Seek  immediately,  and  seek;  thus  command- 
eth the  Lord  thy  God,  by  the  first  man,  that  God  might  be 
loved.     Seek  immediatelv,   and  convulse:  thus  command- 


33 

eth  the  Lord  thy  God,  through  the  Holy  Fathers,  who  have 
been  made  by  divine  and  holy  writ.  Seek  immediately, 
and  convulse ;  thus  commandeth  the  Lord  thy  God,  through 
the  dear  and  holy  angels,  and  through  his  paternal  and  di- 
vine Omnipotence,  and  his  heavenly  confidence  and  endur- 
ance. Seek  immediately,  and  convulse  ;  thus  commandeth 
the  Lord  thy  God,  through  the  burning  oven  which  was 
preserved  by  the  blessing  of  God.  Seek  immediately,  and 
convulse  5  thus  commandeth  the  Lord  thy  God,  through  all 
power  and  might,  through  the  prophet  Jonah  who  was  pre- 
served in  the  belly  of  the  whale  for  three  days  and  three 
nights,  by  the  blessing  of  God.  Seek  immediately,  and 
convulse  ;  thus  commandeth  the  Lord  thy  God,  through  all 
the  power  and  might  which  proceed  from  divine  humility, 
and  in  all  eternity ;  whereby  no  harm  be  done  unto  t  N  t 
nor  unto  any  part  of  his  body,  be  they  the  raving  convul- 
sions, or  the  yellow  convulsions,  or  the  white  convulsions, 
or  the  red  convulsions,  or  the  black  convulsions,  or  by 
whatever  name  convulsions  may  be  called  ;  these  all  shall 
do  no  harm  unto  thee  fNf  nor  to  any  part  of  thy  body, 
nor  to  thy  head,  nor  to  thy  neck,  nor  to  thy  heart,  nor  to 
thy  stomach,  nor  to  any  of  thy  reins,  nor  to  thy  arms,  nor 
to  thy  legs,  nor  to  thy  eyes,  nor  to  thy  tongue,  nor  to  any 
part  or  parcel  of  thy  body.  This  I  write  for  thee  f  N  f  in 
these  words,  and  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen. — God  bless  it.    Amen." 

jVbte. — If  any  one  writes  such  a  letter  for  another,  the 
Christian  name  of  the  person  must  be  mentioned  in  it  ;  as 
vou  will  observe,  where  the  N  stands  singly  in  the  above 
letter,  there  must  be  the  name. 

A  good  way  to  destroy  Worms  in  Bee-Hives. 
With  very  little  trouble  and  at  an  expense  of  a  quarter 
'  dollar,  you  can  certainly  free  your  bee-hives  from  worms 
for  a  whole  year.  Get  from  an  apothecary  store  the  pow- 
der called  Pensses  Blum,  which  will  not  injure  the  bees  in 
the  least.  The  application  of  it  is  as  follows  :  For  one  bee- 
hive you  take  as  much  of  this  powder,  as  the  point  of  your 
knife  will  hold,  mix  it  with  one  ounce  of  good  whiskey,  and 
put  it  in  a  common  vial,  then  make  a  hole  in  the  bee-hive 


34 

and  pour  it  in  thus  mixed  with  the  whiskey,  which  is  suffi- 
cient for  one  hive  at  once.  Make  the  hole  so  that  it  can  be 
easily  poured  in.  As  said  before,  a  quarter  dollar's  worth 
of  this  powder  is  enough  for  one  hive. 


Recipe  for  making  a  paste  to  prevent  gun  barrels  from  rust- 
ing, whether  iron  or  steel. 

Take  one  ounce  of  bear's  fat,  half  an  ounce  of  badger- 
grease,  half  an  ounce  of  snake's  fat,  one  ounce  of  almond 
oil,  and  a  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  pulverized  indigo,  and 
melt  it  all  together  in  a  new  vessel  over  a  fire,  stir  it  well, 
and  put  it  afterwards  into  some  vessel.  In  using  it,  a  lump 
as  large  as  a  common  nut  must  be  put  upon  a  piece  of 
woolen  cloth  and  then  rubbed  on  the  barrel  and  lock  of  the 
gun,  and  it  will  keep  the  barrel  from  rusting. 


To  make  a  Wick  which  is  never  consumed* 

Take  an  ounce  of  asbestos  and  boil  it  in  a  quart  of  strong 
ley  for  two  hours  ;  then  pour  off  the  ley  and  clarify  what  re- 
mains by  pouring  rain  water  on  it  three  or  four  times,  after 
which  you  can  form  a  wick  from  it  which  will  never  be  con- 
sumed by  the  fire. 

\  

A  Morning  Prayer,  to  be  spoken  before  starting  on  a  jour- 
ney, which  will  save  the  person  from  all  mishaps. 

I,  [here  the  name  is  to  be  pronounced,]  will  go  on  a 
journey  to-day ;  I  will  walk  upon  God's  way,  and  walk 
where  God  himself  did  walk,  and  our  dear  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  our  dearest  Virgin  with  her  dear  little  babe, 
with  her  seven  rings  and  her  true  things.  Oh  thou !  my 
dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  am  thine  own,  that  no  dog  may 
bite  me,  no  wolf  bite  me,  and  no  murderer  secretly  approach 
me:  Save  me,  oh  my  God,  from  sudden  death!  I  am  in 
God's  hands,  and  there  I  will  bind  myself.  In  God's  hands 
I  am  by  our  Lord  Jesus'  five  wounds,  that  any  gun  or  other 
arms  may  not  do  me  any  more  harm  than  the  virginity  of 
our  Holy  Virgin  Mary  was  injured  by  the  favour  of  her  be- 
loved Jesus. — After  this  say  three  Lord's  prayer,  the  Ava 
Maria,  and  the  articles  of  faith. 


35 

Jl  safe  and  approved  means  to  be  applied  in  limes  of  Fire 
and  Pestilence. 

Wellcome  !  thou  firey  fiend  !  do  not  extend  further  than 
thou  already  hast.  This  I  count  unto  thee  as  a  repentant 
act,  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

I  command  unto  thee,  fire,  by  the  power  of  God,  which 
createth  and  worketh  every  thing,  that  thou  now  do  cease, 
and  not  extend  any  further;  as  certainly  as  Christ  was 
standing  on  the  Jordan's  stormy  banks  being  baptised  by 
John,  the  holy  man. 

This  I  count  unto  thee  as  a  repentant  act,  in  the  name  of 
the  holy  Trinity. 

I  command  unto  thee,  fire,  by  the  power  of  God,  now  to 
abate  thy  flames  ;  as  certainly  as  Mary  retained  her  virgin- 
ity before  all  ladies  who  retained  theirs,  so  chaste  and  pure  j 
therefore,  fire,  cease  thy  wrath. 

This  I  count  unto  thee,  fire,  as  a  repentant  act,  in  the 
name  of  the  most  holy  trinity. 

I  command  unto  thee,  fire,  to  abate  thy  heat,  by  the  pre- 
cious blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  has  shed  for  us,  and 
our  sins  and  transgressions. 

This  I  count  unto  thee,  fire,  as  a  repentant  act,  in  the 
name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  king  of  the  Jews,  help  us  from  (his 
dangerous  fire,  and  guard  this  land  and  its  bounds  from  all 
epidemic  disease  and  pestilence. 

REMARKS. 

This  has  been  discovered  by  a  christian  Gipsey  King  of 
Egypt — Anno  1740,  on  the  10th  of  June,  six  Gipsies  were 
executed  on  the  gallows  in  the  Kingdom  of  Prussia.  The 
seventh  of  their  party  was  a  man  of  eighty  years  of  age,  and 
was  to  be  executed  by  the  sword,  on  the  lrith  of  the  same 
month.  But  fortunately  for  him,  mute  unexpectedly  a  con- 
flagration broke  out,  and  the  old  Gipsey  was  taken  to  the 
io  try  his  arts  j  which  he  successfully  done  to  the  great 
surprise  of  all  present,  by  bespeaking  the  conflagration  in  a. 
manner  that  it  wholely  and  entirely  ceased  and  disappeared 


GO 

in  less  than  ten  minutes.  Upon  thisj  the  proof  having  been 
given  in  day  time,  he  received  pardon  and  was  set  at  liberty. 
This  was  confirmed  and  attested  by  the  government  of  the 
King  of  Prussia,  and  the  General  Superintendent  at 
Kcenigsberg,  and  given  to  the  public  in  print.  It  was  first 
published  at  Koenigsberg  in  Prussia,  by  Alexander  Baus- 
man,  anno  1745. 

Whoever  has  this  epistle  in  his  house,  will  be  safe  from 
anger  of  fire,  as  well  as  from  lightning.     If  a  pregnant, 
v.  oman  carries  this  letter  about  her,  neither  enchantment  or 
spints  can  injure  her  or  her  child.      Further,   if  any 
body  has  this  letter  in  his  house,  or  carries  it  about  his  per- 
son, he  will  be  safe  from  the  injuries  of  pestilence. 

While  saying  these  sentences  one  must  pass  three  times 
around  the  fire.     This  has  availed  in  all  instances. 


To  prevent  Conflagration. 

Take  a  black  chicken  in  the  morning  or  evening,  cut  its 
head  off  and  throw  it  upon  the  ground  ;  cut  its  stomach  out, 
jet  Leave  it  all  together  ;  then  try  to  get  a  piece  of  a  shirt 

ii  was  worn  by  a  chaste  virgin  during  her  terms,   and 

it  a  piece  as  large  as  a  common  dish  from  that  part 
which  is  bloodiest.     These  two  things  wrap  up  together, 

try  to  get  an  egg  which  was  laid  on  maunday  Thursday. 
These  three  things  put  together  in  wax;  then  put  them  in  a 
poj,  holding  eight  quarts,  and  bury  it  under  the  threshhold 
of  your  house,  with  the  aid  of  God,  and  as  long  as  there 
remains  a  single  stick  of  your  house  together,  no  conflagra- 

will  happen. — If  your  house  should  happen  to  be  on  fire 
already  in  front  and  behind,  the  fire  will,  nevertheless,   do 

viry^to  you,  nor  to  your  children.     This  is  done  by  the 

power  of  God,   and   is  quite  certain  and  infallible. — If  fire 

ild  bieak  out  unexpectedly,  then  try  to  get  a  whole  shirt 

in  which  >o»»r  servant  maid  had  her  terms,  or   a  sheet  on 

h  a  chifd  was  born,  and  throw  it  into  the  fire,  wrapped 
•  p  in  a  |  v.r\  without   saying  anything.     This  will 


y  37  * 

To  prevent  Witches  from  bewitching  Cattle,  to  be  written 
and  placed  in  the  stable  /  and  against  Bad  Men  and  Evil 
Spirits,  which  nightly  torment  old  and  young  people,  to 
be  written  and  placed  on  the  bedstead. 

"Trotter  Head,  I  forbid  thee  tny  house  and  premises,*! 
forbid  thee  my  horse  and  cow  stable,  I  forbid  th<?e  my  bed- 
stead, that  thou  raayest  not  breathe  upon  me  :  breathe  into 
sojnevothei;  house,  ,t  ascended  every  hil},.uutil> 

-J thou,  hast  counted  ^v.  ■  post,"  and   until  thou  hast 

crossed,  every  wa1  !   thus  dear  day  may  come  again 

into  my  house,  in  e  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 

the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen.'" 

This  will  certainly  protect  and  fre.e  all  persons  and  ani- 
mals from  witchcraft. 


To  prevent  bad  people  from  getting  about  the  Cattle. 

Take  wormwood,  gith,  five-finger  weed,  and  assafoedita  j 
three  cents  worth  of  each ;  the  straw  of  horse-beans,  some 
dirt  swept, together  behind  the  door  of  the  stable,  and  a  lit- 
tle salt.  Tie  these  all  up  together  with  a  tape,  and  put  the 
bundle  in  a  hole  about  the  threshold  over  which  your  cattle 
pass  in  and  out,  and  cover  it  well  with  lignum  Vitae  wood. 
This  will  certainly  be  of  use. 

■  * 

To  Extinguish  Fire  without  Water. 
»  Write  the  following  letters  upon  each  «ide  of  a  plate,  and 
throw  it  into  the  fire,  and  it  will  be  extinguished  forthwith: 
S    A    T    O    R 


A 

R 

E 

P 

0 

T 

E 

N 

E 

T 

O 

P 

E 

R 

A 

R 

O 

T 

A 

S 

Another  Method  of  stopping  Fire. 

Our  Dear  Sarah  journoyeth  through  the  land,   havin^ 
>t  brand  in  her  hand.  '  The  firy  brand  heats  ;  the  firy 
brand  sweats.     Firy  brand  stop  your  heat;  firy  brand  stop 


veat. 


38 

How  to  Fasten  or  Spell-bind  anything. 
Yon  say:  "Christ's  cross  and  Christ's  crown,  Christ 
Jesus'  coloured  blood,  be  thou  every  hour  good.  God,  the 
Father,  is  before  me ;  God,  the  Son,  is  beside  me ;  God,  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  behind  me.  Whoever  now  is  stronger  than 
these  three  persons,  may  come  by  day  or  night,  to  attack 
me."     t  t  f     Then  say  the  Lord's  prayer  three  times. 

'    Another  way  of  Fastening  or  Spell-binding.       .  ^^ 

After  repeating  the  above,  you  speak:  "At  every  step 
may  Jesus  walk  with  [name].  He  is  my  head,  I  am  his 
limb  ;  therefore  Jesus  be  with  [name]. 


A  Benediction  to  prevent  Fire. 
"The  bitter  sorrows  and  the  death  of  our  dear  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ  shall,prevail:  Fire,  and  wind,  and  great  heat, 
and  all  that  is  within  the  power  of  these  elements,  I  com- 
mand thee  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  lias  spoken 
to  the  winds  and  the  waters,  and  they  obeyed  him.  By 
these  powerful  words  spoken  by  Jesus,  I  command,  threat- 
en, and  inform  thee,  fire,  flame,  and  heat,  and  your  powers 
as  elements,  to  fiee  forthwith.  The  holy,  rosy  blood  of  our 
dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  may  rule  it.  Thou,  fire  and  wind, 
and  great  heat,  I  command  thee,  as  the  Lord  did  by  his  ho- 
ly angels  command  the  great  heat  in  the  firy  oven  when 
those  three  holy  men,  Sadrach  and  his  companions,  Mesach 
and  Obed  RBgo,  to  leave  them  untouched,  as  was  done  ac- 
cordingly. Thus  they  shalt  abate,  thou  fire,  flame,  and 
great  heat,  the  Almighty  God  having  spoken  in  creating  the 
four  elements,  together  with  heaven  and  earth  :  Fiat,  Fiat, 
Fiat!  that  is  :  It  shall  5e,  in  the  name  of  God,  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.     Amen." 


How  to  Believe  Persons  or  Animal;  after  being  Bewitched. 

Three  false  tongues  have  bound  thee,  three  holy  tongues 
have  spoken  for  thee.  The  first  is  God,  the  father,  the  se- 
cond is  God,  the  son,  and  the  third  is  God*  the  holy  ghost. 
They  will  give  you  blood  and  flesh,  peace  and  comfort. — 
Flesh  and  blood  are  grown  upon  thee,  born  on  thee,  and 


39 

lost  on  thee.  If  any  man  trample  on  thee  with  his  horse-, 
God  will  bless  thee,  and  the  holy  Ciprian  ;  has  any  woman 
trampled  on  thee,  God  and  the  body  of  Mary  shall  bless 
thee  ',  if  any  servant  has  given  you  trouble,  I  bless  thee 
through  God  and  the  laws  of  heaven ;  if  any  servant  maid 
or  woman  has  led  you  astray,  God  and  the  heavenly  con- 
stellations shall  bless  thee.  Heaven  is  above  thee,  the  earth 
is  beneath  thee,  and  thou  art  between.  I  bless  thee  against 
all  tramplings  by  horses.  Our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
walked  about  in  his  bitter  afflictions  and  death  ;  and  all  th.3 
Jews  that  had  spoken  and  promised,  trembled  in  their  false- 
hoods and  mockery.  Look,  now  trembleth  the  Son  of  God, 
as  if  he  had  the  itch,  said  the  Jews.  And  then  spake  Jesus: 
I  have  not  the  itch,  and  no  one  shall  have  it.  Whoever 
will  assist  me  to  carry  the  cross,  him  I  will  free  from  the 
itch,  in  the  name  of  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the  holy 
ghost.     Amen. 

To  protect  houses  and  premises  against  Sickness  8f  Tlieft. 

Ito;  alo  Massa  Dandi  Bando,  III.     Amen. 
J.  R.  N.  11.  J. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  stepped  into  the  hall,  and  the 
Jews  searched  him  everywhere.  Thus  shall  those  who  now 
speak  evil  of  me  with  their  false  tongues,  and  conteud  a- 
gainst  me,  one  day  bear  sorrows,  be  silenced,  dumbstruck, 
intimidated,  and  abused,  for  ever  and  ever,  by  the  glory  of 
God.  The  glory  of  God  shall  assist  me  in  this.  Do  tkou 
aid  me  J.  J.  J.  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Against  Mishaps  and  Dangers  in  the  house. 

Sanct   Matheus,    Sanct  Marcus,    Sanct  Lucas, 
Sanct  Johannis. 


A  Direction  for  a  Gipsy -Sentence,  to  be  carried  about  the 
person,  as  a  protection  under  all  circumstances. 

Like  unto  the  prophet  Jonas,  as  a  type  of  Christ,    who 
was  guarded  for  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  belly  of 


40 

a  whale,  thus  shall  the  Almighty  God,  as  a  father,  guard 
and  protect  me  from  all  evil.     J.  J.  J. 

Against  Evil  Spirits  and  all  manner  of  Witchcraft. 
I. 

N.  I.  R. 

1. 

SANCTUS     SPIRITUS. 

I. 

N.  I.  R. 

I. 

All  this  be  guarded,  here  in  time,  and  there  in  eternity. 
Amen. 

You  must  write  all  the  above  on  a  piece  of  white  paper, 
and  carry  it  about  you. — The  characters  or  letters  above, 
signify  :   "God  bless  me  here  in  time,  and  there  eternally." 

Against  Swellings. 
"  Three  pure  Virgins  went  out  on  a  journey,  to  inspect  a 
swelling  and  sickness.  The  first  one  said  :  It  is  hoarse. 
The  second  said  :  It  is  not.  The  third  said  :  If  it  is  not, 
then  will  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  come."  This  must  be  spok- 
en in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 

Against  Adversities  and  all  manner  of  Contentions. 
Power,  hero,  Prince  of  Peace,  J.  J.  J. 


Against  Danger  and  Death,  to  be  carried  about  the  person. 

I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  will  call 
me  from  the  grave,  &c. 

How  to  Treat  a  Cow  after  the  Milk  is  taken  from  her. 

Give  to  the  cow  three  spoonsful  of  her  last  milk,  and  say 
to  the  spirits  in  her  blood  :  "Ninny  has  done  it,  and  I  have 
swallowed  her  in  the  name  of  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and 
the  holy  ghost.  Amen." — Pray  what  you  choose  at  the  same 
time. 


41  • 

Another  method  of  treating  a  Sick  Cowt 

J.   The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  poured  out  milk  ; 
J.   The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  poured  out  water  ; 
J.   The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  has  poured  them  out. 

These  lines  must  be  written  on  three  pieces  of  white  pa- 
per, then  take  the  milk  of  the  sick  cow  and  these  three 
pieces  of  paper,  put  them  in  a  pot,  and  scrape  a  little  of  the 
scull  of  a  criminal  on  them  ;  close  it  well,  and  put  it  over 
a  hot  fire,  and  the"witch  will  have  to  die. — If  you  take  the 
three  pieces  of  paper,  with  the  writing  on  tkem,  in  jour 
mouth,  and  go  out  before  your  house,  speak  three  times,  and 
then  give  them  to  your  cattle,  you  shall  not  only  see  all  the 
witches,  but  your  cattle  will  also  get  well  again. 

Against  the  Fever. 
Pray  early  in  the  morning,  and  then  turn  your  shirt  a- 
round  the  left  sleeve,  and  say:  "turn  thou,  shirt,  and  thou, 
fever,  do  likewise,  turn.  [Do  not  forget  to  mention  the 
name  of  the  person  having  the  fever.]  This  I  tell  thee, 
for  thy  repentance  sake,  in  the  name  of  .Grod,  the  father, 
the  son,  and  the  holy  ghost.  Amen. — If  you  repeat  this  &W 
three  successive  mornings,  the  fever  will  djgajftrt&f. 

To  Spell-bind  a  Thief  so  that  he  cannot  stir. 

This  benediction  must  be  spoken  a  Thursday  morning, 
before  sunrise,  and  in  the  open  air : 

"Thus  shall  rule  it  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the  ho- 
ly ghost,  Amen.  Thirty -three  Angels  speak  to  each  other, 
coming  to  administer  in  company  with  Mary.  Then  s-poke. 
dear  Daniel,  the  holy  one  :  Trust,  my  dear  woman,  I  see 
some  thieves  coming  who  intend  stealing  your  dear  bah"  ; 
this  I  cannot  conceal  from  you.  Then  spake  our  dear  lady 
to  Saint  Peter  :  I  have  bound  with  a  band,  through  Christ's 
hand  ;  therefore  my  thieves  are  bound  even  by  the  hand  of 
Christ,  if  they  wish  to  steal  mine  own,  in  the  house,  in  the 
chest,  upon  the  meadow  or  fields,  in  the  woods,  in  the  or- 
chard, in  th^viueyard,  or  in  the  garden,  or  wherever  they 
intend  to  steal.  Our  dear  lady  said  :  "Whoever  chooses  may 
steal  ;  yet  if  any  one  does  steal ,  he  sjiall  stan^d  like  a  buck, 


42 

he  shall  stand  like  a  stake,  and  shall  count  all  the  stones 
upon  the  earth,  and  all  the  stars  in  the  heavens.  Thus  I 
give  thee  leave,  and  command  every  spirit  to  be  master  over 
every  thief,  by  the  guardianship  of  Saint  Daniel,  and  by 
the  burden  of  this  world's  goods.  And  the  countenance 
shall  be  unto  thee,  that  thou  canst  not  move  from  the  spot, 
as  long  as  my  tongue  in  the  flesh  shall  not  give  thee  leave. 
This  I  command  thee  by  the  holy  virgin  Mary,  the  Mother 
of  God,  by  the  power  and  might  by  which  he  has  created 
heaven  and  earth,  by  the  host  of  all  the  angels,  and  by  all 
the  Saints  of  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the  holy  ghost, 
Amen." — If  you  wish  to  set  the  thief  free,  you  must  tell 
him  to  leave  in  the  name  of  Saint  John. 


Another  ivay  to  Still-bind  Tliieves. 

Ye  thieves,  I  conjure  you,  to  be  obedient  like  Jesus 
Christ,  who  obeyed  his  heavenly  father  unto  the  cross,  and 
to  stand  without  moving  out  of  my  sight,  in  the  name  of 
the  Trinity.  I  command  you  by  the  power  of  God  and  the 
incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  to  move  out  of  my  sight, 
t  t  t  like  Jesus  Christ  was  standing  on  Jordan's  stormy 
banks  to  be  baptized  by  John.  And  furthermore,  I  conjure 
you,  horse  and  rider,  to  stand  still  and  not  to  move  out  of 
my  sight,  like  Jesus  Christ  did  stand  when  he  was  about  to 
be  nailed  to  the  cross  to  release  the  fathers  of  the  church 
from  the  bonds  of  hell.  Ye  thieves,  I  bind  you  with  the 
same  bonds  with  which  Jesus  our  Lord  has  bound  hell ;  and 
thus  ye  shall  be  bound ;  f  t  t  and  the  same  words  that  bind 
you,  shall  also  release  you. 


To  effect  the  same  in  less  time. 

Thou  horseman  and  footman,  you  are  coming  under  your 
hats  ;  you  are  scattered!  With  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
with  his  five  holy  wounds,  thy  barrel,  thy  gun,  and  thy  pis- 
tol are  bound;  sabre,  sword,  and  knife/are  enchanted  and 
bound,  in  the  name  of  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the 
holy  ghost.  Amen. 

This  must  be  spoken  three  times. 


43 

To  Release  Spell-bound  Persona. 
You  horseman  and  footman,  whom  I  here  conjured  at  this 
time,  you  may  pass  on  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  through 
the  word  of  God  and  the  will  of  Christ  j  ride  ye  on  now  and 
pass.  

To  Compel  a  Thief  to  return  Stolen  Goods. 

Early  in  the  morning  before  sunrise,  you  must  go  to  a 
pear  tree,  and  take  with  you  three  nails  out  of  a  coffin,  or 
three  horse-shoe  nails  that  were  never  used,  and  holding 
these  towards  the  rising  sun,  you  must  say  : 

"Oh  thief,  I  bind  thee  by  the  first  nail,  which  I  drive 
into  thy  scull  and  thy  brain,  to  return  the  goods  thou  hast 
stolen,  to  their  former  place  ;  thou  shalt  feel  as  sick  and  as 
anxious  to  see  men,  and  to  see  the  place  you  stole  from,  as 
felt  the  desciple  Judas  after  betraying  Jerusalem.  I  bind 
thee  by  the  other  nail,  which  I  drive  into  your  lungs  and 
liver,  to  return  the  stolen  goods  to  their  former  place  ;  thou 
shalt  feel  as  sick  and  as  anxious  to  see  men,  and  to  see  the 
place  you  have  stolen  from,  as  did  Pilate  in  the  fires  of  hell. 
The  third  nail  I  shall  drive  into  thy  foot,  oh  thief,  in  order 
that  thou  shalt  return  the  stolen  goods  to  the  very  same 
place  from  which  thou  hast  stolen  them.  Oh  thief,  I  bind 
thee,  and  compel  thee,  by  the  three  holy  nails  which  were 
driven  through  the  hands  and  feet  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  re- 
turn the  stolen  goods  to  the  very  same  place  from  which 
thou  hast  stolen  them."  f  f  t  The  thrge  nails,  however, 
must  be  greased  with  the  grease  from  an  excuted  criminal 
or  other  sinful  person. 

A  Benediction  for  all  purposes. 
Jesus,  I  will  arise  j  Jesus,  do  thou  accompany  me;  Jesus 
do  thou  lock  my  heart  into  thine,  and  let  my  body  and  my 
soul  be  commended  unto  thee.  The  Lord  is  crucified.  May 
God  guard  my  senses  that  evil  spirits  may  not  overcome 
me,  in  the  name  of  > God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the  holy 
ghost.     Amen.        '  

To  Win  every  Game  one  engages  in. 
Tie  the  heart  of  a  bat  with  a  red  silken  string  to  the  right 
arm,  and  you  will  win  every  game  at  cards  you  play. 


44 

Against  Burns. 
Our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ  going  on  a  journey,  saw  a 
fire-brand  burning:  it  was  Saint  Lorenzo  stretched  out  on 
a  roast.  He  rendered  him  assistance  and  consolation ;  he 
lifted  his  divine  hand,  and  blessed  the  brand  ;  he  stopped  it 
from  spreading  deeper  and  wider.  Thus  may  the  burning 
be  blessed  in  the  name  of  God,  the  father,  the  son,  and  the 
holy  ghost.     Amen. 

Another  Remedy  for  Burns. 

Clear  out  brand,  but  never  in ;  be  thou  cold  or  hot,  thou 
must  cease  to  burn.  May  God  guard  thy  blood  and  thy 
flesh,  thy  marrow  and  thy  bones,  and  every  artery  great  or 
email — they  all  shall  be  guarded  and  protected  in  the  name 
of  God,  against  inflammation  and  mortification,  in  the  name 
of  God  the  father,  the  son,  and  the  holy  ghost.     Amen. 

To  be  given  to  Cattle,  against  Witchcraft . 

S  A  T  O  R 
A  R  E  P  O 
TENET 
OPERA 
ROTAS 

This  must  be  written  on  paper  and  the  cattle  mad*  to 
swallow  it  in  their  feed. 


Hoio  to  tie  up  and  heal  Wounds. 

Speak  the  following  :  *'  This  wound  I  tie  up  in  three 
names,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  take  from  it,  heat,  water, 
falling  ofFof  the  flesh,  swelling,  and  all  that  may  be  injur- 
ious about  the  swelling,  in  the  name  of  the  holy  trinity." — 
This  must  be  spoken  three  times  ;  then  draw  a  string  three 
times  around  the  wound,  and  put  it  under  the  corner  of  the 
house  towards  the  east,  and  say:  "I  put  thee  there,  f  t  t 
in  order  that  thou  mayest  take  unto  thyself  the  gathered 
water,  the  swelling,  and  the  running,  and  all  that  may  be 
injurious  about  the  wound.  Amen." — Then  repeat  tke 
Lord's  prayer  and  some  good  hymn. 

4* 


45 

To  take  the  Pain  out  of  a  Fresh  Wound. 

Our  clear  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  a  great  many  biles  and 
wounds,  and  yet  he  never  had  them  dressed.  They  did 
not  grow  old,  they  were  not  cut,'  nor  were  they  ever  found 
running.  Jonas  was  blind,  and  I  spoke  to  the  heavenly 
child,  as  true  as  the  five  holy  wounds  were  inflicted. 

A  Benediction  against  Worms. 

Peter  and  Jesus  went  out  upon  the  fields  ;  they  ploughed 
three  furrows,  and  ploughed  up  three  worms.  The  one 
was  white,  the  other  was  black,  and  the  third  one  was  red. 
Now  all  the  worms  are  dead,  in  the  name  t  t  t-  Repeat 
these  words  three  times. 


Against  every  Evil  Influence. 
Lord  Jesus,  thy  wounds,  so  red,  will  guard  me  against 


death 


To  retain  the  Right  in  Court  and  Council. 

Jesus  Nazareuus,  Rex  Judeorum. 

First  carry  these  characters  with  you,  written  on  paper, 
and  then  repeat  the  following  words:  "I,  (name)  appear 
before  the  house  of  the  judge.  Three  dead  men  look  out  of 
the  window ;  one  having  no  tongue,  the  other  having  no 
lungs,  and  the  third  was  sick,  blind  and  dumb." — This  is 
intended  to  be  used  when  you  are  standing  before  a  court 
in  your  right,  and  the  judge  not  being  favorably  disposed 
towards  you.  While  on  your  way  to  the  court,  you  must 
repeat  the  benediction  already  given  above. 

To  stop  Bleeding  at  any  time. 
As  soon  as  you  cut  yourself,   you   must  say:    "Blessed 
wound,  blessed  hour,    blessed  be  the  day  on  which  Jesus 
Christ  was  born,  in  the  name  f  1 1     Amen. 


Another  way  to  Stop  Blood. 
Write  the  name  of  the  four  principle  waters  of  the  whole 
world,  flowing  out  of  Paradise,  on  a  paper,  namely  :  Pison, 


45 

Gihon,  Hcdekicl,  and  Pheat,  and  put  it  on  the  wound.  In 
the  first  book  of  Moses,  the  second  chapter,  verses  11,  12, 
13,  you  will  find  them.      You  will  find  this  effective. 

Another  similar  Prescription. 
Breathe  three  times  upon  the  patient,  and  say  the  Lord's 
prayer  three  times  until  the  words,    "upon  the  earth,"  and 
the  bleeding  will  be  stoped. 

Another  still  more  certain  way  to  stop  Bleeding. 
If  the  bleeding  will  not  stop,  or  if  a  vein  has  been  cut, 
then  lay  the  following  on  it,  and  it  will  stop  that  hour.  Yet 
if  any  one  does  not  believe  this,  let  him  write  the  letters 
upon  a  knife  and  stab  an  irrational  animal,  and  he  will  not 
be  able  to  draw  blood.  And  whosoever  carries  this  about 
him,  will  be  safe  against  all  his  enemies  : 

I.  m.  I.  K.  I.  B.  I.  P.  a.  x.  v.  ss.    Ss.   vas 
I.  P.  O.  unay  Lit.  Dom.  inper  vobism. 

And  whenever  a  woman  is  going  to  give  birth  to  a  child, 
or  is  otherwise  afflicted,  let  her  have  this  letter  about  her 
person ;  it  will  certainly  be  of  avail. 

A  peculiar  sign  to  keep  back  men  and  animals. 
Whenever  you  are  in  danger  of  being  attacked,  then  car- 
ry this  sign  with  you  :  4<  In  the  name  of  God  I  make  the 
attack.  May  it  please  my  Redeemer  to  assist  me.  Upon 
the  holy  assistance  of  God  I  depend  entirely  ;  upon  the  ho- 
ly assistance  of  God  and  my  gun  I  rely  very  truly.  God 
alone  be  with  us.     Blessed  be  Jesus. 


Protection  of  one's  House  and  Hearth. 
Beneath  thy  guardianship,  I  am  safe  against  all  tempests 
and  all  enemies,  J.  J.  J. 

These  three  J's  signify  Jesus  three  times. 

A  Charm — to  be  carried  about  the  person. 
Carry  these  words  about  you,  and  nothing  can  hit  you  : 


4T 

Annania,  Azaria^  and  Misael,  blessed  be  the  Lord  j  fer  he 
has  redeemed  us  from  hell,  and  has  saved  as  from  death, 
and  he  has  redeemed  us  out  of  the  firy  furnace,  and  has  pre- 
served us  even  in  the  midst  of  the  fire  ;  in  the  same  manner 
may  it  please  him,  the  Lord,  that  there  be  no  fire  : 

I. 

N.  I.  R. 
I. 


To  Charm  Enemies,  Robbers  and  Murderers. 

God  be  with  you,  brethern  ;  stop,  ye  thieves,  robbers, 
murderers,  horsemen,  and  soldiers,  in  all  humility,  for  we 
have  tasted  the  rosy  blood  of  Jesus.  Your  rifles  and  guns 
will  be  stopped  up  with  the  holy  blood  of  Jesus  ;  and  all 
swords  and  arms  are  made  harmless  by  the  five  holy  wounds 
of  Jesus.  There  are  three  roses  upon  the  heart  of  God  : 
the  first  is  beneficent,  the  other  is  omnipotent,  and  the 
third  is  his  holy  will.  You,  thieves,  must  therefore  stand 
under  it,  standing  still  as  long  as  I  will.  In  the  name  of 
God  the  father,  son,  and  holy  ghost,  you  arc  conjured  and 
made  to  stand, 


Protection  against  all  kinds  of  Weapons. 

Jesus,  God  and  man,  do  thou  protect  me  against  all  man- 
ner of  guns,  fire  arms,  long  or  short,  of  any  kind  of  metal. 
Keep  thou  thine  fire,  like  the  Virgin  Mary, -who  kept  her 
fire  both  before  and  after  her  birth.  May  Christ  bind  up 
all  fire  arms  after  the  manner  of  his  having  bound  up  him- 
self in  humility,  while  in  the  flesh.  Jesus,  do  thou  render 
harmless  all  arms  and  weapons,  like  unto  the  husband  of 
Mary  the  mother  of  God,  he  having  been  harmless  likewise. 
Furthermore,  do  thoo  guard  the  three  holy  drops  of  blood 
which  Christ  sweated  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Jesus  Christ! 
do  thou  protect  me  against  being  killed,  and  against  burn- 
ing fires.  Jesus,  do  thou  not  suffer  me  to  be  killed,  much 
less  to  be  damned,  without  having  received  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per. May  God  the  father,  son,  and  holy  ghost,  assist  me 
in  this.     Amen. 


49 

A  Charm  against  Fire-arms. 

Jesus  passed  over  the  Red  Sea,  and  looked  upon  the  land ; 
and  thus  must  break  all  ropes  and  bands,  and  thus  must 
break  all  manner  of  fire-arms,  rifles,  guns,  or  pistols,  and 
all  false  tougues  be  silenced.  May  the  benediction  of  God 
on  creating  the  first  man,  always  be  upon  me  ;  the  benedic- 
tion spoken  by  God,  when  he  ordered  in  a  dream  that  Jo- 
seph and  Mary  together  with  Jesus  should  flee  into  Egypt, 
be  upon  me  always,  and  may  the  holy  f  be  ever  lovely  and 
beloved  in  my  right  hand.  I  journey  through  the  country 
at  large  where  no  one  is  robbed,  killed,  or  murdered, — 
where  no  one  can  do  me  any  injury,  and  where  not  even  a 
dog  could  bite  me,  or  any  other  animal  tear  me  to  pieces. 
In  all  things  let  me  be  protected,  as  also  my  flesh  and  blood, 
against  sins  and  false  tongues  which  reach  from  the  earth 
up  to  heaven,  by  the  power  of  the  four  Evangelists,  in  the 
name  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Amen. 


Another  for  the  same. 

I,  £name/]  conjure  ye  guns,  swords,  and  knives,  as  well 
as  all  other  kinds  of  arms,  by  the  spear  that  pierced  the 
side  of  God,  and  opened  it  so  that  blood  and  water  could 
flow  out,  that  ye  do  not  injure  me,  a  servant  of  God,  in  the 
fit*  I  conjure  ye  by  Saint  Stephan,  who  was  stoned  by 
the  virgin,  that  ye  cannot  injure  me  who  am  a  servant  of 
God,  in  the  name  of  ftt«     Amen. 


A  Charm  against  shooting,  cutting  or  thrusting. 

In  the  name  of  J.  J.  J.  Amen.  I,  [name,]  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  true  salvation;  Jesus  Christ  governs,  reigns,  defeats 
and  conquers  every  enemy,  visible  or  invisible  ;  Jesus,  be 
thou  with  me  at  all  times,  for  ever  and  ever,  upon  all  roads 
and  ways,  upon  the  water  and  the  land,  on  the  mountain 
and  in  the  valley,  in  the  house  and  in  the  yard,  in  the 
whole  world  wherever  I  am,  stand,  run,  ride  or  drive  • 
whether  I  sleep  or  wake,  eat  or  drink,  there  be  thou  also, 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  at  all  times,  late  and  early,  every  hour, 
every  moment  j  and  in  all  my  goings  in  or  goings  out. 


■13 

Those  five  holy  red  wounds,  oh  Lord  Jesu9  Christ,  may 
they  guard  me  against  all  fire-arms,  be  they  secret  or  pub- 
lic, that  they  cannot  injure  me,  or  do  me  any  harm  whatever, 
in  the  name  of  ttf-  May  Jesus  Christ  with  his  guardian- 
ship and  protection  shield  me,  (name),  always  from  daily 
commission  of  sins,  worldly  injuries  and  injustice,  from  con- 
tempt, from  pestilence  and  other  diseases,  from  fear,  tor- 
ture and  great  suffering,  from  all  evil  intentions,  from  false 
tongues  and  old  clatter  brains  ;  and  that  no  kind  of  fire- 
arms can  inflict  any  injury  to  my  body,  do  thou  take  care 
of  me  f  t  t«  And  that  no  band  of  thieves,  nor  Gipsies, 
highway  robbers,  incendiaries,  witches  and  other  evil  spir- 
its may  secretly  enter  my  house  or  premises,  nor  break  in  j 
may  the  dear  Virgin  Mary,  and  all  children  who  are  in 
heaven  with  God  in  eternal  joys,  protect  and  guard  me  a- 
gainst  them  ;  and  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  shall  strength- 
en me,  the  wisdom  of  God  the  Son  shall  enlighten  me,  and 
the  grace  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  empower  me  from 
this  hour  unto  all  eternity.     Amen. 

^S  To  Charm  Guns  and  other  Arms. 

The  blessing  which  came  from  heaven  at  the  birth  of 
Christ,  be  with  me  (name).  The  blessing  of  God  at  the 
creation  of  the  first  man,  be  with  ire  ',  the  blessing  of  Christ 
on  being  imprisoned,  bound,  lashed,  crowned  so  dreadfully 
and  beaten,  and  dicing  on  the  cross,  be  with  me;  the  bless- 
ing which  the  Priest  spoke  over  the  tender,  joyful  corpse  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be  with  me  ;  the  constancy  of  the 
holy  Mary  and  all  the  Saints  of  God,  of  the  three  holy 
kings,  Casper,  Mclchior,  and  Balthasar,  be  with  me ;  the 
holy  four  Evangelists,  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  be 
with  me  ;  the  Archangels  St.  Michael,  St.  Gabriel,  St. 
Raphael,  and  St.  Uriel,  be  with  me  ;  the  twelve  holy  mes- 
sengers of  the  Patriarchs  and  all  the  Hosts  of  Heaven,  be 
with  me  ;  and  the  inexpressible  number  of  all  the  Saints, 
be  witluutc.     Amen. 

Papa,       11.      tarn,      Tetregammaten       Angen. 
Jesus  Nazarenus.  Rex  Judeorum. 


so 

To  prevent  being  Cheated,  Charmed,  or  Bewitched,  and  to 
be  at  all  times  blessed. 
Like' unto  the  cup,  and  the  wine,  and  the  holy  supper, 
which  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gave  unto  his  dear  disci- 
ples on  Maunday  Thursday,  may  the  Lord  Jesus  guard 
me  in  day  time  and  at  night,  that  no  dog  may  bite  me,  no 
wild  beast  tear  me  to  pieces,  no  tree  fall  on  me,  no  water 
rise  against  me,  no  fire-arms  injure  me,  no  weapons,  no 
steel,  no  iron  cut  me,  no  fire  burn  me,  no  false  sentence 
fall  upon  me,  no  false  tongue  injure  me,  no  rogue  enrage 
me,  and  that  no  fiends,  no  witchcraft  and  enchantment  can 
harm  me.     Amen. 


Different  Directions  to  effect  the  same. 

The  Holy  Trinity  guard  me,  and  be  and  remain  with  me 
on  the  water  and  upon  the  land,  in  the  water  or  in  the 
fields,  in  cities  or  villages,  in  the  whole  world  wherever  I 
am.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  protect  me  against  all  my  ene- 
mies, secret  or  public  ;  and  may  the  Eternal  Godhead  also 
guard  me,  through  the  bitter  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ ;  his 
holy  rosy  blood,  shed  on  the  cross,  assist  me,  J.  J.  Jesus 
has  been  crucified,  tortured,  and  died.  These  are  true 
words  ;  and  in  the  same  way  must  all  words  be  efficacious 
which  are  here  put  down,  and  spoken  in  prayet  by  me. 
This  shall  assist  me  that  I  shall  not  be  imprisoned,  bound, 
or  overcome  by  any  one.  Before  me  all  guns  and  other 
weapons  shall  be  of  no  use  or  power.  Fire-arms,  hold  your 
fire  in  the  almighty  hand  of  God.  Thus  all  fire-arms  shall 
be  charmed,  fff  When  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  fastened  to  the  tree  of  the  cross ;  like  unto  the 
son  of  the  heavenly  father  who  was  obedient  unto  death, 
may  the  eternal  Godhead  protect  me  by  the  rosy  blood,  by 
the  five  holy  wounds  on  the  tree  of  the  cross  :  and  thus  must 
I  be  blessed  and  well  protected,  like  the  cup  and  the  wine, 
and  the  genuine  true  bread,  which  Jesus  Christ  gave  to  his 
desciples  on  the  evening  of  Maunday  Thursday.  J.  J.  J. 

Another  Similar  Direction. 
The  grace  of  God  and  his  benevolence,  be  with  me  (N.) 


51 

I  shall  now  ride  or  walk  out ;  and  I  will  gird  about  my  loins 
with  a  sure  ring.  So  it  pleases  God,  the  heavenly  father, 
he  will  protect  me,  my  flesh  and  blood,  and  all  my  arteries 
and  limbs,  during  this  day  and  night  which  I  have  before 
me ;  and  however  numerous  my  enemies  might  be,  they 
must  be  dumbstruck,  and  all  become  like  a  dead  man,  white 
as  snow,  so  that  no  one  will  be  able  to  shoot,  cut,  or  throw 
at  me,  nor  to  overcome  me,  although  he  may  hold  rifle  or 
or  steel  against  whosoever  else  evil  weapons  and  arms 
might  be  called,  in  his  hand.  My  rifle  shall  go  oflT  like  the 
lightning  from  heaven,  and  my  sword  shall  cut  like  a  razor. 
Then  went  our  dear  lady  Mary  upon  a  very  high  mountain  ; 
she  looked  down  into  a  very  dusky  valley,  and  beheld  her 
dear  child  standing  amidst  the  Jews,  harsh,  very  harsh,  be- 
cause he  was  bound  so  harsh,  because  he  was  bound  so  hard  ; 
and  therefore  may  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ  save  mc 
from  all  that  is  injurious  to  me.  fff    Amen. 

Another  Similar  Direction. 

There  walk  out  during  this  day  and  night,  that  thou  may- 
estnot  let  any  of  my  enemies,  or  thieves,  approach  me,  if 
they  do  not  intend  to  bring  me  what  was  spent  from  the 
holy  alter.  Because  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  ascen- 
ded into  heaven  in  his  living  body.  O  Lord,  this  is  good 
for  me  this  day  and  night,  ttf    Amen. 

Another  one  like  it. 
In  the  name  of  God  I  walk  out.  God  the  father  be  with 
me,  and  God  the  holy  ghost  be  by- my  side.  Whoever  is 
stronger  than  these  three  persons,  may  approach  my  body 
and  my  life  ;  yet  whoso  is  not  stronger  than  these  three, 
would  much  better  let  me  be.     J.  J.  J. 


A  very  Safe  and  reliable  Charm. 
The  peace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  me.  [name] 
Oh  shot,  stand  still !  in  the  name  of  the  mighty  prophets 
Agtion  and  Elias,  and  do  not  kill  me  !  oh  shot,  stop  short ! 
I  conjure  you  by  heaven  and  earth,  and  by  the  last  judg- 
ment, that  you  do  no  harm  unto  me,  a  child  of  God.  ttt 


52 

Another  one  like  it. 
I  conjure  thee,  sword,  sabre,  or  knife,  that  mighlcst  in- 
jure or  harm  me,  by  the  priest  of  all  prayers,  who  had  gone 
into  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  said  :  an  edged  sword 
shall  pierce  your  soul  that  you  may  not  injure  me,  who  am 
a  child  of  God. 


A  Very  Effective  Charm. 
I,  (name,)  conjure  thee,  sword  or  knife,  as  well  as  all 
other  weapons,  by  that  spear  which  pierced  Jesus'  side  and 
opened  it  to  the  gushing  out  of  blood  and  water,  that  he 
keep  me  from  injury  as  one  of  the  servants  of  God.  f  1 1 
Amen. 


A  Good  Charm  against  Tliieves. 

There  are  three  lilies  standing  upon  the  grave  of  the 
Lord  our  God  :  the  first  one  is  the  courage  of  God,  the  oth- 
er is  the  blood  of  God,  and  the  third  one  is  the  will  of  God. 
Stand  still,  thief!  No  more  than  Jesus  Christ  stepped  down 
from  the  cross,  no  more  shalt  thou  move  from  this  spot : — 
this  I  command  tiiee,  by  the  four  evangelists  and  elements 
of  heaven,  there  in  the  river,  or  in  the  shot,  or  in  the  judg- 
ment, or  in  sight.  Thus  I  conjure  you  by  the  last  judgment 
to  stand  still  and  not  to  move,  until  I  see  all  the  stars  in 
heaven,  and  the  sun  rises  again.  Thus  I  stop  thy  running 
and  jumping,  and  command  it  in  the  name  of  ttt*    Amen. 

This  must  be  repeated  three  times. 


How  to  Recover  Stolen  Goods. 

Take  good  care  to  notice  through  which  door  the  thief 
passed  out,  and  cut  oft"  three  small  chips  from  the  posts  of 
that   door,   then  take  these  three  chips  to  a  wagon,  unbe- 
schrewedlv  however,  take  off  one  of  the  wheels  and  put  the 
three  chips  into  the  stock  of  the  wheel,  in  the  three  higl 
names,  then  turn  the  wheel  backwards  and  say:  Thief,  tl 
thief!  Turnback  with  the  stolen  goods  ;  thou  art  fore* 
do  it  by  the  Almighty  power  of  God  :  ftt     God  tin    I 
calls  thee  back,   God  the  son  turns  thee  back  so  that 
must  return,  and  God  the  holy  ghost  leads  thee  back  i 


53 

thou  arrive  at  the  place  from  which  thou  ha&t  stolen.  By 
the  almighty  power  of  God  the  father  thou  must  come,  by 
the  wisdom  of  God  the  son  thou  hast  niether  peace  nor  quiet 
until  thou  hast  returned  the  stolen  goods  to  their  former 
place,  by  the  grace  of  God  the  holy  ghost  thou  must  run  and 
jump  and  canst  find  no  peace  or  rest  until  thou  arrivest  at 
the  place  from  which  thou  hast  stolen.  God  the  father  binds 
thee,  God  the  son  forces  thee,  and  God  the  holy  ghost  turns 
thee  back. — (You  must  not  turn  the  wheel  too  fast.)  Thief, 
thou  must  come,  ttt  thief,  thou  must  come  ftt  thief,  thou 
must  come,  ftt-  If  thou  art  more  almighty,  thief,  thief, 
thief,  if  thou  art  more  almighty  than  God  himself,  then  you 
may  remain  where  you  are.  The  ten  commandments  force 
thee,  thou  shalt  not  steal,  and  therefore  thou  must  come.fff 
Amen. 


A  well-tried  Charm. 
Three  holy  drops  of  blood  have  passed  down  the  holy 
cheeks  of  the  Lord  God,  and  these  three  holy  drops  of 
blood  are  placed  before  the  touch-hole.  As  surely  as  our 
dear  lady  was  pure  from  all  men,  as  surely  shall  no  fire 
or  smoke  pass  out  of  this  barrel.  Barrel,  do  thou  give 
neither  fire,  nor  flame,  nor  heat.  Now  I  will  walk  out,  be- 
cause the  Lord  God  goeth  before  me,  God  the  son  is  with 
me,  and  God  the  holy  ghost  is  about  me  forever. 


X- 


Another  well-tried  Charm  against  Fire-Jlrms. 
Blessed  is  the  hour  in  which  Jesus  Christ  was  born  ;  bless- 
ed is  the  hour  in  which  Jesus  Christ  was  born  5  blessed  is 
the  hour  in  which  Jesus  Christ  has  arisen  from  the  dead  ; 
blessed  are  these  three  hours  over  thy  gun,  that  no  shot  or 
ball  shall  fly  toward  me,  and  neither  my  skin,  nor  my  hair, 
nor  my  blood,  nor  my  flesh,  be  injured  by  them,  and  that 
no  kind  of  weapon  or  metal  shall  do  me  any  harm,  so  sure- 
ly as  the  Mother  of  God  shall  not  bring  forth  another  son. 
ttt-     Amen. 


Jl  Charm  to  gain  advantage  of  a  man  of  superior  strength. 

I,  [name,]  breathe  upon  thee.  Three  drops  of  blood  I 
take  from  thee  ;  the  first  out  of  thy  heart,  the  other  out  of 
thy  liver,  and  the  third  out  of  thy  vital  powers ;  and  in  this 
I  deprive  thee  of  thy  strength  and  manliness. 

Hbbi  Massa  danti  Lantien.  I.  I.  I. 


A  Recipe  for  destroying  Spring-  Tails  or  Ground  Fleas. 

Take  the  chaff  upon  which  children  have  been  laying  in 
their  cradles,  or  take  the  dung  of  horses,  and  put  that  upon 
the  field,  and  the  spring-tails  or  ground-fleas  will  no  longer 
do  you  any  injury. 

A  Benediction  for  and  against  all  Enemies. 

The  cross  of  Christ  be  with  me  j  the  cross  of  Christ  over- 
comes all  water  and  every  fire  ;  the  cross  of  Christ  over- 
comes all  weapons  ;  the  cross  of  Christ  is  a  perfect  sign  and 
blessing  to  my  soul.  May  Christ  be  with  me  and  my  body 
during  all  my  life,  at  day  and  at  night.  Now  I  pray,  I, 
[name,]  pray  God  the  father  for  the  soul's  sake,  and  I  pray 
God  the  son  for  the  father's  sake,  and  I  pray  God  the  holy 
ghost  for  the  Father's  and  the  Son's  sake,  that  the  holy 
corpse  of  God  may  bless  me  against  all  evil  things,  words, 
and  works.  The  cross  of  Christ  open  unto  me  future  bliss  ; 
the  cross  of  Christ  banish  all  evil  from  me;  the  cross  of 
Christ  be  with  me,  above  me,  before  me,  behind  me,  beneath 
me,  aside  of  me,  and  everywhere,  and  before  all  my  ene- 
mies, visible  and  invisible  ;  these  all  flee  from  me  as  soon 
as  they  but  know  or  hear.  Enoch  and  Elias,  the  two  pro- 
phets, were  never  imprisoned,  nor  bound,  nor  beaten,  and 
came  never  out  of  their  power  :  thus  no  one  of  my  enemies 
must  be  able  to  injure  or  attack  me  in  my  body  or  my  life, 
in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.     Amen. 


A  Benediction  against  Enemies,  Sickness  and  Misfortunes. 

The  blessing  which  came  from  heaven,    from  God   the 
father,  when  the  true  living  Son  was  born,  be  with  me  at 


all  times;  the  blessing  which  God  spoke  over  the  whole  hu- 
man race,  be  with  me  always.  The  holy  cross  of  God,  as 
long  and  as  broad,  as  the  one  upon  which  God  suffered  his 
blessed,  bitter  tortures,  bless  me  to-day  and  forever.  The 
three  holy  nails  which  were  driven  through  the  holy  hands 
and  feet  of  Jesus  Christ,  shall  bless  me  to-day  and  forever. 
The  bitter  crown  of  thorns  which  was  forced  upon  the  holy 
head  of  Christ,  shall  bless  me  to-day  and  forever.  The 
spear  by  which  the  holy  side  of  Jesus  wa"s*  opened,  shall 
bless  me  to-day  and  forever.  The  rosy  blood  protect  me 
from  all  my  enemies,  and  from  every  thing  which  might  be 
injurious  to  my  body  or  soul,  or  my  worldly  goods.  Bless 
me,  oh  ye  five  holy  wounds,  in  order  that  all  my  enemies 
may  be  driven  away  and  bound,  while  God  has  encompass- 
ed all  Christendom.  In  this  shall  assist  me  God  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen. — Thus  must  I,  (N.) 
be  blessed  as  well  and  as  valid  as  the  cup  and  the  wine,  and 
the  true,  living  bread  which  Jesus  gave  his  desciples  on  the 
evening  of  Maunday  Thursday.  AH  those  that  hate  you, 
must  be  silent  before  me;  their  hearts  are  dead  in  regard  i;> 
me  ;  and  their  tongues  are  mute,  so  that  they  are  not  aU# 
able  to  inflict  the  least  injury  upon  me,  or  my  house,  or 
premises  :  And  likewise,  all  those  who  intend  attacking 
and  wounding  me  with  their  arms  and  weapons,  shall  be 
defenceless,  weak,  and  conquered  before  me.  In  this  shall 
assist  me  the  holy  power  of  God,  which  can  make  all  arms 
or  weapons  of  no  avail.  All  this  in  the  name  of  God  the 
father,  the  son,  and  the  holy  ghost.     Amen. 


THE  TALISMAN. 

It  is  said  that  any  one  going  out  hunting  and  carrying  it 
in  his  game  bag,  cannot  but  shoot  something  worth  while, 
and  bring  it  home. 

An  old  hermit  once  found  an  old,  lame  huntsman  in  a 
forest,  laying  beside  the  road,  and  weeping.  The  hermit 
asked  him  the  cause  of  his  dejection.  Ah  me,  thou  raaq 
God,  I  am  a  poor  unfortunate  being  ;  I  must  annually  fur- 
nish my  lord  with  as  many  deer,  and  hares,  and  partridges, 
as  a  young  and  healthy  huntsman  could  hunt  up,  or  else  I 


56 

will  be  discharged  from  my  office ;  now  I  am  old  and  lame, 
besides  game  is  getting  scarce,  and  I  cannot  follow  it  up 
any  longer  as  I  ought  to  ;  and  I  know  not  what  will  become 
0f  nie. — Here  the  old  man's  feelings  overcome  him,  and  he 
could  not  utter  another  word.  The  hermit,  upon  this,  took 
out  a  small  piece  of  paper,  upon  which  he  wrote  some  words 
with  a  pencil,  and  handing  it  to  the  huntsman,  he  said  : 
there,  old  friend,  put  this  in  your  game-bag  whenever  you 
go  out  hunting,  and  you  shall  certainly  shoot  something 
worth  while,  and  bring  it  home  too  j  yet  be  careful  to  shoot 
no  more  than  you  necessarily  need,  nor  to  communicate  it 
to  any  one  that  might  misuse  it,  on  account  of  the  high 
meaning  contained  in  these  words.  The  hermit  then  went 
on  his  journey,  and  after  a  little  the  huntsman  also  arose, 
and  without  thinking  of  any  thing  particular,  he  went  into 
the  woods,  and  had  scarcely  advanced  a  hundred  yards, 
when  he  shot  as  fine  a  roe-buck  as  he  ever  saw  in  his  life. 

This  huntsman  was  afterwards  and  during  his  whole  life- 
time lucky  in  his  hunting,  so  much  so  that  he  was  consider- 
ed one  of  the  best  hunters  in  that  whole  country.     The  fol- 
ftwing  is  what  the  hermit  wrote  on  the  paper  : 

Ut  nemo  in  sense  tentat,  descendere  nemo.     .. 

* 
*  * 

t 
At  precedents  spectatur  mantica  tergo. 

The  best  argument  is  to  try  it. 

To  prevent  any  one  from  Killing  Game. 

Pronounce  the  name,  as  for  instance  Jacob  Wohlgemuth, 
shoot  whatever  you  please  ;  shoot  but  hair  and  feathers  with 
and  what  you  give  to  poor  people,  fit     Amen. 

To  Compel  a  Thief  to  Return  Stolen  Goods. 

Walk  out  early  in  the  morning,  before  sunrise,  to  a  Juni- 
per tree,  and  bend  it  with  the  left  hand  towards  the  rising 
sun,  while  you  are  Saying:  Juniper  tree,  I  shall  bend  and 


57 

squeeze  thee,  until  the  thief  has  returned  the  stolen  goods 
to  the  place  from  which  lie  took  them. — Then  you  must  take 
a  stone  and  put  it  on  the  bush,  and  under  the  bush  and 
the  stone  you  must  place  thcscull  of  a  malefactor,  f  t  t 
Yet  you  must  be  careful  in  case  the  thief  return  the  stolen 
goods,  to  unloose  the  bush  and  replace  the  stone  where  it 
was  before. 


Ji  Charm  against  Powder  and  Ball. 
The  heavenly  and  holy  trumpet  blow  every  ball  and  mis- 
fortune away  from  me.  I  seek  refuge  beneath  the  tree  of 
life  which  bears  twelvefold  fruits.  I  stand  behind  the  holy 
altar  of  the  christian  church.  I  commend  myself  to  the 
holy  trinity.  I,  [name,]  hide  myself  beneath  the  holy  corpse 
of  Jesus  Christ.  I  commend  myself  unto  the  wounds  of 
Jesus  Christ,  that  the  hand  of  no  man  might  be  able  to  sieze 
me,  or  to  bind  me,  or  to  cut  me,  or  to  throw  me,  or  to  beat  me 
or  to  overcome  me  in  any  way  whatever,  so  help  me,  [N.] 

IC3"  Whoever  carries  this  book  with  him,  is  safe  from  all 
his  enemies,  visible  or  invisible  ;  and  whoever  has  this  book 
with   him,    cannot  die    without   the  holy   corpse  of  J< 
Christ,  nor  drownd  in  any  water,   nor  burn  up  in  any  I 
nor  can  an  unjust  sentence  be  passed  upon  him.     So  help 
zne.  iff 


UNLUCKY   DAYS, 

To  be- found  in  each  Month. 

January  1   2  3  4  6   11   12.     July  IT  21. 
February  1    17   18.  August  20  21. 

March   i4   la.  September  10  18. 

April   10   17   18.  October  M. 

May  7  8.  November  G  10. 

June   l; .  December  6  11    15. 

Whoever  is  born  upon  one  of  these  A 
suffers  from  poverty  ;  and  whoevi  a  one  of 

overs  health  ;  and   I 
any  on  tl  ,  become  very  poor  an 

advisable  to  move  from  on:  :er, 


58 

nor  to  travel,  nor  to  bargain,  nor  to  engage  in  a  law-snit, 
on  one  of  these  days. 

The  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  must  be  observed  by  the  course 
of  the  moon,  as  they  are  daily  given  in  common  almanacs. 

If  a  cow  calves  in  the  sign  of  the  Virgin,  the  calf  will 
not  live  one  year  ;  if  it  happens  in  the  Scorpion,  it  will  die 
much  sooner ;  therefore  no  one  should  be  weened  off  in 
these  signs,  nor  in  the  sign  of  the  Capricorn  or  Aquarius, 
and  they  will  be  in  less  danger  from  mortal  inflammation. 

This  is  the  only  piece  extracted  from  a  centennial  alma- 
nac imported  from  Germany,  and  there  are  many  who  be- 
lieve in  it. 

HOHMAN. 


In  conclusion  the  following  Morning  Prayer  is  given,  which 
is  to  be  spoken  before  entering  upon  a  Journey-.  It  pro- 
tects against  all  manner  of  bad  luck. 

Oh  Jesus  of  Nazereth,  King  of  the  Jews,  yea,  a  King  over 
the  whole  world,  protect  me,  (name,)  during  this  day  and 
night,  protect  me  at  all  times  by  thy  five  holy  wounds,  that 
I  may  not  be  siezed  and  bound.  The  holy  trinity  guard 
me,  that  no  gun,  fire-arm,  ball,  or  lead,  shall  touch  my  bo- 
dy ;  and  that  they  shall  be  weak  like  the  tears  and  the 
bloody  sweat  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  name  of  God  the  fatk- 
eri  the  son,  and  the  holy  ghost.     Amen, 


APPENDIX, 


The  following  Remedy  for  Epilepsy  was  published  in  the 
Lancaster,  (Pa.)  papers,  in  the  year  1828. 

TO  SUFFERING  HUMANITY. 

We  ourselves  know  of  many  unfortunate  beings  who  are 
afflicted  with  Epilepsy — yet  how  many  more  may  be  in  the 
country  who  have  perhaps  already  spent  their  fortunes  in 
seeking  aid  in  this  disease,  without  gaining  relief.  We 
have  now  been  informed  of  a  remedy  which  is  said  to  be 
infallible,  and  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  most  distin- 
guished physicians  in  Europe,  and  has  so  well  stood  the  test 
of  repeated  trials,  that  it  is  now  generally  applied  in  Eu- 
rope. It  directs  a  bedroom  for  the  sick  person  to  be  fitted 
up  over  the  cow  stable,  where  the  patient  must  sleep  at 
night,  and  should  spend  the  greater  part  of  his  time  during 
the  day  in  it.  This  is  easily  done  by  building  a  regular 
room  over  the  stable.  Then  care  is  to  be  taken  to  leave  an 
opening  in  the  ceiling  of  the  stable,  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  evaporation  from  the  same  can  pass  into  the  room, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  cow  may  inhale  the  perspira- 
tion of  the  sick  person.  In  this  way  the  animal  will  grad- 
ually attract  the  whole  disease,  and  be  affected  with  arthri- 
tic attacks,  and  when  the  patient  has  entirely  lost  them, 
the  cow  will  fall  (lead  to  the  ground.  The  stable  must  not 
be  cleaned  during  the  operation,  though  fresh  straw  or  hay 
may  be  put  in  ;  and,  of  course,  the  milk  of  the  cow,  as  long 
as  she  gives  any,  must  be  thrown  away  as  useless. 

[  Lancaster  Eagle. 


60 

A  Saloe  to  Heal  up  JVounds. 

Take  tobacco,  green  or  dry;  if  green,  a  good  handful;  if 

,  2  ounces;  together  with  this  take  a  good  handful  of 

elder  leaves,    fry  them   well  in  butter,   press   it  through 

a  cloth,  and  you  may  use  it  as  a  salve.     This  will  heal  up 

a  wound  in  a  short  time. 

Or  go  to  a  white  oak  tree  that  stands  pretty  much  isola- 
ted, and  scrape  off  the  rough  bark  from  the  eastern  side  of 
the  tree,  then  cut  off  the  thinner  bark,  break  it  into  small 
pieces,  and  boil  it  until  all  the  strength  is  drawn  out,  strain 
it  through  a  piece  of  Hnnen,  and  boil  it  again,  until  it  be- 
tomes  as  thick  as  tar;  then  take  out  as  much  as  you  need, 
and  put  to  it  an  equal  proportion  of  sheep  tallow,  rosin  and 
wax,  and  work  them  together  until  they  form  a  salve.  This 
salve  you  pu-t  on  a  piece  of  linnen,  very  thinly  spread,  and 
lay  it  on  the  wound,  renewing  it  occasionally  till  the  wound 
is  healed  up. 

Or  take  a  handful  of  parseley,  pound  it  fine,  and  work  it 
to  a  saJve  with  an  equal  proportion  of  fresh  butter.  This 
salve  prevents  mortification  and  heals  very  fast. 


PEACHES. 

The  flowers  of  the  peach  tree,  prepared  like  salad,  opens 
(i  is  of  use  in  the  dropsy.     Six  or  seven  peal- 
ed kernels  of  the  peach  stone,  eaten  daily,  will  ease  the 
aey  arc  also  said  to  prevent  drunkenness,  when 
eaten  before  meals. 

iver  loses  Lis  hair,  should  pound  up  peach  kernels, 
and  put  them  on  the  bald  place. 
I  from  peach  flowers,  opens  the  bowels 
of  infants,  and  destroys  their  worms. 


SWEET  OIL. 

a  great  many  valuable  properties,  and 
!e  for  every  head  of  a  family  to  have 

ie  house,  in  order  that  it  may  be  ap- 
-ity.     Here  follow  some  of  its  chief 


61 

It  is  a  sure  remedy,  internally  as  well  as  externally,  in 
all  cases  of  inflammation,  in  men  and  animals. 

Internally,  it  is  given  to  allay  the  burning  in  the  stom- 
ach, caused  by  strong  drink  or  by  purging  too  severely,  or 
by  poisonous  medicines.  Even  if  pure  poison  has  been 
swallowed,  vomiting  may  be  easily  produced  by  one  or  two 
wine  glasses  of  sweet  oil,  and  thus  the  poison  will  be  carried 
off",  provided  it  has  not  already  been  too  long  in  the  bowels  ; 
and  after  the  vomiting,  a  spoonful  of  the  oil  should  be  taken 
every  hour  until  the  burning  caused  by  the  poison,  is  en- 
tirely allayed. 

Whoever  is  bit  by  a  snake,  or  by  any  other  poisonous  an- 
imal, or  by  a  mad  dog,  and  immediately  takes  warmed 
sweet  oil,  and  washes  the  wound  with  it,  and  then  puts  a 
rag,  three  or  four  times  doubled  up,  and  well  soaked  with^ 
oil,  on  the  wound  every  three  or  four  hours,  and  drinks  a 
couple  of  spoonsful  of  the  oil,  every  four  hours,  for  some 
days,  will  surely  find  out  what  peculiar  virtues  the  sweet 
oil  possesses  in  regard  to  poisons. 

In  Dysentery,  sweet  oil  is  likewise  a  very  useful  remedy, 
when  the  stomach  has  first  been  cleansed  by  Rheubarb  or 
some  other  suitable  purgative,  and  then  a  few  spoonsful  of 
sweet  oil  should  be  taken  every  three  hours.  Fcr  this  pur- 
pose, however,  the  sweet  oil  should  have  been  well  boiled 
and  a  very  little  hartshorn  be  mixed  with  it.  This  boiled 
sweet  oil  is  also  serviceable  in  all  sorts  of  bowel  complaints 
and  in  colics  ;  or  when  any  one  receives  internal  injury  as 
from  a  fall,  a  few  spoonsful  of  it  should  be  taken  every  two 
hours  :  for  it  allays  the  pain,  scatters  the  coadjulatcd  blood, 
prevents  all  inflammation,  and  heals  gently. 

Externally,  it  is  applicable  in  all  manner  of  swellings; 
it  ?  oftens,  allays  the  pain,  and  prevents  inflammation. 

Sweet  oil  and  white  lead  ground  together,  makes  a  very 
good  salve,  which  is  applicable  in  burns  or  scalds.  This 
salve  is  also  excellent  against  infection  from  poisonous 
weeds  or  waters,  if  it  is  put  on  the  infected  part  as  soon  as 
it  is-noticed. 

If  sweet  oil  is  put  in  a  large  glass,  so  as  to  fill  it  about 
one  half  full,  and  the  glass  is  then  filled  up  with  the  flower- 
of  the  St.  Johnswort,  and  well  covered  and  placed  in  the 

6 


62 

sun  for  about  four  weeks,  the  oil  proves  then,  when  distill- 
ed, such  a  valuable  remedy  for  all  fresh  wounds  in  men  and 
animals,  that  no  one  can  imagine  its  medicinal  powers  who 
has  not  tried  it.  This  should  at  all  times  be  found  in  a  well 
conducted  household.  In  a  similar  manner,  an  oil  may  be 
made  of  white  lilies,  which  is  likewise  very  useful  to  soften 
hardened  swellings  and  burns,  and  to  cure  the  sore  breasts 
of  women. 


CURE  FOR  DROPSY. 

Dropsy  is  a  disease  derived  from  a  cold  humidity,  which 
passes  through  the  different  limbs  to  such  a  degree  that  it 
either  swells  the  whole  or  a  portion  of  them.  The  usual 
symptoms  and  precursors  of  every  case  of  dropsy,  are  the 
swelling  of  the  feet  and  thighs,  and  then  of  the  face;  be- 
sides this  the  change  of  the  natural  colour  of  the  flesh  into 
a  dull  white,  with  great  thirst,  loss  of  appetite,  costiveness, 
sweating,  throwing  up  of  slimy  substances,  but  little  urine, 
laziness  and  aversion  to  exercise. 

Physicians  know  three  different  kinds  of  dropsy,  which 
they  name  : 

1.  Anasarca,  when  the  water  penetrates  between  the 
skin  and  the  flesh  over  the  whole  body,  and  all  the  limbs, 
and  even  about  the  face,  and  swells  them. 

2.  Ascites,  when  the  belly  and  thighs  swell,  while  the 
upper  extremities  dry  up. 

3.  Tympanites,  caused  rather  by  wind  than  water.  The 
belly  swells  up  very  hard,  the  navel  is  forced  out  very  far, 
and  the  other  members  fall  away.  The  belly  becomes  so 
much  inflated,  that  knocking  against  it  causes  a  sound  like 
that  of  a  large  drum,  and  from  this  circumstance  its  name 
is  derived. 

The  chief  thing  in  curing  dropsy,  rests  upon  three  points, 
namely: 

1.  To  reduce  the  hardness  of  the  swelling  which  may  be 
in  the  bowels  or  other  parts. 

2.  To  endeavor  to  scatter  the  humours. 

3.  To  endeavor  to  pass  them  off  either  through  the  slool 
or  through  the  urine. 


63 

The  bost  cure  therefore  must  chiefly  consist  in  this  :  To 
avoid  as  much  as  possible  all  drinking,  and  use  only  dry 
vituals  ;  to  take  moderate  exercise,  and  to  sweat  and  purge 
the  body  considerably. 

If  any  one  feels  symptoms  of  dropsy,  or  while  it  is  yet 
in  its  first  stages,  let  him  make  free  use  of  the  sugar  of  the 
herb  called  Fumatory,  as  this  purifies  the  blood  f  and  the 
Euphrasy  sugar  to  open  the  bowels. 


A  CURE  FOR  DROPSY.—  ( Said  to  be  Infallible. ) 

Take  a  jug  of  stone  or  earthen  ware,  and  put  four  quarts 
of  strong  healthy  cider  into  it;  take  two  handsful  of  parse- 
ly  roots  and  tops,  cut  it  fine;  a  handful  of  scraped  horse- 
raddish,  two  table-spoonsful  of  bruised  mustard  seed,  half 
an  ounce  of  squills,  and  half  an  ounce  of  juniper  berries  ; 
put  all  these  in  the  jug,  and  place  it  near  the  fire  for  2-1 
hours,  so  as  to  keep  the  cider  warm,  and  shake  it  up  often  j 
then  strain  it  through  a  cloth  and  keep  it  for  use. 

To  a  grown  person  give  half  a  wine  glass  full  three  times 
a  day,  on  an  empty  stomach.  But  if  necessary  you  may 
increase  the  dose,  although  it  must  decrease  again  as  soon 
as  the  water  is  carried  off;  and,  as  stated  before,  use  dry 
vituals  and  exercise  gently. 

This  remedy  has  cured  a  great  many  persons,  and  among 
others  a  woman  of  70  years  of  age,  who  had  the  dropsy  so 
badly,  that  she  was  afraid  to  get  out  of  bed,  for  fear  her 
skin  might  burst,  and  whom  it  was  thought  could  not  live 
but  a  few  days.  She  used  0s  remedy  according  to  the 
directions  given,  and  in  less  than  a  week  the  water  had 
passed  off'  her,  the  swelling  of  her  stomach  fell,  and  in  a 
few  weeks  afterwards  she  again  enjoyed  perfect  health. 

Or  :  Drink  for  a  few  days  very  strong  Bohea  tea,  and  eat 
the  leaves  of  it.  This  simple  means  is  said  to  have  carried 
away  the  water  from  some  persons  in  three  or  four  days, 
and  freed  them  from  the  swelling,  although  the  disease  had 
reached  the  highest  pitch. 

Or:  Take  three  spoonsful  of  rape  seed,  and  half  an  onuco 
of  clean  gum  myrrh,  put  these  together  in  a  quart  of  good 


64 

old  wine,  and  let  it  stand  over  night  in  the  room,  keeping 
it  well  covered.  Aged  persons  are  to  take  2  spoonsful  of 
this  an  hour  after  supper,  and  the  same  before  going  to  bed  j 
younger  persons  must  diminish  the  quantity  according  to 
their  age,  and  continue  the  use  of  it  as  long  as  necessary. 

Or :  Take  young  branches  of  spruce  pine,  cut  them  into 
small  pieces,  pour  water  on  them  and  let  them  boil  a  while, 
then  pour  it  into  a  large  tub,  take  off  your  clothes,  and  sit 
down  over  it,  covering  yourself  and  the  tub  with  a  sheet  or 
blanket,  to  prevent  the  vapour  from  escaping.  When  the 
water  begins  to  cool,  let  some  one  put  in  hot  bricks  ;  and 
when  you  have  thus  been  sweating  for  a  while,  wrap  the 
sheet  or  blanket  close  around  you  and  go  to  bed  with  it.  A 
repetition  of  this  for  several  days  will  free  the  system  from 
all  water. 


The  following  Valuable  Recipes,  not  in  the  original 
work  of  llohmaii,  are  added  by  the  publishers* 

CURE  FOR  DROPSY. 

Take  of  the  broom-corn  seed,  well  powdered  and  sifted,  one 
drachm.  Let  it  sleep  twelve  hours  in  a  wine  glass  and  a 
half  of  good  rich  wine,  and  take  it  in  the  morning  fasting, 
having  first  shaken  it  so  that  the  whole  may  be  swallowed. 
Let  the  patient  walk  after  it,  if  able,  or  let  him  use  what  ex- 
ercise he  can  without  fatigue,  for  an  hour  and  a  half;  after 
which  let  him  take  2  oz.  of  ■olive  oil;  and  not  eat  or  drink 
any  thing  in  less  that  half  an  hour  afterwards.  Let  this  be 
repeated  every  day,  or  once  in  three  days,  and  not  oftener, 
till  a  cure  is  effected ;  and  do  not  let  blood,  or  use  any  other 
remedy  during  the  course. 

Nothing  can  be  more  gentle  and  safe  than  the  operation  of 
this  remedy.  If  the  dropsy  is  in  the  body,  it  discharges  it  by 
urine,  without  any  inconvenience :  if  it  is  between  the  skin 
and  flesh,  it  causes  blisters  to  rise  on  the  legs,  by  which  it 
will  run  off;  but  this  does  not  happen  to  more  than  one  in 
thirty :  and  in  this  case  no  plasters  must  be  used,  but  apply 
red  cabbage  haves.     It  cures  dropsy  in  pregnant  womeny 


65 

without  injury  to  the  mother  or  child.      It  also  alleviates 
asthma,  consumption,  and  disorders  of  the  liver. 

REMEDY  FOR  THE  LOCK  JAW. 

We  are  informed  by  a  friend  that  a  sure  preventive  against 
this  terrible  disease,  is,  to  take  some  soft  soap,  and  mix  it 
ivith  a  sufficient  quantity  of  pulverized  chalk,  so  as  to  make 
it  of  the  consistency  of  buckwheat  batter;  keep  the  chalk 
moistened  with  afresh  supply  of  soap  until  the  wound  begins 
to  discharge,  and  the  patient  finds  relief.  Our  friend  stated 
to  us  that  explicit  confidence  may  be  placed  in  what  he  says, 
that  he  has  known  several  cases  where  this  remedy  has  been 
successfully  applied.  So  simple  and  so  valuable  a  remedy, 
within  the  reach  of  every  person,  ought  to  be  generally  known. 

[N.  Y.  Evening  Post. 

FOR  THE  STING  OF  A  WASP  OR  BEE. 

A  Liverpool  paper  states  as  follows : — "  A  few  days  ago 
happening  to  be  in  the  country,  we  witnessed  the  efficacy  of 
the  remedy  for  the  sting  of  a  wasp  mentioned  in  one  of  our 
late  papers.  A  little  boy  ivas  stung  severely  and  was  in 
great  torture,  until  an  onion  ivas  applied  to  the  part  affected, 
when  the  cure  was  instantaneous.  This  important  and  sim- 
ple remedy  cannot  be  too  generally  known,  and  we  pledge 
ourselves  to  the  fact  above  stated." 


■■"W/»//»/AW~ 


TO    THE 


Arts  &  Remedies  contained  in  this  Book. 


PAGE. 

Preface,  to  the  first  edition  of  this  little  book,  3 

Testimonials,  of  cures  performed  by  the  author,  6 

Postscript  and  Prayer,  by  the  author.  8 

ARTS  AND  REMEDIES. 

A  good  remedy  for  hysterics,  9 

Another  remedy  for  hysterics,  9 

A  certain  remedy  to  stop  bleeding,  9 

A  remedy  to  prevent  falling  away,  9 
-Another  remedy  to  be  applied  when  any  one  is  sick,        10 

A  good  remedy  for  worms,  10 

A  good  remedy  against  slander,  10 

A  good  remedy  for  the  fever,  10 

A  good  remedy  for  the  colic,  11 

To  attach  a  dog  to  a  person,  11 

To  make  a  wand  for  searching  for  iron  or  water,  11 

A  very  good  remedy  for  palpitation  of  the  heart,  12 

A  precaution  against  injuries,  12 

How  to  obtain  things  desired,  12 

A  sure  way  of  catching  fish,  12 

A  safe  remedy  for  various  Ulcers,  &c.  12 

A  good  remedy  for  mortification  and  inflammation,  12 

To  prevent  malicious  persons  from  doing  injury,  13 


68 

To  destroy  bots  or  worms  in  horses,  13 

To  cure  the  pollevil  in  horses,  13 

A  good  remedy  for  wounds  and  burns,  13 

A  good  remedy  for  the  wild-fire,  I4 

To  stop  pains  or  smarting  in  a  wound,  14 

To  destroy  warts,  14 

To  banish  the  hooping  cough,  14 

Another  remedy  for  hooping  cough,  14 

A  good  remedy  to  stop  bleeding,  14 

To  banish  convulsive  fevers,  15 

A  good  remedy  for  the  tooth-ache,  15 

How  to  banish  the  fever,  15 

How  to  walk  and  step  securely  in  all  cases,  15 

A  very  good  remedy  for  the  colic,  16 

A  very  good  plaster,  16 

To  make  a  good  eye  water,  16 

Remedy  for  the  white  swelling,  16 

Remedy  for  epilepsy,  17 

Remedy  for  burns,  17 

To  stop  bleeding,  17 

Remedy  to  relieve  pain,  17 

Remedy  for  the  tooth-ache,  17 

To  remove  bruises  and  pains,  17 
A  remarkable  passage  from  the  book  Albertus  Magnus,     IS 

Another  passage  from  the  same,  18 

To  cure  fits  or  convulsions,  18 

Cure  for  the  head-ache,  18 

To  mend  broken  glass,  18 

To  make  cattle  return  to  the  same  place,  19 

Another  method  of  making  cattle  return,  19 

To  prevent  the  hessian  fly  from  injuring  wheat,  19 
To  prevent  cherries  from  ripening  before  Martinmas,  19 
Stinging  nettle — good  for  banishing  fear  and  fancies, 

and  to  cause  fish  to  collect,  19 

Heliotrope,  a  means  to  prevent  calumniation,  19 

To  heal  a  sore  mouth,  20 

Swallow-wort,  its  properties,  20 

A  good  remedy  for  comsumption,  20 

For  the  hollow  horn,  20 

To  destroy  the  wheal  in  the  eye,  21 

0* 


G9 

To  make  hens  lay  many  eggs,  21 
Words  to  be  spoken  while  making  divinatory  wands,       21 

How  to  destroy  a  tape  worm,  21 

A  good  remedy  for  the  bots  in  horses,  21 

How  to  cure  a  burn,  22 

To  cure  the  bite  of  a  snake,  22 

Security  against  mad  dogs,  22 
To  remove  pain  and  heal  wounds  with  three  switches,      22 

Remedy  for  fever,  worms,  and  the  colic,  23 

How  to  cure  weakness  of  the  limbs,  23 

Another  remedy  for  weakness,  23 

A  good  method  of  destroying  rats  and  mice,  23 

To  make  horses  that  refuse  their  feed  to  eat  again,  23 

To  cure  any  excressence  or  wen  on  a  horse,    '  24 

How  to  prepare  a  good  eye  water,  24 

How  to  cause  thieves  to  stand  still,  24 

To  cure  the  sweeney  in  horses,  24 

How  to  make  molasses,  25 

To  make  good  beer,  23 

Cure  for  the  Epilepsy,  25 

Another  way  to  make  cattle  return  home,  25 

A  very  good  remedy  to  cure  sores,  25 

A  good  cure  for  wounds,  25 

To  make  oil  out  of  paper,  good  for  sore  eyes,  26 

To  destroy  crab-lice,  25 

To  prevent  the  worst  kind  of  paper  from  blotting,  26 

A  very  good  remedy  for  the  gravel,  26 
A  good  remedy  for  those  who  cannot  keep  their  water,     26 

To  destroy  field-mice  and  moles,  26 

To  remove  a  wen  during  the  crescent  moon,  27 

To  remove  a  scum  or  skin  from  the  eye,  27 

For  deafness,  buzzing  in  the  ear,  &c.  27 

To  cause  children  to  cut  their  teeth  without  pain,  27 

For  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  27 

To  heal  burns,  27 

A  very  good  cure  for  weakness  of  the  limbs,  &c.  23 

For  dysentery  and  diarrhoea,  20 

Cure  for  the  tooth-ache,  23 

Advise  to  pregnant  women,  28 

Cure  for  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog,  28 


70 

A  very  good  means  to  increase  fhe  growth  of  wool  on 

sheep,  and  to  prevent  disease  among  them,  20 

A  well-tried  plaster  to  remove  mortification,  SO 

A  good  remedy  for  the  poll-evil  in  horses,  30 

For  the  scurvy  and  sore  throat,  SO 

A  very  good  plaster,  SO 

To  stop  bleeding,  SI 

Another  way  to  stop  bleeding,  and  to  heal  wounds,  31 

For  gaining  a  lawful  suit,  SI 

For  the  swelling  of  cattle,  SI 

An  easy  method  of  catching  fish,  SI 

A  very  good  and  safe  remedy  for  rheumatism,  S2 

A  good  way  to  destroy  worms  in  bee-hives,  S3 
For  making  a  paste  to  prevent  gun  barrels  from  rusting,  34 

To  make  a  wick  which  is  never  consumed,  34 

A  morning  prayer,  before  entering  upon  a  journey,  34 
A  safe  and  approved  means  to  be  applied  in  time  of 

fire  and  pestilence,  35 

To  prevent  conflagration,  S3 
To  prevent  witches  from  bewitching  cattle,  and  a- 

gainst  bad  men  and  evil  spirits,  37 

To  prevent  bad  people  from  getting  among  the  cattle,  S7 

To  extinguish  fire  without  water,  ST 

Another  method  of  stopping  fire,  37 

How  to  fasten  or  spell-bind  any  thing,  S8 

Another  way  to  spell-bind,  38 

A  benediction  to  prevent  fire,  38 

How  to  relieve  persons  or  animals  that  are  bewitched,  38 

To  protect  houses  &  premises  against  sickness  &  theft,  39 

Against  mishaps  and  dangers  in  the  house,  39 

A  direction  for  a  gipsy  sentence,  &c.  39 

Against  evil  spirits  and  all  manner  of  witchcraft,  4q 

Against  swellings,  40 

Against  adversaries,  &c.  40 

Against  danger  and  death,  40 

How  to  treat  a  cow  after  the  milk  is  taken  from  her,  40 

Another  method  of  treating  a  sick  cow,  41 

Against  fevers,  41 

To  spell-bind  a  thief,  41 

Another  way  to  spell-bind  thieves,  42 


71 

To  effect  the  same  in  less  time,  42 

To  release  spell-bound  persons,  43 

To  compel  a  thief  to  return  stolen  goods,  43 

A  benediction  for  all  purposes,  43 

To  win  every  game  you  engage  in  at  cards,  43 

Against  burns,  44 

Another  remedy  for  burns,  44 

To  protect  cattle  against  witchcraft,  44 

How  to  tie  up  and  heal  wounds,  44 

To  take  the  pain  out  of  fresh  wounds,  45 

A  benediction  against  worms,  45 

Against  every  evil  influence,  45 

To  retain  the  right  in  a  court  of  justice,  45 

To  stop  bleeding  at  any  time,  45 

Another  way  to  stop  bleeding,  45 

Another  similar  prescription,  46 

Another  still  more  certain  way,  4G 

A  sign  to  keep  back  men  and  animals,  46 

Protection  to  house  and  hearth,  46 

A  charm,  to  be  carried  about  the  person,  46 

To  charm  enemies,  robbers,  and  murderers,  47 

Protection  against  weapons,  47 

A  charm  against  fire-arms,  48 

Another  for  the  same,  48 

A  charm  against  shooting,  &c.  48 

To  charm  guns  and  other  arms,  49 

To  prevent  being  cheated,  charmed,  or  bewitched,  50 

Another  to  effect  the  same,  50 

Another  similar  direction,  50 

Another  similar  direction,  51 

Another  one  like  it,  51 

A  very  safe  and  reliable  charm,  51 

Another  one  like  it,  J2 

A  very  effective  charm,  52 

A  good  charm  against  thieves,  52 

How  to  recover  stolen  goods,  52 

A  well-tried  charm,  53 

Another  against  fire-arms,  53 

A  charm  to  gain  advantage  over  stronger  persons,  54 

Tu  destroy  spring-tails  or  ground  fleas,  54 


72 

A  benediction  for  and  against  all  enemies, 
Another  against  sickness  and  misfortunes, 
The  Talisman, 

To  prevent  any  one  from  killing  game, 
To  compel  a  thief  to  return  stolen  goods, 
A  charm  against  powder  and  ball, 
Unlucky  days, 
Concluding  prayer, 

APPENDIX. 

A  certain  cure  for  elilepsy, 

A  salve  to  heal  up  wounds, 

Peaches,  their  medical  properties, 

Sweet  oil,  its  virtues, 

Cure  for  the  Dropsy, 

Cure  for  the  Dropsy,  said  to  be  infallible, 

Additional, — Cure  for  Dropsy,  effectual, 
Remedy  for  the  Lock  Jaw, 
For  the  sting  of  a  wasp  or  bee, 


) 


& 


7?7 


WW 


QA 


5=**-
