Evangeline (Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 1847)
==========================================================
The tale of the Acadian lovers parted by the British expulsion — the American epic in English hexameters, memorized by generations. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'evangelineatale02longgoog' (https://archive.org/details/evangelineatale02longgoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




*!'** 






^QO 




y 





f 



i.^i 




. ( 

\ ■ 

\ i 







J^^^^UOXHa^ ^ Ql^ 



■Mtal*/ 




^ 



Saper-royal S2mo, neatly and substantially bound in 

green doth, gilt. 

SLATER'S SHILLING SERIES 



OF 



POPULAR AND CLASSICAL WORKS. 

It is intended to embrace, in this monthly series, the 
most popular and classical works of Emersoi|, Lamar- 
tine, Longfellow, George Sand, and other celebrated 
English and Foreign writers. 



ALREADY PUBLTSHED. 
I. 

EMERSON'S TWELVE ESSAYS. 

On History, Self-Reliance, Compensation, Spiritual 
Laws, Love, Friendship, Prudence, Heroism, the Over 
Soul, Circles, Intellect, and Art. * 

II. 

Y AT HE K; 

An Arabian Tale, by W. Beckford, Esq., with a 
Memoir of the Author, by W. North. 

" Vathek is, indeed, a remarkable performance *' 

Quarterly Review, 

" For correctness of costame, beauty of description, and 
power of imagination, Vatkek far surpasses all European imi- 
tations As an Eastern tale, even Rasselas must bow before it; 
his Happy Valley will not bear comparison with the Hall of 
Sblis.**— X,or<< Byron. 

in. 

HYPERION, 

A Romance, by Hf.nry W. Lonofrllow, Author of 
the " Voices of the Night," " Evangeline," &c., &c. 

*'Look not mournfully into the past, it comes not back 
•gain. Wisely imprcve the present.' It is thine. Oo forth 
into the shadowy future, witUouF fear and with a manU 



TALES OF EVERY-DAY LIFE, 

BY 

FREDERIKA BREMER. 



UNIFORM WITH SLATER'S SHILLI»Q SERIES. 

To be published in Monthly Volumes, price One 
Shilling each, handsomely bound in green cloth, gilt, a 
new, complete, and uniform edition of 

MISS BREiVIER*S NOVELS, 

TRANSLAFED FROM THE SWEDISH. 



VOL. !• 

• THE II FAMILY. 

VOL. II. 

STRIFE AND PEACE 

VOLS. 111. IV. 

THE HOME. 

<* No fictions, since those of Scott, hare captivateil «U classes 
like those of Fredcrika Bremer." 



V. Volume will be published on the 15 th of each monthi 
until the whole are completed. 



LONDON: 
GEORGE SLATER, 252, STRAND/ 

MS^VZIES, EDJNUURQUi J. McQLASHAN, DUBLIN 



r 



EVANGELINE : 



TALE OF ACADIE. 



BY 

HENRY W. LONGFELLOW. 

AUTHOR OF TDE " VOICES OF THE NIOHT *' 



LONDON : 
GEORGE SLATER, 252, STRAND. 

1849 



INTRODUCTION. 



So much of the charm of Evangeline is derived from 
the very foundation of the narrative — the simple dignity 
and earnestness ot the characters, and the deep re- 
ligious tone of the interest, that it may he acceptable 
to the reader to give the historical fact which has in- 
spired so exquisite an ideal picture. There are many* 
doubtless, who have never read the cruel story, and 
such will be glad to see it in a few words, condensed from 
the best authority on the subject. The Instorical ac- 
curacy of the poem enhances its beauty. The fact, as 
given by Haliburton in his History of Nova Scotia, is, 
in brief, as follows : 

Some dispute existing between the English and the 
French, respecting the territorial limits of both parties ; 
the region about Hudson's Bay, and the province of 
Acadie, since called Nova Scotia, to settle the mattfi?t<^ 
were ceded to Great Britain, in \1\%. 

Acadie was inhabited by aiv eTiitfe\\^iv\.^x«tx^^^^ 
htion. When these good peo^\e ^^^^^'^^'L'^^^'t 
yielded to England, and t\iein»ftVie*xio\«^«^ 



iy INTRODUCTION. 

of the French king, they were grieved to be forced to 
acknowledge another master. They knew that the 
French and English were hostile to each other, and 
they dreaded to be compelled, some time or other, to 
take up arms against Frenchmen ; they, therefore, en- 
treated the English that they might never be forced to 
so painful a service, and might be excused from taking 
the oath of allegiance. 

This request received no special attention, but, for a 
time, a kind forbearance was exercised towards them. 
After a period of forty years, the English government 
came to the conclusion that these neutral French, as 
they were called, might become dangerous to their in- 
terests by taking part with the Canadian French, their 
active enemies. On account of this presumed danger, 
without the least alleged provocation, or the least show 
of justicCi they took upon themselves to drive out of 
their possessions this peaceable, prosperous, and un- 
offending people. 

The Acadians had no warning of tbeir fate. At 
harvest time they were ordered to assemble in a cer- 
tain district, and being collected, were informed they 
were prisoners, — that their lands, cattle, and moveables 
were no longer their own, but were confiscated by 
government, — that they might take what they could 
convey away, but must immediately ^uit the province* 

In one single district, two hundred and fifty>five 
houses, as many barns, eleven mills, and one church 
were destroyed. Ships were in readiness to convey 
the persecuted Acadians to different parts of the Con- 
tinent, — ^to Louisiana, to French Guiana in South 
America^ and to distant places in the then British 
Rvvincea on the Atlantic, 
nese people bad been remarkable ioil^xevtm^MRtrj* 



INTRODUCTION. V 

their skilful husbandry, their pure morals, and their 
exemplary piety. Tbeir lands produced wheat and 
corn, potatoes, and flax, abundantly. Their houses were 
convenient, and furnished with all things necessary to 
comfort Then: numerous flocks afforded the wool 
which was manufactured in the family for their cloth- 
ing: they had no paper money, and little silver or 
gold, and livid by simple exchange of commodities. 
So little contentipn arose among them, that courts and 
lawyers were needless ; the wise and experienced de- 
cided their small differences. They were Catholics; 
the priests drew up their public acts, wrote their wills, 
and kept possession of the documents, until death called 
for the execution uf them. To requite these services, 
the inhabitants allowed them one twenty-seventh of the 
harvest for their subsistence. 

At the time of the dispersion, the Acadians were 
18,000 in number. No want existed among them : the 
poor were few, and the prosperous cheerfully supported 
those. These unfortunate people were the victims of 
their own integrity. Had they taken the oath which 
demanded of them to violate their best affections, they 
might have retained their houses, their fields and their 
flocks ; their good feelings demanded only the innocent 
liberty of neutrality. 

In September, 1755, Colonel Winslow, an officer 
usually resident at Marshfield, Plymouth County, 
Maasachussetts, was sent with the King's Commission 
to demolish the pi;(^perty of the neutrals, and to expel 
them, without exception, from the province. Colonel 
Winslow deeply regretted that he should he e^cc^^^st^^^ 
in this cruel service. He ktvevi, ^oV'b ^«cv^^ ^•^wx.'^'e^ 
were of " the same speciea" ^\\!tk '\vvxw&'^^> ^^^* \^ 



VI INTRODUCTION. 

pain. His first measure, on landing at Grand Pr^, 
was to make prisoners of several hundreds of the most 
considerable of the men of the settlement. " In con- 
sequence of their earnest entreaties, the prisoners were 
permitted, ten at once, to return to visit their wretched 
families, and to look, for the last time, upon their beauti- 
ful fields, and their loved and lost homes.*' 

These unhappy men bore their misfortunes with 
firmness, until they were ordered on board the trans- 
port ship, many to be dispersed among people in the 
British provinces, whose customs, language, and re- 
ligion, were opposed to all they held dear and sacred. 

On the 16th of September, the prisoners were drawn 
up six deep ; and the young men, one hundred and 
sixty in number, were ordered to go on board the 
vessels. They refused to do this, unless their families 
migiit be permitted to accompany them : this was de- 
nied, and the soldiers were ordered to do their duty. 
The wretched Acadians no longer resisted, but marched 
from the chapel of Grand Prg to the ships. 

The road from the chapel to the shore, just one mile 
in length, was crowded with women and children, who, 
on their knees, and with eyes and hands raised to 
heaven, entreated blessings on their young friends, so 
unmercifully torn from them. Some of the latter broke 
out into bitter lamentations; others prayed aloud; and 
another portion sang mournful hymns, as they took 
their way to the ships. The seniors formed another 
detachment, and their departure occasioned a similar 
scene of distress. Other vessels arrived, and their 
wives and children followed. Their dwellings were 
burnt before their eyes, and the work of destruction 
'^a^ complete. Eighteen thousand souVs vjexe c^&x 
^iva upon thepItUess world. Desolate and Atx»o\>>x\«i\.e^ 



INTRODVCTXON. VU 

was the beautiful tract they had occupied : their homes 
lay smoking in ruins ; the cattle, abandoned by their 
protectors, assembled about the forsaken dwelling- 
places, anxiously seeking their wonted masters ; and 
all night long, the faithful watch-dogs howled for tl)e 
hands that had fed, and the roofs that had sheltered 
them. 

The distress of one family will serve to exhibit the 
sufferings of these refugees. There was among them a 
notary-public, named Rene Le Blanc. He loved the 
£nglish. On one occasion, the Indians would ha^e 
persuaded him to assist them, in an attempt upon the 
English. He refused; and the Indians, in resent- 
ment, made him prisomer, and detained him four 
years. 

At the time of the expulsion, Le Blanc was living at 
an advanced age. His fidelity to the English, and his 
sufferings on that account, deserved favour, but he 
found none. Le Blanc had twenty children, and about 
one hundred and fifty grandchildren : these were em- 
barked in different vessels, and scattered in different 
provinces. The unfortunate old man was set ashore 
in New York, with his wife, and the two youngest of 
their children. Love for those that were scattered, led 
him from one strange city to another* He reached 
Philadelphia : there he found three of his children, and 
there, despairing to recover the rest, in penury and 
sorrow, he sank into his grave. " It may be ques- 
tioned," says a writer in the North American Review, 
** if the history of the world exhibits a more heart- 
rending incident than the exile of thi& a\x\\^VA^ -^xw^ 
unhappy people. When lYie tiaNfeWet coxw\k«s«^"«^v'»> "^^^ 
noble dykes reared by tVveit in^^iatn \ ^'^^'^ ^V*"^^ 
beneath the shade of t\ieVc aAaxiXk^wi^. ctOs^sa^*'^ 



«»ik 



YUl INTRODUOTIOK. 

Standi over the ruins of their cottagesi or muses among 
their graveS) his imaginadon goes back to a scene of 
rural felicity and purity seldom seen in the world, and 
bis heart melts at the sudden and dreadful fate of the 
Acadians," 



PART THE FIK5T. 



PRELUDE. 



Tms is the forest primseyal. The murmur • 
ing^ pines and the hemlocks. 

Bearded with moss, and in garments green, in- 
distinct in the twilight, 

Stand like Druids of eld, with voices sad and 
prophetic ; 

Stand like harpers hoar, with beards that re^t 
on their bosoms. 

Loud from its rocky caverns, the deep-voiced 
neigbouring ocean 

Speaks, and in accents disconsolate answers 
the wail of the forest. 



I. 



In the Acadian land^ on the shores of the 

Basm of Mmas, 
Distant, secluded, still, the little village of 

Grand-Pre 
Lay in the fruitful valley. Vast meadows 

stretched to the eastward, 
Giving the village its name, and pasture to 

flocks without numher. 
Dikes, that the hands of the farmers had 

raised with lahour incessant, 
S}iut out the turhulent tides ; but at stated 

seasons the flood-gates 
Opened, and welcomed the sea to wander at 

will o'er the meadows, 



EYAMGEUNE. 11 

West and south there were fields of flax, and 

orchards, and cornfields. 
Spreading afar and unfenced o'er the plain ; 

and away to the northward 
Blomidon rose, and the forests old, and aloft 

on the mountains 
8ea-fogs pitched their tents, and mists from 

the mighty Atlantic 
Looked on the happy valley, hut ne'er from 

their station descended. 
There, in the midst of its farms, reposed the 

Acadian village. 
Strongly built were the houses, with frames of 

oak and chestnut. 
Such as the peasants of Normandy built in the 

reign of the Henries. 
Thatched were the roofs, with dormer-windows ; 

and gables projecting 
Over the basement below protected and shaded 

the door-way. 
There in the tranquil evenings of summer, when 

brightly the sunset 



12 XVAKaSLDrX. 

Lighted the yiUage street, and gilded the ranes 

on the chimnejBy 
Matrons and maidens sat in snow-white o^ 

and in kirtles 
Scarlet and hlue and green, with distaffs spin*. 

ning the golden 
Flax for the gossiping loomsy whose noii^ 

shuttles within doors 
Mingled their sound with th« whir of the 

wheels and the songs of the maidens. 
Solemnly down the «treet came the parish 

priest, and the children 
Paused in their play to kiss the hand he ex- 
tended to bless them. 
Rererend walked he among them; and np 

rose matrons and maidens, 
Hailing his slow approach with words of affec 

tionate welcome. 
Then came the labourers home from the field 

and serenely the sun sank 
Down to rest and twilight prevailed. Anon 

from the belfry 



EVAlYGELUra:. 13 

Hottlj the Angelus sounded, and over the roofs 

of the village 
Oolmnns of pale blue smoke, like clouds of 

incense ascending, 
Rose fh>m a hundred hearths, the homes of 

peace and contentment. 
Thus dwelt together in lore these simple Aca- 
dian farmers, — 
Dwelt in the lore of God and man. Alike 

were they f5ree from 
Fear, that reigns with the tyrant, and envy, 

the vice of republics. 
Neitii^ locks had they to their doors, nor 

bars to their windows ; 
But their dwellings were open as day and the 

hearts of the owners ; 
There the richest was poor, and the poorest 

lived in abundance. 

Somewhat apart from the village, and near- 

er the Basin of Minas, 
Benedict BeUefontaine, the wealtl»ft&\. l^roassx 

Orand'Pre, 



14 EVANGELINB. 

Dwelt on his goodly acres; and with him, 

directing his household, 
Gentle Evangeline lived, his child, and the 

pride of the village. 
Btalworth and stately in form was the man of 

seventy winters; 
He&rty and hale was he, an oak that is covered 

vnth snow-flakes; 
White as the snow were his locks, and his cheeks 

as brown as the oak leaves. 
Fair was she to behold, that maiden of seven- 
teen summers ; 
Black were her eyes as the berry that grows 

on the thorn by the way-side, — 
Black, yet how softly they gleamed be^ieath 

the brown shade of her tresses I 
Sweet was her breath, as the breath of kine 

that feed m the meadows 
When in the harvest' heat she bore to the 

reapers at noontide 
Flagons of home-brewed ale : ah ! fair in sooth 

was the maiden. 



EYANaELINE. 15 

Fairer was she when, on Sunday mom, while 

tne bell from its turret 
Sprinkled with holy sounds the air, as the 

priest with his hyssop 
Sprinkles the congregation, and scatters bles- 
sings upon them, 
Down the long street she passed, with her 

cbaplet of beads and her missal. 
Wearing her Norman cap, and her kirtle of 

blue, and the ear-rings, 
Brought in the olden time from France, and 

since, as an heir-loom, 
Handed down from mother to child, through 

Vong generations. 
But a celestial brightness — a more ethereal 

beauty — 
Shone on her face and encircled her form 

when after confession. 
Homeward serenely she walked with God's 

benediction upon her. 
When she had passed, it seemed like the 

exquisite music. 



16 EYABTGELIZfE. 

Firmly builded with rafters of oek, tbe hoiue 

of the farmer 
Stood on the tide of a hill commanfttBg the 

sea; and a shady 
Sycamore grew by the door, with a woodbine 

wreathing around it i 
Budely carved, was the porch, with Mats be^ 

neath ; and a foot-path 
Led through an orchard wide, and dlisappdardd 

in the meadow,-^ 
Under the sycamore tr«e were hireft overhung 

by a penthouse, 
Such as the traveller sees in regions r#mote 

by the road-side, 
Built o'er a box for the poor, or tho blessed 

image of Mary. 
Farther dowr, on the slope of the hill, was the 

well with its moss-grown 
Bucket, fastened with iron, and near it a 

trough for the homes. 
Shielding the house from storms, on the north, 

were the bams and the farm-yard * 



ETANGEUNE. 17 

There stood the broad-wheeled wains and the 

antique ploughs and harrows ; 
There were the folds for the sheep ) and there». 

in his feathered seragiiO) 
Strutted the lordly turkey, and crowed (he 

cock, with the self-same 
Toiee that in ages of old had startled th^ 

penitent Peter. 
Bursting with hay were the bams, themselres 

a Tillage. In each one 
Far o'er the gable projected a roof of thatch 

and a staircase, 
Under the sheltering eaves, led up to the odor-' 

ouscomJoft. 
There too the dore^ot stood, with its meek 

and innocent inmates 
Murmuring ever of lore ; while aboye in the 

variant breezes 
Numberless noisy weathercocks rattled and 

sang of mutation. 

Thus, at peace with God and the world, the 
farmer of Grand-Pre 



18 EYANGELIKE. 

Lired on his sunny farm, and Erangeline go* 

verued his household. 
Many a youth, as he knelt in the church and 

opened his missal, 
Fixed his eyes upon her, as the saint of his 

deepest derotion; 
Happy was he who might touch her hand or 

the hem of her garment I 
Many a suitor came to her door, by the dark- 
ness befriended, 
And as he knocked and waited to hear the 

sound of her footsteps, 
Knew not which beat the louder, his heart or 

the knocker of iron ; 
Or at the joyous feast of the Patron Saint of 

the Tillage, 
Bolder greW) and pressed her hand in the dance 

as he whispered 
Hurried words of love, that seemed a part of 

the music. 
But, among all who came, young Gabriel only 

was welcome; 



EYANOSLINB. 19 

Gabriel Lajtunesse, the son of Basil the black- 

smithy 
WVio was a mighty man in the village, and 

honoured of all men ; 
For since the birth of time, throughout all 

ages and nations, 
Has the craft of smith been held in high repute 

by the people. 
Basil was Benedict's friend. Their children 

from earliest childhood 
Grew up together as brother and sister ; and 

Father Felician, 
Priest and pedagogue both in the Tillage, had 

taught them their letters 
Out of the selfsame book, with the hymns of 

church and the plain-song. 
But when the hymn was sung, and the daily 

lesson completed. 
Swiftly they hurried away to the forge of 

Basil the blacksmith. 
There at the door they stood, with wondering 

eyes to behold him 



-I I 



^ 



20 ETAKasUNS. 

Take in his leathern lap the hoof of the hone 

as a plaything, 
Nailing the shoe in its place ; while near him 

the tire of the cart-wheel 
Lay like A fiery snake, coiled round in a circle 

of cinders. 
Oft on autumnal eyes^ when without in the 

gathering darkness 
Bursting with light Memed the smithy, throtgh 

erery cranny and crerice, 
Warm hy the forge within they watched the 

lahouring bellows, 
And as its panting ceased, and the sparks 

expired in the ashes. 
Merrily laughed, and said they were nuns 

going into the chapel. 
Oft on sledges in winter, as swift as the swoop 

of the eagle, 
Down the hill-side bounding, they glided away 

o''er the meadow. 
Oft ifl the bams they climbed to the populous 

nests on the rafters. 



BYANQELHTE. 21 

Seeking with eager eyes that wondrous stone, 

which the swallow^ 
Brings from the shore of the sea to restore 

the sight of its fledgliiiga ) 
Lucky was he who found that stone in the nest 

of the swallow I 
Thus passed a few. swift years, and they no 

longer were children. 
He was a yaliant youth, and his face, like the 

face of the morning. 
Gladdened the earth with its light, and ripened 

thought into action. 
She was a woinan now, with the heart and 

hopes of a woman. 
<< Sunshine of Saint Eulalie" was she called; 

for that was the sunshine 
Which, as the farmers belieyed, would load 

orchards with apples ; 
She, too, would bring to her husband's house 

delight and abundance. 
Filling it full of lore and the ruddy faces of 

children. 



% 



EVANGELINE 23 



II. 



Now had the season returned, when the nights 
grow colder and longer. 

And the retreating sun the sign of the Scor- 
pion en|0B. 

Birds of passage sailed through the leaden air, 
from the ice-bound. 

Desolate northern bays to the shores of tro- 
pical islands. 

Hanrests where gathered in; and wild with 
the winds of September 

Wrestled the trees of the foi e^t, as Jacob of 
old with the angel. 

All the signs foretold a winter long and incle 
ment. 



24 ISfJJXQELOm. 

BeeSf with prophetic instinct of want had 
hoarded their honej 

Till the hires oyerflowed; and the Indian 
hunters asserted 

Cold would the winter be, for thick was the 
fur of the foxes. 

Such was the adrent of autumn. Then fol- 
lowed that beautiful season. 

Called by th« pious Aeadiaa ptMsats the Sum- 
mer of All-Saints I 

niled was the air with » dreany and magical 
light ; and the landscape m- 

Lay as If created in all the fnmkmi^ of child- 
hood. 

Peace seemed to reign upon earth, and the 
restless heart of the ocaaa 

Was for a moment consoled. All sounds were 
in harmony blended i 

Voices of diildren at play, tha crowing of 
cocks in the farm-yards, 

Whir of wings in tho drowriy air, and the 
cooing of pigeons, 



STJUraSLQfE. 25 

Ail were Bnbdaed and low m the murnmrs of 
loTO, and the great sun 

Looked with tho eye <^ lore tiuough the gol- 
den yapoon around faim i 

While airayed in its robei of roMOt^ and soar- 
let, and yellow, 

Bright with the sheen of the dew, each glitter* 
ing tree of the forest 

Flashed like the plane-tree the Persian adorn- 
ed with mantles and jewels. 

Now recommenced the reign of rest and 

affection and stillness. 
Day with its burden and heat had departed, 

and twilight descending 
Brought back the OTening star to the sky, and 

the herds to the homestead. 
Pawing the ground they came, and resting 

their necks on each other, 
And with their nostnls distended inhalmj the 

froshnoss of cronin^r. 



26 ETAirOELDIE. 

Foremost, bearing the bell, Eyangeline's beau- 
tiful heifer, 

Proud of her mow-white hide, and the ribbon 
that wared from her collar. 

Quietly paced and slow, as if conscious of 
human affection. 

Then came the shepherd back with his bleat- 
ing flocks from the sea-side. 

Where was their fayourite pasture. Behind 
them followed the watch-dog. 

Patient, taHl of importance, and grand in the 
pride of his instuict. 

Walking from side to side with a lordly aim, 
and superbly 

Waving his bushy tail, and urging forward 
the stragglers ; 

Regent of flocks was he when the shepherd 
slept ; their protector, 

When from the forest at night, through the 
starry silence, the wolres howled. 

Late, with the rising moon, returned the wains 
from the marshes, 



EVANGELINE. 27 

Laden with briny hay, that filled the air with 

its odour. 
Cheerily neigh'd the steeds, with dew on their 

manes and their fetlocks. 
While aloft on their shoulders the wooden and 

ponderous saddles 
Painted with brilliant dyes, and adorned with 

tassels of crimson. 
Nodded in bright array, like hollyhocks heavy 

with blossoms. 
Patiently stood the cows meanwhile, and 

yielded their udders 
Unto the milkmaid's hand ; whilst loud and in 

regular cadence 
Into the sounding pail the foaming streamlets 

descended. 
Lowing of cattle and peals of laughter were 

heard in the farm-yard, 
Echoed back by the bams. Anon they sank 

into stillness ; 
Heavily closed, with a creaking sound, the 

valves of tho barn-doors, 



28 EYANQELINB 

Battled the wooden bars, and all for a seaeon 

was silent. 



In-doors, warm by the wide-mouthed fire- 
place, idly the farmer 
Sat in his elbow-chair, and watched how the 

flames and the smoke-wreaths 
Struggled together like foes in a burning city. 

Behind him, 
Nodding and mocking along the wall, with 

gesture fantastic, 
Darted his own huge shadow, and ranished 

away into darkness. 
Faces, clumsily carred in oak, on the back of 

his arm-chair. 
Laughed in the flickering light, and the 

pewter plates on the dresser 
Caught and reflected the flame, as shields of 

armies the sunshine. 
Fragments of song the old man sang, and 

carols of Christmas, 



Ef AKaELnrE. 29 

Bach as at home, in the olden time, his fathers 

before him 
Sang to their Norman orchards and bright 

Borgundian vineyards. 
Olose at her father's side was the gentle Evan- 
geline seated, 
Spinning flax for the loom, that stood in the 

comer behind her t 
Silent awhile were its treadleS) at rest was its 

diHgent shuttle. 
While the monotonous drone of the wheel, 

like the drone of a bagpipe, 
followed the old man's song, and united the 

fragments together. 
As in a church, when the chant of the choir 

at intervals ceases. 
Footfalls are heard in the dale?, or words of 

the priest at the altar, 
So, in each pause of the song, with measured 

motion, the clock clicked. 

Thus as they sat, there were footstep h<^oa:^^ 
and^ suddenly liftedy 



30 EVANGELINE. 

Sounded the wooden latch, and the door swung 

back on its hinges. 
Benedict knew by the hob-nailed shoes it was 

Basil the blacksmith. 
And by her beating heart Evangeline knew 

who was with him. 
*^ Welcome!'' the farmer exclaimed, as their 

footsteps paused on the threshold, 
« Welcome, Basil, my friend I Come, take thy 

place on the settle 
Close by the chimney-side, which is always 

empty without thee ; 
Take from the shelf overhead thy pipe and 

the box of tobacco ; 
Never so much thyself art thou as when 

thi'ough the curling 
Smoke of the pipe or the forge thy friendly 

and jovial face gleams 
Round and red as the harvest moon through 

the mist of the marshes." 
Then, with a smile of content, thus answered 

Basil the Blacksmith, 




EYAKGBLmE. 31 

Taking with easy air the accustomed seat by 

the fireside ; — 
« Benedict Bellafontaine, thou hast ever thy 

jest and thy ballad! 
Ever in cheerfullest mood art thou, when 

others are filled with 
Gloomy forebodings of ill, and see only ruin 

before them, 
Happy. art thou, as if every day thou hadst 

picked up a horseshoe." 
Pausing a moment, to take the pipe that 

Evangeline brought him. 
And with a coal from the embers had lighted 

he slowly continued : — 
« Four days now are passed since the EngHsh 

ships at their anchors 
Bide in the Gaspereau's mouth, with their 

cannon pointed against us. 
What their design may be is imknown ; but ail 

are commanded 
On the morrow to meet in the church, where 

his Majesty's mandate 



•II'- 

ifl> 

Hi" 



11 






32 STAKOELUnS^. 

Will be pFOclflimed as law in the land. Alas 

in the mean time 
Many surmises of evil alarm the hearts of the 

people." 
Then made answer the farmer:-^ ^Perhaps 

some friendlier purpose 
Brings these ships to our shores. Perhaps 

the harrests in England, 
Sy the untimely rains or untimelier heat haye. 
I 11 :,: been blighted, 

i]| ;} And from our bursting barns they would feed 

their cattle and children." 
<' Not so thinketh the folk in the village," said, 

warmly, the blacksmith, 
Shaking his head, as in doubt ; then, heaving, 

a sigh, he continued : — 
* Louisbnrg is not forgotten, nor Beau S6jour 

nor Port BoyaL 
Many already have fled to the forest, and lurk 

on its outskirts, 
Waiting with anxious hearts the dubious fate 

of to-morrow. 



>3 - 



i -1 
.1) . 

J 



■I I 



IiVAI«G?xa>£. 33 

Arms have been taken from us, and warlike 

weapons of all kinds $ 
Nothing is left but the blacksmith's sledge and 

the scythe of the mower." 

m 

Then with a pleasant smile made answer the 

jovial farmer : — 
^ Safer are we unarmed, in the midst of our 

flocks and our cornfields, 
6afer within these peaceful dikes, besieged by 

the ocean, 
Than were our fathers in forts, besieged by 

the enemy's cannon. 
Fear no evil, my friend, and to-night may no 

shadow of sorrow 
Fall on this house and hearth ; for this is the 

night of the contract. 
Built are the house and the bam. The merry, 

lads of the village 
Strongly have built them and well ; and 

breaking the glebe round about them, 
Filled the bam with hay, and the house with 

food for a twelvemonth. 



34 



EYAKGELINB. 



■] 



ii 

ii 
II 






Jden^ Leblano vrill be here anon, with his 

papers and inkhom ; 
Shall we not then be glad, and rejoice in the 

joy of our children ? " 
As apart by the widow she stood, with her 

hand in her lover's, 
Blushing, Erangeline heard the words that her 

father had spoken, 
And as they died on his lips the worthy notary 

entered. 



■J 



H 



EYANGELINE. 35 



III. 

Bent like a labouring oar, that toils in the surf 

of the ocean, 
Bent, but not broken, by age was the form of 

the notary public; 
Shocks of yellow hair, like the silken floss of 

the maize, hung 
Oyer his shoulders ; his forehead was high ; 

and glasses with horn bows 
Sat astride on his nose, with a look of wisdom 

supernal. 
Father of twenty children was he, and more 

than a hundred 
Children's children rode on his knee, and heard 

his great watch tick. 
Four long years in the times of the war had 
he lanquished a captiye. 



86 £YANG£LIX£. 

Suffering mucli in an old French fort as the 

friend of the English. 
Now, though warier grown, without all guile 

or suspicion. 
Ripe in wisdom was ne, but patient, and sim- 
ple, and childlike. 
He was belored by all, and most of all by the 

children ; 
For he told them tales of the Loup-garou in 

the forest, 
And of the goUin that came in the night to 

water the horses. 
And of the white Letiche, the ghost of a child 

who unchristened 
Died, and was doomed to haunt unseen the 

chambers of children ; 
And how on Christmas ere the oxen talked in 

the stable, 
And how the fever was cured by a spider shut 

up in a nut-shell. 
And of the marvellous powers of four-leaved 

clover and horseshoes 



^ 



With whatBoerer else waa writ in the lore of 

the village. 
Then np rose from his seat hy the fireside 

Basil the blacksmith, 
£[nocked from his pipe the ashes, and slowlj 

extending his right hand, 
** Father Leblanc/' he exclaimed, *' thou hast 

heard the talk in the Tillage, 
And, perchance canst tell us some news of 

these ships and their errand/' 
Then wiih modest demeanour made answer 

the notary public, — 
^ Gossip enough hare I heard, in sooth, yet 

am never the wiser ; 
And what their errand may be I know not 

better than others. 
Yet am I not of those who imagine some evil 

intention 
Brings them here, for we are at peace ; and 

why then molest us ? " 
^ God's name I "shouted the hasty and some- 
what irascible blacksmith ; 



88 ETANOELINE. 

^Must we in all things look for the how, and 

the why, and the wherefore ? 
Dailj injustice is done, and might is the right 

of the strongest ! " 
But, without heeding his warmth, continued 

the notary puhlic, — 
<*Man is unjust, hut God is just; and finally 

justice 
Triumphs ; and well I remember a story, that 

often consoled me. 
When as a captive I lay in the old French fort 

at Port Royal. " 
This was the old man's favourite tale, and he 

loved to repeat it 
Whenever neighbours complained that any 

injustice was done tliem. 
** Once in an ancient city, whose name I no 

longer remember, 
Raided aloft on a column, a brazen statue of 

Justice 
Stood in the public square, upholding the scales 

in its left hand, 



And in its right a sword, as an emblem that 

justice presided 
Over the laws of the land, and the hearts and 

homes of the people. 
Even the birds had built their nests in the 

Bcales of the balance, 
Having no fear of the sword that flashed in 

the sunshine above them. 
But in the course of time the laws of the laud 

were corrupted ; 
Might took the place of right, and the weak 

were oppressed, and the mighty 
Ruled with an iron rod. Then it chanced in 

a nobleman's palace 
That a necklace of pearls was lost, and ere 

long a suspicion 
Fell on an orphan girl who lived as maid in 

the household. 
She, after form of trial condemned to die on 

the scaffold, 
Patiently met her doom at the foot of the 

statue of Justice. 



40 EYA176ELINS. 

Ab to her Father in heaven her innocent spirit 

ascended, 
Lo I o'er the cit j a tempest rose ; and the bolts 

of the thunder 
Smote the statue of hronee, and hurled in 

wrath from its lefl; hand 
Down on the pavement below the clattering 

scales of the balance, 
And in the hollow thereof was found the nest 

of a magpie, 
Into whose clay-built walls the necklace of 

pearls was inwoven." 
Silenced, but not convinced, when the story 

was ended, the blacksmith 
Stood like a man who fain would speak, but 

findeth no language ; 
And all his thoughts congealed into Unes on 

his face, as the vapours 
Freeze in fantastic shapes on the window* 

panes in the winter. 



VrAJUQULDXE. 41 

Then Eyangellne lighted the brasen lamp on 

the table, 
Filled, till it orerflowed, the pewter tankard 

with home-brewed 
Nut-brown ale, that was famed for its strength 

in the village of Grand-Pr6 ; 
While from his pocket the notary drew his 

papers and ink-horn, 
Wrote with a steadj hand the date and the age 

of the parties, 
Naming the dower of the bride in flocks of 

sheep and in cattle. 
Orderly all thmgs proceeded, and duly and 

well were completed, 
And the great seal of the law was set like a sun 

on the margin. 
Then from his leathern pouch the farmer threw 

on the table 
Three times the old man's fee in solid pieces 

ofsilyer; 
And the notary rising, and blessing the bride 

and the bridegroom, 



42 EVANGELINE. 

Lifted aloft the tankard of ale and drank to 
their welfare. 

Wiping the foam from his lip, he solemnly 
howed and departed, 

While in silence the others sat and mused by 
the fireside, 

Till Evangeline brought the draught-board out 
of its comer. 

Soon was the game begun. In friendly con- 
tention the old men 

Laughed at each lucky hit, or unsuccessful 
manoeuvre ; 

Laughed when a man was crowned, or a breach 
was made in the king-row. 

Meanwhile apart, in the twilight gloom of a 
window's embrasure, 

Sat the lovers, and whispered together, behold- 
ing the moon rise 

Over the pallid sea and the silvery mist of the 
meadows. 

Silently, one by one, in the infinite meadows of 
heaven. 



EVA^ci.i.I^^'i:. 43 

Blossomed the lovely stars^ the forget-me-nots 
of the aDgels. 



Thus passed the eyening away. Anon the 

bell from the belfry 
Rang out the hour of nine, the yillage curfcw> 

and straightway 
Bose the guests and departed; and silence 

reigned in the household. 
Many a farewell word and sweet good-night on 

the door-step 
Lingered long in Evangeline's heart, and filled 

it with gladness. 
Carefully then were covered the embers that 

glowed on the hearth-stone. 
And on the oaken stairs resounded the tread of 

the farmer. 
Soon with a soundless step the foot of Evan- 
geline followed. 
Up the staircase moved a luminous space in 
the darkness, 



44 BVANGELINB. 

Lighted less by the lamp than the shining face 
of the maiden. 

Silent she passed through the hall, and entered 
the door of her chamber. 

Simple that chamber was, with its curtains of 
white, and its clothes-press 

Ample and high, on whose spacious sh^yes 
were carefully folded 

Linen and woollen stuffs, by the hand of Evan- 
geline woven. 

This was the precious dower she would bring 
to her husband in marriage 

Better than flocks and herds, being proofs of 
her skill as a housewife. 

Soon she extinguished her lamp, for the mellow 
and radiant moonlight 

Streamed through the windows, and lighted 
the room, till the heart of the maiden 

Swelled and obeyed its power, like the tremu- 
lous tides of the ocean. 

Ah ! she was fair, exceeding fair to behold, as 
she stood with 



EVANGELINE. 46 

Naked snow-white feet on the gleaming floor 

of her chamber 
Little she dreamed that below, among the trees 

of the orchard, 
Waited her lover, and watched for the gleam 

of her lamp and her shadow. 
Yet were her thoughts of him, and at times a 

feeling of sadness 
Passed o'er her soul, as the sailing shade of 

clouds in the moonlight 
Flitted across the floor and darkened the room 

for a moment. 
And as she gazed from the window she saw 

serenely the moon pass 
Forth from the folds of a cloud, and one star 

follow her footsteps. 
As out of Abraham's tent young Ishmael wan- 
dered with Hagar ! 



zrANQZLonn. 47 



IV. 



Pleasantly rose next morn tlie suu on tlie 

Tillage of Grand-Pre. 
Pleasantly gleamed in the soft sweet air the 

Basin of Minas, 
Where the ships, with their wavering shadows 

were riding at anchor. 
Life had long been astir in the Tillage, and 

clamorous labour 
Knocked with its hundred hands at the golden 

gates of the morning. 
Now from the country around, from the farms 

and the neighbouring hamlets, 
Came in their holiday dresses the blithe Aca* 

dian peasants. 



48 StANaELIHS. 

Many a glad good morrow and jocund laugh 

from the young folk 
Made the hright air hrighteri as up from the 

numerous meadows, 
Where no path could he seen hut the track of 

wheels in the greensward. 
Group after group appeared, ^ and joined or 

passed on the highway. 
Long ere noon, in the Tillage all KNuidi of 

lahour were silenced. 
Thronged were the streets with people | and 

noisy groups at the house-doors 
Sat in the cheerful sun, and rejoiced and gos- 

sipped together. 
Erery house was an inn, where all were wel« 

comed and feasted; 
For with this simple people^ who lired like 

hrothers together. 
All things were held iu oommon, and what one 

had was another's. 
Yet under Benedict's roof hospitality seemed 
more abundant 



STANaELIIlB. 49 

For Eyangeline stood among the guests of her 

father ; 
Bright was her face with smiles, and words of 

welcome and gladness 
Fell from her beautiful lips, and blessed the 

cup as she gave it. 



Under the open sky, in the odorous abr of 
the orchard, 

Bending with golden fruit, was spread the feast 
of the betrothal. 

There in the shade of the porch were the 
priest and the notary seated ; 

There good Benedict sat, and sturdy Basil the 
blacksmith. 

Not far withdrawn from these, by the cider- 
press and the beehives, 

Michael the fiddler was placed^ with the gay- 
est of hearts and of waistcoats* 

Shadow and light from the leaves alternately 
played on his snow-white 



50 bvanqeLine. 

Hair, as it waved in the wind ; and the jolly 

face of the fiddler 
Glowed like a living coal when the ashes are 

blown from the embers. , 

Gaily the old man sang to the vibrant sound 

of his fiddle, 

ToiM les Bourgeois de ChcUreSy and Le Carillon 
de Dunkerque, 

And anon with his wooden shoes beat time to 
the music. 

Merrily, merrily whirled the wheels of the diz- 
zying dances 

Under the orchard-trees and down the path to 
the meadows ; 

Old folk and young together, and children 
mingled among them. 

Fairest of all the maids was Evangeline, Bene- 
dict's daughter ! 

Noblest of all the youths was Gabriel, son pf 
the blacksmith I 



H 



XYANGEUNE. 51 

So passed the morning away. And lo I with 

a summons sonorous 
Sounded the bell from its tower, and oyer the 

meadows a drum beat. 
Thronged ere long was the church with men. 

Without, in the churchyard, 
Waited the women. They stood by the grayes, 

and hung on the head-stones 
Garlands of autimm leayes and evergreens 

fresh from the forest. 
Then came the guard from the ships, and 

marching proudly among them 
Entered the sacred portal. With loud and 

dissonant clangour 
Echoed the sound of their brazen drums from 

ceiling and casement, — 
Echoed a moment only, and slowly the ponder- 
ous portal 
dosed, and in silence the crowd awaited the 

will of the soldiers. 
Then up rose their commander, and spake 
^ from the steps of the altar. 



52 EVAKGELINE. 

Holding aloft iu liis hands, vitli its seals, the 
royal commission. 

** Tou are conrened this day/' he said, <' by 
his Majesty's orders : 

Clement and kind has he been ; but how you 
have answered his kindness, 

Let your own hearts reply I To my natural 
make and my temper 

Painful the task is I do, which to you I know 
must be grievous : 

Yet must I bow and obey, and delirer the will 
of our monarch ; 

Namely, that all your lands, and dwellings, 
and cattle of all kinds 

Forfeited be to the crown ; and that you your- 
selves from this province 

Be transported to other lands. God grant 
you may dwell there 

Ever as faithful subjects, a happy and peace- 
able people I 

Prisoners now I declare you ; for such is liis 
Mfyesty*s pleasure I " 




BTANQELINB. 53 

A»$ when the aur is serene ' in the snltry 

solstice of summer, 
Suddenly gathers a storm, and the deadly sling 

of the hailstones 
Beats down the farmer's corn in the field and 

shatters his windows^ 
Hiding the sun, and strewing the ground with 

thatch from the house-roofis, 
Bellowing fly the herds, and seek to hreak 

their inclosures ; 
So cm the hearts of the people descended the 

words of the speaker. 
i3ilent a moment they stood in speechless won* 

der, and then rose 
Louder and ever louder a wail of sorrow and 

anger, 
And, by one impulse moved, they madly rushed 

to the door- way. 
Vain was the hope of escape, and cries and 

fierce imprecations 
Bang through the house of prayer i aud high 

o'er the heads of the others 



54 SYAKGELINE. 

Rose, with anna uplifted, the figure of Basil 

the hlacksmith, 
As on a stormy sea a spar is tossed hj the 

billows. 
Flushed was his face and distorted with pas- 
sion ; and wildly he shouted, — 
" Down with the tyrants of England ! we 

never have sworn them allegiance I 
Death to these foreign soldiers, who seize on 

our homes and our harvests ! " 
More he fain would have said, but the merci~ 

less hand of a soldier 
Smote him upon the mouth, and dragged him 

down to the pavement. 



In the midst of the strife and tumult of 

angry contention, 
Lo ! the door of the chancel opened, and Father 

Felician 
Entered, with serious mien, and ascended the 

steps of the altar. 



i 



JSVAJSiiJiaaiSE. 55 

Baifiing liis reverend liand, with a gestuie ho 

awed into silence 
All that clamourous throng ; and thus he spake 

to his people : 
Deep were his tones and solemn ; in accents 

measured and mournful 
Spake he, as after the tocsin's alarum, distinctly 

the clock strikes. 
*' What is this that ye do, my children ? what 

madness has seized you ? 
Forty years of my life have I lahoured among 

you, and taught you, 
Not in word alone, but in deed, to love one 

another ! 
Is this the fruit of my toils, my vigils, and 

prayers, and privations ? 
Have you so soon forgotten all lessons of love 

and forgiveness ? 
This is the house of the Prince of Peace, and 

would you profane it 
Thus with violent deeds and hearts overflow- 
ing with hatred ? 



56 SyAMGSLniE. 

Lo ! where the crucified Christ fircnn his 

is gazing upon you ! 
Seel in those sorrowftil eyes what meeknesfl 

and holy compassion ! 
Hark ! how those lips still repeat the prayer— 

< O Father, forgiye them ! ' 
Let us repeat that prayer in the hour when the 

wicked assail us, 
Let us repeat it now, and say, * O Father, for- 
give them I ' ** 
Few were his words of rebuke, but deep in the 

hearts of his people 
Sank they, and sobs of contrition succeeded 

that passionate outbreak ; 
And they repeated his prayer, and said, ^ Oh^ 

Father, forgive them I " 



Then came the evening service. The tapers 
gleamed from the altar ; 
Fervent and deep was the voice of the priest, 
and the people responded. 



SVANGBUNE. 57 

Kot with their lips fdone, but their hearts ; and 

the Ave Maria 
Sang they, and fell on their knees, and theur 

souls, with deyotion translated. 
Rose on the ardor of prajer, like Elijah ascend. 

ing to heaven. 



Meanwhile had spread in the village the 

tidings of ill, and on all sides 
Wandered, wailing, from house to house the 

women and children. 
Long at her Other's door Evangeline stood, 

with her right hand 
Shielding her eyes from the level rays of the 

sun, that, descending, 
Lighted the village street with mysterious 

splendour, and roofed each 
Peasant's cottage with golden thatch, and em- 

blazoned its windows. 
Long within had been spread the snow-white 

cloth on the table ; 



There stood the wheaten loaf, and the honey, 

fragrant with wild flowers ; 
There stood tho tankard of ale, and the cheese 

fresh hrought from the dairy ; 
And at the head of the board the great arm. 

chair of the farmer. 
Thus did Evangeline wait at her father's door, 

as the sunset 
Threw the long shadows of trees o'er the broad 

ambrosial meadows. 
Ah ! on her spirit within a deeper shadow had 

fallen, 
And from the fields of her soul a fhtgrance 

celestial ascended, — 
Charity, meekness, love, and hope, and for- 

giyeness, and patience ! 
Then, all forgetful of self, she wandered into 

the vilkge. 
Cheering with looks and words the disconso* 

late hearts of the women. 
As o'er the darkening fields with lingering 

steps they departed. 



i 



EVANQELINB. 69 

Urged by tlieir household cares, and the weary 

feet of their children. 
Down ttank the great red sun, and in golden 

glimmering vapours 
Veiled the light of his face, like the prophet 

descending from Sinai. 
Sweetly over the village the bell of the Angelus 

sounded. 



Meanwliile, amid the gloom, by the church 
Evangeline lingered. 

All was silent within ; and in vain at the door 
and the windows 

Stood she, and listened and looked, until, over- 
come by eilnotion, 

" Gabriel I *' cried she aloud with tremulous 
voice ; but no answer 

Came from the graves of the dead, nor the 
gloomier grave of the living. 

Slowly at length she returned to the tenantless 
house of her father. 



60 BTAKGXLINB. 

Smouldered the fire on the hearth, oiu the 
hoard stood the supper imtasted. 

Empty and drear was each room, and haunted 
with phantoms of terror; 

Sadly echoed her step on the stair and the 
floor of her chamher. 

In the dead of the night she heard the whis- 
pering rain fall 

Loud on the withered leaves of the sycamore- 
tree by the window. 

Keenly the lightning flashed ; and the yoiee of 
the neighbouring thunder 

Told her that God was in heayen, snd gortmed 
the world he created ! 

Then she remembered the tale she had heard 
of the justice of heaven ; 

Soothed was her troubled soul, and she p^ae^ 
fully slumbered till morning. 



JSYAKQXIINE. 61 



V. 



FouB times the 8im had risen and set ; and now 
on the fifth day 

Cheerily called the cock to the Bleeping maids 
of the farm-house. 

Ston o'er the yellow fields, in silent and mourn- 
ful procession. 

Came from the neighhonring hamlets and 
farms the Acadian women, 

Driving in ponderous wains their household 
goods to the sea-shore, 

Pausing and looking hack to gaze once more 
on their dwellings, 



02 EVANGELINE. 

Ere they were shut from sight by the winding 

road and the woodland. 
Olose at their sides their children ran, and 

urged on the oxen, 
While in their little hands they clasped some 

fragments of playthings. 



Thus to the Gaspereau's mouth they hur- 
ried ; and there on the sea-beach 

Piled in concision lay the household goods of 
the peasants. 

All day long between the shore and the ihipi 
did the boats ply ; 

All day long the wains came labouring dK^pi 
from the village. 

Late in the afternoon, when the sun was near 
to his setting, 

Echoing far o'er the fields came the r<^ of 
drums from the churchyard. 

Thither the women and children thronged. 
On a sudden the church-doors 



EYANGElIlNE. 63 

Opened, and forth came the g^ard, and march- 
ing in gloomy procession 

Followed the long imprisoned^ bnt patient, Aca« 
dian farmers. 

Even as pilgriais, who journey afar from their 
homes and their country, 

Sing as they go, and in singing forget they are 
weary and way-worn, 

So with songs on their lips the Acadian pea- 
sants descended 

Down from the church to the shore, amid their 
wires and their daughters, 

Foremost the young men came ; and raising 
together their roiccs. 

Sang they with tremulous lips a chant of the 
Catholic Missions : — 

** Sacred heart of the Saviour I Oh, inex- 
haustible fountain? 

¥111 our hearts this day with strength and sub- 
mission and patience I " 

Then the old men, as they marched, and the 
women that stood by the way-side 



64 KTAHGELINS. 

Joined in the sacred psalm, and the birds in the 

sunshine abore them 
Mingled their notes therewith, like yoices of 

spirits departed. 



Half-way down to the shore Erangeline 

waited in silence, 
Not oyercome with grief, but strong in the 

hour of affliction, — 
Calmly and sadly waited, until the proces8i<m 

approached her. 
And she beheld the face of Gabriel pale with 

emotion. 
Tears then filled her eyes, and, eagerly numing 

to meet him, 
Clasped she his hands, and laid her head on 

his shoulder, and whispered,-— 
*^ Gabriel ! be of good cheer I for if we lore 

one another, 
Nothing, in truth, can harm tis, whaterer mis- 

chances may happen 1 " 



I 



Smiling she spake these words; then suddenly 

paused, for her father 
Saw she slowly adyancing. Alas ! how changed 

was his aspect! 
Gone was the glow from his cheek, and the 

fire from his eye, and his footstep 
HeaTier seemed with the weight of the weary 

heart in his hosom. 
But with a smile and a sigh, she clasped his 

neck and emhraced him, 
Speaking words of endearment where words 

of comfort availed not. 
Thus to the Gaspereau's mouth moved on that 

mournful procession. 



There disorder prevailed, and the tumult 

and stir of emharking. 
Busily plied the freighted boats ; and in the 

confusion 
Wives were torn from their husbands, and 

mothers, too late, saw their children 



6G EVANGELINE, 

Left on the land, extending their arms, with 

wildest entreaties. 
So unto separate ships were Basil and Gabriel 

carried, 
While in despair on the shore Evangeline 

stood with her father. 
Half the task was not done when the sun went 

down, and the twilight 
Deepened and darkened around; and in haste 

the refluent ocean 
Fled away from the shore, and left the line of 

the sand-beach 
Covered with waifs of the tide, with kelp and 

the slippery sea-weed. 
Farther back, in the midst of the househoijl^ 

goods and the waggons, — 
Like to a gipsey camp, or a leaguer after a 

battle, 
All escape cut off by the sea, and the sentinels 

near them, — 
Lay encamped for the night the houseless Aca- 
dian farmers. 



EVANGELINB. 67 

Back to its nethermost caves retreated the beU 
lowing occean, 

Dragging adown the beach the rattling peb- 
bles, and leaving 

Inland and far up the shore the stranded 
boats of the sailors. 

Then^ as the night descended, the hards re- 
turned from their pastures ; 

Sweet was the moist still air with the odour of 
milk from their udders ; 

Lowing they waited, and long, at the well- 
known bars of the farm-yard — 

Waited and looked in vain for the voice and 
the hand of the milkmaid. 

Silence reigned in the streets; from the 
church no Angelus sounded. 

Rose no smoke from the roofs, and gleamed 
no lights from the windows. 



But on the shores meanwhile the evening 
fires had been kindled. 



08 EVANGELIIfE. 

BaUt of the drifii-wood thrown on the stands 

from wrecks in the tempest. 
Bound them shapes of gloom and sorrowful 

faces were gathered : 
Voices of women were heard, and oimen^ and 

the crying of children. 
Onward from fire to fire, as from hearth to 

hearth in his parish, 
Wandered the faithful priest, consoling, and 

Messing, and cheering. 
Like unto shiprecked Paul on Melita's desolate 

sea-shore. 
Thus he approached the place where ETaiige- 

line sat with her father. 
And in the flickering light heheld the fince of 

the old man, 
Haggard and hollow and wan, and without 

either thought or emotion. 
E'en as the face of a clock from which the 

hands have heen taken. 
Vainly Evangeline strove with words and ca- 
resses to cheer him, 



STAIrQBLDtS. 69 

Vainly offered bim food ; jet he mored not) he 

looked Dot, he apake not, 
But, with a racant stare, erer gazed at the 

flickering fire'light. 
" Btnedioite I " murmared the prieHl, in tones 

of compassion. 
More' he fain wonld have said, but hia heart 

was full, and Mb accents 
Faltered and paused on his lips, as the feet of 

a child on a threshold. 
Husked by the scene he beholds, and the awfiil 

presence of sorrow. 
Silently, therefore, he laid his hand on the 

head of the muden. 
Raising his eyes full of tears, to the silent 

stars that abore them 
Hored on their way, unperturbed b; the 

wTongB and sorrows of mortals. 
Then sat he down at her side, and they wept 

together in silence. 



70 EVANGELINE. 

Suddenly rose from the south a light, as in 

autumn the blood-red 
Moon climbs the crystal walls of heaven, and 

o'er the horizon 
Titan-like, stretches its hundred hands upon 

mountain and meadow, 
Seizing the rocks and the riyers, and piling 

huge shadows together. 
Broader and ever broader it gleamed on the 

roofs of the village ; 
Gleamed on the sky and the sea, and the ships 

that lay in the roadstead. 
Columns of shining smoke uprose, and flashes 

of flames were 
Thrust through their folds and withdrawn, like 

the quivermg hands of a martyr. 
Then as the wind seized the gleeds and the 

burning thatch, and, uplifting, 
Whirled them aloft through the air, at once 

from a hundred house-tops 
Started the sheeted smoke with flashes of flame 

intermingled. 



EVANGELINE. 71 

These things beheld in dismay the crowd on 

the shore and on shipboard. 
Speechless at first they stood, then cried aloud 

in their anguish, 
** We shall behold no more our homes in the 

village of Grand-Pre I " 
Loud on a sudden the cocks began to crow in 

the farm-yards, 
Thinking the day had dawned ; and anon the 

lowing of cattle 
Come on the evening breeze, by the barking 

of dogs interrupted. 
Then rose a sound of dread, such as startles 

the sleeping encampments 
Far in the western prairies of forests that skirt 

the Nebraska, 
When the wild horses affrighted sweep by with 

the speed of the whirlwind. 
Or the loud bellowing herds of buffaloes rush 

to the river : 
Such was the sound that arose on the night, as 

the herds and the horses 



72 SYANQELINE. 

Broke through their folds and fencesy and 
madly rushed o'er the meadowB. 



Overwhelmed ¥rith the sights yet speechless, 

the priest and the maiden 
Gazed on the seene of terror that reddened 

and widened before them ; 
And as they turned at length to ej^eak to their 

silent companion, 
Lo I from his seat he had fallen, and stretched 

abroad on the sea-shore 
Motionless lay his form, firom which the soul 

had departed 
Slowly the priest uplifted the lifeless head, and 

the maiden 
Knelt at her father's side^ and wailed aloud in 

her terror. 
Then in a swoon she sank, and lay with her 

head on his bosom. 
Through the long night she lay in deep, obli- 

Ttous slumber ; 



XYANGELIKE. 73 

And when she awoke from the trance, she 
beheld a multitude near her : 

Faces of frienda she beheld^ that were mourn- 
fully gazing upon her, 

Pallidy with tearful e jes, and looks of saddest 
compassion. 

Still the Uaze of the burning Tillage illumined 
the landscape, 

Beddened the sky overhead, and gleamed on 
the faces around her, 

And like the day of doom it seemed to her 
wavering senses. 

Then a familiar voice she heard, as it said to 
the people, — 

^ Let us bury him here by the sea. When a 
happier season 

Brings us again to our homes from the un- 
known land of our exile. 

Then shall his sacred dust be piously laid in 
the churchyard." 

JBuch were the words of the priest. And there 
iin haste by the sea-side. 



74 EYANGEUNE. 

Having the glare of the hurnhig village for 
fuucral torches, 

But without hell or hook, they huried the far- 
mer of Graud-Pre. 

And as the voice of the priest repeated the ser- 
vice of sorrow, 

Lo I with a mournful sound, like the voice of a 
vast congregation, 

Solemnly answered the sea, and mingled its 
roar with the dirges. 

T was the returning tide, that afar from the 
waste of the ocean. 

With the first davm of the day, came heaving 
and hurrying landward. 

Then recommenced once more the stir and 
noise of emharking ; 

And with the ehh of that tide the ships sailed 
out of the liarhour. 

Leaving hehind them the dead on the shore, 
and the village in ruins. 



PART THE SECOND. 



V 



XTAHGELINE. 77 



I. 



Many a weary year had passed since llie 

burning of Grand-Pr6, 
Wben on tUe falling tide the freighted vessels 

departed^ 
Bearing a nation» with all its household gods, 

into exile, — 
Exile without an end, and without an example 

in story. 
Far asunder, on separate coasts, the Acadians 

landed: 
Scattered were they, like flakes of snow, when 

the wind from the north-east 
Strikes aslant through the fogs that darken 

the banks of Newfoundland. 
Friendless, homeless, hopeless, they wandered 

from city to city, 



78 EVANGELINE. 

From the cold lakes of the north to sultry 

southern savannas, — 
From the bleak shores of the sea io the lands 

where the Father of Waters 
Seizes the hills in his hands, and drags them 

down to the ocean, 
Deep in their sands to bury the scattered bones 

of the mammoth. 
Friends they sought and homes ; and many, 

despairing, heart-broken. 
Asked of the earth but a grave, and no longer 

a friend nor a fireside. 
Written their history stands on tablets of stone 

in the churchyards. 
Long among them was seen a maiden who 

waited and wandered, 
Lowly and meek in spirit, and patiently suffer- 

ing all things. 
Fair was she and young ; but, alas ! before her 

extended. 
Dreary and vast and silent, the desert of life, 

with its pathway 



EVANQELDiE. 79 

Marked by the graves of those who had sor- 
rowed and suffered before her. 
Passions long eztmguished, and hopes long 

dead and abandoned, 
^Aa the emigrant's way o'er the western desert 

is marked by 
Camp fires long consumed, and bones that 

bleach in the sunshine. 
Something there was in her life incomplete, 

imperfect, unfinished 
As if a morning of June, with aU its music and 

sunshine. 
Suddenly paused in the sky, and, fading, slowly 

descended 
Into the east agaia, from whence it late had 

arisen. 
Sometimes she lingered in towns, till, urged 

by the fever within her, 
Urged by a restless longing, the hunger and 

thirst of the spirit. 
She would commence again her endless search 
and endeavour 



80 EVANGELINE. 

Sometimes in chnrchyards strayed, and gazed 
on the crosses and tombstones. 

Sat by some nameless graye, and thought that 
perhaps in its bosom 

He was abeady at rest and she longed to slom^ 
ber beside him. 

Sometimes a rumour, A hearsay, an inarticu- 
late whisper, 

Came with its airy hand to point ftnd beckon 
her forward. 

Sometimes she spake with those who had seen 
her beloved and known him. 

But it was long ago, in some far-off place or 
forgotten. 

* Gabriel Lajeunesse I " said they ; " Oh, yes 
we have seen him. 

He was with Basil the blacksmith, and both 
had gone to the prairies ; 

Coureurs-des-Bois, are they, and famous hun- 
ters and trappers." 

** Gabriel Lajeunesse I " said others ; Oh, yes ! 
we have seen him. 



XYANGELIHB. 81 

He is a Voyagemvr in the lowlands of Louis- 
iana.'' 

Then would they say. •^^ Dear child! why 
dream and wait for him letter ? 

Are there not other youths as t^is as Gabriel ? 
others 

Who hare hearts as tender and true^ and spi-« 
rits as loyal ? 

Here ii Baptiste Leblanci the notdry's son^ who 
has loved thee 

Matty a tedious year ; come^ giro him thy hand 
and be happy ! 

Thou Mrl too fair to be lefb to braid St. Catha« 
rine's tresses.'' 

Ihen would Erangeline imswer, serenely but 
sadly, — ^ I cannoti 

Wither my heart has gone there follows my 
hand, and not elsewhere. 

For When the heart goes before, like a lamp^ 
and illumines the pathway, 

Mttuy things are made clear, that else lie hid- 
den in darkness." 



82 EYAKGEUMB. 

And thereupon the priest, her friend and 

father^onfessor, 
Said, with a smile, — Oh, daughter! thy God 

thus speaketh within thee ! 
Talk not of wasted affection ; affection nerer 

was wasted ; 
If it enrich not the heart of another, its waters, 

returning 
Back to their springs, like the rain, shall fill 

them full of refreshment ; 
That which the fountain sends forth returns 

again to the fountain. 
Patience ; accomplish thy lahour ; accomplish 

thj work of affection! 
Sorrow and silence are strong, and patient 

endurance is godlike. 
Therefore accomplish thy lahour of lore, till 

the heart is made godlike. 
Purified, strengthened, perfected, and render- 
ed more worthy of heaven ! " 
Cheered by the good man's words^ Eraogeline 

laboured and waited. 



EVANGELINE. 83 

Still in her heart she heard the funeral dirge 
of the ocean, 

But with its sound there was mingled a voice 
that whispered, "Despair not I " 

Thus did the poor soul wander in want and 
cheerless discomfort, 

Bleeding, barefooted, over the shards and 
thorns of existence. 

Let me essay, oh. Muse, to follow the wan- 
derer's footsteps ; — 

Not through each devious path, each change- 
ful year of existence ; 

But as the traveller follows a streamlet's course 
through the valley : 

Far from its margin at times, and seeing the 
gleam of its water 

Here and there, in some open space, and at 
intervals only ; 

Then drawing nearer its banks, through sylvan 
glooms that conceal it, 

Though he behold it not, he can hear its con- 
tinuous murmur ; 

Happy* &t length, if he find the shot where it 
reaches an outlet. 



"ttYAv^wam. 85 



II. 



It was the month of May. Far down the 

beautiful riyer, 
Paat the Ohio shore, and past the mouth of 

the Wabash, 
Into the golden stream of the broad and swift 

Mississipi, 
Floated a cumbrous boat, that was rowed by 

Acadian boatmen. 
It was a band of exiles : a raft, as it were, from 

the shipwrecked 
Nation, scattered along the coast, now floaliiiig 

together, 
Bound by the bonds of a common belief ttod 0i 

common misfortune ; 



66 EYAIYGELINK. 

Men^ and women^ and children, who, guided 

by hope or by hearsay, 
Sought for their kith and their kin among the 

few-acred farmers 
On the Acadian coast, and the prairies of fair 

Opelousas. 
With them Erangeline went, and her guide, 

the Father Felician. 
Onward o'er sunken sands, through a wilder- 
ness sombre with forests, 
Day after day they glided adown the turbulent 

river; 
Night after night, by their blazing fires, en^ 

camped on its borders. 
Now through rushing chutes, among green 

islands, where plumelike 
Cotton trees nodded their shadowy crests, 

. they swept with the current. 
Then emerged into broad lagoons, where sii- 

yery sand-bars 
Lay in the stream, and along the wimping 

waves of their margin, 



EVANGELINE. 87 

Shining with snow-white plumes, large flocks 

of pelicans waded. 
Level the landscape grew, and along the shores 

of the river, 
Shaded hj china-trees, in the midst of luzu-* 

riant gardens. 
Stood the houses of planters, with negro cabins 

and dove-cots. 
They were approaching the region were reigns 

perpetual summer. 
Where through the Golden Coast, and groves 

of orange and citron. 
Sweeps with majestic curve the river away to 

the eastward. 
They, too, swerved from their course; and, 

entering the Bayou of Plaquemine, 
Soon were lost in a maze of sluggish and 

devious waters. 
Which, like a network of steel, extended in 

every direction. 
Over their heads the towering and tenebrous 

boughs of the cypress 



88 EVANGELINE. 

Met in a dusky aroh, and trailing moasea in 

mid air 
Wared like bannerB that hang on the walls of 

ancient cathedrals. 
Peathlike the silence seemed^ and nnbroken, 

save bj the herons 
Home to their roosts in the cedar trees return- 
ing at sunset, 
Or by the owl* as he greeted the moon with 

demoniac laughter, 
liorely the moonlight was as it glanced and 

gleamed on the water, 
Gleamed on the columns of cypress and cedar 

sustaining the arches, 
Down through whose broken vaults it fell as 

through chinks in a ruin. 
Dreamlike, and indistinct, and strange were 

all things around them ; 
And o'er their spirits there came a feeling of 

wonder and sadness,— 
Strange forebodings of ill, unseen and that 

cannot be compassed. 



EVAKGSLINI8. 89 

Asi at the tramp of a home's hoof on the turf 

of the prairies, 
Far In adranee are ploi^ the leayes of the 

shrinking numoBa, 
^, at the hoof«heat8 of fate^ with lad forebod- 
ings of evil, 
Shrinks and closes the heart, ere the stroke of 

doom has attained it. 
But Evangeline's heart was sustained by a 

yision, that faintly 
Floated before hor eyes, and beckoned her on 

through the moonlight. 
It was the thought of her brain that assumed 

the shape of a phantom. 
Through those shadowy aisles had GaMel 

wandered before her, 
And every stroke of the oar now brought him 

nearer and nearer. 



Then in his place, at the prow of the boat, 
rose one of the oarsmen, 



90 EYANGELINE. 

Andy as a sig^nal sound, — ^if others like them 
peradyenture 

Sailed on those gloomy and midnight streams, 
— blew a blast on his bugle. 

Wild through the dark colonnades and corri- 
dors leafy the blast rang, 

Breaking the seal of silence, and giying ton- 
gues to the forest. 

Soundless above them the banners of moss just 
stirred to the music. 

Multitudinous echoes awoke and died in the 
distance, 

Over the watery floor, and beneath the rever- 
berant branches ; 

But not a yoice replied ; no answer came from 
the darkness ; 

And when the echoes had ceased, like a sense 
of pain was the silence. 

Then Evangeline slept ; but the boatmenrowed 
through the midnight ; 

Silent at times, and then singing familiar 
Canadian boat-songs. 



EVANGELINE. 91 

Such as they sang of old on their own Acadian 

rivers. 
And through the night were heard the mjste* 

rious sounds of the desert. 
Far off, indistinct, as of wave or wind in the 

forest, 
Mixed with the woop of the crane and the 

roar of the grim alligator. 



Thus ere another noon they emerged from 

those shades ; and before them 
Lay, in the golden sun, the lakes of the Atcha- 

falaya. 
Water-lilies in myriads rocked on the slight 

undulations 
Made by the passing oars, and, resplendent in 

beauty, the lotus 
Lifted her golden crown above the heads of 

the boatmen. 
Faint was the air with the odorous breath of 

magnolia blossoms, 



92 EVANGELINE. 

And with the heat of noon ; and numberless 
Bjlvan islands, 

Fragrant and thickly embowered with blossom- 
ing hedges of roses, 

Near to whose shores they glided along, in- 
vited to slumber. 

Soon by the fairest of these their weary oars 
were suspended. 

Under the boughs of Wachita willows, that 
grew by the margin. 

Safely their boat was moored ; and scattered 
about on the greensward. 

Tired with their midnight toil, the weary tra- 
vellers slumbered. 

Over them vast and high extended the cope of 
a cedar. 

Swinging from its great arms, the trumpet- 
flower and the grape-vine. 

Hung their ladder of ropes aloft Hke the lad- 
der of Jacob, 

On whose pendulous stairs the angels ascend- 
ing, descending. 



EYANaEUNE. 9S 

Were the swift humming-birds, that flitted 

from blossom to blossom. 
Such was the yision Evangeline saw as she 

slimibered beneath it. 
Filled was her heart with loye, and the dawn 

of an opening heaven 
Lighted her soul in sleep with the glory of 

regions celestial. 



Nearer and ever nearer^ among the num- 
berless islands, 

Darted a light swift boat, that sped away o'er 
the water. 

Urged on its course by the sinewy arms of 
hunters and trappers. 

Northward its prow was turned, to the land 
of the bison and beaver. 

At the helm sat a youth, with countenance 
thoughtful and careworn ; 

Dark and neglected locks overshadowed 1^ 
brow, and a sadness 



94 EYANGELINE. 

Somewhat beyond his years on his face was 

legibly written. 
Gabriel was it, who, weary with waiting, un- 
happy and restless. 
Sought in the western wilds oblivion of self 

and of sorrow. 
Swiftly they glided along, close under the lee 

of the island. 
But by the opposite bank, and behind a scpeen 

of palmettos, 
So that they saw not the boat, where it lay 

concealed in the willows. 
And undisturbed by the dash of their oars, and 

unseen, were the sleepers ; 
Angel of God was there none to awaken the 

slumbering maiden. 
Swiftly they glided away, like the shade of a 

cloud on the prairie. 
After the sound of their oars on the tholes had 

died in the distance, 
As from a magic trance the sleepers awoke, 

and the maiden 



BVAflGELINE. 05 

Said with a sigh to the frieudly priest, — << O 

Father Felician ! 
Something says in mj heart that near me 

Gabriel wanders : 
Is it a foolish dream, an idle and rague super- 
stition ? 
Or has an angel passed, and revealed the truth 

to my spirit ? " 
Then, with a blush, she added, — <'AIas, for 

my credulous fancy I 
Unto ears like thine such words as these have 

no meaning." 
But made answer the reverend man, and he 

smiled as he answered, — 
" Daughter, thy words are not. idle ; nor are 

they to me without meaning. 
Feeling is deep and still ; and the word that 

floats on the surface 
Is as the tossing buoy, that betrays where the 

anchor is hidden. 
Therefore trust to thy heart, and to what the 

world calls illusions. 



96 EYANaELINE. 

Gabriel truly is near thee ; for not far away 

to the southward, 
On the banks of the T^che^ are the towns of 

St. Maur and St. Martin. 
There the long-wandering bride shall be giyen 

agamtoherbridegroem, 
There the long-absent pastor regain his flock 

and his sheepfold. 
Beautiful is the land, with its prairies and 

forests of fruit-trees ; 
Under the feet a garden of flowers^ and the 

bluest of heavens 
Bending above, and resting its dome on the 

walls of the forest. 
They who dwell there have named it the Eden 

of Louisiana/' 



And with these words of cheer they arose 
and continued their journey. 
Boftly the evening came. The sun from the 
western horizon 



EVANGELINE, 97 

Like a magician , extended his golden wand 
o'er the landscape ; 

Twinkling vapours arose ; and sky, and water^ 
and forest, 

Seemed all on fire at the touch, and melted and 
mingled together. 

Hanging between two skies, a cloud with edges 
of silver, 

Floated the boat, with its dripping oars, on the 
motionless water. 

Filled was Evangeline's heart with inexpressi- 
ble sweetness. 

Touched by the magic spell, the sacred foun- 
tains of feeling 

Glowed with the light of love, as the skies and 
waters around her. 

Then from a neighbouring thicket the mock- 
ing-bird, wildest of singers. 

Swinging aloft on a willow spray that hung o'er 
the water, 

Shook from his little throat such^floods of 
delirious music, 



I 



08 ETAKOELUfE. 

That the whole air, and the wood% and the 

wayes seemed silent to listen. 
FhiintiYe at first were the tones and sad ; then 

soaring to madness 
Seemed they to follow or guide the revel of 

frenzied Bacchantes. 
Then single notes were heard, in sorrowful, low 

lamentation ; 
Till, haying gathered them all, he flung them 

abroad in derision, 

As when, after a storm, a gust of wind through 

the tree-tops 
Shakes down the rattling rain in a crystal 

shower on the branches. 
With such a prelude as this, and hearts that 

throbbed with emotion. 
Slowly they entered the T^che, where it flows 

through the green Opelousas, 

Andthroifg^h the amber air, above the crest of 
the woodland, 



J 



EYAKOELINE. 99 

8aw the column of smoke that arose from a 

neighbouring dwelling ; — 
Sounds of a horn they heard, and the distant 

wing of cattle. 



ETANOEUNE. 101 



III. 

Neab to the bank of a river, o'ershadowed by 
oaks, from whose branches 

Garlands of Spanish moss and of mystic mis- 
tletoe flaunted, 

Such as the Druids cut down with golden hat- 
chets at Yule-tide, 

Stood, secluded and still, the house of the 
herdsman. A garden 

Girded it round about with a belt of luxuriant 
blossoms, 

Filling the air with fragrance. The house 
itself was of timbers 



102 £yAl(G£LINE. 

Hewn from the cypress-tree, and carefullj 
fitted together. 

Large and low was the roof; and on slender 
columns supported, 

Rose-wreathed, Tme-encii*clcd, a broad and 
spacious verandah. 

Haunt of the humming-bird and the bee, 
extended around it. 

At each end of the house, amid the flowers of 
the garden, 

Stationed the dove-cots were, as love's perpe- 
tual symbol. 

Scenes of endless wooing, and endless conten- 
tions of rivals. 

Silence reigned o'er the place. The line of 
shadow and sunshine 

Ban near the tops of the trees ; but the house 
itself was in shadow. 

And from its chimney top, ascending and slowly 
expanding 

Tuto the evening air, a thin blue column of 
smoke rose. 



ETAKOELnnS. 103 

lu the rear of the house, from the garden gate, 
ran a pathway 

Through the great groves of oak to the skirts 
of the lunitless prairie, 

Into whose sea of flowers the sun was slowly 
descending. 

Fall in his track of life, like ships with sha- 
dowy canyas 

Hanging loose from their spars in a motion- 
less calm in the tropics. 

Stood a cluster of cotton-trees, with cordage 
of grape-vines 



Just were the woodlands met the flowery 

surf of the prairie,- 
Mounted upon his horse, with Spanish saddle 

and stirrups. 
Sat a herdsman, arrayed in gaiters and dou- 

hlet of deer-skin. 
Broad and hrown was the face that from under 

the Spanish somhrero 



104 XTANQEUNE. 

Gkzed on the peaceful scene, with the lordly 

look of its master. 
Bound about him were numberless herds of 

kine, that were grazing 
Quietly in the meadows, and breathing the 

vapoury freshness 
That uprose ftom the river and spread itself 

over the landscape. 
Slowly lifting the horn that hnng at his side, 

and expanding 
Fully his broad deep chest, he blew a blast» 

that resounded 
Wildly, and sweet, and far, through the still 

damp air of the evening. 
Suddenly out of the grass the long white horns 

of the cattle 
Rose like flakes of foam on the adverse cur- 
rents of ocean. 
Silent a moment they gazed, then bellowing 

rushed o'er the prairie. 
And the whole mass became a cloud, a shade 

in the distance. 



EYANaELINE. 105 

Then, as the herdsman turned to the house, 

through the gate of the garden 
Saw he the forms of the priest and the maiden 

advancing to meet him. 
8addenly down from his horse he spsang in 

amazement, and forward 
Bushed with extended arms and exclamations 

of wonder. 
When they heheld his face, thej recognized 

Basil the Blacksmith. 
Hearty his welcome was, as he led his guests 

to the garden, 
There in an arbour of roses with endless ques- 
tion and answer 
Gaye they rent to their hearts, and renewed 

their friendly embraces, 
Laughing and weeping by turns, or sitting 

silent and thoughtfuL 
Thoughtful, for Gabriel came not^ and now 

dark doubts and misgivings 
Stole o'er the maiden's h^urt ; and Basil, soma- 

what embarrassed. 



106 EVANGELINE. 

Broke the silence and said^ — " If you came by 

the Atchafalaya, 
How have you nowhere encountered my Ga- 

briers boat on the bayous ?*' 
Over Eyangeline's face at the words of Basil 

a shade passed. 
Tears came into her eyes, and she said, with 

a tremulous accent, — 
''Gone? is Gabriel Gone ? '^ and, coneealing 

her face on his shoulder, 
All her o'erburdened heart gave way, and she 

wept and lamented. 
Then the good Basil said, — and his voice grew 

blithe as he said it, — 
** Be of good cheer, my child ; it is only to-day 

he departed. 
Foolish boy ! he has left me alone with my 

herds and my horses. 
Moody and restless grown, and tried and trou- 
bled, his spirit 
Could no longer endure the calm of this quiet 

existence. 



BYANaBLINE.- 107 

Thinking ever of thee, uncertain and sorrowful 

ever, 
Ever silent, or speaking onlj of thee and hia 

troubles, 
He at length had become so tedious to men 

and to maidens, 
Tedious eyen to me, that at length I bethought 

me, and sent him 
Unto the town of Adayes to trade for mules 

with the Spaniards. 
Thence he will follow the Indian trails to the 

Ozark mountains. 
Hunting for furs in the forest, on rivers trap- 

4 

ping the beaver. 
Therefore be of good cheer ; we will follow 

the fugitive lover ; 
He is not far on his way, and the Fates and 

the streams are against him. 
Up and away to-morrow, and through the red 

dew of the moniing 
We will follow him fast, and bring him back 

to his prison." 

n 



108 ByANGELINB. 

Then glad voices were heard^ and up from 

the banks of the riyer, 
Borne aloft on his comrade's arms, came Mi- 
chael the fiddler. 
Long under Basil's roof had he lired like a god 

on Olympus, 
Haying no other care than dispensing music to 

mortals. 
Far renowned was he for his silver locks and 

his fiddle. 
** Long live Michael," they cried, **our brave 

Acadian minstrel ! " 
As they bore him aloft in triumphal procession ; 

and straightway 

■ 

Father Felician advanced with Evangeline, 
greeting the old man 

Kindly and oft, and recalling the past, while 
Basil, enraptured. 

Hailed with hilarious Joy his old companions 
and gossips, 

Laughing loud and long, and embracing mo- 
thers and daughters. 



ETANGELINE. 109 

Much they marvelled to see the wealth of the 

ci-deyant blacksmithf 
All his domaina and his herdsi and his patriar^ 

chal demeanour ; 
Much they marvelled to hear his tales of the 

soil and the climate, 
And of the prairies, whose numberless herds 

were his who would take them ; 
Eaoh one thought in his heart, that he, too, 

would go and do likewise. 
Thus they ascended the steps, and, crossing 

the airy verandah, 
Entered the hall of the house, where already 

the supper of Basil 
Waited his late return ; and they rested and 

feasted together. 



Over the joyous feast the sudden darkness 
descended. 
All was silent without, and, illuming the land- 
scape with silver. 



i 



110 EVANGELINE. 

Fair rose the dewy moon and the myriad stars ; 

bnt within doors, 
Brighter than these, shone the faces of friends 

in the glimmering lamplight. 
Then from his station aloft, at the head of the 

table, the herdsman 
Poured forth his heart and his wine together 

in endless profusion. 
Lighting his pipe, that was filled with Katchi. 

toches tobacco, 
Thus he spake to his guests, who listened and 

smiled as they listened : — 
^ Welcome once more, my Mends, who so long 

hare been friendless and homeless ; 
Welcome once more to a home, that is better 

perchance than the old one I 
Here no hungry winter congeals our blood 

like the rivers ; 
Here no stony ground provokes the wrath of 

the farmer. 
Smoothly the ploughshare runs through the 

soil, as a keel through the water. 



EYANaEUNE. Ill 

All the year round the (Mrange groves are in 
hlossom ; and grass grows 

More in a single night than a whole Canadian 
summer. 

Here, too, numberless herds run wild and un- 
claimed in the prairies ; 

Here, too, lands may be had for the asking 
and forests of timber 

With a few blows of the axe are hewn and 
framed into houses. 

After your houses are built, and your fields 
are yellow with harvests, 

No King George of England shall drive you 
away from your homesteads, 

Burning your dwellings and bams, and steal- 
ing your farms and your cattle." 

Speaking these words, he blew a wrathful 
cloud from his nostrils, 

And his huge brawny hand came thundering 
down on the table. 

So that the guests all started ; and Father Fell- 
cian, astounded. 



112 EVAWGELINB. 

Suddenly paosedy with a pinch of snulf half- 
way to his nostrils. 
But the hraye Basil resumed, and his words 

were milder and gayer : — . 
" Only beware of the fever, my friends, beware 

of the ferer ; 
For it is not like that of our cold Acadian 

climate, 
Cured by wearing a spider hung round one's 

neck in a nutshell ! " 
Then there were yoices heard at the door, and 

footsteps approaching 
Sounded upon the stairs and the floor of the 

breezy verandah. 
It was the neighbouring Creoles and small 

Acadian planters. 
Who had been summoned all to the house of 

Basil the herdsman. 
Merry the meeting was of ancient comrades 

and neighbours : 
Friend clasped friend in his arms ; and they 

who before were as strangers. 



Meeting in exile, became straightway as friends 
to each other, 

Drawn bj the gentle bond of a commou coan« 
try together, -t 

But in the neighbouring hall a strain of music, 
proceeding 

From the accordant strings of Michael's melo- 
dious fiddle, 

Broke up all further speech. Away, like chil- 
dren delighted. 

All things forgotten beside, they gave them- 
selyes to the maddening 

Whirl of the dizzy dance, as it swept and 
swayed to the music. 

Dreamlike, with beaming eyes and the rush 
of fluttering garments. 



Meanwhile, apart, at the head of the hall, the 
priest and the herdsman 
Sat, conyersing together of past and present 
and future ; 



114 XTANGELINE. 

While Evangeline stood like one entranced, for 

inthui her 
Olden memories rose, and loud in the midst 

of the music 
Heard she the sound of the sea, and an irre- 
pressible sadness 
Came o'er her heart, and unseen she stole 

forth into the garden. 
Beautiful was the night. Behind the black 

wall of the forest, 
Tipping its summit with silver, arose the moon. 

On the river 
Fell here and there through the branches a 

tremulous gleam of the moonlight, 
Like the sweet thoughts of love on a darkened 

and devious spirit. 
Nearer and round about her, the manifold 

flowers of the garden 
Poured out their souls in odours, that were 

their prayers and confessions 




ETANGELUnB. 115 

Unto the night, as it went its way, like a silent. 

Carthusian. 
Fuller of fragrance than thej, and as heavy 

with shadows and night-dews, 
Hung the heart of the maiden. The calm and 

the magical moonlight 

Seemed .to inundate her soul with indefinable 
longings. 

As through the garden gate, beneath the 

brown shade of the oak trees, 
Passed she along the path to the edge of the 

measureless prairie. 

Silent it lay, with a silvery haze upon it, and 

fire-flies 
Gleaming and floating away in mingled and 

infinite numbers. 
Over her head the stars, the thoughts of God 

in the heavens, 
Shone on the eyes of man, who had ceased to 

marvel and worship. 



116 BAANOELINE. 

Save when a blazing comet was seen on the 

walla of that temple, 
As if a hand had appeared and written upon 

them, " Upharsin," 
And the soul of the maiden, between the stars 

and the fire-flies, 
Wandered alone, and she cried, — ** Gabriel! 

O my beloved ! 
Art thou so near unto me, and yet I cannot 

behold thee ? 
Art thou so near unto me, and yet thy yoice 

does not reach me ? ^ 
Ah ! how often have thy feet trod this path to 

the prairie I 
Ah ! how often thine eyes hare looked on the 

woodlands around me ! 
Ah! how often beneath this oak, returning 

from labour. 
Thou hast lain down to rest, and to dream of 

me in thy slumbers. 
When shall these eyes behold, these arms be 

folded about thee?" 



KYAHOEUini. 117 

Iiond} and sudden, and near, the note of a 
whip-poor-Will sonnded 

Like a flute in the woods ; and anon, throug^h 
the neighbouring* thickets, 

Farther and farther away it floated and dropped 
into silence. 

'< Patience 1 " whispered the oaks fVom oracu- 
lar caycms of darkness ; 

And from the moonlit meadow a sigh res- 
ponded, " To-morrow ! " 



Bright rose the sun next day ; and all the 

flowers of the garden 
Bathing his shining feet with their tears, and 

anointed his tresses 
With the delicious halm that they bore in thek 

yases of crystal. 
'< Farewell I " said the priest, as he stood at the 

shadowy threshold ; 
^ See that you bring back the Prodigal Son 

from his fasting and famine. 



118 EYANGELnTE. 

And, too, the fooliali virgin, who slept when 
the bridegroom was coming." 

' Farewell ! " answered the maiden^ and smil- 
ing, with Basil descended 

Down to the river's brinks where the boatmen 
already were waiting. 

Thus beginning their journey with morning 
and sunshine, and gladness. 

Swiftly they followed the flight of him who 

» 

was speeding before them. 
Blown by the blast of fate like a dead leaf 

over the desert. 
Not that day, nor the next, nor yet the day 

that succeeded, 
Found they trace of his course, in lake, or 

forest, or river. 
Nor after many days had they found him ; but 

vague and uncertain 
Rumours alone were their guides through a 

wild and desolate country ; 
Till, at the little inn of the Spanish town of 

Adayes, 



I 



BTAKasLira. 119 

Weary and worn, the; alighted, oud learned 

from the garrulooa landlord. 
That on the da; before, with horses and guide*, 

and compauioti!!, 
Chibriel left the Tillage, nnd took the rood of 

the prairies. 




BYAKOELINE. 121 



IV. 



Fab in the west there lies a desert land, where 

the mountains 
Lift, through perpetual snows, their lofty and 

luminous summits, 
Down from the desolate deep ravines, where 

the gorge, like a gateway. 
Opens a passage nide to the wheels of the emi- 
grant's waggon. 
Westward the Oregon flows and the Walleway 

and Owyhee ; 
Eastward, with devious course, among the 

Windriver Mountains, 
Through the Sweet-water Valley precipitate 

leaps the Nebraska ; 



122 EYANQELINE. 

And to the south, from Fontaine-qui-bout and 

the Spanish sierras 
Fretted with sands and rocks, and swept hj 

the wind of the desert, 
Numberless torrents, with ceaseless sound, 

descend to tho ocean. 
Like the great chords of a harp, in loud and 

solemn Tibrations. 
Spreading between these streams are the won- 
drous beautiful prairies, 
Billowy bays of grass eyer rolling in shadow 

and sunshine. 
Bright with luxuriant clusters of roses and 

purple amorphas. 
Over them wander the buffalo herds, and the 

elk, and the roebuck; 
Over them wander the wolves, and herds of 

riderless horses ; 
Fires that blast and blight, and winds that 

are weary with travel; 
Over them wander the scattered tribes of Ish- 

mael's children. 



EVANGELINE. 123 

Staining the desert with flood ; and above their 
terrible war-trails 

Circles and sails aloft, on pinions majestic, the 
vulture, 

Like the implacable soul of a chieftain slaugh- 
tered in battle, 

By invisible stairs ascending, and scaling the 
heavens. 

Here and there rise smokes from the camps of 
these savage marauders ; 

Here and there rise groves from the margins 
of swift-running rivers ; 

And the grim, taciturn bear, the anchorite 
monk of the desert, 

Climbs down their dark rayines to dig for 
roots by the brook-side. 

And over all is the sky, the clear and crystal- 
line heaven. 

Like the protecting hand of God inverted 
above them. 



124 EVANGELIME. 

Into this wonderful land, at the base of the 

Ozark mountains^ 
Ckibriel far had entered, with hnnten and trap- 
pers behind him. 
Day after day, with their Indian guides, the 

maiden and Basil 
Followed his flying steps, and thought each day 

to overtake him. 
Sometimes they saw, or thought they saw^ the 

smoke of his camp-fire 
Bise in the morning air froi^ the distant plain ; 

but at nightfall. 
When they had reached the place, they found 

only embers and ashes. 
And, though their hearts were sad at times 

and their bodies were weary, 
Hope still guided them on, as the magic Fata 

Morgana 
Showed them her lakes of light, that retreated 

and vanished before them. 



EYANaELnnB. 125 

OBce, as thej eat bj their evening fire, there 

silently entered 
Into the little camp an Indian woman, whose 

features 
Wore deep traces of sorrow, and patience as 

great as her sorrow. 
She was a Shawnee woman returning home to 

her people, 
From the far-ofT hunting-grounds of the cruel 

Oamanches, 
Where her Canadian husband, a Coureur-des- 

Bois, had been murdered. 
Touched were their hearts at her story, and 

warmest and friendHest welcome 
Ckiye they, with words of cheer, and she sai; 

and feasted among them 
On the buffalo-meat and the yenison cooked on 

the embers. 
But when their meal was done, and Basil and 

all his companions. 
Worn with the long day's march and the chase 

of the deer and the bison, 



126 EVANGELIKK. 

Stretched tbemselyes on the ground^ aud slept 

where the quiveriDg fire-light 
Flashed on their swarthy cheeks^ and their 

forms wrapped up in their blankets, 
Then at the door of Evangeline's tent she sat 

and repeated 
Slowly, with soft, low voice, and the charm of 

her Indian accent. 
All the tale of her love, with its pleasures, and 

pains, and reverses. 
Much Evangeline wept at the tale, and to know 

that another 
Hapiess heart like her own had loved and had 

been disappointed. 
Moved to the depths of her soul by pity and 

woman's compassion. 
Yet in her sorrow pleased that one who had 

suffered was near her, 
She in turn related her love and all its disas- 
ters. 
Mute with wonder the Shawnee sat, and when 

she had ended 



EVANGELINE. 127 

Still was mute ; but at lengthy as if a myste- 
rious horror 

Passed through her brain, she spake, aud re- 
peated the tale of the Mowis ; 

Mowis, the bridegroom of snow, who won and 
wedded a maiden. 

But, when the morning came, arose and passed 
from the wigwam, 

Fading and melting away and dissolving into 
the sunshine. 

Till she beheld him no more, though she fol- 
lowed far into the forest. 

Then, in those sweet low tones, that seemed 
like a weird incantation. 

Told she the tale of the fair Lilinau, who was 
wooed by a phantom. 

That, through the pines o'er her father's lodge, 
in the hush of the twilight. 

Breathed like the evening wind, and whispered 
love to the maiden. 

Till she followed his green and waving plume 
through tlie forest, 



jaied**'"" I.., Mart . .j-a, 

X A'Wl* At*. 



ETASrOELINB. 129 

Ab the cold, poisonous snake creeps into the 

nest of the swalloTr. 
it fras no earthly fear. A breath from the 

region of spirits 
Beemed to float in the air of night ; and she 

felt for a moment 
That, like ike Indian maid, she, too» was pur* 

suing a phantom. 
And with this thought she slept, and the fear 

and the phantom had yanished. 



Barly upon the morrow the march was re- 
sumed ; and the Shawnee 

Siud, as they joumied along, «-> ^ On the west- 
em slope of these mountains 

Dwells in his little Tillage the Black Robe 
Chief of the Mission. 

Much he teaches the people, and tells them of 
Mary and Jesus ; 

Loud laugh their hearts with joy, and weep 
with pain, as they hear him." 



130 EVANGELINE. 

Then with a sadden and secret emotion, 
Erangeline answered, — 

^'Let us go to the Mission, for there good 
tidings await us I " 

Thither they turned their steeds ; and hehind 
a spur of the mountain, 

Just as the sun went down, they heard a mur- 
mur of voices, 

And in a meadow green and broad, by the bank 
of a river, 

Saw the tents of the Christians, the tents of 
the Jesuit Mission. 

Under a towering oak, that stood in the midst 
of the village. 

Knelt the Black Robe Chief with his children. 
A crucifix fastened 

High on the trunk of the tree, and oversha- 
dowed by grape-vines. 

Looked with its agonized face on the multitude 
kneeling beneath it. 

This was their rural chapel. Aloft, through 
the intricate arches 



BYANGELINE. 131 

Of its aerial roof, arose the chant of iheir ves- 
pers, 
Mingling its notes with the soft susnrrus and 

sighs of the branches. 
Silent, with heads nncoyered, the travellers, 

nearer approaching. 
Knelt on the swarded floor, and joined in the 

evening devotions. 
But when the service was done, and the bene- 
diction had fallen 
From the hands of the priest, like seed from the 

hands of the sower. 
Slowly the reverend man advanced to the 

strangers, and bade them 
Welcome ; and when they replied he smiled 

with benignant expression. 
Hearing the homelike sounds of his mother- 
tongue in the forest. 
And with words of kindness eonducted them 

into his wigwam. 
There upon mats and skins they reposed, and 
on cakes of the maize-ear 



132 ZYANQISLDXZ. 

Feasted, and slaked their thirst from the water- 
gourd of the teacher. 
Soon was their story told ; and the priest with 

solemnity answered : 
^Not six snns hare risen and set since Gabriel, 

seated 
On this mat by my side, where now the maiden 

reposes. 
Told me this same sad tale ; then arose and 

continued his journey I " 
Soft was the voice of the priest, and he spake 

with an accent of kindness; 
But on Evangeline's heart fell his words as in 

winter the snow-flakes 
Fall into some lone nest from which the birds 

have departed. 
« Far to the north he has gone,** continued the 

priest; but in autumn. 
When the chase is done, will return again 

to the Mission." 
Then Evasgeline said, and her voice was meek 

and submissive, — 



k 



BYAN6ELINV. 133 

^ Let me remain with thee, for my soul ia sad 

and affiicted.'' 
Bo seemed it vise and well unto all; aud 

betimes on the morrow. 
Mounting his Mexican steed, with his Indian 

gfuides and companions. 
Homeward Basil returned, and Erangeline 

stayed at the Mission. 



Slowly, slowly, slowly the days succeeded 
each other, — 

l)ays, and weeks, and months ; and the fields 
of maize that were springing 

Green from the ground when a stranger she 
came, now waring above her. 

Lifted their slender shafts, with leaves inter- 
lacing, and forming 

Cloisters for mendicant crows and granaries 
pillaged by squirrels. 

Then in the golden weather the maise was 
husked, and the maidens 



134 EVANaELINE. 

Blushed at each blood-red ear, for that beto- 
kened a lover, 

Bnt at the crooked laughed, and called it a 
thief in the corn-field. 

Eren the blood-red ear to Erangeline brought 
not her lover. 

^ Patience I " the priest would say ; have faith, 
and thy prayers will be answered! 

Look at this delicate flower that lifts its head 
from the meadow. 

See how its leaves all point to the north, as 
true as the magnet ; 

It is the compass-flower, that the finger of God 
hath suspended 

Here on its fragile stalk, to direct the travel- 
ler's journey 

Over the sea-like, pathless, limitless waste of 
the deserfc. 

Such in the soul of man is faith. The blos- 
soms of passion. 

Gay and luxuriant flowers, are brighter and 
fuller of fragrance, 



i 



EVANGELINE. 135 

But they beguile us, and lead us astrayj and 

their odour is deadly. 
Only this humble plant can guide us here, and 

hereafter 
Crown us with asphodel flowers, that are wet 

with the dews of nepenthe/' 



So came the autumn, and passed, and the 
winter, — ^yet Gabriel came not ; 

Bloijsomed the opening spring, and the note s 
of the robin and blue-bird 

Sounded sweet upon wold and in wood, yet 
Gabriel came not ! 

But on the breath of the summer winds a ru- 
mour was wafted 

Sweeter than song of bird, or hue or odor of 
blossom. 

Far to the north and east, it said, in the Michi- 
gan forests, 

Gabriel had his lodge by the banks of the Sa gi- 
naw river. 



I 



136 ETANGELINE. 

And, with returning guides, that sought the 

lakes of St. Lawrence, 
Saying a sad farewell, Eyangeline went from 

the Mission. 
When over weary ways, by long and perilous 

marches, 
She had attained at length the depths of the 

Michigan forests. 
Found she the hunter's lodge deserted and 

fallen to ruin ! 



Thus did the long sad years glide on, and in 

seasons and places 
Diyers and distant far was seen the wandering 

maiden ; — 
Now in the tents of grace of the meek Mora« 

vian Missions, 
Now in the noisy camps and the battle-fields 

of the army, 
Now in secluded hamlets, in towns and popa^^ 

lous cities. 



2TAN0BLINB. 157 

Like a phantom she came, and passed away 

nnrememhered. 
Fair was she and young, when in hope began 

the long journey; 
Faded was she and old, when in disappoint- 
ment it ended. 
Each succeeding year stole something away 

from her beauty, 
Leaving behind it, broader and deeper, the 

gloom and the shadow. 
Then there appeared and spread faint streaks 

of grey o'er her forehead — 
Dawn of another life, that broke o'er her 

earthly horizon. 

As in the eastern sky the first faint streaks of 
the morning. 



ETANGELINB. 139 



V. 



In that delightful land which is washed by the 

Delaware's waters, 
Guarding in sylvan shades the name of Penn 

the apostle, * 
Stands on the banks of its beautiful stream the 

city he founded. 
There all the air is balm, and the peach is the 

emblem of beauty, 
And the streets still reecho the names of the 

trees of the forest. 
As if they fain would appease the Dryads whose 

haunts they molested. 
There from the troubled sea had Evangeline 

landed, an exile, 

TC 



140 ETiUfGELINE. 

Finding among the children of Penn a home 

and a country. 
There old Rene Lehlanc had died ; and when 

he departed, 
Saw at his side only one of all his hundred 

descendants. 
Something at least there was in thefiriendlj 

streets of the city, 
Something that spake to her heart, and made 

her no longer a stranger | 
And her ear was pleased with the Tho6 and 

Thou of the Quakers, 
For it recalled the past, the old Acadian ooim- 

try, 
Where all men were equal, and all were hro* 

thers and sisters. 
So, when the fruitless search, the disappointed 

endeayour, 
Ended, to recommence no more tipoti earthy 

uncomplaining, 
Thither, as leaves to the light, wer^ turned her 

thoughts and her footsteps. 



b 



EYANGELIinS. 141 

As from a moontam's top the rainy mists of 

the morning 
Boll away, and afar we behold the landscape 

below us, 
Sun-illumined, with shining rirers and cities 

and hamlets, 
80 fell the mists from her mind, and she saw 

the world far below her. 
Dark no longer, but all illumined with love ; 

and the pathway 
Which she had climbed so far lying smooth 

and far in the distance. 
Gabriel was not forgotten. Within her heart 

was his image. 
Clothed in the beauty of lore and youth, as last 

she beheld liim, 
Only more beautiful made by his deathlike 

silence and absence. 
Into her thoughts of him tune entered not, for 

it was not. 
Orer him years had no power | lie WM not 

changed, but transfigured | 



142 EYilNOELINE. 

He had become to her heart as one who is dead, 

and not absent ; 
Patiebce and abnegation of self, and devotion 

to others, 
This was the lesson a life of trial and sorrow 

had tanght her. 
So was her love diffused, but, like to some 

odourons spices. 
Suffered no waste nor loss, though filling the 

air with aroma. 
Other hope had she none, nor wish in life, but 

to follow 
Meekly, with reverent steps, the sacred feet of 

her Saviour. 
Thus many years she lived as a Sister of 

Mercy; frequenting 
Lonely and wretched roofs in the crowded lanes 

of the city. 
Where distress and want concealed themselves 

from the sunlight. 
Where disease and sorrow in garrets languished 

neglected. 



k 



EYANQELINE. 143 

Kight after night, when the world was asleep , 

as the watchman repeated 
Loud, through the gusty streets, that all was 

well in the city, 
High at some lonely window he saw the light 

of her taper. 
Day after day, in the grey of the dawn, as slow 

through the suhurbs. 
Plodded the German farmer, with flowers and 

fruits, for the market. 
Met he that meek, pale face, returning home 

from its watchings. 



Then it came to pass that a pestilence fell 

on the city, 
Presaged by wondrous signs, and mostly by 

flocks of wild pigeons. 
Darkening the sun in their flight, with nought 

in their craws but an acorn. 
And, as the tides of the sea arise in the month 

of September, 



144 ETANaSLINB. 

Flooding iome gUyer Btream, till it spreads to 

a lake in the meadow^ 
So death flooded life, and, o'erflowing its natu- 
ral margin, 
Spread to a brackiah lake the silver stream of 

existence. 
Wealth had no power to bribe, nor beaaty to 

charm, the oppressor; 
But all perished alike beneath the scourge of 

his anger ; — 
Only, alas I tiie poor, who had neither Mends 

nor attendants. 
Crept away to die in the almshouse, home of 

the homeless. 
Then in the suburbs it stood, in the midst of 

meadows and woodlands ; — 
Now the city surrounds it; but still, with its 

gateway and wicket. 
Meek in the midst of splendour, its humble 

walls seem to echo 
Softly the words of the Lord : -^^ The poor ye 

always have with you." 



ThitheTy by night and by day, came the Sister 

of Mercy. The dying 
Looked up into her faoe, and thought^ indeed^ 

to behold there 
Gleams of celestial light encircle her forehead 

with splendour, 
Such as the artist paints o'er the brows of 

saints and apostles, 
Or such as hangs by night o'er a city seen at 

a distance. 
Unto their eyes it seemed the lamps of the 

city celestial, 
Into whose shining gates ere long their spirits 

would enter. 



Thus, on a Sabbath mom, through the 

streets, deserted and silent. 
Wending her quiet way, she entered the door 

of the almshouse. 
Sweet on the summer air was the odour of 

flowers in the garden ; 



146 BYANGSLINB. 

And she paused 6n her way to gather the fair- 
est among them, 

That the dying once more might rejoice in 
their fragrance and beauty. 

Then, as she mounted the stairs to the corri 
ridors, cooled by the east wind, 

Distant and soft on her ear fell the chimes 
from the belfry of Christ Church, 

And, intermiugled with these, across the mea- 
dows were wafted 

Sounds of psalms, that were sung, by the 
Swedes in their church at Wicaco. 

Soft as descending wings fell the cahn of the 
hour on her spirit ; 

Something within her said^ — ^'^ At length thy 
trials are ended ; " 

And, with light in her looks, she entered the 
chambers of sickness. 

Noiselessly moved about the assiduous, careful 
attendants, 

Moistened the feyerish lip, and the aching 
brow, and in silence 



EVANGELINE. 147 

dosing the sightless eyes of the dead, and cou- 

cealing their faces, 
Where on their pallets thej lay, like drifts of 

snow by the road-side. 
>Iany a languid head, upraised as Evangeline 

entered, 
Turned on its pillow of pain to gaze while she 

passed, for her presence 
Fell on their hearts like a ray of the sun on 

the walls of a prison. 
And, as she looked around, she saw how Death, 

the consoler. 
Laying his hand upon many a heart, had healed 

it for ever. 
Many familiar forms had disappeared in the 

night time ; 
Vacant their places were, or filled already by 

strangers. 



Suddenly, as if arrested by fear or a feeling 
of wonder, 



148 STASOJSliUIB. 

Still she stood, with her colourless lips apart, 

while a shudder 
Ban through her frame, and, forgotten, the 

fiowrets dropped from her fingers, 
And from her eyes and cheeks the light and 

hloom of the morning. 
Then there escaped from her lips a cry of such 

terrihle anguish, 
That the dying heard it, and started up from 

their pmows. 
On the pallet hefore her was stretched the 

form of an old man. 
Long, and thin, and grey were the locks that 

shaded his temples ; 
But, as he lay in the morning light, his face 

for a moment 
Seemed to assume once more the forms of its 

earlier manhood ; 
So are wont to be changed the faces of those 

who are dying. 
Hot and red on his lips still burned the flush 

of the feyer. 



JBYAirafiLIIIB. 149 

As if life« like the Hebrew» with blood had 

besprinkled its portals, 
That the Angel of Death might see the lign^ 

and pass over. 
Motionless, senseless, dying, he lay, and his 

spirit exhausted 
Seemed to be sinking down through infinite 

depths in the darkness, 
Darkness of slumber and death, for erer sink- 

ing and sinking, 
Then through those realms of shade, in multi- 
plied reyerberations. 
Heard he that cry of pain, and through the 

hush that succeeded 
Whispered a gentle voice, in accents tender 

and saint-like, 
'< Gabriel 1 oh, my beloved l** and died away 

into silence. 
Then he beheld, in a dream, once more the 

home of his childhood ; 
Green Acadian meadows, with sylvan rivers 

among them. 



150 fiYANO£LINE. 

Village, and mountain, and woodlands : and, 
walking under their shadow, 

As in the days of her youth, Eyangeline rose 
in his yision. 

Tears came into his eyes ; and as slowly he 
lifted his eyelids. 

Vanished the vision away, but Eyangeline 
knelt by his bedside. 

Vainly he strove to whisper her name, for the 
accents unutlered 

Died on his lips, and their motion revealed 
what his tongue would have spoken. 

Vainly he strove to rise ; and Evangeline, kneel- 
ing beside him. 

Kissed his dying lips, and laid his head on her 
bosom. 

Sweet was the light of his eyes ; but it sud- 
denly sank into darkness, 

As when a lamp is blown out by a gust of wind 
at a casement. 



BVASGELINE. 161 

All was ended now^ the hope, and ihe fear 
and the sorrow 

All the aching of heart, the restless, unsatis- 
fied longing, 

All the dull, deep pain, and constant anguish 
of patience! 

And, as she pressed once more the lifeless head 
to her bosom. 

Meekly she bowed her own, and murmured, 
•* Father, I thank thee ! " 



152 BYAiraEUNS. 



Stili stands the forest primeyal ; but far away 

from its shadow. 
Side by side, in their nameless grayes, the 

loyers are sleeping. 
Under the humble walls of the little Catholic 

churchyard, 
In the heart of the city, they lie, unknown and 

unnoticed. 
Daily the tides of life go ebbing and flowing 

beside them. 
Thousands of throbbing hearts, where theirs 

are at rest and for eyer, 



EYAKGELINX. 153 

THpnsands of acMng brains where theirs no 

longer are busy. 
Thousands of toiling hands where theirs hare 

ceased from their labours, 
Thousands of weary feet, where theirs have 

completed their journey. 



Still stands the forest primeyal ; but under 

the shade of its branches 
Dwells another race with other customs and 

language. 
Only along the shore of the mournful and 

misty Atlantic 
Linger a few Acadian peasants, whose fathers 

from exile 
Wandered back to their native land to die in 

its bosom. 
In the fisherman's cot the wheel and the loom 

are still busy ; 
Maidens still wear their Norman caps and 

their kirtles of homespun. 



154 BYANGBLINB. 

And by the evening fire repeat Eyangeline's 

Btory; 
While from its rocky cayems the deep-voiced 

neighbouring ocean 
Speaks, and in accents disconsolate answers 

the wail of the forest. 



THB END
