The Theory of Electrons and Its Applications to the Phenomena of Light and Radiant Heat (Hendrik Antoon Lorentz, 1909)
======================================================================================================================
H. A. Lorentz — The Theory of Electrons (New York, 1909; 2nd ed. 1916 printing). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (theoryofelectron00loreuoft).

L 


COLUMBIA  UNIVEESITY  IN  THE  CITY  OF  NK\Y  YORK 

PUBLICATION  NUMBER  TWO  OF  THE 
ERNEST  KEMPTON  ADAMS  FUND  FOR  PHYSICAL  RESEARCH 

ESTABLISHED  DECEMBER  17TH,  1904 


THE  THEOKY  OF  ELECTRONS 

AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS  TO  THE  PHENOMENA 
OF  LIGHT  AND  RADIANT  HEAT 

A  COURSE  OF  LECTURES   DELIVERED  IN   COLUMBIA 
UNIVERSITY,  NEW  YORK,  IN  MARCH  AND  APRIL,  1906 


BY 


H.  A.  LORENTZ 


PROFESSOR   IN   THE  UNIVERSITY  OF   LEIDEN 
LKCTUKKR   IN   MATHEMATICAL   PHYSICS   IN   COLUMBIA   UNIVERSITY   FOR   1905-1906 


NEW   YORK 

THE   COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

THE   MACMILLAN   CO.,  AGENTS 

LONDON:   MACMILLAN  &   CO.,   LTD. 

1909 


On  the  seventeenth  day  of  December,  nineteen  hundred  and 
four,  Edward  Dean  Adams,  of  New  York,  established  in  Columbia 
University  "The  Ernest  Kempt  on  Adams  Fnnd  for  Physical 
Research"  as  a  memorial  to  his  son,  Ernest  Kempion  Adams, 
who  received  the  degrees  of  Electrical  Engineering  in  1897  and 
Master  of  Arts  in  1X98,  and  who  devoted  his  life  to  scientific  re- 
search. The  income  of  this  fund  is,  by  the  terms  of  the  deed  of 
gift,  to  be  devoted  to  the  maintenance  of  a  research  fellowship  and 
to  the  publication  and  distribution  of  the  results  of  scientific  re- 
search on  the  part  of  the  fellow.  A  generous  interpretation  of 
the  terms  of  the  deed  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Adams  and  of  the  Trus- 
tees of  the  University  has  made  it  possible  to  issue  and  distribute 
a  limited  number  of  copies  of  the  following  lectures  as  a  publi- 
cation of  the  Ernest  Kempton  Adams  Fund  : 


X 


B.  G.  TEUBNERS  SAMMLUNG  VON  LEHRBUCHERN 
AUF  DEM  GEBIETE  DER 

MATHEMATISCHEN  WISSENSCHAFTEN 

MIT  EINSCHLUSS  IHRER  ANWENDUNGEN. 
BAND  XXIX. 


THE  THEORY  OE  ELECTRONS 

AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS  TO  THE  PHENOMENA 
OF  LIGHT  AND  RADIANT  HEAT 


A  COURSE  OF  LECTURES  DELIVERED  IN  COLUMBIA 
UNIVERSITY,  NEW  YORK,  IN  MARCH  AND  APRIL  1906 

BY 

H.  A.  LORENTZ 

PROFESSOR  IN  THE   UNIVERSITY  OF  LEIDEN 
LECTURER  IN  MATHEMATICAL  PHYSICS  IN  COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY  FOR  1905-1906 


LEIPZIG:  B.  G.  TEUBNER 
1909 

LONDON:  DAVID  NUTT,  57-59  LONG  ACRE  -  WILLIAMS  &  NORGATE,  w.c.u  HENRIETTA  STREET 
NEW  YORK:  G.  E.  STECHERT  &  Co.,  129-133  WEST  201S  STREET 


ALL  BIGHTS  RESERVED. 
PRINTED  BY  B.G.TEUBNER,  LEIPZIG. 


PREFACE. 

The  publication  of  these  lectures,  which  I  delivered  in  Columbia 
University  in  the  spring  of  1906,  has  been  unduly  delayed,  chiefly 
on  account  of  my  wish  to  give  some  further  development  to  the  sub- 
ject, so  as  to  present  it  in  a  connected  and  fairly  complete  form; 
for  this  reason  I  have  not  refrained  from  making  numerous  additions. 
Nevertheless  there  are  several  highly  interesting  questions,  more  or 
less  belonging  to  the  theory  of  electrons,  which  I  could  but  slightly 
touch  upon.  I  could  no  more  than  allude  in  a  note  to  Voigt's 
Treatise  on  magneto-optical  phenomena,  and  neither  Planck's  views 
on  radiation,  nor  Einstein's  principle  of  relativity  have  received  an 
adequate  treatment. 

In  one  other  respect  this  book  will,  I  fear,  be  found  very  deficient. 
No  space  could  be  spared  for  a  discussion  of  the  different  ways  in 
which  the  fundamental  principles  may  be  established,  so  that,  for  in- 
stance, there  was  no  opportunity  to  mention  the  important  share  that 
has  been  taken  in  the  development  of  the  theory  by  L  arm  or  and 
Wiechert. 

It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  express  my  thanks  to  Professor 
A.  P.  Wills  for  his  kindness  in  reading  part  of  the  proofs,  and  to 
the  publisher  for  the  care  he  has  bestowed  on  my  work. 

Leiden,  January  1909. 

H.  A.  Lorentz. 


CONTENTS. 

Chapter  Page 

I.  General  principles.    Theory  of  free  electrons 1 

II.  Emission  and  absorption  of  heat 68 

III.  Theory  of  the  Zeeinan-effect 98 

IV.  Propagation  of  light  in  a  body  composed  of  molecules.     Theory  of  the 

inverse  Zeeman  -  effect 132 

V.  Optical  phenomena  in  moving  bodies 168 

Notes 231 

Index    .  330 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF.  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

The  theory  of  electrons,  on  which  I  shall  have  the  honor  to 
lecture  before  you,  already  forms  so  vast  a  subject,  that  it  will  be 
impossible  for  me  to  treat  it  quite  completely.  Even  if  I  confine 
myself  to  a  general  review  of  this  youngest  branch  of  the  science 
of  electricity,  to  its  more  important  applications  in  the  domain 
of  light  and  radiant  heat,  and  to  the  discussion  of  some  of  the 
difficulties  that  still  remain,  I  shall  have  to  express  myself  as  con- 
cisely as  possible,  and  to  use  to  the  best  advantage  the  time  at  our 
disposal. 

In  this,  as  in  every  other  chapter  of  mathematical  physics,  we 
may  distinguish  on  the  one  hand  the  general  ideas  and  hypotheses 
of  a  physical  nature  involved,  and  on  the  other  the  array  of 
mathematical  formulae  and  developments  by  which  these  ideas  and 
hypotheses  are  expressed  and  worked  out.  I  shall  try  to  throw  a 
clear  light  on  the  former  part  of  the  subject,  leaving  the  latter  part 
somewhat  in  the  background  and  omitting  all  lengthy  calculations, 
which  indeed  may  better  be  presented  in  a  book  than  in  a  lecture.1) 

1.  As  to  its  physical  basis,  the  theory  of  electrons  is  an  off- 
spring of  the  great  theory  of  electricity  to  which  the  names  of 
Faraday  and  Maxwell  will  be  for  ever  attached. 

You  all  know  this  theory  of  Maxwell,  which  we  may  call  the 
general  theory  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  and  in  which  we  con- 
stantly have  in  view  the  state  of  the  matter  or  the  medium  by  which 
the  field  is  occupied.  While  speaking  of  this  state,  I  must  immediately 
call  your  attention  to  the  curious  fact  that,  although  we  never  lose 
sight  of  it,  we  need  by  no  means  go  far  in  attempting  to  form  an 
image  of  it  and,  in  fact,  we  cannot  say  much  about  it.  It  is  true 
that  we  may  represent  to  ourselves  internal  stresses  existing  in  the 

1)  In  this  volume  such  calculations  as  I  have  only  briefly  indicated  in  my 
lectures  are  given  at  full  length  in  the  appendix  at  the  end. 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  1 


2  I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

medium  surrounding  an  electrified  body  or  a  magnet,  that  we  may 
think  of  electricity  as  of  some  substance  or  fluid,  free  to  move  in 
a  conductor  and  bound  to  positions  of  equilibrium  in  a  dielectric, 
and  that  we  may  also  conceive  a  magnetic  field  as  the  seat  of 
certain  invisible  motions,  rotations  for  example  around  the  lines  of 
force.  All  this  has  been  done  by  many  physicists  and  Maxwell 
himself  has  set  the  example.  Yet,  it  must  not  be  considered  as 
really  necessary;  we  can  develop  the  theory  to  a  large  extent  and 
elucidate  a  great  number  of  phenomena,  without  entering  upon 
speculations  of  this  kind.  Indeed,  on  account  of  the  difficulties  into 
which  they  lead  us,  there  has  of  late  years  been  a  tendency  to  avoid 
them  altogether  and  to  establish  the  theory  on  a  few  assumptions 
of  a  more  general  nature. 

The  first  of  these  is,  that  in  an  electric  field  there  is  a  certain 
state  of  things  which  gives  rise  to  a  force  acting  on  an  electrified 
body  and  which  may  therefore  be  symbolically  represented  by  the 
force  acting  on  such  a  body  per  unit  of  charge.  This  is  what  we 
call  the  electric  force,  the  symbol  for  a  state  in  the  medium  about 
whose  nature  we  shall  not  venture  any  further  statement.  The  second 
assumption  relates  to  a  magnetic  field.  Without  thinking  of  those 
hidden  rotations  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  we  can  define  this  by 
the  so  called  magnetic  force,  i.  e.  the  force  acting  on  a  pole  of  unit 
strength. 

After  having  introduced  these  two  fundamental  quantities,  we 
try  to  express  their  mutual  connexions  by  a  set  of  equations  which 
are  then  to  be  applied  to  a  large  variety  of  phenomena.  The  mathe- 
matical relations  have  thus  come  to  take  a  very  prominent  place, 
so  that  Hertz  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that,  after  all,  the  theory 
of  Maxwell  is  best  defined  as  the  system  of  Maxwell's  equations. 

We  shall  not  use  these  formulae  in  the  rather  complicated  form 
in  which  they  can  be  found  in  Maxwell's  treatise,  but  in  the  clearer 
and  more  condensed  form  that  has  been  given  them  by  Heaviside 
and  Hertz.  In  order  to  simplify  matters  as  much  as  possible,  I  shall 
further  introduce  units1)  of  sucli  a  kind  that  we  get  rid  of  the  larger 
part  of  such  factors  as  4n  and  ]/4jr,  by  which  the  formulae  were 
originally  encumbered.  As  you  well  know,  it  was  Heaviside  who 
most  strongly  advocated  the  banishing  of  these  superfluous  factors  and 
it  will  be  well,  I  think,  to  follow  his  advice.  Our  unit  of  electricity 
will  therefore  be  |/4sr  times  smaller  than  the  usual  electrostatic  unit. 

1)  The  units  and  the  notation  of  these  lectures  (with  the  exception  of  the 
letters  serving  to  indicate  vectors)  have  also  been  used  in  my  articles  on 
Maxwell's  Theory  and  the  Theory  of  Electrons,  in  the  ,,Encyklopadie  der 
mathematischen  Wissenschaften",  Vol.  V,  13  and  14. 


MATHEMATICAL  NOTATION.  3 

This  choice  having  been  made,  we  have  at  the  same  time  fixed  for 
every  case  the  number  by  which  the  electric  force  is  to  be  represented. 
As  to  the  magnetic  force,  we  continue  to  understand  by  it  the  force 
acting  on  a  north  pole  of  unit  strength;  the  latter  however  is  like- 
wise }/4jr  times  smaller  than  the  unit  commonly  used. 

2.  Before  passing  on  to  the  electromagnetic  equations,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  choice  of  the  axes  of  coor- 
dinates and  about  our  mathematical  notation.  In  the  first  place,  we 
shall  always  represent  a  line  by  s,  a  surface  by  <J  and  a  space  by  S, 
and  we  shall  write  ds,  da,  dS  respectively  for  an  element  of  a  line, 
a  surface,  or  a  space.  In  the  case  of  a  surface,  we  shall  often  have 
to  consider  the  normal  to  it;  this  will  be  denoted  by  n.  It  is  always 
to  be  drawn  towards  a  definite  side  and  we  shall  agree  to  draw  it 
towards  the  outside,  if  we  have  to  do  with  a  closed  surface. 

The  normal  may  be  used  for  indicating  the  direction  of  a 
rotation  in  the  surface.  We  shall  say  that  the  direction  of  a  rotation 
in  a  plane  and  that  of  a  normal  to  the  plane  correspond  to  each 
other,  if  an  ordinary  or  right-handed  screw  turned  in  the  direction 
of  the  rotation  advances  in  that  of  the  normal.  This  being  agreed 
upon,  we  may  add  that  the  axes  of  coordinates  will  be  chosen  in 
such  a  manner  that  OZ  corresponds  to  a  rotation  of  90°  from  OX 
towards  0  Y. 

We  shall  further  find  it  convenient  to  use  a  simple  kind  of 
vector  analysis  and  to  distinguish  vectors  and  scalar  quantities  by 
different  sorts  of  letters.  Conforming  to  general  usage,  I  shall  denote 
scalars  by  ordinary  Latin  or  Greek  letters.  As  to  the  vectors,  I  have, 
in  some  former  publications,  represented  them  by  German  letters. 
On  the  present  occasion  however,  it  seems  to  me  that  Latin  letters, 
either  capital  or  small  ones,  of  the  so  called  Clarendon  type,  e.  g. 
A,  P,  C  etc.  are  to  be  preferred.  I  shall  denote  by  AA  the  component 
of  a  vector  A  in  the  direction  It,  by  Ax,  Ay,  As  its  components  parallel 
to  the  axes  of  coordinates,  by  A,  the  component  in  the  direction  of 
a  line  s  and  finally  by  AB  that  along  the  normal  to  a  surface. 

The  magnitude  of  a  vector  A  will  be  represented  by  A  | .  For 
its  square  however  we  shall  simply  write  A2. 

Of  the  notions  that  have  been  introduced  into  vector  analysis, 
I  must  recall  to  your  minds  those  of  the  sum  and  of  the  difference 
of  vectors,  and  those  of  the  scalar  product  and  the  vector  product  of 
two  vectors  A  and  B.  The  first  of  these  ,,products",  for  which  we 
shall  use  the  symbol 

(A  •  B), 

is  the  scalar  quantity  defined  by  the  formula 

(A  •  B)  -  '  A     B  |  cos  (A,  B)  -  ASB,  +  AyBy  +  A.B,. 

i* 


4  I.   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OP  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

The  vector  product,  for  which,  we  shall  write 

[A-B], 

is  a  vector  perpendicular  to  the  plane  through  A  and  B,  whose 
direction  corresponds  to  a  rotation  by  less  than  180°  from  the  direc- 
tion of  A  towards  that  of  B,  and  whose  magnitude  is  given  by  the 
area  of  the  parallelogram  described  with  A  and  B  as  sides.  Its 
components  are 

[A    B],  =  AyBs  -  A,By,    [A    B],  -  A^  -  A,B,, 
[A    B],  =  AxBy  -  AyB,. 

In  many  cases  we  have  to  consider  a  scalar  quantity  q>  or  a 
vector  A  which  is  given  at  every  point  of  a  certain  space.  If  <p  is  a 
continuous  function  of  the  coordinates,  we  can  introduce  the  vector 
having  for  its  components 

d<p      8y>      dy 

Wx>     8y'     Jz ' 

This  can  easily  be  shown  to  be  perpendicular  to  the  surface 

tp  =  const. 

and  we  may  call  it  the  gradient  of  q>,  which,  in  our  formulae,  we 
shall  shorten  to  ,,grad  go". 

A  space  at  every  point  of  which  a  vector  A  has  a  definite 
direction  and  a  definite  magnitude  may  be  called  a  vector  field,  and 
the  lines  which  at  every  point  indicate  the  direction  of  A  may  be 
spoken  of  as  vector-  or  direction-lines.  In  such  a  vector  field,  if 
Ax,  Ay,  Az  are  continuous  functions  of  the  coordinates,  we  can  intro- 
duce for  every  point  a  certain  scalar  quantity  and  a  certain  new 
vector,  both  depending  on  the  way  in  which  A  changes  from  point 
to  point,  and  both  having  the  property  of  being  independent  of  the 
choice  of  the  axes  of  coordinates.  The  scalar  quantity  is  called  the 
divergence  of  A  and  defined  by  the  formula 

div  A  =  ?  A«.  +  ^  +  2 A<  • 

8x        8y        8z 

The  vector  is  called  the  rotation  or  the  curl  of  A;  its  com- 
ponents are 

9A.  _  d  A,,       >  ^  _  0A,        3Ay  _  aA, 
cy  ~        -  '       de   ~     dx'       dx  "  8y  ' 

and  it  will  be  represented  by  the  symbol  ,,rot  A". 

If  the  divergence  of  a  vector  is  0  at  all  points,  its  distribution 
over  space  is  said  to  be  solenoidal.  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall 
speak  of  an  irrotational  distribution,  if  at  all  points  we  have 
rot  A  =  0. 


FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS  FOR  THE  ETHKR.         5 

In  order  to  complete  our  list  of  notations,  I  have  only  to  add 
that  the  symbol  A  is  an  abbreviation  for 

d^   ,   J**,    os 
and  that  not  only  scalars  but  also  vectors  may  be  differentiated  with 

n  A 

respect  to  the  coordinates  or  the  time.     For  example,   ?      means  a 

o  sc 

vector  whose  components  are 


8x  >      dx> 

O  » 

and  ----   has  a  similar  meaning.    A  differentiation  with  respect  to  the 

time  t  will  be  often  represented  by  a  dot,  a  repeated  differentiation 
of  the  same  kind  by  two  dots,  etc. 

3.  We  are  now  prepared  to  write  down  the  fundamental  equa- 
tions for  the  electromagnetic  field  in  the  form  which  they  take  for 
the  ether.  We  shall  denote  by  (I  the  electric  force,  the  same  symbol 
serving  for  the  dielectric  displacement,  because  in  the  ether  this  has 
the  same  direction  and,  on  account  of  the  choice  of  our  units,  the 
same  numerical  magnitude  as  the  electric  force.  We  shall  further 
represent  by  h  the  magnetic  force  and  by  c  a  constant  depending  on 
the  properties  of  the  ether.  A  third  vector  is  the  current  C,  which 
now  consists  only  of  the  displacement  current  of  Maxwell.  It  exists 
wherever  the  dielectric  displacement  d  is  a  function  of  the  time,  and 
is  given  by  the  formula 

C  =  d.  (I) 

In  the  form  of  differential  equations,  the  formulae  of  the  electro- 
magnetic field  may  now  be  written  as  follows: 

div  d  =  0,  (2) 

div  h  =  0,  (3) 

roth  =  |c  =  |d,  (4) 

rot  d  =       *  h.  (5) 

The  third  equation,  conjointly  with  the  second,  determines  the 
magnetic  field  that  is  produced  by  a  given  distribution  of  the 
current  C.  As  to  the  last  equation,  it  expresses  the  law  according 
to  which  electric  forces  are  called  into  play  in  a  system  with  a 
variable  magnetic  field,  i.  e.  the  law  of  what  is  ordinarily  called 
electromagnetic  induction.  The  formulae  (1),  (4)  and  (5)  are  vector 
equations  and  may  each  be  replaced  by  three  scalar  equations  relating 
to  the  separate  axes  of  coordinates. 


6  I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

Thus  (1)  is  equivalent  to 

C*  =  ~W>     C        ~8T>     C*  ==  ~W' 
and  (4)  to 

U  U  ;'.! 

On,          ony  _     I    oux         , 

The  state  of  things  that  is  represented  by  our  fundamental 
equations  consists,  generally  speaking,  in  a  propagation  with  a  velo- 
city c.  Indeed,  of  the  six  quantities  d^.,  dy,  d2,  h,,.,  hy,  hz,  five  may 
be  eliminated1),  and  we  then  find  for  the  remaining  one  $  an  equation 
of  the  form 

-4!S  =  (X  (6) 


This  is  the  typical  differential  equation  for  a  disturbance  of  the 
state  of  equilibrium,  travelling  onwards  with  the  speed  c. 

Though  all  the  solutions  of  our  equations  have  this  general 
character,  yet  there  are  a  very  large  variety  of  them.  The  simplest 
corresponds  to  a  system  of  polarized  plane  waves.  For  waves  of  this 
kind,  we  may  have  for  example 

d;/  =  a  cos  n  (t  —  -*-) ,     hz  =  a  cos  n  (t  -  ^-) ,  (7) 

all  other  components  of  d  and  h  being  0. 

I  need  not  point  out  to  you  that  really,  in  the  state  represented 
by  these  formulae,  the  values  of  dy  and  h2,  which  for  a  certain  value 
of  t  exist  at  a  point  with  the  coordinate  x,  will  after  a  lapse  of 
time  St  be  found  in  a  point  whose  coordinate  is  x  +  cSt.  The 
constant  a  is  the  amplitude  and  n  is  the  frequency,  i.  e.  the  number 
of  vibrations  in  a  time  2it.  If  n  is  high  enough,  we  have  to  do 
with  a  beam  of  plane  polarized  light,  in  which,  as  you  know  already, 
the  electric  and  the  magnetic  vibrations  are  perpendicular  to  the  ray 
as  well  as  to  each  other. 

Similar,  though  perhaps  much  more  complicated  formulae  may 
serve  to  represent  the  propagation  of  Hertzian  waves  or  the  radiation 
which,  as  a  rule,  goes  forth  from  any  electromagnetic  system  that  is 
not  in  a  steady  state.  If  we  add  the  proper  boundary  conditions, 
such  phenomena  as  the  diffraction  of  light  by  narrow  openings  or 
its  scattering  by  small  obstacles  may  likewise  be  made  to  fall  under 
our  system  of  equations. 

The  formulae  for  the  ether  constitute  the  part  of  electromagnetic 
theory  that  is  most  firmly  established.  Though  perhaps  the  way  in 
which  they  are  deduced  will  be  changed  in  future  years,  it  is 

1)  See  Note  1  (Appendix). 


GENERAL  EQUATIONS  OF  THE  ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD.          7 

hardly  conceivable  that  the  equations  themselves  will  have  to  be 
altered.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  consider  the  phenomena  in 
ponderable  bodies,  that  we  are  led  into  uncertainties  and  doubts. 

4.  There  is  one  way  of  treating  these  phenomena  that  is  compa- 
ratively safe  and,  for  many  purposes,  very  satisfactory.  In  following 
it,  we  simply  start  from  certain  relations  that  may  be  considered  as 
expressing,  in  a  condensed  form,  the  more  important  results  of  electro- 
magnetic experiments.  We  have  now  to  fix  our  attention  on  four 
vectors,  the  electric  force  E,  the  magnetic  force  H,  the  current  of 
electricity  C  and  the  magnetic  induction  B.  These  are  connected  by 
the  following  fundamental  equations: 

div  C  =  0,  (8) 

div  B  =  0,  (9) 

rot  H  =^-C,  (10) 

rotE=     --'ft,  (11) 

presenting  the  same  form  as  the  formulae  we  have  used  for  the  ether. 
In  the  present  case  however,  we  have  to  add  the  relation  between 
E  and  C  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  between  H  and  B  on  the  other. 
Confining  ourselves  to  isotropic  bodies,  we  can  often  describe  the 
phenomena  with  sufficient  accuracy  by  writing  for  the  dielectric  dis- 
placement 

D  =  B  E,  (12) 

a  vector  equation  which  expresses  that  the  displacement  has  the  same 
direction  as  the  electric  force  and  is  proportional  to  it.  The  current 
in  this  case  is  again  Maxwell's  displacement  current 

C  =  D.  (13) 

In  conducting  bodies  on  the  other  hand;  we  have  to  do  with  a 
current  of  conduction,  given  by 

J  =  aE,  (14) 

where  &  is  a  new  constant.  This  vector  is  the  only  current  and 
therefore  identical  to  what  we  have  called  C,  if  the  body  has  only 
the  properties  of  a  conductor.  In  some  cases  however,  one  has  been 
led  to  consider  bodies  endowed  with  the  properties  of  both  conductors 
and  dielectrics.  If,  in  a  substance  of  this  kind,  an  electric  force  is 
supposed  to  produce  a  dielectric  displacement  as  well  as  a  current 
of  conduction,  we  may  apply  at  the  same  time  (12)  and  (14),  writing 
for  the  total  current 

C  =  D  +  J  =  £E  +  tfE.  (15) 


8  I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

Finally,  the  simplest  assumption  we  can  make  as  to  the  relation 
between  the  magnetic  force  and  the  magnetic  induction  is  expressed 
by  the  formula 

B  =  ftH,  (16) 

in  which   i  is  a  new  constant. 


5.  Though  the  equations  (12),  (14)  and  (16)  are  useful  for  the 
treatment  of  many  problems,  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  applicable  to 
all  cases.  Moreover,  even  if  they  were  so,  this  general  theory,  in 
which  we  express  the  peculiar  properties  of  different  ponderable 
bodies  by  simply  ascribing  to  each  of  them  particular  values  of  the 
dielectric  constant  s,  the  conductivity  0  and  the  magnetic  permeabi- 
lity ft,  can  no  longer  be  considered  as  satisfactory,  when  we  wish  to 
obtain  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  phenomena.  If  we 
want  to  understand  the  way  in  which  electric  and  magnetic  properties 
depend  on  the  temperature,  the  density,  the  chemical  constitution  or 
the  crystalline  state  of  substances,  we  cannot  be  satisfied  with  simply 
introducing  for  each  substance  these  coefficients,  whose  values  are 
to  be  determined  by  experiment;  we  shall  be  obliged  to  have  recourse 
to  some  hypothesis  about  the  mechanism  that  is  at  the  bottom  of 
the  phenomena. 

It  is  by  this  necessity,  that  one  has  been  led  to  the  conception 
of  electrons,  i.  e.  of  extremely  small  particles,  charged  with  electricity, 
which  are  present  in  immense  numbers  in  all  ponderable  bodies,  and 
by  whose  distribution  and  motions  we  endeavor  to  explain  all  electric 
and  optical  phenomena  that  are  not  confined  to  the  free  ether.  My 
task  will  be  to  treat  some  of  these  phenomena  in  detail,  but  I  may 
at  once  say  that,  according  to  our  modern  views,  the  electrons  in 
a  conducting  body,  or  at  least  a  certain  part  of  them,  are  supposed 
to  be  in  a  free  state,  so  that  they  can  obey  an  electric  force  by 
which  the  positive  particles  are  driven  in  one,  and  the  negative 
electrons  in  the  opposite  direction.  In  the  case  of  a  non-conducting 
substance,  on  the  contrary,  we  shall  assume  that  the  electrons  are 
bound  to  certain  positions  of  equilibrium.  If,  in  a  metallic  wire,  the 
electrons  of  one  kind,  say  the  negative  ones,  are  travelling  in  one 
direction,  and  perhaps  those  of  the  opposite  kind  in  the  opposite 
direction,  we  have  to  do  with  a  current  of  conduction,  such  as  may 
lead  to  a  state  in  which  a  body  connected  to  one  end  of  the  wire 
has  an  excess  of  either  positive  or  negative  electrons.  This  excess, 
the  charge  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  will,  in  the  state  of  equilibrium 
and  if  the  body  consists  of  a  conducting  substance,  be  found  in  a 
very  thin  layer  at  its  surface. 

In  a  ponderable  dielectric  there  can  likewise  be  a  motion  of  the 


ELECTRONS.  9 

electrons.  Indeed,  though  we  shall  think  of  each  of  them  as  having 
a  definite  position  of  equilibrium,  we  shall  not  suppose  them  to  be 
wholly  immovable.  They  can  be  displaced  by  an  electric  force  exerted 
by  the  ether,  which  we  conceive  to  penetrate  all  ponderable  matter, 
a  point  to  which  we  shall  soon  have  to  revert.  Now,  however,  the 
displacement  will  immediately  give  rise  to  a  new  force  by  which  the 
particle  is  pulled  back  towards  its  original  position,  and  which  we  may 
therefore  appropriately  distinguish  by  the  name  of  elastic  force.  The 
motion  of  the  electrons  in  non-conducting  bodies,  such  as  glass  and 
sulphur,  kept  by  the  elastic  force  within  certain  bounds,  together 
with  the  change  of  the  dielectric  displacement  in  the  ether  itself, 
now  constitutes  what  Maxwell  called  the  displacement  current. 
A  substance  in  which  the  electrons  are  shifted  to  new  positions  is 
said  to  be  electrically  polarized. 

Again,  under  the  influence  of  the  elastic  forces,  the  electrons  can 
vibrate  about  their  positions  of  equilibrium.  In  doing  so,  and  perhaps 
also  on  account  of  other  more  irregular  motions,  they  become  the 
centres  of  waves  that  travel  outwards  in  the  surrounding  ether  and 
can  be  observed  as  light  if  the  frequency  is  high  enough.  In  this 
manner  we  can  account  for  the  emission  of  light  and  heat.  As  to 
the  opposite  phenomenon,  that  of  absorption,  this  is  explained  by 
considering  the  vibrations  that  are  communicated  to  the  electrons 
by  the  periodic  forces  existing  in  an  incident  beam  of  light.  If  the 
motion  of  the  electrons  thus  set  vibrating  does  not  go  on  undisturbed, 
but  is  converted  in  one  way  or  another  into  the  irregular  agitation 
which  we  call  heat,  it  is  clear  that  part  of  the  incident  energy  will 
be  stored  up  in  the  body,  in  other  terms  that  there  is  a  certain  ab- 
sorption. Nor  is  it  the  absorption  alone  that  can  be  accounted  for 
by  a  communication  of  motion  to  the  electrons.  This  optical  resonance, 
as  it  may  in  many  cases  be  termed,  can  likewise  make  itself  felt 
even  if  there  is  no  resistance  at  all,  so  that  the  body  is  perfectly 
transparent.  In  this  case  also,  the  electrons  contained  within  the 
molecules  will  be  set  in  motion,  and  though  no  vibratory  energy  is 
lost,  the  oscillating  particles  will  exert  an  influence  on  the  velocity 
with  which  the  vibrations  are  propagated  through  the  body.  By 
taking  account  of  this  reaction  of  the  electrons  we  are  enabled  to 
establish  an  electromagnetic  theory  of  the  refrangibility  of  light,  in 
its  relation  to  the  wave-length  and  the  state  of  the  matter,  and  to 
form  a  mental  picture  of  the  beautiful  and  varied  phenomena  of 
double  refraction  and  circular  polarization. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  theory  of  the  motion  of  electrons  in 
metallic  bodies  has  been  developed  to  a  considerable  extent.  Though 
here  also  much  remains  to  be  done,  new  questions  arising  as  we 
proceed,  we  can  already  mention  the  important  results  that  have 


10        I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

been  reached  by  Riecke,  Drude  and  J.  J.  Thomson.1)  The  funda- 
mental idea  of  the  modern  theory  of  the  thermic  and  electric  pro- 
perties of  metals  is,  that  the  free  electrons  in  these  bodies  partake 
of  the  heat-motion  of  the  molecules  of  ordinary  matter,  travelling  in 
all  directions  with  such  velocities  that  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of 
each  of  them  is  equal  to  that  of  a  gaseous  molecule  at  the  same 
temperature.  If  we  further  suppose  the  electrons  to  strike  over  and 
over  again  against  metallic  atoms,  so  that  they  describe  irregular 
zigzag-lines,  we  can  make  clear  to  ourselves  the  reason  that 
metals  are  at  the  same  time  good  conductors  of  heat  and  of  electri- 
city, and  that,  as  a  general  rule,  in  the  series  of  the  metals,  the  two 
conductivities  change  in  nearly  the  same  ratio.  The  larger  the 
number  of  free  electrons,  and  the  longer  the  time  that  elapses  between 
two  successive  encounters,  the  greater  will  be  the  conductivity  for 
heat  as  well  as  that  for  electricity. 

6.  This  rapid  review  will  suffice  to  show  you  that  the  theory 
of  electrons  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  extension  to  the  domain  of 
electricity  of  the  molecular  and  atomistic  theories  that  have  proved 
of  so  much  use  in  many  branches  of  physics  and  chemistry.  Like 
these,  it  is  apt  to  be  viewed  unfavourably  by  some  physicists,  who 
prefer  to  push  their  way  into  new  and  unexplored  regions  by  follow- 
ing those  great  highways  of  science  which  we  possess  in  the  laws 
of  thermodynamics,  or  who  arrive  at  important  and  beautiful  results, 
simply  by  describing  the  phenomena  and  their  mutual  relations  by 
means  of  a  system  of  suitable  equations.  No  one  can  deny  that 
these  methods  have  a  charm  of  their  own,  and  that,  in  following 
them,  we  have  the  feeling  of  treading  on  firm  ground,  whereas  in 
the  molecular  theories  the  too  adventurous  physicist  often  runs  the 
risk  of  losing  his  way  and  of  being  deluded  by  some  false  prospect 
of  success.  We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  these  molecular  hypo- 
theses can  boast  of  some  results  that  could  never  have  been  attained 
by  pure  thermodynamics,  or  by  means  of  the  equations  of  the  electro- 
magnetic field  in  their  most  general  form,  results  that  are  well  known 
to  all  who  have  studied  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  the  theories  of 


1)  E.  Riecke,  Zur  Theorie  des  Galvanismus  und  der  Wiirme,  Ann.  Phys. 
Chem.  66  (1898),  p.  353,  545,  1199;  Ober  das  Verhaltnis  der  Leitfahigkeiten 
der  Metalle  fur  Waime  und  fur  Elektrizitat ,  Ann.  Phys.  2  (1900),  p.  835. 
P.  Drude,  Zur  Elektronentheorie  der  Metalle,  Ann.  Phys.  1  (1900),  p.  566; 
3  (1900),  p.  369.  J.  J.  Thomson,  Indications  relatives  a  la  constitution  de  la 
matiere  fournies  par  les  recherches  recentes  sur  le  passage  de  I'electricite"  a 
travers  les  gaz,  Rapports  du  Congres  de  physique  de  1900,  Paris,  3,  p.  138. 
See  also  H.  A.  Lorentz,  The  motion  of  electrons  in  metallic  bodies,  Amsterdam 
Proc.  1904-1905,  p.  438,  588,  684. 


ELECTRONS  AND  ETHEE.  H 

dilute  solutions,  of  electrolysis  and  of  the  genesis  of  electric  currents 
by  the  motion  of  ions.  Nor  can  the  fruitfulness  of  these  hypotheses 
be  denied  by  those  who  have  followed  the  splendid  researches  on  the 
conduction  of  electricity  through  gases  of  J.  J.  Thomson1)  and  his 
fellow  workers. 

7.  I  have  now  to  make  you  acquainted  with  the  equations 
forming  the  foundation  of  the  mathematical  theory  of  electrons. 
Permit  me  to  introduce  them  by  some  preliminary  remarks. 

In  the  first  place,  we  shall  ascribe  to  each  electron  certain  finite 
dimensions,  however  small  they  may  be,  and  we  shall  fix  our  attention 
not  only  on  the  exterior  field,  but  also  on  the  interior  space,  in 
which  there  is  room  for  many  elements  of  volume  and  in  which  the 
state  of  things  may  vary  from  one  point  to  another.  As  to  this 
state,  we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  at  outside  points. 
Indeed,  one  of  the  most  important  of  our  fundamental  assumptions 
must  be  that  the  ether  not  only  occupies  all  space  between  molecules, 
atoms  or  electrons,  but  that  it  pervades  all  these  particles.  We  shall 
add  the  hypothesis  that,  though  the  particles  may  move,  the  ether 
alivays  remains  at  rest.  We  can  reconcile  ourselves  with  this,  at 
first  sight,  somewhat  startling  idea,  by  thinking  of  the  particles  of 
matter  as  of  some  local  modifications  in  the  state  of  the  ether.  These 
modifications  may  of  course  very  well  travel  onward  while  the  volume- 
elements  of  the  medium  in  which  they  exist  remain  at  rest. 

Now,  if  within  an  electron  there  is  ether,  there  can  also  be  an 
electromagnetic  field,  and  all  we  have  got  to  do  is  to  establish  a 
system  of  equations  that  may  be  applied  as  well  to  the  parts  of  the 
ether  where  there  is  an  electric  charge,  i.  e.  to  the  electrons,  as  to 
those  where  there  is  none.  As  to  the  distribution  of  the  charge,  we 
are  free  to  make  any  assumption  we  like.  For  the  sake  of  convenience 
we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  distributed  over  a  certain  space,  say  over 
the  whole  volume  occupied  by  the  electron,  and  we  shall  consider 
the  volume-density  Q  as  a  continuous  function  of  the  coordinates,  so 
that  the  charged  particle  has  no  sharp  boundary,  but  is  surrounded 
by  a  thin  layer  in  which  the  density  gradually  sinks  from  the  value 
it  has  within  the  electron  to  0.  Thanks  to  this  hypothesis  of  the 
continuity  of  p,  which  we  shall  extend  to  all  other  quantities  occurring 
in  our  equations,  we  have  never  to  trouble  ourselves  about  surfaces 
of  discontinuity,  nor  to  encumber  the  theory  by  separate  equations 
relating  to  these.  Moreover,  if  we  suppose  the  difference  between 
the  ether  within  and  without  the  electrons  to  be  caused,  at  least  so 


1)  J.  J.   Thomson,   Conduction  of  electricity  through  gases,   Cambridge, 
1903. 


12         I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

far  as  we  are  concerned  with  it,  only  by  the  existence  of  the  volume- 
density  in  the  interior,  the  equations  for  the  external  field  must  be 
got  from  those  for  the  internal  one  by  simply  putting  Q  =  0?  so  that 
we  have  only  to  write  down  one  system  of  differential  equations. 

Of  course,  these  must  be  obtained  by  a  suitable  modification,  in 
which  the  influence  of  the  charge  is  expressed,  of  the  equations 
(2)  —  (5)  which  we  have  established  for  the  free,  i.  e.  for  the  uncharged 
ether.  It  has  been  found  that  we  can  attain  our  object  by  the 
slightest  modification  imaginable,  and  that  we  can  assume  the  following 
system 

div  d  =  Q,  (17) 

div  h  =  0,  (18) 

roth  =  |c  =  --J-(d  +  pV),  (19) 

rot  d  =       ~h,  (20) 

in  which  the  first  and  the  third  formula  are  the  only  ones  that  have 
been  altered. 

In  order  to  justify  these  modifications,  I  must  in  the  first  place 
recall  to  your  minds  the  general  relation  existing  in  Maxwell's 
theory  between  the  dielectric  displacement  across  a  closed  surface 
and  the  amount  of  charge  e  contained  within  it.  It  is  expressed  by 
the  equation 

f *.*«  =  *  (21) 

in  which  the  integral  relates  to  the  closed  surface,  each  element  da 
of  it  being  multiplied  by  the  component  of  d  along  the  normal  n, 
which,  as  we  have  already  said,  is  drawn  towards  the  outside.  Using 
a  well  known  form  of  speech  and  comparing  the  state  of  things  with 
one  in  which  there  would  be  no  dielectric  displacement  at  all,  we 
may  say  that  the  total  quantity  of  electricity  that  has  been  displaced 
across  the  surface  (a  quantity  that  has  been  shifted  in  an  outward 
direction  being  reckoned  as  positive),  is  equal  to  the  charge  e.  Now, 
if  we  apply  this  to  an  element  of  space  dxdydz,  taken  at  a  point 
where  there  is  a  volume-density  p,  we  have 

e  =  Q  dxdydz 

and,  since  the  integral  in  (21)  reduces  to 

div  d  •  dx  dy  dz, 

we  are  at  once  led  to  the  formula  (17). 

In  the  second  place,  we  must  observe  that  a  moving  charge 
constitutes  what  is  called  a  convection  current  and  produces  the 
same  magnetic  effects  as  a  common  current  of  conduction;  this  was 


FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS.  13 

first  shown  by  Rowland's  celebrated  and  well  known  experiment. 
Now,  if  v  is  the  velocity  of  the  charge,  it  is  natural  to  write  pV  for 
the  convection  current;  indeed,  the  three  components  QVZ,  pV  ,  pV, 
represent  the  amounts  of  charge,  reckoned  per  unit  of  area  and  unit 
of  time,  which  are  carried  across  elements  of  surface  perpendicular  to 
the  axes  of  coordinates.  On  the  other  hand,  if  in  the  interior  of  an 
electron  there  is  an  electromagnetic  field,  there  will  also  be  a 
displacement  current  d.  We  are  therefore  led  to  assume  as  the 
expression  for  the  total  current 

C  =  d  +  pV,  (22) 

and  to  use  the  equation  (19)  in  order  to  determine  the  magnetic 
field.  Of  course,  this  is  again  a  vector  equation.  In  applying  it  to 
special  problems,  it  is  often  found  convenient  to  replace  it  by  the 
three  scalar  differential  equations 


r       *>   ~w  "  -fo  ==  -<r 


_ 

3x        dy       ~ 

You  see  that  by  putting  p  =  0,  in  the  formulae  (17)  and  (19), 
we  are  led  back  to  our  former  equations  (2)  and  (4). 

8.  There  is  one  more  equation  to  be  added,  in  fact  one  that 
is  of  equal  importance  with  (17)  —  (20).  It  will  have  been  noticed 
that  I  have  carefully  abstained  from  saying  anything  about  the 
nature  of  the  electric  charge  represented  by  p.  Speculations  on  this 
point,  or  attempts  to  reduce  the  idea  of  a  charge  to  others  of  a 
different  kind,  are  entirely  without  the  scope  of  the  present  theory; 
we  do  not  pretend  to  say  more  than  this,  that  p  is  a  quantity, 
belonging  to  a  certain  point  in  the  ether  and  connected  with  the 
distribution  of  the  dielectric  displacement  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
that  point  by  the  equation  (17).  We  may  say  that  the  ether  can 
be  the  seat  of  a  certain  state,  determined  by  the  vector  d  which  we 
call  the  dielectric  displacement,  that  in  general  this  vector  is  solenoidally 
distributed,  but  that  there  are  some  places  which  form  an  exception 
to  this  rule,  the  divergence  of  d  having  a  certain  value  p,  different 
from  0.  In  such  a  case,  we  speak  of  an  electric  charge  and  under- 
stand by  its  density  the  value  of  div  d. 

As  to  the  statement  that  the  charges  can  move  through  the 
ether,  the  medium  itself  remaining  at  rest,  if  reduced  to  its  utmost 
simplicity,  it  only  means  that  the  value  of  div  d  which  at  one  moment 
exists  at  a  point  P,  will  the  next  moment  be  found  at  another 
place  P'. 


14        I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

Yet,  in  order  to  explain  electromagnetic  phenomena,  we  are 
obliged  to  go  somewhat  further.  It  is  not  quite  sufficient  to  con- 
sider Q  as  merely  the  symbol  for  a  certain  state  of  the  ether.  On 
the  contrary,  we  must  invest  the  charges  with  a  certain  degree  of 
substantiality,  so  far  at  least  that  we  recognize  the  possibility  of 
forces  acting  on  them  and  producing  or  modifying  their  motion.  The 
word  ,,force"  is  here  taken  in  the  ordinary  sense  it  has  in  dynamics, 
and  we  should  easily  become  accustomed  to  the  idea  of  forces  acting 
on  the  charges,  if  we  conceived  these  latter  as  fixed  to  what  we  are 
accustomed  to  call  matter,  or  as  being  a  property  of  this  matter. 
This  is  the  idea  underlying  the  name  of  ,,charged  particle"  which 
we  have  already  used  and  shall  occasionally  use  again  for  an  electron. 
We  shall  see  later  on  that,  in  some  cases  at  least,  the  fitness  of  the 
name  is  somewhat  questionable. 

However  this  may  be,  we  must  certainly  speak  of  such  a  thing 
as  the  force  acting  on  a  charge,  or  on  an  electron,  on  charged 
matter,  whichever  appellation  you  prefer.  Now,  in  accordance  with 
the  general  principles  of  Maxwell's  theory,  we  shall  consider 
this  force  as  caused  by  the  state  of  the  ether,  and  even,  since 
this  medium  pervades  the  electrons,  as  exerted  by  the  ether  on  all 
internal  points  of  these  particles  where  there  is  a  charge.  If  we 
divide  the  whole  electron  into  elements  of  volume,  there  will  be  a 
force  acting  on  each  element  and  determined  by  the  state  of  the 
ether  existing  within  it.  We  shall  suppose  that  this  force  is  pro- 
portional to  the  charge  of  the  element,  so  that  we  only  want  to 
know  the  force  acting  per  unit  charge.  This  is  what  we  can  now 
properly  call  the  electric  force.  We  shall  represent  it  by  f.  The 
formula  by  which  it  is  determined,  and  which  is  the  one  we  still 
have  to  add  to  (17) — (20),  is  as  follows: 

f  =  d  +  |[v-h].  (23) 

Like  our  former  equations,  it  is  got  by  generalizing  the  results  of 
electromagnetic  experiments.  The  first  term  represents  the  force 
acting  on  an  electron  in  an  electrostatic  field;  indeed,  in  this  case, 
the  force  per  unit  of  charge  must  be  wholly  determined  by  the 
dielectric  displacement.  On  the  other  hand,  the  part  of  the  force 
expressed  by  the  second  term  may  be  derived  from  the  law  according 
to  which  an  element  of  a  wire  carrying  a  current  is  acted  on  by  a 
magnetic  field  with  a  force  perpendicular  to  itself  and  the  lines  of 
force,  an  action,  which  in  our  units  may  be  represented  in  vector 
notation  by 


FORCE  ACTING  ON  UNIT  CHARGE.  15 

where  i  is  the  intensity  of  the  current  considered  as  a  vector,  and  s 
the  length  of  the  element.  According  to  the  theory  of  electrons, 
F  is  made  up  of  all  the  forces  with  which  the  field  h  acts  on  the 
separate  electrons  moving  in  the  wire.  Now,  simplifying  the  question 
by  the  assumption  of  only  one  kind  of  moving  electrons  with  equal 
charges  e  and  a  common  velocity  V,  we  may  write 

si  =  NeV, 
if  N  is  the  whole  number  of  these  particles  in  the  element  s.    Hence 


so  that,  dividing  by  Ne,  we  find  for  the  force  per  unit  charge 


As  an  interesting  and  simple  application  of  this  result,  I  may  mention 
the  explanation  it  affords  of  the  induction  current  that  is  produced 
in  a  wire  moving  across  the  magnetic  lines  of  force.  The  two  kinds 
of  electrons  having  the  velocity  V  of  the  wire,  are  in  this  case  driven 
in  opposite  directions  by  forces  which  are  determined  by  our  formula. 

9.  After  having  been  led  in  one  particular  case  to  the  existence 
of  the  force  d,  and  in  another  to  that  of  the  force  —  [V  •  h],  we  now 

combine  the  two  in  the  way  shown  in  the  equation  (23),  going 
beyond  the  direct  result  of  experiments  by  the  assumption  that  in 
general  the  two  forces  exist  at  the  same  time.  If,  for  example,  an 
electron  were  moving  in  a  space  traversed  by  Hertzian  waves,  we 
could  calculate  the  action  of  the  field  on  it  by  means  of  the  values 
of  d  and  h,  such  as  they  are  at  the  point  of  the  field  occupied  by 
the  particle. 

Of  course,  in  cases  like  this,  in  which  we  want  to  know  the 
force  exerted  by  an  external  field,  we  need  not  distinguish  the 
directions  and  magnitudes  of  f  at  different  points  of  the  electron,  at 
least  if  there  is  no  rotation  of  the  particle;  the  velocity  V  will  be 
the  same  for  all  its  points  and  the  external  field  may  be  taken  as 
homogeneous  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  electron.  If  however, 
for  an  electron  having  some  variable  motion,  we  are  required  to 
calculate  the  force  that  is  due  to  its  own  field,  our  analysis  must  be 
pushed  further.  The  field  is  now  far  from  homogeneous,  and  after 
having  divided  the  particle  into  elements  of  volume,  we  must 
determine  the  action  of  the  field  on  each  of  them.  Finally,  if  the 
electron  is  treated  as  a  rigid  body,  we  shall  have  to  calculate  in  the 
ordinary  way  the  resultant  force  and  the  resultant  couple. 


16         I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

10.  While  I  ani  speaking  so  boldly  of  what   goes   on  in   the 
interior  of  an  electron,  as  if  I  had  been  able  to  look  into  these  small 
particles,  I  fear  one  will  feel  inclined  to   think  I  had  better  not  try 
to  enter  into   all   these   details.     My  excuse  must  be   that   one   can 
scarcely  refrain  from   doing  so,    if   one    wishes   to   have  a   perfectly 
definite  system  of  equations;  moreover,  as  we  shall  see  later  on,  our 
experiments  can  really  teach  us   something  about  the  dimensions  of 
the  electrons.    In  the  second  place,  it  may  be  observed  that  in  those 
cases    in  which  the  internal    state    of  the  electrons  can  make  itself 
felt,  speculations  like  those  we  have  now  entered  upon,   are  at  all 
events  interesting,  be  they  right  or  wrong,  whereas  they  are  harm- 
less as  soon  as  we  may   consider  the  internal  state  as  a  matter  of 
little  importance. 

It  must  also  be  noticed  that  our  assumptions  by  no  means 
exclude  the  possibility  of  certain  distributions  of  charge  which  we 
have  not  at  first  mentioned.  By  indefinitely  diminishing  the  thickness 
of  the  transition  layer  in  which  Q  passes  from  a  finite  value  to  0, 
we  can  get  as  a  limiting  case  that  of  an  electron  with  a  sharp 
boundary.  We  can  also  conceive  the  charge  to  be  present,  not 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  particle,  but  only  in  a  certain 
layer  at  its  surface,  whose  thickness  may  be  made  as  small  as  we 
like,  so  that  after  all  we  can  speak  of  a  surface -charge.  Indeed,  in 
some  of  our  formulae  we  shall  have  in  view  this  special  case. 

11.  Since  our  equations  form  the  real  foundation-stones  of  the 
structure  we  are  going  to  build,  it  will  be  well  to   examine  them 
somewhat  more  closely,  so  that  we  may  be  sure  that  they  are  con- 
sistent with  each  other.     They  are  easily  shown   to  be  so,  provided 
only  the  charge  of  an  element  of  volume  remain  constant  during  its 
motion.1)     If  we  regard  the   electrons  as  rigid  bodies,   as   we    shall 
almost  always  do,   this  of  course  means  that  Q   is  constant  at  every 
point  of  a  particle.     However,  we  might  also  suppose  the  electrons  to 
change  their  shape  and  volume;    only,  in  this  case,  the   value  of  p 
for  an  element  of  volume  ought  to  be  considered  as  varying  in   the 
inverse  ratio  as  the  magnitude  of  the  element. 

It  is  also  important  to  remark  that  our  formulae  are  applicable 
to  a  system  in  which  the  charges,  instead  of  being  concentrated  in 
certain  small  particles,  are  spread  over  larger  spaces  in  any  way  you 
like.  We  may  even  go  a  step  further  and  imagine  any  number  of 
charges  with  the  densities  QI}  p2  etc.,  which  are  capable  of  penetrating 
each  other  and  therefore  of  occupying  the  same  part  of  space,  and 
which  move,  each  with  its  own  velocity.  This  would  require  us  to 

1)  Note  2. 


DETERMINATION  OF  THE  FIELD.  17 

replace  the  terms  p  and  (>v  in  (17)  and  (19)  by  ft  +  ft  H  ----  and 
d  vi  +  ft  V2  H  ----  ,  the  vectors  V17  V2,  ...  being  the  velocities  of  the 
separate  charges.  An  assumption  of  this  kind,  artificial  though  it 
may  seem,  will  be  found  of  use  in  one  of  the  problems  we  shall 
have  to  examine. 

12.  I  have  now  to  call  your  attention  to  some  of  the  many 
beautiful  results  that  may  be  derived  from  our  fundamental  equations, 
in  the  first  place  to  the  way  in  which  the  electromagnetic  field  is 
determined  by  the  formulae  (17)—  (20),  if  the  distribution  and  the 
motion  of  the  charges  are  supposed  to  be  given.  The  possibility  of 
this  determination  is  due  to  the  fact  that  we  can  eliminate  five  of 
the  six  quantities  dz,  dy,  dz,  h^,  hy,  bs,  exactly  as  we  could  do,  when 
we  treated  the  equations  for  the  free  ether,  and  to  the  remarkable 
form  in  which  the  final  equation  presents  itself.1)  We  have,  for 
example,  three  equations  for  the  components  of  d,  which  we  may 
combine  into  the  vector  formula 


,  (24) 

and  the  similar  condition  for  the  magnetic  force 

Ah-|2ti  =     -irotfov).  (25) 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  write  down  the  six  scalar  equations  for 
the  separate  components;  we  can  confine  ourselves  to  the  formulae 
for  d.,.  and  h,,.,  viz. 

Ad        —  d   -  8f-  '-4-  -  8-^V*>  (26} 

«*°.        c*ax  —    x  +  c*       t    ' 


Ah  h  - 

An.-^n,-   --c-g- 

In  order  to  express  myself  more  clearly,  it  will  be  proper  to 
introduce  a  name  for  the  left-hand  sides  of  these  equations.  The 
result  of  the  operation  A,  applied  to  a  quantity  i/>  that  is  a  function 
of  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z,  has  been  called  the  Laplacian  of  #. 

i    82 
Similarly,  the  result  of  the  operation  A  --  1  --^  may  be  given  the  name 

of  the  Dalembertian  of  the  original  quantity,  in  commemoration 
of  the  fact  that  the  mathematician  d'Alembert  was  the  first  to 
solve  a  partial  differential  equation,  occurring  in  the  theory  of  a 
vibrating  string,  which  contains  this  operation,  or  rather  the  operation 

og  .«        03 

5-3  ---  i  o,,,  which  is  a  special  case  of  it.  Of  course,  since  vectors 
can  be  differentiated  with  respect  to  time  and  place,  we  may  as  well 

1)  Note  3. 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


18         I.   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

speak  of  the  Dalembertian  of  a  vector  as  of  that  of  a  scalar  quan- 
tity. Accordingly,  since,  for  a  given  distribution  and  motion  of  the 
charges,  the  right-hand  members  of  our  last  equations  are  known 
functions  of  x,  y,  z,  t,  we  see  that  the  vectors  (I  and  h,  as  well  as 
each  of  their  components,  are  determined  by  the  values  of  their 
Dalembertians.  We  have  therefore  to  look  into  the  question,  what 
will  be  the  value  of  a  quantity  ty  whose  Dalembertian  has  a 
given  value  co.  This  is  a  problem  which  admits  a  simple  solution. 
In  the  ordinary  theory  of  the  potential  it  is  proved  that  a  function  «/> 
whose  Laplacian  has  a  given  value  w,  may  be  found  by  the 
formula 


where  r  is  the  distance  from  an  element  of  volume  dS  to  the  point  P 
for  which  we  want  to  calculate  ty,  to  the  value  of  the  Laplaciau 
in  this  element,  and  where  we  have  to  integrate  over  all  parts  of 
space  in  which  ra  is  different  from  0. 

Now,    it    is    very    remarkable    that   a   function   ^   satisfying    the 
equation 


may  be  found  by  a  calculation  very  like  that  indicated  in  (28)  1).  The 
only  difference  is  that,  if  we  are  asked  to  determine  the  value  of  V 
at  the  point  P  for  the  instant  t,  we  must  take  for  to  the  value  of 

this  function  existing  in  the  element  dS  at  the  time  t-  —  We 
shall  henceforth  include  in  square  brackets  quantities  whose  values 

1' 

must  be  taken,  not  for  the  time  t,  but  for  the  previous  time  t  - 
Using  this  notation,  we  may  say  that  the  function 


is  a  solution  of  the  differential  equation  (29).  It  should  be  observed 
that  this  also  holds  when  to  is  a  vector  quantity;  [ra]  and  *-=d8 

will  then  be  so  likewise,  and  the  integration  in  (30)  is  to  be  under- 
stood as  the  addition  of  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  small  vectors. 
For  purposes  of  actual  computation,  the  vector  equation  may  again 
be  split  up  into  three  scalar  ones,  containing  the  components  of  o, 
and  giving  us  those  of  ip. 

1)  Note  4. 


POTENTIALS.  19 

13.  The  above  method  of  calculation  might  be  applied  to  the 
equations  (24)  and  (25)  or  (26)  and  (27).  Since,  however,  the  second 
members  of  these  formulae  are  somewhat  complicated,  we  prefer  not 
directly  to  determine  d  and  h,  but  to  calculate  in  the  first  place 
certain  auxiliary  functions  on  which  the  electric  and  magnetic  forces 
may  be  made  to  depend,  and  which  are  called  potentials.  The  first 
is  a  scalar  quantity,  which  I  shall  denote  by  <p,  the  second  a  vector 
for  which  I  shall  write  a. 

If  the  potentials  are  subjected  to   the  relations 


-?*--*  (31) 

and 

Aa--ia  =  -l(,v,  (32) 

one  can  show1),  by  means  of  (17) — (20),  that  the  dielectric  displacement 
is  given  by 

d  =  -  -*-  a  -  grad  cp  (33) 

and  the  magnetic  force  by 

h  =  rot  a.  (34) 

You  see  that  the  equations  (31)  and  (32)  are  again  of  the  form  (29), 
so  that  the  two  potentials  are  determined  by  the  condition  that  their 

Dalembertians    must    have    the    simple    values    — p    and    •     —  pV. 
Therefore,  on  account  of  (30),  we  may  write 


and 


By  these  equations,  combined  with  (33)  and  (34),  our  problem  is 
solved.  They  show  that,  in  order  to  calculate  the  field,  we  have  to 
proceed  as  follows:  Let  P  be  the  point  for  which  we  wish  to 
determine  the  potentials  at  the  time  t.  We  must  divide  the  whole 
surrounding  space  into  elements  of  volume,  any  one  of  which  is 
called  dS.  Let  it  be  situated  at  the  point  Q  and  let  the  distance  QP 
be  denoted  by  r.  In  this  element  of  space  there  may  or  may  not 
be  a  part  of  an  electron  at  a  certain  time.  We  are  only  concerned 

with  the  question  whether   it   contains   a   charge  at  the  time  t  - 
Indeed,   the  brackets   serve  to  remind   us   that  we  are   to   understand 

1)  Note  5. 

2* 


20         I-   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

by   Q   the    density    existing   in  dS   at   the   particular   instant   t  - 

and  by  pv  the  product  of  this  density  and  the  velocity  of  the  charge 
within  dS  at  that  same  instant.  These  values  [p]  and  [pY]  must  be 
multiplied  by  dS  and  divided  by  r.  Finally,  we  have  to  do  for  all 
elements  what  we  have  done  for  the  one  dS  and  to  add  all  the 
results.  Of  course  there  may  be  many  elements  which  do  not  con- 
tribute anything  to  the  integrals,  viz.  all  those  which  at  the  time 

t  —      -  did  not  contain  any  charge. 
c 

14.  What  has  been  said  calls   forth   some    further  remarks.     In 
the  first  place,  you  see  that  the  factor       ,  which   we  have   been  so 

anxious  to  get  rid  of,  has  again  appeared.  We  cannot  prevent  it 
from  doing  so,  but  fortunately  it  is  now  confined  to  a  few  of  our 
equations.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  especially  important  to  observe 
that  the  values  of  p  and  pV  existing  in  a  certain  point  Q  at  the 

time  t—     -  do  not  make  themselves  felt  at  the  point  P  at  the  same 

moment  t  -    '  ,  but  at  the  later  time  t.     We  may  therefore  really 

speak  of  a  propagation  taking  place  with  the  velocity  c.  The  parts 
of  q>  and  a  which  are  due  to  the  several  elements  dS  correspond  to 
states  existing  in  these  elements  at  times  which  are  the  more  remote, 
the  farther  these  elements  are  situated  from  the  point  P  considered. 

On  account  of  this  special  feature  of  our  result,  the  potentials  cp 
and  a,  given  by  (35)  and  (3(5),  are  often  called  retarded  potentials. 

I  must  add  that  the  function  (30)  is  not  the  most  general 
solution  of  (29),  and  that  for  this  reason  the  values  of  (33)  and  (34) 
derived  from  (35)  and  (36)  are  not  the  only  ones  satisfying  the 
fundamental  equations.  We  need  not  however  speak  of  other  solutions, 
if  we  assume  that  an  electromagnetic  field  in  the  ether  is  never  pro- 
duced by  any  other  causes  than  the  presence  and  motion  of  electrons.1) 

15.  The  case  of  a  single  electron  furnishes  a  good  example  for 
the  application  of  our  general  formulae.     Let  us  suppose  in  the  first 
place   that  the   particle    never    has    had    nor    will    have    any    motion. 
Then  we  have  a  =  0,  and  since  p  is  the  same  at  all  instants,  the 
scalar  potential  is  given  by 


. 

r 

The  equations  (33)  and  (34)  becoming 

d  =  —  grad  cp,     h  =  0, 
we  fall  back  on  the  ordinary  formulae  of  electrostatics. 

1)  Note  6. 


FIELD  OF  A  MOVING  ELECTRON.  21 

We  shall  next  consider  an  electron  having  (from  t  —  —  oo  until 
t  =  +  oo)  a  translation  with  constant  velocity  w  along  a  straight 
line.  Let  P  and  P'  be  two  points  in  such  positions  that  the  lino 
PP'  is  in  the  direction  of  the  motion  of  the  particle.  It  is  easily 
seen  that,  if  we  wish  to  calculate  <p,  a,  (I  and  h,  first  for  the  point  P 

and  the  time  t,  and  then  for  the  point  P'   and  the  time  t  +  ' ' '' 

w    ' 

we  shall  have  to  repeat  exactly  the  same  calculations.  If,  for  example, 
dS  is  an  element  of  space  contributing  a  part  to  the  integrals  (35) 
and  (36)  in  the  first  problem,  the  corresponding  integrals  in  the 
second  will  contain  equal  parts  due  to  an  element  dS'  which  may 
be  got  by  shifting  dS  in  the  direction  of  translation  over  a  distance 
equal  to  PP'. 

It  appears  from  this  that  the  electron  is  continually  surrounded 
by  the  same  field,  which  it  may  therefore  be  said  to  carry  along 
with  it.  As  to  the  nature  of  this  field,  one  can  easily  deduce  from 
(33)— (36)  that,  in  the  case  of  a  spherical  electron  with  a  charge 
symmetrically  distributed  around  the  centre,  if  s  is  the  path  of  the 
centre,  the  electric  lines  of  force  are  curves  situated  in  planes 
passing  through  s,  and  the  magnetic  lines  circles  having  s  as  axis.1) 
The  field  is  distinguished  from  that  of  an  electron  without  translation, 
not  only  by  the  presence  of  the  magnetic  force,  but  also  by  an 
alteration  in  the  distribution  of  the  dielectric  displacement. 

We  shall  finally  take  a  somewhat  less  simple  case.  Let  us 
suppose  that,  from  t  =  —  oo  until  a  certain  instant  tL,  the  electron 
is  at  rest  in  a  position  A,  and  that,  in  a  short  interval  of  time 
beginning  at  ti}  it  acquires  a  velocity  w  which  remains  constant  in 
magnitude  and  direction  until  after  some  time,  in  a  short  interval 
ending  at  the  instant  t%,  the  motion  is  stopped.  Let  B  be  the  final 
position  in  which  the  electron  remains  for  ever  afterwards. 

If  P  is  any  point  in  the  surrounding  ether,  we  can  consider  two 
distances  ^  and  ?2,  the  first  of  which  is  the  shortest  of  all  the  lines 
drawn  from  P  to  the  points  of  the  electron  in  the  position  A,  and 
the  second  the  longest  of  all  the  lines  joining  P  to  the  electron  in 
the  position  B.  We  shall  suppose  the  interval  tt  —  ^  to  be  so  long 

that  «,  +  A- >«,  +  i~ 

It  will  be  clear  that  in  performing  the  calculation  of  <p  and  a, 
for  the  point  P  and  for  an  instant  previous  to  t^  +  — ,  we  shall  get 

a  result  wholly  independent  of  the  motion  of  the  electron.  This 
motion  can  by  no  means  make  itself  felt  in  P  during  this  first 
period,  which  will  therefore  be  characterized  by  the  field  belonging 

1)  Note  7. 


22         I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

to  the  immovable  electron.  A  similar  field  will  exist  in  P  after  the 
time  t%  +  -'-,  every  influence  that  has  been  emitted  by  the  particle 

while  moving,  having  already,  in  its  outward  progress,  passed  over 
the  point  considered. 

Between  tt  +  —  and  (L  -}-•*•  the  field  at  P  will  be   due  to  the 
c  c 

moving  electron.  If  we  suppose  the  dimensions  of  the  particle  to  be 
very  small  in  comparison  with  the  distances  llf  12,  and  the  velocity  w 
to  be  acquired  and  lost  in  intervals  of  time  much  shorter  than  ts  —  t1, 
we  may  be  sure  that  during  the  larger  part  of  the  interval  between 

ti  H  —  L  and  <2  4-  -     the  field  at  P  will  be  what  it  would  have  been, 

C  C 

had  a  constant  velocity  w  existed  for  ever.  Of  course,  immediately 
after  t,  -+-  '  an(i  shortly  before  t2  +  it  will  be  otherwise;  then, 

C  C 

there  will  be  a  gradual  transition  from  one  state  of  things  to  the 
other.  It  is  clear  also  that  these  periods  of  transition,  taken  for 
different  points  P,  will  not  be  found  to  coincide.  If  Slt  S2,  S3  are 
parts  of  space  at  different  distances  from  the  line  AB,  Sl  being  the 
most  remote  and  <S3  the  nearest,  it  may  very  well  be  that,  at  some 
particular  instant,  /S,  is  occupied  by  the  field  belonging  to  the  elec- 
tron while  at  rest  in  the  position  A,  St  by  the  field  of  the  moving 
electron,  and  Ss  by  the  final  field. 

16.  Thus  far  we  have  only  used  the  equations  (17)  —  (20). 
Adding  to  these  the  formula  (23)  for  the  electric  force,  and  supposing 
the  forces  of  any  other  nature  which  may  act  on  the  electrons  to  be 
given,  we  have  the  means  of  determining,  not  only  the  field,  but 
also  the  motion  of  the  charges.  For  our  purpose  however,  it  is  not 
necessary  to  enter  here  into  special  problems  of  this  kind.  We  shall 
concentrate  our  attention  on  one  or  two  general  theorems  holding  for 
any  system  of  moving  electrons. 

In  the  first  place,  suitable  transformations  of  the  fundamental 
formulae  lead  to  an  equation  expressing  the  law  of  conservation  of 
energy.1)  If  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  part  of  the  system  lying 
within  a  certain  closed  surface  <?,  this  equation  has  the  form 


cf[A  •  h].rftf  =  0,     (37) 


which  we  shall  now  try  to  interpret.  Since  f  is  the  force  with  which 
the  ether  acts  on  unit  charge,  gfdS  will  be  the  force  acting  on  the 
element  dS  of  the  charge,  and 


1)  Note  8. 


ELECTRIC  AND  MAGNETIC  ENERGY.    PLOW  OF  ENEIKiY.         23 

its  work  per  unit  of  time.  The  first  integral  in  (37)  is  thus  seen 
to  represent  the  work  done  by  the  ether  on  the  electrons  per  unit 
of  time.  Combined  with  the  work  of  other  forces  to  which  the 
electrons  may  be  subjected,  this  term  will  therefore  enable  us  to 
calculate  the  change  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  electrons. 

Of  course,  if  the  ether  does  work  on  the  electrons,  it  must  lose 
an  equivalent  amount  of  energy,  a  loss  for  which  a  supply  of  energy 
from  the  part  of  the  system  outside  the  surface  0  may  make  up,  or 
which  may  be  accompanied  by  a  transfer  of  energy  to  that  part. 
We  must  therefore  consider 

Hd'  +  hV-S  (38) 

as  the  expression  for  the  energy  contained  within  an  element  of 
volume  of  the  ether,  and 

C/[d  -  hLrftf  (39) 

as  that  for  an  amount  of  energy  that  is  lost  by  the  system  within 
the  surface  and  gained  by  the  surrounding  ether. 

The  two  parts  into  which  (38)  can  be  divided  may  properly  be 
called  the  electric  and  the  magnetic  energy  of  the  ether.  Reckoned 
per  unit  of  volume  the  former  is  seen  to  be 


(40) 

and  the  latter 

^  =  lh2-  (41) 

These  values  are  equivalent  to  those  that  were  given  long  ago  by 
Maxwell.  That  the  coefficients  are  \  and  not  2it  or  something  of 
the  kind,  is  due  to  the  choice  of  our  new  units  and  will  certainly 
serve  to  recommend  them. 

As  to  the  transfer  of  energy  represented  by  (39),  it  must 
necessarily  take  place  at  the  points  of  the  surface  a  itself,  because 
our  theory  leaves  no  room  for  any  action  at  a  distance.  Further, 
we  are  naturally  led  to  suppose  that  the  actions  by  which  it  is 
brought  about  are  such  that,  for  each  element  da,  the  quantity 
c[d  •  h]ndd  may  be  said  to  represent  the  amount  of  energy  that  is 
transmitted  across  this  particular  element.  In  this  way  we  come  to 
the  conception,  first  formulated  by  Poynting1),  of  a  current  or  flow 
of  energy.  It  is  determined  by  the  vector  product  of  (I  and  h,  mul- 
tiplied by  the  constant  c,  so  that  we  can  write  for  it 

8-c[d-h],  (42) 


1)  J.  H.  Poynting,  On  the  transfer  of  energy  in  the  electromagnetic  field, 
London  Trans.  175  (1884),  p.  343. 


24         I-   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

the  meaning  being  that,  for  any  element  d6,  the  amount  of  energy 
by  which  it  is  traversed,  is  given  for  unit  of  time  and  unit  of  area 
by  the  component  sn  of  the  vector  8  along  the  normal  to  the 
element. 

17.  It  is  interesting  to  apply  the  above  results  to  the  beam  of 
polarized  light  represented  by  our  equations  (7).  We  find  for  the 
energy  which  it  contains  per  unit  of  space 


and  for  the  flow  of  energy  across  a  plane   perpendicular  to  the  axis 
of  x 

cdyhz  =  ca2  cos2  n  (t  -   —  J • 

The  mean  values  of  these  expressions  for  a  full  period  are 

^ 
and 

%ca\ 

Indeed,  by  a  well  known  theorem,  the  mean  value  of  cos2w(tf  —  —  \ 

•     1 
is  •£. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  expression  \ca?  may  also  be  used  for 
calculating  the  flow  of  energy  during  any  lapse  of  time  that  is  very 
long  compared  with  a  period. 

If  the  beam  of  light  is  laterally  limited  by  a  cylindrical  surface 
whose  generating  lines  are  parallel  to  OX,  as  it  may  be  if  we 
neglect  diffraction  phenomena,  and  if  a  normal  section  has  the  area  27, 
the  flow  of  energy  across  a  section  is  given  by  -J-ca227.  It  is  equal 
for  any  two  sections  and  must  indeed  be  so,  because  the  amount  of 
energy  in  the  part  of  the  beam  between  them  remains  constant. 

The  case  of  a  single  electron  having  a  uniform  translation  like- 
wise affords  a  .good  illustration  of  what  has  been  said  about  the 
flow  of  energy.  After  having  determined  the  internal  and  the  external 
field  by  means  of  the  formulae  (33) — (36),  we  can  deduce  the  total 
electromagnetic  energy  from  (40)  and  (41).  I  shall  later  on  have 
occasion  to  mention  the  result.  For  the  present  I  shall  only  say 
that,  considering  the  course  of  the  electric  and  the  magnetic  lines  of 
force,  which  intersect  each  other  at  right  angles,  we  must  conclude 
that  there  is  a  current  of  energy,  whose  general  direction  is  that  of 
the  translation  of  the  electron.  This  should  have  been  expected, 
since  the  moving  electron  is  constantly  surrounded  by  the  same  field. 
The  energy  of  this  field  may  be  said  to  accompany  the  particle  in 
its  motion. 


FLOW  OF  ENERGY.  25 

Other  examples  might  likewise  show  us  how  Poynting's  theorem 
throws  a  clear  light  on  many  questions.  Indeed,  its  importance  can 
hardly  be  overestimated,  and  it  is  now  difficult  to  recall  the  state 
of  electromagnetic  theory  of  some  thirty  years  ago,  when  we  had  to 
do  without  this  beautiful  theorem. 

18.  Before  leaving  this  subject  I  will,  with  your  permission, 
call  attention  to  the  question,  as  to  how  far  we  can  attach  a  definite 
meaning  to  a  flow  of  energy.  It  must,  I  believe,  be  admitted  that, 
as  soon  as  we  know  the  mutual  action  between  two  particles  or  ele- 
ments of  volume,  we  shall  be  able  to  make  a  definite  statement  as 
to  the  energy  given  by  one  of  them  to  the  other.  Hence,  a  theory 
which  explains  things  by  making  definite  assumptions  as  to  the 
mutual  action  of  the  parts  of  a  system,  must  at  the  same  time  admit 
a  transfer  of  energy,  concerning  whose  intensity  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
Yet,  even  if  this  be  granted,  we  can  easily  see  that  in  general  it 
will  not  be  possible  to  trace  the  paths  of  parts  or  elements  of  energy 
in  the  same  sense  in  which  we  can  follow  in  their  course  the  ultimate 
particles  of  which  matter  is  made  up. 

In  order  to  show  this,  I  shall  understand  by  P  a  particle  or  an 
element  of  volume  and  by  A,  B,  C, . .  . ,  A',  B',  C', . .  .  a  certain  number 
of  other  particles  or  elements,  between  which  and  P  there  is  some 
action  resulting  in  a  transfer  of  energy  and,  in  accordance  with  what 
has  just  been  said,  I  shall  suppose  these  actions  to  be  so  far  known 
that  we  can  distinctly  state  what  amount  of  energy  is  interchanged 
between  any  two  particles.  Let,  for  example,  P  receive  from  A,  B,  C, . . . 
the  quantities  a,  b,  c,  .  .  .  of  energy,  and  let  it  give  to  A',  fi',  C', .  .  . 
the  quantities  a,  V,  c,  ... ,  gaining  for  itself  a  certain  amount  p. 
Then  we  shall  have  the  equation 

a  +  b  +  c+---^p  +  a'  +  V  +  c'-\ . 

Now,  though  in  our  imaginary  case  each  term  in  this  equation  would 
be  known,  we  should  have  no  means  for  determining  in  what  way 
the  quantities  of  energy  contained  in  a,  b,  c,  . .  .,  say  the  individual 
units  of  energy,  are  distributed  among  p,  a,  V,  c,  ....  If,  for 
example,  there  are  only  two  terms  on  each  side  of  the  equation, 
all  of  the  same  value,  so  that  it  takes  the  form 

a  +  b  =  a'  -f-  V, 

we  can  neither  conclude  that  a  is  the  same  energy  as  a  and  V  the 
same  as  b,  nor  that  a  is  identical  to  b,  and  b'  to  a.  There  would 
be  no  means  of  deciding  between  these  two  views  and  others  that 
likewise  suggest  themselves. 

For  this  reason,  the  flow  of  energy  can,  in  my  opinion,  never 
have  quite  the  same  distinct  meaning  as  a  flow  of  material  particles, 


26         I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

which,  by  our  imagination  at  least,  we  can  distinguish  from  each 
other  and  follow  in  their  motion.  It  might  even  be  questioned 
whether,  in  electromagnetic  phenomena,  the  transfer  of  energy  really 
takes  place  in  the  way  indicated  by  Poynting's  law,  whether,  for 
example,  the  heat  developed  in  the  wire  of  an  incandescent  lamp  is 
really  due  to  energy  which  it  receives  from  the  surrounding  medium, 
as  the  theorem  teaches  us,  and  not  to  a  flow  of  energy  along  the 
wire  itself.  In  fact,  all  depends  upon  the  hypotheses  which  we  make 
concerning  the  internal  forces  in  the  system,  and  it  may  very  well  be, 
that  a  change  in  these  hypotheses  would  materially  alter  our  ideas 
about  the  path  along  which  the  energy  is  carried  from  one  part  of 
the  system  to  another.  It  must  be  observed  however  that  there  is 
no  longer  room  for  any  doubt,  so  soon  as  we  admit  that  the  pheno- 
mena going  on  in  some  part  of  the  ether  are  entirely  determined  by 
the  electric  and  magnetic  force  existing  in  that  part.  No  one  will 
deny  that  there  is  a  flow  of  energy  in  a  beam  of  light;  therefore, 
if  all  depends  on  the  electric  and  magnetic  force,  there  must  also  be 
one  near  the  surface  of  a  wire  carrying  a  current,  because  here,  as 
well  as  in  the  beam  of  light,  the  two  forces  exist  at  the  same  time 
and  are  perpendicular  to  each  other. 

19.  Results  hardly  less  important  than  the  equation  of  energy, 
and  of  the  same  general  character,  are  obtained  when  we  consider 
the  resultant  of  all  the  forces  exerted  by  the  ether  on  the  electrons 
of  a  system.  For  this  system  we  can  take  a  ponderable  body  which 
is  in  a  peculiar  electromagnetic  state  or  in  which  electromagnetic 
phenomena  are  going  on.  In  our  theory  the  ponderomotive  force 
exerted  on  a  charged  conductor,  a  magnet  or  a  wire  carrying  a 
current,  is  made  up  of  all  the  forces  with  which  the  ether  acts  on 
the  electrons  of  the  body. 

Let  6  again  be  a  closed  surface,  and  F  the  resultant  force  oil 
all  the  electrons  contained  within  it.  Then,  on  account  of  (23),  we 
may  write 

F  =  /  Q  {  d  +  -  [v  •  h] )  dS,  (43) 

J  c 

extending  the  integral  to  all  the  electrons,  or  as  we  may  do  as  well 
(p  being  0  in  the  space  between  the  particles),  to  the  whole  space  S. 
Now,  by  the  application  of  the  equations  (17j — (20)1),  this  force  F 
may  be  shown  to  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  two  vectors 

F  =  F!  +  F,,  (44) 

which  are  determined  by  the  equations 

1)  Note  9. 


and 


STRESSES  IN  THE  ETHER.  27 

^ix  ™?  i  I  {  2d.rdn  —  d2  cos  (w,  a;) }  da 

+  -J- 1  {  2  h.,.  hB  —  h2  cos  (n,  x) }  da  etc.  (45) 

F3=    -if MS.  (46) 

The  first  part  of  the  force  is  represented  by  an  integral  over 
the  surface  ff,  its  components,  of  which  only  one  is  given  here,  being 
determined  by  the  values  of  d^,  dy,  dz,  h^,  etc.  at  the  surface.  The 
second  part  of  the  force,  on  the  contrary,  presents  itself  as  an  integral 
over  the  space  S,  not  only  over  those  parts  of  it  where  there  is  an 
electric  charge,  but  also  over  those  where  there  is  none. 

20.  In  discussing  the  above  result  we  must  distinguish  several 
cases. 

a)  In  all  phenomena  in  which  the  system  is  in  a  stationary 
state,  the  force  Fa,  for  which  we  may  write 

•9    ==  ^  ~3~t 


2 


disappears,  and  the  whole  force  F  is  reduced  to  an  integral  over  the 
surface  6.  In  other  terms,  the  ponderomotive  action  can  be  regarded 
as  the  sum  of  certain  infinitely  small  parts,  each  of  which  belongs 
to  one  of  the  surface-elements  do  and  depends  on  the  state  existing 
at  that  element.  A  very  natural  way  of  interpreting  this  is  to 
speak  of  each  of  these  parts  as  of  a  stress  in  the  ether,  acting  on 
the  element  considered. 

The  stress  depends  on  the  orientation  of  the  element.  If  this  is 
determined  by  the  normal  n,  and  if,  using  a  common  notation,  we 
write  Xn,  Yn,  Zn  for  the  components  of  the  force  per  unit  area, 
exerted  by  the  part  of  the  medium  on  the  positive  side  of  the  sur- 
face on  the  part  lying  on  the  negative  side,  we  shall  have 

-  X.  =  1  {  2dxdn-  d2  cos  («,  «)}  +  {•  { 2hA -  h2  cos  (n,  x) }  etc.     (48) 

From  these  formulae  we  can  easily  deduce  the  components  Xx> 
Yx>  Zx,  X,  etc.  of  the  stresses  acting  on  elements  whose  normal  is 
parallel  to  one  of  the  axes  of  coordinates.  We  find 

X,  =  \  (d,2  -  dy2  -  d/)  +  \  (h,2  -  hy2  -  h/)  etc.,  (49) 

x,=  r,  =  d,d,  +  M,  etc.,  (50) 

precisely  the  values  of  the  stresses  by  which  Maxwell  long  ago 
accounted  for  the  ponderomotive  forces  observed  in  electric  and 
magnetic  fields. 


28         I.   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

This  method  of  calculating  the  resultant  force  is  often  very 
convenient,  the  more  so  because  we  can  take  for  a  any  surface 
surrounding  the  body  for  which  we  have  to  solve  the  problem. 

b)  We  are  led  to  similar  conclusions  if  we  consider  a  system 
that  is  the  seat  of  periodical  phenomena,  confining  ourselves  to  the 
mean  value  of  the  force  taken  for  a  complete  period  T.  The  mean 
value  being  given  by 


the  last  term  in  (44)  disappears.  Indeed,  by  (47)  the  time  integral 
of  F2  is  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  values  of 

-  ^fsdS 

for  t  =  0  and  t  —  T,  and  these  values  are  equal  on  account  of  the 
periodicity  of  the  changes. 

Hence,  in  this  case  also,  the  resultant  force  is  reduced  to  surface- 
integrals,  or,  as  we  may  say,  to  stresses  in  the  ether. 

It  can  easily  be  shown  that  the  mean  value  of  F  (and  of 
periodically  changing  quantities  in  general)  during  a  lapse  of  time 
that  is  very  much  longer  than  a  period  T,  is  equal  to  the  mean 
value  during  a  period,  even  though  the  interval  considered  is  not 
exactly  a  multiple  of  T. 

21.  An  interesting  example  is  furnished  by  the  pressure  of 
radiation.  Let  (Fig.  1)  AB  be  a  plane  disk,  receiving  in  a  normal 

direction  a  beam  of  light  L,  which,  taking 
OX  in  the  direction  shown  in  the  diagram, 
we  can  represent  by  our  formulae  (7).  Let 
us  take  for  a  the  surface  of  the  flat  cylin- 
drical box  CDEF,  whose  plane  sides  lie 
before  and  behind  the  disk  and  are  parallel 
to  it.  Then,  if  the  plate  is  perfectly  opaque, 
we  have  only  to  consider  the  stress  on  CD. 
Kg.  i.  Moreover,  if  the  disk  is  supposed  to  be 

perfectly  black,  so  that  there  is  no  reflected 

beam,  there  is  only  the  electromagnetic  field  represented  by  the 
equations  (7).  Hence,  since  a  normal  to  the  plane  CD,  drawn 
towards  the  outside  of  the  box  CDEF,  has  a  direction  opposite 
to  that  of  OX,  the  force  acting  on  the  absorbing  body  in  the  direc- 
tion of  OX  per  unit  area  is  given  by 


J. 


RADIATION  PRESSURE.  29 

-X.-W  +  «-.•)> 
and  its  mean  value  by 

i«2- 

Comparing  this  with  the  value  of  the  energy  and  attending  to  the 
direction  of  the  force,  we  conclude  that  the  beam  of  light  produces 
a  normal  pressure  on  the  absorbing  body,  the  intensity  of  the  pressure 
per  unit  of  surface  being  numerically  equal  to  the  electromagnetic 
energy  which  the  beam  contains  per  unit  of  volume. 

The  same  method  can  be  applied  to  a  body  which  transmits 
and  reflects  a  certain  amount  of  light,  and  to  a  disk  on  which  a 
beam  of  light  falls  in  an  oblique  direction.  In  all  cases  in  which 
there  is  no  light  behind  the  disk,  the  force  in  the  direction  of  the 
normal  will  be  a  pressure  —  Xx  on  the  illuminated  side,  if  the  axis 
of  x  is  directed  as  stated  above. 

We  shall  apply  this  to  a  homogeneous  and  isotropic  state  of 
radiation,  existing  in  a  certain  space  that  is  enclosed  by  perfectly 
reflecting  walls.  By  homogeneous  and  isotropic  we  mean  that  the 
space  is  traversed  by  rays  of  light  or  heat  of  various  directions,  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  radiation  is  of  equal  intensity  in  different 
parts  of  the  space  and  in  all  directions,  and  that  all  directions  of  (I 
and  h  are  equally  represented  in  it.  It  can  easily  be  shown  that  in 
this  case  there  is  no  tangential  stress  on  an  element  ds  of  the  wall. 
As  to  the  normal  pressure,  which  is  represented  by  —  Xx,  if  the 
axis  of  x  is  made  to  coincide  with  the  normal,  we  may  write  for  it 


p 

where  the  horizontal  bars  are  intended  to  indicate  the  mean  values, 
over  the  space  considered,  of  the  several  terms.1)  But,  on  account 
of  our  assumptions  regarding  the  state  of  radiation, 


Each  of  these  quantities  is  therefore  equal  to  one  third  of  their  sum, 
i.  e.  to  -J-d2.     Similarly 

v-v-v^fP- 

Hence,  if  the  formulae  (40)  and  (41)  are  taken  into  account, 


In  this  case,  the  pressure  on  the  walls  per  unit  of  surface  is  equal 
to  one  third  of  the  electromagnetic  energy  per  unit  of  volume. 

Later  on,  the  problem  of  radiation  pressure  will  be  treated  by 
a  different  method. 

1)  Note  10. 


30         I.    GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

22.  Thus  far  we  have  simplified  the  equation  (44)  by  supposing 
the  last  term  to  vanish.     In  general,  however,  this  term  may  not  be 
omitted,   and   the   force  F  cannot   be  accounted  for  by   a   system  of 
stresses  acting  on  the  surface  6. 

This  conclusion  takes  a  remarkable  form,  if  the  surface  <?  is 
supposed  to  enclose  no  electrons  at  all.  Of  course,  the  total  force  F 
must  be  0  in  this  case,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  original  expression  (43). 
Nevertheless,  the  force  due  to  the  stresses  is  not  generally  0,  having 
the  value 

(51) 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  last  equation  is  quite  independent  of 
the  theory  of  electrons,  being  a  consequence  of  the  fundamental 
equations  for  the  case  p  =  0,  i.  e.  of  the  equations  for  the  free  ether. 
It  has  indeed  been  known  for  a  long  time.1) 

In  the  mind  of  Maxwell  and  of  many  writers  on  the  theory 
there  seems  to  have  been  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  the  real  existence 
of  the  ether  stresses  determined  by  the  formulae  (49)  and  (50). 
Considered  from  this  point  of  view,  the  equation  (51)  tells  us  that 
in  general  the  resultant  force  Ft  of  all  the  stresses  acting  on  a  part 
of  the  ether  will  not  be  0.  This  was  first  pointed  out  by  Helm- 
holtz.2)  He  inferred  from  it  that  the  ether  cannot  remain  at  rest, 
and  established  a  system  of  equations  by  which  its  motion  can  be 
determined.  I  shall  not  enter  upon  these,  because  no  experiment  has 
ever  shown  us  any  trace  of  a  motion  of  the  ether  in  an  electro- 
magnetic field. 

We  may  sum  up  by  saying  that  a  theory  which  admits  the 
existence  of  Maxwell's  stresses  leads  to  the  following  conclusions: 

1.  A  portion  of  the  ether  is  not  in  equilibrium  under  the  stresses 
acting  on  its  surface. 

2.  The    stresses    acting   on    the    elements    of    a    surface    which 
surrounds   a   ponderable   body   will,    in    general,    produce    a   resultant 
force   different  from   the  force  acting  on  the  electrons  of  the  body 
according  to  our  theory. 

23.  Having  got  thus  far,  we    may  take  two  different  courses. 
In  the   first   place,    bearing    in    mind  that   the   ether   is   undoubtedly 
widely  different  from  all  ordinary  matter,  we  may  make  the  assump- 
tion that   this    medium,    which    is   the    receptacle    of  electromagnetic 
energy  and  the  vehicle  for  many  and  perhaps  for  all  the  forces  acting 
on  ponderable  matter,  is,  by  its  very  nature,  never  put  in  motion, 

1)  Note  11. 

2)  Helmholtz,  Folgerungen  aus  Maxwell's  Theorie  fiber  die  Bewegungen 
des  reiuen  Athers,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  53  (1894),  p.  135. 


IMMOBILITY  OF  THE  ETHEK.  31 

that  it  has  neither  velocity  nor  acceleration,  so  that  we  have  no 
reason  to  speak  of  its  mass  or  of  forces  that  are  applied  to  it. 
From  this  point  of  view,  the  action  on  an  electron  must  be  con- 
sidered as  primarily  determined  by  the  state  of  the  ether  in  the 
interior  of  each  of  its  elements  of  volume,  and  the  equation  (43)  as 
the  direct  and  immediate  expression  for  it.  There  is  no  reason  at 
all  why  the  force  should  be  due  to  pressures  or  stresses  in  the  uni- 
versal medium.  If  we  exclude  the  idea  of  forces  acting  on  the  ether, 
we  cannot  even  speak  of  these  stresses,  because  they  would  be  forces 
exerted  by  one  part  of  the  ether  on  the  other. 

I  should  add  that,  while  thus  denying  the  real  existence  of 
ether  stresses,  we  can  still  avail  ourselves  of  all  the  mathematical 
transformations  by  which  the  application  of  the  formula  (43)  may 
be  made  easier.  We  need  not  refrain  from  reducing  the  force  to  a 
surface-  integral,  and  for  convenience's  sake  we  may  continue  to  apply 
to  the  quantities  occurring  in  this  integral  the  name  of  stresses. 
Only,  we  must  be  aware  that  they  are  only  imaginary  ones,  nothing 
else  than  auxiliary  mathematical  quantities. 

Perhaps  all  this  that  has  now  been  said  about  the  absolute 
immobility  of  the  ether  and  the  non-existence  of  the  stresses,  may 
seem  somewhat  startling.  If  it  is  thought  too  much  so,  one  may 
have  recourse  to  the  other  conception  to  which  I  have  alluded.  In 
choosing  this,  we  recognize  the  real  existence  of  Maxwell's  internal 
forces,  and  we  regard  the  ether  as  only  approximately  immovable. 

Let  us  admit  that  between  adjacent  parts  of  the  ether  there  is 
an  action  determined  by  the  equations  (48),  so  that  an  element  of 
volume  of  the  free  ether  experiences  a  force 


and  let  us  suppose  the  medium  to  move  in  such  a  way   that   it  has 
a  momentum 


(52) 

or  -^8  per  unit  of  volume.    Let  us  further  imagine  that  the  density 

of  the  ether  is  so  great  that  only  a  very  small  velocity,  too  small 
to  be  detected  by  any  means  at  our  disposal,  is  required  for  the 
momentum  (52).  Then,  the  formula  (51)  which,  applied  to  an 
element  of  the  ether,  takes  the  form 


tells  us  that  the  assumed  state  of  motion  can  really  exist.     This  is 
clear  because  for  very  small  velocities  the  resultant  force  acting  on 


32        I.   GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

the  ether  contained  in  a  fixed  element  of  volume  may  be  said  to  be 
equal  to  the  rate  of  change  of  the  momentum  that  is  found  within 
that  element.1) 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  an  element  dS  occupied  by 
a  charge,  the  formula 


may  be  interpreted  as  follows.  The  ether  within  the  element  is 
subject  to  a  force  F1?  due  to  the  stresses  on  the  surface.  Of  this 
force,  the  part 


goes  to  produce  the  change  of  momentum  of  the  ether,  the  remaining 
part  F  being  transferred  to  the  charge. 

You  will  readily  perceive  that,  after  all,  the  difference  between 
the  two  modes  of  view  consists  mainly  in  the  different  interpretations 
given  to  the  same  equations. 

24.  Whatever  may  be  our  opinion  about  the  questions  we  have 
now  touched  upon,  our  discussion  shows  the  importance  of  the  vector 


which  has  a  definite   direction  and  magnitude  for  every  element  of 
volume,  and  of  the  vector 

(53) 


that  may  be  derived  from  it  by  integration.  Abraham2)  of  Gottingen 
has  applied  to  these  quantities  the  name  of  electromagnetic  momentum. 
We  may  term  them  so,  even  if  we  do  not  wish  to  convey  the  idea 
that  they  represent  a  real  momentum,  as  they  would  according  to 
the  second  of  the  two  lines  of  thought  we  have  just  followed. 

The  way  in  which  the  conception  of  electromagnetic  momentum 
may  be  of  use  for  the  elucidation  of  electromagnetic  phenomena 
comes  out  most  clearly  if,  in  dealing  with  a  system  of  finite  dimen- 
sions, as  the  systems  in  our  experiments  actually  are,  we  make  the 
enclosing  surface  6  recede  on  all  sides  to  an  infinite  distance.  It 
may  be  shown  that  the  surface  -integrals  in  (45)  then  become  0,  so 
that,  if  the  integration  is  extended  to  all  space,  we  shall  have 

F  —  g, 


1)  Note  12. 

2)  M.  Abraham,   Prinzipien   der  Dynamik  des   Elektrons,   Ann.  Phys.  10 
(1903),  p.  105. 


RADIATION  PRESSURE.  33 

or  in  words:  the  force  exerted  by  the  ether  on  a  system  of  electrons, 
or,  as  we  may  say,  on  the  ponderable  matter  containing  these  elec- 
trons, is  equal  and  opposite  to  the  change  per  unit  of  time  of  the 
electromagnetic  momentum.  Now,  since  the  action  tends  to  produce 
a  change  equal  to  the  force  itself  in  the  momentum  (in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word)  of  the  ponderable  matter,  we  see  that  the  sum 
of  this  momentum  and  the  electromagnetic  one  will  not  be  altered 
by  the  actions  exerted  by  the  ether. 

Before  passing  on  to  one  or  two  applications,  I  must  call  your 
attention  to  the  intimate  connexion  between  the  momentum  and  the 
flow  of  energy  8.  The  equation  (53)  at  once  shows  us  that  every 
part  of  space  in  which  there  is  a  flow  of  energy  contributes  its  part 
to  the  vector  G;  hence,  in  order  to  form  an  idea  of  this  vector  and 
of  its  changes,  we  have  in  the  first  place  to  fix  our  attention  on  the 
radiation  existing  in  different  parts  of  space.  If,  in  course  of  time, 
the  flow  of  energy  reaches  new  parts  of  space  or  leaves  parts  in 
which  it  was  at  first  found,  this  will  cause  the  vector  G  to  change 
from  one  moment  to  another. 

It  must  also  be  kept  in  mind  that  (53)  is  a  vector  equation  and 
that  (54)  may  be  decomposed  into  three  formulae  giving  us  the 
components  Fx,  Fy,  fe  of  the  resultant  force. 

25.  Very  interesting  illustrations  of  the  preceding  theory  may 
be  taken  from  the  phenomena  of  radiation  pressure,  to  which  I  shall 
therefore  return  for  a  moment.  Let  us  consider,  for  example,  a  source 
of  light  sending  out  its  rays  in  a  single  direction,  which  may  be  brought 
about  by  suitable  arrangements,  and  let  us  suppose  this  radiation  to 
have  begun  at  a  certain  instant,  so  that  we  can  speak  of  the  first 
wave  or  of  the  front  of  the  train  of  waves  that  have  been  emitted. 
This  front  is  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  the  beam  and  advancing 
with  the  velocity  c.  Hence,  if  £  is  the  normal  section  of  the  beam, 
the  volume  occupied  by  the  radiation  increases  by  c'E  per  unit  of 
time.  As  we  have  seen,  the  flow  of  energy  has  the  direction  of  the 
beam.  In  making  the  following  calculation,  we  shall  reason  as  if, 
at  every  point,  the  flow  were  constantly  equal  to  the  mean  flow  8 
taken  for  a  full  period.  If  the  magnitude  of  this  mean  flow,  which 
relates  to  unit  of  area,  is  |  8  ,  we  shall  find  that  of  the  electro- 
magnetic momentum,  whose  direction  is  likewise  that  of  the  beam, 
if  we  multiply  -,-  .  8  by  the  volume  occupied  by  the  light.  It  appears 


, 

C 


from  this  that  the  change  of  G  per  unit  of  time  is 


consequently,  since  this  vector  has  the  direction  of  the  rays,  there 
will  be  a  force  on  the  source  of  light  of  the   same  intensity  and  in 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


34         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

a  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which  the  rays  are  emitted.  This 
force  of  recoil,  which,  however,  is  extremely  small,  may  be  compared 
with  the  reaction  that  would  exist  if  the  rays  of  light  consisted  of 
a  stream  of  material  particles.  By  similar  reasoning  we  can  deter- 
mine the  pressure  on  the  black  disk  we  have  formerly  considered. 
But,  in  this  case,  it  is  best  to  imagine  the  radiation  of  the  source 
to  have  been  stopped  at  a  certain  moment,  so  that  there  is  a  plane 
which  we  may  call  the  rear  of  the  progression  of  waves.  It  approaches 
the  black  disk  with  the  velocity  c,  and  if  2  and  |  s  |  have  the  same 
meaning  as  just  now,  the  magnitude  of  the  electromagnetic  momentum 
will  diminish  by 


per  unit  of  time.  Consequently,  there  will  be  a  normal  pressure  of 
this  intensity  acting  on  the  disk.  The  result  agrees  with  what  we 
have  deduced  from  the  value  of  the  stress  in  the  ether,  the  quantity 
|  8  being  related  to  the  amplitude  a  by  the  equation 


It  is  easy  to  extend  these  results  to  a  more  general  case.  Let  a 
plane  disk  receive,  from  any  direction  we  like,  a  beam  of  parallel  rays, 
and  let  one  part  of  these  be  reflected,  another  absorbed  and  the 
remaining  part  transmitted.  Let  the  vectors  8,  8'  and  s"  be  the 
flows  of  energy  per  unit  of  area  in  the  incident,  reflected  and  trans- 
mitted beams,  S,  s',  s"  the  mean  flows  taken  for  a  full  period, 
2,  £',  E"  the  normal  sections  of  the  beams.  Then,  if  we  imagine 
the  space  occupied  by  the  light  to  be  limited  by  two  fronts,  one  in 
the  reflected  and  one  in  the  transmitted  beam,  and  by  a  rear  plane 
in  the  incident  one,  all  these  planes  travelling  onward  with  the 
velocity  c,  the  change  of  electromagnetic  momentum  will  be  given 
by  the  vector  expression 


and  the  force  on  the  plate  by 


It  must  here  be  mentioned  that  the  radiation  pressure  has  been  ob- 
served by  Lebedew1)  and  by  E.  F.  Nichols  and  Hull2),  and  that 
the  theoretical  predictions  as  to  its  intensity  have  been  verified  to 
within  one  percent  by  the  measurements  of  the  last  named  physicists. 

1)  P.  Lebedew,   Untersuchungen  uber  die  Druckkrilfte   des  Licbtes,   Ann. 
Phys.  6  (1901),  p.  433. 

2)  E.    F.    Nichols    and    G.    F.    Hull,    The    pressure    due    to    radiation, 
Astrophysical  Journ.  17  (1903),  p.  315;    also  Ann.  Phys.  12  (1903),  p.  225. 


FIELD  OF  MOVING  ELECTRONS.  35 

26.  The  theory  of  electromagnetic  momentum,  which  we  have 
found  of  so  much  use  in  the  case  of  beams  of  light  that  are  emitted, 
reflected  or  absorbed  by  a  body,  is  also  applicable  to  the  widely 
different  case  of  a  moving  electron.  We  may  therefore,  without  too 
abrupt  a  transition,  turn  once  more  to  some  questions  belonging  to 
what  we  can  call  the  dynamics  of  an  electron,  and  in  which  we  are 
concerned  with  the  field  the  particle  produces  and  the  force  exerted 
on  it  by  the  ether.  We  shall  in  this  way  be  led  to  the  important 
subject  of  the  electromagnetic  mass  of  the  electrons. 

To  begin  with,  I  shall  say  some  words  about  the  field  of  a 
system  of  electrons  or  of  charges  distributed  in  any  way,  having  a 
constant  velocity  of  translation  w,  say  in  the  direction  of  the  axis 
of  x,  smaller  than  the  speed  of  light  c.  We  shall  introduce  axes  of 
coordinates  moving  with  the  system,  and  we  shall  simplify  our  for- 
mulae by  putting 

-f  =  ft.  (55) 

Now,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  field  is  carried  along  by  the 
system.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  potentials  <p  and  a,  which 
serve  to  determine  it,  and  it  may  easily  be  inferred  from  this1)  that 

the  values  of  -£  and  -r  -  in  a  fixed  point  of  space  are  given  by 

(}  f  0  v 

(jcp  dn 

Similarly 

Thus  the  equation  (31)  takes  the  form 

a/»q\  O    (p           0    £p           G    (p  /K.r*\ 

—  o   ) ""r~  ~T~ ~~"  —  O  (OO  J 

whereas  (32)  may  be  replaced  by  the  formula 

the  components  ay  and  az  being  both  0,  as  is  seen  directly  from  (36). 
Comparing  (56)  and  (57),  we  conclude  that 

a*  =  ftg>, 

so  that  we  have  only  to  determine  the  scalar  potential. 

This  can  be  effected  by  a  suitable  change  of  independent 
variables.  If  a  new  variable  x'  is  defined  by 

xr  =  (i  -  p)-  v*  *,  (5g) 

1)  Note  18. 

3* 


36         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.     THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

(56)  becomes 

^-L^l3p4.^__0 
8x*  +  a*/8  +  8z*  Q> 

having  the  well  known  form  of  Poisson's  equation.  Since  this 
equation  occurs  in  the  determination  of  the  field  for  charges  that 
are  at  rest,  the  problem  is  hereby  reduced  to  an  ordinary  problem 
of  electrostatics.  Only,  the  value  of  cp  in  our  moving  system  S  is 
connected  with  the  potential,  not  of  the  same  system  when  at  rest, 
but  of  a  system  in  which  all  the  coordinates  parallel  to  OX  have 
been  changed  in  the  ratio  determined  by  (58).1 ) 

The  result  may  be  expressed  as  follows.  Let  S'  be  a  system 
having  no  translation,  and  which  we  obtain  by  enlarging  the  dimen- 
sions of  S  in  the  direction  of  OX  in  the  ratio  of  1  to  (1  —  /32)~  . 
Then,  if  a  point  with  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z  in  S  and  a  point  with 
the  coordinates  x,  y,  z  in  S'  are  said  to  correspond  to  each  other, 
if  the  charges  of  corresponding  elements  of  volume  are  supposed  to 
be  equal,  and  if  <p'  is  the  potential  in  S',  the  scalar  potential  in  the 
moving  system  is  given  by 

^(i-^-'V-  (so) 

Let  us  now  take  for  the  moving  system  a  single  electron,  to  which 
we  shall  ascribe  the  form  of  a  sphere  with  radius  H  and  a  uniformly 
distributed  surface -charge  e.  The  corresponding  system  S'  is  an 
elongated  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  and  its  charge  happens  to  be  distri- 
buted according  to  the  law  that  holds  for  a  conductor  of  the  same 
form.  Therefore,  the  field  of  the  moving  spherical  particle  and  all 
the  quantities  belonging  to  it,  can  be  found  by  means  of  the  ordinary 
theory  of  a  charged  ellipsoid  that  is  given  in  many  treatises.  I  sh;ill 
only  mention  the  results  obtained  for  the  more  important  quantities. 
The  total  electric  energy  is  given  by 

3  — 138  ,       l-f-|3 

- 


(61) 
i_     r  r        -• 

and  the  magnetic  energy  by 

T  -  g^j  [-+  P-  log  ii-J  -  2]  •  (62) 

As  to  the  electromagnetic  momentum,  this  has  the  direction  of  the 
translation,  as  may  at  once  be  deduced  from  (53),  because  we  know 
already  that  the  general  direction  of  the  flow  of  energy  coincides 
with  that  of  the  motion  of  the  particle.  The  formula  for  the  magni- 
tude of  the  electromagnetic  momentum,  calculated  for  the  first  time 
by  Abraham,  is 

G 

1)  Note  14. 


FORCE  ON  AN  ELECTRON,  DUE  TO  ITS  OWN  FIELD.  37 

All  these  values  U,  T,  j  G  |  increase  when  the  velocity  is  augmented. 
They  become  infinite  for  ft  =  1,  i.  e.  when  the  electron  reaches  a 
velocity  equal  to  that  of  light.1) 

27.  According  to  our  fundamental  assumptions,  each  element  of 
volume  of  an  electron  experiences  a  force  due  to  the  field  produced 
by  the  particle  itself,  and  the  question  now  arises  whether  there  will 
be  any  resultant  force  acting  on  the  electron  as  a  whole.  The  con- 
sideration of  the  electromagnetic  momentum  will  enable  us  to  decide 
this  question. 

If  the  velocity  w  is  constant  in  magnitude  and  direction,  as  it 
has  been  supposed  to  be  in  what  precedes,  the  vector  G  will  likewise 
be  constant  and  there  will  be  no  resultant  force.  This  is  very  im- 
portant; it  shows  that,  if  free  from  all  external  forces,  an  electron, 
just  like  a  material  point,  will  move  with  constant  velocity,  notwith- 
standing the  presence  of  the  surrounding  ether.  In  all  other  cases 
however  there  is  an  action  of  the  medium. 

It  must  be  observed  that,  in  the  case  of  a  variable  velocity,  the 
above  formulae  for  U,  T  and  G  do  not,  strictly  speaking,  hold. 
However,  if  the  variation  of  the  state  of  motion  is  so  slow  that  the 

-D 

change  taking  place  in  a  time  —  may  be  neglected,  one  may  apply  the 

formula  (63)  for  every  moment,  and  use  it  to  determine  the  change  6 
of  the  momentum  per  unit  of  time.8)  As  the  result  depends  on  the 
acceleration  of  the  electron,  the  force  exerted  by  the  ether  is  like- 
wise determined  by  the  acceleration. 

Let  us  first  take  the  case  of  a  rectilinear  translation  with 
variable  velocity  w.  The  vector  G  is  directed  along  the  line  of 
motion,  and  its  magnitude  'is  given  by 


dt  die  f,     dp 

Putting 

•»  '   **  1       Jt  \  O  [ 

id4fi  =  m',  (64) 


dw          c     dp 

we  conclude  that  there  is  a  force  acting  on  the  electron,  opposite  to 
its  acceleration  and  equal  to  the  product  of  the  latter  and  the 
coefficient  m. 

In  the  second  place,  I  shall  consider  an  electron  having  a 
velocity  W  of  constant  magnitude,  but  of  varying  direction.  The 
acceleration  is  then  normal  to  the  path  and  it  is  convenient  to  use 
vector  equations.  Let  W  be  the  velocity,  W  the  acceleration,  and 


1)  Note  15.        2)  See  8  37. 


38         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

let  us  take  into  account  that  in  this  case  there  is  a  constant  ratio 
between     G    and    w      for  which  I  shall  write 


We  have  also 

G  =  m"w, 

and  the  force  exerted  by  the  ether  is  given  by 

-G  =    -m"w. 

It  is  opposite  in  direction  to  the  normal  acceleration  W  and  has  an 
intensity  equal  to  the  product  of  this  acceleration  with  the  coeffi- 
cient m". 

In  the  most  general  case  the  acceleration  j  will  be  directed 
neither  along  the  path  nor  normally  to  it.  If  we  decompose  it  into 
two  components,  the  one  j'  in  the  line  of  motion  and  the  other  j" 
at  right  angles  to  it,  we  shall  have,  for  the  force  on  the  electron 
due  to  its  own  electromagnetic  field,  in  vector  notation1) 

-  m'\'  -  m"\".  (66) 

28.  The  way  in  which  these  formulae  are  usually  interpreted 
will  become  clear  to  us,  if  we  suppose  the  electron  to  have  a  certain 
mass  m0  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  and  to  be  acted  on,  not 
only  by  the  force  that  is  due  to  its  own  field,  but  also  by  a  force  K 
of  any  other  kind.  The  total  force  being 

K  —  m'\  —  m"\", 

the  equation  of  motion,  expressed  in  the  language  of  vector  analysis, 
will  be 

K-ro'J'-»»T==»»o 
Instead  of  this  we  can  write 


from  which  it  appears  that  the  electron  moves,  as  if  it  had  two  different 
masses  m0  +  m'  and  m0  +  m"  ,  the  first  of  which  comes  into  play 
when  we  are  concerned  with  an  acceleration  in  the  line  of  motion, 
and  the  second  when  we  consider  the  normal  acceleration.  By 
measuring  the  force  K  and  the  accelerations  j'  and  j"  in  different 
cases,  we  can  determine  both  these  coefficients.  We  shall  call 
them  the  effective  masses,  m0  the  material  mass,  and  m',  m"  the 
electromagnetic  masses.  In  order  to  distinguish  m  and  m",  we  can 
apply  the  name  of  longitudinal  electromagnetic  mass  to  the  first,  and 

1)  Note  16. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  MASS  OF  AN  ELECTRON.        39 

that    of   transverse    electromagnetic    mass    to    the    second    of    these 
coefficients.1) 

From  what  has  been  said  one  finds  the  following  formulae  for 
m    and  m": 


m  -  - 


or,  expanded  in  series, 


For  small  velocities  the  two  masses  have  the  same  value 


whereas  for  larger  velocities  the  longitudinal  mass  always  surpasses 
the  transverse  one.  Both  increase  with  /3,  until  for  /3  =  1  ,  i.  e.  for 
a  velocity  equal  to  the  speed  of  light,  they  become  infinite. 

If,  for  a  moment,  we  confine  ourselves  to  a  rectilinear  motion 
of  an  electron,  the  notion  of  electromagnetic  mass  can  be  derived 
from  that  of  electromagnetic  energy.  Indeed,  this  latter  is  larger  for 
a  moving  electron  than  for  one  that  is  at  rest.  Therefore,  if  we  are 
to  put  the  particle  in  motion  by  an  external  force  K,  we  must  not 
only  produce  the  ordinary  kinetic  energy  ^m0w2  but,  in  addition  to 
this,  the  part  of  the  electromagnetic  energy  that  is  due  to  the  velo- 
city. The  effect  of  the  field  will  therefore  be  that  a  larger  amount 
of  work  is  required  than  if  we  had  to  do  with  an  ordinary  material 
particle  #»0;  it  will  be  just  the  same  as  if  the  mass  were  larger 
than  m0. 

By  reasoning  of  this  kind  we  can  also  easily  verify  the  for- 
mula (68).  If  the  velocity  is  changing  very  slowly,  we  may  at  every 
instant  apply  the  formulae  (61)  and  (62).  Since  the  total  energy 
T  -\-  U  is  a  function  of  the  velocity  tv,  its  rate  of  change  is  given  by 


LW=  ^   ^J-  —  w.  (73) 

dw  d$         c 

This  must  be  equal  to  the  work  done  per  unit  of  time  by  the  moving 
force,  or  rather  by  the  part  of  it  that  is  required  on  account  of  the 

1)  The  notion  of  (longitudinal)  electromagnetic  mass  was  introduced  for 
the  first  time  by  J.  J.  Thomson  in  his  paper  ,,0n  the  electric  and  magnetic 
effects  produced  by  the  motion  of  electrified  bodies",  Phil.  Mag.  (6)  11  (1881), 
p.  227.  The  result  of  his  calculation  is,  however,  somewhat  different  from  that 
to  which  one  is  led  in  the  modern  theory  of  electrons. 


40         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

electromagnetic  field.  Consequently,  dividing  (73)  by  w,  we  find  the 
intensity  of  this  part,  and  if  next  we  divide  by  w,  the  acceleration, 
the  result  must  be  the  longitudinal  electromagnetic  mass.  If  one 

calculates 

,        1   d(T+U)_  _l_d_(r+_Z7) 

~  cw     ap         /Jcs~    <//* 

by  means  of  the  formulae  (61)  and  (62),  one  really  finds  exactly  the 
value  (68). 

29.  A  close  analogy  to  this  question  of  electromagnetic  mass 
is  furnished  by  a  simple  hydrodynamical  problem.  A  solid,  per- 
fectly smooth  sphere,  moving  with  the  velocity  W  in  an  incom- 
pressible perfect  fluid  which  extends  on  all  sides  to  infinite  distance, 
produces  in  this  fluid  a  state  of  motion  characterized  by  a  kinetic 
energy  for  which  we  may  write 


if  a  is  a  constant,  depending  on  the  radius  of  the  ball  and  on  the 
density  of  the  fluid.  Under  the  influence  of  an  external  force  applied 
to  the  ball  in  the  direction  of  the  translation,  its  velocity  will  change 
as  if  it  had,  not  only  its  true  mass  m0,  but  besides  this  an  apparent 
mass  m  ',  whose  value  is  given  by 

'_    *      dT 

~  W  djwl  "   tt> 

•A  formula  corresponding  to  the  last  equation  of  §  28. 

We  could  have  obtained  the  same  result  if  we  had  first  calculated 
the  momentum  of  the  fluid.     We  should  have  found  for  it 


an    expression   from    which   we    can    also    infer   that   the    transverse 
apparent  mass  has  the  same  value  a  as  the  longitudinal  one. 
This  is  shown  by  the  equation 

"          G 

m  =kr 

3O.  If,  in  the  case  of  the  ball  moving  in  the  perfect  fluid,  we 
were  obliged  to  confine  ourselves  to  experiments  in  which  we  measure 
the  external  forces  applied  to  the  body  and  the  accelerations  produced 
by  them,  we  should  be  able  to  determine  the  effective  mass  »wc  +  m 
(or  ma  +  m"},  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  the  values  of  m0 
and  m  (or  m"}  separately.  Now,  it  is  very  important  that,  in  the 
experimental  investigation  of  the  motion  of  an  electron,  we  can  go 
a  step  farther.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  electromagnetic  mass 
is  not  a  constant,  but  increases  with  the  velocity. 


RATIO  OF  THE  CHAEGE  TO  THE  MASS  OF  AN  ELECTRON.         41 

Suppose  we  can  make  experiments  for  two  different  known 
velocities  of  an  electron,  and  that  by  this  means  we  can  find  the 
ratio  fc  between  the  effective  transverse  masses  which  come  into  play 
in  the  two  cases.  Let  x  be  the  ratio  between  the  electromagnetic 
transverse  masses,  calculated,  as  can  really  be  done,  by  the  formula  (69). 
Then,  distinguishing  by  the  indices  /  and  II  the  quantities  relating 
to  the  two  cases,  we  shall  have  the  formulae 


I  f  J 

»w0  +  mn  mn 

and   the    ratio   between  the    true  mass  m0   and   the   electromagnetic 
mass  m'i  will  be  given  by 


w0          x  —  k 

If  the  experimental  ratio  Ic  differed  very  little  from  the  ratio  >c  that 
is  given  by  the  formula  (69),  m0  would  come  out  much  smaller 
than  m'j  and  we  should  even  have  to  put  m0  =  0,  if  k  were  exactly 
equal  to  x. 

I  have  spoken  here  of  the  transverse  electromagnetic  mass,  because 
this  is  the  one  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  experiments  I 
shall  now  have  to  mention. 

31.  You  all  know  that  the  cathode  rays  and  the  /?-rays  of 
radio-active  bodies  are  streams  of  negative  electrons,  and  that  Gold- 
stein's canal  rays  and  the  «-rays  consist  of  similar  streams  of 
positively  charged  particles.  In  all  these  cases  it  has  been  found 
possible  to  determine  the  ratio  between  the  numerical  values  of  the 
charge  of  a  particle  and  its  transverse  effective  mass.  The  chief 
method  by  which  this  has  been  achieved  is  based  on  the  measure- 
ment, for  the  same  kind  of  rays,  of  the  deflections  from  their  recti- 
linear course  that  are  produced  by  known  external  electric  and 
magnetic  forces. 

The  theory  of  the  method  is  very  simple.  If,  in  the  first  place, 
an  electron  having  a  charge  e  and  an  effective  mass  TO,  moves  in  an 
electric  field  d,  with  a  velocity  w  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force, 

the  acceleration  is  given  by  -  -;   hence,  if  r  is  the  radius  of  curvature 

of  the  path, 

w^       <•  i  d  ] 
r          m   ' 

so  that,  if  |  d  |  and  r  have  been  measured,  we  can  calculate  the 
value  of 


42         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

Let  us  consider  in  the  second  place  an  electron  moving  in  a  magnetic 
field  h,  and  let  us  suppose  the  velocity  w  to  be  perpendicular  to  the 

magnetic  force.    Then,  the  field  will  exert  on  the  particle  a  force  -     — , 

as  is  seen  from  the  last  term  of  (23).    This  force  being  perpendicular 
to  the  velocity,  we  shall  have,  writing  r   for  the  radius  of  curvature 

of  the  path, 

w*      ew   h 


r  cm 


The  determination  of  |  h     and  r   can  therefore  lead   to  a  knowledge 
of  the  expression 


and,  by  combining  this  with  (74),  we  shall  be  enabled  to  find  both  w 


and  — 
m 


32.  I  shall  not  speak  of  the  large  number  of  determinations  of 
this  kind  that  have  been  made  by  several  physicists,  and  will  only  say 
a  few  words  relative  to  the  important  work  of  Kaufmann1)  on  the  /?- 
rays  of  radium.  These  rays  appear  to  contain  negative  electrons  with 
widely  different  velocities,  so  that  it  is  possible  to  examine  the  question 

whether  —  is  a  function  of  the  velocity  or  a  constant.    Kaufmann's 
m 

experiments  were  arranged  in  such  a  manner  that  the  electric  and 
the  magnetic  deflection,  belonging  to  the  same  electrons,  could  be 

measured,  so  that  the  values  both  of  w  and  of  —  could  be  deduced 
from  them.  Now,  it  was  found  that,  while  the  velocity  w  ranges  from 

Q 

about  0,5  to  more  than  0,9  of  the  velocity  of  light,  the  value  of 
diminishes  considerably.     If  we  suppose  the  charge  to   be  equal  for 
all  the  negative  electrons  constituting  the  rays,  this  diminution  of  — 

must  be  due  to  an  increase  of  the  mass  m.  This  proves  that  at  all 
events  the  electromagnetic  mass  has  an  appreciable  influence.  It  must 
even  greatly  predominate.  Indeed,  Kaufmann's  numbers  show  no 
trace  of  an  influence  of  the  material  mass  m0,  his  ratio  k  of  effective 
masses  for  two  different  velocities  (a  ratio  which  is  the  inverse  of 

that  of  the  values  of  — )  agreeing  within  the  limits  of  experimental 

errors  with  the  ratio  x  between  the  electromagnetic  masses,  as  deduced 
from  Abraham's  formula  (69). 


1)  W.   Kaufmann,    Uber  die   Konstitution   des  Elektrons,   Ann.  Phys.  19 
(1906),  p.  487. 


MASS  OF  A  NEGATIVE  ELECTRON  WHOLLY  ELECTROMAGNETIC.    43 

Of  course,  we  are  free  to  believe,  if  we  like,  that  there  is  some 
small  material  mass  attached  to  the  electron,  say  equal  to  one 
hundredth  part  of  the  electromagnetic  one,  but  with  a  view  to 
simplicity,  it  will  be  best  to  admit  Kaufmann's  conclusion,  or  hypo- 
thesis, if  we  prefer  so  to  call  it,  that  the  negative  electrons  have  no 
material  mass  at  all. 

This  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  important  results  of  modem 
physics,  and  I  may  therefore  be  allowed  to  dwell  upon  it  for  a  short 
time  and  to  mention  two  other  ways  in  which  it  can  be  expressed. 
We  may  say  that,  in  the  case  of  a  moving  negative  electron,  there 
is  no  energy  of  the  ordinary  form  l-m0tv2,  but  merely  the  electro- 
magnetic energy  T  +  U,  which  may  be  calculated  by  means  of  the 
formulae  (61)  and  (62).  For  high  velocities  this  energy  is  a  rather 
complicated  function  of  the  velocity,  and  it  is  only  for  velocities 
very  small  compared  with  that  of  light,  that  the  part  of  it  which 
depends  on  the  motion,  can  be  represented  by  the  expression  \m'w3, 
where  m  has  the  value  given  by  (72).  This  is  found  by  expanding 
T+  U  in  a  series  similar  to  (70)  and  (71). 

We  obtain  another  remarkable  form  of  our  result,  if  in  the 
equation  of  motion  (67),  which  for  m0  =  0  becomes 

K  -  m'\  -  m"\"  =  0, 

we  attach  to  the  two  last  terms  their  original  meaning  of  forces 
exerted  by  the  ether.  The  equation  tells  us  that  the  total  force 
acting  on  the  particle  is  always  0.  An  electron,  for  example,  which 
has  an  initial  velocity  in  an  external  electromagnetic  field,  will  move 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  force  due  to  the  external  field  is  exactly 
counterbalanced  by  the  force  that  is  called  forth  by  the  electron's 
own  field,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  that  the  force  exerted 
by  the  resulting  field  is  0. 

After  all,  by  our  negation  of  the  existence  of  material  mass,  the 
negative  electron  has  lost  much  of  its  substantiality.  We  must  make 
it  preserve  just  so  much  of  it,  that  we  can  speak  of  forces  acting 
on  its  parts,  and  that  we  can  consider  it  as  maintaining  its  form  and 
magnitude.  This  must  be  regarded  as  an  inherent  property,  in  virtue 
of  which  the  parts  of  the  electron  cannot  be  torn  asunder  by  the 
electric  forces  acting  on  them  (or  by  their  mutual  repulsions,  as  we 
may  say). 

33.  In  our  preceding  reasoning  we  have  admitted  the  equality 
of  the  charges  of  all  the  negative  electrons  given  off  by  the  radium 
salt  that  has  been  used  in  Kaufmann's  experiments.  We  shall  now 
pass  on  to  a  wide  generalization  of  this  hypothesis. 


44         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

As  is  well  known,  Faraday's  law  of  electrolysis  proves  that  all 
monovalent  electrolytic  ions  have  exactly  equal  charges,  and  that, 
if  this  is  denoted  by  e,  the  charges  of  bivalent,  trivalent  ions  etc. 
are  2e,  3e  etc.  Thus  the  conception  has  arisen  that  this  e,  say  the 
charge  of  an  ion  of  hydrogen,  is  the  smallest  quantity  of  electricity 
that  ever  occurs  in  physical  phenomena,  an  atom  of  electricity,  as 
we  may  call  it,  which  can  only  present  itself  in  whole  numbers. 
Experimental  determinations  by  J.  J.  Thomson1)  of  the  charges 
carried  by  the  ions  in  conducting  gases,  and  certain  speculations  about 
the  electrons  which  are  vibrating  in  a  body  traversed  by  a  beam  of 
light,  have  made  it  highly  probable  that  this  same  amount  of  charge  e 
occurs  in  these  cases,  that  it  is,  so  to  say,  a  real  natural  unit  of 
electricity,  and  that  all  charged  particles,  all  electrons  and  ions  carry 
one  such  unit  or  a  multiple  of  it.  The  negative  electrons  which 
constitute  the  /3-rays  and  the  cathode  rays  are  undoubtedly  the 
simplest  of  all  these  charged  particles,  and  there  are  good  reasons  for 
supposing  their  charge  to  be  equal  to  one  unit  of  electricity,  i.  e.  to 
the  charge  of  an  ion  of  hydrogen. 

Leaving  aside  the  case  of  multiple  charges,  and  ascribing  to  all 
electrons  or  ions,  whether  they  be  positive  or  negative,  the  same 
amount  of  electricity,  we  can  say  that  the  masses  m  of  different 
particles  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  values  that  have  been  found 

f       e 
for  — 
m 

Now,  for  the  negative  electrons  of  the  cathode  rays  and  of  the 
/3-rays,  this  latter  value  is,  for  small  velocities2) 


1,8 

For  an  ion  of  hydrogen,  the  corresponding  number  can  be  drawn 
from  the  electrochemical  equivalent  of  the  gas.  It  is  found  to  be 

9650.6/4*:, 

nearly  1900  times  -smaller  than  the  number  for  the  free  negative 
electrons.  Hence,  the  mass  of  a  negative  electron  is  about  the  1900th 
part  of  that  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen. 


1)  See  J.  J.  Thomson,    Conduction   of  electricity  through  gases,  and  The 
corpuscular  theory  of  matter,  London,  1907,  by  the  same  author. 

2)  I  write  it  in  this  form  in  order  to   show  that  the  number  is  1,8-  10", 
if  the  ordinary  electromagnetic  units  are  used.    It  may  be  mentioned  here  that 
Simon's   measurements  on   cathode  rays  [Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  69  (1899),  p.  589] 
lead  to  the  value  1,878  •  10',   and  that  Kaufmann,   calculating  his   results  by 
means  of  Abraham's  formulae,  finds  1,823  •  107.     Later  experiments  on  j3-rays 
by    Bestelmeyer    [Ann.  Phys.  22   (1907),    p.  429],    however,    have    given    the 
number  1,72  •  10'. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  THEORY  OF  MATTER.  45 


It  must  be  noticed  especially  that  the  values  of  e  obtained  for 
different  negative  electrons  are  approximately  equal.  This  lends  a 
strong  support  to  the  view  that  all  negative  electrons  are  equal  to 
each  other.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  great  differences  between  the 
positive  electrons,  such  as  we  find  in  the  canal  rays  and  the  a- rays 

of  radio-active  substances.     The  values  of  --  belonging  to  these  rays 

are  widely  divergent.  They  are  however  all  of  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  as  the  values  holding  for  electrolytic  ions.  Consequently, 
the  masses  of  the  positive  electrons  must  be  comparable  with  those  of 
chemical  atoms.  We  can  therefore  imagine  the  free  electrons  to  be 
the  product  of  a  disintegration  of  atoms,  of  a  division  into  a  positively 
and  a  negatively  charged  particle,  the  first  having  nearly  the  whole 
mass  of  the  atom,  and  the  second  only  a  very  small  part  of  it. 

34.  Of  late  the  question  has  been  much  discussed,  as  to  whether 
the  idea  that  there  is  no  material  but  only  electromagnetic  mass,  which, 
in  the  case  of  negative  electrons,  is  so  strongly  supported  by  Kauf- 
mann's  results,  may  not  be  extended  to  positive  electrons  and  to 
matter  in  general.  On  this  subject  of  an  electromagnetic  theory  of 
matter  we  might  observe  that,  if  we  suppose  atoms  to  contain  negative 
electrons,  of  which  one  or  more  may  be  given  off  under  certain 
circumstances,  as  they  undoubtedly  are,  and  if  the  part  that  remains 
after  the  loss  of  a  negative  particle  is  called  a  positive  electron,  then 
certainly  all  matter  may  be  said  to  be  made  up  of  electrons.  But 
this  would  be  mere  words.  What  we  really  want  to  know  is, 
whether  the  mass  of  the  positive  electron  can  be  calculated  from  the 
distribution  of  its  charge  in  the  same  way  as  we  can  determine  the 
mass  of  a  negative  particle.  This  remains,  I  believe,  an  open  question, 
about  which  we  shall  do  well  to  speak  with  some  reserve. 

In  a  more  general  sense,  I  for  one  should  be  quite  willing  to 
adopt  an  electromagnetic  theory  of  matter  and  of  the  forces  between 
material  particles.  As  regards  matter,  many  arguments  point  to  the 
conclusion  that  its  ultimate  particles  always  carry  electric  charges 
and  that  these  are  not  merely  accessory  but  very  essential.  We 
should  introduce  what  seems  to  me  an  unnecessary  dualism,  if  we 
considered  these  charges  and  what  else  there  may  be  in  the  particles 
as  wholly  distinct  from  each  other. 

On  the  other  hand,  I  believe  every  physicist  feels  inclined  to  the 
view  that  all  the  forces  exerted  by  one  particle  on  another,  all 
molecular  actions  and  gravity  itself,  are  transmitted  in  some  way  by 
the  ether,  so  that  the  tension  of  a  stretched  rope  and  the  elasticity 
of  an  iron  bar  must  find  their  explanation  in  what  goes  on  in  the 


46         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

ether  between  the  molecules.  Therefore,  since  we  can  hardly  admit 
that  one  and  the  same  medium  is  capable  of  transmitting  two  or 
more  actions  by  wholly  different  mechanisms,  all  forces  may  be  re- 
garded as  connected  more  or  less  intimately  with  those  which  we 
study  in  electromagnetism. 

For  the  present,  however,  the  nature  of  this  connexion  is  entirely 
unknown  to  us  and  we  must  continue  to  speak  of  many  kinds  of 
forces  without  in  the  least  being  able  to  account  for  their  origin. 
We  shall  even  be  obliged  to  subject  the  negative  electrons  to  certain 
forces,  about  whose  mode  of  action  we  are  in  the  dark.  Such  are,  for 
example,  the  forces  by  which  the  electrons  in  a  ponderable  dielectric 
are  driven  back  to  their  positions  of  equilibrium,  and  the  forces  that 
come  into  play  when  an  electron  moving  in  a  piece  of  metal  has 
its  course  changed  by  an  impact  against  a  metallic  atom. 

35.  The  universal  unit  of  electricity  of  which  we  have  spoken 
can  be  evaluated  as  soon  as  we  have  formed  an  estimate  of  the 
mass  of  the  chemical  atoms.  This  has  been  done  fairly  well  in 
different  ways,  and  we  shall  not  be  far  from  the  truth  if  we  take 

1,3-  10-  24  gramm 

for  the  mass  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen.  Combining  this  with  the 
electrochemical  equivalent  of  this  element,  which  in  our  units  is 

0,0001036 
—  •?=—,  we  nnd  lor  the  charge  or  an  ion  of  hydrogen 


This  number  must   also   represent  the  charge  of  a  negative  electron. 
Therefore,  the  value  of  -  (for  small  velocities)  being 

1,8- 


we  find 

m  =  7  •  10~28  gramm. 

Now,  this  must  be  the  mass  given  by  the  formula  (72).  Substituting 
also  the  value  of  e,  we  get  the  following  number  for  the  radius 

R=  1,5-10-13  cm. 

We  may  compare  this  with  the  estimates  that  have  been  formed  in 
the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  The  distance  of  neighboring  molecules 
in  the  atmospheric  air  is  probably  about 

3  •  10-'  cm 

and  the  diameter  of  a  molecule  of  hydrogen  may  be  taken  to  be 

2  •  10-  8  cm. 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  MASS  OF  A  SYSTEM  OP  ELECTRONS.    47 

You  see  that,  compared  with  these  lengths,  the  electron  is  quite 
microscopical.  Probably  it  is  even  much  smaller  than  a  single  atom, 
so  that,  if  this  contains  a  certain  number  of  negative  electrons,  these 
may  be  likened  to  spheres  placed  at  distances  from  each  other  that 
are  high  multiples  of  their  diameters. 

36.  Before  closing  our  discussion  on  the  subject  of  electro- 
magnetic mass,  I  must  call  your  attention  to  the  question  as  to  whether, 
in  a  system  composed  of  a  certain  number  of  electrons,  the  electro- 
magnetic mass  is  the  sum  of  the  electromagnetic  masses  of  the 
separate  particles,  or,  as  I  shall  rather  put  it,  whether,  if  the  system 
moves  with  a  common  velocity  of  translation,  the  electromagnetic 
energy,  in  so  far  as  it  depends  on  the  motion,  can  be  made  up  of  parts, 
each  belonging  to  one  electron,  so  that,  for  small  velocities,  it  can 
be  represented  by 


This  will,  of  course,  be  the  case,  if  the  electrons  are  so  far  apart  that 
their  fields  may  be  said  not  to  overlap.  If,  however,  two  electrons 
were  brought  into  immediate  contact,  the  total  energy  could  not 
be  found  by  an  addition,  for  the  simple  reason,  that,  being  a 
quadratic  function  of  d  and  h,  the  energy  due  to  the  superposition 
of  two  fields  is  not  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  energies  which  would 
be  present  in  each  of  the  two,  if  it  existed  by  itself. 

We  have  now  to  bethink  ourselves  of  the  extreme  smallness  of 
the  electrons.  It  is  clear  that  the  larger  part  of  the  electromagnetic 
energy  belonging  to  a  particle  will  be  found  in  a  very  small  part  of 
the  field  lying  quite  near  it,  within  a  distance  from  the  centre  that 
is  a  moderate  multiple  of  the  radius.  Therefore,  it  may  very  well  be 
that  a  number  of  electrons  are  so  widely  dispersed  that  the  effective 
parts  of  their  fields  lie  completely  outside  each  other.  In  such  a 
case  the  system  may  be  said  to  have  an  electromagnetic  mass  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  individual  electrons. 

Yet  there  are  important  cases  in  which  we  are  not  warranted  in 
asserting  this.  In  order  to  make  this  clear,  I  shall  call  f\  the  part  of 
the  field  of  an  electron  which  lies  nearest  to  the  particle,  and  Fa  the 
more  distant  part,  the  surface  of  separation  between  the  two  being  a 
sphere  whose  radius  is  rather  large  in  comparison  with  that  of  the 
electron.  Then,  if  the  electron  is  taken  by  itself,  the  part  El  of  the 
energy  contained  within  I\  far  surpasses  the  energy  E%  which  has  its 
seat  in  I\.  Now,  if  we  have  N  electrons  at  such  distances  from  each 
other  that  their  fields  F^  do  not  overlap,  we  shall  have  to  add  to 
each  other  the  amounts  of  energy  Ev  The  quantities  Ea  on  the 
contrary  must  not  be  simply  added,  for  the  remoter  fields  F2  will 
certainly  cover,  partly  at  least,  the  same  space  8.  If,  in  this  space, 


48         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

the  dielectric  displacements  or  the  magnetic  forces  due  to  the  indi- 
vidual elestrons  have  directions  mating  rather  small  angles  with  each 
other,  all  the  fields  Fs,  feeble  though  they  are,  may  very  well  pro- 
duce a  resulting  field  of  appreciable  energy.  We  have  an  example  of 
this  in  the  electric  field  of  a  charged  conductor,  and  in  the  magnetic 
field  around  a  wire  carrying  a  current.  The  energy  of  this  magnetic 
field  may  be  shown  to  be,  in  very  common  cases,  considerably  larger 
than  the  sum  of  all  the  amounts  of  energy  which  I  have  called  Elf 
at  least  in  as  much  as  these  depend  on  the  motion  of  the  electrons. 
The  possibility  of  this  will  be  readily  understood,  if  one  thinks  of 
the  extreme  case  that,  at  a  point  of  the  space  S,  all  electrons  produce 
a  magnetic  force  in  exactly  the  same  direction.  Then,  if  each  of  these 
forces  has  the  magnitude  h  j ,  the  resultant  magnetic  force  has  the 
magnitude  N  \  h  ! ,  so  that  the  magnetic  energy  per  unit  of  volume 
becomes  ^2V3h2.  This  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  number  N 
which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  very  large.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
sum  of  the  quantities  Ev  may  be  reckoned  to  be  proportional  to  the 
first  power  of  N. 

This  digression  was  necessary  in  order  to  point  out  the  connexion 
between  the  electromagnetic  mass  of  electrons  and  the  phenomena  of 
self-induction.  In  these  latter  it  is  the  magnetic  energy  due  to  the 
overlapping  of  the  feeble  fields  _F2  that  makes  itself  felt.  In  dealing 
with  effects  of  induction  we  can  very  well  speak  of  the  electro- 
magnetic inertia  of  the  current,  or  of  the  electromagnetic  mass  of  the 
electrons  moving  in  it,  but  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  this  mass  is 
very  much  larger  than  the  sum  of  those  we  should  associate  with 
the  separate  particles.  This  large  value  is  brought  about  (as  are  all 
effects  of  the  current)  by  the  cooperation  of  an  immense  number  of 
electrons  of  the  same  kind  moving  in  the  same  direction.1) 

37.  In  our  treatment  of  the  electromagnetic  mass  of  electrons 
we  have  started  from  the  expression  (66)  for  the  force  to  which  an 
electron  is  subjected  on  account  of  its  own  field.  However,  this  ex- 
pression is  not  quite  exact.  It  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the 
equation  (63)  may  be  applied  to  a  case  of  non-uniform  motion,  and 
we  observed  already  that  this  may  be  done  only  if  the  state  of  motion 
changes  very  little  during  the  time  an  electromagnetic  disturbance 
would  take  to  travel  over  a  distance  equal  to  the  dimensions  of  the 
electron.  This  amounts  to  saying  that,  if  I  is  one  of  these  dimen- 
sions, and  r  a  time  during  which  the  state  of  motion  is  sensibly 
altered,  the  quantity 


must  be  very  small. 
1)  Note  17. 


(75) 

CT 


RESISTANCE  TO  THE  MOTION.  49 

In  reality,  the  force  (66)  is  only  the  first  term  of  a  series  in 
which,  compared  with  the  preceding  one,  each  term  is  of  the  order 
of  magnitude  (75). 

In  some  phenomena  the  next  term  of  the  series  makes  itself  felt; 
it  is  therefore  necessary  to  indicate  its  value.  By  a  somewhat  la- 
borious calculation  it  is  found  to  be 

i^V,  (76) 

where  the  vector  V  is  twice  differentiated  with  respect  to  the  time. 
I  may  mention  by  the  way  that  this  formula  holds  for  any  distri- 
bution of  the  electric  charge  e.1) 

In  many  cases  the  new  force  represented  by  (76)  may  be  termed 
a  resistance  to  the  motion.  This  is  seen,  if  we  calculate  the  work  of 
the  force  during  an  interval  of  time  extending  from  I  =  ^  to  t  =  t3. 
The  result  is 


Here  the  first  term  disappears  if,  in  the  case  of  a  periodic  motion, 
the  integration  is  extended  to  a  full  period;  also,  if  at  the  instants  tl 
and  t2  either  the  velocity  or  the  acceleration  is  0.  We  have  an 
example  of  the  latter  case  in  those  phenomena  in  which  an  electron 
strikes  against  a  ponderable  body  and  is  thrown  back  by  it. 

Whenever  the  above  formula  reduces  to  the  last  term,  the  work 
of  the  force  is  seen  to  be  negative,  so  that  the  name  of  resistance  is 
then  justly  applied.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  form  our  formula 
takes  for  an  electron  having  a  simple  harmonic  motion.  The  velocity 
being  given  by 

V  =  bcosnt, 

where  n  is  a  constant,  we  may  write  V  =  —  w2  V,  and,  instead  of  (76), 


so  that,  in  this  particular  case,  the  force  is  opposite  to  the  velocity 
and  proportional  to  it. 

The  work  of  (77)  during  a  full  period  T  is 


'/' 

t. 


v*<«=  ^VF.  (78) 


38.    In  all  cases  in  which  the  work  of  the  force  (76)  is  nega- 
tive,  the  energy  of  the  electron  (if  not  kept  at  a  constant  value  by 


1)  Note  18. 

LOT  fnt  z,  Theory  of  electrons. 


50         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

the  action  of  some  other  cause)  must  diminish,  and  that  of  the  ether 
must  increase.  This  means  that  there  is  a  continous  radiation  from 
the  particle  outwards,  such  as  cannot  be  said  to  exist  when  the  velo- 
city is  constant  and  the  electron  simply  carries  its  field  along  with  it. 

For  the  purpose  of  getting  a  clear  idea  of  the  radiation,  it  is 
well  to  consider  the  field  at  a  very  large  distance  from  the  particle. 
We  shall  see  that,  if  the  distance  is  large  enough,  the  radiation  field 
gets,  so  to  say,  disentangled  from  the  field  we  have  formerly  consi- 
dered, which  is  carried  along  by  the  moving  particle. 

In  order  to  determine  the  field  at  a  large  distance,  we  can  avail 
ourselves  of  the  following  formulae  for  the  scalar  and  the  vector 
potential,  which  hold  for  all  points  whose  distance  from  the  electron 
is  very  large  compared  with  its  dimensions: 

(79) 


Here,  the  square  brackets  have  a  meaning  similar  to  that  which  we 
gave  them  in  the  general  equations  (35)  and  (36).  If  one  wishes  to 
determine  the  potentials  at  a  point  P  for  the  time  t,  one  must  first 
seek  the  position  M  of  the  electron,  which  satisfies  the  condition 
that,  if  it  is  reached  at  the  time  t0,  previous  to  t, 

MP-c(t-t0). 

The  distance  M  P  is  denoted  by  r,  and  [v]  means  the  velocity  in  the 
position  M,  Vr  its  component  in  the  direction  MP. 

The  formulae  have  been  deduced  from  (35)  and  (36);  the  vector 

1  -  ^f-  in  the  denominators  shows,  however,  that  the  problem  is  not 
c 

quite  so  simple  as  might  be  expected  at  first  sight.  A  complication 
arises  from  the  circumstance  that  we  must  not  integrate  over  the 
space  occupied  by  the  electron  at  the  particular  instant  which  we 
have  denoted  by  t0.  On  the  contrary,  according  to  the  meaning 
of  (35)  and  (36),  we  must  fix  our  attention  on  the  different  points 
of  the  electron  and  choose  for  each  of  them,  among  all  its  succes- 
sive positions,  the  one  M'  which  is  determined  by  the  condition, 
that,  if  it  is  reached  at  the  time  t^, 


The  time  to  is  slightly  different  for  the  different  points  of  the  electron 
and  therefore  the  space  over  which  we  have  to  integrate  (which 
contains  all  the  points  M'  )  cannot  be  said  to  coincide  with  the 
space  occupied  by  the  electron  at  any  particular  instant.1) 


1)  Note  If). 


RADIATION  FROM  AN  ELECTRON.  51 

39.  Leaving  aside  these  rather  complicated  calculations,  I  pro- 
ceed to  the  determination  of  the  field  at  very  large  distances.  The 
formulae  (33)  and  (34)  which  we  must  use  for  this  purpose  require 
us  to  differentiate  y  and  a.  In  doing  so  I  shall  omit  all  terms  in 
which  the  square  and  the  higher  powers  of  the  distance  r  appear  in 
the  denominator.  I  shall  therefore  treat  as  a  constant  the  factor  r  in 
the  denominators  of  (79),  so  that  only  Vr  has  to  be  differentiated  in  the 
expression  for  qp  and,  if  we  also  neglect  terms  in  which  a  component 
of  the  velocity  is  multiplied  by  one  of  the  acceleration,  only  [v]  in 
the  second  formula.  Performing  all  operations  and  denoting  by  x,  y,  z 
the  coordinates  of  P  with  respect  to  the  point  M  as  origin,  and  by  j 
the  acceleration  of  the  electron  in  the  position  M,  I  find1) 


The  three  formulae  for  d  can  be  interpreted  as  follows.  If  the  acce- 
leration j  is  decomposed  into  \r  in  the  direction  of  M  P  and  \p  per- 
pendicular to  it,  the  dielectric  displacement  in  P  is  parallel  to  \p  and 
its  magnitude  is  given  by 


In  order  to  see  the  meaning  of  the  equations  for  h,  we  can  introduce 
a  vector  k  of  unit  length  in  the  direction  from  M  towards  P.    The 

components  of  this  vector  being  —  ,    —  ,    —  ,    we  have 


The  magnitude  of  h  is  therefore 

_« ! 

I        TT      /'      '     .'  Jfl 


equal  to  that  of  the  dielectric  displacement.  Further,  the  magnetic 
force  is  seen  to  be  perpendicular  both  to  the  line  M  P  and  to  the 
dielectric  displacement.  Consequently  there  is  a  flow  of  energy  along 
MP.  It  is  easily  seen  that  this  flow  is  directed  away  from  the 
position  M  of  the  electron,  and  that  its  intensity  is  given  by 


if  &  is  the  angle  between  MP  and  the  acceleration  j.2) 


1)  Note  20.        2)  Note  21. 


52         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

The  result  may  be  applied  to  any  point  of  a  spherical  surface  <j 
described  around  the  centre  M  with  r  as  radius.  The  total  outward 
flow  of  energy  across  this  sphere  is  given  by 


The  reason  for  my  former  assertion  that,  at  very  large  distances 
from  the  electron,  the  radiation  field  predominates  over  the  field  con- 
sidered in  §  26,  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter,  d  and  h  diminish 

as     8   and  in  the  radiation  field  only  as 

We  can  sum  up  the  preceding  considerations  by  saying  that  an 
electron  does  not  emit  energy  so  long  as  it  has  a  uniform  rectilinear 
motion,  but  that  it  does  as  soon  as  its  velocity  changes  either  in 
magnitude  or  in  direction. 

40.  The  theory  of  the  production  of  Rontgen  rays,  first  pro- 
posed by  Wiechert  and  Stokes,  and  worked  out  by  J.  J.  Thomson1), 
aifords  a  very  interesting  application  of  our  result.  According  to  it, 
these  rays  consist  of  a  rapid  and  irregular  succession  of  sharp  electro- 
magnetic impulses,  each  of  which  is  due  to  the  change  of  velocity 
which  an  electron  of  the  cathode  rays  undergoes  when  it  impinges 
against  the  anti-cathode.  I  cannot  however  dwell  upon  this  subject, 
having  too  much  to  say  about  the  emission  of  light  -vibrations  with 
which  we  shall  be  often  concerned. 

If  (an  electron  has  a  simple  harmonic  motion,  the  velocity  is 
continually  changing,  and,  by  what  has  been  said,  there  must  be  a 
continous  emission  of  energy.  It  will  also  be  clear  that,  at  each  point 
of  the  surrounding  field,  the  state  is  periodically  changing,  keeping 
time  with  the  electron  itself,  so  that  we  shall  have  a  radiation  of 
homogeneous  light.  Before  going  into  some  further  details,  I  shall 
first  consider  the  total  amount  of  energy  emitted  during  a  full  period. 

Let  us  choose  the  position  of  equilibrium  as  origin  of  coordinates 
and  let  the  vibration  take  place  along  the  axis  of  x,  the  displacement 
at  the  time  t  being  given  by 

x  =  acos(nt  +  p). 
Then  the  acceleration  is 

-  aw2  cos  (nt  +  p). 

I)  E.  Wiechert,  Die  Theorie  iler  Elektrodynamik  und  die  Rontgen'sche 
Entdeckung,  Abh.  d.  Phys.-okon.  Ges.  zu  Konigsberg  i.  Pr.  (1896),  p.  1;  Ober  die 
Grundlagen  der  Elektrodynatnik,  Ann.  Phya.  Chem.  59  (1896),  p.  283;  G.  G.  Stokes, 
On  the  nature  of  the  Rontgen  rays,  Manch.  Memoirs  41  (1897),  Mem.  15; 
J.  J.  Thomson,  A  theory  of  the  connexion  between  cathode  and  Rontgen  rays, 
Phil.  Mag.  (5)  45  (1898),  p.  172. 


FIELD  OF  A  VIBRATING  ELECTRON.  53 

If  the  amplitude  a  is  very  small,  the  sphere  of  which  we  have  spoken 
in  the  preceding  paragraph  may  be  considered  as  having  its  centre, 
not  in  M,  one  of  the  positions  of  the  electron,  but  in  the  origin  0, 
and  we  may  understand  by  j  the  acceleration  of  the  electron  at  the 

time  t  -  —  ,   r  being   the   distance   from    0.     Therefore,   on   account 
c 

of  (82),  the  flow  of  energy  across  the  sphere  will  be  per  unit  of  time 


Integrating  this  over  a  full  period  T  we  get 


Now,  if  the  amplitude  is  to  remain  constant,  the  electron  must  be 
acted  on  by  an  external  force  equal  and  opposite  to  the  resistance  (77). 
The  work  of  this  force  is  given  by  (78)  with  the  sign  reversed. 
Since  the  amplitude  of  the  velocity  is  equal  to  the  amplitude  a  of 
the  elongation,  multiplied  by  n,  the  work  of  the  force  corresponds 
exactly  to  the  amount  of  energy  (83)  that  is  emitted.1) 

41.  For  the  sake  of  further  examining  the  field  produced 
by  an  electron  having  a  simple  harmonic  motion,  we  shall  go  back 
to  the  formulae  (79).  Let  us  first  only  suppose  that  the  motion 
of  the  electron  is  confined  to  a  certain  very  small  space  S,  one 
point  of  which  is  chosen  as  origin  of  coordinates.  Let  x,  y,  z 
be  the  coordinates  of  the  electron,  x,  y,  z  its  velocities  and  x,  y,  z 
the  components  of  its  acceleration.  We  shall  consider  all  these  quan- 
tities as  infinitely  small  of  the  first  order,  and  neglect  all  terms 
containing  the  product  of  any  two  of  them.  We  shall  further  denote 
by  x,  y,  S  the  coordinates  of  the  point  P  for  which  we  wish  to 
determine  the  field,  and  by  r0  its  distance  from  the  origin.  Now, 
if  M  is  the  position  of  the  electron  of  which  we  have  spoken  in  our 
explanation  of  the  equations  (79),  the  distance  MP  =  r  will  be  in- 
finitely near  the  distance  r0,  and  the  time  t0  infinitely  near  the  time 

£  _  -a  -  .    The  changes  in  the  position  and  the  velocity  of  the  electron 

C 

in  an  infinitely  small  time  being  quantities  of  the  second  order,  we 
may  therefore  understand  by  M  the  position  at  the  instant  t  -  °  , 
and  by  V  the  velocity  at  that  time.  Further: 

T  ==  77  "  -fa  (77)  M  -  gy  (TT)  [y]  -  -fc  (TT)  M  , 
1)  Note  22. 


54         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  Ol1  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

because,  as  is  easily  seen,  the  change  in  the  distance  between  0  and  P, 
due  to  a  shifting  of  the  first  point  towards  M,  is  equal  to  the  change 
that  would  take  place,  if  0  remained  where  it  was,  but  P  were  given 
a  displacement  —  x,  —  y,  —  z.  The  square  brackets  now  serve  to  in- 
dicate the  values  at  the  time  t  —  — ;  they  will  have  this  meaning  in 

c 

all  formulae  that  are  now  to  be  developed. 
Substituting  the  above  value  of  — ,  and 


where  Vr  may  be  considered  as  the  component  along  OP,  we  find 
for  the  scalar  potential 


Having  got  thus  far,  we  can  omit  the  index  o,  so  that  r  now  means 
the  distance  from  the  origin  0  to  a  point  with  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z. 
As  regards  the  last  term,  we  can  use  the  transformation 


1  y  rv  i 

c   r  LvjJ 


,      ., 
'    3y      »r 

the  last  step  in  which  will  be  clear,  if  we  attend  to  the  meaning 
of  -  -  etc.  The  symbol  [x]  represents  the  value  of  x  at  the  time  t  — 

which  we  shall,  for  a  moment,  denote  by  t'.  This  time  t'  depends  in 
its  turn  on  the  distance  r,  which  again  is  a  function  of  the  coordi- 
nates x,  y,  z  of  the  external  point.  Hence 

1^    etc 

' 


._. 

8x    '  '    tit'     Sr  dx  c  r 

Finally,  the  scalar  potential  becomes 

._£_(!         3    [x]       _a_fr]_     .  AW).  (84) 

~  4*  I  r       ~dx    r         dy    r          8z    r   \ 

The  expression  for  the  vector  potential  is  even  more  simple,  viz. 


The  radiation  field,  which  predominates  at  large  distances,  and  in 
which  we  find  the  flow  of  energy  of  which  we  have  already  spoken, 
is  determined  by  the  three  last  terms  of  9  and  by  the  vector  potential. 
At  smaller  distances  it  is  superposed  on  the  field  represented  by  the 
first  term  of  <p,  which  is  the  same  that  would  surround  the  electron 
if  it  were  at  rest. 


FIKLD  OF  A  1'OLAUIZKU  PARTK'I.K  55 

42.  By  a  slight  change  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  we 
can  do  away  with  the  electrostatic  field  altogether.  Let  us  suppose 
the  electron  to  perform  its  vibrations  in  the  interior  of  an  atom  or  a 
molecule  of  matter,  to  which  we  shall  now  give  the  name  of  particle 
and  which  occupies  the  small  space  S.  If  the  particle  as  a  whole 
is  not  charged,  it  must  contain,  besides  our  movable  electron,  a 
charge  —  e,  either  in  the  form  of  one  or  more  electrons,  or  distri- 
buted in  any  other  manner.  We  shall  suppose  that  this  complementary 
charge  —  e  remains  at  rest,  and  that,  if  the  electron  e  did  so  likewise, 
in  a  determinate  position,  which  we  shall  take  as  origin  of  coordinates, 
there  would  be  no  external  field  at  all,  at  least  not  at  a  distance  that 
is  large  in  comparison  with  the  dimensions  of  S.  This  being  admitted, 
the  immovable  charge  —  e  must  produce  a  scalar  potential  equal  and 
opposite  to  the  first  term  in  (84),  so  that,  if  we  consider  the  field 
of  the  whole  particle,  this  term  will  be  cancelled.  Our  assumption 
amounts  to  this,  that  the  charge  —  e  is  equivalent  to  a  single  electron  —  e 
at  the  point  0,  so  that,  if  the  electron  +  e  has  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z, 
things  will  be  as  if  we  had  two  equal  and  opposite  charges  at  a 
small  distance  from  each  other.  We  express  this  by  saying  that  the 
particle  is  electrically  polarized,  and  we  define  its  electric  moment  by 
the  equation 

P  -  «r,  (86) 

where   r   is  the  vector  drawn   from   0   towards    the   position    of   the 
movable  electron.    The  components  of  p  are 

P*  =  ex>       P.,  =  ey>       P,  =  ez;  (87) 

and   from  (84)    and  (85)  we   find   the    following   expressions   for    the 
potentials  in  the  field  surrounding  the  polarized  particle 

MAM  -AM  +  AMl,  (88) 

4x\9«    r      h  0y     r      '    ciz     r    I' 

(89) 


These  relations  also  hold  in  the  case  of  a  polarized  particle  whose 
state  is  somewhat  more  complicated.  Let  us  imagine  that  it  contains 
a  certain  number  of  electrons,  any  part  of  which  may  be  movable. 
We  shall  find  the  potentials  by  calculating  (84)  and  (85)  for  the 
separate  electrons  and  adding  the  results.  Using  the  sign  2  for  this 
last  operation,  and  keeping  in  mind  that 

Ze  =  0,  (90) 

we  shall  again  find  the  formulae  (88)  and  (89),  if  we  define  the 
moment  of  the  particle  by  the  formula 

p  =  Zer,  (91) 


56         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 
or  its  components  by 


(92) 

It  is  even  unnecessary  that  the  charges  should  be  concentrated  in 
separate  electrons.  We  can  as  well  suppose  them  to  be  continuously 
distributed,  but  of  course  capable  of  moving  or  fluctuating  in  one 
way  or  another.  Then  the  sums  in  the  last  formulae  must  be  replaced 
by  integrals.  We  shall  have 

flfdS  -  0  (93) 

and  for  the  components  of  the  moment 


(94) 

the  integration  being  extended  over  the  space  S  occupied  by  the 
particle.  It  must  be  noticed  that  on  account  of  (90)  and  (93),  the 
vectors  (91)  and  (!'4)  are  independent  of  the  choice  of  the  point  0. 

43.  The  formulae  (88)  and  (89)  show  that  the  particle  is  a 
centre  of  radiation  whenever  the  moment  p  is  changing,  and  that  it 
emits  regular  vibrations  if  p  is  a  periodic  function  of  the  time. 

We  shall  suppose  for  example  that 

p,  =  b  cos  (nt  +  p),      py  =  0,      p,  =  0, 
i,  w  and  p  being  constants.    Then  we  have 

JU_i  „(„(,_  .;)  +  ,), 

and  the  field  is  easily  determined  by  means  of  (88)  and  (89). 

I  shall  not  write  down  the  general  formulae  but  only  those 
which  hold  for  values  of  r  that  are  very  large  compared  with  the 
wave-length,  and  which  are  obtained  by  the  omission  of  all  terms  of 

the  order  -j  •     They  are  as  follows: 


4«c'r 


xy 


inc'r  "r 


f  cosjw^-  j)4-J»}i 


n!6       z          I     /.        r\    ,       } 

n,,  =  -r  —  5  ---  cos  {  n  [  t  ----  1  +  P  1 
»       4jtc!r     r         \    \         c)    '  ^  } 

n*b       y 


(95) 


corresponding  to  (80)  and  (81).1) 
1)  Note  23. 


FUNDAMENTAL  EQUATIONS  FOR  A  MOVING  SYSTKM.      57 

I  must  add  that  our  formulae  for  the  field  around  a  particle 
whose  state  of  polarization  is  periodically  changing,  agree  with 
those  by  which  Hertz  represented  the  state  of  the  field  around  his 
vibrator.1) 

44.  We  shall  now  pass  on  to  certain  equations  that  will 
be  of  use  to  us  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  influence  of  the 
Earth's  translation  on  optical  phenomena.  They  relate  to  the  electro- 
magnetic phenomena  in  a  system  of  bodies  having  a  common  uniform 
translation,  whose  velocity  we  shall  denote  by  w,  and  are  derived 
from  our  original  equations  by  a  change  of  variables.  Indeed,  it  is 
very  natural  to  refer  the  phenomena  in  a  moving  system,  not  to  a 
system  of  axes  of  coordinates  that  is  at  rest,  but  to  one  that  is  fixed 
to  the  system  and  shares  its  translation;  these  new  coordinates  will 
be  represented  by  x',  y',  z'.  They  are  given  by 

x'  =  x  —  wxt,      y'  =  y-wytf,      g'  =  e-vt,t.  (96) 

It  will  also  be  found  useful  to  fix  our  attention  on  the  velocity  u 
of  the  charges  relatively  to  the  moving  axes,  so  that  in  our  funda- 
mental equations  we  have  to  put 

v  =  w  +  u. 

Now  it  has  been  found  that  in  those  cases  in  which  the  velocity  of 

w! 
translation  W  is  so  small  that  its  square  W2,  or  rather  the  fraction     ,  , 

may  be  neglected,  the  differential  equations  referred  to  the  moving 
axes  take  almost  the  same  form  as  the  original  formulae,  if,  instead 
of  t,  we  introduce  a  new  independent  variable  f,  and  if,  at  the  same 
time,  the  dielectric  displacement  and  the  magnetic  force  are  replaced 
by  certain  other  vectors  which  we  shall  call  d'  and  h'. 
The  variable  t'  is  defined  by  the  equation 

*'  =  «_-I.(wX  +  w,y'  +  wX),  (97) 

and  the  vectors  d'  and  h'  by 

T  c  L        J? 

We  can  regard  t'  as  the  time  reckoned  from  the  instant 
—  (WX  +  W/  +  Ws/), 


1)  H.  Hertz,  Die  Krafte   elektrischer  Schwingungen ,  behandclt  nach  der 
Maxwell'schen  Theorie,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  36  (1888),  p.  1. 


58         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OP  PREE  ELECTRONS. 

which  changes  from  one  point  to  the  other.  This  variable  is  there- 
fore properly  called  the  local  time,  in  order  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  universal  time  t. 

As  to  the  vectors  d'  and  h',  the  difference  between  them  and  d, 

I  ny  1 

h  is  but  small,    since  the  fraction   L    -!  is  so.    Even  if  we  have  to  do 

with  the  translation  of  the  Earth,  the  value  of  W  is  no  more  than 
one  ten  -thousandth  part  of  the  velocity  of  light. 

Neglecting  terms  with  the  square  of      '—  ,   as    has    already   been 

c 

said,  one  finds  the  following  system  of  transformed  equations: 

,  (100) 


div  h'  =  0,  (101) 

roth'=  J(d'  +  pU),  (102) 

rot  d'  =     -  1  h'.  (103) 

The  dot  means  a  differentiation  with  respect  to  f,  and  the 
symbols  div  and  rot  (and,  in  the  next  paragraph,  grad)  serve  to  indicate 
differentiations  with  respect  to  x,  y,  z  in  exactly  the  same  manner 
as  they  formerly  indicated  differentiations  with  respect  to  x,  y,  z. 
Rot  h',  for  example,  now  means  a  vector  whose  components  are 
i  h;  dVy  a  hi  dV  t  h',  dtix 


_  _ 

dy'  "  da'  '       W"  8x'  '       dx'        dy*" 

You  see  that  the  formulae  have  nearly,  but  not  quite,  the  same  form 

fw  •  u\ 
as  (17)  —  (20),  the  difference  consisting  in  the  term  -—  -,-—  in  the  first 

equation.1) 

45.  Starting  from  the  new  system  of  equations,  we  can  now 
repeat  much  of  what  has  been  said  in  connexion  with  the  original 
one.  For  a  given  distribution  and  motion  of  the  charges,  the  field 
is  entirely  determined,  and  here  again  the  problem  can  be  considerably 
simplified  by  the  introduction  of  two  potentials,  a  scalar  and  a  vector 
one.  These  are  given  by  the  equations 


(104) 

^*"*/         ' 

and 


where  however  the  symbols  [p]   and  [pu]  require  some  explanation. 
If  we  want  to  calculate  <p'  and  a'  for  a  point  P,  for  the  moment  at 

1)  Note  24. 


RADIATION  FROM  A  MOVING  PARTICLE.  59 

which  the  local  time  of  this  point  has  a  definite  value  t',  we  must, 
for  each  element  dS  situated  at  a  distance  r  from  P,  take  the  values 
of  Q  and  <iii  such  as  they  are  at  the  instant  at  which  the  local  time 
of  the  element  is 


Finally,  we  have  the  following  formulae  for  the  determination 
of  the  field  by  means  of  the  potentials1): 


'),  (106) 

h'  =  rot  a'.  (107) 

Here  again,  if  we  compare  with  (33)  and  (34),  we  notice  a  slight 
difference.  In  (33)  there  is  no  term  corresponding  to  the  last  one 
in  (106). 

Notwithstanding  the  two  differences  I  have  pointed  out,  there 
is  a  large  variety  of  cases,  in  which  a  state  of  things  in  a  system 
at  rest  has  its  exact  analogue  in  the  same  system  with  a  translation. 
I  shall  give  two  examples  that  are  of  interest. 

In  the  first  place,  the  values  of  d'  and  h'  produced  by  a  particle 
moving  with  the  velocity  W,  and  having  a  variable  electric  moment, 
are  given  by  formulae  similar  to  those  we  formerly  found  for  the 
radiation  from  a  particle  without  a  translation,  und  which  I  therefore 
need  not  even  write  down. 

If  the  moment  of  a  particle  placed  at  the  origin  of  coordinates 
is  represented  by 

p,  =  &cos(»rf+j»),       py  =  0,       p,  =  0,  (108) 

all  we  have  to  do  is  to  replace,  in  (95),  d,  h,  x,  y,  z,  t  by  d',  h',  x',  y,  z,  t'.*) 

In  order  to  show  the  meaning  of  this  result,  I  shall  consider  the 

field  at  a  point  situated  on  the  positive  axis  of  y.    It  is  determined  by 


all  other  components  being  0.    Since,  neglecting  terms  of  the  second 
order,  we  may  write 

d  =  d'-i[w.h'] 

instead  of  (98),  we  have 

dx  =  d;-^h;, 

from  which  it  appears  that  the  dielectric  displacement  takes  the  form 

d.  —  tf  608  j*^--  - 
in  which  a  is  a  constant. 


1)  Note  25.        2)  Note  26. 


60         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

By  substitution  of  the  value  of  the  local  time  and  of  the  value  (96) 
for  y,  this  becomes 


Thus  we  see  that,  at  a  fixed  point  of  space,  i.  e.  for  a  definite  value 
of  y,  the  frequency  of  the  vibrations  is  given  by 


(i  +  -?)• 


If  the  radiating  particle  has  a  positive  velocity  Wf/,  i.  e.  one  that  is 
directed  towards  the  point  considered,  this  frequency  is  higher  than 
that  of  the  particle  itself,  which,  as  is  shown  by  (108),  still  has  the 
value  n.  This  is  the  well  known  change  of  frequency  which,  according 
to  Doppler's  principle,  is  caused  by  a  motion  of  the  source  of  light. 

46.  Our  second  example  relates  to  the  reflexion  of  a  beam  of 
light  by  a  perfectly  reflecting  mirror,  for  instance  by  one  that  con- 
sists of  a  perfectly  conducting  substance.  We  shall  suppose  the 
incidence  to  be  normal,  and  begin  with  the  case  of  a  mirror  having 
no  translation,  so  that  we  have  to  use  the  original  equations.  Let 
the  beam  of  light  be  represented  by  (7)  and  let  the  surface  of  the 
mirror  coincide  with  the  plane  YOZ.  Then,  the  reflected  beam, 
which  we  shall  distinguish  by  the  suffix  (r),  is  given  by 

dy(r)  =  -  «  cos  n  (<  +  y),  h,(r)  =  a  cos  n(t  +  -J-)  • 

Indeed,  these  values  satisfy  the  condition  that,  at  the  mirror,  there 
be  no  dielectric  displacement  along  its  surface.  If  we  put  x  =  0, 
we  really  find 

«.,  +  *,„  =  0. 

The  case  of  reflexion  by  a  mirror  moving  with  the  velocity  W^., 
in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  x,  i.  e.  in  the  direction  of  its  normal, 
can  be  treated  by  the  same  formulae,  provided  only  we  change  x,  t,  d,  h 
into  x',  t',  d',  h'.1)  Therefore,  if  the  incident  beam  is  now  represented  by 

Ay'  =  a  cos  n(t'-  —  V  h.'  =  a  cos  nit'  -  —  \, 
we  shall  have  for  the  reflected  light 

d  W)  =  -  a  cos  n  (f  +  -c)  '    h'«  W  -  a  cos  n  (f  +  -7)  ' 

Let  us  now  examine  the  values  of  dy,  ht,  dy(r)  and  hz(r)  in  this  case. 
The  only  component  of  W  being  wz,  we  find 

1)  Note  27. 


UWLEXION  BY  A  MOVING  MIRROR.  01 


so  that  the  incident  rays  are  given  by 


h,  =  a  l  +          cos  W  *'- 
and  the  reflected  rays  by 


In  these  formulae  we  shall  now  express  t'  and  x'  in  terms  of  £  and  x. 
The  value  of  the  local  time  is 


and 

z'  =  a;  — 
Hence 


The  formulae  are  simplified  if  we  put 


Continuing  to  neglect  the  square  of  --*-,  we  infer  from  this 

c 


so  that  the  final  formulae  for  the  incident  rays  are 

d,,  =  a  cosn^—  *),  h,  =  a  cos 
and  those  for  the  reflected  light 


.^-^)  («+:•). 


These  equations  show  that  both  the  frequency  and  the  amplitude 
of  the  reflected  beam  are  changed  by  the  motion  of  the  mirror.    The 


62         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

(2  IV    \ 
1  -      cx\,  smaller  than  n,   if  the  mirror  recedes 

from  the  source.  These  changes  might  have  been  predicted  on  the 
ground  of  Doppler's  principle.  As  to  the  amplitude,  it  is  changed 
in  exactly  the  same  ratio  as  the  frequency,  so  that  the  reflected  in- 
tensity is  diminished  by  a  motion  in  one  direction  and  increased  by 
a  motion  in  the  other  direction.- 

It  is  interesting  to  verify  these  results  by  considering  the  energy 
of  the  system.  This  may  easily  be  done,  if  we  fix  our  attention, 
not  on  the  fluctuations  of  the  electromagnetic  energy,  but  on  its 
mean  value,  so  that,  at  every  point  of  the  beam,  we  and  wm  (§  16) 
are  considered  as  constants.  Let  the  rays  occupy  a  cylinder  whose 
generating  lines  are  parallel  to  OX  and  whose  normal  section  is  27. 
Let  P  be  a  plane  perpendicular  to  OX  at  some  distance  before  the 
mirror  and  having  a  fixed  position  in  the  ether.  If  w.,.  is  positive, 
so  that  the  mirror  recedes,  the  space  between  the  mirror  and  the 
plane  P  increases  by  WX27  per  unit  of  time,  so  that  the  energy 
contained  in  that  space  increases  by 

Cw.4-tfjw.27. 

Again,  if  p  is  the  pressure  on  the  mirror,  the  work  done  by  the 
field  will  be 


Consequently,  if  S  is  the  current  of  energy  towards  the  mirror  per 
unit  of  area  of  the  plane  P,  we  must  have 

S27  =  (we  +  wj  W,27  +  p  w,27.  (109) 

We  can  easily  calculate   the    quantities  occurring   in    this    equation. 
In  the  incident  beam  there  is  a  flow  of  energy  (§  17) 


towards  the  mirror,  and  in  the  reflected  light  a  flow 

K(I-^)'.-^(I-^:-). 

away  from  it,  so  that 

S  =  2ttsW,.  (110) 

As  to  we,  wm  and  p,  we  may  take  for  them  the  values  that  would 
hold  if  the  mirror  where  at  rest,  because  these  quantities  have  to  be 
multiplied  by  w.,..  Therefore,  since  the  value  of  we-\-  wm  consists  of 
two  equal  parts,  one  belonging  to  the  incident  and  the  other  to  the 
reflected  light1), 

we+wm  =  tf.  (Ill) 

1)  Note  28. 


MOTION  OF  ELECTRICITY  IN  METALS.  63 

Finally,  by  what  has  been  said  in  §  25, 

p  =  a2.  (112) 

The  values  (110),  (111)  and  (112)  really  satisfy  the  condition  (109). 

47.  I  shall  close  this  chapter  by  a  short  account  of  the  appli- 
cation of  the  theory  of  electrons  to  the  motion  of  electricity  in 
metallic  bodies.  In  my  introductory  remarks,  I  have  already  alluded 
to  the  researches  of  Kiecke,  Drude  and  J.  .1.  Thomson.  I  now 
wish  especially  to  call  your  attention  to  the  views  that  have  been 
put  forward  by  the  second  of  these  physicists. 

In  his  theory,  every  metal  is  supposed  to  contain  a  large  number 
of  free  electrons,  which  are  conceived  to  partake  of  the  heat-motion 
of  the  ordinary  atoms  and  molecules.  Further,  a  well  known  theorem 
of  the  kinetic  theory  of  matter,  according  to  which,  at  a  given  tem- 
perature, the  mean  kinetic  energy  is  the  same  for  all  kinds  of  par- 
ticles, leads  to  the  assumption  that  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  an 
electron  is  equal  to  that  of  a  molecule  of  a  gas  taken  at  the  same 
temperature.  Though  the  velocity  required  for  this  is  very  conside- 
rable, yet  the  electrons  are  not  free  to  move  away  in  a  short  time 
to  a  large  distance  from  their  original  positions.  They  are  prevented 
from  doing  so  by  their  impacts  against  the  atoms  of  the  metal 
itself. 

For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  shall  assume  only  one  kind  of 
free  electrons,  the  opposite  kind  being  supposed  to  be  fixed  to  the 
ponderable  matter.  Now,  if  the  metal  is  not  subjected  to  an  electric 
force,  the  particles  are  moving  indiscriminately  towards  all  sides; 
there  is  no  transfer  of  electricity  in  a  definite  direction.  This  changes 
however  as  soon  as  an  electric  force  is  applied.  The  velocities  of  the 
electrons  towards  one  side  are  increased,  those  towards  the  other  side 
diminished,  so  that  an  electric  current  is  set  up,  the  intensity  of 
which  can  be  calculated  by  theoretical  considerations.  The  formula 
to  which  one  is  led,  of  course  contains  the  electric  force,  the  number 
N  of  electrons  per  unit  of  volume,  the  charge  e  and  the  mass  m  of 
each  of  them.  In  the  first  place,  the  force  acting  on  an  electron  is 
found  if  we  multiply  by  e  the  electric  force.  Next  dividing  by  m,  we 
shall  find  the  velocity  given  to  the  electron  per  unit  of  time.  The 
velocity  acquired  by  the  electrons  will  further  depend  on  the  time 
during  which  they  are  exposed  to  the  undisturbed  action  of  the 
electric  force,  a  time  for  which  we  may  take  the  interval  that  elapses 
between  two  successive  impacts  against  a  metallic  atom.  During  this 

interval,  the  length  of  which  is  given  by  — ,  if  I  is  the  path  between 
the  two  encounters,   and  u  the  velocity  of  the   electron,   the  electric 


64         I-  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

force  produces  a  certain  velocity  which  we  can  take  to  be  lost  again 
at  the  next  collision. 

These    considerations    will    suffice   for    the    explanation    of    the 
formula 

(H3) 


which  Drude  has  established  for  the  electric  conductivity  of  the 
metal,  and  in  which  we  must  understand  by  n  the  mean  velocity  of 
the  electrons  in  their  irregular  heat-motion,  and  by  I  their  mean 
length  of  free  path.  Now,  as  I  said  already,  the  mean  kinetic  energy 
of  an  electron,  for  which  we  may  write  ^mu2,  is  supposed  to  be 
equal  to  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  gaseous  molecule.  The  latter 
is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature  T,  and  may  therefore  be 
represented  by 

ccT, 

where  K  is  a  universal  constant.  If  we  use  this  notation,  (113)  takes 
the  form 

e*Nlu 


48.  Iii  order  to  show  you  all  the  beauty  of  Drude's  theory, 
I  must  also  say  a  few  words  about  the  conductivity  for  heat.  This 
can  be  calculated  in  a  manner  much  resembling  that  in  which  it  is 
determined  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  Indeed,  a  bar  of  metal 
whose  ends  are  maintained  at  different  temperatures,  may  be  likened 
to  a  colum  of  a  gas,  placed,  for  example,  in  a  vertical  position,  and 
having  a  higher  temperature  at  its  top  than  at  its  base.  The  process 
by  which  the  gas  conducts  heat  consists,  as  you  know,  in  a  kind  of 
diffusion  between  the  upper  part  of  the  column,  in  which  we  find 
larger,  and  the  lower  one  in  which  there  are  smaller  molecular  velo- 
cities; the  amount  of  this  diffusion,  and  the  intensity  of  the  flow  of 
heat  that  results  from  it,  depend  on  the  mean  distance  over  which  a 
molecule  travels  between  two  successive  encounters.  In  Drude's 
theory  of  metals,  the  conduction  of  heat  goes  on  in  a  way  that  is 
exactly  similar.  Only,  the  carriers  by  which  the  heat  is  transferred 
from  the  hotter  towards  the  colder  parts  of  the  body,  now  are  the 
free  electrons,  and  the  length  of  their  free  paths  is  limited,  not,  as 
in  the  case  of  a  gas,  by  the  mutual  encounters,  but  by  the  impacts 
against  the  metallic  atoms,  which  we  may  suppose  to  remain  at  rest 
on  account  of  their  large  masses. 

Working  out  these  ideas,  Drude  finds  for  the  coefficient  of  con- 
ductivity for  heat 

(115) 


CONDUCTIVITY  FOR  HEAT  AND  FOR  ELECTRICITY.  65 

49.  It  is  highly  interesting  to  compare  the  two  conductivities, 
that  for  heat  and  that  for  electricity.  Dividing  (115)  by  (114), 
we  get 


which  shows  that  the  ratio  must  be  equal  for  all  metals.  As  a  rough 
approximation  this  is  actually  the  case. 

We  see  therefore  that  Drude  has  been  able  to  account  for  the 
important  fact  that,  as  a  general  rule,  the  metals  which  present  the 
greatest  conductivity  for  heat  are  also  the  best  conductors  of  elec- 
tricity. 

Going  somewhat  deeper  into  details,  I  can  point  out  to  you  two 
important  verifications  of  the  equation  (116). 

In    the    first    place,    measurements    by    Jaeger    and    Diessel- 

horst1)  have  shown  that  the  ratio        between  the  two  conductivities 

varies  approximately  as  the  absolute   temperature,   the    ratio  between 

k 
the  values  of         for  100°  and    18°  ranging,   for  the  different  metals, 

between  1,25  and  1,12,  whereas  the  ratio  between  the  absolute 
temperatures  is  1,28. 

In  the  second  place,  the  right-hand  member  of  (116)  can  be 
calculated  by  means  of  data  taken  from  other  phenomena.2)  In  order 
to  see  this,  we  shall  consider  an  amount  of  hydrogen,  equal  to  an 
electrochemical  equivalent  of  this  substance,  and  we  shall  suppose 
this  quantity  to  occupy,  at  the  temperature  T,  a  volume  of  one  cubic 
centimetre.  It  will  then  exert  a  pressure  that  can  easily  be  calculated, 
and  which  I  shall  denote  by  p. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  charge  e  which  occurs  in  the 
formula  (116),  may  be  reckoned  to  be  equal  to  the  charge  of  an 
atom  of  hydrogen  in  an  electrolytic  solution.  Therefore,  the  number 

of  atoms  in  one  electrochemical  equivalent  of  hydrogen  is  -  -•  The  gas 

€ 

being  diatomic,  the  number  of  molecules  is  ,  and  the  total  kinetic 
energy  of  their  progressive  motion  is 

aT 
2e 
per  cubic  centimetre. 

By  the  fundamental   formula   of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  the 


1)  W.  Jaeger  und  H.  Diesselhorst,  Warmeleitung,  Elektrizitatsleitung, 
Warmekapazitat  und  Thermokraft  einiger  Metalle,  Sitzungsber.  Berlin  1899,  p.  719. 

2)  See  M.  Reinganum,   Theoretische  Bestimmung  des  VerhiVltnisses   von 
Wiirme-  und  Elektrizitatsleitung  der  Metalle   aus  der  Drudeschen  Elektronen- 
theorie,  Ann.  Phys.  2  (1900),  p.  398. 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  5 


66         I.  GENERAL  PRINCIPLES.    THEORY  OF  FREE  ELECTRONS. 

pressure  per  unit  area  is  numerically   equal  to   two   thirds   of  this, 

so  that 

«T 


The  equation  (116)  therefore  takes  the  form 

* 
7 

or 


(117) 


This  relation  between  the  conductivities  of  a  metal  and  other 
quantities  derived  from  phenomena  which,  at  first  sight,  have  no  con- 
nexion at  all,  neither  with  the  conduction  of  heat,  nor  with  that  of 
electricity,  has  been  verified  in  a  very  satisfactory  way. 

The  electrochemical  equivalent  of  hydrogen  being 

0,000104 


in  our  units,  and  the  mass  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  the  gas  at  0° 
and  under  a  pressure  of  76  cm  of  mercury  being  0,0000896  gramra, 
one  finds  for  the  temperature  of  18°  (T  =  273  +  18), 

12,5xl06 

!'  =  --,.--•  (118) 

cyiit 

On  the  other  hand,  expressing  <J  in  the  ordinary  electromagnetic  units, 
Jaeger  and  Diesselhorst  have  found  for  silver  at  18° 

-  -  686  X  108. 
a 

In  our  units  this  becomes 

fc       686  x  108 


by  which  we  find  for  the  quantity  on  the  right   hand   side    of  (117) 

12.9X106 


showing  a  very    close  agreement  with   the  value    we   have  just  cal- 
culated for  p. 

50.  I  must  add,  however,  that  the  numerical  agreement  becomes 
somewhat  less  satisfactory,  if,  instead  of  Drude's  formulae  for  the  con- 
ductivities, one  takes  the  equations  to  which  I  have  been  led  by  cal- 
culations that  seem  to  me  somewhat  more  rigorous  than  his.  Taking 
into  account  that  the  electrons  in  a  piece  of  metal  have  unequal  velo- 


CONDUCTIVITY  FOR  HEAT  AND  FOR  ELECTRICITY.  67 

cities,    and    assuming  Maxwell's   law  for   the  distribution  of  these 
among  the  particles,  I  find,  instead  of  (114)  and  (115)1), 

IT  e'INu 

3*      K']'     ' 

and 


fc  =  *l/a    uNlu.  (120) 

'      f         OJl 

In  these  equations,  u  is  a  velocity  of  such  a  magnitude  that  its  square 
is  equal  to  the  mean  square  of  the  velocities  which  the  electrons 
have  in  their  heat-motion,  and  /  represents  a  certain  mean  length  of 
free  path. 

The  ratio  of  the  two  conductivities  now  becomes 

a       * \ e)      ' 

it  is  still  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature,  but  it  is  only 
two  thirds  of  the  value  given  by  Drude.  On  account  of  this  we 
must  replace  (117)  by  the  equation 

J»  — 

whose  right-hand  side,  in  the  example   chosen  in  §  49,  has  the  value 


oJ/4* 

This  is  rather  different  from  (118). 

If  we  prefer  the  formulae  (119)  and  (120)  to  (114)  and  (115), 
as  I  think  we  are  entitled  to  do,  the  agreement  found  in  the  prece- 
ding paragraph  must  be  considered  as  produced  by  a  fortuitous  coin- 
cidence. Nevertheless,  even  the  agreement  we  have  now  found,  cer- 
tainly warrants  the  conclusion  that,  in  Drude's  theory,  a  fair  start 
has  been  made  towards  the  understanding  of  the  electric  and  thermal 
properties  of  metals.  It  is  especially  important  to  notice  that  our 
calculations  rest  on  the  assumption  that  the  free  electrons  in  a  metal 
have  charges  equal  to  those  of  the  ions  of  hydrogen. 


1)  Note  29. 


CHAPTER  II. 

EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

51.  The  subject  of  this  and  my  next  lecture  will  be  the  radia- 
tion and  absorption  of  heat,  especially  the  radiation  by  what  is  called 
a  perfectly  black  body,  considered  with  regard  to  the  way  in  which 
these  phenomena  depend  on  the  temperature  and  the  wave-length. 
I  shall  first  recall  to  your  minds  the  important  theoretical  laws  which 
Kirchhoff,  Boltzmann  and  Wien  have  found  by  an  application 
of  thermodynamic  principles.  After  that,  we  shall  have  to  examine 
how  far  the  theory  of  electrons  can  give  us  a  clue  to  the  mechanism 
of  the  phenomena. 

We  must  begin  by  clearly  defining  what  is  meant  by  the  absorb- 
ing power  and  the  emissivity  of  a  body.  Let  ra  and  to'  be  two  in- 
finitely small  planes  perpendicular  to  the  line  r  joining  their  centres, 
and  let  M  be  a  body  of  the  temperature  T,  placed  so  that  it  can 
receive  a  beam  of  rays  going  through  a'  and  w.  We  shall  suppose 
this  beam  to  consist  of  homogeneous  rays  whose  wave-length  is  A, 
and  to  be  plane -polarized, 'the  electrical  vibrations  having  a  certain 
direction  h,  perpendicular  to  the  line  r.  Part  of  the  incident  rays 
will  be  reflected  at  the  front  surface  of  the  body,  part  of  them  will 
penetrate  into  its  interior,  and  of  these  some  will  again  leave  the 
body,  either  directly  or  after  one  or  more  internal  reflexions.  How- 
ever this  may  be,  the  body  M,  if  it  be  not  perfectly  transparent, 
will  retain  a  certain  amount  of  energy,  an  amount  that  is  converted 
into  heat,  because  we  shall  exclude  from  our  considerations  all  other 
changes  that  might  be  produced. 

The  coefficient  of  absorption  A  is  defined  as  the  fraction  indi- 
cating what  part  of  the  incident  energy  is  spent  in  heating  the  body  M. 

On  the  other  hand,  of  the  whole  radiation  emitted  by  M,  a 
certain  portion  will  travel  outwards  through  the  two  elements  to  and  a'. 
We  shall  decompose  this  radiation  into  rays  of  different  wave-lengths, 
and  we  shall  fix  our  attention  on  those  whose  wave-length  lies  be- 
tween two  limits  infinitely  near  each  other,  I  and  I  -\-  ill.  We  shall 
also  decompose  the  electrical  vibrations  of  these  rays  into  a  com- 


EMISSIV1TY  AND  ABSORBING  I'OWKK.  69 

ponent  along  the  line  h  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  and  a  second 
component  perpendicular  both  to  it  and  to  the  direction  of  the  beam 
itself.  It  can  easily  be  shown  that  the  amount  of  energy  emitted 
by  the  body  per  unit  of  time  through  the  two  elements  of  surface, 
so  far  as  it  belongs  to  rays  of  the  wave-lengths  that  have  been 
specified,  and  to  vibrations  of  the  direction  h,  is  proportional  to 
«,  o',  dk,  and  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  r.  It  can  there- 
fore be  represented  by 


The  coefficient  E  is  called  the  emissivity  of  the  body  M.  It  is  a 
quantity  depending  on  the  nature  of  M,  its  position  with  respect  to 
the  line  r,  the  wave-length  A,  the  temperature  T  and  the  direction  h 
which  we  have  chosen  for  the  vibrations. 

Starting  from  the  thermodynamic  principle  that  in  a  system  of 
bodies  having  all  the  same  temperature,  the  equilibrium  is  not  dis- 
turbed by  their  mutual  radiation,  and  using  a  train  of  reasoning 
which  I  shall  not  repeat,  Kirchhoff1)  fiuds  that  the  ratio 


between  the  ernissivity  and  the  absorbing  power  is  independent,  both 
of  the  direction  we  have  chosen  for  h,  and  of  the  position  and  the 
peculiar  properties  of  the  body  M.  It  will  not  be  altered  if  we 
change  the  position  of  M,  or  replace  it  by  an  altogether  different 
body  of  the  same  temperature.  The  ratio  between  the  emissivity  and 
the  coefficient  of  absorption  is  a  function  of  the  temperature  and  the 
wave-length  alone. 

52.  I  shall  now  point  out  to  you  two  other  meanings  that  may 
be  attached  to  this  function.  In  the  first  place,  following  the  example 
of  Kirchhoff,  we  can  conceive  a  perfectly  black  body,  or,  as  we  shall 
simply  say,  a  black  body,  i.  e.  one  that  has  the  power  of  retaining 
for  itself  the  total  radiating  energy  which  falls  upon  it.  Its  coeffi- 
cient of  absorption  is  therefore  1,  and  if  we  denote  its  emissivity 
by  Eb,  the  symbols  A  and  E  relating  to  any  other  body,  we  shall 
have 

f  =  ^V  (122) 

We  may  notice  in  passing  that  Kirchhoff  s  law  requires  all  black 
bodies,  whatever  be  their  nature,  to  have  exactly  the  same  emissivity. 


1)  G.  Kirchhoff,  tlber  das  Verhiiltnis  zwischen  dem  Emissionsvermogen 
und  dem  Absorptions vermb'gen  der  Korper  fiir  Wilrme  und  Licht,  Ann.  Phys. 
Chem.  109  (I860),  p.  275. 


70  n.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

10 

The    equation  (122)  expresses    one  of  the    two    meanings  of 

to  which  I  have  alluded.  The  other  will  become  apparent,  if  we  fix 
our  attention  on  the  state  existing  in  the  ether  in  the  neighborhood 
of  radiating  bodies. 

We  shall  consider  a  space  void  of  all  ponderable  matter  and 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  perfectly  black  envelop,  which  is  kept 
at  a  fixed  temperature  T.  The  ether  within  this  space  is  traversed 
in  all  directions  by  rays  of  heat.  Let  to  be  an  element  of  a  plane 
situated  at  any  point  P  of  the  space,  and  having  any  direction  we 
like.  We  shall  consider  the  quantity  of  energy  by  which  this  ele- 
ment is  traversed  per  unit  of  time  in  the  direction  of  its  normal  n, 
or  rather  in  directions  lying  within  an  infinitely  narrow  cone,  whose 
solid  angle  we  shall  denote  by  s,  and  whose  axis  coincides  with 
the  normal  n,  always  confining  ourselves  to  wave-lengths  between  I. 
and  I  +  dl.,  and  to  a  particular  direction  h  of  the  electrical  vibrations. 
By  this  I  mean  that  all  vibrations  of  the  rays  within  the  cone  are 
decomposed  along  lines  h  and  k  that  are  perpendicular  as  well  to 
each  other  as  to  the  axis  of  the  cone,  and  that  we  shall  only  con- 
sider the  components  having  the  first  named  direction. 

Let  P'  be  a  point  on  the  normal  n,  at  a  distance  r  from  the 
point  P,  and  let  us  place  at  f  an  element  of  surface  perpendicular 
to  r,  and  whose  magnitude  is  given  by 

«' =»•*£.  (123) 

It  is  clear  that,  instead  of  speaking  of  the  rays  whose  direction  lies 
within  the  cone  e,  we  may  as  well  speak  of  those  that  are  propagated 
through  the  elements  o  and  «'. 

The  quantity  we  wish  to  determine  is  therefore  the  flow  of 
energy  through  the  two  small  planes,  issuing  from  the  part  of 
the  enclosing  wall  behind  w.  In  virtue  of  the  formula  (121),  it  is 
given  by 

J$btam'dl 


for  which,  on  account  of  (123),  we  may  write 

(124) 


Having  got  thus  far,   we   need  no  longer   consider  the    element   w'; 
we  have  only  to  think  of  the  element  ra  and  the  cone  e. 

Now,  what  is  most  remarkable  in  our  result,  is  the  fact  that  it 
is  wholly  independent  of  the  position  of  the  point  P,  the  direction 
of  the  element  K>  and  the  directions  h  and  k,  in  which  we  have  de- 
composed the  vibrations.  The  radiation  field  within  the  ether  is  a 


ENERGY  OF  RADIATION  PER  UNIT  OF  VOLUME.  71 

truly  isotropic  one,  i.  e.  the  propagation  takes  place  in  exactly  the 
same  manner  in  all  directions,  and  electrical  vibrations  of  all  different 
directions  occur  with  the  same  intensity. 

We  shall  now  calculate  the  amount  of  energy  in  this  radiation 
field  per  unit  of  volume.  In  the  case  of  a  beam  of  rays  of  a  definite 
direction  the  quantity  of  energy  that  is  carried  per  unit  of  time 
through  a  plane  co  perpendicular  to  the  rays,  is  equal  to  the  amount 
existing  at  one  and  the  same  moment  in  a  cylinder  whose  generating 
lines  are  parallel  to  the  rays,  and  which  has  oj  for  its  base  and  a 
height  equal  to  the  velocity  of  light  e;  it  is  CK>  times  the  energy 
existing  per  unit  of  volume.  Hence,  the  energy  per  unit  of  volume, 
belonging  to  the  rays  to  which  the  expression  (124)  relates,  is  found 
if  we  divide  that  expression  by  cw;  its  value  is 


We  must  now  keep  in  mind  that  we  have  all  along  considered  only 
the  rays  whose  direction  lies  within  the  cone  e,  and  only  those  com- 
ponents of  their  vibrations  which  have  the  direction  /(.  If  we  wish 
to  include  all  rays,  whatever  be  their  direction  and  that  of  their 
vibrations,  we  must  make  two  changes.  In  the  first  place  we  must 
multiply  by  2,  because  the  vibrations  of  the  direction  it  have  the 
same  intensity  as  those  we  have  till  now  considered,  and  in  the  se- 
cond place  we  must  replace  £  by  4re,  because  equal  quantities  of 
energy  belong  to  rays  whose  directions  lie  within  different  cones  of 
equal  solid  angles.  The  final  result  for  the  amount  of  energy  present 
in  unit  volume  of  our  radiation  field,  the  ,,density"  of  the  energy, 
BO  far  as  it  is  due  to  rays  whose  wave-lengths  lie  between  the 
limits  i  and  i  +  di,  is 


We  shall  write  for  tbis  energy 


so  that,  if  we  also  take  into  account  the  relation  (122),  we  have 

(125) 


V 

This    equation,    which    expresses    the    relation    between    J  '    and    the 
density  of  energy,   shows   us   the  other   meaning   that  may  be  given 


63.    One  word  more  may  be  said  about  the  state  of  radiation 
characterized   by   the   function  F(\,  T).     For   the   existence    of  this 


72  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  Ol1  HEAT. 

state  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  that  the  walls  of  the  enclosure  should 
be  perfectly  black.  We  may  just  as  well  suppose  that  they  are  per- 
fectly reflecting  on  the  inside,  and  that  the  rays  are  produced  by  a 
body  placed  somewhere  between  them.  Nor  need  this  body  be  per- 
fectly black.  Whatever  be  its  nature,  if  it  is  maintained  at  the  tem- 
perature T  we  have  chosen  once  for  all,  it  can  always  be  in  equili- 
brium with  a  state  of  radiation  in  which  each  element  of  volume 
contains  the  energy  we  have  been  considering.  We  may  add  that 
not  only  will  it  be  in  equilibrium  with  this  state,  but  that  it  will 
actually  produce  it,  provided  only  the  body  have  some  emitting 
power,  however  small  it  may  be,  for  all  wave-lengths  occurring  in 
the  radiation  of  a  black  body  of  the  same  temperature.  If  this  con- 
dition is  fulfilled,  the  radiation  in  the  ether  will  be  independent  of 
the  nature  of  the  matter  in  which  it  originates;  it  will  be  determined 
by  the  temperature  alone. 

54.  Kirchhoff  has  already  laid  stress  on  the  importance  of  the 
function  I1' (I,  T),  which  must  be  independent  of  the  peculiar  pro- 
perties of  any  body,  and  indeed  the  problem  of  determining  this 
function  is  of  paramount  interest  in  modern  theoretical  physics. 
Boltzmann1)  and  Wien2)  have  gone  as  far  towards  the  solution  as 
can  be  done  by  thermodynamic  principles,  combined  with  general 
results  of  electromagnetic  theory,  if  one  leaves  aside  all  speculations 
concerning  the  constitution  of  the  radiating  and  absorbing  matter. 

Boltzmann's  law  shows  us  in  what  way  the  total  energy 
existing  per  unit  of  volume  in  the  radiation  field  we  have  spoken  of, 
I  mean  the  energy  for  the  rays  of  all  wave-lengths  taken  together, 
depends  on  the  temperature.  It  is  proportional  to  the  fourth  power 
of  the  absolute  temperature,  a  result  that  had  already  been  established 
as  an  empirical  rule  by  Stefan. 

In  his  demonstration,  Boltzmann  introduces  the  fact  that  there 
is  a  radiation  pressure  of  the  amount  which  we  have  formerly  cal- 
culated. 

Let  us  consider  a  closed  envelop,  perfectly  reflecting  on  the  in- 
side, and  containing  a  body  M  to  which  heat  may  be  given  or  from 
which  heat  may  be  taken,  in  one  way  or  another.  The  remaining 
part  of  the  space  contains  only  ether,  and  the  walls  are  supposed  to 
be  movable,  so  that  the  enclosed  volume  can  be  altered. 


1)  L.  Boltzmann,   Ableitung  des   Stefan'schen  Gesetzes,    betreffend   die 
Abhangigkeit  der  Warmestrahlung  von   der  Temperatur  aus  der  elektromagnR- 
tischen  Lichttheorie,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  22  (1884),  p.  291. 

2)  W.  Wien,   Eine  neue  Beziehung  der  Strahlung  sckwarzer  Korper  zum 
zweiten  Hauptsatz  der  Wiirmetheorie,  Berlin.  Sitzungsber.  1893,  p.  55. 


BOLTZMANN'S  LAW.  73 

The  system  we  have  obtained  in  this  manner  is  similar  in  many 
respects  to  a  gas  contained  in  a  vessel  of  variable  capacity.  It  is 
the  seat  of  a  certain  energy,  and  like  a  gas  it  exerts  a  pressure  on 
the  bounding  walls;  only,  we  have  now  to  do,  not  with  the  collisions 
of  moving  molecules,  but  with  the  pressure  of  radiation.  If  the  walls 
move  outwards,  the  system  does  a  certain  amount  of  work  on  them. 
Hence,  a  supply  of  heat  is  required,  if  we  wish  to  maintain  a  con- 
stant temperature,  and  the  temperature  is  lowered  by  the  expansion, 
if  the  process  is  adiabatic.  You  will  easily  see  that  the  system  may 
be  made  to  undergo  a  cycle  of  operations,  two  of  which  are  isother- 
mic  and  two  adiabatic  changes,  and  to  which  we  may  apply  the  well 
known  law  of  Carnot. 

Instead  of  imagining  a  cycle  of  this  kind,  I  shall  use  a  small 
calculation  that  will  lead  us  to  the  same  result.  In  all  cases  in 
which  the  state  of  a  system  is  determined  by  the  temperature  T  and 
the  volume  v,  and  in  which  the  only  force  exerted  by  the  system  is 
a  normal  pressure  p  uniformly  distributed  over  the  surface,  there  is 
a  simple  thermodynamic  relation  by  which  we  can  learn  something 
about  the  internal  energy  e.  If  we  choose  v  and  T  as  independent 
variables,  the  equation  has  the  form 


This  may  be  applied  to  our  envelop  filled  with  rays,  as  well  as  to 
a  gas;  in  a  certain  sense  the  case  of  the  radiation  is  even  the  more 
simple  of  the  two.  The  reason  for  this  is,  that  the  density  of  the 
energy  depends  solely  on  the  temperature,  so  that,  in  an  isothermic 
expansion,  the  new  part  that  is  added  to  the  volume  is  immediately 
filled  with  an  amount  of  energy  proportional  to  its  extent.  The 
energy  contained  in  the  space  that  was  already  occupied  by  the  radia- 
tion, remains  unchanged,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  energy 
contained  within  the  body  M.  In  order  to  see  this,  we  must  keep 
in  mind  that,  by  what  has  been  found  in  §  21,  the  pressure  is  equal 
to  one  third  of  the  electromagnetic  energy  per  unit  of  volume,  so 
that  the  body  remains  exposed  to  the  same  pressure  and,  the  tem- 
perature being  likewise  constant,  will  undergo  no  change  at  all. 

Let  us  denote  by  K  the  electromagnetic  energy  per  unit  of 
volume,  which,  as  we  must  take  together  all  wave-lengths,  may  be 
represented  by 

00 

K-fF(H,F)dl. 

0 

Then  we  shall  have 


74  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

and 

dt       jf. 
o~  =  A, 

8v 

because,  if  the  volume  is  increased  by  dv,  the  energy  augments   by 
Kdv.     Substituting  in  the  formula  (126),  we  find 


dK  _  .  dT 
K  ~~     l   T   ' 


from  which  we  deduce  by  integration 


where  C  is  a  constant.  The  total  energy  per  unit  of  volume,  or  as, 
in  virtue  of  (125),  we  may  also  say,  the  total  emissivity  of  a  black 
body  must  be  proportional  to  the  fourth  power  of  the  temperature. 

55.  Passing  on  now  to  Wien's  law,  I  shall  first  state  the  form 
in  which  it  may  be  put  if  we  avail  ourselves  of  that  of  Boltzinann. 
Wien  has  not  succeeded  in  determining  the  form  of  the  function, 
which  indeed  cannot  be  done  by  thermodynarnic  reasoning  anil 
electromagnetic  principles  alone;  he  has  however  shown  us  how,  as 
soon  as  the  form  of  the  function  is  known  for  one  temperature,  it 
may  be  found  from  this  for  any  other  temperature. 

This  may  be  expressed  as  follows.  If  T  and  T'  are  two  diffe- 
rent temperatures,  A  and  A'  two  wave-lengths,  such  that 

i:l'=T':T,  (127) 

we  shall  have 

F(l,  T)  :  F(i',  T)  =  A'5  :  i5.  (128) 

If  we  put  this  in  the  form 


we  see  that  really  F(Ji',  7")  can  be  determined  for  all  values  of  A', 
if  we  know  F(l,  T)  for  all  values  of  L 

We  can  also  infer  from  (127)  and  (128)  that  if,  while  varying 
I  and  T,  we  keep  the  product  /IT  constant,  the  function  isF(Ji,  T) 
must  also  remain  unchanged.  Therefore,  this  last  expression  must 
be  some  function  f(kT)  of  the  product  of  wave-length  and  tempera- 
ture, so  that  our  original  function  must  be  of  the  form 

(129) 


WIEN'S  LAW. 


75 


The  relation  between  the  forms  of  the  function  .F(A,  71)  for 
different  temperatures  comes  out  very  beautifully.  If,  for  a  definite 
temperature  T,  we  plot  the  values  of  l'\i,  7'),  taking  i  as  abscissae 
and  F  as  ordinates,  we  shall  obtain  a  certain  curve,  which  may  be 
said  to  represent  the  distribution  of  energy  in  the  spectrum  of  a 
black  body  of  the  temperature  T.  From  this  we  can  get  the  corre- 
sponding curve  for  the  temperature  T'  by  changing  all  abscissae  in 
the  ratio  of  T  to  T,  and  all  ordinates  in  the  ratio  of  T5  to  T*. 

The  form  of  the  curve  has  been  determined  with  considerable 
accuracy  by  the  measurements  of  Lummer  and  Pringsheim.1)  The 
accompanying  figure  will  give  an  idea 
of  it.  It  shows  that,  as  could  have 
been  expected,  the  intensity  is  small 
for  very  short  and  very  long  waves, 
reaching  a  maximum  for  a  definite 
wave-length  which  is  represented  by 
OA,  and  which  I  shall  call  lm.  Now, 
if  the  curve  undergoes  the  change  of 
shape  of  which  I  have  just  spoken, 
this  maximum  will  be  shifted  towards 
the  right  if  T'  is  lower  than  T,  and 
towards  the  left  in  the  opposite  case,  the  value  of  Am  being  in  fact 
inversely  proportional  to  the  temperature.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
Wien's  law  is  often  called  the  displacement- law  (Verschiebungsgesetz). 

The  diagram  may  also  be  used  for  showing  that  Boltzmann's 
law  is  included  in  the  formulae  (127)  and  (128).  The  value  of  K 
is  given  by  the  total  area  included  between  the  curve  and  the  axis 
of  abscissae,  and  this  area  changes  in  the  ratio  of  T*  to  T'4,  when 
the  abscissae  and  ordinates  are  changed  as  has  been  stated. 

56.  It  would  take  too  much  of  our  time,  if  I  were  to  give  you 
a  complete  account  of  the  theoretical  deductions  by  which  Wien  found 
his  law.  Just  as  in  Boltzmann's  reasoning,  we  can  distinguish 
two  parts  in  it,  one  that  is  based  on  the  equations  of  the  electro- 
magnetic field,  and  a  second  that  is  purely  thermodynamic. 

We  have  already  seen  that,  for  every  temperature  T,  there  is  a 
perfectly  definite  state  of  radiation  in  the  ether,  which  has  the  pro- 
perty that  it  can  be  in  equilibrium  with  ponderable  bodies  of  the 
temperature  T.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  I  shall  call  this  the  natural 


1)  0.  Lummer  u.  E.  Pringsheim,  Die  Strahlung  eines  schwarzen  Korpers 
zwischen  100  und  1300°  C,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  63  (1897),  p.  395;  Die  Verteilung 
der  Energie  im  Spektrum  des  schwarzen  Korpers,  Verh.  d.  deutscken  phys.  Ges. 
1  (1899),  p.  23. 


76  U-  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

state  of  radiation  for  the  temperature  T.  It  is  characterized  by 
a  definite  amount  K  of  energy  per  unit  of  volume,  proportional 
to  I*4,  and  which  may  therefore  be  used,  instead  of  T  itself,  for 
defining  the  state  of  the  ether.  If  we  speak  of  a  natural  state  of 
radiation  with  the  energy -density  K,  we  shall  know  perfectly  what 
we  mean. 

In  this  natural  state  the  total  energy  is  distributed  in  a  definite 
manner  over  the  various  wave-lengths,  a  distribution  that  is  expressed 
by  the  function  F(i,  T).  Now,  we  can  of  course  imagine  other 
states  having  the  same  density  of  energy  K,  but  differing  from  the 
natural  one  by  the  way  in  which  the  energy  is  distributed  over  the 
wave-lengths;  it  might  be,  for  example,  that  the  energy  of  the  long 
waves  were  somewhat  smaller,  and  that  of  the  short  ones  somewhat 
greater  than  it  is  in  the  natural  state. 

Wien  takes  the  case  of  a  closed  envelop  perfectly  reflecting  on 
the  inside,  and  containing  only  ether.  He  supposes  this  ether  to  be 
the  seat  of  a  natural  state  of  radiation  A  with  the  energy-density  K; 
this  may  have  been  produced  by  a  body  of  the  temperature  T  that 
has  been  temporarily  lodged  in  the  enclosure,  and  has  been  removed 
by  some  artifice.  Of  course,  this  operation  would  require  a  super- 
human experimental  skill  and  especially  great  quickness,  but  we  can 
suppose  it  to  be  succesfully  performed.  If  then  we  leave  the  vessel 
to  itself,  the  radiations  that  are  imprisoned  within  it,  will  continue 
to  exist  for  ever,  the  rays  being  over  and  over  again  reflected  by  the 
walls,  without  any  change  in  their  wave-lengths  and  their  intensity. 

At  this  point,  Wien  introduces  an  imaginary  experiment  by 
which  the  state  of  things  can  be  altered.  It  consists  in  giving  to 
the  walls  a  slow  motion  by  which  the  interior  volume  is  increased  or 
diminished.  We  have  already  seen  (§  46)  that,  if  a  mirror  struck 
normally  by  a  beam  of  rays  is  made  to  recede,  this  will  have  a  twofold 
influence  on  the  reflected  rays;  their  frequency  is  lowered,  so  that 
the  wave-length  becomes  larger,  and  their  amplitude  is  diminished. 
The  same  will  be  true,  though  in  a  less  degree,  if  the  incidence  of 
the  rays  is  not  normal  but  oblique,  and  in  this  case  also  the  effect 
can  be  easily  calculated. 

In  order  to  fix  .our  ideas  we  shall  suppose  the  walls  of  our 
vessel  to  expand.  Then,  every  time  a  ray  is  reflected  by  them,  it 
has  its  amplitude  diminished  and  its  wave-length  increased,  so  that, 
after  a  certain  time,  we  shall  have  got  a  new  state  of  radiation  B, 
differing  from  the  original  one  by  its  energy  per  unit  of  volume  and 
by  the  distribution  of  the  energy  over  the  wave-lengths.  The  den- 
sity of  energy  will  have  a  certain  value  K',  smaller  than  the  original 
value  K,  and  the  distribution  over  the  wave-lengths  will  have  been 
somewhat  altered  in  favour  of  the  larger  wave-lengths. 


WIEN'S  LAW.  77 

Of  course,  K'  can  have  different  values,  because  the  expansion  by 
which  the  new  state  is  produced  may  be  a  large  or  a  small  one. 
Since,  however,  the  changes  in  the  amplitudes  and  those  in  the  wave- 
lengths are  closely  connected,  it  is  clear  that  the  distribution  of  the 
energy  over  the  wave-lengths  must  be  quite  determinate  if  we  know 
K',  so  that  it  was  possible  for  Wien  to  calculate  it.  His  result  may 
be  expressed  as  follows.1)  If 

<f>(X)dl  (130) 

is  the  part  of  the  original  energy  per  unit  of  volume  that  is  due  to 
the  rays  with  wave-lengths  between  1  and  Jl  +  di,  the  amount  of  en- 
ergy corresponding  to  the  same  interval  in  the  new  state  B  is  given  by 


57.  I  hope  I  have  given  you  a  sufficiently  clear  idea  of  one 
part  of  Wien's  demonstration.  As  to  the  second  part,  the  thermo- 
dynamic  one,  its  object  is  to  show  that  the  new  state  S,  in  which 
there  is  a  density  of  energy  K',  cannot  be  different  from  a  natural 
state  of  radiation  having  the  same  K',  that  it  must  therefore  itself 
be  a  natural  state.  If  it  were  not,  we  could  place  our  vessel  con- 
taining the  state  _B  against  a  second  vessel  containing  a  natural  state 
A  with  the  same  value  K',  the  two  states  being  at  first  separated 
by  the  walls  of  the  two  vessels.  Then  we  could  make  an  opening 
in  these  walls,  and  close  it  immediately  by  means  of  a  very  thin  plate 
of  some  transparent  substance.  Such  a  plate  will  transmit  part  of 
the  rays  by  which  it  is  struck,  and,  on  account  of  the  well-known 
phenomena  of  interference,  the  coefficient  of  transmission  will  not  be 
the  same  for  different  kinds  of  rays.  Let  us  suppose  it  to  be  some- 
what greater  for  the  long  waves  than  for  the  short  ones,  and  let  us 
also  assume  that  the  state  J3  contains  more  of  the  long  waves  than 
the  state  A',  and  less  of  the  short  waves.  Then,  it  is  easily  seen  that, 
in  the  first  instants  after  communication  has  been  established  between 
the  two  vessels,  more  energy  will  pass  from  S  towards  A'  than  in 
the  inverse  direction,  so  that  the  energy  of  the  two  states  will  not 
remain  equal.  This  can  be  shown  to  be  in  contradiction  with  the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics. 

Our  conclusion  must  therefore  be  that,  by  means  of  the  ex- 
pression (131),  we  can  calculate  the  distribution  of  energy  in  a  natural 
state  characterized  by  K',  as  soon  as  we  know  the  distribution,  re- 
presented by  (130),  for  a  natural  state  characterized  by  K.  Now, 
both  states  being  natural  ones,  we  shall  have,  if  we  write  T  and  T' 


1)  Note  30. 


78  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

for  the  temperatures  to  which  they  correspond, 

K:K'=T*:T'1. 

Therefore,  (131)  becomes 


by  which  we   are  led  to  Wien's  law   in   the   form   in   which  I  have 
stated  it. 

58.  Though  Boltzmann  and  Wien  have  gone  far  towards 
determining  the  function  F(3.,  T\  the  precise  form  of  the  curve  in 
Fig.  2  remains  to  be  found,  and  since  the  means  of  thermodynamics 
are  exhausted,  we  can  only  hope  to  attain  this  object,  if  we  succeed 
in  forming  some  adequate  mental  picture  of  the  processes  which  mani- 
fest themselves  in  the  phenomena  of  radiation  and  absorption. 

The  importance  of  the  problem  will  be  understood,  if  one  takes 
into  account  that  the  curve  in  Fig.  2  requires  for  its  determination 
at  least  two  constants.  Calling  im  the  abscissa  OA  for  which  the 
ordinate  is  a  maximum,  we  have  by  Wien's  law 


and  if,  as  before,  the  total  area  included  between  the  curve  and  the 
axis  of  abscissae  is  denoted  by  K,  we  shall  have 


Of  the  two  constants  a  and  b,  the  first  determines,  for  a  given  tem- 
perature T,  the  position  of  the  point  A,  and  the  second  relates  to 
the  values  of  the  ordinates,  because  the  larger  these  are,  the  greater 
will  be  the  area  K.  Now,  if  the  state  of  radiation  is  produced  by  a 
ponderable  body,  the  values  of  the  two  constants  must  be  determined 
by  something  in  the  constitution  of  this  body,  and  these  values  can 
only  have  the  universal  meaning  of  which  we  have  spoken,  if  all 
ponderable  bodies  have  something  in  common.  If  we  wish  comple- 
tely to  account  for  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  curve,  we  shall 
have  to  discover  these  common  features  in  the  constitution  of  all 
ponderable  matter. 

59.  I  shall  speak  of  three  theories  by  which  the  problem  has 
been  at  least  partially  solved,  beginning  with  the  one  that  goes  farthest 
of  all.  This  has  been  developed  by  Planck1),  and  leads  to  a  definite 
formula  for  the  function  f(lT)  in  (129),  viz.  to 

1)  M.  Planck,  tiber  irreversible  Strahlungsvorgange,  Ann.  Phys.  1  (1900), 
p.  69;  tiber  das  Gesetz  cler  Energieverteilung  im  Normalspektrum,  Ann.  Phys.  4 
(1901),  p.  563;  tiber  die  Elementarquanta  der  Materie  und  der  Elektrizitlit, 
ibid.,  p.  564;  see  also  his  book:  Vorlesungen  fiber  die  Theorie  der  Warme- 
strahlung,  Leipzig,  1906. 


THEORY  OF  PLANCK.  79 

-JT-,  (132) 

«U    —1 

in  which  s  is  the  basis  of  natural  logarithms,  whereas  h  and  k  are 
two  universal  physical  constants. 

Planck's  theory  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  every  ponde- 
rable body  contains  an  immense  number  of  electromagnetic  vibrators, 
or  ,,resonators"  as  he  calls  them,  each  of  which  has  its  own  period. 
If  a  body  is  enclosed  within  the  perfectly  reflecting  walls  we  have 
so  often  mentioned,  there  will  be  a  state  of  equilibrium,  on  the  one 
hand  between  the  resonators  and  the  radiation  in  the  ether,  and  on 
the  other  hand  between  the  resonators  and  the  ordinary  heat  motion 
of  the  molecules  and  atoms  constituting  the  ponderable  matter.  The 
first  of  these  equilibria  can  be  examined  by  means  of  the  electro- 
magnetic equations,  and,  in  order  to  understand  the  second,  one 
could  try  to  trace  the  interchange  of  energy  between  the  resonators 
and  the  ordinary  particles.  Planck,  however,  has  not  followed  this 
course,  which  would  lead  us  into  very  serious  difficulties,  but  has 
found  his  formula  by  reasonings  of  a  different  kind. 

In  one  of  his  papers  he  deduces  it  by  examining  what  partition 
of  the  energy  between  the  two  sets  of  particles,  the  molecules  and 
the  resonators,  is  to  be  considered  as  the  most  probable  one.  Of 
course  this  is  an  expression,  the  precise  meaning  of  which  has  to  be 
fixed  before  we  can  make  it  the  basis  of  the  theory.  I  must  abstain 
from  explaining  the  sense  in  which  it  is  understood  by  Planck. 
There  is  one  point,  however,  in  his  theory  to  which  I  must  refer  for 
a  moment.  He  is  obliged  to  assume  that  the  resonators  can  gain 
or  lose  energy,  not  quite  gradually  by  infinitely  small  amounts,  but 
only  by  certain  portions  of  a  definite  finite  magnitude.  These  por- 
tions are  taken  to  be  different  for  resonators  of  different  frequencies. 
The  portions  of  energy  which  we  have  to  imagine  when  we  speak 
of  a  resonator  of  the  frequency  n,  have  an  amount  that  is  given 

by  the  expression 

hn 

It  is  in  this  way  that  the  constant  h  is  introduced  into  the  equations. 

As  to  the  constant  k,  it  has  a  very  simple  physical  meaning. 
According  to  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of 
the  progressive  motion  of  a  molecule  is  equal  for  all  gases,  when 
compared  at  the  same  temperature.  This  mean  energy  is  proportional 
to  T,  and  if  we  represent  it  by  ffcT,  the  quantity  k  will  be  the 
constant  appearing  in  the  formula  (132). 

Planck's  law  shows  a  most  remarkable  agreement  with  the 
experimental  results  of  Lumrner  and  Pringsheim,  and  it  is  of 


80  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

high  value  because  it  enables  us  to  deduce  from  measurements  on 
radiation  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule,  which,  in  its  turn, 
leads  us  to  the  masses  of  the  atoms  in  absolute  measure.  As  the 
numbers  obtained  in  this  way1)  are  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude 
as  those  that  have  been  found  by  other  means,  there  is  undoubtedly 
much  truth  in  the  theory.  Yet,  we  cannot  say  that  the  mechanism 
of  the  phenomena  has  been  unveiled  by  it,  and  it  must  be  admitted 
that  it  is  difficult  to  see  a  reason  for  this  partition  of  energy  by 
finite  portions,  which  are  not  even  equal  to  each  other,  but  vary 
from  one  resonator  to  the  other. 

60.  I  shall  dwell  somewhat  longer  on  the  second  theory2),  be- 
cause it  is  an  application  of  the  theory  of  electrons,  and  therefore 
properly  belongs  to  my  subject.  In  a  certain  sense,  it  may,  I  think,  be 
considered  as  rather  satisfactory,  but  it  has  the  great  defect  of  being 
confined  to  long  waves.  I  may  be  permitted  perhaps,  by  way  of  in- 
troduction, to  tell  you  by  what  considerations  I  have  been  led  to 
this  theory.  It  is  well  known  that,  in  general,  the  optical  properties 
of  ponderable  bodies  cannot  be  deduced  quantitatively  with  any 
degree  of  accuracy  from  the  electrical  properties.  For  example,  though 
Maxwell's  theoretical  inference,  published  long  ago  in  his  treatise, 
that  good  conductors  for  electricity  must  be  but  little  transparent 
for  light,  is  corroborated  by  the  fact  that  metals  are  very  opaque, 
yet,  if  we  compare  the  optical  constants  of  a  metal,  one  of  which  is 
its  coefficient  of  absorption,  with  the  formulae  of  the  electromagnetic 
theory  of  light,  taking  for  the  conductivity  the  ordinary  value  that 
is  found  by  measurements  on  electric  currents,  there  is  a  very  wide 
disagreement.  This  shows,  and  so  does  the  discrepancy  between  the 
refractive  indices  of  dielectrics  and  the  square  root  of  their  dielectric 
constants,  that,  in  the  case  of  the  very  rapid  vibrations  of  light,  cir- 
cumstances come  into  play  with  which  we  are  not  concerned  in  our 
experiments  on  steady  or  slowly  alternating  electric  currents. 

If  this  idea  be  right,  we  may  hope  to  find  a  better  agreement, 
if  we  examine  the  ,,optical"  properties  as  we  may  continue  to  call 
them,  not  for  rays  of  light,  but  for  infra-red  rays  of  the  largest 
wave-lengths  that  are  known  to  exist. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  the  metals,  this  expectation  has  been  verified 
in  a  splendid  way  by  the  measurements  of  the  absorption  that  were 
made  some  years  ago  by  Hagen  and  Rubens.3)  These  physicists  have 

1)  Note  31. 

2)  Lorentz,   On  the  emission   and   absorption   by  metals  of  rays  of  heat 
of  great  wave-lengths,  Amsterdam  Proc.,  1902 — 03,  p.  GG6. 

3)  E.    Hagen    u.    H.    Rubens,    tJber   Beziehungen    des    Reflexions-    und 
Emissionsvermogens  der  Metalle  zu  ihrem  elektrischen  Leitvermogen,  Ann.  Phys. 
11  (1903),  p.  873. 


ABSORPTION  BY  A  THIN  METALLIC  PLATE.  81 

shown  that  rays  whose  wave-length  is  between  8  and  25  microns,  are 
absorbed  to  a  degree  that  may  be  calculated  with  considerable  accuracy 
from  the  known  conductivity.1)  We  can  conclude  from  this  that,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  theory  of  absorption  in  the  case  of  these  long  waves, 
we  only  have  to  understand  the  nature  of  a  common  current  of  con- 
duction. Moreover,  if  in  this  line  of  thought,  we  can  form  for  our- 
selves a  picture  of  the  absorption,  it  must  also  be  possible  to  get  an 
insight  into  the  way  in  which  rays  are  emitted  by  a  metal.  Indeed, 
the  universal  validity  of  Kirchhoff's  law  clearly  proves  that  the 
causes  which  produce  the  absorption  by  a  body,  and  those  which  call 
forth  its  radiation,  must  be  very  closely  related.  Therefore,  as  soon 
as  we  have  an  adequate  idea  about  a  common  current  of  conduction, 
we  may  hope  to  be  able  to  explain  the  absorption  and  the  emissivity 
of  a  metal,  and  to  calculate  the  ratio  between  the  two,  i.  e.  our  uni- 
versal function  F(i,  T~).  However,  we  can  only  hope  to  succeed  in 
this,  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  long  waves. 

Now,  as  we  have  already  seen,  a  very  satisfactory  conception  of 
the  nature  of  a  current  of  conduction  has  been  worked  out  by 
Drude.  We  must  therefore  try  to  obtain  a  theory  of  the  radiation 
and  emission  of  metals  that  is  based  on  his  general  principles,  and 
in  which  we  simply  assume  that  the  metal  contains  a  large  number 
of  free  electrons,  moving  with  such  speeds  that  their  mean  kinetic 
energy  is  equal  to  aT. 

61.  In  doing  so,  we  shall  simplify  as  much  as  possible  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case.  We  shall  consider  a  metal  plate,  whose  thickness 
A  is  so  small  that  the  absorption  may  be  considered  as  proportional  to 
it,  and  that,  in  examining  the  emission,  we  need  not  consider  the  ab- 
sorption which  the  rays  emitted  by  the  back  half  of  the  plate  undergo, 
while  traversing  the  layers  lying  in  front  of  it.  We  shall  also  confine 
ourselves  to  rays  whose  direction  is  perpendicular  to  the  plate  or  makes 
an  infinitely  small  angle  with  the  normal.  These  assumptions  will 
greatly  facilitate  our  calculations  without  detracting  from  the  generality 
of  the  final  result.  If  we  trust  to  Kirchhoff's  law,  the  value  which 
we  shall  find  for  the  ratio  between  the  emissivity  and  the  coefficient 
of  absorption  may  be  expected  to  hold  for  all  bodies  and  for  all 
directions  of  the  rays. 

The  calculation  of  the  absorption  is  very  easy.  By  the  ordinary 
formulae  of  the  electromagnetic  field  we  find  for  the  coefficient  of 
absorption8) 


1)  Note  32.        2)  Note  38. 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


82  II-  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

and  here  we  have  only  to  substitute  the  value  of  0,  given  by  Drude's 
theory.     Using  the  formula  (119),  we  find 


62.  The  question  now  arises,  in  what  manner  a  piece  of  metal 
in  which  free  electrons  are  moving  in  all  directions  can  be  the  source 
of  a  radiation.     The  answer  is  contained  in  what  we  have  seen  in  a 
former  lecture.     We  know  that  an  electron  can  be  the  centre  of  an 
emission   of  energy  only  when  its  velocity  changes.     The  cause  of 
the  emission  must  therefore  be  looked  for  in  the  impacts  against  the 
metallic  atoms,  by  which  the  electron  is  made  to  rebound  in  a  new 
direction,  so  that  the  radiation  of  heat,  in  the  case  we  are  now  con- 
sidering, very  much  resembles  the  production  of  Rontgen  rays,  as 
it  is  explained  in  Wiechert's  and  J.  J.  Thomson's  theory. 

The  mathematical  operations  required  for  the  determination  of 
the  effects  of  the  impacts  are  rather  complicated,  the  more  so  because 
we  must  decompose  the  total  radiation  into  the  parts  corresponding 
to  different  wave-lengths.  I  shall  therefore  give  only  a  general  outline 
of  the  calculations. 

I  must  mention  in  advance  that  the  decomposition  of  which 
I  have  spoken  just  now  will  be  performed  by  means  of  Fourier's 
theorem,  and  that  the  duration  of  an  impact  will  be  taken  to  be  ex- 
tremely small  in  comparison  with  the  time  of  vibration  of  the  rays 
considered.  We  shall  even  make  the  same  assumption  with  regard 
to  the  time  between  two  successive  impacts  of  an  electron.  This  is 
justified  by  the  experiments  of  Hagen  and  Rubens.  It  is  easily 
seen  that  the  conductivity  of  a  metal  can  be  given  by  the  formula 
(119),  only  if  the  electric  force  acts  on  the  body  either  continually 
or  at  least  for  a  time  during  which  a  large  number  of  encounters  of 
an  electron  take  place.  Therefore,  the  result  found  by  flagen  and 
Rubens,  viz.  that  the  absorption  corresponds  to  the  coefficient  of 
conductivity,  proves  that  the  time  during  which  the  electric  force 
acts  in  one  and  the  same  direction,  i.  e.  half  a  period,  contains  very 
many  times  the  interval  between  two  successive  encounters. 

63.  In  §  51  we  have  considered  the  radiation  from  the  body  M 
through  two  infinitely  small  planes  o  and  a'.    We  shall  now  suppose 
the  first   of  these    to    be    situated    in    the    front    surface   of   the   thin 
metallic  plate,  and  we  shall  fix  our  attention  on  the  radiation  issuing 
from  the  corresponding  part  cod  of  the   plate,   and   directed   towards 
the   element  to',  parallel  to  o>,  and  situated  at  a  point  P  of  the  line 
drawn  normally  to  the  plate  from  the  centre  0  of  the  element  to. 


EMISSION  BY  A  THIN  PLATE.  83 

We  shall   begin  by  taking   into  account  only  the  component  of  the 
electric  vibrations  in  a  certain  direction  h  perpendicular  to  OP. 

Let  us  choose  the  point  0  as  origin  of  coordinates,  drawing  the 
axis  of  e  along  OP,  that  of  x  in  the  direction  //,  and  denoting  the 
distance  OP  by  r.  According  to  what  has  been  found  in  §  39, 
a  single  electron,  moving  with  the  velocity  V  in  the  part  of  the  plate 
considered,  will  produce  at  P  a  dielectric  displacement  whose  first 
component  is  given  by 

«      dv,,. 
~  ~dt   ' 


if  we    take   the  value    of  the   differential  coefficient   for  the  proper 
instant. 

On  account  of  our  assumption  as  to  the  thickness  of  the   plate, 
this  instant  may  be  represented  for  all  the  electrons  in  the  portion  ad 

Dv  ^  ~~    ~  »  if  ^  's  khe  time  f°r  which  we  wish  to  determine  the  state 

of  things    at   the   point   P.     We    may   therefore  write    for   the    first 
component  of  the  dielectric  displacement  at  P 


The  flow  of  energy  through  o'  per  unit  of  time  will  be 


Since  the  motion  of  the  electrons  between  the  metallic  atoms  is 
highly  irregular,  we  shall  have,  at  rapidly  succeeding  instants,  a  large 
number  of  impacts  in  which  the  changes  of  the  velocity  are  widely 
different.  The  state  at  P,  which  is  due  to  all  these  impacts,  will 
show  the  same  irregularity.  Nevertheless,  we  must  try  to  deduce 
from  the  formulae  relating  to  it,  results  concerning  those  quantities 
that  can  make  themselves  felt  in  actual  experiments. 

Results  of  this  kind  are  obtained  by  considering  the  mean  values 
of  the  variable  quantities  calculated  for  a  sufficiently  long  lapse  of 
time.  We  shall  suppose  this  time  to  extend  from  t  =  0  to  t  =  &. 
If  the  mean  value  of  d|  is  denoted  by  d|,  we  shall  have  for  the  flow 
of  energy  through  03'  that  is  accessible  to  our  means  of  observation 

(135) 


64.  The  introduction  of  this  long  time  &  is  also  very  useful 
for  the  application  of  Fourier's  theorem.  Whatever  be  the  way  in 
which  da  changes  from  one  instant  to  the  next,  we  can  always  expand 
it  in  a  series  by  the  formula 


84  H.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 


where  s  is  a  positive  whole  number,  each  coefficient  as  being  deter- 
mined by 


o 
It  appears  from  (136)  that  the  frequency  of  one  of  the  terms  is 


so  that  the  corresponding  wave-length  is  given  by 


The  interval  &  being  very  large,  the  values  of  A  belonging  to  small 
values  of  s  will  be  so  too;  we  shall  not,  however,  have  to  speak  of 
these  very  long  waves,  because  they  may  be  expected  to  represent 
no  appreciable  part  of  the  total  radiation.  The  rays  with  which  we 
are  concerned,  will  have  wave-lengths  below  a  certain  upper  limit  i0; 
therefore,  provided  the  time  &  (which  we  are  free  to  choose  as  long 
as  we  like)  be  long  enough,  they  will  correspond  to  very  high  values 
of  the  number  s.  Now,  if  JLt  and  A4  +  1  are  two  successive  wave- 
lengths, we  shall  have 


_     _    __       __ 

I,  s  +  i      s  +  1  ' 

which  is  a  very  small  number.  The  wave-lengths  corresponding  to 
the  successive  terms  in  our  series  are  thus  seen  to  diminish  by  ex- 
ceedingly small  steps.  This  means  that,  if  we  were  to  decompose 
the  radiation  represented  by  (136)  into  a  spectrum,  we  should  find  a 
very  large  number  of  lines  lying  closely  together.  Their  mutual 
distances  may  be  indefinitely  diminished  by  increasing  the  length  of 
the  time  &  and  the  values  of  s  corresponding  to  the  part  of  the 
spectrum  we  wish  to  consider.  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  can 
deduce  from  our  formulae  the  existence  of  a  continuous  spectrum 
and  the  laws  relating  to  it. 

Let  i  and  A  +  dk  be  two  wave-lengths,  which,  from  a  physical 
point  of  view,  may  be  said  to  lie  infinitely  near  each  other.  If  # 
is  duly  lengthened,  the  part  of  the  spectrum  corresponding  to  dk 
contains  a  large  number  of  spectral  lines,  for  which  we  find 


EMISSION  BY  A  THIN  PLATE.  H5 

This  is  clear,  if,  after  having  written  (138)  in  the  form 


_ 

i    ' 

we  observe  that  the  number  of  lines  is  the  same  as  the  number  of 
integers  lying  between  the  limits 


i  +  m   and     i  ' 

for  which  we  may  take  the  difference 


because,  in  virtue  of  our  supposition,  this  difference  is  much  larger 
than  1. 

We  have  now  to  substitute  the  value  (136)  in  the  equation  (135). 
It  is  easily  seen  that  the  product  of  two  terms  of  the  series  for  dx 
will  give  0,  if  integrated  with  respect  to  time  between  the  limits  0 
and  &.  Moreover 


and  (135)  becomes 

«=O9 

(139) 


This  is  the  total   flow  of  energy  through  to'.     In  order  to   find  the 
part  of  it,  corresponding  to  wave-lengths  between  I  and  /I  +  d).,  we 

have  only  to  observe  that  the  -rt  -di  spectral  lines  lying  within  that 

interval,  may  be  considered  to  have  equal  intensities.1) 

In   other  terms,  the   value  of  at  may   be  regarded  as   equal   for 
each  of  them,  so  that  they  contribute  to  the  sum  in  (139)  an  amount 


Consequently,  the  part  of  the  flow  of  energy,  belonging  to  the  inter- 
val of  wave-lengths  di,  is  given  by 


and  our  problem  will  be  solved,  if  we  succeed  in  calculating  a*. 

65.     The   following   mathematical   developments   are   somewhat 
more  rigorous  than  those  which  I  gave  in  my  paper  on  the  subject. 

1)  Note  34. 


86  U.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

In  fact,  I  shall  now  introduce  Maxwell's  law  for  the  distribution 
of  the  velocities  among  the  electrons,  and  take  into  account  that  the 
free  paths  are  not  all  of  the  same  length.  At  the  same  time  I  shall 
introduce  a  simplification  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Langevin1),  and 
by  which  it  will  be  possible  to  -give  in  a  small  space  the  essential 
part  of  the  calculation. 

By  (134)  and  (137)  we  see  that 


a  * —  — 

o 


where  the  square  brackets  serve  to  indicate   the  value   of  vx  at  the 

time  t  •  --- 
c 

The  meaning  of  this  equation  is,  that  we  must  first,  for  one 
definite  electron,  calculate  the  integral,  taking  into  account  all  the 
values  of  the  acceleration  occurring  during  the  interval  of  time 

between  -     -  and  &  —   —  •    This  having  been  done,  we  have  to  take 

the  sum  of  the  values  that  are  found   in  this   way  for  all  the  free 
electrons  contained  in  the  part  ad  of  the  plate. 

Integrating  by  parts  we  find,  because   sin  -    -  vanishes    at   the 


limits, 


2  1  / 


T 


for  which,  understanding  by  v^  the  value  at  the  time  t,  we  may  also 
write 


By  this  artifice  of  partial  integration,  the  problem  is  reduced  to  a 
much  simpler  one.  If  we  had  directly  to  calculate  the  integral 
in  (141),  we  should  have  to  attend  to  the  intervals  of  time  during 
which  an  electron  is  subjected  to  the  force  which  makes  it  rebound 
from  an  atom  against  which  it  strikes;  indeed,  it  is  only  during  these 
intervals  that  there  is  an  acceleration.  On  the  other  hand,  the  inte- 
gral in  (142)  is  made  up  of  parts,  due,  not  only  to  the  times  of 


1)  See  his  translation  of  my  paper  in  H.  Abraham  et  P.  Langevin,  Les 
quantites  elementaires  d'e'lectricite,  ions,  electrons,  corpuscules,  Paris  (1905),  1, 
p.  507. 


EMISSION  BY  A  THIN  PLATE.  87 

impact,  but  also  to  all  intervening  intervals.  If  we  suppose  the  du- 
ration of  an  encounter  to  be  very  much  smaller  than  the  lapse  of 
time  between  two  successive  collisions  of  an  electron,  we  may  even 
confine  ourselves  to  the  part  that  corresponds  to  the  free  paths  be- 
tween these  collisions. 

While  an  electron  travels  over  one  of  these  free  paths,  its  velo- 
city Vx  is  constant.     We  may  also  neglect  the  change  in  the  factor 

cos  -.*-  (t  +  —  J  ,  because  the  time  between  two  encounters  is  supposed 

to  be  very  much  smaller  than  the  time  of  vibration  corresponding 
to  s.  The  part  of  a,  which  corresponds  to  one  electron,  and  to 
the  time  during  which  it  describes  one  of  its  free  paths,  is  therefore 
given  by 


if  we  understand  by  r  the  time  during  which  the  path  is  travelled 
over.  In  the  last  factor  we  may  take  for  t  the  value  corresponding 
to  the  middle  of  the  time  r. 

We  shall  now  fix  our  attention  on  all  the  paths  described  by 
all  the  electrons  during  the  time  &.  If  we  use  the  symbol  S  for 
denoting  a  sum  relating  to  all  these  free  paths,  we  shall  have 


66.    We  have  to  determine  the  square  of  the  sum  S.    This  may 
be  done  rather  easily,  because  the  products  of  two  terms 


TV,.  COS  -t-(t  +  - 


whether  they  correspond  to  two  different  free  paths  of  one  and  the 
same  electron,  or  to  two  paths  described  by  diS'erent  electrons  will 
give  0,  if  all  taken  together.  Indeed,  the  velocities  of  two  electrons 
are  wholly  independent  of  each  other,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of 
the  velocities  of  one  definite  electron  at  two  instants  between  which  it 
has  undergone  one  or  more  impacts.')  Therefore,  positive  and  negative 
values  of  V.,  being  distributed  quite  indiscriminately  between  the  terms 
of  (143),  positive  and  negative  signs  will  be  equally  probable  for  the 
products  of  two  terms. 

It   is   seen  in  this  way  that  we  have  only  to  calculate  the  sum 
of  the  squares  of  the  several  terms,  so  that  we  find 


1)  Note  35. 


88  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

Now,  since  the  irregular  motion  of  the  electrons  takes  place  with  the 
same  intensity  in  all  directions,  we  may  replace  v|  by  -J-V2.  Therefore, 
writing  I  for  the  length  r  \  V  \  of  the  free  path,  we  find 


a.a  = 

In  the  immense  number  of  terms  included  in  the  sum,  the  length  I 
is  very  different,  and  in  order  to  effect  the  summation  we  may 
begin  by  considering  only  those  terms  for  which  it  has  a  certain 
particular  value.  In  these  terms,  which  are  still  very  numerous,  the 

angle  -  ^  (t  +     }  has  values  that  are  distributed  at  random  over  an 
&  \        c  j 

interval  ranging  from  0  to  sn.  The  square  of  the  cosine  may  there- 
fore be  replaced  by  its  mean  value  \,  so  that 


67.  The  metallic  atoms  being  considered  as  immovable,  the 
velocity  of  an  electron  is  not  altered  by  a  collision.  We  can  there- 
fore fix  our  attention  on  a  certain  group  of  electrons  which  move 
along  their  zigzag-lines  with  a  definite  velocity  u.  During  the  time  &, 
one  of  these  particles  describes  a  large  number  of  free  paths,  this 

number  being  given  by 

u& 

IT1 

if  lm  is   the  mean  length  of  the  paths.     It  can  be  shown1)  that  the 
number  of  paths  whose  length  lies  between  I  and  I  +  dl,  is 


so  that 

i 
±*L»«-fc<H 

& 

is  the  part  of  the  sum  S(Z2)  contributed  by  these  paths.    Integrating 
with  respect  to  I  from  0  to  oo,  we  find 

2&ulm  (145) 

for  the  value  of  S(£2)  in  so  far  as  it  is  due  to  one  electron. 

The  total  number  of  electrons  in  the  part  of  the  metallic  plate 
under  consideration  is  N(o4  and,   by  Maxwell's  law,   among  these 

(146) 


1)  Note  36. 


KATIO  BETWEEN  EMISSIV1TY  AND  AHSOUPTION.  89 

have  velocities  between  u  and  u  -\-  du,  the  constant  q  being  related 
to  the  velocity  um  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  mean  value  of  u3, 
by  the  formula 

3 


In  order  to  find  the  total  value  of  S(P)  we  must  multiply  (145)  by 
(146),  and  integrate  the  product  between  the  limits  u  =  0  and  u  =  oo. 
Supposing  lm  to  be  the  same  for  all  values  of  u1),  we  find 


Finally,  the  equation  (144)  becomes 


and  the  expression  (140)  for  the  radiation  through  the  element  w' 
takes  the  form 


or,  in  virtue  of  (138),  if,  instead  of  lm,  um,  we  simply  write  I,  u, 

2  e*lNu 


3      r'i4 


OHO 


This  is  the  energy  radiated  per  unit  of  time,  in  so  far  as  it  belongs 
to  wave-lengths  between  i  and  i.  +  di,  and  to  the  components  of 
the  vibrations  in  one  direction  h.  Thus,  the  quantity  we  have  cal- 
culated is  exactly  what  was  represented  by  (121),  and  on  comparing 
the  two  expressions  we  find 


for  the  euiissivity  of  the  plate. 

68.    We  have  now  to  combine  this  with  the  value  (133),  which 
we  have  found   for  the   coefficient   of  absorption.     If  Kirchhoff's 

13 
law  is  to  hold,  the  ratio  -j-  must  be  independent  of  those  quantities 

by  which  one  metallic  plate  differs  from  the  other.  This  is  really 
seen  to  be  the  case,  since  the  number  N  of  electrons  per  unit  of 
volume,  the  mean  length  I  of  their  free  paths  and  the  thickness  ^ 

E 
of  the  plate  all  disappear  from  the  ratio.    We  really  get  for   ^  and 

for  F(l,  T~)  values  that  are  independent  of  the  peculiar  properties  of 
1)  Note  37. 


90  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

any  ponderable  body.  I  must  repeat  however  that  all  our  considerations 
only  hold  for  large  wave-lengths. 

Using  the  formulae  (125),  (133)  and  (147),  we  find 

(148) 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  this  result  is  of  the  form  (129)  and  that 
it  agrees  exactly  with  that  of  Planck.  This  may  be  seen,  if  in  (132) 
we  suppose  the  product  AT  to  have  a  very  large  value,  so  that  the 
exponent  is  very  small.  Then,  we  may  put 

ch 

Ch 


1 
=  1  + 


klT 


and  (132)  becomes 

F(l,  T)  =  - 

This  is  equal  to  (148),  because  our  coefficient  a  corresponds  to  f  k 
in  Planck's  notation.  As  has  been  stated,  the  mean  kinetic  energy 
of  a  molecule  of  a  gas  is  |-7>;T,  and  we  have  represented  it  by  ccT.1) 

69.  A  widely  different  theory  of  the  radiation  of  a  black  body 
has  been  developed  by  Jeans.2)  It  is  based  on  the  theorem  of  the 
so-called  equipartition  of  energy,  which  plays  an  important  part  in 
the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  and  in  molecular  theories  in  general. 
In  its  most  simple  form  it  was  discovered  by  Maxwell  in  1860; 
afterwards  it  was  largely  extended  by  Boltzmann,  and  Jeans  has 
given  an  ample  discussion  of  it  in  his  book  on  the  kinetic  theory 
of  gases. 

Maxwell  was  led  to  the  theorem  by  his  theoretical  investigations 
concerning  the  motion  of  systems  consisting  of  a  large  number  of 
molecules.  If,  from  a  mass  of  gas,  we  could  select  single  molecules, 
we  should  find  them  to  move  with  very  different  velocities,  and  to 
have  very  different  kinetic  energies.  The  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the 
progressive  motion,  taken  for  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  molecules 
will  however  be  the  same  in  adjacent  parts  of  the  gas,  if  the  tem- 
perature is  the  same  everywhere,  so  that  these  parts  can  be  said  to 
be  in  equilibrium.  This  will  even  be  true  if  the  gas  is  subjected  to 
external  forces,  such  as  the  force  of  gravity,  which  make  the  density 
change  from  point  to  point.  Also,  if  we  have  a  mixture  of  two 
gases,  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule  can  be  shown  to  be 
equal  for  the  two  constituents,  and  we  can  safely  assume  that  for 


1)  Note  38. 

2)  J.  H.  Jeans,   On  the  partition   of  energy  between  matter  and   aether, 
Phil.  Mag.  (6)  10  (1905),  p.  91. 


EQUIPART1TION  OF  KNERQY.  91 

two  gases  that  are  not  mixed,  but  kept  apart,  this  equality  of  the 
mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule  is  the  condition  for  the  existence 
of  equilibrium  of  temperature.  We  can  express  this  by  saying  that 
the  kinetic  energy  of  a  gas,  in  so  far  as  it  is  due  to  the  progressive 
motion  of  the  molecules,  can  be  calculated  by  attributing  to  each 
molecule  an  amount  of  energy  having  the  same  definite  value, 
whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  gas. 

This  amount  of  energy  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  tempera- 
ture T,  and  may  therefore  be  represented,  as  I  have  done  already 
several  times,  by  aT,  u  being  a  universal  constant. 

We  can  express  the  result  in  a  somewhat  different  way.  If  the 
molecules  of  the  gas  are  supposed  to  be  perfectly  elastic  and  rigid 
smooth  spheres,  the  only  motion  with  which  we  are  concerned  in 
these  questions  is  their  translation;  the  position  of  the  particles  can 
therefore  be  determined  by  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z  of  their  centres. 
It'  AT  is  the  number  of  molecules,  the  configuration  of  the  whole 
system  requires  for  its  determination  3JV  coordinates,  or,  as  is  often 
said,  the  system  has  3N  degrees  of  freedom.  To  each  degree  of 
freedom,  or  to  each  coordinate  x,  y  or  z,  corresponds  a  certain  velo- 
city x,  y  or  z,  and  also  a  certain  kinetic  energy  $mxa,  ^my*,  \-ms*. 
The  total  energy  of  the  gas  can  be  calculated  by  taking  %a.T  for 
the  kinetic  energy  corresponding  to  each  degree  of  freedom.  The 
factor  ^  is  here  introduced  because  the  total  kinetic  energy  of  a 
molecule,  whose  mean  value  is  ctT,  is  the  sum  of  the  quantities 
's*,  corresponding  to  its  three  degrees  of  freedom. 


70.  These  remarks  will  suffice  for  the  understanding  of  what 
is  meant  by  the  equipartition  of  energy  in  less  simple  cases.  The 
configuration  of  a  body  of  any  kind,  i.  e.  the  position  of  the  ultimate 
particles  of  which  it  is  conceived  to  be  made  up,  can  always  be  de- 
termined, whatever  be  the  connexions  between  these  particles,  by  a 
certain  number  of  coordinates  p  in  the  general  sense  in  which  the 
term  has  been  used  by  Lagrange,  and  these  coordinates  can  often 
be  chosen  in  such  a  manner  that  the  kinetic  energy  is  equal  to  a 
sum  of  terms,  each  of  which  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  one  of 
the  velocities  p,  so  that  it  may  be  said  to  consist  of  a  number  of 
parts  corresponding  to  the  different  degrees  of  freedom  of  the  system. 
The  theorem  of  equipartition  tells  us  that,  if  the  temperature  is  T, 
the  kinetic  energy  of  a  system  having  a  very  large  number  of  degrees 
of  freedom,  as  all  bodies  actually  have,  can  be  found  by  attributing 
to  each  degree  of  freedom  a  kinetic  energy  equal  to  ^ccT. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  it  is  only  the  kinetic  energy  that  can 
be  calculated  in  this  way.  If  we  wish  to  determine  the  whole  energy, 
we  must  add  the  potential  part  of  it.  Now,  there  is  one  case,  and 


92  n.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

it  is  the  very  one  that  is  most  relevant  to  our  purpose,  in  which 
the  value  of  the  potential  energy  is  likewise  determined  by  a  very 
simple  rule. 

Let  us  consider  a  system  capable  of  small  vibrations  about  a 
position  of  stable  equilibrium,  and  let  the  coordinates  plf  p2,  .  .  .,  pn 
be  0  in  this  position,  so  that  they  measure  the  displacement  of  the 
system  from  it.  These  coordinates  can  be  chosen  in  such  a  way  that 
not  only,  as  we  have  already  required,  the  kinetic  energy  is  the  sum 
of  a  number  of  terms  each  containing  the  square  of  a  velocity  p,  but 
that,  besides  this,  the  potential  energy  is  expressed  as  a  similar  sum 
of  terms  of  the  form  apa,  where  a  is  a  constant. 

The  most  general  motion  of  the  system  is  made  up  of  what  we 
may  call  fundamental  or  principal  modes  of  vibration.  These  are 
characterized  by  the  peculiarity  that  in  the  first  mode  only  the  co- 
ordinate pl  is  variable,  in  the  second  only  p%,  and  so  on,  the  variable 
coordinate  being  in  every  case  a  simple  harmonic  function  of  the 
time  t,  with  a  frequency  that  is  in  general  different  for  the  different 
modes.  It  is  a  fundamental  property  of  these  principal  vibrations, 
that,  in  each  of  them,  the  mean  value  of  the  potential  energy  for  a 
full  period,  or  for  a  lapse  of  time  that  is  very  long  in  comparison 
with  the  period,  is  equal  to  the  mean  value  of  the  kinetic  energy. 
Moreover,  if  the  system  vibrates  in  several  fundamental  modes  at  the 
same  time,  the  total  energy  is  found  by  adding  together  the  values 
which  the  energy  would  have  in  each  of  these  modes  separately.1) 

71.  We  shall  now  suppose  a  system  of  this  kind,  having  a  very 
large  number  of  degrees  of  freedom,  to  be  connected  with  an  ordinary 
system  of  molecules,  with  a  gas  for  example,  so  that  it  can  be  put 
in  motion  by  the  forces  which  it  experiences  from  the  molecules,  and 
can  in  its  turn  give  off  to  these  a  part  of  its  vibratory  energy.  Then, 
there  can  be  a  state  of  equilibrium  between  the  heat  motion  of  the 
molecules  and  the  vibratory  motion  of  the  system.  We  may  even 
speak  of  the  vibrations  of  the  system  as  of  its  heat  motion,  and  say 
that  the  system  has  a  definite  temperature,  the  same  as  that  of  the 
system  of  molecules  with  which  it  is  in  equilibrium. 

The  theorem  of  the  equipartition  of  energy  requires  that,  whatever 
be  the  exact  way  in  which  the  vibrating  system  loses  or  gains  energy, 
it  shall  have  for  each  of  its  coordinates  a  kinetic  energy  given  by 
^uT.  The  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic  energies  must  be  %<xT 
for  each  of  its  fundamental  modes  of  vibration,  and  the  problem  of 
determining  the  total  energy  is,  after  all,  a  very  simple  matter.  We 
need  not  even  specify  the  coordinates  by  which  the  configuration  of 


1)  Note  39. 


JEANS'S  THEORY  OF  RADIATION.  93 

the  system  can  be  determined.  All  we  want  to  know  is  the  number 
of  the  fundamental  modes  of  vibration;  multiplying  by  this  the  quan- 
tity f  uT,  we  shall  have  the  energy  of  the  system  corresponding  to 
the  temperature  T. 

72.  It  was  a  most  happy  thought  of  Jeans  to  apply  this 
method  to  the  problem  of  radiation.  It  enables  us  to  calculate 
the  energy  of  radiation  in  the  ether  for  a  certain  temperature  T 
without  having  to  trouble  ourselves  about  the  mechanism  of  emission 
and  absorption,  without  even  considering  a  ponderable  body.  The 
only  question  is,  what  is  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  for  a 
certain  volume  of  ether.  For  the  sake  of  convenience  we  shall  enclose 
this  volume  by  totally  reflecting  walls,  and  to  begin  with,  we  shall 
imagine  two  such  walls,  unlimited  parallel  planes  at  a  distance  q  from 
each  other.  The  ether  between  them  can  be  the  seat  of  standing 
waves,  which  we  can  compare  to  tbose  existing  in  an  organ-pipe,  and 
which  may  be  conceived  to  arise  from  the  superposition  of  systems 
of  progressive  waves. 

The  condition  at  a  perfectly  reflecting  surface  is  that  Poynting's 
flow  of  energy  be  tangential  to  it.  It  will  be  so  if,  for  example,  the 
surface  is  a  perfect  conductor,  the  tangential  components  of  the 
electric  force  being  0  in  this  case.  Let  us  suppose  the  two  boundary 
planes  to  be  of  this  kind.  If  they  are  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  x, 
their  equations  being  x  =  0,  and  x  —  q,  the  condition  for  the  electric 
force  can  be  fulfilled  by  the  superposition  of  two  sets  of  progressive 
waves,  such  as  are  represented  by  the  equations  (7)  and  by  those 
given  in  §  46.  The  total  dielectric  displacement 


=  a  cos  n  (t  —   —  J  —  a  cos  n  (t  +  —  ) 


,    .     nx 
=  2a  sin  nt  sin 

c 

will  be  0  for  x  =  0,  and  also  for  x  =  q,  if  —  -  is  a  multiple  of  n, 

or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  if  the  distance  q  is  a  multiple 
of  half  the  wave-length.  The  possible  modes  of  motion  will  therefore 
have  wave-lengths  equal  to  2q,  q,  $q,  etc. 

73.  We  shall  next  examine  the  vibrations  that  can  take  place 
in  the  ether  contained  within  a  box,  whose  walls  are  perfectly  reflecting 
on  the  inside,  and  which  has  the  form  of  a  rectangular  parallelepiped. 
Let  the  axes  of  coordinates  be  parallel  to  the  edges,  and  let  the  lengths 
of  these  be  qif  q%,  qs. 

We  can  imagine  eujht  lines  such  that  their  direction  constants 
have  equal  absolute  values,  but  all  possible  algebraic  signs;  indeed, 


94  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

denoting  by  (i1,  ,u2,  ft3  the  absolute  values  of  the  constants,  we  shall 
have  the  eight  combinations 

(Pi,P2,Pa),     (~Pi>P2,  Ps),     (Pi,-P2,Ps),     (Pi,P«,—  Ps)>| 

(Pi,-P2,-p3),      (--Pi,P2,  -Pa),      (—  Pi,—  P2,Ps),         (149) 
(—  Ai—  ft»—  ft)- 

If  a  beam  of  parallel  rays  within  the  rectangular  box  has  one  of  these 
lines  for  its  direction  of  propagation,  the  reflexion  at  the  walls  will 
produce  bundles  parallel  to  the  other  seven  lines,  and  if  the  values 
of  (ilf  fa,  P3  and  the  wave-length  I  are  properly  chosen,  the  boundary 
conditions  at  the  walls  can  be  satisfied  by  the  superposition  of  eight 
systems  of  progressive  waves  travelling  in  the  eight  directions.  In 
order  to  express  the  condition  to  which  /t1;  /t2,  /js,  A  must  be  sub- 
jected, we  shall  imagine  three  lines  PlQl,  P2Qs>  an(l  Aft  parallel 
to  the  sides  of  the  box  and  joining  points  of  two  opposite  faces, 
so  that 

A  &=<?!,         P,Q,~9»         J?3&=«3- 

In  a  system  of  progressive  waves  travelling  in  the  direction  determined 
by  Pi,  Ps,  p3  the  difference  of  phase  between  Pl  and  Qi  is  measured 
by  a  distance  (ilq1,  that  between  P2  and  Q3  by  f<2<72,  and  that  be- 
tween P3  and  $3  by  fisqs.  The  condition  for  /t,,  [%,  fi3,  A  amounts  to 
this1)  that  each  of  these  three  lengths  must  be  a  multiple  of  ^A. 
Therefore,  if  we  put 


i  fa      -/.  /IK™ 

*l>          i  *»> 


2,  A3  must  be  whole  positive  numbers 
On  account  of  the  relation 


we  have 

*?  +  *1,  *i_.J_ 
?!      «i      2i      iis  ' 

and  so  we  now  see  that  for  any  three  whole  numbers  \,  &2,  k3  there  is 
a  correspouding  set  of  standing  waves.  The  wave-length  is  given 
by  (151)  and  the  direction  constants  of  the  normals  to  the  progres- 
sive waves  which  we  have  to  combine,  by  (149)  and  (150).  As  these 
progressive  waves  can  have  two  different  states  of  polarization8),  each 
set  of  numbers  Jc1}  ka,  £3  will  lead  us  to  two  fundamental  modes  of 
vibration  of  the  ether  in  the  rectangular  box,  and  the  energy  corre- 
sponding to  each  set  (klf  &«,,  k3)  will  be  not  -§«T,  but  -§ 

1)  Note  40.        2)  Note  41. 


JEANS'S  THEORY  OF  RADIATION.  95 

Now,  the  object  of  our  enquiry  is  the  amount  of  energy  of  the 
ether  in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  vibrations  whose  wave-length  lies 
between  given  limits  A  and  A  +  dk.  This  amount  is 


if  v  is  the  number  of  sets  of  positive   integers  Jclf  Jclf  J>3  for  which 
the  value  of  A  given  by  (151)  lies  between  i  and  A  +  di. 

74.  The  number  v  can  easily  be  calculated  if  we  confine  our- 
selves, as  we  obviously  may  do,  to  wave-lengths  that  are  very  small 
in  comparison  with  the  dimensions  qt,  qa,  qa  of  the  box. 

Let  us  consider  kl;  &2,  Jc3  as  the  rectangular  coordinates  of  a 
point.  Then  (151)  is  the  equation  of  an  ellipsoid  having  for  its 
semi-axes 


Changing  I  into  A  +  dK  we  get  a  second  ellipsoid,  and  v  will  be  the 
number  of  points  (1c1,  ltz,  fe,)  lying  between  these  two  surfaces,  whose 
corresponding  semi-axes  differ  by 

2  9l       di  22s      di  Z,h      di  m_. 

I   "T>       i   "T>       I   'T' 

On  account  of  our  assumption  concerning  the  wave-lengths,  the 
expressions  (152)  are  very  high  numbers,  and  we  may  even  suppose 
that,  notwithstanding  the  smallness  of  d\,  the  numbers  (153)  are 
also  very  large.  This  means  that  all  dimensions,  the  thickness  in- 
cluded, of  the  ellipsoidal  shell  are  very  large  in  comparison  with 
the  unit  of  length. 

The  number  of  points  with  coordinates  represented  by  whole 
numbers,  which  lie  in  a  part  of  space  whose  dimensions  are  much 
larger  than  the  unit  of  length,  may  be  tsiken  to  be  equal  to  the 
number  representing  the  volume  of  that  part.  Remembering  that  we 
are  only  concerned  with  positive  values  of  klt  &g,  k$,  we  find  that  v 
is  equal  to  the  eighth  part  of  the  numerical  value  of  the  volume  of 
the  ellipsoidal  shell.  We  have  therefore 


and  for  the  energy  which  we  were  to  calculate 


This   is   the   energy  contained  in  the  volume  of  our  rectangular  box. 
Dividing  by  qtq^C[3,  one  finds  for  the  energy  of  radiation  in  the  ether, 


96  II.  EMISSION  AND  ABSORPTION  OF  HEAT. 

per  unit  of  volume,   so  far  as  it  is  due  to  vibrations  whose  wave- 
length lies  between  /I  and  A  +  d&, 


31« 

a  result  agreeing  exactly  with  (148). 

75.  The  theory  of  radiation  that  was  given  in  §§  60 — G8  is 
restricted  to  systems  containing  free  electrons  and  to  the  case  of  very 
long  waves.  It  therefore  requires  a  further  development  with  regard 
to  bodies,  such  as  a  piece  of  glass,  in  which  we  can  hardly  admit 
the  existence  of  freely  moving  electrons,  and  with  regard  to  the 
shorter  waves.  If  we  admit  the  laws  of  Boltzmann  and  Wien,  and 
if  we  take  for  granted  that  a  curve  like  that  of  Fig.  2  represents  a 
state  of  radiation  that  can  be  in  equilibrium  with  a  ponderable  body 
of  a  given  temperature,  we  must  try  to  account  for  the  form  of  the 
curve  and  to  discover  the  ground  for  the  constancy  of  the  product 
imT.  If  we  succeed  in  this,  we  may  hope  to  find  in  what  manner 
the  value  of  this  constant  is  determined  by  some  numerical  quantity 
that  is  the  same  for  all  ponderable  bodies. 

The  theory  of  these  phenomena  takes  a  very  different  aspect  if 
we  regard  the  law  of  the  equipartition  of  energy  as  a  rule  to  which 
there  is  no  exception,  considering  at  the  same  time  the  ether  as  a 
continuous  medium  without  molecular  structure.  Just  like  any  other 
continuous  distribution  of  matter,  like  a  homogeneous  string  for 
example,  a  finite  part  of  the  ether  must  then  be  said  to  have  an  in- 
finite number  of  degrees  of  freedom;  there  will  be  no  upper  limit  to 
the  frequency  of  the  modes  of  vibration  that  can  exist  in  the  ether 
enclosed  in  the  rectangular  box  of  which  we  have  spoken. 

On  the  contrary,  the  number  of  degrees  of  freedom  of  a  pon- 
derable body  is  certainly  finite  if  the  ultimate  particles  of  which  it 
consists  are  considered  as  rigid.  Consequently,  as  Jeans  has  ob- 
served, the  theorem  of  equipartition  requires  that  in  a  system  com- 
posed of  a  ponderable  body  and  ether,  however  large  be  the  part  of 
space  that  is  occupied  by  the  body,  no  appreciable  part  of  the  total 
energy  shall  be  found  in  the  latter  when  the  equilibrium  is  reached. 
Indeed,  according  to  Jeans's  theory,  the  formula  (148)  must  be  true 
for  all  wave-lengths,  so  that,  for  a  given  temperature,  we  shall  find 
an  infinite  value  if,  for  the  calculation  of  the  total  amount  of  energy, 
the  expression  is  integrated  as  far  down  as  A  =  0.  This  means  that, 
if  the  ether  receives  any  finite  amount  of  energy,  such  as  that  which 
is  stored  up  in  a  body  of  finite  size,  the  temperature  of  the  ether 
cannot  perceptibly  rise,  the  energy  being  wasted,  so  to  say,  for  the 
production  of  extremely  short  electromagnetic  ripples. 


.JEANS'S  THEORY  OF  RADIATION.  97 

In  order  to  reconcile  these  results  with  observed  facts,  Jeans 
points  out  that  the  emission  of  rays  whose  wave  lengths  are  below  a 
certain  limit  may  be  a  very  slow  process,  so  slow  that  a  true  equi- 
librium is  never  realized  in  our  experiments.  Under  these  circum- 
stances it  is  conceivable  that,  though  in  length  of  time  all  energy  of 
a  body  will  be  frittered  away,  yet  a  certain  state  may  be  reached  in 
which  there  are  no  observable  changes,  and  in  which  therefore  there 
is  a  kind  of  spurious  equilibrium. 

76.  Jeans's  conclusions  are  certainly  very  important  and  deserve 
careful  consideration.  One  can  imagine  three  ways  in  which  one 
might  escape  from  them.  In  the  first  place,  one  could  suppose  the 
number  of  degrees  of  freedom  of  a  ponderable  body  to  be  itself  in- 
finite, either  on  account  of  the  deformability  of  the  ultimate  particles 
or  on  account  of  the  ether  the  body  contains;  this,  however,  would 
lead  us  to  a  contradiction  with  experiments,  because  it  would  require 
a  value  of  the  specific  heat,  far  surpassing  that  to  which  we  are  led 
if  we  attend  only  to  the  progressive  motion  of  the  molecules.  In 
the  second  place,  we  could  imagine  a  structure  of  the  ether  which 
would  make  a  finite  portion  of  it  have  only  a  finite  number  of  de- 
gress of  freedom.  Lastly,  we  could  altogether  abandon  the  theorem 
of  equipartition  as  a  general  law.  Then,  however,  we  shall  be  obliged 
to  explain  why  it  holds  for  the  case  of  sufficiently  long  waves. 

Questions  of  equal  importance  and  no  less  difficulty  arise  when 
we  adhere  to  Jeans's  views.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that,  in 
establishing  the  laws  of  Boltzmann  and  Wien,  which  have  been 
so  beautifully  confirmed  by  experiment,  physicists  have  been  on  a 
wholly  wrong  track.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  show  for  what 
reason  those  spurious  states  of  equilibrium  of  which  I  have  spoken 
are  subjected  to  the  laws  of  thermodynamics,  and  we  shall  again 
have  to  find  the  physical  meaning  of  the  constant  value  of  imT. 

I  shall  conclude  by  observing  that  the  law  of  equipartition  which, 
for  systems  of  molecules,  can  be  deduced  from  the  principles  of  sta- 
tistical mechanics,  cannot  as  yet  be  considered  to  have  been  proved 
for  systems  containing  ether.1) 


1)  Note  42. 


Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

77.  The  phenomenon  of  the  magnetic  rotation  of  the  plane  of 
polarization,  discovered  by  Faraday  in  1845,  was  the  first  proof  of 
the  intimate  connexion  between  optical    and   electromagnetic  pheno- 
mena.    For  a  long  time  it  remained  the  only  instance  of  an  optical 
effect  brought  about  by  a  magnetic  field.     In  1877,  however,  Kerr 
showed  that  the  state  of  polarization  of  the  rays  reflected  by  an  iron 
mirror   is    altered   by    a    magnetization    of  the    metal,    and    in   1890 
Zeeman1)  detected  an  influence  of  a  magnetic  field  on  the  emission 
of  light.    If  a  source  of  light,  giving  one  or  more  sharp  lines  in  the 
spectrum,    is  placed  between  the  poles  of  a  powerful  electromagnet, 
each  line  is  split  into  a  certain  number  of  components,  whose  distances 
are  determined  by  the  intensity  of  the  external  magnetic  force. 

In  my  discussion  of  these  magneto-optical  phenomena  (in  which, 
however,  I  shall  not  speak  of  the  theory  of  the  Kerr- effect),  I  shall 
first  take  the  simplest  of  them  all.  This  is  the  Zee  man-effect,  as 
it  showed  itself  in  the  first  experiments,  a  division  of  the  original 
spectral  line  into  three  or  two  components,  the  number  depending 
on  the  direction  in  which  the  rays  are  emitted. 

78.  I    shall    first    present    to    you    the    elementary    explanation 
which  this  decomposition  of  the  lines  finds  in  the  theory  of  electrons, 
and  by  which  it  has  even  been  possible  to  predict  certain  peculiarities 
of  the  phenomenon. 

We  know  already  that,  according  to  modern  views,  the  emission 
of  light  is  due  to  vibratory  motions  of  electric  charges  contained  in 
the  atoms  of  ponderable  bodies,  of  a  sodium  flame,  for  example,  or 
the  luminescent  gas  in  a  vacuum  tube.  The  distribution  of  these 


1)  P.  Zeeinan,  Over  den  invloed  eener  magnetiaatie  op  den  aard  van  het 
door  een  stof  uitgezonden  licht,  Zittingsversl.  Amsterdam  5  (189G),  p.  181,  242 
[translated  in  Phil.  Mag  (5)  43  (1897),  p.  22CJ;  Doublets  and  triplets  in  the 
spectrum  produced  by  external  magnetic  forces,  Phil.  Mag.  (5)  44  (1897),  p.  65, 
256;  Measurements  concerning  radiation  phenomena  in  the  magnetic  field, 
ibid.  45  (1898),  p.  197. 


ELECTRON  VIBRATING  IN  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD.  99 

charges  and  their  vibrations  may  be  very  complicated,  but,  if  we  wish 
only  to  explain  the  production  of  a  single  spectral  line,  we  can  con- 
tent ourselves  with  a  very  simple  hypothesis.  Let  each  atom  (or 
molecule)  contain  one  single  electron,  having  a  definite  position  of 
equilibrium,  towards  which  it  is  drawn  back  by  an  "elastic"  force, 
as  we  shall  call  it,  as  soon  as  it  has  been  displaced  by  one  cause 
or  another.  Let  us  further  suppose  this  elastic  force,  which  must 
be  considered  to  be  exerted  by  the  other  particles  in  the  atom,  but 
about  whose  nature  we  are  very  much  in  the  dark,  to  be  pro- 
portional to  the  displacement.  According  to  this  hypothesis,  which 
is  necessary  in  order  to  get  simple  harmonic  vibrations,  the  compo- 
nents of  the  elastic  force  which  is  called  into  play  by  a  displacement 
from  the  position  of  equilibrium,  whose  components  are  {;,  rj,  £,  may 
be  represented  by 

-ft,   -fn,   -K, 

where  f  is  a  positive  constant,  determined  by  the  properties  of 
the  atom. 

If  m  is  the   mass  of  the  movable  electron,  we  shall  have    the 
equations  of  motion 

d-£  d*7]  d'f 

w3?--tf»    »3?--ft»    mW~-ft> 

whose  general  solution  is 

|  =  a  cos(n0t  +  p),     rj  =  a  cos  (n0t  +  p') , 

e-o"coB(V  +  P"),  (154) 

a,  a,  a",  p,  p,  p"  being  arbitrary  constants,  and  the  frequency  n0 
of  the  vibrations  being  determined  by 


Let  us  next  consider  the  influence  of  an  external  magnetic  field  H. 
This  introduces  a  force  given  by 

|[v-H],  (156) 

in  which  expression  e  denotes  the  charge  of  the  electron  and  V  its 
velocity.  If  the  magnetic  force  H  is  parallel  to  the  axis  of  2,  the 
components  of  (156)  are 

e\\,  drj         _  ett2  dj^        ,, 
c  ~  di  '         '~t~dt' 

Hence  the  equations  of  motion  become 

,„<**£  f£       eH,  dri 

mdt<-  =-f*  +  ~c    dt> 


100  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

(I    71  r  €nrd$  /,.  r  o\ 

in-T-£  =  —  fr] *  -j-- ,  (15") 

mdH=-K.  (159) 

d  c 

79.  The  last  equation  shows  that  the  vibrations  in  the  direction 
of  OZ  are  not  affected  by  the  magnetic  field,  a  result  that  was  to 
be  expected,  because  the  force  (156)  is  0,  if  the  direction  of  V  coin- 
cides with  that  of  H.  The  particular  solution  (154)  therefore  still 
holds.  As  to  the  pair  of  equations  (157)  and  (158),  these  admit  of 
two  particular  solutions,  represented  by  the  formulae 


sn 
and 

|  =  ffl  cos 


in  which  the  frequencies  nt  and  n2  are  determined  by 

««_!!!•«=„»  (162) 

me    • 

and 

Wo'»  (163) 


me 


whereas  ai,  a%,  pi  and  p%  are  arbitrary  constants. 

Combination  of  (154),  (160)  and  (161)  gives  a  solution  that 
contains  six  constants  and  is  therefore  the  general  solution. 

The  two  solutions  (160)  and  (161)  represent  circular  vibrations 
in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  field,  and  taking  place  in 
opposite  directions.  The  frequency  «j  of  one  is  higher  (if  eHz  is 
positive)  and  that  of  the  other  lower  than  the  original  frequency  MO. 
The  possibility  of  these  circular  motions  can  also  be  understood  by 
a  very  simple  reasoning.  If  the  electron  describes  a  circle  with 
radius  r  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  Hs,  and  in  a  direction  opposite 
to  that  which  corresponds  to  this  force,  there  will  be,  in  addition 
to  the  elastic  force  fr,  an  electromagnetic  force 


c 

directed  towards  the  centre.  Both  forces  being  constant,  the  circular 
orbit  can  really  be  described,  and  we  have,  by  the  well  known  law 
of  centripetal  force, 

fy>       I        [     A.       s    ==±    

or,  since  |  V   =  n  r , 

entt,  , 

-z  =  mn~. 
c 

from  which  (162)  immediately  follows.  The  equation  (163)  can  be 
found  in  exactly  the  same  way. 


NATURE  OF  THE  EMITTED  LIGHT.  101 

In  all  real  cases  the  change  in  the  frequency  is  found  to  be 
very  small  in  comparison  with  the  frequency  itself.  This  shows  that, 

€  H 

even  in  the  most  powerful  fields,  — -  is  very  small  in  comparison 
with  «0.  Consequently,  (162)  and  (163)  may  be  replaced  by 

"i—o +  .'"',»     "•—•-£;•  (164) 

The  points  in  the  spectrum  corresponding  to  these  frequencies  lie  at 
equal  small  distances  to  the  right  and  to  the  left  of  the  original 
spectral  line  n0. 

SO.  We  have  next  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  light  emitted 
by  the  vibrating  electron.  The  total  radiation  is  made  up  of  several 
parts,  corresponding  to  the  particular  solutions  we  have  obtained,  and 
which  we  shall  examine  separately. 

Our  former  discussion  (§§  39 — 41)  of  the  radiation  by  an  electron 
shows  that,  if  such  a  particle  has  a  vibration  about  a  point  0,  along 
a  straight  line  L,  the  dielectric  displacement  at  a  distant  point  P 
has  a  direction  perpendicular  to  OP,  in  the  plane  LOP,  and  that, 
for  a  given  distance  OP,  its  amplitude  is  proportional  to  the  sine 
of  the  angle  LOP.  The  radiation  will  be  zero  along  the  line  of  vibra- 
tion L,  and  of  greatest  intensity  in  lines  perpendicular  to  it;  mo- 
reover, along  each  line  drawn  from  0,  the  light  will  be  plane 
polarized. 

As  to  a  circular  vibration,  such  as  is  represented  by  the  for- 
mulae (160),  its  effect  is  the  resultant  of  those  which  are  produced 
by  the  two  rectilinear  vibrations  along  OX  and  OY,  into  which  it 
can  be  decomposed.  We  need  only  consider  the  state  produced 
either  in  the  plane  of  this  motion,  or  along  a  line  passing  through 
the  centre,  at  right  angles  to  the  plane.  At  a  distant  point  P  of  the 
plane,  the  light  received  from  the  revolving  electron  is  plane  pola- 
rized, the  electric  vibrations  being  perpendicular  to  OP,  in  the  plane 
of  the  circle;  if,  for  example,  P  is  situated  on  OY,  the  vibration 
along  this  line  will  have  no  eifect,  and  we  shall  only  have  the  field 
produced  by  the  motion  along  OX. 

Both  components  of  (160)  are,  however,  effective  in  producing 
a  field  at  a  point  on  the  axis  of  the  circle,  i.  e.  on  OZ,  the  first 
component  giving  rise  to  an  electric  vibration  parallel  to  OX,  and 
the  second  to  one  in  the  direction  of  OY.  It  is  immediately  seen 
that  between  these  vibrations  there  is  exactly  the  same  difference 
of  phase  as  between  the  two  components  of  (160)  themselves,  i.  e. 
a  difference  of  a  quarter  period,  and  that  their  amplitudes  are  equal. 
The  light  emitted  along  OZ  is  therefore  circularly  polarized,  the 
direction  of  the  dielectric  displacement  rotating  in  the  sense  corre- 


102  HI.  THEORY  OF  THK  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

spending  to  the  circular  motion  of  the  electron.  The  formulae  (160) 
show  that,  for  an  observer  placed  on  the  positive  axis  of  z,  the 
rotation  of  the  electron  takes  place  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of 
the  hands  of  a  clock.  From  this  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  rays 
emitted  along  the  positive  axis  by  the  motion  (160)  have  a  right- 
handed  circular  polarization. 

Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  motion  represented  by  (161). 
The  radiation  issuing  from  it  in  the  direction  just  stated  has  a  left- 
handed  circular  polarization.  If  it  is  further  taken  into  account  that 
the  frequency  of  the  rays  is  in  every  case  equal  to  that  of  the  motion 
originating  them,  one  can  draw  the  following  conclusions,  which  have 
been  fully  verified  by  Zeeman's  experiments.1) 

Let  the  source  of  light  be  placed  in  a  magnetic  field  whose 
lines  of  force  are  horizontal,  and  let  the  light  emitted  in  a  horizontal 
direction  at  right  angles  to  the  lines  of  force  be  examined  by  means 
of  a  spectroscope  or  a  grating.  Then  we  shall  see  a  triplet  of  lines, 
whose  middle  component  occupies  the  place  of  the  original  line. 
Each  component  is  produced  by  plane  polarized  light,  the  electric 
vibrations  being  horizontal  for  the  middle  line,  and  vertical  for  the 
two  outer  ones. 

If,  however,  by  using  an  electromagnet,  one  core  of  which  has 
a  suitable  axial  hole,  we  examine  the  light  that  is  radiated  along  the 
lines  of  force,  we  shall  observe  only  a  doublet,  corresponding  in  po- 
sition to  the  outer  lines  of  the  triplet.  Its  components  are  both 
produced  by  circularly  polarized  light,  the  polarization  being  right- 
handed  for  one,  and  left-handed  for  the  other. 

81.  After  having  verified  all  this,  Zeeman  was  able  to  obtain 
two  very  remarkable  results.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  found  that, 
for  light  emitted  in  a  direction  coinciding  with  that  of  the  magnetic 
force,  i.  e.,  if  Hz  is  positive,  in  that  of  OZ,  the  polarization  of  the 
component  of  the  doublet  for  which  the  frequency  is  lowest,  is  right- 
handed  This  proves  that,  for  a  positive  value  of  H.,  the  first  of 
the  two  frequencies  given  by  (1G4)  is  the  smaller.  Therefore,  the 
charge  e  of  the  electron  to  whose  motion  the  radiation  has  been 
ascribed  must  be  negative.  This  agrees  with  the  general  result  of 
other  lines  of  research,  that  the  negative  charges  have  a  greater  mo- 
bility than  the  positive  ones. 

The  other  result  relates  to  the  ratio  between  the  numerical  values 
of  the  electric  charge  and  the  mass  of  the  movable  electrons.  This 
ratio  can  be  calculated  by  means  of  the  formulae  (164),  as  soon  as 
the  distance  between  the  components,  from  which  we  can  deduce 


1)  Note  43. 


SERIES  OF  SPECTRAL  LINES.  103 

ni  —  no>  and  ^e  strength  of  the  magnetic  field  have  been  measured. 
The  number  deduced  by  Zeeman  from  the  distance  between  the 
components  of  the  D- lines,  or  rather  from  the  broadening  of  these 
lines,  whose  components  partly  overlapped  each  other,  was  one  of 

the  first  values  of  that  have  been  published.  In  order  of  magni- 
tude it  agrees  with  the  numbers  that  have  been  found  for  the  nega- 
tive electrons  of  the  cathode-rays  and  the  /J-rays. 

Unfortunately,  the  satisfaction  caused  by  this  success  of  the 
theory  of  electrons  in  explaining  the  new  phenomenon,  could  not  last 
long.  It  was  soon  found  that  many  spectral  lines  are  decomposed 
into  more  than  three  components,  four,  six  or  even  more1),  and  till 
the  present  day,  these  more  complicated  forms  of  the  Zeeman-effect 
cannot  be  said  to  have  been  satisfactorily  accounted  for. 

All  I  can  do,  will  therefore  be  to  make  some  suggestions  as  to 
the  direction  in  which  an  explanation  may  perhaps  be  looked  for. 

82.  Before  proceeding  to  do  so,  I  may  be  permitted  briefly  to 
mention  some  of  the  important  results  that  have  been  found  in  the 
examination  of  the  distribution  of  spectral  lines,  such  as  they  are  in 
the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field.  In  the  spectra  of  many  elements 
the  lines  arrange  themselves  in  series,  in  such  a  manner  that,  for 
each  series,  the  frequencies  of  all  the  lines  belonging  to  it  can  be 
represented  by  a  single  mathematical  formula.  The  first  formula  of 
this  kind  was  given  by  Balmer2)  for  the  spectrum  of  hydrogen.  After 
him,  equations  for  other  spectra  have  been  established  by  many 
physicists,  especially  by  Rydberg3)  and  by  Kayser  and  Runge.4) 

For  our  purpose  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  some  examples. 

In  the  spectrum  of  sodium  three  series  of  double  lines  have 
been  found,  which  are  distinguished  by  the  names  of  principal  series, 
first  subordinate  or  nebulous  series,  and  second  subordinate  or  sharp 
series.  We  may  also  say  that  each  of  the  three  is  composed  of  two 
series  of  single  lines,  one  containing  the  less  refrangible,  and  the 
other  the  more  refrangible  lines  of  the  doublets. 


1)  In  later  researches   a  decomposition   into  no  less  than   17   components 
has  been  observed. 

2)  J.  J.  Balmer,  Notiz  iiber  die  Spektrallinien  des  Wasserstoffs,  Ann.  Phys. 
Chem.  25  (1885),  p.  80. 

3)  J.  E.  Rydberg,   Rechercbes  sur  la  constitution  des  spectres  demission 
des  elements  chimiques,   Svenska  Vetensk.  Akad.  Handl.  23  (1889),  No.  11;    La 
distribution   des  raies  spectralcs,  Rapports  pres.  au  Congres  do  physique,  1900, 
2,  p.  200. 

4)  H.  Kayser  u.  C.  Runge,  ftber  die  Spektren  der  Alkalien,   Ann.  Phys. 
Chem.  41  (1890),  p.  302;    ftber  die  Spektra  der  Elemente   der  zweiten  Mende- 
lejcfi"schen  Grnppe,  ibid.  43  (1891),  p.  385 


104  HI-  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

The  frequency  in  these  six  series,  measured  by  the  number  n 
of  wave-lengths  in  a  centimetre,  has  been  represented  by  Rydberg 
by  means  of  the  formulae  contained  in  the  following  table. 

Principal  series  I    ^  =  (1  ^  tf)1  -  ^qp^p  ,  (165) 


'~  2' 


First  subordinate  (nebulous)  series  I  -^  =  ^  .      .,  —  ,      ,  dy,    (167) 

TT  —  -         1 

~ 


Second  subordinate  (sharp)  series  I  •==-  =  —7-  —  r^  — 


TT    n  __        1  1  (170") 

!  1 


In  these  equations,  N0,  f*,,  ft2,  S  and  tf  are  constants  having  the 
values 

N0  =  109675 

p,  =  1,1171,        ft,  =  1,1163,        ^  =  0,9884,         a  =  0,6498 

and  we  shall  find  the  frequencies  of  the  successive  lines  in  each 
series  by  substituting  for  m  successive  positive  whole  numbers.  If, 
in  doing  so,  we  get  for  n  a  negative  value  —  n,  this  is  to  mean 
that  there  is  a  line  of  the  frequency  n. 

83.  I  particularly  wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  following 
remarkable  facts  that  are  embodied  in  the  above  formulae. 

1.  If  the  value  of  m  is  made  continually  to  increase,  that  of  n 
increases  at  the  same  time,  converging  however  towards  a  finite 
limit,  corresponding  to  m  =  oo,  and  given  for  the  different  series  by 
etc 


The  lines  of  a  series  are  not  placed  at  equal  distances  from  each 
other;  as  we  proceed  towards  the  side  of  the  ultra-violet,  the  lines 
become  crowded  together,  the  series  being  unable,  so  to  say,  to 
pass  the  limiting  position  of  the  line  given  by  one  of  the  above 
numbers. 

As  to  the  number  of  lines  that  have  been  observed,  this  varies 
from  one  series  to  the  other.  If  the  above  formulae  (or  equations 
of  a  similar  kind)  are  the  expression  of  the  real  state  of  things,  the 
number  of  lines  is  to  be  considered  as  infinitely  great. 

2.  The  frequencies  of  a  doublet  of  the  first  subordinate  series  (I,  II) 
are  obtained,  if  in  (167)  and  (168)  we  substitute  for  m  the  same 


CONNEXION  BETWEEN  DIFFERENT  SERIES.  105 

number.     These  frequencies  differ  by 


whatever  be  the  value  of  m.  The  same  difference  is  found,  if  wo 
calculate  the  frequencies  of  a  doublet  of  the  second  subordinate 
series  (I,  II).  Therefore,  if  the  distance  between  two  lines  is  measured 
by  the  difference  of  their  frequencies,  the  interval  between  the  two 
components  is  the  same  for  all  the  doublets  of  the  first  and  of  the 
second  subordinate  series. 

It  is  otherwise  with  the  doublets   of  the  principal  series  (I,  II). 
The  distance  between  the  two  components  is  given  by 


a  quantity,   which   diminishes  when  m  increases,    and  approaches  the 
limit  0  for  m  =  oo. 

In  connexion  with  this,  it  must  be  noticed  that  the  convergence 

N 
frequency  has  the  same  value    .     .  °    ,   for  the   members   I   and  II    of 

the  principal  series. 

3.    This    is    not    the    only    connexion    between    different    series. 

N 
The  formulae  show  that  the  convergence  frequencies  are  -.r-.  °  .,  and 

--TI,    both  for  the  first  and  the   second  subordinate  series  (I,  II). 


(1- 

Finally,    it  is  important  to   remark  that,    if  in  (165)  and  (166)    we 

put  m  =  l,  we  get  the  same  frequencies  as  from  (169)  and  (170) 
for  the  same  value  of  m.  The  doublet  with  these  frequencies  can 
therefore  be  considered  to  be  at  the  same  time  the  first  of  the  prin- 
cipal, and  the  first  of  the  second  subordinate  series. 

We  may  further  say  that  the  entire  principal  series  I  and  the 
entire  sharp  series  I  correspond  to  each  other,  being  both  charac- 
terized by  the  constants  ft,  and  6,  and  that  there  is  a  similar  relation 
between  the  principal  series  II  and  the  sharp  series  II.  In  this 
connexion  it  is  proper  to  remark  that  the  more  refrangible  lines  of 
the  principal  doublets  correspond  to  the  less  refrangible  ones  of  the 
sharp  doublets,  and  conversely.  If,  for  example,  ftj  is  greater  than  /i2, 
the  first  constant  will  give  the  larger  frequency  in  the  principal 
series,  and  the  lesser  frequency  in  the  second  subordinate  one. 

4.  Similar  results  have  been  obtained  for  the  other  alkali  metals, 
which  also  show  series  of  doublets  in  their  spectrum,  and  for  magne- 
sium, calcium,  strontium,  zinc,  cadmium  and  mercury.  Only,  in  the 
spectra  of  these  latter  metals,  one  finds  series,  not  of  doublets  but  of 
triplets.  To  the  scheme  given  in  the  formulae  (165) — (170),  we  have 


106  HI-  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

therefore  to  add  in  this  case: 

Principal  series  III         =  - 


First  subordinate  series  III  ^  -  =  ^^  -  (m| 


Second 


However,  even  thus  the  scheme  is  not  yet  complete.  In  the  spectrum 
of  mercury,  for  example,  there  is  a  certain  number  of  additional 
lines,  which  closely  accompany  those  of  which  we  have  just  spoken, 
and  which  are  therefore  often  called  satellites. 

These  again  show  certain  remarkable  regularities.  They  occur 
in  the  first  subordinate  series  (I,  II,  III),  but  not  in  the  second  sub- 
ordinate one.  In  each  triplet  of  the  first  series,  there  are  three  satellites 
accompanying  the  first  line  of  the  triplet,  two  belonging  to  the 
second,  and  one  for  the  third,  so  that  the  triplet  is  really  a  group 
of  nine  lines. 

As  to  the  principal  series  of  the  last  named  elements,  I  have 
added  them  only  for  the  sake  of  analogy.  Principal  series  of  triplets 
have  not  yet  been  observed. 

84.  It  is  only  for  a  comparatively  small  number  of  chemical 
elements,  that  one  has  been  able  to  resolve  the  system  of  their 
spectral  lines,  or  at  least  the  larger  part  of  them,  into  series  of  the 
kind  we  have  been  considering.  In  the  spectra  of  such  elements  as 
gold,  copper  and  iron,  some  isolated  series  have  been  discovered,  but 
the  majority  of  their  lines  have  not  yet  been  disentangled.  Never- 
theless, it  cannot  be  denied  that  we  have  made  a  fair  start  towards 
the  understanding  of  line  spectra,  which  at  first  sight  present  a 
bewildering  confusion.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  lines  of  a 
series  really  belong  together,  originating  in  some  common  cause,  and 
that  even  different  series  must  be  produced  by  motions  between  which 
there  is  a  great  resemblance. 

The  similarity  of  structure  in  the  spectra  of  elements  that  re- 
semble each  other  in  their  chemical  properties,  is  also  very  striking. 
The  metals  in  whose  spectra  the  lines  are  combined  in  pairs  are  all 
monovalent,  whereas  the  above  series  of  triplets  belong  to  divalent 
elements.  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  of  all  is  the  fact,  that  liydberg 
was  able  to  represent  all  series,  whatever  be  the  element  to  which 
they  belong,  by  means  of  formulae  containing  the  same  number  N0. 
This  equality,  rigorous  or  approximate,  of  a  constant  occurring  in 
the  formulae  of  the  different  elements,  must  of  course  be  due  to 
some  corresponding  equality  in  the  properties  of  the  ultimate  par- 


DIVISION  OF  THE  LINES  01"  A  SERIES. 


107 


tides  of  which  these  elements  consist,  but  at  present  we  are  wholly 
unable  to  form  an  idea  of  the  nature  of  this  similarity,  or  of  the 

physical  meaning  "of  the  length  of  time  corresponding  to  „-  '  • 

"t 

85.  The  investigation  of  the  Zeeman-effect  for  a  large  number 
of  spectral  lines,  to  which  many  physicists  have  devoted  themselves 
of  late  years,  has  fully  confirmed  the  hypothesis  of  an  intimate  con- 
nexion between  the  different  spectral  lines  of  a  substance;  it  has 
furnished  rich  material  for  future  research,  but  which,  in  the  present 
state  of  theory,  we  can  understand  only  very  imperfectly. 

Before  saying  a  few  words  of  the  results  that  have  been  obtained, 
I  must  revert  once  more  to  the  elementary  theory  of  the  triplets  and 
to  the  formulae  (164)  we  deduced  from  it.  These  show  that,  if  all 
spectral  lines  were  split  according  to  the  elementary  theory,  and  if, 

in  all  cases,  the  ratio  '  had  the  same  value,  we  should  always  ob- 
serve triplets  with  the  same  difference  of  frequency  between  their 
components.  This  is  what,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  shall  call  an 
equal  splitting  of  the  lines. 

Now,  the  measurements  of  Kunge  and  Paschen3)  and  other 
physicists  have  led  to  a  very  remarkable  result.  Though  there  are 
a  large  number  of  spectral  lines  which 
are  split  into  more  than  three  components, 
and  though  even  the  triplets  that  have 
been  observed,  are  not  equal  to  each 
other  ih  the  above  sense,  yet  all  lines 
forming  a  series,  i.  e.  all  lines  that  can 
be  represented  by  one  and  the  same 
formula,  are  divided  in  exactly  the  same 
way,  and  to  exactly  the  same  extent. 
There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  as  to  the 
validity  of  this  general  law. 

In  those  series  which  consist  of  triplets  or  doublets,  the  mode 
of  division  of  the  lines  is  in  general  different  for  the  lines  of  one 
and  the  same  triplet  or  pair,  but,  according  to  the  law  just  mentioned, 
the  same  mode  of  division  repeats  itself  in  every  triplet  or  every 
doublet.  Thus,  in  each  triplet  belonging  to  the  second  subordinate 


71     n     n 


n     t 

r>          r>           n.    T 

Fig.  3. 


1)  Several  authors  have  tried  to  establish  formulae  by  which  the  distribu- 
tion  of  the   lines  of  a  series   can  be  represented  still  more  accurately  than  by 
those  of  Rydberg.     See,  for  instance,  W.  Bitz,  Ann.  Phys.  12  (1903),  p  264, 
and  E.  E.  Mogendorff,  Amsterdam  Proc.  9  (1906),  p.  434. 

2)  C.  Runge,  tJber  den  Zeeman-Effekt  der  Serienlinien,  Phys.  Zeitschr.  3 
(1902),  p.  441;  C.  Runge  u.  F.  Paschen,  Uber  die  Strahlung  des  Quecksilbers 
im  magnetischen  Felde,  Anhang  z.  d.  Abhandl.  Akad.  Berlin,  1902,  p.  1. 


108  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

series  of  mercury,  the  less  refrangible  line  is  split  into  nine  com- 
ponents, the  middle  line  into  six,  and  the  most  refrangible  line  into 
three  components.  These  divisions  are  shown  in  Fig.  3,  in  which  the 
letters  p  and  n  mean  that  the  electric  vibrations  of  the  line  are 
parallel  or  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force. 

Equal    modes    of   division    are    found    not    only   in   the   different 
lines  of  one  and  the  same  series,  but  also  in  the  corresponding  series 

of  different  elements.  For  example,  the 
lines  7)j  and  D2  of  sodium,  which  form 
the  first  member  of  the  principal  series, 
are  changed  into  a  quartet  (Cornu's 
quartet)  and  a  sextet  (Fig.  4),  and  the 
first  terms  in  the  principal  series  of 
copper  and  silver  present  exactly  the 


Fig.  4.  same  division. 

86.  You  see  from  all  this  that  the  phenomena  are  highly  com- 
plicated, and  that  there  would  be  a  bewildering  intricacy,  were  it  not 
for  the  law  which  I  have  just  pointed  out  to  you,  which  reveals 
itself  in  the  decomposition  of  the  lines  of  the  same  series,  or  of 
corresponding  series.  Nor  is  this  the  only  case  in  which  a  connexion 
has  been  found  between  the  Zeeman-effect  for  different  lines.  Fig.  3 
shows  another  most  remarkable  regularity.  The  distances  represented 
in  it  can  all  be  considered  as  multiples  of  one  number,  and  the 
same  can  be  said  of  many  of  the  displacements  that  have  been  observed 
by  Runge  and  Paschen  in  the  spectrum  of  mercury.  A  similar 
remark  applies  to  the  case  of  Fig.  4.1) 

I  should  also  mention  thfit  the  interesting  connexion  between 
the  principal  series  and  the  second  subordinate  series  of  which  we 
have  already  spoken,  is  beautifully  corroborated  by  the  observations 
of  the  Zeeman-effect.  The  more  refrangible  components  of  the  doublets 
of  one  of  these  series  are  split  in  the  same  way  as  the  less  refrangible 
components  of  the  doublets  of  the  other. 

Finally,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  although  a  very  large 
number  of  lines  show  a  rather  complicated  Zeeman-effect,  especially 
those  which  belong  to  the  series  of  which  we  have  spoken,  yet  there 
are  also  many  lines  which  are  changed  into  triplets  by  the  action  of 
a  magnetic  field.  In  the  recent  work  of  Purvis,  for  example,  no 
less  than  fifty  cases  of  this  kind  have  been  found  in  the  spectrum  of 
palladium.  I  must  add  that  many  more  lines  of  this  element  are 
decomposed  in  a  different  way. 

1)  See  on  this  question  of  the  commensurability  of  the  magnetic  separations 
in  different  cases,  C.  Runge,  Uber  die  Zerlegung  von  Spektrallimeu  im  mag- 
netischen  Felde,  Phys.  Zeitschr.  8  (1907),  p.  232. 


SINUFFICIENCY  OF  THE  ELEMENTARY  THEORY.  109 

87.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  Zee  man's   first  deter- 
mination of  the  ratio    "   led  to  a  value  of  the  same  order  of  magni- 
tude as  that  which   has   been   found  for  the  electrons  of  the  cathode 
rays    and    the    /3-rays    of  radium.     Later  measurements   have   shown, 
however,   that  the  distance  between  the   components  is  not  the  same 

in  different  triplets,  and  that  therefore  different  values  of      are  found. 

m 

if  the  formulae  (164)  are  applied  in  all  cases.    Though  some  triplets  give 

a 

a  value  of  -  equal  to  the  number  found  for  free  negative  electrons, 
the  result  is  different  in  the  majority  of  cases.  This  can  be  attributed, 

either  to  real  differences   between  the  values  of       ,  or  to  the  imper- 

m  ' 

fectness  of  the  elementary  theory.  I  believe  that  there  is  much  to  be 
said  in  favour  of  the  latter  alternative.  After  all  that  has  been  said, 
we  cannot  have  much  confidence  in  the  formulae  (164),  but  there  are 
strong  reasons  for  believing  in  the  identity  of  all  negative  electrons. 

88.  If  time  permitted  it,  it  would  be  highly  interesting  to  con- 
sider  some   of  the   hypotheses   that  have  been  put  forward    in   order 
to   explain  the  structure  of  spectra   and  the  more  complicated  forms 
of  the  Zeem  an -effect.     There  can  be  no  difference   of  opinion  as  to 
the   importance   of  the   problem,    nor,    I  believe,    as  to  the  direction 
in   which   we   have   to   look   for  a  solution.     The  liability   of  spectral 
lines  to  be  changed  by  magnetic  influences  undoubtedly  shows,  what 
we  had  already  assumed  on  other  grounds,  that  the  radiation  of  light 
is  an  electromagnetic   phenomenon   due   to   a   motion  of  electricity  iu 
the  luminous  particles,  and  our  aim  must  be  to  explain  the  observed 
phenomena  by  suitable  assumptions  concerning  the  distribution  of  the 
charges  and  the  forces  by  which  their  vibrations  are  determined. 

Unfortunately,  though  many  ingenious  hypotheses  about  the  struc- 
ture of  radiating  particles  have  been  proposed,  we  are  still  very  far 
from  a  satisfactory  solution.  I  must  therefore  confine  myself  to  some 
general  considerations  on  the  theory  of  the  Zee  man -effect,  and  to 
the  working  out  of  a  single  example  which  may  serve  to  illustrate 
them. 

89.  In  the  first  place,   we  can  leave  our  original  hypothesis  of 
a  single  movable  electron  for  a  more   general   assumption   concerning 
the   structure   and   properties   of  the  radiating  particles.     Let  each  of 
these  be  a  material   system   capable   of  very  small  vibrations  about  a 
position  of  stable  equilibrium,  and  let  its  configuration  be  determined 
by  a  certain  number  of  generalized  coordinates  jot,  p2,  .  . .,  pfl.     We 
shall  suppose  these  to  be  chosen  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  are  0 


III.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

in   the   position   of  equilibrium,    and   that    the    potential   energy   and 
the  kinetic  energy  are  represented  by  expressions  of  the  form 

+  Aft'  +  •••  +  /•„  p,2), 


Then,  Lagrange's  equations  of  motion  become 

w'lFi  =  -fiPi,  »»2ft=  -Aft,  •-•>  ^J,,  =  ~ff.Pt.- 
Since  each  of  these  formulae  contains  but  one  coordinate,  the  changes 
of  one  coordinate  are  wholly  independent  of  those  of  the  other,  so 
that  each  equation  determines  one  of  the  fundamental  modes  of 
vibration  of  the  system.  The  frequencies  of  these  modes,  and  the 
positions  of  the  corresponding  spectral  lines  are  given  by 


We  shall  now  introduce  an  external  magnetic  force  H,  which  of 
course  may  be  considered  to  be  the  same  in  all  parts  of  our  small 
material  system.  In  order  to  make  this  force  have  an  influence  on 
the  vibrations,  we  shall  suppose  the  parts  of  the  system  to  carry 
electric  charges,  which  are  rigidly  attached  to  them,  so  that  the 
position  of  the  charges  is  determined  by  the  coordinates  p. 

As  soon  as  the  system  is  vibrating,  the  charges  are  subjected 
to  forces  due  to  the  external  magnetic  field.  These  actions  can  be 
mathematically  described  by  the  introduction  into  the  equations  of 
motion  of  certain  forces  in  the  generalized  sense  of  the  word.  Deno- 
ting these  forces  by  P1}  P2,  .  .  .,  P,,,  we  shall  have,  instead  of  (171), 

»»i-Pi=  -fiPi  +  Pi>  etc- 

Without  a  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  vibrating  system, 
and  of  the  distribution  of  its  charges,  it  is  of  course  impossible, 
completely  to  determine  Pt,  P2,  ....  One  can  show,  however,  that 
the  expressions  for  these  quantities  must  be  of  the  form 


(173) 
etc., 

where  the  constants  c  are  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic 

field.1)     Between  these  coefficients  there  are  the  following  relations 

csi  =  —  c,z,    c32  =    -  c23,     etc.  (174) 

The  proof  of  all  this   is  very  easy,   if  we  remember  the  funda- 

mental expression      [v  •  h]    for   the    action    of  a  field    on   a   moving 

C 

1)  Note  44. 


VIBRATIONS  OF  A  CHARGED  SYSTEM  IN  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD.    1  1  1 

charge.  The  components  of  this  action  along  the  axes  of  coordinates 
are  linear  and  homogeneous  functions  of  the  components  of  the  velo- 
city V.  Consequently,  all  the  rectangular  components  of  the  forces 
acting  on  the  vibrating  particle  must  be  functions  of  this  kind  of 
Pa  Pa>  •  •  •>  Pf,i  because  the  velocity  of  any  point  of  the  system  is  a 
linear  and  homogeneous  function  of  these  quantities.  The  same  must 
be  true  of  the  Lagrangian  forces  P,,  Pg,  .  .  .,  P  ,  because  these  are 
linear  and  homogeneous  functions  of  the  rectangular  components  of 
the  forces. 

In  order  to  find  the  relations  between  the  coefficients  c,  we  have 
only  to  observe  that  the  work  of  the  additional  forces  P17  P2,  etc. 
is  0,  because  the  force  exerted  by  the  magnetic  field  on  a  moving 
charge  is  always  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  motion.  The  condition 


to  which  we  are  led  in  this  way,  is  the  ground  for  the  relations  (174) 
and  for  the  absence  of  a  term  with  pt  in  the  first  of  the  equations 
(173),  of  one  with  j>2  in  the  second,  etc. 

90.    The  equations  of  motion 

miPi  +  fiPi  =  cmP2  +  cisPs  -\  -----  1-  ci,,,/V 


etc. 
can  be  treated  by  well  known  methods.     Putting 

/>!  =  ?,«"",    A  =  ?,«"",     ••••    !»„  =  «„«"", 
where  n,  ql}  q%,  .  .  .,  q^   are  constants,  we  find  the  ft  equations 
(/;  -  ml  n2)  g-j  -  incaqt  —  inc13q3  -----  inclflqfl  =  0, 

-  inc^q^  +  (fa  —  mXH  -  ™CK<!S  -----  inc*f,<lf>  =  °>     (176) 

etc. 

If,  from  these,  the  quantities  qlf  qt,  .  .  .,  qf,  are  eliminated,  the  result 
is  an  equation  which  determines  the  coefficient  n.  On  account  of  the 
relations  (174),  and  the  smallness  of  the  terms  with  c12,  C18,  etc.,  it 
may  be  shown  that  the  equation  contains  only  w2,  and  that  it  gives  ft 
real  positive  values  for  this  latter  quantity.  Hence,  there  are  ;i 
positive  numbers  M,',  W8',  .  .  .  such  that  the  resulting  equation  is 
satisfied  by 

n  =  ±  MJ',     n  =  +  «2',     .  .  .  ,     n  =  ±  nf',  . 

For  each  of  these  values  of  n,  the  ratios  between  qlf  qs,  ...,  q^ 
can  be  deduced  from  (176).  Finally,  if  we  take  the  real  parts  of 


112  IH.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

the  expressions  (175),   we    find    p   fundamental   modes    of   vibration, 
whose  frequencies  are 


It  is  easily  seen  from  this  that,  if  we  do  not  assume  any  special 
relations  between  the  constants  involved  in  our  problem,  there  will 
be  no  trace  at  all  of  the  Zeeman -effect.  In  the  absence  of  the 
magnetic  field  we  had  ft  spectral  lines,  corresponding  to  the  frequen- 
cies MU  n2,  .  .  .,  nfl .  The  effect  of  the  field  is,  to  replace  these  by 
the  slightly  different  values  w/,  »»2',  .  .  . ,  n£,  so  that  the  lines  are 
shifted  a  little  towards  one  side  or  another,  without  being  split  into 
three  or  more  components.1) 

91.  The  assumption  that  is  required  for  the  explanation  of  the 
Zeeman-effect  can  be  found  without  any  calculation.  Let  us  imagine, 
for  this  purpose,  a  source  of  light  placed  in  a  magnetic  field,  and 
giving  in  the  spectrum  a  triplet  instead  of  an  original  spectral  line. 
The  components  of  this  triplet  are  undoubtedly  due  to  three  modes 
of  motion  going  on  in  the  interior  of  the  radiating  particles,  and  these 
modes  must  be  different  from  each  other,  because  otherwise  their  fre- 
quencies ought  to  be  the  same.  Let  us  now  diminish  the  strength  of 
the  field.  By  this  the  components  are  made  to  approach  each  other, 
perhaps  so  much,  that  we  can  no  longer  distinguish  them,  but  the 
three  modes  of  motion  will  certainly  not  cease  to  be  there.  Only,  their 
frequencies  are  less  different  from  each  other  than  they  were  in  the 
strong  field.  By  continually  weakening  the  field,  we  can  finally  obtain 
the  case  in  which  there  is  no  field  at  all,  but  even  then  the  three 
modes  of  motion  must  exist.  They  still  differ  from  each  other,  but 
their  frequencies  have  become  equal. 

The  necessary  condition  for  the  appearance  of  a  magnetic  triplet 
is  thus  seen  to  be  that,  in  the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field,  three  of 
the  frequencies  nl}  n2, . . .,  nfl,  corresponding  to  three  different  degrees 
of  freedom,  are  equal  to  each  other,  or,  as  I  shall  say  for  the  sake 
of  brevity,  that  there  are  three  equivalent  degrees  of  freedom.  Then, 
the  magnetic  field,  by  which  all  the  frequencies  are  changed  a  little, 
produces  a  slight  inequality  between  the  three  that  were  originally 
equal.  We  can  express  the  same  thing  by  saying  that  only  a  spectral 
line  which  consists  of  three  coinciding  lines  can  be  changed  into  a 
triplet,  the  magnetic  field  producing  no  new  lines,  but  only  altering 
the  positions  of  already  existing  ones. 

1)  Note  45. 


SHARPNESS  OF  THE  MAGNETIC  COMPONENTS.  113 

92.  These  conclusions,  which  one  can  easily  extend  to  quartets, 
quintets  etc.,  are  fully  corroborated  by  the  mathematical  theory.  If 
originally 

MI  =«2  =  W;), 

we  shall  have,    under   the   influence  of  a  magnetic   field,   the    three 
frequencies 

and  n,±  4-  !/—  +  —  +—•  (177) 

Wl    m  TO,  TO,  TO,  JB2  ' 


indicating  the  existence  of  a  symmetrical  triplet,  the  middle  line  of 
which  has  the  position  of  the  original  spectral  line.  In  a  similar 
manner  it  can  be  shown  that  we  shall  observe  a  quartet,  a  quintet, 
etc.,  whenever  the  system  has  four,  five  or  more  equivalent  degrees 
of  freedom.  All  these  more  complicated  forms  of  division  of  a 
spectral  line  are  found  to  be  symmetrical  to  the  right  and  to  the 
left  of  the  original  position,  so  that,  if  the  number  of  components  is 
odd,  the  middle  one  always  occupies  the  place  of  the  primitive  line.1) 

93.  The  existence  of  a  certain  number  of  equivalent  degrees  of 
freedom  is  not  the  only  condition  to  which  we  must  subject  the 
radiating  particles.  The  fact  that  the  magnetic  components  of  the 
spectral  lines  have  the  same  degree  of  sharpness  as  the  original  lines 
themselves  requires  a  further  hypothesis.  We  can  understand  this 
by  reverting  for  a  moment  to  the  expression  (177).  In  it,  the  coef- 
ficients cJ3,  c31,  Cjjj  are  linear  and  homogeneous  functions  of  the  com- 
ponents Hxf  Hy,  H2  of  the  external  magnetic  force.  Therefore,  the 
distance  between  the  outer  components  of  the  triplet  and  the  middle 
one  is  given  by  an  expression  of  the  form 


+  2^pTH7+  2?^VT+2g7tTp;,    (178) 

in  which  qn,  q.n,  .  .  .,  q^,  ...  are  constants  depending  on  the  nature 
of  the  vibrating  particle.  If,  without  changing  the  direction  of  the 
field,  its  intensity  is  doubled,  the  distance  between  the  lines  will  in- 
crease in  the  same  ratio.  So  far  our  formula  agrees  with  experi- 
mental results.2) 

Let  us  now  consider  the  influence  of  a  change  in  the  direction 
of  the  magnetic  field,  the  intensity  |H|  being  kept  constant.  By 
turning  the  field  we  shall  give  other  values  to  ttx,  Hy,  H^,  and  also 
to  the  expression  (178).  It  is  clear  that  the  same  change  will  be 
brought  about  if,  leaving  the  field  as  it  is,  we  turn  the  radiating 
particle  itself.  Hence,  if  the  source  of  light  contains  a  large  number 
of  particles  having  all  possible  orientations,  the  distance  (178)  will 


1)  Note  46.        2)  Note  47. 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


114  III.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

vary  between  certain  limits,  so  that  the  outer  lines  of  the  observed 
triplet,  which  is  due  to  the  radiation  of  all  the  particles  together, 
must  be  more  or  less  diffuse. 

Since  it  is  difficult  to  admit  that  the  particles  of  a  luminous 
gas,  when  subjected  to  a  magnetic  field,  are  kept  in  one  definite 
position,  the  only  way  of  explaining  the  triplet  with  sharp  outer  com- 
ponents seems  to  be1)  the  assumption  that  the  coefficients  in  (178) 
are  such  that  the  quadratic  function  takes  the  form 


In  this  case,  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  field  on  the  frequencies  is 
independent  of  the  direction  of  the  force  relatively  to  the  particle. 
As  regards  this  influence,  the  particle  can  then  be  termed  isotropic. 
The  simple  mechanism  which  we  imagined  in  the  elementary 
theory  of  the  Zeernan-effect  obviously  fulfils  the  conditions  to  which 
we  have  been  led  in  what  precedes.  Indeed,  a  single  electron  which 
can  be  displaced  in  all  directions  from  its  position  of  equilibrium, 
and  which  is  pulled  back  towards  this  position  by  a  force  indepen- 
dent of  the  direction  of  the  displacement,  has  the  kind  of  isotropy 
we  spoke  of  just  now.  It  has  also  three  degrees  of  freedom,  corre- 
sponding to  the  displacements  in  three  directions  perpendicular  to 
each  other. 

94.  The  question  now  arises,  whether  we  can  imagine  other, 
more  complicated  systems  fulfilling  the  conditions  necessary  for  the 
production  of  magnetic  quartets,  quintets  etc.  In  order  to  give  an 
example  of  a  system  of  this  kind,  I  may  mention  the  way  in  which 
A.  A.  Robba)  has  explained  a  quintet.  For  this  purpose  he  supposes 
that  a  radiating  particle  contains  two  movable  electrons,  whose  posi- 
tions of  equilibrium  coincide,  and  which  are  pulled  towards  this 
position  by  elastic  forces  proportional  to  the  displacements,  and  deter- 
mined by  a  coefficient  that  is  the  same  for  both  electrons.  The 
charges  and  the  masses  are  also  supposed  to  be  equal.  Robb  does 
not  speak  of  the  mutual  electric  action  of  the  electrons,  but  he  in- 
troduces certain  connexions  between  their  positions  and  their  motions. 
If  TJ  and  r2  are  vectors  drawn  from  the  position  of  equilibrium 
towards  the  two  electrons,  and  r12  the  vector  drawn  from  the  first 
electron  towards  the  second,  these  connexions  are  expressed  by  the 
equations 


1)  See,  however,  Note  64. 

2)  A.  A.  Robb,  Beitrage  zur  Theorie  des  Zeeman-Effektes,  Ann.  Phys.  15 
(1904),  p.  107. 


VIBRATIONS  OF  CHARGED  SPHERICAL  SHELLS.  115 


Pffl"f  *(?»»+  Pi"), 

where  A;  is  a  constant.  It  is  immediately  seen  that  in  all  these 
assumptions  there  is  nothing  that  relates  to  a  particular  direction  in 
space.  On  account  of  this,  the  five  different  frequencies  which  are 
found  to  exist  under  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  force,  are  independ- 
ent of  the  direction  of  this  force,  and  a  large  number  of  systems 
of  the  kind  described  would  give  rise  to  a  quintet  of  sharp  lines. 

Robb  has  worked  out  his  theory  at  a  much  greater  length  than 
appears  from  the  few  words  I  have  said  about  it,  and  it  certainly  is 
very  ingenious.  Yet,  his  hypothesis  about  the  connexions  between 
the  two  electrons  seems  to  me  so  artificial,  that  I  fear  he  has  given 
us  but  a  poor  picture  of  the  real  state  of  things. 

95.  The  same  must  be  said  of  an  hypothesis  which  I  tried  many 
years  ago.  After  having  made  clear  to  myself  that  the  vibrating  par- 
ticles must  be  isotropic,  I  examined  the  motions  of  systems  surely 
possessing  this  property,  namely  of  uniformly  charged  spherical  shells, 
having  an  elasticity  of  one  kind  or  another,  and  vibrating  in  a  mag- 
netic field.  By  means  of  the  theory  of  spherical  harmonics,  the  dif- 
ferent modes  of  motion  corresponding  to  what  we  may  call  the  dif- 
ferent tones  of  the  shell,  can  easily  be  determined,  and  it  was  found 
that  each  of  the  tones  can  originate  in  several  modes  of  motion,  so 
that  we  can  truly  say  that  each  spectral  line  (if  the  vibrations  can 
produce  light)  consists  of  a  certain  number  of  coinciding  lines,  this 
number  increasing  as  we  pass  on  to  the  higher  tones  of  the  shell.  The 
calculation  of  the  influence  of  an  external  magnetic  force  confirmed 
the  inference  drawn  from  the  general  theory;  if  a  certain  frequency 
can  be  produced  in  3,  5  or  7  independent  ways,  the  spectral  line 
corresponding  to  it  is  split  into  3,  5  or  7  components. 

For  more  than  one  reason,  however,  this  theory  of  vibrating 
spherical  shells  can  hardly  be  considered  as  anything  more  than  an 
illustration  of  the  general  dynamical  theorem;  it  cannot  be  said  to 
furnish  us  with  a  satisfactory  conception  of  the  process  of  radiation. 
In  the  first  place,  if  the  series  of  tones  of  the  shell  gave  rise  to  the 
successive  members  of  a  series  of  spectral  lines,  the  number  of  com- 
ponents into  which  these  are  divided  in  a  magnetic  field  ought  to 
increase  as  we  proceed  in  the  series  towards  the  more  refrangible 
side.  This  is  in  contradiction  with  the  results  of  later  experience, 
which  has  shown,  as  I  already  mentioned,  that  all  the  lines  of  a  series 
are  split  in  exactly  the  same  way. 


116  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

In  the  second  place,  I  pointed  out  that  the  spherical  shells,  when 
vibrating  in  their  higher  modes,  are  very  poor  radiators.  In  these 
modes  the  surface  of  the  shell  is  divided  by  nodal  lines  into  parts, 
vibrating  in  different  phases,  so  that  the  phases  are  opposite  on  both 
sides  of  a  nodal  line.  The  vibrations  issuing  from  these  several  parts 
must  necessarily  destroy  each  other  for  the  larger  part  by  inter- 
ference. 

96.  In  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge,  a  third  objection, 
which  is  a  very  serious  one,  may  be  raised.  Though  in  the  Z  e  email  - 
effect  the  separation  of  the  components  is  not  exactly  what  it  would 

be,  if  in  the  formulae  (164)  the  ratio  —  had  the  value  that  has  been 

deduced  from  experiments   on  cathode-rays,  yet  it  is  at  least  of  the 
same  order  of  magnitude  as  the   value  which  we  should  find  in  this 

case.    Hence,  if  we   write  (  -—  )    for  the  ratio   deduced  from  the  obser- 

\m/c 
vations  on  cathode-rays,   and  if  we  use  the  symbol  (=)  to  indicate 

that  two  quantities  are  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  we  have  for 
the  distance  between  two   magnetic  components  the   general  formula 


On  the  other  hand,   the  theory   of  the  vibrating   shells  leads  to 
an  equation  of  the  form 

dM(=)l»-ULl  (180) 

v    '  m,    c    ' 

in  which  es  is  the  charge  and  m,  the  mass  of  the  shell. 
We  may  infer  from  (179)  and  (180)  that 


an  equation  which  shows  that  the  properties  of  the  charged  sphere 
cannot  be  wholly  different  from  those  of  a  free  electron.  Therefore, 
as  we  know  that  the  mass  mc  of  such  an  electron  is  purely  electro- 
magnetic, we  are  led  to  suppose  that  the  mass  ms  of  the  shell  is  of 
the  same  nature.  This,  however,  leads  us  into  a  difficulty,  when  we 
come  to  consider  the  frequencies  of  the  vibrations.  The  relative 
motions  of  the  parts  of  the  shell  are  in  part  determined  by  the  electric 
interactions  of  these  parts,  and  even  if  they  were  wholly  so,  i.  e.  if 
there  were  no  ,,elasticity"  of  an  other  kind,  the  wave-lengths  cor- 
responding to  the  different  tones  as  I  have  called  them,  would,  on 
the  above  assumption  concerning  the  mass,  be  extremely  small;  they 
would  be  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  radius  Rt.  They 
would  be  still  smaller  if  there  were  an  additional  elasticity.  There- 


THOMSON'S  MODEL  OP  AN  ATOM.  H7 

fore,  as  the  radius  Rs  must  certainly  be  very  much  smaller  than  the 
wave-length  of  light,  we  can  never  hope  to  explain  the  radiation  of 
light  by  the  distortional  vibrations  of  spheres  whose  charge  and 
radius  are  such  as  is  required  by  the  magnitude  of  the  Zeeman-effect. 

97.  It  is  clear  in  what  way  we  can  escape  from  the  difficulty 
I  just  now  pointed  out.  We  must  ascribe  the  radiation,  not  to  the 
distortional  vibrations  of  electrons,  but  to  vibrations  in  which  they 
move  as  a  whole  over  certain  small  distances.  Motions  of  this  kind 
can  exist  in  an  atom  which  contains  a  certain  number  of  negative 
electrons,  arranged  in  such  a  manner  that  they  are  in  stable  equili- 
brium under  the  influence  of  their  mutual  forces,  and  of  those  that 
are  exerted  by  the  positive  charges  in  the  atom.  This  conception  is 
very  like  an  assumption  that  has  been  developed  to  a  considerable 
extent  by  J.  J.  Thomson1),  and  according  to  which  an  atom  consists 
of  a  positive  charge  uniformly  distributed  over  a  spherical  space, 
a  certain  number  of  negative  electrons  being  embedded  in  this  sphere, 
and  arranging  themselves  in  a  definite  geometrical  configuration. 

In  what  follows,  it  will  be  found  convenient  to  restrict  the  name 
of  electrons  to  these  negative  particles  or,  as  Thomson  calls  them, 
,,corpuscles". 

If  the  atom  as  a  whole  is  uncharged,  the  total  positive  charge 
of  the  sphere  must  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  charges  of  the  nega- 
tive electrons;  we  can,  however,  also  conceive  cases  in  which  this 
equality  does  not  exist. 

It  is  interesting  to  examine  the  dimensions  that  must  be  ascribed 
to  a  structure  of  the  above  kind.  Let  the  mutual  distances  of  the 
electrons  be  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  a  certain  line  I,  and 
let  e  be  the  charge  of  each  electron.  Then,  the  repulsion  between 

e* 
two  electrons  is   of  the   same  order  as    — -,t,  and  the  change  which 

this  force  undergoes  by  a  very  small  displacement  8  of  one  of  the 
corpuscles,  is  of  the  order 

e'S 
4*J8' 

This  change  may  be  considered  as  an  additional  force  that  is  called 
into  play  by  the  displacement  6.  Hence,  if  we  exclude  those  cases 
in  which  a  very  large  number  of  electrons  produce  additional  forces 
of  the  same  direction,  and  also  those  in  which  the  additional  force 
which  is  due  to  the  negative  electrons  is  compensated  or  far  surpassed 
by  that  which  is  caused  by  the  positive  charge,  the  total  force  by 


1)  J.  J.   Thomson,    The    corpuscular   theory    of  matter,    London,    1907. 
chap.  6  and  7. 


118  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

which  an  electron  is  pulled  back  towards  its  position  of  equilibrium 
is  given,  as  to  order  of  magnitude,  by  the  above  expression.  I  shall 
suppose  the  electrons  to  have  the  same  radius  R,  charge  e  and  mass  m 
as  the  free  negative  electrons,  and  I  shall  write  I  for  the  wave-length 
corresponding  to  their  vibrations.  Now,  by  what  precedes,  we  have 
for  the  frequency 

2  /       \          ^ 

^4^^T8' 
or,  on  account  of  (72), 

2/    \  3  -Re2 
"?HTT-- 

But 

„  = 

so  that 


Putting  K  =  0,5  •  10~*cm,  and  introducing  the  value  of  E  (§  35),  one 
finds  by  this  equation 

I  (=)  2,4  •  10-8cm  (-)  1,6  •  105E. 

This  means  that  the  electrons  must  be  placed  at  distances  from  each 
other  that  are  very  much  larger  than  their  dimensions,  so  that,  com- 
pared with  the  separate  electrons,  the  atom  is  of  a  very  large  size. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  very  small  compared  with  the  wave-length,  for 
according  to  the  above  data  we  have 

I  (-.)  5  •  10-*A. 

One  consequence  of  the  high  value  which  we  have  found  for  I :  R  is 
that  the  electromagnetic  fields  of  the  electrons  do  not  appreciably 
overlap.  This  is  an  important  circumstance,  because,  on  account  of 
it,  we  may  ascribe  to  each  electron  the  electromagnetic  mass  m  which 
it  would  have  if  it  were  wholly  free. 

The  value  we  have  found  for  I  is  of  about  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  as  the  estimates  that  have  been  formed  of  molecular 
dimensions.  We  may  therefore  hope  not  to  be  on  a  wrong  track  if, 
in  the  above  manner,  we  try  to  explain  the  production  of  light  by 
the  vibrations  of  electrons  under  the  influence  of  electric  forces. 

98.  It  is  easily  seen  that  a  number  of  negative  electrons  can 
never  form  a  permanent  system,  if  not  held  together  by  some  ex- 
ternal action.  This  action  is  provided  for  in  J.  J.  Thomson's  model 
by  the  positive  sphere,  which  attracts  all  the  electrons  towards  its 
centre  0,  and  which  must  be  supposed  to  extend  beyond  the  electrons, 
because  otherwise  there  could  be  no  true  static  equilibrium.  As 


NEGATIVE  ELECTRONS  IN  POSITIVE  SPHERE.  119 

already  stated,  I  shall  use  the  same  assumption,  but  I  shall  so  far 
depart  from  Thomson's  ideas  as  to  consider  the  density  p,  not  as 
constant  throughout  the  sphere,  but  as  some  unknown  function  of 
the  distance  r  from  its  centre.  The  greater  generality  that  is  obtained 
in  this  way  will  be  seen  to  be  of  some  interest.  With  a  slight  modi- 
fication, our  formulae  might  even  be  adapted  to  the  case  of  electrons 
attracted  towards  the  point  0  by  some  force  f(r)  of  unknown  origin, 
for  any  field  of  force  that  is  symmetrical  around  a  centre  0,  can  be 
imitated  by  the  electric  field  within  a  sphere  in  which  the  density  p 
is  a  suitable  function  of  r. 

However,  I  shall  suppose  p  to  be  positive  in  all  layers  of  the 
sphere,  and  to  decrease  from  the  centre  outward. 

As  is  well  known,  the  general  outcome  of  the  researches  on  the 
a-rays  of  radio-active  bodies  and  on  the  canal  rays  has  been  that 
the  positive  electricity  is  always  attached  to  the  mass  of  an  atom.1) 
In  accordance  with  this  result,  we  shall  consider  the  positive  sphere 
as  having  nearly  the  whole  mass  of  the  atom,  a  mass  that  is  so 
large  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  negative  electrons,  that  the 
sphere  can  be  regarded  as  immovable,  while  the  electrons  can  be  dis- 
placed within  it.  The  question  as  to  whether  the  mass  of  the  posi- 
tive sphere  is  material  or  electromagnetic,  can  be  left  aside.  Of  course 
the  latter  alternative  must  be  discarded,  if  we  apply  to  the  positive 
electricity  a  formula  similar  to  the  one  we  have  formerly  given  for 
the  electromagnetic  mass  of  an  electron;  on  account  of  the  large 
radius  of  the  sphere,  the  mass  calculated  by  the  formula  would  be 
an  insignificant  fraction  of  the  mass  of  the  negative  electrons.  It 
might  however  be  that  part  of  the  charge  is  concentrated  in  a  large 
number  of  small  particles  whose  mutual  distances  are  invariable;  in 
this  case  the  total  electromagnetic  mass  of  the  positive  charge  could 
have  a  considerable  value. 

99.  Before  passing  on  to  a  special  case,  some  other  remarks  may 
be  introduced. 

In  the  first  place,  an  atom  which  contains  N  movable  negative 
electrons,  will  have  3N  degrees  of  freedom.  Consequently,  if  its 
vibrations  are  to  be  made  accountable  for  the  production  of  one  or 
more  series  of  spectral  lines,  the  number  of  electrons  must  be  rather 
large.  It  ought  even  to  be  infinite,  if  a  series  really  consisted  of  an 
infinite  number  of  lines,  as  it  would  according  to  Rydberg's  equa- 
tions. Since,  however,  these  formulae  are  only  approximations,  and 
since  the  lines  that  can  actually  be  observed  are  in  finite  number, 
I  believe  this  consideration  need  not  withhold  us  from  ascribing  the 


1)  See,  however,  Note  64. 


120  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EPFECT. 

radiation  of  light  to  atoms  containing  a  finite,  though  perhaps  a  rather 
large  number  of  negative  electrons. 

In  the  second  place  we  shall  introduce  the  condition  that  the 
vibrating  system  must  be  isotropic.  True  isotropy,  i.  e.  perfect 
equality  of  properties  in  all  directions,  can  never  be  attained  by 
a  finite  number  of  separated  particles.  It  is  only  when  we  are  con- 
tent with  the  explanation  of  triplets,  that  no  difficulty  arises  from 
this  circumstance,  because  in  this  case  equality  of  properties  with 
respect  to  three  directions  at  right  angles  to  each  other  will  suffice 
for  our  purpose.  Arrangements  possessing  this  limited  kind  of  iso- 
tropy,  can  easily  be  imagined  for  different  numbers  of  corpuscles,  pro- 
vided there  be  at  least  four  of  them.  The  electrons  may  be  placed 
at  the  angles  of  one  of  the  regular  polyhedra,  or  of  a  certain  number 
of  such  polyhedra  whose  centres  coincide  with  that  of  the  positive 
sphere,  and  whose  relative  position  presents  a  sufficient  regularity. 

Our  final  remark  relates  to  the  radiation  emitted  by  the  atom. 
When  we  examined  the  radiation  from  a  single  electron  we  found 
that  it  is  determined  by  the  acceleration.  One  can  infer  from  this 
that  the  radiation  produced  at  distant  points  by  an  atom  which 
contains  a  number  of  equal  vibrating  electrons,  and  whose  dimensions 
are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length,  is  equal  to  that 
which  would  take  place  if  there  were  but  one  electron,  moving  with 
an  acceleration  that  is  found  by  compounding  all  the  individual 
accelerations.  In  some  cases,  especially  likely  to  occur  in  systems 
presenting  a  geometrical  configuration  of  high  regularity,  this  resultant 
acceleration  is  zero,  so  that  there  is  no  perceptible  radiation  at  all,  or 
at  least  only  a  very  small  residual  one,  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
different  electrons  are  not  at  exactly  the  same  distance  from  the 
outer  point  considered,  and  that  therefore  we  have  to  compound  the 
accelerations,  such  as  they  are,  not  at  one  and  the  same  instant,  but 
at  slightly  different  times.  Vibrations  presenting  the  peculiarity  in 
question  may  properly  be  designated  as  ineffective  ones. 

100.  We  shall  now  occupy  ourselves  with  a  special  case,  the 
simplest  imaginable,  namely  that  of  four  equal  electrons  A,  B,  C,  D, 
which,  of  course,  are  in  equilibrium  at  the  corners  of  a  regular 
tetrahedron  whose  centre  coincides  with  the  centre  0  of  the  positive 
sphere.1) 

The  fundamental  modes  of  motion  of  this  system  can  easily  be 
determined.2)  In  order  to  obtain  simple  formulae  for  the  frequencies, 

1)  The  Zeeman-effect  in  a  system  of  this  kind  has  already  been  examined 
by  J.  J.  Thomson,   who,  however,  supposed  the  positive  sphere  to  have  a  uni- 
form volume-density. 

2)  Note  48. 


VIBRATIONS  OP  A  SYSTEM  OF  FOUR  ELECTRONS.  121 

I  shall  imagine  a  spherical  surface  to  pass  through  A,  B,  C,  D- 
I  shall  denote  by  p  the  value  which  the  density  of  the  positive 
charge  presents  at  this  surface,  and  by  p0  the  mean  density  in  its  interior. 
I  shall  further  introduce  a  certain  coefficient  o>,  which,  in  those 
cases  in  which  there  is  a  Zeeman- effect,  can  be  regarded  as  a 
measure  of  it.  We  shall  be  concerned  only  with  triplets,  and  the 
meaning  of  co  is,  that  the  actual  separation  of  the  components  is 
found,  if  the  separation  required  by  the  elementary  theory,  for  the 

same  value  of   — ,  is  multiplied  by  co. 

In  the  first  fundamental  mode,  the  four  electrons  perform  equal 
vibrations  along  the  lines  OA,  OB,  OC,  OD,  in  such  a  way  that, 
at  every  instant,  they  are  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre  0.  The 
frequency  of  this  motion,  which  is  inefficient,  and  not  affected  by  a 
magnetic  field,  is  determined  by 

9  PC 

n*  =  —  — , 
m ' 

a  formula  which  gives  a  real  value  for  n,  because  Q  is  positive  and 
e  negative. 

Other  modes  of  motion  are  best  described  by  choosing  as  axes 
of  coordinates  the  lines  joining  the  middle  points  of  opposite  edges 
of  the  tetrahedron,  and  by  fixing  our  attention  on  two  such  edges, 
for  example  on  those  which  are  perpendicular  to  OX.  Let  these 
edges  be  AB  and  CD,  x  being  positive  for  the  first,  and  negative 
for  the  second. 

The  corpuscles  can  vibrate  in  such  a  manner  that,  at  every 
instant,  the  displacement  of  any  one  of  them  from  its  position  of 
equilibrium  can  be  considered  as  made  up  of  a  component  p  parallel 
to  OX  and  a  transverse  component,  which  for  A  and  B  is  along 
AB,  and  for  C  and  D  along  CD.  Calling  the  component  p  positive 
or  negative  according  to  its  direction,  which  may  be  that  of  OX  or 
the  reverse,  and  giving  to  the  transverse  displacement  the  positive 
sign  if  it  is  away  from  OX,  and  the  negative  sign  if  it  is  directed 
towards  this  line,  we  have  for  all  the  electrons 

p  —  a  cos  nt, 
for  the  transverse  displacement  of  A  and  B 

9  —  *P> 

and  for  that  of  C  and  D 

-9  —  —  8P, 

the  constant  s  being  determined  by  the  equation 

s  =  v  1/2  ±  1/TT2V8 ,  (181) 


122  HI-  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

where 


The  double  sign  in  (181)  shows  that  there  are  two  modes  of  the 
kind  considered.  These  have  unequal  frequencies,  for  which  I  find 
the  formula 


^)},        (183) 

and  are  both  effective  for  radiation,  on  account  of  the  accelerations 
of  the  electrons  in  the  direction  OX.  The  system  will  therefore 
produce  two  lines  Lt  and  L%  in  the  spectrum. 

Now,  it  is  immediately  seen  that,  in  addition  to  these  two  modes 
of  vibrating,  which  are  related,  as  we  may  say,  to  the  direction  OX, 
there  are  similar  ones  related  in  the  same  way  to  OY  and  OZ,  so 
that  Lt  and  i2  are  triple  lines,  which  can  be  split  into  three  com- 
ponents by  a  magnetic  field.  For  Llt  the  separation  between  the 
outer  components  and  the  middle  one  is  determined  by 

»--  J-Fl-       =2S-g"l,  (184) 

V'2(l+2i»I)J 
and  for  L2  by 

co  =  ~  fl  +  ---  1  -  (185) 

Ty*(l  +  **•)] 

Moreover,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  state  of  polarization  of  the  light 
producing  the  components  of  these  triplets  is  the  same  which  we 
have  deduced  from  the  elementary  theory,  the  radiation  along  the 
lines  of  force  again  consisting  of  two  circularly  polarized  beams  of 
different  frequencies,  the  one  right-handed  and  the  other  left-handed. 
The  modes  of  motion  to  which  I  have  next  to  call  your  attention 
may  be  described  as  a  twisting  of  the  system  around  one  of  the 
axes  OX,  OY,  OZ.  The  first  of  these  modes  is  characterized  by 
small  rotations  of  the  lines  AS  and  CD  around  the  axis  OX,  the 
direction  of  the  rotation  changing  periodically  for  each  line  and  being 
at  every  instant  opposite  for  the  two  lines.  Since  a  twisting  of  this 
kind  around  OZ  can  be  decomposed  into  a  twisting  around  OX  and 
one  around  0  Y,  these  motions  constitute  only  two  fundamental 
modes.  They  are  ineffective,  and  their  frequency,  which  is  given  by 
the  formula 

^  =  _ie»e  (186) 

4    m  ' 

is  not  altered  by  a  magnetic  field. 

We  have  now  found  nine  fundamental  modes  of  motion  in  all. 
The  remaining  ones  are  rotations  around  one  of  the  axes  OX, 


VIBRATIONS  OF  A  SYSTEM  OF  FOUR  ELECTRONS.  123 

OY,  OZ;  these  are  not  controlled  by  the  internal  forces  we  have 
assumed,  and  cannot  be  called  vibrations  about  the  position  of 
equilibrium. 

101.  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  (186)  always  gives  a  real  value 
for  n,  and  that  the  two  frequencies  determined  by  (183)  are  real  too, 

provided  the  value  of  p  be  greater  than  --  p0.     When   this  condition 

is  fulfilled,  the  original  state  of  the  system  is  one  of  stable  equilibrium. 
If  we  adopt  J.  J.  Thomson's  hypothesis  of  a  uniformly  charged 
sphere,  we  have  p  =  p0.     In  this  case  we  can  write  instead  of  (183), 
(184)  and  (185) ') 

2  1      9oe  1      Pn« 

rr  =  —  -s  or  r  JSS- 1 

2m  3m' 

or     1 . 


102.  Other  cases  in  which  a  certain  number  of  electrons  have 
a  regular  geometrical  arrangement  within  the  positive  sphere,  can  be 
treated  in  a   similar  way,    though   for   a   larger   number   of  particles 
the  calculations  become  rather  laborious.     So   far   as   I   can   see,   the 
line  of  thought  which  we  are  now  following   promises   no  chance  of 
finding  the  explanation  of  a  quartet  or  a  quintet,    so  that,   after  all, 
the  progress  we  have  made  is  not  very  important.    The  main  interest 
of  the  preceding  theory  lies  in  the  fact,  that  it  shows  the  possibility 
of  the  explanation   of  magnetic   triplets   in  which  the   separation  of 
the  components  is  different  from  that  of  the  triplets  of  the  elementary 
theory,  as  is  shown  by  the  value  of  co  differing  from  1.     According 
to  our  formulae,  co  can  even  have  a  negative  value.     In  the  above 
example  this  means  that,   in   the   radiation   along   the  lines   of  force, 
the  circular  polarization  of  the  outer  components  of  the  doublet  can 
be    the    inverse    of  what    it  would    be   according  to   the  elementary 
theory.2) 

It  is  remarkable  that  negative  electrons  may  in  this  way  produce 
a  Zeem an- effect  which  the  elementary  theory  would  ascribe  to  the 
existence  of  movable  positive  particles. 

103.  Shortly  after  Zeeman's  discovery  some  physicists  observed 
that,  just  like  the  magnetic  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization,  the 
new  phenomenon  makes  one  think  of  some  rotation  around  the  lines 
of  force,  going  on  in  the  magnetic  field.     There  is   certainly  much  to 
be  said  in  favour  of  this  view.     Only,  if  one  means  the  hidden  ro- 

1)  Note  49.        2)  Note  50. 


124  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

tations  which  some  theories  suppose  to  exist  in  the  ether  occupying 
a  magnetic  field  (and  to  which  those  theories  must  ascribe  every 
action  of  the  field)  a  development  of  the  idea  lies  outside  the  scope 
of  the  theory  of  electrons  as  I  am  now  expounding  it,  because,  in 
this  theory,  we  take  as  our  basis,  without  further  discussion,  the 
properties  of  the  ether  which  are  expressed  in  our  fundamental 
equations.  There  is,  however,  a  rotation  of  a  different  kind  to  which 
perhaps  we  may  have  recourse  in  our  attempts  to  explain  Zeeman's 
phenomenon. 

Let  us  consider  the  interval  of  time  during  which  a  magnetic 
field  is  set  up  in  a  certain  part  of  the  ether.  While  the  magnetic 
force  H  is  changing,  there  are  electric  forces  d,  whose  distribution 
and  magnitude  are  determined  by  our  fundamental  equations  (2)  and  (5). 
These  are  the  forces  which  cause  the  induction  current  produced  in 
a  metallic  wire,  and  they  may  be  said  to  be  identical,  though 
presented  in  a  modern  form;  with  the  forces  by  which  W.  Weber 
explained  the  phenomena  of  diamagnetism,  an  explanation  that  can 
readily  be  reproduced  in  the  language  of  the  theory  of  electrons. 
I  shall  now  consider  the  rotation  they  impart  to  a  system  of  negative 
electrons  such  as  we  have  been  examining  in  the  preceding  paragraphs. 
In  doing  so,  I  shall  suppose  the  positively  charged  sphere  to  have 
so  large  a  mass  that  it  may  be  regarded  as  immovable,  and  I  shall 
apply  to  the  system  of  negative  electrons  the  laws  that  hold  for  a 
rigid  body;  this  will  lead  to  no  appreciable  error,  if  the  time  during 
which  the  magnetic  field  is  started,  is  very  long  in  comparison  with 
the  periods  of  the  vibrations  of  the  electrons. 

104.  I  shall  again  confine  myself  to  arrangements  of  the  electrons 
that  are  isotropic  with  respect  to  three  directions  at  right  angles  to 
each  other.  Then,  if  the  axes  of  coordinates  are  drawn  through  the 
centre  0  in  any  directions  we  like,  and  if  the  sums  are  extended  to 
all  the  negative  electrons  of  the  system,  we  shall  have 

2*-2i-2»-*> 

Also,  the  moment   of  inertia  will   be   the  same  with  respect  to  any 
axis  through   0.     We  may  write  for  it 

Q  =  2mK, 

if 

JT-^^-^f*-^, 

and  we  have 


The  force  acting  on  one  of  the  electrons  is  given  by 

ed*>     edj,,     edz, 


ROTATION  OP  A  PARTICLE  IN  A  MAGNETIC  FIELD.  125 

and   we   find   therefore   for   the   components  of  the  resultant  couple 
with  reference  to  the  point  0 

e2(y*.-**J,    e2('*,-x*.),     Ofad,  -  JMIJ.      (188) 

By  d  we  shall  understand  the  electric  force  due  to  causes  out- 
side the  system.  On  account  of  the  small  dimensions  of  the  latter, 
this  force  will  be  nearly  constant  throughout  its  extent,  so  that, 
denoting  by  d0  the  electric  force  at  the  centre,  we  may  write 


d 
- 


Substituting   these   values   in   the  expressions  (188),  and  bearing  in 
mind  the  equations  (187),  one  finds 


or,  in  virtue  of  the  fundamental  equation  (5), 


---jrh 


In  order  to  find  the  components  of  the  angular  acceleration,  we  must 
divide  these  expressions  by  Q  =  2mK.  The  result  is 

e    :  e    i  e    t 

~  2mc    •"      ~  2»»c  V       ~  sTme    " 

from   which   it   at   once   appears   that,   after  the   establishment  of  a 

field  H,  a  system  that  was  initially  at  rest,  has  acquired  a  velocity 
of  rotation 

k  =  _oe    H.  (189) 

2  me 

The  axis  of  rotation  has  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field,  and,  if 
e  is  negative,  the  direction  of  the  rotation  corresponds  to  that  of  the 
field.  It  is  interesting  that  the  velocity  of  the  rotation  is  independent 
of  the  particular  arrangement  of  the  electrons,  and  that  its  frequency, 
i.  e.  the  number  of  revolutions  in  a  time  2  it,  is  equal  to  the  change 
of  frequency  we  have  calculated  in  the  elementary  theory  of  the 
Zeeman-  effect. 

The  same  rotation  would  be  produced  if,  after  the  setting  up  of 
the  field,  the  system  were,  by  a  motion  of  translation,  carried  into 
it  from  an  outside  point.  Once  started,  the  rotation  will  go  on  for 


126  in.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

ever,  as  long  as  the  field  is  kept  constant,    unless    its   velocity  be 
slowly  diminished  by  the  radiation  to  which  it  gives  rise.1) 

1O5.  We  shall  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  small  vibrations 
that  can  take  place  in  the  system  while  it  rotates.  For  this  purpose, 
we  shall  introduce  axes  of  coordinates  having  a  fixed  position  in  the 
system,  and  distinguish  between  the  motion  with  respect  to  these 
axes,  the  relative  motion,  and  the  motion  with  respect  to  axes  fixed 
in  space,  which  we  may  call  the  absolute  one. 

Let,  for  any  one  of  the  electrons,  V  be  the  absolute  velocity, 
q  the  absolute  acceleration,  qa  the  part  of  it  that  is  due  to  the 
internal  forces  of  the  system,  and  (|.,  the  part  due  to  the  magnetic 
field.  Then,  we  shall  have  for  the  acceleration  q'  of  the  relative 
motion,  if  we  neglect  terms  depending  on  the  square  of  the  angular 
velocity  k,  and  therefore  on  the  square  of  the  magnetic  force  H, 

q'  =  q-2[k-v]  =  q[  +  q2-2[k    v], 

i.  e.  on  account  of  (189), 


q  =  -1  [V  .  H], 

L 


Since 
we  find2) 

This  shows  that  the  relative  motion  is  determined  solely  by  the 
internal  forces  of  the  system;  it  is  identical  with  the  motion  that 
could  take  place  in  a  system  without  rotation  and  free  from  the 
influence  of  a  magnetic  field.  I  shall  express  this  by  saying  that  in 
the  system  rotating  with  the  velocity  which  we  calculated,  there  is 
no  internal  Zeeman-effect,  the  word  ,,internal"  being  introduced, 
because,  as  we  shall  presently  show,  there  remains  a  Zeeman-effect 
in  the  external  radiation.  This  effect  is  brought  about  by  the  same 
cause  that  has  made  the  internal  effect  disappear,  namely  by  the 
rotation  of  the  particles. 

106.  We  have  already  observed  (§  99)  that  a  particle  which 
contains  a  certain  number  of  equal  vibrating  electrons,  and  whose 
size  is  very  small  compared  with  the  wave-length,  will  radiate  in  the 
same  way  as  a  single  electron  of  the  same  kind,  moving  with  the 

accelerations  ^x,  ^jj,  ^j'z,  the  sums  extending  to  all  the  separate 
electrons,  and  x,  y,  z  being  their  coordinates  with  respect  to  axes 

1)  Note  51.         2)  Note  52. 


ZEEMAN-EFFECT  DUE  TO  THE  ROTATION  OF  A  PARTICLE. 

fixed  in  space.  The  accelerations  will  have  these  values  if  the  co- 
ordinates of  the  equivalent  electron,  as  it  may  properly  be  called, 
are  given  at  every  instant  by  ^x,  ^y,  ^z, 

In  order  to  apply  this  theorem  to  the  problem  before  us,  I  shall 
again  choose  the  centre  of  the  positive  sphere  as  origin  of  coordinates, 
drawing  the  axis  of  z  in  the  direction  of  the  external  magnetic 
force  H.  Let  OX  and  OF  be  fixed  in  space,  and  let  OX',  OY'  be 
axes  rotating  with  the  system;  then,  if  Jc  is  the  positive  or  negative 
velocity  of  rotation  around  OZ,  we  may  put 

x  =  x  cos  Jet  —  y  sin  Jet,  | 
y  =  x  sin  Jet  -f  y'  cos  Jet,  j 

since  we  may  take  Jet  for  the  angle  between  OX  and  OX'.  Now, 
if  x0',  y0',  #0'  are  the  coordinates  of  one  of  the  negative  electrons  in 
its  position  of  equilibrium,  and  a  cos  (nt-\-f},  ft  cos  (nt  +  g), 
y  cos  (nt  +  Ji)  the  displacements  from  that  position,  due  to  the 
internal  vibrations,  and  referred  to  the  moving  axes,  we  shall  have 
for  this  particle 

x'=xa'+  a  cos  (nt  +  f),     y  =  y0'  +  ft  cos  (n  t  +  g).        (191) 

Whereas  the  constants  K,  ft,  f,  g  (and  y,  Ji)  have  different  values  for  the 
several  electrons,  the  frequency  n  will  have  for  all  these  corpuscles 
a  common  value,  equal  to  the  frequency  of  the  radiation  in  the 
absence  of  a  magnetic  field. 

Introducing  the  values  (191)  into  the  expressions  (190)  and 
taking  the  sum  for  all  the  corpuscles,  we  shall  find  the  coordinates 
x,  y  of  the  equivalent  electron.  Since  ^x0'  =  ^y0'  =  0,  the  result 
may  be  put  in  the  form 

x  =  xt  +  xg,     y  =  yt  +  y2, 
where 

Xj  =  A  cos  {  (n  +  Jc)t  +  (f  }  ,      yt  =      A  sin  {  (n  +  K)t  +  if  }  , 
Xj,  =  B  cos  {  (w  —  Jc)t  +  4>  }  ,       y2  =  —  S  sin  {(n  —  fyt  +  $}, 

A,  B,  tp  and  ip  being  constants.  These  formulae  show  that,  leaving  aside 
the  vibration  in  the  direction  of  OZ,  which  is  entirely  unaffected  by 
the  field  and  the  rotation,  we  can  decompose  the  motion  of  the 
equivalent  electron  into  two  circular  motions  in  opposite  directions, 
performed  with  the  frequencies  n  +  Jc  and  n  —  Jc.  Therefore,  since 
in  virtue  of  (189)  Jc  is  given  by  the  equation 

7 

*=   - 


the  Zeeman-effect  in  the  radiation  issuing  from  the  rotating  particle 
exactly  corresponds  to  that  which  we  formerly  derived  from  the 
elementary  theory  for  a  particle  without  rotation. 


128  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EPFECT. 

107.  There  are  one  or  two  points  in  this  last  form  of  the 
theory  that  are  particularly  to  be  noticed. 

In  the  first  place,  we  can  suppose  the  system  of  electrons  within 
the  positive  sphere  to  be  capable  of  vibrating  in  different  modes, 
thereby  producing  a  series  of  spectral  lines.  In  consequence  of  the 
rotation  set  up  by  the  field,  all  these  lines  will  be  changed  into 
equal  triplets,  so  that  we  have  now  found  a  case,  in  which  all  the 
lines  of  a  series  are  divided,  as  they  really  are,  in  the  same  way. 
I  may  add  that,  according  to  the  view  of  the  phenomenon  we  are 
now  discussing,  the  Zeeman-effect  is  due  to  a  combination  of  the 
internal  vibrations  whose  frequency  is  n,  with  the  rotation  of  the 
frequency  k. 

This  calls  forth  a  more  general  remark.  It  is  well  known  that 
in  acoustic  phenomena  two  tones  with  the  frequencies  n^  and  «2 
are  often  accompanied  by  the  so  called  combination-tones  whose 
frequencies  are  wt  -(-  n3  and  ^  —  na  respectively.  Something  of  the 
same  kind  occurs  in  other  cases  in  which  a  motion  or  any  other 
phenomenon  shows  two  different  kinds  of  periodicity  at  the  same 
time;  indeed,  on  account  of  these,  terms  such  as  cos  n^t  and  cos  n^t 
will  occur  in  the  mathematical  expressions,  and  as  soon  as  the  product 
of  two  quantities  having  the  two  periods  shows  itself  in  the  formulae, 
the  simple  trigonometric  formula 

cos  n^t  cos  n%t  —  —  cos  (nt  +  n^)t  +  —  cos  (wt  —  n2)t 

leads  us  to  recognize  two  new  frequencies  MJ  +  ns  and  «t  —  nr 
Indeed,  it  is  precisely  in  this  way  that,  in  the  preceding  paragraph, 
the  frequencies  n  +  k  and  n  —  k  have  made  their  appearance. 

Many  years  ago,  V.  A.  Julius  observed  that  certain  regularities 
in  the  spectra  of  elements  may  be  understood,  if  we  suppose  the 
lines  to  be  caused  by  combination -tones,  the  word  being  taken  in 
the  wide  sense  we  can  give  it  on  the  ground  of  what  has  just  been 
said.  If,  for  example,  there  are  two  fundamental  modes  of  vibration 
with  the  frequencies  wt  and  w2  or,  as  we  may  say  more  concisely, 
two  ,,tones"  n^  and  ns,  and  if  each  of  these  combines  with  a  series 
of  tones,  so  that  secondary  tones  with  frequencies  equal  to  the  diffe- 
rences between  those  of  their  primaries  are  produced,  we  shall  obtain 
a  series  of  pairs,  in  which  the  components  of  each  pair  are  at  the 
distance  wt  —  w2  from  each  other. 

In  connection  with  this,  it  should  also  be  noticed  that,  in 
Rydb erg's  formulae,  every  frequency  is  presented  as  the  difference 
between  two  fundamental  ones. 

Of  course  it  would  be  premature  to  attach  much  value  to 
speculations  of  this  kind.  Yet,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  all  lines  of 


SECOND AEY  VIBRATIONS.  129 

a  series  undergo  the  same  magnetic  splitting,  one  can  hardly  help 
thinking  that  all  the  fundamental  modes  of  motion  belonging  to  the 
series  are  somehow  combined  with  one  or  more  periodic  phenomena 
going  on  in  the  magnetic  field,  as,  in  the  example  we  have  worked 
out,  they  were  combined  with  the  rotation  of  the  particles. 

I  may  add  that  the  form  of  Rydberg's  equations,  in  which  each 
frequency  is  represented  as  the  difference  of  two  terms,  naturally 
suggests  the  idea  that  under  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  field  one 
or  both  of  these  terms  have  their  value  changed,  or  rather,  are  replaced 
by  a  number  of  slightly  different  terms,  to  each  of  which  corresponds 
a  magnetic  component.  It  is  clear  that  if,  for  all  lines  of  a  series, 

the  part  of  -~-  which  they  have  in  common,  for  instance  the  part  — 

•"•  (i  +  fh) 

in  the  second  subordinate  series  I  (§  82),  is  altered  in  the  same  way, 

the  other  part  —  : — rJ  remaining  unchanged,  the  equality  of  the 
Zeem  an -effect  for  all  the  members  of  the  series  will  be  accounted  for. 

108.  In  the  second  place,   it  is  important  to  remark  that,  for 
the  entire  prevention  of  an  internal  Zeeman-effect,  the  rotation  of 
a  particle  as  a  whole  must  have  exactly  the  velocity  we  have  found 
for  it  in  §  104. 

For  other  values  of  k,  such  as  might  occur  if  the  rotating  par- 
ticle had  a  moment  of  inertia  different  from  that  which  we  formerly 
took  into  account,  q'  would  come  out  different  from  qt,  so  that  the 
relative  motion  of  the  electrons  with  respect  to  the  rotating  axes 
would  still  be  affected  by  the  magnetic  force.  In  such  a  case,  in 
order  to  find  the  Zeeman-effect  as  it  becomes  manifest  in  the 
radiation,  we  should  have  to  combine  the  internal  motions  with  the 
rotation,  after  the  manner  shown  in  §  106;  the  result  would  obviously 
be  a  decomposition  of  the  original  spectral  lines  into  more  than 
three  components. 

This  seems  rather  promising  at  first  sight,  but  it  must  be 
admitted  that  one  can  hardly  assign  a  reason  for  the  existence  of  a 
moment  of  inertia,  different  from  the  value  used  in  §  104,  and  that 
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  reconcile  the  results  with  Runge's  law 
for  the  multiple  divisions  of  the  lines. 

109.  The    preceding   theory   of  rotating   radiating   particles   is 
open  to   some  objections.    Besides  the  two  cases  mentioned  in  §  104, 
a   third    must   perhaps    be    considered   as   possible.     In   a   Geissler 
tube  or  a  flame  combinations  and  decompositions  of  minute  particles 
are  no  doubt  continually  going  on;    a  radiating  atom  cannot  there- 
fore be  supposed  to  have  been  in  a  free  state  ever  since  the  magnetic 
field  was  set  up.     Now,  in  atoms  combined  with  other  particles,  the 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electron!.  9 


130  HI.  THEORY  OF  THE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

mobility  of  the  electrons  might  perhaps  be  so  much  diminished,  that 
the  production  of  the  field  cannot  make  them  rotate;  since  there  is 
no  reason  why  they  should  begin  to  do  so  the  moment  the  atoms 
are  set  free,  we  can  imagine  in  this  way  the  existence  in  the  mag- 
netic field  of  free  atoms  without  a  rotation. 

Another  difficulty,  which  one  also  encounters  in  some  questions 
belonging  to  the  theory  of  magnetism,  arises  from  the  fact  that  a 
rotating  particle  whose  charge  is  not  quite  uniformly  distributed, 
must  necessarily,  in  the  course  of  time,  lose  its  energy  by  the 
radiation  that  is  due  to  the  rotation  itself.  It  is  probable  that 
the  time  required  for  an  appreciable  diminution  of  the  rotation 
would  be  very  long.  An  exact  determination  of  it  would,  however, 
require  rather  complicated  calculations. 

110.  After  all,  you  see  by  these  considerations  that  we  are 
rather  at  a  loss  as  to  the  explanation  of  the  complicated  forms  of 
the  Zeem  an -effect.  In  this  state  of  things,  it  is  interesting  that 
some  conclusions  concerning  the  polarization  of  the  radiation  can  be 
drawn  from  general  principles,  independently  of  any  particular  theory. 
For  this  purpose  we  shall  avail  ourselves  of  the  consideration  of 
what  we  may  term  the  reflected  image  of  an  electromagnetic  system. 

Let  S  be  a  system  composed  of  moving  electrons  and  material 
particles,  the  motion  of  the  former  being  accompanied  by  an  electro- 
magnetic field  in  the  intervening  ether.  Then,  a  second  system  S', 
which  may  be  called  the  image  of  S  with  respect  to  a  plane  V,  may 
be  defined  as  follows.  To  each  particle  or  electron,  and  even  to 
each  charged  element  of  volume  in  S,  corresponds  an  equal  particle, 
electron  or  element  of  volume  in  S',  moving  in  such  a  way  that  the 
positions  of  the  two  are  at  every  instant  symmetrical  with  respect 
to  the  plane  V-  further,  if  P  and  P'  are  corresponding  points,  the 
vector  representing  the  dielectric  displacement  at  P'  is  the  image  of 
the  corresponding  one  at  P,  whereas  the  magnetic  forces  in  S  and 
S'  are  represented  by  vectors,  one  of  which  is  the  inverted  image  of 
the  other.  On  certain  assumptions  concerning  the  forces  between  the 
electrons  and  other  particles,  which  seem  general  enough  not  to 
exclude  any  real  case,  the  system  S'  can  be  shown  to  be  a  possible 
one,  as  soon  as  S  has  an  objective  existence. 

We  shall  apply  this  to  the  ordinary  experiment  for  the 
exhibition  of  the  Zeeman-effect,  fixing  our  attention  on  the  rays  that 
are  emitted  along  the  lines  of  force,  and  placing  the  plane  V  parallel 
to  these  lines.  There  are  many  positions  of  the  plane  fulfilling  the 
latter  condition,  but  it  is  clear  that,  whichever  of  them  we  choose, 
the  image  of  the  electromagnet  will  always  have  the  same  properties. 
The  same  may  be  said,  so  far  as  the  properties  are  accessible  to  our 


POLARIZATION  OF  THE  RADIATION.  131 

observations,  of  the  source  of  light  itself;  therefore,  the  radiation 
too  must  be  exactly  the  same  in  all  systems  that  can  be  got  by 
taking  the  image  of  the  experiment  with  respect  to  planes  that  are 
parallel  to  the  lines  of  force.  From  this  we  can  immediately  infer 
that  the  light  radiated  along  the  lines  of  force  can  never  show  a 
trace  of  rectilinear  or  elliptic  polarization;  it  must  either  be  un- 
polarized,  or  have  a  circular  polarization,  partial  or  complete.  This 
conclusion  also  holds  for  the  part  of  the  radiation  that  is  charac- 
terized by  a  definite  frequency,  and  is  therefore  found  at  a  definite 
point  of  the  spectrum. 

By  a  similar  mode  of  reasoning  we  can  predict  that,  in  the 
emission  at  right  angles  to  the  lines  of  force,  there  can  never  be 
any  other  polarization,  either  partial  or  complete,  but  a  rectilinear 
one  with  the  plane  of  polarization  parallel  or  perpendicular  to  the 
lines  of  force. 

Finally,  since  the  image  of  a  magnetic  field  with  respect  to  the 
plane  of  which  we  have  spoken,  is  a  field  of  the  opposite  direction, 
the  state  of  radiation  must  be  changed  into  its  image  by  an  inversion 
of  the  magnetic  force.  At  every  point  of  the  spectrum  the  direction 
of  the  circular  polarization  will  be  inverted  at  the  same  time. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  BODY  COMPOSED  OF 

MOLECULES. 
THEORY  OF  THE  INVERSE  ZEEMAN-EFFECT. 

111.  In  the  preceding  discussion  we  had  in  view  the  influence 
of  a  magnetic  field  on  the  light  emitted  by  a  source  of  light.  There 
is  a  corresponding  influence  on  the  absorption,  as  was  already  shown 
by  one  ofZeeman's  first  experiments.  He  found  that  the  dark  lines 
which  appear  in  the  spectrum  of  a  beam  of  white  light,  passed 
through  a  sodium  flame,  are  changed  in  exactly  the  same  way  as 
the  emission  lines  of  the  luminous  vapour,  when  the  flame  is  exposed 
to  an  external  magnetic  field.  We  can  easily  understand  this  inverse 
phenomenon  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  intimate  connexion  between  the 
emission  and  the  absorption  of  light.  According  to  the  well  known 
law  of  resonance,  a  body  whose  particles  can  execute  free  vibrations 
of  certain  definite  periods,  must  be  able  to  absorb  light  of  the  same 
periods  which  it  receives  from  without.  Therefore,  if  in  a  sodium 
flame  under  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  field  there  are  three  periods 
of  free  vibrations  instead  of  one,  we  may  expect  that  the  flame  can 
produce  in  a  continuous  spectrum  three  absorption  lines  corresponding 
to  these  periods,  and  in  general,  if  we  want  to  know  what  kinds  of 
light  are  emitted  by  a  body  under  certain  circumstances,  we  have 
only  to  examine  the  absorption  in  a  beam  of  light  sent  across  it. 

A  highly  interesting  theory  based  on  this  idea  has  been  deve- 
loped by  Voigt.1)  It  has  the  advantage  of  being  applicable  to  bodies 
whose  density  is  so  great  that  there  is  a  certain  mutual  action 
between  neighboring  molecules,  a  case  in  which  it  is  rather  difficult 
directly  to  consider  the  emission  of  light. 

Voigt 's  theory  was  not  originally  expounded  in  the  language 
of  the  theory  of  electrons,  his  first  method  belonging  to  those  which 


1)  W.  Voigt,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  67  (1899),  p.  345;  68  (1899),  p.  352,  604; 
69  (1899),  p.  290;  Ann.  Phys.  1  (1900),  p.  376,  389;  G  (1901),  p.  784;  see  also 
his  book:  Magneto-  und  Elektrooptik,  Leipzig,  1908. 


MEAN  VALUES.  133 

I  have  formerly  alluded  to,  in  which  one  tries  to  describe  the  observed 
phenomena  by  judiciously  chosen  differential  equations,  without 
troubling  oneself  about  the  mechanism  underlying  them.  However, 
in  order  not  to  stray  from  the  main  subject  of  these  lectures,  I  shall 
establish  Voigt's  equations,  or  rather  a  set  of  formulae  equivalent 
to  them,  by  applying  the  principles  of  the  theory  of  electrons  to  the 
propagation  of  light  in  a  ponderable  body  considered  as  a  system  of 
molecules. 

These  formulae  are  also  interesting  because  by  means  of  them 
we  can  treat  a  number  of  other  questions,  relating  to  the  velocity 
of  propagation  and  the  absorption  of  light  of  different  frequencies. 
It  will  be  well  to  begin  with  some  of  these,  deferring  for  some  time 
the  consideration  of  the  action  exerted  by  a  magnetic  field. 

112.  Let  us  imagine  a  body  composed  of  innumerable  molecules 
or   atoms,    of  ,,particles"    as   I    shall  term   them,    each    particle   con- 
taining a  certain  number  of  electrons,   all   or   some  of  which  are  set 
vibrating  by  an  incident  beam   of  light.     Between  the  electrons  and 
in  their   interior  there  will  be  a  certain  electromagnetic  field,    which 
we  could  determine   by   means   of  our  fundamental  equations,    if  the 
distribution    and    the    motion    of   the    charges    were    known;     having 
calculated  the  field,  we  should  also  be  able  to  find  its  action  on  the 
movable  electrons,   and  to  form  the  equations  of  motion  for  each  of 
them.    This  method,  in  which  the  motion  of  the  individual  electrons 
and    the    field   in    their    immediate    neighborhood    and    even   within 
them,   would  be   the  object  of  our  investigation,  is  however  wholly 
impracticable,  when,  as  in  gaseous  bodies  and  liquids,  the  distribution 
of    the    particles    is    highly    irregular.      We    cannot   hope    to    follow 
in   its   course   each   electron,    nor  to   determine   in   all   its  particulars 
the   field   in    the    intermolecular    spaces.      We    must    therefore   have 
recourse  to  an  other  method.     Fortunately,  there  is  a  simple  way  of 
treating  the  problem,  which  is  sufficient  for  the   discussion   of  what 
can  really  be  observed,  and  is  indeed  suggested  by  the  very  nature 
of  the  phenomena. 

It  is  not  the  motion  of  a  single  electron,  nor  the  field  produced 
by  it,  that  can  make  itself  felt  in  our  experiments,  in  which  we  are 
always  concerned  with  immense  numbers  of  particles;  only  the  resultant 
effects  produced  by  them  are  perceptible  to  our  senses.  It  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  irregularities  of  which  I  have  spoken,  will  disappear 
from  the  total  effect,  and  that  we  shall  be  able  to  account  for  it, 
if,  from  the  outset,  we  fix  our  attention,  not  on  all  these  irregularities, 
but  only  on  certain  mean  values.  I  shall  now,  proceed  to  define  these. 

113.  Let  P   be    a    point    in    the   body    S    a    sphere    described 
around   it   as   centre,    and   <p    one   of  the   scalar   or   vector    quantities 


134     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

occurring  in  our  fundamental  equations.     Then  the  mean  value  of  qp 
at  the  point  P,  which  we  shall  denote  by  <p,  is  given  by  the  equation 


in  which  S  means  the  volume  of  the  sphere,  and  the  integration  is 
to  be  extended  to  this  volume.  The  elements  dS  are  to  be  taken 
infinitely  small  in  the  mathematical  sense  of  the  words,  so  that  even 
an  electron  is  divided  into  many  elements.  As  to  the  sphere  S,  it 
must  be  chosen  neither  too  small  nor  too  large.  Since  our  purpose 
is  to  get  rid  of  the  irregularities  in  the  distribution  of  cp,  the  sphere 
must  contain  a  very  large  number  of  particles.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  must  be  careful  not  to  obliterate  the  changes  from  point  to  point 
that  can  really  be  observed.  The  radius  of  the  sphere  must  there- 
fore be  so  small  that  the  state  of  the  body,  so  far  as  it  is  accessible 
to  our  means  of  observation,  may  be  considered  as  uniform  throughout 
the  sphere.  In  the  problems  we  shall  have  to  deal  with,  this  means 
that  the  radius  must  be  small  compared  with  the  wave-length.  For- 
tunately, the  molecular  distances  are  so  much  smaller  than  the  length 
of  even  the  shortest  light-waves,  that  both  conditions  can  be  satisfied 
at  the  same  time. 

114.  The  mean  value  <p,  taken  for  a  point  P,  is  in  general  a 
function  of  the  coordinates  of  this  point,  and  if  qo  itself  depends 
iipon  the  time,  (p  will  do  so  too.  We  can  easily  infer  from  our 
definition  the  relations 

8<p 8<p  d<p 2<p 

da;  =  Wx '     '"'     ~di  =  Hi' 

by  which  the  transition  from  our  fundamental  equations  to  the 
corresponding  formulae  for  the  mean  values  is  made  very  easy.  Of 
course,  the  mean  values  of  the  quantities  on  the  right -and  on  the  left- 
hand  side  of  an  equation  must  be  equal  to  each  other,  so  that  all 
we  have  got  to  do,  is  to  replace  d,  h,  etc.  by  their  mean  values. 
The  resultant  formulae,  viz. 

rot  h  =  *  (j  + 
and 

rot  d  =  - 

c 

may  be  considered  as  the  general  electromagnetic  equations  for  the 
ponderable  body;  they  are  comparable  with  those  of  which  we  spoke 
in  §  4.  In  order  to  bring  out  the  similarity,  I  shall  put 

d  =  E, 


GENERAL  EQUATIONS  FOR  MEAN  VALUES  .        135 

and 

h  =  H. 

It  only  remains  to  examine  the  term  p  v.  According  to  our  definition 
of  mean  values,  we  have  for  the  components  of  this  vector,  if  x, 
y,  z  are  the  coordinates  of  an  element  of  the  moving  charges  at  the 
time  t, 

V'-'TffojB—wJ'Jg*8.'    etc'> 

or,  if  we  suppose  the  surface  of  the  sphere  not  to  intersect  any 
electrons, 

^  =  ^t[if^ds]>  etc- 

We  have  formerly  seen  that  I  QxdS,  IgydS,  I gzdS  are  the  com- 
ponents of  the  electric  moment  of  the  part  of  the  body  to  which 

,  • 

the  integration  is  extended.  Hence,  -^  I  $xdS  and  the  two  corre- 
sponding expressions  with  y  and  z  are  the  components  of  the  electric 
moment  of  the  body  per  unit  of  volume.1)  We  shall  represent  this 
moment,  or,  as  it  may  also  be  termed,  the  electric  polarization  of  the 
body,  by  P.  Thus 

pv  =  P, 

and 

d  +  pv  =  E  +  P. 

Simplifying  still  further  by  putting 

E  +  P  =  D,  (192) 

we  are  led  to  the  equations 

rot  H  =  -  D,  (193) 


c 

J_ 
o 


(194) 


which  have  exactly  the  form  of  those  of  which  we  spoke  in  §  4. 
If  we  like,  we  may  now  call  E  and  D  the  electric  force  and  the 
dielectric  displacement,  D  the  displacement  current.  This  exactly 
agrees  with  common  usage;  only,  in  our  definition  of  these  vectors, 
one  clearly  sees  the  traces  of  our  fundamental  assumption  that  the 
system  is  made  up  of  ether  and  of  particles  with  their  electrons. 
Thus,  E  is  the  mean  force  acting  on  a  charge  that  is  at  rest.  The 
total  dielectric  displacement  D  consists  of  two  parts,  the  one  E  having 
its  seat  in  the  ether,  and  the  other  P  in  the  particles.  Corresponding 


1)  Note  53. 


136     IV-  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OP  MOLECULES. 

to  these,  we  distinguish  two  parts  in  the  current  D:  the  first,  E  is 
the  mean  of  the  displacement  current  in  the  ether,  and  the  second 
the  mean  of  the  convection  current  pV. 

115.  To    complete    our    system    of    equations    we    must    now 
examine  the  relation  between  D  and   E,    or   rather   that   between  P 
and  E.     This  is  found  by  considering   the  way  in  which  the  electric 
moment  in  a  particle  is  produced  or  changed. 

Let  us  suppose  that  each  particle  contains  a  single  movable 
electron  with  charge  e  and  mass  m,  and  let  us  denote  by  ij,  17,  £  the 
distances  over  which  it  is  displaced  from  its  position  of  equilibrium 
in  the  directions  of  the  axes  of  coordinates.  The  components  of  the 
electric  moment  of  a  single  particle  are 

P*  =  e%,     Py  =  frl,     P*  =  e£, 
and,  writing  N  for  the  number  of  particles  per  unit  volume,  we  have 

*,  =  Nel,     P^Ncri,     P,  =  Net,  (195) 

if  the  particles  have  a  regular  geometrical  arrangement.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  they  are  irregularly  distributed,  so  that  the  values  of  the 
displacements  |,  17,  £  change  abruptly  from  one  particle  to  the  next, 
we  may  use  the  same  equations,  provided  we  understand  by  |,  77,  £ 
mean  values  taken  for  all  the  particles  situated  in  a  space  that  is 
infinitely  small  in  a  physical  sense.  A  similar  remark  applies  to 
other  quantities  occurring  in  the  equations  we  are  going  to  establish 
for  the  motion  of  the  electrons. 

116.  The  values  of  jj,  rj,  £,  and  consequently  those  of  Px,  Py,  P,, 
depend  on  the  forces  acting  on  the  movable  electrons.    These  are  of 
four  different  kinds. 

In  the  first  place  we  shall  conceive  a  certain  elastic  force  by 
which  an  electron  is  pulled  back  towards  its  position  of  equilibrium 
after  having  been  displaced  from  it.  We  shall  suppose  this  force  to 
be  directed  towards  that  position,  and  to  be  proportional  to  the 
displacement.  Denoting  by  /'  a  certain  positive  constant  which 
depends  on  the  structure  and  the  properties  of  the  particle,  we  write 
for  the  components  of  this  elastic  force 

-ft,       ~fl,       -K 


The  second  force  is  a  resistance  against  the  motion  of  the 
electron.  We  must  introduce  some  action  of  this  kind,  because 
without  it  it  would  be  impossible  to  account  for  the  absorption 
which  it  is  one  of  our  principal  objects  to  examine.  Following  the 
example  given  by  Helmholtz  in  his  theory  of  anomalous  dispersion, 


FORCES  ACTING  ON  AN  ELECTRON.          137 

with  which  the  present  investigation  has  many  points  in  common, 
I  shall  take  the  resistance  proportional  to  the  velocity  of  the  electron, 
and  opposite  to  it.  Thus,  if  g  is  a  new  positive  constant,  the  com- 
ponents of  the  second  force  are 

-«Tt>    -9%>    -9%' 
We  shall  later  on  return  to  this  question. 

117.  We  have  next  to  consider  the  force  acting  on  the  electron 
on  account  of  the  electromagnetic  field  in  the  ether.  At  first  sight 
it  may  be  thought  that  this  action  is  to  be  represented  by  ef..  On 
closer  examination  one  finds  however  that  a  term  of  the  form  aeP 
is  to  be  added,  in  which  a  is  a  constant  whose  value  is  little  different 
from  ^.  I  shall  not  enter  upon  the  somewhat  lengthy  calculations 
that  are  required  for  the  determination  of  this  additional  force.  In 
order  to  explain  why  it  is  introduced,  I  have  only  to  remind  you 
of  the  well  known  reasoning  by  which  Kelvin  long  ago  came  to 
distinguish  between  the  magnetic  force  and  the  magnetic  induction. 
He  defined  these  as  forces  exerted  on  a  pole  of  unit  strength,  placed 
in  differently  shaped  infinitely  small  cavities  surrounding  the  point 
considered.  The  magnetically  polarized  parts  of  the  body  outside  the 
cavity  turn  their  poles  more  or  less  towards  it,  and  thus  produce  on 
its  walls  a  certain  distribution  of  magnetism,  whose  action  on  an  in- 
side pole  is  found  to  depend  on  the  form  of  the  cavity. 

In  the  problem  before  us  we  can  proceed  in  an  exactly  similar 
manner.  The  general  equations  (33) — (36)  show  that  the  electro- 
magnetic field  is  composed  of  parts  that  are  due  to  the  individual 
particles  of  the  system,  so  that,  if  some  of  these  were  removed,  the 
motion  of  the  electrons  in  the  remaining  ones  being  left  unchanged, 
a  part  of  the  field  would  be  taken  away.  We  must  further  take  into 
account  that  each  component  of  d  or  h  belonging  to  the  field  that 
is  produced  by  a  certain  number  of  particles,  is  obtained  by  an 
addition  of  the  corresponding  quantities  for  the  fields  due  to  each  of 
the  particles  taken  separately.  The  sum  may  be  replaced  by  an 
integral  in  those  cases  in  which  the  discontinuity  of  the  molecular 
structure  does  not  make  itself  felt.  If  we  want  to  know  the  field 
produced  at  a  point  A  by  a  part  of  the  body  whose  shortest  distance 
from  A  is  very  great  compared  with  the  mutual  distance  of  adjacent 
particles,  we  may  replace  the  real  state  of  things  by  one  in  which 
the  polarized  matter  is  homogeneously  distributed. 

All  this  can  also  be  said  of  the  magnetized  particles  one  has  to 
consider  in  Kelvin's  theory,  though  the  cases  are  different,  because 
the  formulae  (§  42)  for  the  field  produced  by  a  variable  electric 


138     IV.  PROPAGATION  OP  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES 

moment  are  less  simple  than  those  which  determine  the  action  of  a 
constant  molecular  magnet.  The  formulae  however  much  resemble 
each  other  if  the  point  for  which  the  field  of  a  particle  is  to  be 
determined,  lies  at  a  distance  from  it  that  is  small  compared  with 
the  wave-length.  In  this  case  the  field  can  be  approximately  con- 
sidered as  an  electrostatic  one,  such  as  would  exist  if  the  electric 
moment  did  not  change  in  the  course  of  time. 

Around  the  particle  A  for  which  we  wish  to  determine  the 
action  exerted  on  the  electron  it  contains,  we  lay  a  closed  surface  d, 
whose  dimensions  are  infinitely  small  in  a  physical  sense,  and  we 
conceive,  for  a  moment,  all  other  particles  lying  within  this  surface 
to  be  removed.  The  state  of  things  is  then  exactly  analogous  to  the 
case  of  a  magnet  in  which  a  cavity  has  been  formed.  There  will  be 
a  distribution  of  electricity  on  the  surface,  due  to  the  polarization  of 
the  outside  portion  of  the  body,  and  the  force  E',  exerted  by  this 
distribution  on  a  unit  charge  at  A  must  be  added  to  the  force  E 
which  appears  in  (194). 

Now,  if  the  particles  we  have  just  removed  are  restored  to  their 
places,  their  electric  moments  will  produce  a  third  force  E"  in  the 
particle  A,  and  the  total  electric  force  to  which  the  movable  electron 
of  A  is  exposed,  will  be 

E  +  E'  +  E". 

It  is  clear  that  the  result  cannot  depend  on  the  form  of  the  cavity  0, 
which  has  only  been  imagined  for  the  purpose  of  performing  the 
calculations.  These  take  the  simplest  form  if  6  is  a  sphere.  Then 
the  calculation  of  the  force  E'  leads  to  the  result1) 


The  problem  of  determining  the  force  E"  is  more  difficult.  I  shall 
not  dwell  upon  it  here,  and  I  shall  only  say  that,  for  a  system  of 
particles  having  a  regular  cubical  arrangement,  one  finds2) 

E"  =  0, 

a  result  that  can  be  applied  with  a  certain  degree  of  approximation 
to  isotropic  bodies  in  general,  such  as  glass,  fluids  and  gases.  It  is 
not  quite  correct  however  for  these,  and  ought  to  be  replaced  in 
general  by 

E'  '  =  sP, 

where,  for  each  body,  s  is  a  constant  which  it  will  be  difficult 
exactly  to  determine. 


1)  Note  54.        2)  Note  56. 


EQUATIONS  OF  MOTION  OF  AN  ELECTRON.  139 

Putting 

a  =  I  +  8, 

we  find  for  the  electric  force  acting  on  an  electron 

E  +  aP. 

118.  The  last  of  the  forces  we  are  enumerating  occurs  in 
magneto-optical  phenomena;  it  is  due  to  the  external  magnetic  field, 
which  we  shall  denote  by  the  symbol  fa,  in  order  to  distinguish  it 
from  the  periodically  changing  magnetic  force  H  that  is  due  to  the 
electric  vibrations  themselves1),  and  occurs  in  our  equations  (193) 
and  (194). 

In  all  that  follows  we  shall  suppose  the  external  field  fe  to 
have  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  z.  Then  its  action  on  the  vibrating 
electron,  which  in  general  is  represented  by 


has  the  components 


ei$  dq        _  e§  dj       „ 
c    dt>        '    c    dt>        ' 


where  £  is  written  instead  of  ^z. 

Taking  together  all  that  has  been  said  about  the  several  forces, 
we  find  for  the  equations  of  motion  of  the  movable  electron  contained 
in  a  particle 


, d'n  _  »fc    ,  ~B\      t»      „"'/      Kv  «s   i.  (198) 


119.  Another  form  of  these  equations  will  be  found  more  con- 
venient for  our  purpose. 

In  the  first  place,  instead  of  the  displacements  of  the  movable 
electron,  we  shall  introduce  the  components  of  the  electric  polari- 
zation P.  Taking  into  account  the  relations  (195),  dividing  the 
formulae  (198)  by  e,  and  putting 


1)  Note  66. 


140     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 
one  finds 


(200) 


These  equations  may  be  further  transformed,  if,  in  our  investigation 
of  the  propagation  of  simple  harmonic  vibrations,  we  use  the  well 
known  method  in  which  the  dependent  variables  in  the  system  of 
equations  are  first  represented  by  certain  exponential  expressions  with 
imaginary  exponents,  the  real  parts  of  these  expressions,  to  which 
one  has  ultimately  to  confine  oneself,  constituting  a  solution  of  the 
system. 

Let  £  be  the  basis  of  natural  logarithms,   and   let  all  dependent 
variables  contain  the  time  only  in  the  factor 


so  that  n  is  the  frequency  of  the  vibrations.     Then,  if  we  put 

«  =  /"-  a  —  m'n*,  (201) 

P  =  ng,  (202) 


all  real  quantities,  the  formulae  (200)  take  the  form 


»yP,, 


(204) 


Since  P  =  D  —  E,  these  equations  may  be  said  to  express  the  relation 
between  E  and  D  which  we  have  to  add  to  the  general  formulae 
(193)  and  (194). 

120.  Before  coming  to  solutions  of  our  system  of  equations, 
it  will  be  well  to  go  into  some  details  concerning  the  cause  by  which 
the  absorption  is  produced.  We  have  provisionally  admitted  the 
existence  of  a  resistance  proportional  to  the  velocity  of  an  electron, 

which  is  represented  by  the  terms  —  g  ,.,  — 9'(rt>  — ff ~Tf   ^°-   (198)j 

and  by  the  terms  ipPx,  ifiP,,,  '>  fiP,  in  (204).  It  must  be  observed, 
however,  that  in  our  fundamental  equations  there  is  no  question  of 
a  resistance  of  this  kind;  as  we  have  formerly  seen,  an  electron  can 
move  for  ever  through  the  ether  with  undiminished  velocity.  In  our 


RESISTANCE  TO  THE  MOTION  141 

considerations   we   have    come   across    only    one    force    that    may  be 
termed  a  resistance,  namely  the  force 


which  is  proportional  to  the  rate  of  change  of  the  acceleration.  In 
the  case  of  simple  harmonic  vibrations,  its  components  can  be  re- 
presented in  the  form  (197),  with  the  following  value  of  the  coefficient 

'--SS-  (206) 

Some  numerical  data  which  I  shall  mention  later  on,  show  however 
that  this  force  (205)  is  much  too  small  to  account  for  the  absorption 
that  is  really  observed  in  many  cases.  We  must  therefore  look  for 
some  other  explanation. 

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  this  may  be  found  in  the  assumption 
that  the  vibrations  in  the  interior  of  a  ponderable  particle  that  are 
excited  by  incident  waves  of  light,  cannot  go  on  undisturbed  for  ever. 
It  is  conceivable  that  the  particles  of  a  gaseous  body  are  so  pro- 
foundly shaken  by  their  mutual  impacts,  that  any  regular  vibration 
which  has  been  set  up  in  them,  is  transformed  by  the  blow  into  the 
disorderly  motion  which  we  call  heat.  The  rise  in  temperature 
produced  in  this  way  must  be  due  to  a  part  of  the  energy  of  the 
incident  rays,  so  that  there  is  a  real  absorption  of  light.  It  is  also 
clear  that  the  accumulation  of  vibratory  energy  in  a  particle,  which 
otherwise,  in  the  case  of  an  exact  agreement  between  the  period  of 
the  vibrating  electrons  and  that  of  the  incident  light,  would  never 
come  to  an  end,  will  be  kept  within  certain  limits  by  this  disturbing 
influence  of  the  collisions,  just  as  well  as  it  could  be  by  a  resistance 
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word. 

In  working  out  this  idea,  one  finds  that  the  formulae  we  have 
established  in  what  precedes  may  still  be  used,  provided  only  we 
understand  by  g  the  quantity1) 

9-*-T,  (207) 

in  which  i  is  the  mean  length  of  time  during  which  the  vibrations 
in  a  particle  can  go  on  undisturbed.  Since  we  can  use  the  same 
formulae  as  if  there  were  a  real  resistance,  it  is  also  convenient  to 
adhere  to  the  use  of  the  latter  term,  and  to  speak  of  the  resistance 
originating  in  the  collisions,  this  resistance  becoming  greater  when 
the  interval  t  is  diminished. 

According  to  the  above  idea,  the  interval  r  ought,  in  gaseous 
bodies,  to  be  equal  to  the  mean  length  of  time  elapsing  between  two 

1)  Note  57. 


142     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

successive  encounters  of  a  molecule.  Unfortunately,  it  is  found  that 
the  value  of  %  deduced  from  experimental  data  is  smaller  than  the 
interval  between  two  encounters.  We  must  conclude  from  this  that 
there  are  causes  in  the  interior  of  a  molecule  by  which  the  regularity 
of  the  vibrations  is  disturbed  sooner  than  it  would  be  by  the  molecular 
impacts.  We  cannot  pretend  therefore  to  have  satisfactorily  elucidated 
the  phenomenon  of  absorption;  its  true  cause  remains  yet  to  be 
discovered. 

121.  Leaving  aside  for  some  time  the  effects  produced  by  a 
magnetic  field,  we  shall  now  examine  the  propagation  of  light  in  the 
case  !Q  =  0,  y  =  0.  Let  us  first  suppose  that  there  is  no  resistance 
at  all,  so  that  /?  is  likewise  0.  Then  the  formulae  (204)  may  be 
written 

E  =  «P, 
from  which  we  deduce 

.  (208) 


Let  the  propagation  take  place  in  the  direction  of  OZ,  so  that 
the  components  of  E,  D  and  H  are  represented  by  expressions  con- 
taining the  factor 

*"•('-«•>,  (209) 

where  q  is  a  constant.     Then,  since  all  differential  coefficients  with 
respect  to  x  and  y  vanish,  we  have  by  (193)  and  (194) 


Sz  '     c    8t 
and 

SEX  =      j_ajy 

dz  c    8t  ' 

or 


whence 

D.-e 

Combining  this  with  (208),  we  get 


cY  =  1  +  ^  •  (210) 

Supposing    1  +  -  -  to  be  positive,  we  find  a  real  value  for  q.     The 
real  part  of  (209)  is 


—  qg), 
from  which  it  is  seen  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  is 


DISPERSION  OF  LIGHT.  143 

It  can  therefore  be  calculated  by  means  of  the  equation  (210),  for 
which  we  may  write 

»*-!  +  -, 

U 

if 

c 

is  the  index  of  refraction. 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  our  result  agrees  with  Maxwell's  well 
known  law,  according  to  which  the  refractive  index  of  a  body  is 
equal  to  the  square  root  of  its  dielectric  constant.  Indeed,  the 
equation  (208)  shows  that  the  ratio  between  the  dielectric  displace- 
ment D  and  the  electric  force  E  is  given  by  1  -) ;  it  is  therefore 

this  quantity  which  plays  the  part   of  the   dielectric   constant  or  the 
specific  inductive  capacity  in  Maxwell's  equations. 

122.  In  one  respect,  however,  the  theory  of  electrons  has  enabled 
us  to  go  further  than  Maxwell.  You  see  from  the  equation  (201) 
that,  for  a  given  system,  a  is  not  a  constant,  but  changes  with  the 
frequency  n.  Therefore,  our  formulae  contain  an  explanation  of  the 
dispersion  of  light,  i.  e.  of  the  fact  that  different  kinds  of  light  have 
not  the  same  refractive  index. 

This  explanation  is  very  much  like  that  which  was  proposed  by 
several  physicists  who  developed  the  undulatory  theory  of  light  in 
its  original  form  in  which  the  ether  was  considered  as  an  elastic 
body.  Sellmeyer,  Ketteler,  Boussinesq  and  Helmholtz  showed 
that  the  velocity  of  light  must  depend  on  the  period  of  the  vibra- 
tions, as  soon  as  a  body  contains  small  particles  which  are  set 
vibrating  by  the  forces  in  an  incident  beam  of  light,  and  which  are 
subject  to  intramolecular  forces  of  such  a  kind  that  they  can  perform 
free  vibrations  of  a  certain  definite  period.  The  amplitude  of  the 
forced  vibrations  of  these  particles,  which  is  one  of  the  quantities 
determining  the  velocity  of  propagation,  will  largely  depend  on  the 
relative  lengths  of  their  own  period  of  vibration  and  the  period  of 
the  light  falling  on  them.  The  theory  of  the  propagation  of  light 
in  a  system  of  molecules  which  has  been  here  set  forth,  is  based  on 
the  same  principles  as  those  older  explanations  of  dispersion,  the 
only  difference  being  that  we  have  constantly  expressed  ourselves  in 
the  terms  of  the  electromagnetic  theory,  and  that  the  small  particles 
imagined  by  Sellmeyer  have  now  become  our  electrons. 

If  we  conceive  a  single  particle  to  be  detached  from  the  body, 
so  that  it  is  free  from  all  external  influence,  and  if  we  leave  out  of 
account  the  resistance  which  we  have  represented  by  means  of  the 
coefficient  g,  the  equations  of  motion  (198)  simplify  to 


144     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 


from  which  it  appears  that  the  electron   can  perform  free  vibrations 
with  a  frequency  n0  determined  by 


m 

Introducing  this  quantity,  and  using  (199),  we  may  write  instead  of 
(201),  if  we  put  a  =  •§•, 

t  /         *>  9N  ^-  ^^       /         9  9\  ^-  /O  •(   •!  \ 

a  =  m  (V  -  w2)  -  y  =  ^-2  (v  -  w8)  -  --  •  (211) 

The  index  of  refraction  is  therefore  determined  by 


The  value  of  jtt  derived  from  this  formula  is  greater  than  1,  if 
the  frequency  n  is  so  far  below  that  of  the  free  vibrations  n0  that 
the  denominator  is  positive;  if  this  condition  is  satisfied,  we  can 
further  conclude  that  [i  increases  with  the  frequency.  This  agrees 
with  the  dispersion  as  it  is  observed  in  transparent  bodies,  at  least 
if  we  suppose  that  in  these  the  frequency  wc  corresponds  to  rays  in 
the  ultra-violet  part  of  the  spectrum. 

123.  As  a  further  application  of  our  results  we  can  take  the 
old  problem  of  the  connexion  between  the  index  of  refraction  (i  of 
a  transparent  body,  and  its  density  p.  As  is  well  known,  Laplace 
inferred  from  theoretical  considerations,  based  on  the  form  the 
undulatory  theory  had  in  his  time,  that,  when  the  density  of  a  body 
is  changed,  the  expression 

^  (213) 

should  remain  constant.  In  most  cases  the  observed  changes  of  the 
refractivity  do  not  at  all  conform  to  this  law,  and  it  has  been  found 
that  a  better  agreement  is  obtained  if  Laplace's  rule  is  replaced  by 
the  empirical  formula 

^=-i  =  const.  (214) 

The  electromagnetic  theory  of  light  leads  to  a  new  form  of  the  re- 
lation. Indeed,  by  a  slight  modification,  (212)  becomes 

m    I      2  8^  _        P*  ~\~  % 

We*  ^n°  ~  =  3(na—  1)  ' 

For  a  given  body  and  a  given  value  of  n,  the  expression 


RELATION  BETWEEN  REFRACTIVITY  AND  DENSITY.  145 

must  therefore  be  proportional  to  the  number  of  molecules  per  unit 
volume,  and  consequently  to  the  density. 

This  result  had  been  found  by  Lorenz1)  of  Copenhagen  some 
time  before  I  deduced  it  from  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  light, 
which  is  certainly  a  curious  case  of  coincidence. 

124.  In  a  certain  sense  the  formula  may  be  said  to  be  much 
older.  Putting  in  (201)  n  =  0  and,  as  before,  a  =  ,  we  find  for  the 
case  of  extremely  slow  vibrations,  or  of  a  constant  field 

„-/•_-!--._£-.  -.1. 
'          3        Ne*        3 

The  corresponding  value  of  the  ratio  1  +       between  D  and  E  is 


JVe»       3 

This,  therefore,  is  the  value  of  the  dielectric  constant  for  our  system 
of  molecules,  a  result  which  we  could  also  have  obtained  by  a  direct 
calculation. 

Now,  the  last  formula  shows  that,  when  N  is  changed,  the  value  of 


remains  constant.    Hence,  the  relation  between  the  dielectric  constant 
and  the  density  p  is  expressed  by 


a  formula  corresponding  to  one  that  was  given  long  ago  by  Clau- 
sius  and  Mossotti.     Substituting  in  it  Maxwell's  value 

e  =  ^,  (215) 

we  find  the  relation 

const- 


In  this  way,  however,  the  formula  is  only  proved  for  the  case  of 
very  slow  vibrations,  to  which  Maxwell's  law  (215)  may  be  applied, 
whereas  our  former  deduction  shows  that  it  holds  for  any  value 
of  n,  i.  e.  for  any  particular  kind  of  light  we  wish  to  consider. 

125.  Let  us  now  compare  our  formula  with  experimental  results. 
Of  course  I  can  only  mention  a  few  of  these.  I  shall  first  consider 
the  changes  in  the  refractivity  of  a  gas  produced  by  pressure,  and 

1)  L.  Lorenz,  tJber  die  Refraktionskonstante,  Ann.  Phys.  Chem.  11  (1880), 
p.  70. 

Loreutz,  Theory  of  electrons.  10 


146     IV.  PROPAGATION  OP  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 


in  the  second  place  the  change  in  the  refractivity  that  is  brought 
about  by  the  passage  of  a  liquid  to  the  gaseous  state.  In  both 
cases  I  shall  compare  the  results  of  our  formula  with  those  that  can 
be  deduced  from  the  empirical  formula  (214).  As  to  Laplace's  law, 
we  need  no  longer  speak  of  it,  because  in  all  cases  it  is  much  less 
satisfactory  than  either  of  the  two  other  formulae. 

The  refractive  index  of  air  up  to  high  densities  has  recently 
been  measured  with  considerable  accuracy  by  Magri.1)  Some  of 
his  results  are  contained  in  the  following  table,  together  with  the 

yalues  of     -?"1-  and       ,- 


Temperature 

Density 

Refractive  index 

10' 

•  10' 

g         lu 
3    o 

0° 

1 

1,0002929        1953 

1953 

14,6 

14,84 

1,004338        1919 

1947 

14,3 

42,13 

1,01241         1964 

1959 

14,4 

69,24 

1,02044         1968 

1961 

14,5 

96,16 

1,02842 

1970 

1961 

14,5 

123,04 

1,03633 

1969 

1956 

14,8 

149,53 

1,04421 

1971 

1956 

14,9 

176,27 

1,05213 

1972 

1953 

You  see  that  with  the  formula  (216)  the  agreement  is  somewhat 
better  than  with  the  empirical  relation  (214). 

The  difference  between  the  two  comes  out  still  more  markedly, 
if  we  compare  the  refractive  index  of  a  vapour  with  the  value  we 
can  deduce  from  that  of  the  liquid  by  means  of  (214)  or  of  (216). 
In  the  following  small  table,  which  relates  to  sodium  light,  the  index 
of  the  liquid  is  given  for  15°,  and  that  of  the  vapour  for  0°  and 
760  mm.  This  means  that  the  observed  values  of  fi  have  been  reduced 
to  the  density  which  the  vapour  would  have  at  0°  and  under  atmo- 
spheric pressure,  if  it  followed  the  laws  of  Boyle  and  Gay-Lussac. 
The  reduction  can  be  made  either  by  (214)  or  by  (216),  the  two 
formulae  being  equally  applicable  to  the  small  changes  in  question. 


Liquid 

Vapour 

Density 

Index  of  refraction 

Density 

Index  of 
refraction 

Obs. 

Calculated 
by  (214) 

Calculated 
by  (216) 

Water  

0,9991 

1,2709 
0,7200 

1,3337 

1,6320 
1,3558 

0,000809 

0,00341 
0,00332 

1,000250 

1,00148 
1,00152 

1,000270 

1,00170 
1,00164 

1,000250 

1,00144 
1,00151 

Bisulphide  of  car- 
bon   .  .        .    . 

Ethyl  ether   

1)  L.  Magri,  Der  Brechungsindex  der  Luft  in   seiner  Beziehung  zu  ihrer 
Dichte,  Phys.  Zeitschr.  6  (1905),  p.  629. 


REFRACTIVITY  OF  A  MIXTURE.  147 

Other  measurements  which  can  be  taken  as  a  test  for  the  two 
formulae  are  those  of  the  indices  of  refraction  of  various  bodies  at 
different  temperatures,  or  when  submitted  to  different  pressures.  As 
a  general  rule,  neither  equation  (214)  nor  (216)  is  found  to  repre- 
sent these  measurements  quite  correctly,  the  disagreement  between 
the  observed  values  and  the  calculated  ones  being  of  the  same  order 
of  magnitude  in  the  two  cases,  and  generally  having  opposite  direc- 
tions. In  most  cases  our  formula  leads  to  changes  in  the  refractivity 
that  are  slightly  greater  than  the  observed  ones;  moreover,  the  devia- 
tions increase  as  one  passes  on  to  higher  values  of  n. 

As  to  the  cause  of  this  disagreement,  it  must  undoubtedly  be 
looked  for,  partly  in  the  fact  that  the  term  a  in  equation  (201)  is 
not  exactly  equal  to  -^,  partly  also  in  changes  that  take  place  in 
the  interior  of  the  particles  when  a  body  is  heated  or  compressed. 
These  changes  can  cause  a  variation  in  the  value  of  the  coefficients 
f  and  f. 

126.  A  problem  closely  connected  with  the  preceding  one  is 
that  of  calculating  the  refractivity  of  a  mixture  from  the  refractivities 
of  its  constituents.  Following  the  same  line  of  thought  that  has  led 
us  to  equation  (212),  but  supposing  the  system  to  contain  two  or 
more  sets  of  molecules  mixed  together,  one  finds  the  following  for- 
mula1), in  which  rlt  ra,  .  .  .  are  the  values  of 

W+jfc  (217) 

for  each  of  the  mixed  substances,  taken   separately,   and  ml,  «?2,  .  .  . 
the  masses  of  these  substances  contained  in  unit  of  mass  of  the  mixture 

r=      =  mlr1  +  m^r,  +  •••.  (218) 


This  equation  is  found  to  hold  as  a  rough  approximation  for  various 
liquid  mixtures.     The  same  may  be  said  of  a  similar  equation  that 

is  often  used  for  calculating  the  value  of  - 

127.  It  is  very  important  that  these  formulae  for  mixtures  can 
also  serve  in  many  cases  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  refracti- 
vity of  chemical  compounds  from  that  of  the  constituting  elements. 
Let  us  consider  a  compound  consisting  of  the  elements  s1}  £2,  ..., 
and  let  us  denote  by  pl}  p2,  ...  their  atomic  weights,  by  qu  q%,  .  .  . 
the  numbers  of  the  different  kinds  of  atoms  in  a  molecule,  and  by 

P  =  ViPi  +  toft  +  •  •  • 

1)  Note  58. 

10* 


148     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

the   molecular   weight   of  the   compound.     Then,  the  amounts  of  £1; 
£g,  ...  in  unit  of  mass  will  be 

mi  =  2LAj     m,  =  9«ft_i 

and  (218)  becomes 

..i     t 

(219) 


Hence,  if  for  each  element  we  call  the  product  of  the  constant  (217) 
by  its  atomic  weight  p  the  refraction  equivalent,  and  if  we  under- 
stand by  the  refraction  equivalent  of  the  compound  the  product  of 
the  value  of  (217)  relating  to  it  by  the  molecular  weight  P,  we  are 
led  to  the  simple  rule  that,  in  order  to  find  the  refraction  equivalent 
of  the  compound,  we  have  only  to  multiply  the  refraction  equivalent 
of  each  element  by  the  number  of  its  atoms  in  the  molecule,  and  to 
add  the  results.  A  large  number  of  physicists  and  chemists  who 
have  determined  the  refractivities  of  many  compounds,  especially  of 
organic  ones,  have  found  the  rule  to  be  approximately  correct. 

128.  The  general  meaning  of  this  result  will  be  obvious.     When 
we  find   that  some  quantity  which  determines  the  ref'ractivity   of  a 
compound  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  parts,  each  of  which  belongs 
to  one  of  the  elements,  we  may  conclude  that,  in  the  propagation  of 
light,  each  element  exerts  an  influence  of  its  own,  which  is  not  disturb- 
ed by  the  influence  of  the  other  elements.    In  the  terms  of  our  theory, 
this  amounts  to  saying  that  the  electric  vibrations  going  on  in  a  beam 
of  light,  in  so  far  as  they  take  place  in  the  ponderable  matter,  have 
their  seat  in  the  separate  atoms,  the  motions  in  one  atom  being  more 
or  less  independent  of  those  in  the  other  atoms  of  the  same  molecule. 

We  may  suppose,  for  example,  that  each  atom  contains  one 
movable  electron,  which,  after  a  displacement  from  its  position  of 
equilibrium,  is  pulled  back  towards  it  by  an  elastic  force  having  its 
origin  in  the  atom  itself,  and  determined  therefore  by  the  properties 
of  the  atom.  If  we  take  this  view,  it  is  easy  so  to  change  the 
equations  for  the  propagation  of  light  that  they  can  be  applied  to 
a  system  of  polyatomic  molecules. 

129.  Let  us  distinguish  the  quantities  relating  to  the  separate 
atoms    of  a    molecule   by    the  indices   1,  2,  . .  .,  A".     Let  elt  e2,  .  .  . 
be  the  charges  of  the  movable    electrons  contained  in  the  first,   the 
second  atom  etc.,  ml}  W2,  ...  their  masses,  |1?  rtl,  £, ,  |2,  •%,  £2,  ... 
the  components  of  their  displacements  from  their  positions  of  equili- 
brium, /i,  /i,  ...   the    coefficients   determining   the  intensities  of  the 
elastic  forces.     Then,  if  the  resistances  are  left  out  of  account,  and 


REFRACTIVITY  OF  A  CHEMICAL  COMPOUND.  •      149 

if  there  is  no  external  magnetic  field,  we  shall  have  for  each  molecule, 
not  one  set  of  equations  of  motion  of  the  form 


etc., 

(which  is  got  from   (198)  if  we  put  g  =  0,   §  =  0),  but  k  sets  of 
this  form: 


z)  -  £  |t  ,   etc. 
J-/^,   etc. 


etc. 


(220) 


The  total  electric  polarization  P  of  the  body  will  now  be  the  sum 
of  the  electric  moments  due  to  the  separate  atoms;  its  components  are 


(221) 


For  a  determinate  value  of  the  frequency  n  we  can  deduce 
from  (220),  (221)  and  (192)  the  relation  between  E  and  D.  Combi- 
ning it  with  the  equations  (193)  and  (194),  one  finds  the  following 
formula,  corresponding  to  (212),  but  more  general  than  it,  for  the 
index  of  refraction  ft1), 

/**—!_      ay      ,      -wy      , 

..II     o  D  ff  *.2\       1"     o  ff  M2\    ~T~  • 


It  is  thus  seen  that,  according  to  our  new  assumptions,  the  value  of 
-  remains  proportional  to  N,  and  therefore  to  the  density  of  the 


ji'+S 

body.  Moreover,  if  we  denote  by  ft1?  ju2,  ...  the  refractive  indices 
for  the  cases  that  unit  volume  of  our  system  contains  only  N  atoms 
of  the  group  1,  or  N  atoms  of  the  group  2;  etc.,  we  have 


Consequently,  (222)  may  be  written 


which  is  but  another  form  of  the  relation  (219). 

13O.    I  need  hardly  observe  that  the  assumptions  we  have  made 
are  at  best  rough  approximations  to   the  true  state  of  things.     We 

1)  Note  59. 


150     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

have  supposed  the  elastic  force  by  which  the  movable  electron  of  an 
atom  is  pulled  towards  its  position  of  equilibrium,  to  arise  from 
actions  which  are  confined  to  the  atom  itself.  Now,  there  is  at  all 
events  an  interaction  of  an  electric  nature  between  neighboring 
atoms,  precisely  on  account  of  the  displacements  of  their  electrons; 
there  may  also  be  other  interactions  about  whose  nature  we  are  as 
yet  entirely  in  the  dark.  On  these  grounds  we  must  expect  greater 
or  smaller  deviations  from  the  law  of  the  refraction  equivalent, 
deviations  from  which  one  may  one  day  be  able  to  draw  some  con- 
clusions concerning  the  structure  of  a  molecule. 

One  important  result  in  this  direction  was  already  obtained  by 
Briihl.1)  He  found  that  a  double  chemical  binding  between  two  atoms 
has  a  striking  influence  on  the  refractivity,  which  can  be  taken  into 
account,  if,  in  the  formula  (218),  we  add  a  term  of  proper  magnitude 
for  each  double  bond. 

Like  many  other  facts,  this  shows  that  our  theory  of  the 
propagation  of  light  in  ponderable  bodies  is  to  be  considered  as 
rather  tentative.  I  must  repeat  however  that,  undoubtedly,  the  actions 
going  on  in  the  separate  atoms  must  be,  to  a  large  extent,  mutually 
independent.  If  they  were  not,  and  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  elastic 
force  acting  on  an  electron  ought  to  be  attributed,  not  to  the  atom 
to  which  it  belongs,  but  to  the  molecule  as  a  whole,  the  refractive 
index  of  a  compound  body  would  be  principally  determined  by  the 
connexions  between  the  atoms,  and  not,  at  it  is,  by  their  individual 
properties. 

131.  At  the  point  which  we  have  now  reached,  it  is  interesting, 
once  more  to  return  to  the  theory  of  the  dispersion  of  light,  and  to 

ask  what  the  general  formula  (222)  can  teach  us  about  it.    To  begin 

„« i 

with,  it  may  be  observed  that,  if  s  is  the  value  of  nnrji  we  shall 

have 

2_  1  +2s 
^     = l—s ' 

from  which  it  is  readily  seen  that,  when  s  continually  changes  from  —  .^ 
to  1,  f/.2  increases  from  0  to  oo.  If  s  remains  confined  to  this  inter- 
val, as  I  shall  for  the  moment  suppose  it  to  do,  ft  changes  in  the 
same  direction  as  s,  having  the  value  1  for  s  =  0. 

The  latter  case  occurs  for  N=  0,  i.  e.  when  there  are  no  ponderable 
particles  at  all,  so  that  the  propagation  takes  place  in  the  ether  alone. 
This  state  of  things  is  altered  by  the  presence  of  the  electrons,  to 


1)  See,  for  instance,  J.  W.  Bruhl,  The  development  of  spectro-cheinistry, 
Proc.  Royal  Institution,  18,  1  (1906),  p.  122. 


DISPERSION  OF  LIGHT. 


151 


which  the  different  terms  on  the  right-hand  side  of  (2i}2)  relate. 
Now,  each  of  these  electrons  has  a  definite  period  of  its  own,  in 
which  it  can  perform  its  free  vibrations.  If  the  frequencies  of  these 
are  «,,  M2,  etc.,  we  shall  have 


and 


A 
«,» 


f* 

mt> 


Swt^Wj'—  »•)     '     3ms(OTs*  —  **)  """"*' 


(223) 


The  influence  of  an  atom  is  thus  seen  to  depend  on  whether  the  fre- 
quency of  the  rays  for  which  we  wish  to  determine  ft,  lies  below  or 
above  the  frequency  of  the  free  vibrations.  Each  group  of  electrons 

tends  to  raise  the  value  of  ^  .     ,  and  consequently  that  of  ;t,  for  all 

frequencies  below  its  own,  and  to  lower  the  refractive  index  for  all 
higher  frequencies. 

As  a  function  of  n,  each  terra  of  (223)  can  be  graphically 
represented  by  a  curve  of  the  form  shown  in  Fig.  5,  in  which  OP 
corresponds  to  w1?  w2,  .  .  .,  as  the  case  may 
be,  and  we  shall  obtain  the  curve  for 

'"t  I  0  by  taking  the  algebraic  sum  of  the 

ordinates  in  the  individual  curves  Lj ,  L2,  etc. 

The  form  of  the  resultant  line  will 
be  determined  by  the  values  of  n1}  n3,  etc. 
or,  as  one  may  say,  by  the  position  in 
the  spectrum  of  the  lines  that'  would  be  @ 
produced  by  the  free  vibrations  of  the 
electrons,  and  which  we  may  provisionally 
call  the  spectral  lines  of  the  body.  If,  as 
we  go  from  left  to  right,  we  pass  one  of 
these  lines,  the  ordinate  of  the  correspon-  Fig.  5. 

ding    curve    suddenly    jumps    from    +  oo 

to  —  oo.  Of  course  all  these  discontinuities  are  repeated  in  the  re- 
sultant dispersion  curve,  and  near  each  of  the  values  wt,  W2,  .  .  .  of  the 
frequency  there  will  be  a  portion  of  the  curve,  in  which  s  first 
changes  from  -f-  1  to  -\-  oo,  and  then  from  —  oo  to  —  ^.  It  may 
be  assumed  that  these  portions,  which  I  shall  call  the  discontinuous 
parts  of  the  curve,  have  a  breadth  that  is  very  small  in  comparison 
with  the  remaining  parts,  of  which  I  shall  speak  as  the  continuous  ones. 

Since  all  the  curves  Lt,  La,  etc.  rise  from  left  to  right,  it  is 
clear  that  each  continuous  portion  of  the  resultant  curve  must  pre- 
sent the  same  feature.  This  agrees  with  the  dispersion  as  it  exists 
in  all  transparent  substances. 


152  IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

The  question  as  to  whether,  for  a  definite  value  of  the  frequency, 
the  index  of  refraction  is  greater  or  less  than  1,  depends  on  circum- 
stances. If  all  the  spectral  lines  of  the  body  lie  in  the  ultra-violet, 
the  refractive  index  will  be  larger  than  1  throughout  the  infra-red 
and  the  visible  spectrum.  It  may  remain  so  in  the  visible  part,  even 
if  there  are  one  or  more  infra-red  lines,  provided  only  there  be  also 
lines  in  the  ultra-violet,  whose  influence  in  raising  the  refractive  index 
predominates  over  the  opposite  influence  of  the  lines  in  the  infra-red. 
At  all  events,  the  dispersion  of  light  observed  in  all  transparent 
bodies  requires  for  its  explanation  the  existence  of  one  or  more  lines 
in  the  ultra-violet. 

r 

132.  We  could  now  enter  upon   a  comparison  of  our  dispersion 
formula  with   the   measurements  of  the  indices  of  refraction,  but  I 
shall  omit  this,  because  we  must  not  attach  too  much  importance  to 
the    particular   form    which    we    have    found    for   the    equation.      By 
slightly  altering  the  assumptions  on  which  it  is  based,  it  would  be 
possible  to  find  an  equation   of  a  somewhat  different  form,  though 
agreeing   with   (223)   in  its   main   features.     There  is,   however,   one 
consequence  resulting  from  the  preceding  theory,  to  which  I  should  like 
to  draw  your  attention.     If  the  frequency  n  is  made  to  increase  in- 
definitely,  all  the  terms   on   the   right-hand  side  of  (223)  approach 
the   limit   0;   hence,   for   very  high   frequencies,    we   shall   ultimately 
have  s  =  0,   and  /t  =  1,  the  reason  being  simply,  that  the  electrons 
cannot  follow  electric  forces   alternating   with  a  frequency  far  above 
that  of  their  free  vibrations.    The  remark  is  important,  because  it  ex- 
plains the  fact  that  the  Rontgen   rays   do  not  suffer  any  refraction 
when   they   enter   a   ponderable   body.     These  rays,   though  not  con- 
stituted by  regular  vibrations,   are   in   all   probability  produced  by  a 
very   rapid    succession   of  electromagnetic   disturbances   of  extremely 
short  duration. 

133.  Thus  far  we  have  only  spoken  of  the  continuous  parts  of 
the   dispersion  curve.     In  each  of  its   discontinuous  portions,  as  we 
have  defined  them,  the  right-hand  side   of  (223)  has  values  ranging 
from   +1    to    +00,   and   from   —  oo  to  —  £.     These  values  lead  to 
negative  values  of  ft2,  and  to  imaginary  values  of  ft  itself,  indicating 
thereby  that  waves  of  the  corresponding  frequencies   cannot  be   pro- 
pagated by  the  body  in  the  same  way  as  those  whose  wave-length 
corresponds  to   a  point  in  one  of  the  continuous  parts  of  the  curve. 

We  need  not  however  any  further  discuss  the  meaning  of  our 
formulae  in  this  case,  because,  for  frequencies  very  near  n1}  n2,  .  .  . 
the  resistance  to  the  vibrations,  and  the  absorption  due  to  it  may  no 
longer  be  neglected.  We  must  therefore  now  take  up  the  subject 


ABSORPTION  OF  LIGHT.  153 

of  the  absorption  of  light.  Not  to  complicate  matters  too  much,  I 
shall  do  so  on  the  assumption,  which  we  originally  started  from,  that 
each  particle  contains  a  single  movable  electron. 

If,   in   the    equations   (204),   the    resistance  coefficient  ft    has  a 
certain  value,  and  if  there  is  no  external  magnetic  field,  we  may  write 

This  gives 


On  the  other  hand,  the  equations  deduced  in  §  121  from  (193)  and 
(194)  remain  unchanged,  so  that  we  find,  instead  of  (210), 

*«§-"1  +  ST?-  (224) 

The   constant  q   in   the   expression    (209)   now   becomes   a    complex 
quantity.     It  is  convenient  to  put  it  in  the  form 


v  and  it  being  real.     Then,  (209)  becomes 


and  if,  in  order  to  find  the  expressions  for  the  vibrations,  we  take 
the  real  parts  of  the  complex  quantities  by  which  the  dependent 
variables  E^  etc.  have  first  been  represented,  we  are  led  to  expres- 
sions of  the  form 

s-  *2  cos  n  (t  —  ^  +  p  },  (226) 

where  p  is  a  constant.  The  meaning  of  the  first  factor  is,  that  the 
amplitude  of  the  vibrations  is  continually  decreasing  as  we  proceed 
in  the  direction  of  propagation.  The  light  is  absorbed  to  a  degree 
depending  on  the  coefficient  ft,  which  I  shall  call  the  index  of  ab- 
sorption. On  the  other  hand,  the  second  factor  in  (226)  shows  that 
v  is  the  velocity  with  which  the  phase  of  the  vibrations  is  propagated  ; 

the  ratio   —  ,  for   which  I  shall  write  ft,  is   therefore  properly  called 

the  refractive  index. 

Substituting  (225)  in  (224),  and  separating  the  real  and  the 
imaginary  parts,  one  finds  the  following  equations  for  the  deter- 
mination of  v  (or  ,u)  and  A1) 


(227) 


C>*'-/1    I    2"+1  °  1  C2281 

(     ' 


1)  Note  60. 


154     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

134.  The  discussion  of  these  formulae,  which  in  general  would 
be  rather  complicated,  can  be  considerably  simplified  by  the  assump- 
tion that  ft  is  much  larger  than  1. 

This  is  true  in  the  majority  of  cases,  because  in  nearly  all  bodies 
the  absorption  in  a  layer  whose  thickness  is  equal  to  one  wave-length 

in  air,  i.  e.  to ,   is  very  feeble,    even    for   those   frequencies   for 

which  the  absorption  is  strongest.    According  to  (226)  the  amplitude 
diminishes  in  the  ratio  of  1  to 


while    the    beam   travels   over   a   distance   -       .      Therefore,    for   the 

bodies  in  question, 

ck 


n 


must   be   a   very   small   number.     Now,   if  we  consider  the  particular 
frequency  for  which  a  —  0,  (228)  becomes 


If  this  is  to  be  very  small,  ft  must  be  a  large  number. 

Availing   ourselves   of  this  circumstance,   we   find   the  following 
approximate  equations x) 


(230) 


For  a  given  value  of  ft  the  fraction 


has  its  greatest  value  ^-  for  « =  0.    For  « =  +  ft  it  has  sunk  to  half 

this  maximum  value,  and  for  «  =  +  vft  to  -  If  we   under- 

(»   +1)? 
stand  by  v  a  moderate  number  (say  3  or  6)  the  absorption  can  be 

said  to  be  very  feeble,  in  comparison   with  its   maximum  intensity, 
for  values  of  a  beyond  the  interval  extending   from   —  vft  to   +  vft. 

135.  These  different  cases  succeed  each  other  as  we  pass 
through  the  spectrum,  and  even,  notwithstanding  the  high  value  we 
have  ascribed  to  ft,  the  transition  from  —  vft  to  +  vft  can  take 
place  in  a  very  narrow  part  of  it.  If  we  suppose  this  to  be  the 


1)  Note  61. 


BREADTH  AND  INTENSITY  OF  AN  ABSORPTION  BAND.          155 

case,  the  factor  ^  in  (230),  and  the  factor  n  in  (202)  may  be  con- 

sidered as  constants.  Moreover,  in  virtue  of  (201),  if  w0'  is  the 
frequency  for  which  a  =  0,  we  may  write  for  any  other  value  of  « 
in  the  interval  in  question 

«=  -2m'n0'(n-n0').  (231) 

I  have  written  n0'  for  the  frequency  corresponding  to  «  =  0,  because 
its  value 


differs  from  the  frequency 


of  the  spectral  line  of  a  detached  molecule  of  which  we  have  formerly 
spoken.  It  is  only  when  we  may  neglect  the  coefficient  a,  that  the 
two  may  be  considered  as  identical. 

The  phenomena  which  the  system  of  molecules  produces  in  the 
spectrum  of  a  beam  of  white  light  which  is  sent  across  it,  are  as 
follows.  There  is  an  absorption  band  in  which  the  place  of  greatest 
darkness  corresponds  to 

n  =  «0'. 

The  distribution  of  light  is  symmetrical  on  both  sides  of  this  point. 
As  the  band  has  no  sharp  borders,  we  cannot  ascribe  to  it  a  definite 
breadth;  we  can,  however,  say  that  it  is  seen  between  the  places 
where  «  =  —  vfl  and  a  =  +  vfi,  v  being  a  number  of  moderate 
magnitude.  Measured  by  a  difference  of  frequencies,  half  the  width 
can  therefore  be  represented  by 

v? 

2*»'n0'' 
as  is  seen  from  (231). 

We  may  add  an  interesting  remark  about  the  intensity  of  the 
absorption.  The  maximum  value  of  the  index  of  absorption  is  found 
to  be 


and  the  formulae  (202),  (199)  and  (207)  show  therefore  that  the  maxi- 
mum is  the  larger,  the  smaller  the  resistance,  or  the  longer  the  time  r 
during  which  the  vibrations  of  the  electrons  remain  undisturbed.  This 
result,  strange  at  first  sight,  can  be  understood,  if  we  take  into  con- 
sideration that  the  vibrations  which  are  set  up  in  a  particle  by  optical 
resonance,  so  to  say,  with  the  incident  light,  will  be  sooner  or  later 
converted  into  an  irregular  heat  motion.  It  may  very  well  be,  that 


156     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

the  total  quantity  of  heat  developed  per  unit  of  time  is  larger  when 
vibratory  energy  is  stored  up  during  a  long  time,  and  then  suddenly 
converted,  than  in  a  case  in  which  the  disturbances  take  place  at 
shorter  intervals. 

In  another  sense,  however,  the  absorption  may  be  said  to  be 
intensified  by  an  increase  of  the  resistance  g,  or  by  a  shortening  of 
the  time  r.  Not  only  will  a  change  of  this  kind  enlarge  the  breadth 
of  the  absorption  line;  it  will  also  heighten  the  total  absorption, 
i.  e.  the  amount  of  energy,  all  wave-lengths  taken  together,  that  is 
taken  up  from  an  incident  beam.1) 

As  a  general  rule,  observation  really  shows  that  narrow  absorp- 
tion bands  are  more  intense  in  the  middle  than  broad  ones. 


136.  In  Fig.  6  the  curve  FGH  represents  the  index  of  ab- 
sorption as  a  function  of  the  frequency.  The  other  curve  ABCDE 
relates  to  the  index  of  refraction;  it  corresponds  to  the  formula  (229). 

The  index  fi,  which  is  1  at  large  distances 
on  either  side  of  the  point  P,  rises  to  a 
maximum  QB,  and  then  sinks  to  a  mini- 
mum RD.  The  place  of  the  maximum 
is  determined  by  «  =  /?,  or 

n  =  nn'  —  s- 

2m  n0  ' 

that  of  the  minimum  by  «  =  -  ft,  or 
n  =  «„'  + 


2  m  »„' ' 


Fig.  6. 


the  corresponding  values  of  ft  being 
and     1  —  T-T;- 


J-  "T"  A  a 


The  maximum  and  the  minimum  are  found  at  points  of  the  spectrum 
where  the  index  of  absorption  has  half  its  maximum  value. 

In  the  line  ABODE  one  will  have  recognized  already  the  well 
known  curve  for  the  so-called  anomalous  dispersion.  I  must  add  that, 
if  we  had  supposed,  as  we  did  in  §  128,  the  particles  of  the  system 
to  be  composed  of  a  certain  number  of  atoms,  each  containing  a 
movable  electron,  and  if  we  had  assumed  a  resistance  for  every 
electron,  we  should  finally  have  found  a  dispersion  curve  in  which 
a  part  of  the  form  ABCDE  repeats  itself  in  the  neighborhood 
of  each  free  vibration.  These  parts  would  take  the  place  of  the 
discontinuous  portions  that  would  exist  in  the  curve  for  the  func- 
tion (223). 


1)  Note  62. 


PROPAGATION  ALONG  THE  LINES  OP  FORCE.  157 

137.  The  effect  of  an  external  magnetic  field  on  the  propagation 
of  light  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force  can  be  examined  by 
calculations  much  resembling  the  preceding  ones.  We  have  again  to 
use  the  equations  (192),  (193)  and  (194),  but  we  must  now  combine 
them  with  the  formulae  (204).  Since,  in  these  latter,  the  force  § 
has  been  supposed  to  have  the  direction  of  OZ,  a  beam  of  light 
travelling  along  the  lines  of  force  can  be  represented  by  expressions 
containing  the  factor  (209).  We  are  again  led  to  the  equation 


to  which  we  must  now  add  the  corresponding  formula 

D,=  eVE,, 

which  there  was  no  occasion  to  consider  in  the  preceding  case.    Using 
(192),  we  find 

P,=  (Cy-l)E,,     Py=(cV-l)Ey, 

and  the  first  and  the  second  of  the  equations  (204)  become 


(232) 

showing  that 

Py=  +  iPa?.  (233) 

Thus,  there  are  two  solutions,  corresponding  to  the  double  sign.  In 
order  to  find  out  what  they  mean,  we  must  remember  that,  if  two 
variable  quantities  are  given  by  the  real  parts  of 

afi(nt  +  p)      an^[      arfi(nt  +  p+2nt)  (234) 

i.  e.  if  they  are  represented  by 

a  cos  (nt  +  p)     and     ar  cos  (nt  +  p  +  2ns), 

the  number  r  determines  the  ratio  between  the  maximum  values  or 
amplitudes,  whereas  s  is  the  phase-difference  expressed  in  periods. 
Since  re1"'',  the  ratio  between  the  expressions  (234),  becomes  +  i, 
when  we  take 

equation  (233)  shows  that  P.,  and  Py  have  equal  amplitudes  and  that, 
between  their  variations,  there  is  a  phase-difference  of  a  quarter  period. 
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  displacements  |  and  i)  of  one  of  the 
movable  electrons,  these  quantities  being  proportional  to  P^  and  Py. 
We  can  conclude  from  this  that  each  electron  moves  with  constant 
velocity  in  a  circle,  whose  plane  is  perpendicular  to  OZ,  the  motion 
having  one  direction  in  the  solution  corresponding  to  the  upper  sign, 
and  the  opposite  direction  in  the  other  solution. 


158     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

Similarly,  the  vector  P  has  a  uniform  rotation  in  a  plane  at 
right  angles  to  OZ,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  vectors  E  and  D. 
Each  of  our  solutions  therefore  represents  a  beam  of  circularly  pola- 
rized light,  and  it  is  easily  seen  that,  when  the  real  part  of  q  has  the 
positive  sign  (so  that  the  propagation  takes  place  in  the  direction  of 
the  positive  e)  the  upper  signs  in  our  formulae  relate  to  light  whose 
circular  polarization  is  right-handed,  and  the  under  signs  to  a  left- 
handed  polarization. 

Now,  if  we  substitute  the  value  (233)  in  either  of  the  formulae 
(232),  we  obtain  the  following  condition  for  the  coefficient  q: 


from  which,  if  we  introduce  the  value  (225),  the  index  of  absorption 
and  the  velocity  v,  or  the  index  of  refraction  ji  can  be  calculated. 

138.  It  is  not  necessary  to  write  down  the  expressions  for  these 
quantities.  Comparing  (235)  with  our  former  equation  (224),  we 
immediately  see  that  the  only  difference  between  the  two  is,  that  a 
has  been  replaced  by  a  ±  y.  Now,  in  a  narrow  part  of  the  spectrum, 
y  may  be  considered  as  a  constant.  Therefore,  if  we  use  right-handed 
circularly  polarized  light,  the  values  of  Jc  and  ft  which  correspond  to  a 
definite  value  of  a  must  be  the  same  as  those  which  we  had  for  the 
value  «  -f  y  in  the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field.  On  account  of  the 
relation  (231),  we  can  express  the  same  thing  by  saying  that, 
in  the  neighborhood  of  the  frequency  n0',  the  values  of  ji  and  it 
for  a  frequency  n  are,  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  force  f), 
what  they  would  be  without  this  influence  for  the  frequency 


n  — 


2  »«'«„' ' 


The  absorption    curve   for  a   right-hand   ray  is  therefore  obtained  by 
shifting  the  curve  FGH  of  Fig.  6  over  a  distance 


the  displacement  being  in  the  direction  of  the  increasing  frequencies, 
when  this  expression  is  positive,  and  in  the  opposite  direction,  when 
it  is  negative.  For  the  left-hand  ray  we  find  an  equal  displacement 
in  the  opposite  direction. 

It  is  clear  that  the  inverse  Zeeman  effect  is  hereby  explained. 
If  a  beam  of  unpolarized  light,  which  we  can  decompose  into  a  right 
and  a  left-handed  beam,  is  sent  through  the  flame,  we  shall  get  in  its 
spectrum  both  the  absorptions  of  which  we  have  spoken.  If  the 
distance  (236)  is  large  enough  in  comparison  with  the  breadth  of  the 
region  of  absorption,  we  shall  see  a  division  of  the  dark  band  into 


PROPAGATION  AT  BIGHT  ANGLES  TO  THE  LINES  OF  FORCE.      159 

two   components.     It  is   especially  interesting  that  the  displacement 
(236),  for  which  by  (203)  and  (199)  we  may  write 


cNe  '     Ne*          2mc  ' 

exactly  agrees  with  the  value  we  found  in  the  elementary  theory  of 
the  direct  Zeeman  effect.  Our  result  also  accords  with  our  former 
one  as  to  the  direction  of  the  effect.  When  we  examined  the  emission 
in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  lines  of  force,  we  found  that  the 
light  of  the  component  of  highest  frequency  is  left-handed,  if  e  is 
negative.  Our  present  investigation  shows  that  for  light  of  this  kind, 
if  e  is  again  supposed  to  be  negative,  the  absorption  band  is  shifted 
towards  the  side  of  the  greater  frequencies. 

139.  The  propagation  of  light  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to 
the  lines  of  force  can  be  treated  in  a  similar  way.  If  the  axis  of  x 
is  laid  in  the  direction  of  propagation,  the  axis  of  g  being,  as  before, 
in  the  direction  of  the  field,  and  if  we  assume  that  the  expressions 
for  the  components  of  E,  D,  P  and  H  contain  the  factor 

-*.+*„  (•-') 

£  \       •/, 

Jc  will  again  be  the  index  of  absorption,  and  v  the  velocity  of  pro- 
pagation. 

Now,  it  is  immediately  seen  that  these  quantities  are  not  in  the 
least  affected  by  the  magnetic  field,  if  the  electric  vibrations  of  the 
beam  are  parallel  to  the  lines  of  force,  for  in  this  case  we  have  only 
to  combine  the  last  of  the  equations  (204)  with  the  relations 


SHy  =    £  SO,         8E2  =_  £  dHy 

Sx        c    St  '       dx  '     c    St  ' 

which  are  included  in  (192) — (194).  Since  none  of  these  formulae 
contains  the  external  force  ^p,  we  may  at  once  conclude  that  the 
magnetic  field  has  no  influence  on  the  electric  vibrations  along  the 
lines  of  force. 

As  to  vibrations  at  right  angles  to  these  lines,  I  must  point  out 
a  curious  circumstance.  The  variable  vectors  being  periodic  functions 
of  the  time,  and  depending  only  on  the  one  coordinate  x,  the  con- 
dition 

div  D  =  0, 

which  follows  from  (193),  requires  that 

D*  -  0.  (237) 


160     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

We  can  express  this  by  saying  that  the  electric  vibrations  have 
no  longitudinal  component,  meaning  by  ,,electric  vibrations"  the 
periodic  changes  of  the  vector  D.  But  our  result  by  no  means  ex- 
cludes values  of  Ex  and  Pz  different  from  0,  so  that,  if  the  denomi- 
nation of  electric  vibrations  is  applied  to  the  fluctuations  of  the 
electric  force  E,  or  of  the  polarization  P,  the  vibrations  cannot  be 
said  to  be  transversal. 

The  formula  (237)  is  very  important  for  the  solution  of  our 
problem.  Writing  it  in  the  form 


we  can  deduce  from  (204),  combined  with  (192), 

P*=TlA-  •«?«,,  (238) 

*         --    --   5    r> 


The  condition 

_!_    3'Dy  _    C*ty 

c*    8t*  ="  dx*  ' 

which  follows  from  (193)  and  (194),  will  therefore  be  fulfilled  if 
/I          -fc\2_   !  _(!  +  a  +  */3)*  —  7* 

\» *  */  I=  c*  '  "(M-  «  +  »'0)(a  +  *0)  — r1 ' 
This  is  the  equation  by  which  the  velocity  of  propagation  and  the 
index  of  absorption  can  be  calculated.  At  the  same  time,  the  ratio 
between  Px  and  Py  may  be  taken  from  (238).  If  for  this  ratio  we 
find  the  complex  value  re2*"  (§  137),  so  that 

the  amplitudes  of  Px  and  Py  are  as  r  to  1,  and  there  is  a  phase- 
difference  measured  by  s  between  the  periodic  changes  of  the  two 
components.  The  quantities  r  and  s  also  determine  the  ratio  of  the 
amplitudes  and  the  difference  of  phase  for  the  vibrations  along  OX 
and  0  Y  into  which  the  motion  of  one  of  the  movable  electrons  can 
be  decomposed.  Generally  speaking,  in  the  case  now  under  considera- 
tion, the  path  described  by  each  electron  is  an  ellipse  in  a  plane 
perpendicular  to  the  lines  of  force.  Since  r  and  s  vary  with  the 
frequency,  the  form  and  orientation  of  the  ellipse  will  depend  on  the 
kind  of  light  by  which  the  flame  is  traversed. 

140.  In  order  to  find  the  position  of  the  absorption  lines  in 
the  spectrum,  we  should  have  to  determine  A  by  means  of  the  equa- 
tion (239),  and  to  seek  the  values  of  the  frequency  which  make  fc 
a  maximum.  If  the  denominator  of  the  last  fraction  in  (239)  is 
divested  of  imaginaries,  the  equation  takes  the  form 


TRANSVERSE  ZEEMAN-EPFECT.  161 


and  we  get 


The  general  discussion  of  this  result  leads  to  formulae  of  such  com- 
plexity that  they  can  hardly  be  handled.  Fortunately,  in  the  cases 
we  shall  have  to  consider,  the  frequencies  for  which  k  is  a  maximum, 
may  be  found  with  sufficient  accuracy  by  making  the  denominator  Q 
a  minimum.  Moreover,  in  doing  so,  we  may  again  consider  «  as  the 
only  variable  quantity,  the  quantities  /3  and  y  not  varying  perceptibly 
in  the  narrow  part  of  the  spectrum  with  which  we  are  concerned. 
Now,  the  denominator  may  be  written  in  the  form1) 

Q  ={«(!+«)  +  ^-y»}»  +  /3»( 


from   which   it   immediately   appears  that   the   values  in  question  are 
given  by 

K(\  +  K)  =  y*  -  (?. 
I  shall  suppose  that 

f  -  P  +  i  >  0, 

so  that  the  equation  has  two  real  roots 


Corresponding  to  these,  one  finds 
,4  =  40V,     B-ip(l  +  4f 

(242) 


141.  These  results  take  a  very  simple  form,  when,  as  is  generally 
the  case  (§  134),  ft  is  great  in  comparison  with  1,  and  the  mag- 
netic field  is  so  strong  that,  for  light  travelling  along  the  lines  of 
force,  the  components  of  the  original  absorption  line  are  separated 
to  a  distance  greatly  surpassing  their  breadth.  This  requires  (§  138) 
that  y  be  still  many  times  greater  than  /3.  Instead  of  (241)  we  may 
therefore  write  approximately 

a  =  ±  y,  (243) 

which  shows  that  there  are  two  absorption  lines,  exactly  at  the  points 
of  the  spectrum  where  we  had  lines  when  the  light  had  the  direction 
of  the  lines  of  force,  i.  e.  in  the  positions  which  the  elementary 
theory  of  the  direct  Ze  em  an-  effect  might  lead  us  to  expect. 


1)  Note  «3. 

I,  or  0  nt/,  Theory  of  electrons. 


162     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

In  calculating  the  index   of  absorption   we   may   now   replace  S 
by  2fif  and  Q  by  4|3y.     Since 


* 


VA*  +  B*  -  A  =  - 

YA?+JF+A 


we  find  for  both  lines 


exactly  one  half  of  the  index  of  absorption  corresponding  to  a  =  0 
in  the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field. 

Finally,  the  expression  (242)  has  the  value  +  i,  so  that  we  may 
conclude  as  follows. 

If  the  absorbing  body  is  traversed,  in  the  direction  of  OX,  \>y 
a  beam  of  light  whose  electric  vibrations  were  originally  parallel 
to  0  Y,  the  vibrations  are  absorbed  to  an  amount  determined  by  (244), 
when  the  frequency  has  either  of  the  values  given  by  (243).  The  elec- 
trons in  the  molecules  will  describe  circles  in  planes  parallel  to  OX 
and  OY,  the  direction  of  their  motion  corresponding  to  that  of  the 
magnetic  force  when  a  =  -\-  y,  and  not  corresponding  to  it  when 
a  =  —  y. 

It  should  be  noticed  that,  in  the  case  treated  in  §  138,  in 
accordance  with  our  present  result,  we  found  the  maximal  absorption 
at  the  point  «  =  +  -y,  if  the  circular  motion  had  the  former,  and 
at  the  place  a  =  —  y,  if  it  had  the  latter  of  the  directions  just  named. 

142.  Voigt  has  drawn  from  his  equations  another  very  re- 
markable conclusion.  In  general,  for  a  beam  of  light  travelling  at 
right  angles  to  the  lines  of  force,  and  consisting  of  electric  vibrations 
perpendicular  to  these  lines,  the  two  absorption  bands  which  we  get 
instead  of  the  single  original  one,  are  neither  equally  distant  from 
the  position  of  the  latter,  nor  equally  strong,  as  the  components  of 
the  doublet  observed  in  the  direction  of  the  field  invariably  are. 
This  follows  immediately  from  the  circumstance  that  the  functions 
A,  B  and  Q  contain  not  only  even,  but  also  odd  powers  of  a,  so 
that  the  phenomena  are  not  symmetrical  on  both  sides  of  the  point 
in  the  spectrum  where  a  =  0. 

In  some  experiments  undertaken  by  Zee  man  for  the  purpose 
of  testing  these  predictions,  a  very  slight  want  of  symmetry  was  in- 
deed detected.  If  this  is  really  the  dissymmetry  to  which  Voigt 
w;ts  led  by  his  calculations,  the  phenomenon  is  highly  interesting,  as 
we  can  deduce  from  it  that  the  gaseous  body  in  which  it  occurs 
exerts  what  we  may  call  a  metallic  absorption  in  the  middle  of  the 
band.  Indeed,  the  peculiarity  to  which  Voigt  called  attention,  can 
make  itself  felt  only  in  case  the  coefficient  /3  is  not  much  greater  than 


ROTATION  OF  THE  PLANE  OF  POLARIZATION.       ]63 

unity,  and  this  leads  to  an  absorption  which  is  very  sensible  even  for 
a  thickness  equal  to  a  wave-length  (§  134).1) 

143.  I  must  now  call  your  attention  to  the  intimate  connexion 
between  the  Zee  man -effect  and  the  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polari- 
zation that  was  discovered  by  Faraday.  Reverting  to  the  case  of 
a  propagation  along  the  lines  of  force,  we  can  start  from  our  former 
result  (§§  137,  138),  that  the  simplest  solutions  of  our  system  of 
equations  are  those  which  represent  either  a  right-handed  or  a  left- 
handed  circularly  polarized  beam,  and  that  the  formulae  for  these 
two  cases  are  obtained,  if,  in  the  equations  holding  in  the  absence 
of  a  magnetic  field,  we  replace  «  either  by  «  +  y  or  by  a  —  y.  This 
is  true,  not  only  for  the  formulae  giving  the  coefficient  of  absorption, 
but  also  for  those  which  determine  the  velocity  of  propagation. 
Hence,  if  this  velocity  is  denoted  by  vt  for  a  left-handed,  and  by 
v2  for  a  right-handed  ray,  we  shall  have  (cf.  equation  (229)), 


2c[(a  —  y 

l...L.t        «  +  y 

<M  *^  9  y»  fYrt*   i    *,\8  _ 


For  a  definite  frequency  n,  these  values  are  unequal.  So  are  also 
the  corresponding  values  of  the  coefficient  of  absorption,  so  that, 
under  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  field,  the  system  has  a  different 
degree  of  transparency  for  the  two  kinds  of  circularly  polarized  light. 
For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  however,  we  shall  now  leave  out  of  con- 
sideration this  latter  difference,  and  speak  only  of  the  phenomena 
that  are  caused  by  the  difference  in  the  velocities  of  propagation. 
You  know  that  in  every  case  in  which  these  are  unequal  for  the  two 
kinds  of  circularly  polarized  light,  a  beam  with  a  rectilinear  polari- 
zation will  have  its  plane  of  polarization  turned  as  it  travels  onward. 
The  angle  of  rotation  per  unit  of  length  is  given  by 


(245) 
or  in  our  case  by 

«  r       <x  +  y  «  —  Y       1  i'i)AA\ 

"  ic  L  (o+7)°  +7!  ~  («-r)'  +  H  " 

The  sense  of  the  rotation  depends  on  the  algebraical  sign  of 
this  expression.  When  §  is  positive,  i.  e.  when  the  magnetic  force 
has  the  direction  of  the  beam  of  light,  a  positive  value  of  o>  means  a 
rotation  whose  direction  corresponds  to  that  of  the  magnetic  force. 
The  general  features  of  the  phenomenon,  as  it  depends  on  the 
frequency,  come  out  most  clearly  if  we  avail  ourselves  of  a  graphical 
representation.  In  Fig.  6  we  drew  a  curve  giving  the  index  of  re- 

1)  See  Note  64. 

It* 


164     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 


fraction  as  a  function  of  the  frequency,  and  showing  how  it  changes 
as  we  go  through  the  spectrum  from  left  to  right.  This  curve,  which 
relates  to  the  body  not  subjected  to  a  magnetic  force,  may  also  be 

taken   to   represent  the  values   of  —     Now,   if  there  is  a  magnetic 

field,   the  curves  for  -    and         are  obtained  by  simply  shifting  that 

of  Fig.  6   towards    the   left    or    towards    the   right   over   an   interval 

eS) 
equal  to  -      ,   (*£    §    138).      In    this   way    we   get    the    two    curves 

a  1¥l  C 

A^  Bi  Dl  E1  and  A%  B%  _D2  E%  of  Fig.  7,   and  these  immediately  give  us 

an  idea  of  the  angle  of  rotation  a, 
because,  as  (245)  tells  us,  this  angle 
is  proportional  to  the  algebraic  diffe- 
rence between  corresponding  ordinates. 
It  can  therefore  be  represented  by 
the  line  EE. 

Two  interesting  results  become 
apparent  by  this  construction.  The 
first  is,  that  in  the  narrow  part  of 
the  spectrum  close  to  the  original 
absorption  line,  the  rotation  of  the 
plane  of  polarization  twice  changes 
its  sign;  the  second,  that,  on  account 

of  the  high  values  of  ft  or        which 

are  found  at  some  places,  the  angle 
of  rotation  can  also  attain  a  rather 
great  value. 

Macaluso  and  Corbino1),  who  were  the  first  to  examine  this 
phenomenon  in  the  case  of  a  sodium  flame,  observed  rotations  as 
great  as  270°.  The  results  of  their  experiments  could  immediately 
be  explained  by  the  theory  which  Voigt  had  already  developed. 
Some  years  later,  Zeeman8)  and  Hallo8)  made  a  very  careful  ex- 
perimental study  of  the  phenomenon,  and  again  found  a  satisfactory 
agreement  with  Voigt's  theory. 

144.  The  Far  ad  ay -effect  had  been  known  for  a  long  time,  and 
the  only  thing  in  the  above  results  apt  to  cause  astonishment,  was, 
that  a  rotation  much  greater  than  had  ever  been  observed  in  trans- 
parent bodies,  should  be  produced  in  a  sodium  flame.  An  other 
magneto-optic  effect  that  was  predicted  by  Voigt,  is  an  entirely  new 

1)  D.  Macaluso  and  0.  M.  Corbino,  Comptes  rendus  127  (1898),  p.  548. 

2)  P.  Zeeman,  Amsterdam Proc.  6  (1902), p.  41;  Arch,  neerl.  (2)  7  (1902), p.  4C5. 
8)  J.  J.  Hallo,  Arch.  n(5erl.  (2)  10  (1905),  p.  148. 


MAGNETIC  DOUBLE  REFRACTION.  165 

one.  It  consists  in  a  double  refraction  that  is  observed  when  a  body  such 
as  we  have  considered  in  this  chapter,  is  traversed  by  a  beam  of 
light  at  right  angles  to  the  lines  of  force.  For  such  a  beam  we 
have  to  distinguish  between  the  electric  vibrations  perpendicular  and 
parallel  to  the  lines  of  force.  For  the  former,  the  velocity  of  propa- 
gation is  given  by  the  equation  (239),  for  the  latter  by  (224)  and 
(225),  or  as  we  may  also  say,  by  (239),  if  in  this  latter  formula  we 
put  y  =  0.  The  difference  between  the  two  values  is  what  was 
meant  when  I  spoke  just  now  of  a  double  refraction.  It  can  be 
calculated  by  our  formulae  as  soon  as  K,  /3,  j>  are  known,  but  I  shall 
not  lose  time  in  these  calculations.  I  shall  only  observe  that  the 
effect  remains  the  same  when  the  field  is  reversed;  this  follows  at 
once  from  (239),  because  this  equation  contains  only  the  square  of  y, 
and  therefore  the  square  of  !Q. 

Voigt  and  Wiechert  have  experimentally  verified  these  predic- 
tions, and  Geest1)  has  carefully  measured  the  magnetic  double  refrac- 
tion in  a  sodium  flame. 

145.  Availing  ourselves  of  the  theory  that  has  been  set  forth 
in  this  chapter,  we  can  draw  from  experimental  data  certain  interesting 
conclusions  concerning  the  absorbing  (or  radiating)  particles.  Some 
measurements  enable  us  to  calculate  the  relative  values  of  the  three 
quantities  a,  /J,  7,  whereas  others  can  serve  for  the  determination  of 
their  absolute  values. 

Thus,  if  we  have  measured  the  distance  between  the  middle  com- 
ponent of  Zeeman's  triplet  and  the  outer  ones,  we  know  that  for 
the  frequency  n  belonging  to  one  of  these  latter,  «  and  y  have  equal 
values.  Replacing  y  by  its  value  (203),  and  «  by  (231),  in  which 
we  shall  now  neglect  the  difference  between  n0'  and  w0  (§  135),  so  that 

n)  /f>Ai\ 

-'  ,  (247) 


the  equality  leads  us  back  to  our  old  equation 

e 
n~        ~ 


bv  means  of  which  we  can  determine  the  ratio  — 

m 

The  ratio  between  a  and  ft  could  be  found  if  quantitative  deter- 
minations of  the  absorption,  in  the  ordinary  case  in  which  there  is 
no  magnetic  field,  were  at  our  disposal.  If,  for  example,  we  knew 
that  at  a  certain  point  in  an  absorption  band  the  index  of  absorption 
Jc  is  x  times  smaller  than  at  the  middle  of  the  band,  the  ratio  v 
between  «  and  0  could  be  found  (§  134)  by  means  of  the  formula 

x  =  1  +  v*.  (248) 

1)  J.  Geest,  Arch,  ne'erl.  (-2)  10  (1905),  p.  291. 


166     IV.  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT  IN  A  SYSTEM  OF  MOLECULES. 

The  distribution  of  intensity  has  been  determined  by  bolometric  or 
similar  measurements  for  the  broad  bands  that  are  produced  by  such 
gases  as  carbonic  acid,  but  we  cannot  tell  what  it  is  in  the  narrow 
bands  observed  in  the  case  of  a  sodium  flame  for  instance.  All  we 
can  then  do,  is  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  ratio  v  between  «  and  ft 
for  the  border  of  the  band.  If  we  assume,  for  example,  that  here  x 
is  equal  to  10  or  20,  we  can  calculate  v  from  the  relation  (248), 
and,  substituting  this  value  in  the  equation 

a  =  vft, 
for  which,  on  account  of  (247),  (202)  and  (199),  we  may  write 

2m(n0-n)  =  v<j, 
we  find 


This  formula  takes  an  interesting  form  if  we  use  the  relation  (207). 
It  then  becomes 


«„  —  w  ' 

showing  that  the  time  during  which  the  vibrations  in  a  particle  go 
on  undisturbed  may  be  deduced  from  the  breadth  of  the  bund. 

In  Hallo's  experiments  the  breadth  of  the  /Mines  was  about 
one  Angstrom  unit,  from  which  I  infer  that  the  value  of  T  lies 
between  12  •  10-1*  and  24-  10~12  sec.  The  first  number  is  got  by 
putting  v  =  3  (x  =  10),  the  second  by  taking  v  =  6  (x  =  37).  As 
the  interval  between  two  successive  encounters  of  a  molecule  is  pro- 
bably of  the  order  10~10  sec.,  we  see  that  r  comes  out  somewhat 
smaller  than  this  interval,  as  was  already  mentioned  in  §  120. 

After  having  found  the  ratios  between  a,  ft,  y,  we  can  try  to 
evaluate  the  absolute  values  of  these  coefficients.  For  this  purpose, 
we  could  use  the  absolute  value  of  the  coefficient  of  absorption,  if 
it  were  but  known.  We  can  also  avail  ourselves,  as  Hallo  and 
Geest  have  pointed  out,  of  the  rotation  of  the  plane  of  polarization, 
or  of  the  magnetic  double  refraction.  If  the  ratios  between  K,  ft,  y 
are  given,  the  three  quantities  may  be  deduced  from  the  formula  (246), 
or  from  the  difference  between  the  value  of  v  given  by  (239),  and 
the  corresponding  value  for  §  =  0. 

Now,  when  a  is  known  for  a  certain  point  in  the  spectrum  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  point  w0,  i.  e.  when  we  know  the  value  of  (247), 

and  if  further  we  introduce  the  values  of  -'     and  e,   we  can  draw  a 

m 

conclusion  as  to  the  number  of  absorbing  (or  radiating)  particles  per 


NUMBER  OF  ABSORBING  PARTICLES.  167 

unit  of  volume.  In  this  way  one  finds  for  the  sodium  flame  used 
by  Hallo 

N  =  4-  1014, 

corresponding  to  a  density  of  the  sodium  vapour  of  about  10" 8.  In 
all  probability  this  value  is  very  much  smaller  than  the  density  of 
the  vapour  actually  present  in  the  flame,  a  difference  that  must  per- 
haps be  explained  by  supposing  that  only  those  particles  which  are 
in  a  peculiar  stute,  a  small  portion  of  the  whole  number,  play  a 
part  in  the  phenomenon  of  absorption. 

I  need  scarcely  add  that  all  these  conclusions  must  be  regarded 
with  some  diffidence.  To  say  the  truth,  the  theory  of  the  absorption 
and  emission  of  light  by  ponderable  bodies  is  yet  in  its  infancy.  If 
we  should  feel  inclined  to  think  better  of  it,  and  to  be  satisfied  with 
the  results  already  obtained,  our  illusion  will  soon  be  dispelled,  when  we 
think  a  moment  of  Wood's  investigations  about  the  optical  properties 
of  sodium  vapour,  which  show  that  a  molecule  of  this  substance  must 
have  a  wonderful  complexity,  or  of  the  shifting  of  the  spectral 
lines  by  pressure  that  was  discovered  by  Humphreys  and  Mohler, 
and  which  the  theory  in  its  present  state  is  hardly  able  to  account  for.1) 

1)  Note  64. 


CHAPTER  V. 

OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

146.  The  electromagnetic  and  optical  phenomena  in  systems 
having  a  motion  of  translation ;  as  all  terrestrial  bodies  have  by 
the  annual  motion  of  the  earth,  are  of  much  interest,  not  only  in 
themselves,  but  also  because  they  furnish  us  with  means  of  testing 
the  different  theories  of  electricity  that  have  been  proposed.  The 
theory  of  electrons  has  even  been  developed  partly  with  a  view  to 
these  phenomena.  For  these  reasons  I  shall  devote  the  last  part  of 
my  lectures  to  some  questions  relating  to  the  propagation  of  light 
in  moving  bodies  and,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  astronomical  aberra- 
tion of  light. 

Before  I  go  into  some  details  concerning  the  attempts  that  have 
been  made  to  explain  this  influence  of  the  earth's  motion  on  the 
apparent  position  of  the  stars,  it  will  be  well  to  set  forth  a  general 
mode  of  reasoning  that  can  be  used  in  problems  concerning  the 
propagation  of  waves  and  rays  of  light.  It  consists  in  the  application 
of  Huygens's  well  known  principle. 

We  shall  consider  a  transparent  medium  of  any  kind  we  like, 
moving  in  one  way  or  another,  and  we  shall  refer  this  motion  and 
the  propagation  of  light  in  the  medium  to  three  rectangular  axes  of 
coordinates,  which  we  may  conceive  as  likewise  moving.  We  shall 

suppose  our  diagrams,  which  are  to  re- 
present the  successive  positions  of  waves 
of  light,  to  be  rigidly  fixed  to  the  axes, 
so  that  these  have  an  invariable  position 
in  the  diagrams. 

Let  0  (Fig.  8)  be  a  wave -front  in 
the  position  it  occupies  at  the  time  t, 
and  let  us  seek  to  determine  the  po- 
sition 0'  which  it  will  have  reached 
after  an  infinitely  short  time  dt.  For 

this    purpose   we    must    regard    each  point  P   of  6   as    a    centre    of 
vibration,  and  construct  around  it  the  elementary  wave  that  is  formed 


Fig.  8. 


APPLICATION  OF  HUYGENS'S  PRINCIPLE.  169 

in  the  time  dt,  i.  e.  the  infinitely  small  surface  that  is  reached  at 
the  instant  t  +  dt  by  a  disturbance  starting  from  P  at  the  time  t. 
The  envelop  of  all  these  elementary  waves  will  be  the  new  position 
of  the  wave-front,  and  by  continually  repeating  this  construction  we 
can  follow  the  wave  in  its  propagation  step  by  step. 

At  the  same  time,  the  course  of  the  rays  of  light  becomes 
known.  The  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  vibration  P  of  an 
elementary  wave  to  the  point  P'  where  it  is  touched  by  the  envelop  tf, 
is  an  element  of  a  ray,  and  every  new  step  in  the  construction  will 
give  us  a  new  element  of  it. 

The  physical  meaning  of  the  lines  so  determined  need  scarcely 
be  recalled  here.  The  rays  serve  to  indicate  the  manner  in  which 
beams  of  light  can  be  laterally  limited.  If,  for  example,  the  light 
is  made  to  pass  through  an  opening  in  an  opaque  screen,  the 
disturbance  of  the  equilibrium  behind  the  screen  is  confined  to  the 
part  of  space  that  can  be  reached  by  rays  of  light  drawn  through 
the  points  of  the  opening.  It  must  be  kept  in  mind,  however,  that 
this  is  true  only  if  we  neglect  the  effects  of  diffraction,  as  we  may 
do  when  the  dimensions  of  the  opening  are  very  large  in  comparison 
with  the  wave-length. 

If  we  want  to  lay  stress  on  the  fact  that,  in  the  above  con- 
struction, we  had  in  view  the  relative  motion  of  light  with  respect 
to  the  axes  of  coordinates  or  with  respect  to  some  system  to  which 
these  are  fixed,  we  can  speak  of  the  relative  rays  of  light. 

As  to  the  elementary  waves,  on  whose  dimensions  and  form  all 
is  made  to  depend,  these  are  determined  in  every  case  by  the  optical 
properties  and  the  state  of  motion  of  the  medium. 

147.  We  are  now  prepared  for  examining  the  two  theories  of 
the  aberration  of  light  that  have  been  proposed  by  Fresnel  and 
Stokes.  In  doing  so  we  shall  confine  ourselves  to  the  annual  aber- 
ration, so  that  the  rotation  of  our  planet  around  its  axis  will  be  left 
out  of  consideration.  In  order  further  to  simplify  the  problem,  we 
shall  replace  the  motion  of  the  earth  in  its  annual  course  by  a  uni- 
form translation  along  a  straight  line. 

The  theory  of  Stokes1)  rests  on  the  assumption  that  the  ether 
surrounding  the  earth  is  set  in  motion  by  the  translation  of  this  body, 
and  that,  at  every  point  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  there  is  perfect 
equality  of  the  velocities  of  the  earth  and  the  ether.  According 
to  this  latter  hypothesis,  the  instruments  of  an  observatory  are  at 
rest  relatively  to  the  surrounding  ether.  It  is  clear  that  under  these 


1)  G.  G.  Stokes,  On  the  aberration  of  light,  Phil.  Mag.  (3)  27  (1845),  p.  9; 
Mathematical  and  physical  papers  1,  p.  134. 


170  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

circumstances  the  direction  in  which  a  heavenly  body  is  observed, 
must  depend  on  the  direction  of  the  waves,  such  as  it  is  immediately 
before  the  light  enters  our  instruments.  Now,  on  account  of  the 
supposed  motion  of  the  ether,  this  direction  may  differ  from  the 
direction  of  the  waves  at  some  distance  from  the  earth;  this  is  the 
reason  why  the  apparent  position  of  a  star  will  be  different  from 
the  real  one. 

In  order  to  determine  the  rotation  of  the  waves  we  shall  now 
apply  the  general  method  that  has  been  sketched,  using  a  system  of 
coordinates  that  moves  with  the  earth.  We  shall  denote  by  Q  the 
velocity  with  which  the  ether  moves  across  our  diagram,  a  velocity 
that  is  0  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  if  there  is  no  sliding,  and  equal 
and  opposite  to  the  velocity  of  the  earth  at  a  considerable  distance. 
The  state  of  motion  being  stationary,  this  relative  velocity  of  the 
ether  is  independent  of  the  time.  We  shall  further  neglect  the  in- 
fluence of  the  air  on  the  propagation  of  light,  an  influence  that  is 
known  to  be  very  feeble. 

If  the  ether  were  at  rest  relatively  to  the  axes,  the  light  waves 
would  travel  with  the  definite  velocity  c;  every  elementary  wave 
would  be  a  sphere  whose  radius  is  cdt,  and  whose  centre  lies  at  the 
point  P  from  which  the  radiation  goes  forth.  For  the  moving  ether 
this  has  to  be  modified.  The  elementary  wave  still  remains  a  sphere 
with  radius  cdt,  because  in  the  infinitely  small  space  in  which  it  is 
formed,  the  ether  may  be  taken  to  have  everywhere  the  same  velo- 
city, but  while  it  expands,  the  sphere  is  carried  along  by  the  motion 
of  the  medium,  in  exactly  the  same  manner  in  which  waves  of  sound 
are  carried  along  by  the  wind,  or  water  waves  by  the  current  of  a 
river.  The  elementary  wave  formed  around  a  point  P  (Fig.  8)  will 
therefore  have  its  centre,  not  at  P,  but  at  another  point  Q,  namely 
at  the  point  that  is  reached  at  the  time  t  +  dt  by  a  particle  of  the 
ether  which  had  the  position  P  at  the  time  t.  There  will  be  a  ro- 
tation of  the  wave-front,  if  the  velocity  g  of  the  ether  changes  from 
one  point  of  the  wave  to  the  next. 

It  will  suffice  for  our  purpose  to  consider  so  small  a  part  of 
the  wave  as  can  be  admitted  into  the  instrument  of  observation.  A 
part  of  this  size  can  be  considered  as  plane  and  the  velocity  of  the 
ether  at  its  different  points  can  be  regarded  as  a  linear  function  of 
the  coordinates.  Consequently,  the  centres  of  the  spheres  lie  in  a 
plane  and,  since  the  spheres  are  equal,  the  part  of  the  new  wave- 
front  6  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  a  plane  of  the  same  direction, 
so  that  the  rotation  of  the  wave  is  equal  to  the  rotation  of  a  plane  & 
that  is  carried  along  by  the  motion  of  the  medium. 

Let  us  lay  the  axis  OX  along  the  normal  N  to  the  wave-front 
a,  drawn  in  the  direction  of  propagation.  Then,  the  direction  cosines 


STOKES'S  THEORY  OF  ABERRATION.  171 

of  the  normal  N'  to  the  new  wave-front  are  easily  found1)  to  be 
proportional  to  the  expressions 

i        SV*,if  S9*rff  SOxfJt 

~8xat>  8yat>         ~  ds  dt- 

We  can  express  this  result  by  saying  that  the  direction  of  the  normal 
N'  is  obtained  if  a  vector  of  unit  length  in  the  direction  of  N  is 
compounded  with  a  vector  whose  components  are 

_|B?^      --^dt,     -?9xdt.  (249) 

dx  dy      '  dz 

A  vector  which  serves  in  this  way  to  determine  the  change  of  a 
direction,  by  being  compounded  with  a  unit  vector  in  the  original 
direction,  may  be  termed  a  deviating  vector. 

There  is  one  assumption  which  plays  a  very  important  part  in 
Stokes's  theory  and  of  which  thus  far  no  mention  has  been  made. 
Stokes  supposes  the  motion  of  the  ether  to  be  irrotational,  or,  in 
other  terms,  to  have  a  velocity  potential.  In  virtue  of  this  we  have 

dfl*  _  ?•?      ?«.  =  0.1. 
dy        dx  '      dz         dx  ' 

so  that  we  can  represent  the  components  (249)  of  the  deviating 
vector  by 

-d**dt,     -tydt,    -Q'-dt, 

dx  dx  dx 

and  the  vector  itself  by 


148.  The  velocity  W  of  the  earth  being  only  one  ten-thousandth 
part  of  the  speed  of  light,  all  the  terms  in  our  formulae  which 

I     y. 

contain  the  factor  -  —  ,   are  very   small.     So   are    also  the  terms  con- 
c 

taiuing  the  factor  -—  ,   if   y    is   one   of   the   velocities    of  matter  or 

ether,  and  v  one  of  the  velocities  of  light  with  which  we  are 
concerned.  We  shall  call  terms  of  this  kind  quantities  of  the  first 
order  of  magnitude,  and  we  shall  neglect  in  the  majority  of  cases 
the  terms  of  the  second  order,  i.  e.  those  which  are  proportional 

w1  g! 

to  ^  or  to  |T- 

If  we  do  so,  the  calculation  of  the  total  rotation  which  the 
waves  of  light  undergo  while  advancing  towards  the  earth,  and  which 
is  a  quantity  of  the  first  order,  is  much  simplified.  We  have  only 
to  form  the  sum  of  all  the  deviating  vectors  such  as  (250)  which 

1)  Note  65. 


172  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

belong  to  the  successive  elements  of  time;  the  resultant  vector  will 
be  the  total  deviating  vector,  i.  e.  the  vector  which  we  must  com- 
pound with  a  unit  vector  in  the  direction  of  the  original  normal  to 
the  waves,  in  order  to  get  the  final  direction  of  the  normal.  Since 

(Fig-  8)  qj>. 

ut  =  —  —  , 

c 

(250)  becomes 


and  here  we  may  replace  QP'  by  the  element  PP'  =  ds  of  the  ray, 

/J.P  '  I  fl 

because  the  ratio  „„,  differs  from  1  by  a  quantity  of  the  order  '~t 

and   the   factor  '   is    also   of  this  order    of   magnitude.    Finally, 

we  may  replace   ?  ;   by   ~,   because   the   angle  between  ds   and   the 

C  3C  OS 

axis  of  x,  which  coincides  with  the   wave-normal,   is  a  quantity  of 
the  order        •    The  deviating  vector  corresponding  to  the  element  ds 

C 

becomes  by  this 


an  expression  from  which  all  reference  to  the  axes  of  coordinates  has 
disappeared,  and,  if  the  ray  travels  from  a  point  A  to  a  point  B, 
we  have  for  the  total  deviating  vector 


where    Q^    and    g#   are    the    relative    velocities    of  the    ether   at    the 
points  A  and  13. 

Now,  let  the  point  A  be  at  a  great  distance  from  the  earth, 
and  let  S  lie  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  its  surface.  Then, 
if  there  is  no  sliding,  we  have  fla  =  0,  whereas  Q^  is  equal  and 
opposite  to  the  velocity  w  of  the  earth.  The  deviating  vector  becomes 


w 
c 


and  we  can  draw  the  following  conclusion: 

In  order  to  find  the  final  direction  of  the  wave-normal  (in  the 
direction  of  the  propagation)  we  must  draw  a  vector  equal  to  the 
velocity  c  of  light  in  the  direction  of  the  original  normal  to  the 
waves  at  A,  and  compound  it  with  a  vector  equal  and  opposite  to 
the  velocity  of  the  earth.  If  one  takes  into  account  that  the  normal 
at  A  coincides  with  the  real  direction  of  the  light  coming  from  a 


STOKES'S  THEORY  OF  ABERRATION.  173 

star,  it  is  clear  that  our  result  agrees  with  the  ordinary  explanation 
of  aberration  that  is  given  in  text-books  of  astronomy  and  that  has 
been  verified  by  observations. 

149.  Unfortunately,  there  is  a  very  serious  difficulty  about  this 
theory  of  Stokes:  two  assumptions  which  we  have  been  obliged  to 
make,  namely  that  the  motion  of  the  ether  is  irrotational  and  that  there 
is  no  sliding  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  can  hardly  be  reconciled. 
It  is  wholly  impossible  to  do  so,  if  the  ether  is  regarded  as  incom- 
pressible. Indeed,  a  well  known  hydrodynamical  theorem  teaches  us 
that,  when  a  sphere  immersed  in  a  boundless  incompressible  medium  has 
a  given  translation,  the  motion  of  the  medium  will  be  completely 
determined  if  it  is  required  that  there  shall  be  a  velocity  potential, 
and  that,  at  every  point  of  the  surface,  the  velocity  of  the  medium 
and  that  of  the  sphere  shall  have  equal  components  in  the  direction 
of  the  normal.  In  the  only  state  of  motion  which  satisfies  these 
two  conditions  there  is  a  considerable  sliding  at  the  surface,  the 
maximum  value  of  the  relative  velocity  being  even  one  and  a  half 
times  the  velocity  of  translation  of  the  sphere.1)  This  shows  that  an 
irrotational  motion  of  the  medium  without  sliding  can  never  be 
realized  if  the  medium  is  incompressible,  and  that  we  should  have 
at  once  to  dismiss  Stokes's  theory  if  we  could  be  sure  of  the  in- 
compressibility  of  the  ether. 

The  preceding  reasoning  fails  however,  if  we  admit  the  possibi- 
lity of  changes  in  the  density  of  the  ether,  and  Planck  has  observed2) 
that  the  two  hypotheses  of  Stokes's  theory  no  longer  contradict 
each  other,  if  one  supposes  the  ether  to  be  condensed  around  celestial 
bodies,  as  it  would  be  if  it  were  subjected  to  gravitation  and  had 
more  or  less  the  properties  of  a  gas.  We  cannot  wholly  avoid  a 
sliding  at  the  surface,  but  we  can  make  it  as  small  as  we  please  by 
supposing  a  sufficient  degree  of  condensation.  If  we  do  not  shrink 
from  admitting  an  accumulation  of  the  ether  around  the  earth  to  a 
density  £u  times  as  great  as  the  density  in  celestial  space,  we  can 
imagine  a  state  of  things  in  which  the  maximum  velocity  of  sliding 
is  no  more  than  one  half  percent  of  the  velocity  of  the  earth,  and 
this  would  certainly  be  amply  sufficient  for  an  explanation  of  the 
aberration  within  the  limits  of  experimental  errors.8) 

In  this  department  of  physics,  in  which  we  can  make  no  pro- 
gress without  some  hypothesis  that  looks  somewhat  startling  at  first 


1)  Note  66. 

2)  See  Lorentz,   Stokes's  theory  of   aberration  in   the   supposition  of  a 
variable  density  of  the  aether,  Amsterdam  Proceedings  1898  —  1899,  p.  443  (Ab- 
handlungen  fiber  theoretische  Physik  I,  p.  464). 

3)  Note  67. 


1  74  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

sight,  we  must  be  careful  not  rashly  to  reject  a  new  idea,  and  in 
making  his  suggestion  Planck  has  certainly  done  a  good  thing.  Yet 
I  dare  say  that  this  assumption  of  an  enormously  condensed  ether, 
combined,  as  it  must  be,  with  the  hypothesis  that  the  velocity  of 
light  is  not  in  the  least  altered  by  it,  is  not  very  satisfactory.  I  am 
sure,  Planck  himself  is  inclined  to  prefer  the  unchangeable  and 
immovable  ether  of  Fresnel,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  this  conception 
can  lead  us  to  an  understanding  of  the  phenomena  that  have  been 
observed. 

15O.  The  theory  of  Fresnel,  the  main  principle  of  which  has 
already  been  incorporated  in  the  theory  I  have  set  forth  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapters,  dates  as  far  back  as  1818.  It  was  formulated  for  the 
first  time  in  a  letter  to  Arago1),  in  which  it  is  expressly  stated  that 
we  must  imagine  the  ether  not  to  receive  the  least  part  of  the  motion 
of  the  earth.  To  this  Fresnel  adds  a  most  important  hypothesis 
concerning  the  propagation  of  light  in  moving  transparent  ponderable 
matter. 

I  believe  every  one  will  be  ready  to  admit  that  an  optical  phe- 
nomenon which  can  take  place  in  a  system  that  is  at  rest,  can  go 
on  in  exactly  the  same  way  after  a  uniform  motion  of  translation 
has  been  imparted  to  this  system,  provided  only  that  this  translation 
be  given  to  all  that  belongs  to  the  system.  If,  therefore,  all  that  is 
contained  in  a  column  of  water  or  in  a  piece  of  glass  shares  a  trans- 
latory  motion  which  we  communicate  to  these  substances,  the  propa- 
gation of  light  in  their  interior  will  always  go  on  in  the  same 
manner,  whether  there  be  a  translation  or  not.  The  case  will  however 
be  different,  if  the  glass  or  the  water  contains  something  which  we 
cannot  set  in  motion. 

Now,  as  I  said,  Fresnel  supposed  the  ether  not  to  follow 
the  motion  of  the  earth.  The  only  way  in  which  this  can  be  under- 
stood, is  to  conceive  the  earth  as  impregnated  throughout  its  bulk 
with  ether  and  as  perfectly  permeable  to  it.  When  we  have  gone 
so  far  as  to  attribute  this  property  to  a  body  of  the  size  of  our 
planet,  we  must  certainly  likewise  ascribe  it  to  much  smaller  bodies, 
and  we  inust  expect  that,  if  water  flows  through  a  tube,  there 
is  no  current  of  ether,  and  that  therefore,  since  a  beam  of  light  is 
propagated  partly  by  the  water  and  partly  by  the  ether,  the  light 
waves,  being  held  back  as  it  were  by  the  ether,  will  not  acquire  the 
full  velocity  of  the  water  current.  According  to  Fresnel's  hypo- 
thesis, the  velocity  of  the  rays  relative  to  the  walls  of  the  tube 


1)  Lettre  <le  Fresnel  ii  Arago,  Sur  Tinfluence  du  mouvement  terrestre 
dans  quelques  phenomenes  d'optique,  Ann.  de  chim.  et  de  phys.  9  (1818),  p.  67 
((Euvres  completes  de  Fresnel  2,  p.  627). 


FRKSNEL'S  COEFFICIENT.  175 

(or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  relative  to  the  ether)  is 
found  by  compounding  the  velocity  with  which  the  propagation  would 
take  place  in  standing  water,  with  only  a  certain  part  of  the 

velocity  of  the  flow,  this  part  being  determined  by  the  fraction  1  —  , , 
where  p  is  the  index  of  refraction  of  the  water  when  at  rest.  The 
same  coefficient  1  -  — ^  is  applied  by  him  to  all  other  isotropic 

transparent  substances.  If  JA  is  little  different  from  1,  as  it  is  in 
gases,  the  coefficient  is  very  small;  light  waves  are  scarcely  dragged 
along  by  a  current  of  air,  because  in  air  the  propagation  takes  place 
almost  exclusively  in  the  ether  it  contains.  If  Fresnel's  coeffi- 
cient is  to  be  nearly  1,  i.  e.  if  the  light  waves  are  to  acquire  almost 
the  full  velocity  of  the  ponderable  matter,  we  must  use  a  highly  re- 
fracting body. 

161.  I  must  add  two  remarks.  In  the  first  place,  instead  of 
the  propagation  relative  to  the  ether,  we  can  as  well  consider  that 
relative  to  the  ponderable  matter.  If  water  which  is  flowing  through 
a  tube  towards  the  right-hand  side  with  a  velocity  w,  is  traversed 
by  a  beam  of  light  going  in  the  same  direction,  the  velocity  of 
propagation  relative  to  the  ether  is 


where  v  means  the  velocity  of  light  in  standing  water.  The  rela- 
tive velocity  of  the  light  with  respect  to  the  water  is  got  from  this 
by  subtracting  w,  so  that  it  is  given  by 

v-~,w.  (251) 

It  may  be  considered  as  compounded  of  the  velocity  v  and  a  part, 
determined  by  the  fraction  — ,  of  the  velocity  with  which  the  ether 

moves  relatively  to  the  ponderable  matter,  and  which  in  our  example 
is  directed  towards  the  left. 

In  the  second  place,  the  above  statement  of  Fresnel's  hypo- 
thesis requires  to  be  completed  for  the  case  of  media  in  which  the 
velocity  of  light  depends  on  the  frequency.  When  a  body  is  in 
motion,  we  must  distinguish  between  the  frequency  of  the  vibrations 
at  a  fixed  point  of  the  ether  and  the  frequency  with  which  the 
electromagnetic  state  alternates  at  a  point  moving  with  the  ponderable 
matter.  If,  using  axes  of  coordinates  fixed  with  respect  to  the  ether, 
we  represent  the  disturbances  by  means  of  formulae  containing  an 
expression  of  the  form 

cosn{t-  £  +p),  (252) 


176  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

n  is  the  first  of  these  frequencies,  which  may  be  termed  the  true  or 
absolute  one.  We  can  pass  to  the  other,  the  relative  frequency,  by 
introducing  into  this  expression  the  coordinate  with  respect  to  an 
origin  moving  with  the  ponderable  matter.  If  this  coordinate  is 
denoted  by  x,  and  if  the  motion  of  the  matter  takes  place  in  the 
direction  of  OX  with  the  velocity  w,  we  have 

x  =  x  +  wt, 
so  that  (252)  becomes 

/  ,  10    ,          X  \ 

cos  n  it  --  1—  —  \-  n  }• 

\        u         u    '  •*  / 

The  coefficient  of  t  in  this  expression, 


'         it        w\ 
„=„(!_--) 


is  the  relative  frequency;  that  it  differs  from  n  agrees  with  Doppler's 
principle. 

Fresnel's  hypothesis  may  now  be  expressed  more  exactly  as 
follows.  If  we  want  to  know  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  light 
in  moving  ponderable  matter,  we  must  fix  our  attention  on  the 
relative  frequency  n  of  the  vibrations,  and  we  must  understand  by  v 
and  ft  in  the  expression  (251)  the  values  relating  to  light  travelling 
in  the  body  without  a  translation,  and  vibrating  with  a  frequency 
equal  to  n. 

152.  I  have  now  to  show  that  Fresnel's  theory  can  account 
for  the  phenomena  that  have  been  observed.  These  may  be  briefly 
summarized  as  follows.  First  there  is  the  aberration  of  light  of  which 
I  have  already  spoken.  Further  it  has  been  found  that  an  astro- 
nomer, after  having  determined  the  apparent  direction  of  a  star's  rays 
and  their  apparent  frequency,  can  predict  from  these,  by  the  ordinary 
laws  of  optics,  and  without  attending  any  more  to  the  motion  of  the 
earth,  the  result  of  all  experiments  on  reflexion,  refraction,  diffraction 
and  interference  that  can  be  made  with  these  rays.  Finally,  all 
optical  phenomena  which  are  produced  by  using  a  terrestrial  source 
of  light  are  absolutely  independent  of  the  earth's  motion.  If,  by  a 
common  rotation  of  the  apparatus,  the  source  of  light  included,  we 
alter  the  direction  of  the  rays  with  respect  to  that  of  the  earth's 
translation,  not  the  least  change  is  ever  observed. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  all  this  could  be  accounted  for  at  a 
stroke  and  without  any  mathematical  formula  by  Stokes's  theory, 
if  only  we  could  reconcile  with  each  other  its  two  fundamental 
assumptions.  In  applying  Fresnel's  views,  we  need  some  calculations, 
but  these  will  lead  us  to  a  very  satisfactory  explanation  of  all  that 
has  been  mentioned,  with  the  restriction  however  that  we  must 
confine  ourselves  to  the  effects  of  the  first  order. 


VELOCITY  OF  A  BAY  OP  LIGHT  IN  A  MOVING  MEDIUM.         177 

163.  We  shall  again  begin  by  considering  the  propagation  of 
the  wave-front,  this  time  in  the  interior  of  a  ponderable  transparent 
body,  whose  properties  may  change  from  point  to  point,  but  which 
we  shall  suppose  to  be  everywhere  isotropic.  For  a  given  frequency, 
the  velocity  of  light  in  the  body  while  it  is  at  rest  will  have  at 
every  point  a  definite  value  v,  connected  with  the  index  of  refrac- 
tion ji.  by  the  relation 


As  before,  we  shall  use  axes  of  coordinates  that  are  fixed  to  the 
earth;  if  we  represent  the  progress  of  the  waves  in  a  diagram,  this 
will  likewise  be  supposed  to  move  with  the  earth,  so  that  the  ether 
must  be  understood  to  flow  across  it,  with  a  velocity  which  will  again 
be  denoted  by  g,  but  which  now  has  the  same  direction  and  magni- 
tude at  all  points,  being  everywhere  equal  and  opposite  to  the  velocity 
of  the  earth. 

Let,  as  before,  0  be  the  position  of  a  wave-front  (see  Fig.  8,  p.  168) 
at  the  time  t,  0'  the  position  at  the  time  t  -+-  dt,  the  latter  surface 
being  the  envelop  of  all  the  elementary  waves  that  have  been  formed 
during  the  time  dt.  If  the  ether  were  at  rest  in  our  diagram,  each 
elementary  wave  would  be  a  sphere  having  a  radius  vdt,  and  whose 
geometric  centre  coincides  with  the  centre  of  vibration.  In  reality, 
according  to  what  has  been  said  about  Fresnel's  hypothesis,  the 
geometric  centre  of  the  sphere,  whose  radius  is  still  vdt,  is  dis- 
placed from  the  centre  of  vibration  over  a  certain  distance,  the  dis- 

placement being  given  by  the  vector  -  ^  y  dt. 

Let  us  consider  the  infinitely  small  triangle  having  its  angles  at 
the  point  P  of  the  wave-front  a,  which  is  the  centre  of  disturbance 
for  the  elementary  wave,  the  point  Q  which  is  its  geometric  centre, 
and  the  point  P'  where  it  is  touched  by  the  new  wave-front  &'  .  As 

has  just  been  said,  the  side  P  Q  as  a  vector  is  given  by     ,  ;j  dt.    The 

side  QP',  being  a  radius  of  the  sphere,  is  normal  to  6,  and,  in  the 
limit,  to  g.  Its  length  is  vdt.  As  to  the  side  PP',  this  is  an  ele- 

PP' 
meat  of  a  relative  ray.    According  to  general  usage,  we  shall  call     , 

the  velocity  of  the  ray,  so  that,  if  this  is  denoted  by  v,  we  have 

PP'  —  v'dt. 

It  appears  from  this  that,  if  the  angle  between  the  relative  ray  and 
the  velocity  y  is  represented  by  ft, 


Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons. 


178  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

from  which  one  finds,  omitting  quantities  of  the  third  order,  i.  e.  of 
the  order  --'-]-, 

v'-v  +  -1-8,'  cos »  -  -fl8  4  sin2 ».  (253) 

1     (Is  2t)(t4 

We  shall  have  especially  to  consider  the  inverse  of  this  quantity. 
To  the  same  degree  of  approximation,  it  is  given  by 

.1  =  .  *  1 1  _  JL.  C()s  0  +  -fl^  (1  +  cos2  d) }  •  (254) 

v          v   (  Vfi*  !Df|*4V 

There  is  further  a  simple  rule  by  means  of  which  we  can  pass  from 
the  direction  of  the  wave-normal  to  that  of  the  relative  ray  and  con- 
versely. The  vector  PP'  is  the  sum  of  the  vectors  PQ  and  QP'. 
Hence,  dividing  the  three  by  dt,  we  have  the  following  proposition: 
If  a  vector  having  the  direction  of  the  normal  to  the  wave  and  the 

magnitude  v,  is  compounded  with  a  vector     ,,  the  resultant  vector 

will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  relative  ray.  And,  conversely,  if  a 
vector  in  the  direction  of  the  ray  and  having  the  magnitude  v,  is 

compounded    with    a    vector   -       s,  we  shall  find  the  direction  of  the 

normal  to  the  wave. 

In  order  fully  to  understand  the  meaning  of  these  propositions, 
one  must  keep  in  mind  that,  at  every  point  of  the  medium,  the  re- 
lative ray  and  the  wave  can  have  all  possible  directions.  The  above 
results  apply  to  all  cases. 

154.  These  preliminaries  enable  us  to  prove  the  beautiful 
theorem  that,  if  quantities  of  the  second  order  are  neglected,  the 
course  of  the  relative  rays  is  not  affected  by  the  motion  of  the 
earth.  We  have  seen  in  what  manner  Huygens's  principle,  while 
determining  the  successive  positions  a,  o,  a",  ...  of  a  wave-front, 
also  gives  us  the  succeeding  elements  PP',  P'P",  P" P'",  ...  of  a 
relative  ray.  If  the  centre  of  vibration  of  an  elementary  wave  and 
the  point  where  it  is  touched  by  the  envelop  are  called  conjugate. 
points,  we  may  say  that  a  ray  passes  through  a  series  of  conjugate 
points  succeeding  each  other  at  infinitely  small  distances.  Now,  be- 
tween any  two  consecutive  positions  of  the  wave-front,  we  can  draw 
a  large  number  of  infinitely  small  straight  lines,  some  joining  con- 
jugate points  and  others  not,  and  for  each  of  these  lines  ds  we  can 
calculate  the  value  of 

t'»  (255) 

taking  for  v'  the  value  belonging  to  an  element  of  a  ray  having  the 
direction  of  (Js.  It  is  easily  seen  that  this  expression  (255)  has  one 


COURSE  0V  A  RELATIVE  RAY.  179 

and  the  same  value  for  all  lines  joining  conjugate  points,  and  a  greater 
value  for  all  other  lines.  Indeed,  by  the  definition  of  v,  the  value 
is  for  the  first  lines  equal  to  the  time  dt  in  which  the  light  advances 
from  the  first  position  of  the  wave-front  to  the  second.  As  to  a 
line  ds  which  is  drawn  between  a  point  P  of  the  first  wave-front 
and  a  point  Q  of  the  second,  not  conjugate  with  P,  its  end  Q  lies 
outside  the  elementary  wave  that  is  formed  around  P,  because  the  new 
wave-front  is  less  curved  than  the  elementary  wave  and  must  lie 
outside  it  with  the  exception  of  the  point  of  contact.  Therefore,  for 
the  line  PQ,  the  expression  (255)  must  exceed  the  value  it  would 
have  if  Q  lay  on  the  surface  of  the  elementary  wave. 

Now,  let  A  and  B  be  two  points  of  a  relative  ray  s,  at  a  finite 
distance  from  each  other,  and  let  s  be  any  other  line  joining  these 
points.  If  between  A  and  B  we  construct  a  series  of  wave-fronts  at 
infinitely  small  distances  from  each  other,  the  line  s  is  divided  into 
elements  each  of  which  joins  two  conjugate  points,  whereas  the  ele- 
ments of  s  cannot  be  all  of  this  krtid.  From  this  we  can  infer  that 
the  integral 


taken  for  s  will  have  a  smaller  value  than  the  corresponding  integral 
for  the  line  s'.  Thus,  the  course  of  the  relative  ray  between  two 
given  points  A  and  B  is  seen  to  be  determined  by  the  property  that 
the  integral  (256)  is  smaller  for  it  than  for  any  other  line  between 
the  same  points. 

Substituting    in    the    integral    the    value    (254)    we    find,    if   we 
neglect  terms  of  the  second  order, 


A  A 

Here,  since  (iv  =  c,  we  may  replace  the  last  term  by 

B 


if  we  understand  by  (AB)a  the  projection  of  the  path  AS  on  the 
direction  of  the  velocity  g,  a  projection  that  is  entirely  determined 
by  the  position  of  the  extreme  points  A  and  B.  The  last  term  in 
(257)  is  therefore  the  same  for  all  paths  leading  from  A  to  B,  and 
the  condition  for  the  minimum  simply  requires  that  the  first  term 


12* 


180  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

be  a  minimum.  This  term,  however,  contains  nothing  that  depends 
on  the  velocity  Q;  hence,  the  course  of  the  ray,  for  which  it  is  a 
minimum,  is  likewise  independent  of  that  velocity,  by  which  our 
proposition  is  proved. 

In  the  proof  we  have  made  no  assumption  concerning  the  way 
in  which  v  and  fi  change  from  point  to  point.  It  applies  to  any 
distribution  of  isotropic  transparent  matter,  and  even  to  limiting  cases 
in  which  there  is  a  sudden  change  of  properties  at  a  certain  surface. 
Consequently,  for  the  relative  rays,  the  law  of  refraction  remains  the 
same  as  it  would  be  if  the  bodies  were  at  rest  (in  which  case  the 
word  ,,relative"  might  as  well  be  dropped).  I  must  add  that  this 
proposition  can  easily  be  proved  by  itself,  by  directly  applying 
Huygens's  principle  to  the  refraction  at  a  surface,  and  that  the 
reflexion  of  rays  can  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  and  with  the 
same  result. 

155.  In  order  to  account  for  the  phenomenon  of  aberration, 
one  has  only  to  combine  the  above  results.  Let  P  be  a  distant  point, 
which  we  imagine  to  be  rigidly  connected  with  the  earth,  and  to  lie  just 
outside  the  atmosphere  in  the  free  ether.  At  this  point,  the  light 
coming  from  some  star  will  have  waves  whose  normal  has  a  definite 
direction  N,  opposite  to  the  direction  in  which  the  star  is  really 
situated.  It  has  also  a  definite  relative  frequency,  which  in  general 
differs  from  the  true  or  absolute  one  according  to  Doppler's  principle. 

At  the  point  P  we  have  v  =  c,  ft  =  1.  Hence,  if  we  want  to 
find  the  direction  of  the  relative  ray  s  at  this  place,  we  must  com- 
pound a  vector  c  in  the  direction  of  the  wave -normal  N  with  a 
vector  Q,  which  represents  the  velocity  of  the  ether  relative  to  the 
earth,  and  which  is  therefore  equal  and  opposite  to  the  velocity  of 
the  earth  itself.  This  construction  evidently  leads  to  a  direction  of 
the  relative  ray  identical  with  the  apparent  direction  of  the  rays  as 
determined  in  the  elementary  theory  of  aberration.  We  shall  there- 
fore have  explained  this  latter  phenomenon  if  we  can  show  that  the 
result  of  observations  made  at  the  surface  of  our  planet  is  such  that 
an  astronomer  (who  does  not  think  of  the  earth's  motion),  reckoning 
so  far  as  necessary  with  the  frequency  n  which  shows  itself  to 
him,  would  conclude  from  them  that  the  rays  reach  the  atmosphere 
in  the  direction  s.  This  is  really  so,  because,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
progress  of  the  relative  rays  from  P  onward  is  exactly  what  would 
be  the  progress  of  the  absolute  rays  if  the  earth  did  not  move  and 
the  true  frequency  were  equal  to  n. 

We  may  mention  in  particular  that,  if,  in  this  latter  case,  the 
path  of  a  ray  were  mapped  out  by  means  of  suitably  arranged  screens 
with  small  openings,  a  ray  can  still  pass  through  these  openings,  if 


EXPERIMENTS  WITH  TERRESTRIAL  SOURCES  OF  LIGHT.        181 

the  screens  move  with  the  earth.  Further  that  if,  on  the  immovable 
earth,  the  absolute  rays  were  brought  to  a  focus  in  a  telescope,  the 
relative  rays  will  likewise  converge  towards  this  point,  producing  in 
it  a  real  concentration  of  light.  The  truth  of  this  is  at  once  seen 
if,  by  means  of  the  theorem  of  §  153,  we  determine  the  shape  of 
the  wave-fronts  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  focus.  It  is  found  that 
the  convergence  of  the  relative  rays  towards  a  point  necessarily 
implies  a  contraction  of  the  waves  around  this  point.1) 

The  explanation  of  the  fact  that  all  optical  phenomena  which 
are  produced  by  means  of  terrestrial  sources  of  light  are  uninfluenced 
by  the  earth's  motion,  is  so  simple  that  few  words  are  needed  for  it. 
It  will  suffice  to  observe  that  in  experiments  on  interference  the 
differences  of  phase  remain  unaltered.  This  follows  at  once  from  our 
formula  (257)  for  the  time  in  which  a  relative  ray  travels  over  a 
certain  path.  If  two  relative  rays,  starting  from  a  point  A,  come 
together  at  a  point  B,  the  lengths  of  time  required  by  them  are 
given  by  the  expressions 


and 


where  the  integrals  relate  to   the  two  paths.     Since  the  last  terms 
are  identical,  we  find  for  the  difference  between  the  two  times 


a  a 

C  dst  _     Cds, 
J     v        J     v 


This  being  independent  of  the  motion  of  the  earth,  the  result  of  the 
interference  must  be  so  likewise,  a  conclusion  that  may  be  extended 
to  all  optical  phenomena,  because,  in  the  light  of  Huygens's  prin- 
ciple, we  may  regard  them  all  as  cases  of  interference. 

It  should  be  noticed,  however,  that  the  position  of  the  bright 
and  the  dark  interference  bands  is  determined  by  the  differences  of 
phase  expressed  in  times  of  vibration,  so  that  the  above  conclusions 
are  legitimate  only  if  the  motion  of  the  earth  does  not  affect  the 
periods  themselves  in  which  the  particles  in  the  source  of  light  are 
vibrating.  This  condition  will  be  fulfilled  if  neither  the  elastic  forces 
acting  on  them,  nor  their  masses  are  changed.  Then,  in  all  experi- 
ments performed  on  the  moving  earth,  the  relative  frequency  at  any 

1)  Note  68. 


182  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

point  of  our  apparatus  will  be  equal  to  the  frequency  that  would 
exist  if  we  could  experiment  in  the  same  manner  on  a  planet  having 
no  translation. 

156.  Fresnel's  coefficient  1  -    -  ,,  the  importance  of  which  we 

P 

have  now  learned  to  understand,  can  be  deduced  from  the  theory  that 
in  a  beam  of  light  in  a  ponderable  body  there  is  an  oscillatory 
motion  of  electric  charges.  Unfortunately,  if  these  latter  are  supposed 
to  be  concentrated  in  separate  electrons,  the  deduction  suffers  from 
the  difficulties  that  are  inherent  in  most  molecular  theories,  and  the 
true  cause  of  the  partial  convection  of  light-waves  by  matter  in 
motion  does  not  become  clearly  apparent.  For  this  reason  I  shall 
first  consider  an  ideal  case,  namely  that  of  a  body  in  which  the  charges 
are  continuously  distributed.  In  this  preliminary  treatment  I  shall 
make  light  of  the  difficulty  that  we  are  now  obliged  to  imagine  four 
different  things,  thoroughly  penetrating  each  other,  so  that  they  can 
exist  in  the  same  space,  viz.  1.  the  ether,  2.  the  positive  and  the 
negative  electricity  and  3.  the  ponderable  matter. 

For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  shall  suppose  that  only  one  of  the 
two  electricities  can  be  shifted  from  its  position  of  equilibrium  in 
the  ponderable  body,  the  other  being  rigidly  fixed  to  this  latter,  and 
having  no  other  motion  than  the  common  translation  of  the  entire 
system.  I  shall  denote  by  Q  the  volume-density  of  the  movable,  and 
by  Q'  that  of  the  fixed  charge.  The  body  as  a  whole  being  uncharged, 
we  shall  have  in  the  state  of  equilibrium 

9  +  9  =  0,  (258) 

and  this  will  remain  true  while  the  one  charge  is  vibrating,  unless 
it  be  condensed  or  rarefied  by  doing  so. 

The  question  as  to  whether  it  be  the  positive  or  the  negative 
electricity  that  can  be  displaced  in  the  body  may  be  left  open  in 
this  theory. 

157.  We  shall  suppose  the  movable  charge  to  have  a  certain 
mass,  and  to  be  driven  back  towards   its   position   of  equilibrium   by 
an  elastic  force  opposite  to  the  displacement  and  proportional  to  it-, 
let  q  be  the  displacement,   —  f(\   the  elastic  force,  and  m  the  mass, 
both  reckoned  per  unit  of  volume. 

The  equations  that  must  be  applied  to  the  problem  before  us 
were  already  mentioned  in  §  11.  Introducing  axes  of  coordinates  that 
have  a  fixed  position  in  the  ether,  we  have 

div  d  =  Q  -f  p',  (259) 

div  h  =  0,  (260) 


DEDUCTION  OF  PRESNEL'S  COEFFICIENT.  183 

rotd  =         *  h,  (261) 

roth  =  |(d  +  0v  +  pV),  (262) 

where  v  and  v'  are   the   velocities   of  the   two  electricities,   so   that 
pV  -f-  p'v'  represents  the  convection  current. 

To  these  formulae  we  must  add  the  equation  of  motion  of  the 
vibrating  electricity.  If  its  acceleration  is  denoted  by  j,  we  have 

m\=   -/-q  +  pd  +  l^v-h].  (263) 

158.  Let  us  first  briefly  examine  the  propagation  of  electric 
vibrations  in  the  body  when  kept  at  rest.  We  may  limit  ourselves 
to  the  case  that  there  is  a  displacement  <\y  of  the  movable  charge  in 
the  direction  of  0  Y,  combined  with  a  dielectric  displacement  dy  of 
the  same  direction  in  the  ether,  and  a  magnetic  force  hz  parallel  to 
OZ,  all  these  quantities  being  functions  of  x  and  t  only.  As  the 
relation  (258)  is  not  violated,  the  equations  (259)  and  (260)  are  ful- 
filled by  these  assumptions,  and  (261)  and  (262)  reduce  to 


Finally  the  equation  of  motion  becomes 

m^--/-q,  +  p<l,.  (266) 

A  solution  of  these  equations  is  obtained  by  putting 

dr  —  acos»(<—  •£•), 

from  which  we  find,  by  means  of  (264)  and  (266), 


Substituting  these  values  in  (265),  we  find  the  following  formula  for 
the  determination  of  the  velocity  of  propagation  v: 

4-7-^-i+l.  (268) 

*          —* 


159.  When  the  body  has  a  uniform  translation  with  the  velo- 
city w  in  the  direction  of  OX,  we  can  still  satisfy  the  equations  by 
suitable  values  oL  dy,  hz,  qy,  but  some  alterations  are  necessary.  The 
first  of  these  relates  to  the  convection  current.  Its  component  in 


184  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

the  direction  of  OX  remains  0,  since  both  the  positive  and  the 
negative  electricity  are  carried  along  with  the  translation  of  the  body, 
but,  if  we  continue  to  use  axes  of  coordinates  fixed  in  the  ether,  the 
convection  current  parallel  to  OY  can  no  longer  be  represented 

by  Q  Ay-     The  right  expression  for  it  is  found  as  follows.    If  a  de- 

c  t 

finite  point  of  the  vibrating  charge  has  the  coordinate  x  at  the  time  t, 
its  coordinate  at  the  instant  t  +  dt  will  be  x  -\-  wdt,  so  that  the  in- 
crement of  its  displacement  qy  is  given  by 


and  its  velocity  in  the  direction  of  0  Y  by 

df\y     .  S  <\y 

for  which  we  may  also  write 


if  we  use  the  brackets  for  indicating  the  differential  coefficient  for  a 
point  moving  with  the  body.  The  convection  current  may  therefore 
be  represented  by 


p\yt 

It  is  clear  that  the  acceleration  is 


and  that,  for  any  quantity  <p   which   depends  on  the  coordinates  and 

_O       . 

the  time,  we  may  distinguish  two  differential  coefficients  ?  and  (-J? ) , 

just  as  we  have  done  for  q  .  The  first  is  the  partial  derivative 
when  (f  is  considered  as  a  function  of  t  and  the  ,,absolute"  coordi- 
nates, i.  e.  the  coordinates  with  respect  to  axes  fixed  in  the  ether, 
and  we  have  to  use  the  second  symbol  when  the  time  and  the  ,,re- 
lative"  coordinates,  i.  e.  the  coordinates  with  respect  to  axes  moving 
with  the  body,  are  taken  as  independent  variables.  The  relation  be- 
tween the  two  quantities  is  always  expressed  by  the  formula 

£+"  %•  <269> 

As  to  the  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  x,  y,  2,  each  of 
these  has  the  same  value,  whether  we  understand  by  x,  y,  2  the  ab- 
solute or  the  relative  coordinates. 

The  second  alteration  which  we  have  to  make  is  due  to  the  last 


DEDUCTION  OF  FRESNEL'S  COEFFICIENT.  185 

term  in  (23).    On  account  of  its  velocity  iv  in  the  direction  of  OX, 
the  charge  Q  will  be  acted  on  by  a  force 


parallel  to  OY,  and  this  force  must  be  added  on  the  right-hand  side 
of  the  equation  of  motion. 

In  virtue  of  the  assumptions  now  made,  p  +  p'  again  remains  0 
during  the  vibrations,  and  (259)  and  (260)  are  satisfied.  The  equa- 
tion (264)  can  be  left  unchanged,  but  (265)  and  (266)  must  be  re- 
placed by 


dx        c  \  v\dt)    '    ot 
and 


The  three  formulae  are  somewhat  simplified  if  we  choose  as  in- 
dependent variables  the  time  and  the  relative  coordinates  and  if,  at 
the  same  time,  we  put 


Applying  the  relation  (269)  to  d    and  h^,  we  find 

ad/  _      i  /ah_,\ 

dx  ~         c  \8t}> 

8h*  _  1  I0(SV»\  4.  (°A'J\  _  wat*'  +  w 
~  Sx  ~  ~c  \*\3*)  +  (W)       *'te  +  T  \8t 


The   first   and   the   third   of  these   equations   have   the   same   form  as 
(264)  and  (266).     Hence,  if  we  put 


(270) 

understanding  by  x  the  relative  coordinate,  we  have,   corresponding 

to  (267), 

he  j  /  0         j  / 

.-7^1     *,-?=£&*,  > 

by  which  the  second  equation  becomes 


_    4.  1  4.  9  5  - 
-n'"1"  «' 

Comparing  this  with  (268)  we  see  that,  for   a  definite   value  of  the 
frequency  n,  we  may  write 


186  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

As  we  continually  neglect  quantities  of  the  second  order,  we  may, 
in  the  last  term,  replace  v    by  v.     By  this  we  get 


c         c        w 

V  V  C 


if  ft  is  the  index  of  refraction  for  the  stationary  body. 

It  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  in  (270)  x  means  the  relative 
coordinate.  Therefore,  n  is  the  relative  frequency,  and  v'  the  speed 
of  propagation  relative  to  the  ponderable  matter.  The  velocity  of 
light  with  respect  to  the  ether  is 

1/1          *  \ 
v  +  w  =  v  +  II ^l  w, 

in  accordance  with  Fresnel's  hypothesis. 

160.  I  have  now  to  show  you  in  what  manner  the  same  result 
may  be  derived  from  the  theory  of  electrons.  For  this  purpose  we 
might  repeat  for  a  moving  system  all  that  has  been  said  in  Chap.  IV 
about  the  propagation  of  light  in  a  system  of  molecules.  We  shall 
however  sooner  reach  our  aim  by  following  another  course,  consisting 
in  a  comparison  of  the  phenomena  in  a  moving  system  with  those 
that  can  occur  in  the  same  system  when  at  rest. 

In  this  comparison  we  shall  avail  ourselves  of  the  assumptions 
that  have  been  made  in  Chap.  IV. 

In  the  absence  of  the  translatory  motion,  the  problem  may  be 
stated  as  follows.  In  the  molecules  of  the  .body  there  are  electric 
moments  p  changing  from  one  molecule  to  the  next,  and  variable 
with  the  time.  On  account  of  its  moment,  each  molecule  is  surrounded 
by  an  electromagnetic  field,  which  is  determined  (§  42)  by  the 
potentials 

a,  =  -  —  {  A  ~kl  +  J-  [Py]  +  i-  [P*]  ), 
in  \  ex     r          cy     r      '    cz     r     >' 

a— 4UL, 

x,  y,  z  being  the  coordinates  of  the  point  considered,  r  its  distance 
from  the  molecule,  and  the  square  brackets  reminding  us  that  we 
have  to  do  with  retarded  potentials.  The  electric  force  d  and  the 
magnetic  force  h  are  given  by  the  following  formulae,  to  be  deduced 
from  (33)  and  (34), 

ri=          ~rp]  +  4* 


LOCAL  TIME.  187 

After  having  compounded  with  each  other  the  fields  produced  by  all 
the  molecules  of  the  body,  we  must  add  one  field  more,  namely  that 
which  is  due  to  external  causes,  and  which  I  shall  represent  by  d0,  It0. 
It  satisfies  the  equations 


div  da  =  0, 

div  h0  »  0, 

rot  ho  =  7  <•<» 
rotd0  =  -    -be. 


(273) 


Lastly,  we  have  to  consider  the  equations  of  motion  of  the  electrons 
which,  by  their  displacement,  bring  about  the  electric  moments  p. 
Let  each  molecule  contain  a  single  movable  electron  e,  whose  dis- 
placement q  gives  rise  to  an  electric  moment 

p  =  eq.  (274) 

If  the  symbol  £  relates  to  the  superposition  of  the  fields  of  all  the 
surrounding  particles,  and  if  —  fq  is  the  elastic  force,  —  </q  a  re- 
sistance to  the  motion,  the  equation  of  motion  is 

mq  =e£d  +  ed0  —  /"q  —  g'i\.  (275) 


161.  In  the  theory  of  the  system  moving  with  a  velocity  W  we 
may  avail  ourselves  with  great  advantage  of  the  transformation  that 
has  already  been  used  ,in  §  44. 

Taking  as  independent  variables  the  coordinates  x',  y,  g  with 
respect  to  axes  moving  with  the  system,  and  the  ,,local"  time 

t'=t-  c\  (w,*'  +  wry'  +  w/),  (276) 

we  find  the  equations  (104)  —  (107)  for  the  vectors  d'  and  h',  which 
now  take  the  place  of  d  and  h.  It  is  true  that  the  new  formulae 
have  not  quite  the  same  form  as  (33)  —  (36),  and  that  the  term 

—  grad  (W  •  a'),    which    makes   the  difference,    must    not  be    omitted, 
c 

\  w  i 
being   of  the   first   order   of  magnitude  with  respect  to  -     .  but  not- 

withstanding this  it  is  found  that  the  field  caused  by  an  electric 
moment  is  determined  by  the  formulae1) 


1)  See  Note  26. 


]88  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 


exactly  corresponding  to  (271)  and  (272). 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  repeat  that  the  symbols  grad  and  rot 
have  the  meaning  that  has  been  specified  in  §  44,  and  that,  if  we 
want  to  calculate  d'  and  h'  for  a  point  (x,  y,  z'}  at  a  distance  r 
from  the  polarized  particle,  and  for  the  instant  at  which  the  local 
time  of  this  point  has  a  definite  value  t',  we  must  take  for  p,  |i,  jj 
the  values  existing  at  the  moment  when  the  local  time  of  the  particle 


The  field  produced  by  causes  outside  the  body  is  again  subjected 
to  the  fundamental  equations  for  the  free  ether.  Expressed  in  terms 
of  our  new  variables,  these  are 

div  d0'  =  0, 
div  H0'  =  0, 

rot  hft'  =  --  dn' 


» > 


rotd0'=    -  c  h0', 

as  is  found  by  making  p  =  0  in   (100)  —  (103).     The  form   of  these 
equations  is  identical  with  that  of  (273). 

The   equation  of  motion   of  an   electron  must  now  contain   the 

electromagnetic  force       [w-h],  which  is  due  to  the  translation  W,  so 
that  we  must  write  for  the  total  force  acting  on  unit  charge 


This,  however,  is  precisely  the  vector  which  we  have  called  d'. 
Consequently,  if  we  suppose  that  the  elastic  force  determined  by  the 
coefficient  f,  and  the  resistance  measured  by  y,  are  not  modified  by 
the  translation,  we  may  write  for  the  equation  of  motion 


where  the  sign  2  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  (275). 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  relation  (274)  remains  true,  and 
that  at  a  definite  point  of  the  moving  system,  the  differential  coeffi- 
cients with  respect  to  t  are  equal  to  those  with  respect  to  t'.  On 
account  of  this  we  may  attach  to  the  dots  in  the  above  equation  the 
meaning  of  partial  differentiations  with  respect  to  t'.  They  must  be 
understood  in  the  same  sense  in  the  preceding  formulae. 


THEOREM  OF  CORRESPONDING  STATES.  189 

162.  It   appears   from   what  has  been  said  that,   by  the   intro- 
duction of  the  new  variables,  all   the  equations  of  the  problem  have 
again  taken  the  form   which  they  have  when  there  is  no  translation. 
This  at  once  leads  to  the  following  conclusion: 

If,  in  the  system  at  rest,  there  can  exist  a  state  of  things  in 
which  d,  h  and  p  are  certain  functions  of  x,  y,  z  and  t,  the  moving 
system  can  be  the  seat  of  phenomena  in  which  the  vectors  d',  h',  p 
are  the  same  functions  of  the  relative  coordinates  x',  y,  z'  and  the 
local  time  t'. 

The  theorem  may  be  extended  to  the  mean  values  of  d,  h  or 
d',  h',  the  electric  moment  P  per  unit  of  volume,  and  also  to  the 
vector  D  which  we  have  introduced  in  §  114,  compared  with  a  similar 
one  that  may  be  defined  for  the  moving  system.  If,  for  the  one 
system,  we  put 

d  =  E,     h  =  H,     D  =  E  +  P, 
and  for  the  other 

d^E',    I?  =  H',     D'=E'+P, 

the  result  is,  that  for  each  state  in  which  E,  H,  D  are  certain  func- 
tions of  x,  y,  z,  t,  there  is  a  corresponding  state  in  the  moving  system, 
characterized  by  values  of  E',  H',  D'  which  depend  in  the  same  way 
on  x,  y',  z',  t'. 

163.  The  value  of  Fresnel's  coefficient  follows  as  an  immediate 
consequence   from   this  general   theorem.     Let   us   suppose   that    in  a 
transparent  ponderable  body  without  translation,  there  is  a  propagation 
of  light  waves,  in  which  the  components  of  E  and  H  are  represented 
by  expressions  of  the  form 

acosn 


/,        ax-\-Sy-\-  yz  \ 

lt-  +  P), 


where  «,  ft,  y  are  the  direction  cosines  of  the  normal  to  the  wave, 
and  v  the  velocity  of  propagation.  Then,  corresponding  to  this,  we 
may  have  in  the  same  body  while  in  motion  phenomena  that  may 
likewise  be  described  as  a  propagation  of  light  waves,  and  which 
are  represented  by  expressions  of  the  form 

/.,        KX  -4-  By  -f-  yz  \ 

acosnit-  ••'         -+P), 

i.  e.,  on  account  of  (276), 

a  cosn(t  _  "*A  ±^1+JM'  _  2*±f£+r<.  + 

If  we  put  here 

a  j    w*  _  a'        P       ^s.  —  $L       V_   ,    **    _ 
IT  "    C'   ==  vr>      v  "   c'   "  v   >      v   "   <f        » 


190  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

with  the  condition 

K'i+ pi +  y'i==l}  (278) 

the  formula  becomes 

/,      K  x' +  B'y  4-y'z    .     \ 
a  cos  n  ( t  -  --.  -  +  P), 

showing  in  the  first  place  that  v'  is  the  velocity  of  propagation  re- 
lative to  the  moving  body,  and  in  the  second  place  that  n  is  the 
frequency  at  a  point  moving  with  it.  Hence,  if  we  take  v  and  v  for 
the  same  value  of  n,  we  are  sure  to  compare  the  speed  of  propa- 
gation in  the  two  cases  for  equal  relative  frequencies. 

Neglecting  the  square  of  w,  we  easily  find  from  (277)  and  (278) 

1  1  nrw    4- flw,, -I- vw  1  w 

A      _L  O  **     %    *    "      J    '     '      2  I     9       " 

T*~    V*    +  C-V  -    t)s    T   ^^' 

where  Wn  is  the  component  of  the  velocity  of  translation  along  the 
wave-normal.  It  may  be  observed  that,  since  «',  /3',  y'  differ  from  a, 

/3,  y  only  by  quantities  of  the  order       ,    we    may   take    the    normal 

such  as  it  is  in  the  moving  system. 
Further: 

i         i    ,    WD 


_  , 

c       "  n 

so  that  we  have  been  led  back  to  our  former  result. 

164.  The  hypothesis  advanced  by  Fresnel  has  been  confirmed 
by  Fizeau's  observations  on  the  ^propagation  of  light  in  flowing 
water'),  and,  still  more  conclusively,  by  the  elaborate  researches  of 
Michelson  and  Morley  on  the  same  subject.2)  In  these  experiments 
the  water  was  made  to  flow  in  opposite  directions  through  two 
parallel  tubes  placed  side  by  side  and  closed  at  both  ends  by  glass 
plates;  the  two  interfering  beams  of  light  were  passed  through  these 
tubes  in  such  a  manner  that,  throughout  their  course,  one  went 
with  the  water,  and  the  other  against  it. 

In  order  to  calculate  the  change  in  the  differences  of  phase  caused 
by  the  motion  of  the  fluid,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  velocity 
of  propagation  of  the  light  relative  to  the  fixed  parts  of  the  appa- 

1)  H.  Fizeau,  Sur  les  hypotheses  relatives  a  Tether  lumineux,  et  sur  une 
experience  qui  parait  demontrer  que  le  mouvement   des  corps  change  la  vitesse 
avec   laquelle   la   lumiere   se   propage   dans   leur   interieur,   Comptes  rendus  S3 
(1851),  p.  349;    Ann.  d.  Phys.  u.  Chem.,  Erg.  3  (1853),  p.  457. 

2)  A.  A.  Michelson  and  E.  W.  Morley,  Influence  of  motion  of  the  me- 
dium on  the  velocity  of  light,  Amer.  Journ.  of  Science  (3)  31  (1886),  p.  377. 


APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  THEOREM  OF  CORRESPONDING  STATES.     191 

ratus.1)  If  T  is  the  period  of  vibration  of  the  source  of  light,  the 
preceding  theory  gives  the  following  expression  for  the  velocity  in 
question 


Here  the  velocity  of  the  flow  of  water  is  represented  by  w,  and  we 
must  take  the  upper  or  the  under  signs,  according  as  the  light  goes 
with  or  against  the  stream.  I  must  add  that  the  last  term,  which 
depends  on  the  dispersive  power  of  the  fluid,  has  been  omitted  by 
Michelson  and  Morley  in  the  comparison  of  their  experiments  with 
the  theory.  If  it  is  taken  into  account,  the  agreement  becomes  some- 
what worse;  it  remains  however  fairly  satisfactory,  since  the  influence 
of  the  term  is  but  small. 

165.  After  having  found   Fresnel's   coefficient,   we   may  apply 
it  to  various  phenomena,  as  has  already  been  shown  in  §§  152  —  155. 
The    discussion    of  many    a    question   may,    however,    also    be    based 
directly    on  the    theorem   of  corresponding  states   without  the   inter- 
vention of  the  coefficient. 

If,  for  instance,  the  state  of  things  in  the  system  that  is  kept 
at  rest,  is  such  that  in  some  parts  of  space  both  the  electric  and  the 
magnetic  force  are  continually  zero,  the  corresponding  state  in  the 
moving  system  will  be  characterized  by  the  absence,  in  the  same 
regions,  of  d'  and  h',  and  this  involves  the  absence  of  d  and  h.  There- 
fore, the  geometrical  distribution  of  light  and  darkness  must  be  the 
same  in  the  two  systems,  always  provided  that  the  comparison  be 
made  for  equal  relative  frequencies. 

An  interesting  example  is  afforded  by  a  cylindrical  beam  of 
light.  The  generating  lines  of  its  bounding  surface,  i.  e.  the  relative' 
rays,  may  have  the  same  course  in  the  two  systems,  even  when  the 
beams  are  reflected  or  refracted,  so  that  the  translation  has  no  in- 
fluence on  the  laws  of  reflexion  and  refraction  for  the  relative  rays. 
Nor  can  it  change  the  position  of  the  point  where  the  rays  are 
brought  to  a  focus  by  a  mirror2)  or  a  lens,  and  the  principle  also 
shows  that  the  place  of  the  dark  fringes  in  experiments  on  interference 
must  remain  unaltered. 

The  condition  that  is  necessary  for  these  conclusions,  namely  that 
the  relative  frequencies  be  equal  in  the  two  cases,  will  always  be 
fulfilled  if  the  source  of  light  has  a  fixed  position  with  respect  to 
the  rest  of  the  apparatus,  sharing  its  translation  or  its  immobility. 

166.  It   is   important   to   notice   that  the   foregoing  results   are 
by  no  means  limited  to  isotropic  bodies.     The  case  of  crystals  may 

1)  Note  69.         2)  Note  70. 


192  .V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

easily  be  included  by  conceiving  either  some  appropriate  regular 
arrangement  of  the  particles,  or  a  want  of  isotropy  in  the  structure 
of  the  individual  molecules,  revealing  itself  in  the  elastic  forces  being 
unequal  for  different  directions  of  the  displacement  of  an  electron. 
The  latter  assumption  would  require  us  to  represent  the  components 
of  the  elastic  force  by  expressions  of  the  form 


with  /2!  =  /i2,  /32  =  f23»  /ij  •=  fai,  and  for  the  proof  of  the  theorem  of 
corresponding  states  it  would  be  necessary  to  consider  the  coeffi- 
cients f  as  unaffected  by  a  translation  of  the  system. 

After  having  shown  that,  in  the  phenomena  of  double  refraction, 
the  course  of  the  relative  rays  is  not  altered  by  the  motion  of  the 
earth,  one  can  also  examine  what  becomes  of  Fresnel's  coefficient 
in  the  case  of  crystalline  bodies.  The  result  may  be  expressed  as 
follows: 

If,  foi  a  definite  direction  s  of  the  relative  ray,  u  and  u  are  the 
velocities  of  this  ray  in  a  crystal  that  is  kept  at  rest  and  in  the 
same  body  when  moving,  then 

u  —  u  —  -  ;•  W,, 

( 

where  W5  is  the  component  of  the  velocity  of  translation  in  the 
direction  of  the  ray.1) 

167.    Thus  far  we  have  constantly  neglected  terms  of  the  second 

w  I 
order  with  respect  to  -—f  and  in  fact  in  nearly  all  the  experiments  that 

have  been  made  in  the  hope  of  discovering  an  influence  of  the  earth's 
motion  on  optical  phenomena,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to 

w* 

detect  effects  proportional  to  -  ,  •   There  are,  however,  some  exceptions, 

C 

and  these  are  of  great  importance,  because  they  give  rise  to  difficult 
and  delicate  problems,  of  which  one  has  not,  as  yet,  been  able  to 
give  an  entirely  satisfactory  solution. 

We  have  in  the  first  place  to  speak  of  a  celebrated  experiment 
made  by,  Michelson2)  in  1881,  and  repeated  by  him  on  a  larger  scale 
with  the  cooperation  of  Morley3)  in  1887.  It  was  a  very  bold  one, 

1)  Note  71. 

2)  A.  A.  Michelson,   The   relative  motion  of  the  earth    and  the  lumini- 
ferous  ether,  Amer.  Journ.  of  Science  (3)  22  (1881),  p.  20. 

3)  A.  A.  Michelson  and  E.  W.  Morley,  Amer.  Journ.  of  Science  (3)  34 
(1887),  p.  333. 


MICHELSON'S  EXPERIMENT.  193 

two  rays  of  light  having  been  made  to  interfere  after  having  travelled 
over  paths  of  considerable  length  in  directions  at  right  angles  to 
each  other.  Fig.  9  shows  the  general  arrangement  of  the  apparatus. 
The  rays  of  light  coming  from  the  R 

source  L  are  divided  by   the  glass  - 

plate  P,  which  is  placed  at  an  angle 
of  45°,  into  a  transmitted  part  PA 
and  a  reflected  one  PB.  After  ha- 
ving been  reflected  by  the  mirrors 
A  and  B,  these  beams  return  to 
the  plate  P,  and  now  the  part  of 

the   first   that  is  reflected   and   the     j^ ± 

transmitted  part  of  the  second  pro-  • 

duce  by  their  interference  a  system  " 

of  bright   and    dark   fringes   that  is  _ 

observed    in    a   telescope   placed   on  Vig  9 

the  line  PC. 

The  fundamental  idea  of  the  experiment  is,  that,  if  the  ether 
remains  at  rest,  a  translation  given  to  the  apparatus  must  of  ne- 
cessity produce  a  change  in  the  differences  of  phase,  though  one 
of  the  second  order.  Thus,  if  the  translation  takes  place  in  the 
direction  of  PA  or  AP,  and  if  the  length  of  PA  is  denoted  by  L, 

a  ray  of  light  will  take  a  time  -.  for  travelling  along  this  path 

c  -f-  | w 

in  one  direction,  and  a  time  -       — -.  for  going  in  the  inverse  direction. 

c      |  w| 

The  total  time  is 


cz  —  wz' 
or,  up  to  quantities  of  the  second  order, 

(279) 


•('+35. 


so   that  for   the   rays   that   have   gone  forward  and  back  along  PA 
there  will  be  a  retardation  of  phase  measured  by 


There  is  a  similar  retardation,  though  of  smaller  amount,  for  the  other 
beam.  In  order  to  see  this  by  an  elementary  reasoning,  one  has 
only  to  consider  that  a  ray  of  this  beam,  even  if  it  returns,  as  I  shall 
suppose  it  to  do,  to  exactly  the  same  point  of  the  plate  P,  does  not 
come  back  to  the  same  point  of  the  ether,  the  point  of  the  glass 
having  moved,  with  the  velocity  W  of  the  earth's  translation,  over  a 
certain  distance,  say  from  P  to  P',  while  the  light  went  from  P 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  13 


194  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

to  S  and  back.  If  Q  is  the  point  in  the  ether  where  the  ray  reaches 
the  mirror  7?,  we  may  say  with  sufficient  approximation  that  the 
points  P,  Q,  P'  are  the  angles  of  an  isoscele  triangle,  whose  height 
is  L  (since  the  distances  PA  and  Pli  in  the  apparatus  were  equal) 

and  whose  base  is          "--' •     The  sum  of  the  sides  PQ  and  QP'  is 


so  that  we  may  write 

(280) 


for  the  time  required  by  the  second  beam. 

It  appears  from  this  that  the  motion  produces  a  difference  of 
phase  between  the  two  beams  to  the  extent  of 

iw1 

"c8    ' 

and  this  may  be  a  sensible  fraction  of  the  period  of  vibration,  if  L 
has  the  length  of  some  metres. 

The  same  conclusion  may  be  drawn  somewhat  more  rigorously 
from  the  general  formula  (254).  The  time  during  which  a  relative 
ray  travels  along  a  certain  path  s  is  found  to  be 


/ds 
{- 


14-  cos2  9- 


Here  the  first  term  represents  the  time  that  would  be  required  if 
there  were  no  translation,  and  in  the  problem  now  before  us  the 
second  has  equal  values  for  two  paths  beginning  and  ending  at  the 
same  points,  so  that  we  have  only  to  consider  the  last  term,  for 
which,  using  our  present  notation  and  putting  ,u  =  1,  we  shall  write 

s.  (281) 

The  paths  for  which  this  integral  must  be  calculated  may  be  taken 
to  be  the  straight  lines  indicated  in  Fig.  9.1)  According  to  what  has 
been  said,  cos2^  has  the  value  1  all  along  PAP,  and  the  value  0  at 
every  point  of  PSP.  Therefore  our  last  expression  really  takes  the 
two  values  given  by  (279)  and  (280). 

Now  the  difference  of  phase  that  is  due  to  the  motion  of  the 
earth  must  be  reversed  if,  by  a  rotation  of  the  apparatus,  the  path 
of  the  first  ray  is  made  to  become  perpendicular  to  the  translation, 
and  that  of  the  second  to  be  parallel  to  it.  Hence,  if  the  phenomena 

1)  Note  72. 


DIMENSIONS  OP  A  BODY  CHANGED  BY  A  TRANSLATION.        195 

follow  the  above  theory,  such  a  rotation  must  produce  a  change 
determined  by 

9  T  ui* 

*%L  (282) 

in  the  differences  of  phase,  and  a  corresponding  shifting  of  the 
interference  bands. 

In  the  original  .apparatus  of  Michelson  the  length  L  was  rather 
too  small  to  bring  out  the  effect  that  was  sought  for,  but  in  the 
later  experiments  made  with  Morley  the  course  of  the  rays  was 
lengthened  considerably.  They  were  repeatedly  thrown  forwards  and 
back  by  mirrors  having  suitable  positions  on  different  sides  of  the 
plate  P,  and  which,  together  with  the  other  parts  of  the  apparatus, 
the  source  of  light  and  the  telescope  included,  were  mounted  on  a 
slab  of  stone  floating  on  mercury.  For  each  of  the  rays  the  lines 
along  which  it  had  to  travel  successively  nearly  coincided,  so  that 
cos2^  may  be  regarded  as  constant  for  the  entire  course  of  a  ray. 
If  the  values  of  this  constant  for  the  two  beams  are  first  1  and  0, 
and  afterwards,  after  a  rotation  of  90°,  0  and  1,  the  change  under- 
gone by  the  differences  of  phase  can  be  found  from  (281);  it  may 
still  be  represented  by  (282),  if  we  understand  by  2L  the  whole 
length  of  one  of  the  rays.  As  this  length  amounted  to  about 
22  metres,  the  value  of  (282)  is  equal  to  0,4  times  the  time  of 
vibration  of  yellow  light,  and  a  sensible  shift  of  the  bands  could 
therefore  be  looked  for.  In  no  case,  however,  the  least  displacement 
of  such  a  kind  that  it  could  be  attributed  to  the  cause  above  explain- 
ed was  observed.  _.  A  similar  result  was  subsequently  obtained  by 
Morley  and  Miller1),  who  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  if  there  is 
any  effect  of  the  nature  expected,  it  is  less  than  one  hundredth  part 
of  the  computed  value. 

168.  In  order  to  explain  this  absence  of  any  effect  of  the  earth's 
translation,  I  have  ventured  the  hypothesis,  which  has  also  been  pro- 
posed by  Fitz  Gerald,  that  the  dimensions  of  a  solid  body  undergo 

w2 
slight  changes,    of  the  order  - -,-,  when  it  moves  through  the  ether. 

0 

If  we  assume  that  the  lengths  of  two  lines  Lt  and  L%  in  a  ponderable 
body,  the  one  parallel  and  the  other  perpendicular  to  the  translation, 
which  would  be  equal  to  each  other  if  the  body  were  at  rest,  are 
to  each  other  in  the  ratio 

£  =  l+i  (283) 

during  the  motion,  the  negative  result  of  the  experiments  is  easily 
accounted  for.  Indeed,  these  changes  in  length  will  produce  an 

1)  E.  W.  Morley  and  D.  0.  Miller,  Report  of  an  experiment  to  detect 
the  Fitz  Gerald-Lorentz  effect,  Phil.  Mag.  (6)  8  (1905),  p.  680. 

13* 


196  V.   OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

alteration  in  the  phases  of  the  interfering  rays,  amounting  to  a  rela- 
tive acceleration 

iws 
t* 

for  the  ray  that  is  passed  along  the  line  having  the  direction  of  the 
earth's  motion,  and  this  acceleration  will  exactly  counterbalance  the 
changes  in  phase  which  we  have  considered  in  the  preceding  para- 
graph. 

The  hypothesis  certainly  looks  rather  startling  at  first  sight,  but 
we  can  scarcely  escape  from  it,  so  long  as  we  persist  in  regarding 
the  ether  as  immovable.  We  may,  I  think,  even  go  so  far  as  to  say 
that,  on  this  assumption,  Michelson's  experiment  proves  the  changes 
of  dimensions  in  question,  and  that  the  conclusion  is  no  less  legiti- 
mate than  the  inferences  concerning  the  dilatation  by  heat  or  the 
changes  of  the  refractive  index  that  have  been  drawn  in  many  other 
cases  from  the  observed  positions  of  interference  bands. 

169.  The  idea  has  occurred  to  some  physicists  that,  like  an 
ordinary  mechanical  strain,  the  contractions  or  dilatations  of  which 
we  are  now  speaking,  might  make  a  body  doubly  refracting,  and 
Rayleigh  and  Brace  have  therefore  attempted  to  detect  a  double 
refraction  produced  by  the  motion  of  the  earth.  Here  again  the 
search  has  been  in  vain;  no  trace  of  an  effect  of  the  kind  has 
been  found. 

With  a  view  to  this  question  of  a  double  refraction,  and  for 
other  reasons,  it  seems  proper  to  enter  upon  a  discussion  of  the  electro- 
magnetic phenomena  in  a  moving  system,  not  only,  as  we  did  at 
first,  for  velocities  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  speed  of  light 
c,  but  for  any  velocity  of  translation  smaller  than  c.  Though  the 
formulae  become  somewhat  more  complicated,  we  can  treat  this  pro- 
blem by  much  the  same  methods  which  we  used  before. 

Our  aim  must  again  be  to  reduce,  at  least  as  far  as  possible, 
the  equations  for  a  moving  system  to  the  form  of  the  ordinary  for- 
mulae that  hold  for  a  system  at  rest.  It  is  found  that  the  trans- 
formations needed  for  this  purpose  may  be  left  indeterminate  to  a 
certain  extent;  our  formulae  will  contain  a  numerical  coefficient  7, 
of  which  we  shall  provisionally  assume  only  that  it  is  a  function 
of  the  velocity  of  translation  w,  whose  value  is  equal  to  unity 
for  w  =  0,  and  differs  from  1  by  an  amount  of  the  order  of  magnitude 

for  small  values  of  the  ratio  — 
c*  c 

If  x,  y,  z  are  the  coordinates  of  a  point  with  respect  to  axes 
fixed  in  the  ether,  or,  as  we  shall  say,  the  ,,absolute"  coordinates,  and 
if  the  translation  takes  place  in  the  direction  of  OX,  the  coordinates 


NEW  VARIABLES. 


197 


with  respect  to  axes  moving  with  the  system,  and  coinciding  with 
the  fixed  axes  at  the  instant  t  =  0,  will  be 

xr  =  x  —  wt,    yr  =  y,    zr  =  s.  (284) 

Now,  instead  of  x,  y,  z,  we  shall  introduce  new  independent  variables 
differing  from  these  ,,relative"  coordinates  by  certain  factors  that  are 
constant  throughout  the  system.  Putting 

c1 


I  define  the  new  variables  by  the  equations 

x  =  klxr,    y  =  lyr,    z  =  lar 


or 


(285) 

(286) 
(287) 


x'=kl(x  —  wf),    y'=ly,    z'=lz, 
and  to  these  I  add  as  our  fourth  independent  variable 

t'=~t~Uwt  (x-wf)  =  kl(t-  ~x]-  (288) 

£  c-  ^  \        c*    / 

We  shall  again  understand  by  u  the  velocity  relative  to  the  moving 
axes,  so  that  the  components  of  the  absolute  velocity  are 

ux  +  w,    uy,    u,, 
and  we  shall  introduce  a  new  vector  u'  whose  components  are 

x  xl          y  ' '     y '  ?          3  3  *  V          / 

Let  us  put,  similarly, 


and  let  us  define  two  new  vectors  d'  and  h'  by  the  equations 


(291) 


Then  the  fundamental  equations  take  the  form1) 

J-    'A'          d  WUx\      i          \ 

div  d  =  1 1  —  -   sl{), 
div'  h'  =  0, 


The  meaning  of  the  symbols  div',  rot'  and  grad',  the  last  of 
which  we  shall  have  to  use  further  on,  is  similar  to  that  which  we 
formerly  gave  to  div,  rot  and  grad,  the  only  difference  being  that 

1)  Note  73. 


198  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

the  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  x,  y,  z  (taken  for  a  con- 
stant f)  are  replaced  by  those  with  respect  to  x',  y',  z  (taken  for  a 
constant  value  of  f). *) 

As  to  the  force  f  with  which  the  ether  acts  on  unit  of  electric 
charge,  its  components  are  found  to  be 


f  =  T*A'  +  V  •  - 
x  c 

f  ==  z>  d  '  +  ''    — 


(293) 


Z*  Z8      1 

2  ""*•"•"  A;   '  ~e 

The  determination  of  the  field  belonging  to  a  system  of  electrons 
may  again  be  made  to  depend  on  a  scalar  potential  y>'  and  a  vector 
potential  a'.  If  these  are  defined  by  the  equations 

i'  av  (294) 

in  which  the  symbol  A'  stands  for 
we  shall  have8) 


8y'~  T 


d'  ~    -  ~c  W  - 

h'  =  rot'  a'.  (296) 

The  analogy  between  these  transformations  and  those  which  we  for- 
merly used,  is  seen  at  a  glance.  The  above  formulae  are  changed  into 
those  of  §§  44  and  45  by  neglecting  all  terms  which  are  of  an  order 


higher  than  the  first  with  respect  to  —  ,  by  which  k  and  I  both  take 


c 


the  value  1.    In  the  present  more  general  theory,  it  is  the  variable  t' 
defined  by  (288)  that  may  be  termed  the  local  time. 

It  is  especially  interesting  that  the  final  formulae  (292)  and 
(294)  —  (296)  have  exactly  the  same  form  as  those  which  we  deduced 
for  small  values  of  w.  They  differ  from  the  equations  for  a  system 
without  translation  in  the  manner  pointed  out  in  §§  44  and  45,  but,  as 

1)  In  a  paper  ,,Uber  das  Doppler'sche  Princip",  published  in  1887  (Gott. 
Nachrichten,  p.  41)   and   which  to   my  regret  has   escaped   my   notice   all  these 
years,  Voigt  has  applied  to  equations  of  the  form  (6)  (§  3  of  this  book)  a  trans- 
formation  equivalent  to   the   formulae  (287)  and  (28s).     The  idea  of  the  trans- 
formations used  above   (and  in  §  44)  might  therefore  have   been  borrowed   from 
Voigt  and  the  proof  that  it  does  not  alter  the  form   of  the  equations  for  the 
free  ether  is  contained  in  his  paper. 

2)  Note  74. 


MOVING  ELECTKOSTATIC  SYSTEM.  199 

regards  the  form  of  the  equations,  the  consideration  of  greater  velocities 
of  translation  has  not  been  attended  by  any  new  complications. 

170.  The  problem  is  greatly  simplified  when  we  consider  an  electro- 
static system,  i.  e.  a  system  of  electrons  having  no  other  motion 
than  the  common  translation  w.  In  this  case  a'  =  0,  and  consequently 
h'  =  0.  The  scalar  potential  <p',  the  vector  d',  and  the  electric  force 
f  are  determined  by 

AV--p',  (297) 

d'  =    -  grad>',  (298) 


These  equations  admit  of  a  simple  interpretation.  Let  us  compare 
the  moving  system  g,  the  position  of  whose  points  is  determined  by 
the  relative  coordinates  xr,  yr,  er,  with  a  system  g0  that  has  no 
translation,  and  in  which  a  point  with  the  coordinates  x,  y',  s  cor- 
responds to  the  point  (xr,  yr,  zr~)  in  g,  so  that,  as  is  shown  by  (286), 
S  is  changed  into  $0  if  the  dimensions  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x  are 
multiplied  by  kl,  and  the  dimensions  which  have  the  direction  of  y 
or  that  of  a,  by  1.  Then,  if  <IS  and  dS'  are  corresponding  elements 
of  volume,  we  shall  have 

dS'  =  kPdS,  (299) 

so  that,  if  we  suppose  corresponding  elements  of  volume  to  have 
equal  charges,  the  density  at  a  point  of  g0  will  be  given  by  the 
quantity  p'  that  has  been  defined  by  (290). 

It  follows  that  the  equation  which  determines  the  scalar  potential 
in  $0  has  the  same  form  as  the  equation  (297)  which  we  have  found 
for  qp',  and  that,  therefore,  this  latter  quantity  has,  at  a  point  P  of 
$,  the  same  value  as  the  ordinary  scalar  potential  at  the  correspond- 
ing point  P0  of  g0.  The  equation  (298)  further  tells  us  that  the 
same  is  true  of  the  vector  d'  at  the  point  P  and  the  dielectric  dis- 
placement at  the  point  P0.  But,  in  order  to  find  the  components 

I- 
of  the  electric  force  in  jjj,    we  must  multiply  those   of  d'   by   V,   -p  , 

-r-  ,  whereas,  in  the  system  j^0,  the  components  of  the  electric  force 

K 

are  immediately  given  by  those  of  the  dielectric  displacement.  Hence, 
there  is  between  these  electric  forces  a  relation  that  is  conveniently 
expressed  by  the  formula 

(30°) 


the  coefficients  between  the  brackets  being  those  by  which  we 
must  multiply  the  components  of  the  force  in  g0  in  order  to  get 
those  of  the  force  in  g.  Since  corresponding  elements  have  equal 


200  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

charges,  the  same  relation  exists  between  the  forces  acting  on  cor- 
responding electrons. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  corresponding  electrons  in  the  two 
systems  occupy  corresponding  parts  of  space,  and  that,  while  their 
charges  are  equal,  they  are  geometrically  dissimilar;  if  the  electrons 
in  g  are  spheres,  those  in  ga  are  lengthened  ellipsoids. 

Let  us  also  remember  that  the  potential  at  a  point  P0  of  g0, 
and,  consequently,  the  quantity  y  at  the  corresponding  point  P  of 
g,  can  be  calculated  by  means  of  the  formula 

,  (301) 

where  we  have  denoted  by  /  the  distance  between  a  point  Q0  of  the 
element  dS'  and  the  point  P0.  The  integration  is  to  be  extended  to 
all  elements  in  g0  where  there  is  a  charge. 

The  comparison  of  a  moving  system  with  a  stationary  one  will 
be  found  of  much  use  in  the  remaining  part  of  this  chapter,  and 
it  is  therefore  proper  to  settle  once  for  all  that,  if  we  speak  of 
g  and  gfl,  we  shall  always  mean  two  systems  of  this  kind,  and  that 
the  index  0  will  constantly  serve  to  denote  the  stationary  system. 

171.  With  a  view  to  later  developments  it  will  be  well  to  put 
the  foregoing  statements  in  yet  another  form.  Let  us,  for  a  while, 
discard  all  thoughts  of  the  imaginary  system  g0,  and  confine  ourselves 
to  the  system  g  with  which  we  are  really  concerned.  We  may  intro- 
duce for  this,  as  we  have  already  done,  the  quantities  x',  y,  z,  and 
we  may  even  use  them  for  the  determination  of  the  position  of  a 
point,  because  they  are  related  in  a  definite  manner  to  the  values  of 
xr,  yr,  zr.  Let  them  be  called  the  effective  coordinates,  and  let  us 
define  the  effective  distance  between  two  points  whose  effective  coordi- 
nates are  x^,  y,',  £/,  x%,  y%,  gs'  as  the  quantity 


If  dxr,  dyr,  dzr  are  infinitely  small  increments  of  the  relative  coor- 
dinates, the  corresponding  increments  of  the  effective  coordinates 
will  be 

dx'=kldxr,     dy'=ldyr,     dz'=ldzr, 

and,  of  course,  the  parallelepiped  having  dx,  dy,  dz  for  its  edges 
may  be  said  to  be  determined  by  these  increments  dx,  dy',  dz.  If, 
instead  of  the  ordinary  unit  of  volume,  we  choose  a  unit  ftp  times 
smaller,  the  volume  of  the  parallelepiped  will  be  expressed  by  the 
product  dx'dy'dz',  and,  on  the  same  scale,  an  element  of  any  form 
that  is  given  in  ordinary  measure  by  dS,  will  have  a  volume 

dS'  =  kPdS.  (302) 


MOVING  AND  STATIONARY  ELECTROSTATIC  SYSTEM  COMPARED.      201 

This  is  equal  to  the  dS'  in  the  equation  (299),  but  the  symbol  has 
got  a  new  meaning.  Having  already  used  several  times  the  word 
,,effective",  I  shall  now  —  only  for  the  sake  of  uniformity  and  without 
attaching  any  further  meaning  to  the  words  —  call  dS'  the  effective 
element  of  volume.  A  point  within  dS  will  also  be  said  to  belong 
to  the  effective  element  dS'. 

Finally,  if  the  charge  gdS  of  an  element  dS  is  divided  by  the 
magnitude  of  the  effective  element  dS',  we  get  the  quantity  Q  that 
is  defined  by  (290).  For  this  reason  it  is  not  inappropriate  to  call  y' 
the  effective  density  of  the  charge. 

It  will  now  be  clear  that  the  operations  involved  in  the  symbol 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  (301)  may  be  described  in 
terms  relating  only  to  the  real  system,  the  denominator  r  being  the 
effective  distance  between  a  point  of  the  effective  element  dS'  and 
the  point  P  for  which  we  want  to  calculate  qp'.  This  potential  having 
been  determined,  its  partial  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  the 
effective  coordinates,  taken  with  the  signs  reversed,  will  represent 
the  components  of  the  vector  d'. 

It  is  only  for  moving  systems  that  we  have  had  reason  to 
distinguish  between  the  effective  coordinates  and  the  ,,true"  coordi- 
nates, the  effective  elements  of  volume  and  the  ,,true"  ones,  etc.;  as 
soon  as  w  =  0,  we  shall  have  x  =  xr  =  x,  y  =  yr  =  y,  z  =  zr  —  2, 
dS'=dS,  0'=p,  etc.  Yet,  for  the  very  reason  of  these  equalities, 
we  are  free  also  to  speak  of  the  effective  coordinates,  the  effective 
density,  etc.  in  the  case  of  a  stationary  system;  only,  we  must  not 
forget  that  in  this  case  these  quantities  are  identical  with  the  true 
coordinates,  the  true  density,  etc.  Similarly,  we  may  always  speak 
of  the  vector  d',  remembering  that  it  is  identical  with  d  when  there 
is  no  translation. 

I  have  dwelled  at  some  length  on  these  questions  of  denomi- 
nation, because  in  intricate  problems  a  proper  choice  of  terms  is 
of  much  value.  That  which  we  have  now  made  enables  us  to  con- 
dense into  few  words  what  was  said  in  the  last  paragraph  about  the 
systems  $  and  $0,  namely:  In  two  electrostatic  systems,  the  one  moving 
and  the  other  not,  in  which  the  effective  density  of  the  electric 
charge  is  the  same  function  of  the  effective  coordinates,  the  vector  d' 
will  be  the  same  at  corresponding  points,  and  the  forces  will  be  re- 
lated to  each  other  in  the  way  expressed  by  (300). 

172.  Let  us  now  return  from  this  digression  to  the  hypothesis 
by  which  we  have  tried  to  account  for  the  result  of  Michelson's 
experiment.  We  can  understand  the  possibility  of  the  assumed 
change  of  dimensions,  if  we  keep  in  mind  that  the  form  of  a 
solid  body  depends  on  the  forces  between  its  molecules,  and  that,  in 


202  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

all  probability,  these  forces  are  propagated  by  the  intervening  ether 
in  a  way  more  or  less  resembling  that  in  which  electromagnetic 
actions  are  transmitted  through  this  medium.  From  this  point  of 
view  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that,  just  like  the  electromagnetic  forces, 
the  molecular  attractions  and  repulsions  are  somewhat  modified  by  a 
translation  imparted  to  the  body,  and  this  may  very  well  result  in  a 
change  of  its  dimensions. 

Now,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  we  find  exactly  the  amount  of 
change  that  was  postulated  in  §  168,  if  we  extend  to  molecular 
actions  the  result  found  for  the  electric  forces,  i.  e.  if,  comparing  two 
systems  of  molecules  g  and  yo  in  which  the  particles  have  the  same 
effective  coordinates,  we  admit  for  the  molecular  forces  the  relation 
expressed  by  (300). 

Indeed,  this  equation  implies  that  if  F(^0)  =  0,  F(g)  is  so  like- 
wise, so  that  when,  in  the  system  j^0,  each  molecule  is  in  equilibrium 
under  the  actions  exerted  on  it  by  its  neighbours,  the  same  will  be 
true  for  the  system  $.  Hence,  taking  for  granted  that  there  is  but 
one  position  of  equilibrium  of  the  particles,  we  may  assert  that,  in 
the  moving  system  j^,  the  molecules  will  take  of  themselves  the 
arrangement  corresponding,  in  the  manner  specified  by  (286),  to 
the  configuration  existing  in  g0.  Since  x ',  y',  z'  are  the  true  coordi- 
nates in  this  latter  system,  and  xr,  yr,  zr  the  relative  coordinates  in 
j»5,  the  change  of  dimensions  in  different  directions  is  given  by  the 
coefficients  in  (286),  and  the  two  lines  of  which  we  have  spoken  in 
§  168  will  be  to  each  other  in  the  ratio 

L>  =  k  =      _f 

LI  -j/c'-te'' 

which  agrees  with  the  value  (283).  if  quantities  of  an  order  higher 
than  the  second  are  neglected. 

173.  It  is  a  matter  of  interest  to  inquire  whether  our  assump- 
tions demand  the  same  change  of  dimensions  for  bodies  whose  shape 
and  size  depend  in  a  smaller  or  greater  measure  on  their  molecular 
motions.  As  a  preliminary  to  this  question,  I  shall  consider  a 
system  of  points  having,  besides  a  common  translation  w,  certain 
velocities  u.  For  each  of  them  the  coordinates  xr,  yr>  zr  are  definite 
functions  of  the  time  t,  and 

^  -  u        dVr-u        ^  -  u 
dt   '       *>       dt  y'      dt   '      •' 

But  we  may  also  say  that  for  each  the  effective  coordinates  x,  y^  z 
are  functions  of  the  local  time  /',  which  I  shall  henceforth  also  term 
the  effective  time,  and  we  may  calculate  the  differential  coefficients 
of  x',  y,  s  with  respect  to  t'  in  terms  of  those  of  xr,  yr,  zr  with 


MOLECULAR  MOTION.  203 

respect  to  t.     In  doing  so  I  shall  suppose  the  velocities  u.,.,  Uy,  u,  to 
be  so  small  that  terms  that  are  of  the  order  of  magnitude     J  compared 

with   those  I  am  going  to  write  down,  may  be  neglected.    Then  the 
result  is1) 


dx' 
d? 

: 

I 

M  dxr 
**f 

dj/'  = 
d*y' 

=  fc 

7,-s, 

^ 

d/_ 
d8/ 

,  </ 
« 
fc* 

d<8  ' 

df 

1 

d««  ' 

dt'  2~ 

I 

_  _  /ono  A 

dt'*        I    ~dt"      dt'*~~l  '  dt*  '     d(~*~   I    df' 

The  first  set  of  equations  shows  that       ,  .   -JL  ,  -r-r  are  the  compo- 

u  t       dt        dt 

nents  of  the  vector  u'  that  has  been  defined  in  §  169,  and  it  appears 
from  the  second  set  that,  if  there  are  two  systems  of  points  {«5  and 
j^0  moving  in  such  a  way  that  in  both  the  effective  coordinates  are 
the  same  functions  of  the  effective  time,  we  shall  have  the  following 
relation  between  the  accelerations  j 

KS)=(Jr,  p,  ^)j(So)-  (304) 

This  formula,  in  which  the  mode  of  expression  is  the  same  as  that 
which  we  have  used  in  (300),  follows  immediately  from  (303),  the 

components  of  the  acceleration  in  $0  being  ,  ,,  2,    ,  ,,,  j;>-j,  and  those 

of  the  acceleration  in  S  -,./.     jlf;     ,.,r- 
'    dt1       dt*      dt1 

174.  It  remains  to  apply  this  to  a  body  in  which  molecular 
motions  are  going  on.  At  ordinary  temperatures  the  velocities  of 
these  are  so  small  in  comparison  with  that  of  light,  that  the  approxi- 
mations used  in  the  above  formulae  seem  to  be  allowable.  On  the 
same  ground  we  may  regard  the  interactions  of  the  molecules  to  be 
independent  of  the  velocities  U,  and  to  be  determined  solely  by  the 
relative  positions  and  the  velocity  of  translation  w. 

Let  $  and  $0  be  two  systems  of  molecules  moving  in  such  a 
manner  that  in  both  the  effective  coordinates  are  the  same  functions 
of  the  effective  time.  Let  us  fix  our  attention  on  two  corresponding 
particles  P  and  P0  in  the  positions  which  they  occupy  for  a  definite 
value,  say  ^',  of  the  effective  time.  If  we  wish  to  know  the  simul- 
taneous positions  of  the  neighbouring  particles  of  ga,  which  are  suf- 
ficiently near  P0  sensibly  to  act  on  it,  we  have  only  to  consider  the 
values  of  their  coordinates  x,  y,  z  for  the  same  value  t_  of  the  effec- 
tive, i.  e.  in  this  case,  the  true  time.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  moving 
system  g.  Here  the  instants  for  which  the  effective  (i.  e.  now,  the 
local)  time,  has  a  definite  value  <_'  at  different  points,  are  not  simul- 

1)  Note  75. 


204  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

taneons,  and  this  would  greatly  complicate  the  comparison  of  ft  and 
ft0,  were  it  not  for  the  relative  slowness  of  the  molecular  motions, 
to  which  we  have  already  had  recourse  a  moment  ago.  As  it  is,  we 
may,  I  think,  skip  over  the  difficulty.  If  A  is  the  distance  between 
the  molecule  P  and  another  Q  near  it,  the  interval  between  the 
moments  at  which  the  effective  time  of  P  and  that  of  Q  have  the 

chosen  value  ^,  is  of  the  order  of  magnitude  -  -,  ,    as    appears    from 

c 

(288).  The  changes  which  the  relative  coordinates  of  Q  with  respect 
to  P  undergo  during  an  interval  of  this  length,  are  of  the  order 

— ,J     ,  or  of  the  order       ,      compared  with  A.    The  corresponding 

changes  in  the  components  of  the  force  between  P  and  Q  are  of  the 
same  order  in  comparison  with  the  force  itself,  and  may  therefore  be 

neglected  since          is  very  small.     In   other  terms,  in   order  to  find 

the  force  acting  on  the  molecule  P,  we  may  consider  as  simultaneous 
the  positions  which  the  surrounding  particles  occupy  at  the  instants 
at  which  their  local  times  have  the  value  t!_.  In  virtue  of  our  as- 
sumption, the  relative  coordinates  in  these  positions  bear  to  x,  y,  z  , 
i.  e.  to  the  corresponding  coordinates  in  ft0,  the  ratios  determined  by 
(286),  so  that,  within  the  small  compass  containing  P  and  the  mole- 
cules acting  on  it,  the  body  may  be  said  to  have  its  dimensions 
changed  in  the  way  that  has  often  been  mentioned.  We  infer  from 
this  that  the  forces  acting  on  corresponding  particles,  in  ft  and  ft0, 
are  subjected  to  the  relation  (300). 

On  the  other  hand  we  have  the  relation  (304)  between  the 
accelerations.  Now,  if  the  ratios  occurring  in  (304)  und  (300)  were  the 
same,  we  might  conclude  that,  if  the  state  of  motion  existing  in  ft0 
is  a  possible  one,  so  that  for  each  particle  the  force  acting  on  it  is 
equal  to  the  product  of  its  acceleration  and  its  mass,  and  if  the  par- 
ticles have  equal  masses  in  ft  and  ft0,  the  state  of  motion  in  the 
former  system  which  corresponds  to  that  in  the  latter  will  also  be 
possible. 

As  it  is,  however,  the  ratios  in  (300)  and  (304)  are  not  equal. 
The  above  considerations  cannot,  therefore,  lead  us  to  a  theorem  of 
corresponding  states  existing  in  ft  and  ft0,  unless  we  give  up  the 
equality  of  the  masses  in  these  systems.  We  need  not,  I  think,  be 
afraid  to  make  this  step.  We  have  seen  that  the  mass  of  a  free 
electron  is  a  function  of  the  velocity,  so  that,  if  the  corpuscle  has 
already  the  translation  w  of  the  body  to  which  it  belongs,  the  force 
required  for  a  change  of  the  velocity  will  thereby  be  altered;  we 
have  further  been  led  to  distinguish  between  a  longitudinal  and  a 
transverse  mass.  Now  that  we  have  already  extended  to  the  mole- 
cular interactions  the  rule  that  had  been  deduced  for  the  electric 


LONGITUDINAL  AND  TRANSVERSE  MASS.  205 

forces,  it  will  perhaps  not  be  too  rash  to  imagine  an  alteration  in 
the  masses  of  the  molecules  caused  by  the  translation,  and  even,  if 
it  should  prove  necessary,  to  conceive  two  different  masses,  one  m 
(the  longitudinal  mass)  with  which  we  must  reckon  when  we  con- 
sider the  accelerations  parallel  to  OX,  and  another,  m"  (the  trans- 
verse mass)  which  comes  into  play  when  we  are  concerned  with  an 
acceleration,  either  in  the  direction  of  0  Y  or  in  that  of  OZ. 

Dividing  the  ratios  in  (300)  by  the  corresponding  ones  in  (304), 
we  see  that,  if  m0  is  the  mass  of  a  molecule  in  the  absence  of  a 
translation,  the  formulae 


/72         l  \  "          I  l* 

=  V      F]  W°'     m   ^  (k 


m 

or 

m' =  TfilniQ,    m"  =  Jdm0  (305) 

contain  the  assumptions  required  for  the  establishment  of  the  theorem, 
that  the  systems  ft  and  ft0  can  be  the  seat  of  molecular  motions  of 
such  a  kind  that  in  both  the  effective  coordinates  of  the  molecules 
are  the  same  functions  of  the  effective  time. 

Now,  if  the  molecules  of  ft0,  in  their  irregular  motion,  remain 
confined  within  a  surface  having  a  constant  position,  those  in  ft  will 
be  continually  enclosed  by  the  corresponding  surface,  i.  e.  by  the  one 
that  is  determined  by  the  same  equation  in  x,  y,  z .  Hence,  the 
translation  produces  the  same  changes  in  the  dimensions  of  the 
bounding  surface  as  in  those  of  a  body  without  molecular  motions. 

The  result  may  be  extended  to  bodies  whose  shape  and  size  are 
partly  determined  by  external  forces,  such  as  a  pressure  exerted  by 
an  adjacent  system  of  molecules,  provided  only  that  these  forces  be 
altered  equally  with  those  between  the  particles  of  the  body  itself. 

175.  We  are  now  prepared  for  a  theorem  concerning  correspond- 
ing states  of  electromagnetic  vibration,  similar  to  that  of  §  162,  but 
of  a  wider  scope.  To  the  assumptions  already  introduced,  I  shall  add 
two  new  ones,  namely  1.  that  the  elastic  forces  which  govern  the  vibra- 
tory motions  of  the  electrons  are  subjected  to  the  relation  (300),  and 
2.  that  the  longitudinal  and  transverse  masses  m  and  m'  of  the 
electrons  differ  from  the  mass  m0  which  they  have  when  at  rest  in 
the  way  indicated  by  (305).  The  theorem  amounts  to  this,  that  in 
two  systems  ft  and  ft0,  the  one  moving  and  the  other  stationary, 
there  can  be  motions  of  such  a  kind,  that  not  only  the  effective  co- 
ordinates which  determine  the  positions  of  the  molecules  are  in  both 
the  same  functions  of  the  effective  time  (so  that  the  translation  is 
attended  with  the  change  of  dimensions  which  we  have  discussed) 
but  that  the  same  rule  holds  for  the  effective  coordinates  of  the 


206      .  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

separate  electrons.  Moreover,  the  components  of  the  vectors  d'  and 
h'  will  be  found  to  be  identically  determined  by  x,  y,  z',  t',  both  in 
g  and  in  g0. 

In  our  demonstration  we  shall  regard  the  displacements  of  the 
electrons  from  their  positions  of  equilibrium,  and  the  velocities  of 
vibration  as  very  small  quantities,  the  squares  and  products  of  which 
may  be  neglected.  We  shall  also  leave  aside  the  resistance  that 
may  tend  to  damp  the  vibrations. 

Let  M  and  M0  be  corresponding  particles  of  $  and  &„,  and  let 
us  calculate  for  these,  and  for  a  definite  value  of  the  effective  time, 
say  the  value  £',  the  vector  p'  whose  components  are 


(300) 

where  the  sums  are  extended  to  all  the  electrons  of  the  particle  con- 
sidered. If  we  suppose  the  positions  and  the  motions  of  the  electrons 
to  be  such  as  is  stated  in  the  theorem,  this  vector  p'  will  be  found 
to  be  the  same  for  M  and  for  M0.  For  the  latter  particle,  p' 
is  obviously  the  electric  moment  at  the  time  chosen.  As  to  the 
particle  M,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  if  we  calculate  the  sums  for  the 
chosen  value  t  of  the  effective  time  of  each  electron,  the  values  of 
x,  y,  z  in  the  sums  will  not  be,  strictly  speaking,  the  coordinates  which 
the  different  electrons  have  simultaneously.  On  account  of  the  small  values 
of  the  vibratory  velocities  U,  we  may  however  simplify  the  meaning  of 
the  sums  by  considering  x  ,  y,  z  as  the  effective  coordinates  of  the 
several  electrons,  such  as  they  are  at  one  and  the  same  moment,  namely 
the  moment  when  the  effective  time,  taken  for  a  definite  point  of 
the  molecule,  which  may  be  called  its  centre,  has  the  special  value  i\ 
Then,  since  the  components  of  the  moment  of  M  at  that  instant 
may  be  represented  by 

9,=  £exr,     Vy=  Zeyr,     p,=  £eert  (307) 

we  shall  have,  in  virtue  of  (286), 


It  may  be  shown  that  the  values  of  the  potentials  tp'  and  a'  of 
which  we  have  spoken  in  §  169,  are  given  by  the  equations,  similar 
to  (35)  and  (36), 


where  /  is  the  effective  distance  between  the  point  P  considered  and 
a  point  of  the  effective  element  dS'.  The  square  brackets  mean  that, 
if  we  wish  to  determine  <jp'  and  a'  for  the  value  t'  of  the  effective 


FIELD  OF  A  POLARIZED  PARTICLE  IN  A  MOVING  SYSTEM.      207 

time,  we  must  understand  by  Q'  and  u'  the  values  existing  in  dS'  at 

the  effective  time  t' • 

c 

With  the  aid  of  these  formulae  the  electromagnetic  field  produced 
by  a  molecule  may  be  shown  to  be  determined  in  rather  a  simple 
manner  by  the  vector  p',  which  we  may  call  the  effective  moment. 
The  final  formulae,  whose  form  is  identical  with  that  of  our  previous 
equations  (271)  and  (272),  are1) 

'  (308) 


where  /  is  the  effective  distance  between  the  centre  of  the  molecule 
and  the  point  (x,  y,  z)  considered.  The  square  brackets  mean  that, 
if  we  want  to  know  the  values  of  d'  and  h'  for  the  instant  at  which 
the  local  time  belonging  to  this  point  is  t',  we  must  take  the  values 
of  px,  py',  p/  for  the  instant  at  which  the  local  time  of  the  centre 

of  the  molecule  is  t' .     The  dot  indicates  a  differentiation   with 

c 

respect  to  f,  and  the  equations  apply  as  well  to  the  system  $0  as 
to  g. 

176.  We  have  next  to  fix  our  attention  on  some  molecule  M 
of  the  body  g,  and  on  the  one  movable  electron  which  we  shall 
suppose  it  to  contain.  The  field  produced  in  M  by  all  the  other 
molecules  of  the  body  may  be  represented  by  27d'  and  2^h'  (cf.  §  160), 
but  to  this  we  must  add  the  field  due  to  causes  outside  the  body, 
for  which  the  equations  are 


div'd0'  = 
div'h0'  = 

rot'  ho'  =• 


rot'd0'  =  -    -h0', 


(309) 


as  is  seen  by  putting  p'  =  0  in  the  formulae  (292). 

After  having  found  the  total  values  of  d'  and  h',  we   can  use 
the  equations  (293),  which,  however,  may  be  replaced  by 


Indeed,  so  far  as  d'  and  h'  are  due  to  the  vibrations   in   the   other 
molecules   of  the   body,  these  vectors  are  proportional  to  the  ampli- 


1)  Note  76. 


208  V-  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

tudes,  so  that  all  the  terms  in  which  their  components  are  multiplied 
by  Ux',  \ly'  or  U.'  may  be  neglected.  The  corresponding  terms  with 
components  of  (*„'  and  h0'  may  likewise  be  omitted,  if  the  intensity 
of  the  external  field  is  sufficiently  small,  if,  for  example,  this  field  is 
produced  by  vibrations  of  very  small  amplitude  in  a  source  of  light. 
Returning  to  the  comparison  of  our  two  systems,  we  can  finish 
it  in  few  words.  On  account  of  what  we  know  of  the  accelera- 
tions, and  of  what  has  been  assumed  of  the  masses,  it  is  clear  that 
the  state  of  things  we  have  imagined  can  exist  both  in  (•}  and  in  $0, 
if  all  the  forces  acting  on  the  electrons  satisfy  the  condition  (300). 
We  have  assumed  this  for  the  elastic  forces,  and  we  can  deduce  it 
for  the  electric  forces  from  the  equations  (310),  (308)  and  (300). 
The  effective  moments  being  the  same  functions  of  t'  in  corresponding 
particles  of  $  and  $„,  the  vectors  2?d'  will  be  so  likewise  at  corre- 
sponding points,  and  we  may  suppose  the  same  to  be  true  of  the 
vector  d0',  since  one  and  the  same  set  of  equations,  namely  (309), 
determines  it  (together  with  h0'),  both  for  $  and  for  ^0.  As  the  com- 
ponents of  the  force  acting  on  unit  charge  are  given  by  ix',  d  ',  dz' 
for  j^0,  and  by  the  formulae  (310)  for  $,  the  condition  (300)  is 
really  fulfilled. 

177.  The  generalized  theorem  of  corresponding  states  may  now 
serve  for  the  same  conclusions  which  we  have  drawn  from  it  in  its 
more  restricted  form  (§  165).  Attention  must,  however,  be  called  to 
the  difference  in  frequency  between  the  corresponding  vibrations  in 
$  and  $0.  If,  for  definite  values  of  the  effective  coordinates,  i.  e. 
at  a  definite  point  of  the  system,  a  quantity  varies  as  cos  nt',  n  will 
be  the  frequency  in  the  stationary  system,  because  here  t'  is  the  true 
time,  but  for  the  moving  system  we  shall  have 


cosnf  =  cos»(  ,  t  —  kl 


so  that  here  the  frequency  at  a  definite  point  of  the  system  is 

I 
i~w. 

i      .       k 

It  is  remarkable  that,  when  the  source  of  light  forms  part  of 
the  system,  so  that  it  shares  the  translation  w,  this  frequency  will 
be  produced  by  the  actions  going  on  in  the  radiating  particles,  if 
these  actions  are  such  that  the  frequency  would  be  n  if  the  source 
did  not  move.  At  least,  this  is  true  if  we  make  the  natural 
assumption  that  in  the  source  the  masses  of  the  electrons  and  the 
elastic  forces  to  which  they  are  subjected,  are  altered  in  the  same 
manner  as  in  a  body  through  which  the  light  is  propagated.  Then  we 
may  assert  that  in  the  source  of  light  too,  the  effective  coordinates 
of  the  electrons  can  be  the  same  functions  of  the  effective  time, 


APPLICATION  OF  THE  THEOREM  OF  CORRESPONDING  STATES.    209 

whether  the  source  move  or  not.  If  the  vibrations  are  represented 
in  both  cases  by  formulae  containing  the  factor  nt',  the  frequency 

will  be  n  when  the  source  is  at  rest,  and       «  when  it  moves.     This 

K 

shows  that  in  all  experiments  made  with  a  terrestrial  source  of  light, 
the  phenomena  will  correspond  quite  accurately  to  those  which  one 
would  observe,  using  the  same  source  on  a  stationary  planet;  the 
course  of  the  relative  rays,  the  position  of  interference  fringes,  and, 
in  genera],  the  distribution  of  light  and  darkness  will  be  unaltered. 
The  case  of  experiments  made  with  a  celestial  source  of  light  is 
somewhat  different.  In  these,  the  relative  frequency  n  at  a  point  of 
our  apparatus  is  equal  to  the  frequency  of  the  source,  modified  accord- 
ing to  Doppler's  principle  (a  modification  that  will  not  exist  when  we 
employ  sunlight,  as  our  distance  from  the  sun  may  be  considered  as 
constant),  and  the  phenomena  will  correspond  to  those  taking  place 

with  the  frequency  -j-n  in  a  stationary  system.    Thus,  in  a  dispersive 

medium  the  courses  of  the  relative  rays  observed  with  the  D-lines 
in  sunlight  and  with  a  sodium  flame,  would  not  coincide  exactly.  If, 
supposing  the  sun  to  be  at  rest  relatively  to  the  ether,  we  call  n 

the  relative  frequency  in  the  first  case,  it  will  be    ,  n  in  the  second 

case.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  this  is  of  a  purely  theoretical 
interest,  as  no  phenomenon  that  can  be  accurately  observed  can  be  per- 

w* 
ceptibly  altered   by    this  change  in  the  frequency  of  the  order     ,-• 

It  should  further  be  noticed  that,  in  an  experiment  planned  for 
the  detection  of  an  influence  of  the  earth's  translation,  in  which  we 
turn  round  our  apparatus,  or  repeat  our  observations  after  a  certain 
number  of  hours,  during  which  it  has  rotated  on  account  of  the 
earth's  diurnal  motion,  we  are  constantly  working  with  the  same 
relative  frequency  (whatever  be  the  source  of  light  employed).  This 

k 
constant  frequency  v  will  correspond  to  a  determinate  frequency  -;-  v 

I 

in  a  system  without  translation,  and  the  rotation  can  no  more  pro- 
duce an  effect  than  it  would  do  if  we  rotated  our  instruments  on  a 
body  without  translation,  on  which  we  were  working  with  rays  of 

the  frequency    ,-v. 

But  perhaps  I  am  dwelling  for  too  long  a  time  upon  these 
subtle  questions.  What  must  now  be  pointed  out  particularly,  is, 
that  our  theorem  explains  why  Rayleigh  and  Brace  have  failed  to 
detect  a  double  refraction.  In  the  experiments  of  the  latter  of  these 
physicists  the  beam  of  light  that  was  received  by  the  observer's  eye 
consisted  of  two  parts,  travelling  side  by  side,  and  having  the  same 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  14 


210  V.   OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

state  of  polarization  and  also,  though  they  had  been  passed  through 
different  media,  the  same  intensity.  It  is  clear  that,  whenever  this 
equality  exists  for  two  such  beams  in  a  system  without  translation, 
it  must,  by  our  theorem,  also  be  found  in  the  corresponding  state 
in  a  moving  system. 

178.  When,  in  our  comparison  of  two  electrostatic  systems  ^ 
and  j^0  (§  171),  it  was  stated  that,  in  both  of  them,  the  effective 
.density  of  the  charge  had  to  be  the  same  function  of  the  effective 
coordinates,  this  implied  that  the  electrons  in  the  two  systems  are 
not  of  the  same  shape.  In  the  discussion  given  in  §  175,  however, 
we  have  not  assumed  this,  confining  ourselves  to  the  two  assumptions 
stated  in  the  beginning  of  that  paragraph.  Indeed,  in  dealing  with 
the  motion  of  the  electrons  we  are  concerned  only  with  their  charges, 
their  masses  and  the  elastic  forces  acting  on  them;  all  other  par- 
ticulars are  irrelevant  to  our  final  results.  Consequently,  we  may 
very  well  conceive  the  electrons  not  to  change  their  form  and  size 
when  a  body  is  put  in  motion  (though  the  dimensions  of  the  body 
itself  be  altered  in  the  above  mentioned  manner),  provided  only  that 
the  necessary  relations  between  the  elastic  forces  and  the  masses  of 
the  electrons,  before  and  after  the  translation  is  imparted  to  the 
system,  be  maintained. 

Now,  in  a  theory  that  attempts  to  explain  phenomena  by  means 
of  these  minute  particles,  the  simplest  course  is  certainly  to  consider 
the  electrons  themselves  as  wholly  immutable,  as  perfectly  rigid 
spheres,  for  instance,  with  a  constant  uniformly  distributed  surface- 
charge.  This  is  the  idea  that  has  been  worked  out  by  Abraham, 
and  on  which  many  of  the  formulae  I  have  given  in  Chap.  I  are 
based.  But,  unfortunately,  it  is  at  variance  with  our  theorem  of 
corresponding  states.  This  requires,  as  is  seen  from  (305),  that  the 
longitudinal  and  the  transverse  mass  of  an  electron  be  to  each  other 
in  the  ratio 


m"  c*  —  tv* 

or,  up  to  quantities  of  the  second  order, 


whereas,  according  to  the  formulae  (68)  and  (69),  and  with  the  same 
degree  of  approximation,  it  would  be 

m        1        4   a;1 

^    —    J.    *"r~    ~~^~         f  • 

m  u     c* 

179.    It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  examined  what  becomes 
of  the  theory,  if  the  electrons  themselves  are  considered  as  liable  to 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  MASS  OF  A  DEFORMABLE  ELECTRON.      211 

the  same  changes  of  dimensions  as  the  bodies  in  which  they  are  con- 
tained. This  assumption  brings  out  the  proper  ratios  between  the 
masses  m0,  m,  m",  provided  that  we  assign  the  value  1  to  the  coeffi- 
cient I,  which  we  have  hitherto  left  undeterminate. 

The  electromagnetic  mass  of  the  deformablo  electron  is  easily 
deduced  from  the  theory  of  electromagnetic  momentum,  since  we  can 
always  apply  the  general  formulae  of  §  24,  whatever  be  the  changes 
in  the  form  and  size  of  an  electron  taking  place  during  its  motion. 
By  calculating  the  electromagnetic  momentum  G  and  its  rate  of 
change  6,  we  shall  find  the  force  acting  on  the  electron;  next, 
when  we  divide  by  the  acceleration,  the  electromagnetic  mass,  either 
the  longitudinal  or  the  transverse  one,  will  become  known. 

In  our  calculations  we  shall  ascribe  to  the  electromagnetic  mo- 
mentum the  value  which  it  would  have,  if  the  electron  were  con- 
tinually moving  with  the  velocity  that  exists  at  the  moment  con- 
sidered, a  procedure  the  legitimacy  of  which  will  be  discussed  in  a 
subsequent  paragraph. 

The  determination  of  the  momentum  is  even  more  simple  than  it 
was  in  the  case  of  a  rigid  sphere  We  have  seen  that  the  field  of  a 
moving  electrostatic  system  is  known,  when  the  field  of  another  system 
that  is  supposed  to  be  at  rest,  and  whose  dimensions  differ  in  a  de- 
finite manner  from  those  of  the  moving  one,  is  given.  Now,  if  the 
system  consists  of  a  single  electron,  of  spherical  shape  and  with 
uniformly  distributed  surface  charge,  so  long  as  it  stands  still,  but 
ellipsoidal  when  in  motion,  as  determined  by  (286),  the  stationary 
system  to  the  consideration  of  which  the  problem  is  reduced,  is  found 
to  be  precisely  the  original  sphere,  so  that  the  field  is  determined 
very  easily. 

Calling  e  the  charge,  and  H  the  radius  of  the  sphere,  T  find  for 
the  electromagnetic  momentum  corresponding  to  the  velocity  w1) 


from  which,  using  the  formulae  (64)  and  (65),  we  deduce 

d(klw) 
~ 


_ 

' 
or 

/          diklw)  „          ,,  /o<n\ 

M--^2***'      m    =M»»o-  (312) 

The  latter  formula  agrees  with  the  second  of  the  equations  (305),  so 
that  the  only  remaining  condition  is,  that  the  value  of  m  shall  be 
equal  to  that  given  by  the  former  of  those  equations.  Hence 

d(klw)  =  ,3, 

-  dw 

1)  Note  77. 

14* 


212  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

from  which,  on  account  of 

d(*«0  __  .., 

i  -    III    • 

aw 


we  infer 

dw 


-  =  0,     I  —  const. 


The  value  of  this  constant  must  be  unity,  because,  as  we  know, 
'1  =  1  for  w  =  0. 

We  are  thus  led  so  far  to  specialize  the  hypothesis  that  was 
imagined  for  the  explanation  of  Michelson's  experimental  result, 
as  to  admit,  for  moving  bodies,  only  a  contraction,  determined  by 
the  coefficient  k,  in  the  direction  of  the  line  of  motion.  The  elec- 
trons themselves  become  flattened  ellipsoids  of  revolution,  their  limiting 
form,  which  they  would  reach  if  the  translation  had  attained  the  speed 
of  light,  being  that  of  a  circular  disk  of  radius  R,  perpendicular  to 
the  line  of  motion. 

All  this  looked  very  tempting,  as  it  would  enable  us  to  predict 
that  no  experiment  made  with  a  terrestrial  source  of  light  will  ever 
show  us  an  influence  of  the  earth's  motion,  even  though  it  were 
delicate  enough  to  detect  effects,  not  only  of  the  second,  but  of  any 
order  of  magnitude.  But,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  at  present,  the 
facts  are  against  our  hypothesis. 

According  to  it,  the  longitudinal  and  the  transverse  mass  of  an 
electron  would  be 

m  =  7csw0,  m"  =  km0, 

•  [•  L     "'  a 

or,  it  we  put        =  p, 

When  /3  becomes  greater,  these  values  increase  more  rapidly  than  those 
which  we  have  formerly  found  for  the  spherical  electron.  Therefore, 

the  determination  of  —  for  the  high  velocities  existing  in  the  p*-rays 

affords  the  means  of  deciding  between  the  different  theories.  Kauf- 
mann, who,  as  early  as  1001 1),  had  deduced  from  his  researches  on 

this  subject  that  the  value  of        increases  most  markedly,    so   that 

the  mass  of  an  electron  may  be  considered  as  wholly  electromagnetic, 
has  repeated  his  experiments  with  the  utmost  care  and  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  testing  my  assumption.2)  His  new  numbers  agree 

1)  W.   Kaufmann,    Die    magnetische   und   elektrische   Ablenkbarkeit    der 
Becquerelstrahlen  und  die  scheinbare  Masse  der  Elektronen,  Gott.  Nachr.,  Math.- 
phys.  Kl.  1901,  p.  143;   ttber  die  elektromagnetische  Masse  des  Elektrons,  ibid. 
1902,  p.  291;    1903,  p.  90. 

2)  Kaufmann,  Uber  die  Konstitution  des  Elektrons,  Ann.  Phys.  19  (1906), 
p.  487. 


ENERGY  OF  AN  ELECTRON.  213 

within  the  limits  of  experimental  errors  with  the  formulae  given  by 
Abraham,  but  not  so  with  the  second  of  the  equations  (313),  so 
that  they  are  decidedly  unfavourable  to  the  idea  of  a  contraction, 
such  as  I  attempted  to  work  out.1)  Yet,  though  it  seems  very  likely 
that  we  shall  have  to  relinquish  this  idea  altogether,  it  is,  I  think, 
worth  while  looking  into  it  somewhat  more  closely.  After  that,  it 
will  be  well  also  to  examine  a  modification  of  the  hypothesis  that 
has  been  proposed  by  Bucherer  and  Langevin. 

180.  In  the  preceding  determination  of  the  mass  of  the  deformed 
electron  we  have  availed  ourselves  of  the  electromagnetic  momentum, 
but  we  have  not  considered  the  energy.  This  was  done  by  Abraham2), 
who  found  that,  besides  the  ordinary  electromagnetic  energy,  the 
electron  must  have  an  energy  of  another  kind,  whose  amount  is 
lessened  when  the  particle  is  made  to  move.  The  truth  of  this  be- 
comes apparent  when  we  consider  a  rectilinear  motion  of  the  electron 
with  variable  velocity.  The  mass  is  given  by 


and  the  work  of  the  moving  force  during  the  element  of  time  dt  by 


whereas  the  electromagnetic  energy  is  found  to  be3) 

,       . 


Now,  the  increment   of  the  first  term  during  the  time  dt   is  exactly 
equal  to  the  expression  (314). 

Hence,  there  must  be  another  energy  E  of  such  an  amount  that, 
when  added  to  the  second  term  of  (315),  it  gives  a  constant  sum,  and 
which  is  therefore  determined  by 


where  G  is  a  constant. 

181.  The  nature  of  this  new  energy  and  the  mechanism  of  the 
contraction  are  made  much  clearer  by  the  remark,  first  made  by 
Poincare4),  that  the  electron  will  be  in  equilibrium,  both  in  its  ori- 

1)  See,  however,  Note  87. 

2)  JJ.  Abraham,  Die  Grundhypotheaen  der  Klektronentheorie,  Phys.  Zeit- 
schrift  5  (1904),  p.  576. 

3)  Note  78. 

4)  H.  Poincare,   Sur  la  dynainique  tie  1'electron,   Rendiconti  del  Circolo 
uiaternatico  di  Palermo  21  (1906),  p.  129. 


214  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  CODIES. 

ginal  and  in  its  flattened  form,  if  it  has  the  properties  of  a  very 
thin,  perfectly  flexible  and  extensible  shell,  whose  parts  are  drawn 
inwards  by  a  normal  stress,  having  the  intensity 


per  unit  of  area,  and  preserving  this  magnitude  however  far  the  con- 
traction may  proceed. 

The  value  of  S  has  been  so  chosen  that,  so  long  as  the  electron 
is  at  rest  and  has  therefore  the  shape  of  a  sphere  with  radius  li, 
the  internal  force  exactly  counterbalances  the  electromagnetic  stress 
on  the  outside  which  is  due  to  the  surrounding  field.1)  Now  —  and 
herein  lies  the  .  gist  of  Poincare's  remark  -  -  the  electron,  when 
deformed  as  has  been  stated,  will  still  be  in  equilibrium  under  the 
joint  action  of  the  stress  S  and  the  electromagnetic  forces. 

In  order  to  show  this,  we  shall  fix  our  attention  on  the  com- 
ponents of  the  internal  stress  acting  on  a  surface  element  of  the 
shell;  these  are  found  if  we  multiply  S  by  the  projections  of  the 
element  on  the  planes  of  yz,  zx,  xy.  Now,  when  the  deformation 

takes  place,  these  projections  are  multiplied  by  the  factors  1,       ,       , 

K  K 

from  which  it  appears  that  the  components  of  the  stress  are  altered 
in  the  same  ratios  as  those  of  the  electromagnetic  force  (cf.  (300)),  so 
that  the  equilibrium  will  still  persist.  When  it  is  stable,  the  electron 
will  necessarily  have  the  configuration  corresponding  to  it;  the  electro- 
magnetic forces  exerted  on  its  surface  by  the  ether,  modified  by 
the  translation  according  to  our  formulae,  conjointly  with  the  in- 
variable internal  stress,  will  make  the  electron  take  the  flattened 
ellipsoidal  form. 

Corresponding  to  the  internal  stress  S  there  must  be  a  certain 
potential  energy  U,  and  the  above  result  implies  that  this  energy  is 
equal  to  the  expression  (316).  Indeed,  if  v  is  the  volume  of  the 
ellipsoid,  we  obviously  may  write 

e* 
U  =  Sv  +  const  ==     ,    .  „  .  v  +  const, 

oZ  n   J\ 

and  we  have 

4      -m/-!         w8\V» 
"-I-***  I1"   C'-j      • 

182.  Abraham2)  has  raised  the  objection  that  I  had  not  shown 
that  the  electron,  when  deformed  to  an  ellipsoid  by  its  translation, 
would  be  in  stable  equilibrium.  This  is  certainly  true,  but  I  think 
the  hypothesis  need  not  be  discarded  for  this  reason.  The  argument 


1)  Note  79. 

2)  Abraham,  1.  c.,  p.  578. 


STABILITY  OF  THE  STATE  OF  AN  ELECTRON.        215 

proves  only  that  the  electromagnetic  actions  and  the  stress  of  which 
we  have  spoken  cannot  be  the  only  forces  which  determine  the 
configuration  of  the  electron. 

If  they  were,  each  problem  concerning  the  relative  motion  of 
the  parts  of  the  moving  ellipsoidal  electron  would  have  its  counter- 
part in  a  problem  relating  to  the  spherical  electron  without  trans- 
lation, because  the  forces  of  both  kinds  would  satisfy  the  relation  (300). 
Now,  it  is  easily  seen  that,  under  the  joint  action  of  the  stresses  in 
the  surrounding  field  and  the  constant  internal  stress  S,  a  spherical 
shell  would  be  in  stable  equilibrium  as  regards  changes  of  volume, 
but  that  its  equilibrium  would  be  unstable  with  respect  to  changes 
of  shape.1)  The  same  would  therefore  be  true  of  the  moving  and 
flattened  shell.  In  the  case  of  the  latter  there  would  even  be  in- 
stability of  orientation,  because  after  a  small  rotation  the  electron 
does  no  longer  correspond  [after  the  manner  indicated  by  the  for- 
mulae (286)]  to  the  original  sphere,  but  to  a  slightly  deformed  one. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  it  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  quite 
legitimate  to  maintain  the  hypothesis  of  the  contracting  electrons,  if 
by  its  means  we  could  really  make  some  progress  in  the  understanding 
of  phenomena.  In  speculating  on  the  structure  of  these  minute  par- 
ticles we  must  not  forget  that  there  may  be  many  possibilities  not 
dreamt  of  at  present;  it  may  very  well  be  that  other  internal  forces 
serve  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  system,  and  perhaps,  after  all, 
we  are  wholly  on  the  wrong  track  when  we  apply  to  the  parts  of 
an  electron  our  ordinary  notion  of  force. 

Leaving  aside  the  special  mechanism  that  has  been  imagined  by 
Poincare,  we  are  offered  the  following  alternative.  Either  a  spheri- 
cal electron  must  be  regarded  as  a  material  system  between  whose 
parts  there  are  certain  forces  ensuring  the  constancy  of  its  size  and 
form,  or  we  must  simply  assume  this  constancy  as  a  matter  of  fact 
which  we  have  not  to  analyze  any  further.  In  the  first  case,  the 
form,  size  and  orientation  of  the  moving  ellipsoid  will  also  be 
maintained  by  the  action  of  the  system  of  forces,  provided  all  of 
them  have  the  property  expressed  in  our  relation  (300).  In  the  other 
case  we  may  rest  content  with  simply  admitting  for  the  moving 
electron,  without  any  further  discussion,  the  ellipsoidal  form  with 
the  smaller  axis  in  the  line  of  translation. 

183.  I  must  also  say  a  few  words  about  another  question  that 
is  connected  with  the  preceding  one.  In  our  calculation  of  the 
masses  m  and  m"  in  §  179  we  have  assumed  that  at  any  moment 
the  electromagnetic  momentum  has  the  value  corresponding,  in  a 

1)  Note  80. 


216  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

stationary  state  of  motion,  to  the  actual  velocity.  Particularly,  in  tlie 
application  of  the  formula  (311),  it  has  been  presupposed  that  in  a 
curvilinear  motion  the  electron  constantly  has  its  short  axis  along 
the  tangent  to  the  path,  and  that,  while  the  velocity  changes,  the 
ratio  between  the  axes  of  the  ellipsoid  is  changing  at  the  same  time. 

Strictly  speaking,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  for  our  results 
that  the  orientation  and  shape  of  the  electron  should  follow  in- 
stantaneously the  alterations  in  direction  and  velocity  of  its  trans- 
lation; they  may  be  supposed  to  lag  somewhat  behind.  But  it  is 
clear  that,  at  all  events,  if  we  want  to  apply  the  values  of  m  and 
m"  to  optical  phenomena,  as  we  have  done,  the  time  of  lagging  must 
be  small  in  comparison  with  the  period  of  the  vibrations  of  light. 

Now,  if  we  choose  the  latter  of  the  alternatives  that  presented 
themselves  in  the  last  paragraph,  we  may  as  well  simply  assert  that 
there  is  no  lagging  at  all.  But  we  must  not  proceed  in  this  summary 
manner  if  we  prefer  the  first  alternative.  If  the  form  and  the  orien- 
tation of  the  electron  are  determined  by  forces,  we  cannot  be  certain 
that  there  exists  at  every  instant  a  state  of  equilibrium.  Even  while 
the  translation  is  constant,  there  may  be  small  oscillations  of  the 
corpuscle,  both  in  shape  and  in  orientation,  and  under  variable 
circumstances,  i.  e.  when  the  velocity  of  translation  is  changing  either 
in  direction  or  in  magnitude,  the  lagging  behind  of  which  we  have 
just  spoken  cannot  be  entirely  avoided.  The  case  is  similar  to  that 
of  a  pendulum  bob  acted  on  by  a  variable  force,  whose  changes,  as 
is  well  known,  it  does  not  instantaneously  follow.  The  pendulum 
may,  however,  approximately  be  said  to  do  so  when  the  variations 
of  the  force  are  very  slow  in  comparison  with  its  own  free  vibra- 
tions. Similarly,  the  electron  may  be  regarded  as  being,  at  every 
instant,  in  the  state  of  equilibrium  corresponding  to  its  velocity,  pro- 
vided that  the  time  in  which  the  velocity  changes  perceptibly  be  very 
much  longer  than  the  period  of  the  oscillations  that  can  be  performed 
under  the  influence  of  the  regulating  forces.  If  these  vibrations  are 
much  more  rapid  than  those  of  light,  the  values  (313)  of  the  masses 
m'  and  m"  may  be  confidently  applied  to  the  electrons  in  a  body 
traversed  by  a  beam  of  light,  and  with  even  more  right  to  free  elec- 
trons that  are  deflected  from  their  line  of  motion  by  a  magnetic  or 
an  electric  field. 

Of  course,  since  we  know  next  to  nothing  of  the  structure  of 
an  electron,  it  is  impossible  to  form  an  opinion  about  the  period  of 
its  free  oscillations,  but  perhaps  we  shall  not  be  far  from  the  mark 
if  we  suppose  it  to  correspond  to  a  wave-length  of  the  same  order 
of  magnitude  as  the  diameter. 

It  appears  from  these  considerations  that  the  idea  of  a  deforma- 
bility  of  the  electrons  would  give  rise  to  several  new  problems.  One 


RIGID  SPHERICAL  ELECTRONS.  217 

of  these  would  be  that  of  the  rotation  of  these  particles.  An  electron 
is  set  spinning  whenever  a  magnetic  force  to  which  it  is  exposed 
undergoes  a  change,  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  obtain  an  insight 
into  the  peculiarities  of  the  motion  imparted  in  cases  of  this  kind 
to  our  flattened  ellipsoids. 

184.  As  has  already  been  observed  (§  178),  the  often  mentioned 
changes  in  the  internal  forces,  and  consequently  in  the  dimensions 
of  a  body  can  be  imagined  without  extending  the  assumption  to  the 
electrons  themselves  and  the  question  therefore  naturally  arises, 
whether  after  all  we  may  not  get  a  satisfactory  theory  by  simply 
adhering  to  the  idea  of  rigid  spherical  electrons.  This  course  would 

be  open  to  us,  if  the  discrepancy  between  the  values  of     „  given  at 

the  end  of  §  178  could  be  shown  to  have  no  perceptible  influence 
on  observed  phenomena.  In  examining  this  point  we  are  led  back 
to  the  question  of  double  refraction  of  which  we  have  already 
spoken. 

A  glance  at  the  formulae  that  have  served  us  in  Chap.  IV  for 
treating  the  propagation  of  light  in  a  system  of  molecules,  shows 

that  the  term  m'n?  —  ,T  ,    in   equation  (201)  is    the   only  one   which 

contains  the  mass  of  an  electron.  Moreover  if,  confining  ourselves 
to  perfectly  transparent  bodies  (not  subjected  to  an  external  magnetic 
force),  we  leave  aside  the  resistance  to  the  vibrations,  that  term 
is  also  the  only  one  in  which  there  is  any  question  of  the  frequency. 
It  follows  that  all  depends  on  the  product  mna,  and  that  a  change 
of  TO,  say  in  the  ratio  of  1  to  a,  will  have  the  same  effect  as  a 
change  of  n  in  the  ratio  of  1  to  K'/*. 

Let  us  now  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  values  of  the  two 
masses  of  an  electron,  though  not  exactly  equal  to  the  expressions  (313), 
are  at  least  proportional  to  these,  say 

m  =  Kksm0,     m"  =  akm0,  (317) 

where  the  coefficient  a  is  a  certain  function  of  the  velocity  of  trans- 
lation M-,  equal  to  unity  for  w  =  0,  and  differing  from  1  by  a  quantity 
of  the  second  order  when  w  is  small.  Then,  the  phenomena  in  a 
moving  system  $  and  those  in  a  stationary  one  g0  will  correspond 
to  each  other  as  formerly  explained,  provided  that  the  mass  of  the 
electrons  in  the  system  $0  be  not  ma  but  am0.  If  the  body  considered 
were  originally  isotropic,  a  change  of  the  mass  of  its  electrons  from  m0 
to  ccm0  certainly  would  not  make  it  doubly  refracting.  Hence,  the 
moving  body  whose  electrons  have  the  masses  (317),  can  be  so 
neither.  It  must  be  singly  refracting,  and  we  may  be  sure  that 
practically  it  will  present  the  same  phenomena,  in  experiments,  that 


218  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

is,  in  which  the  source  of  light  moves  with  it,  as  it  would  do  when 
kept  at  rest.  It  is  true  that  there  will  be  a  difference  equivalent  to 
that  which  could  be  caused  by  a  change  of  the  mass  of  an  electron 
from  m0  to  Km0,  or  by  one  of  the  frequency  to  a  corresponding 
amount  (of  the  second  order),  but  certainly  this  can  have  no  per- 
ceptible influence. 

We  shall  next  consider  the  case  that  the  longitudinal  and  the 
transverse  mass  of  an  electron  bear  to  each  other  a  ratio  different 
from  /c2.  Let  us  write  for  their  values 

m  =  h'  m0>     m"  =  h"  m0  , 

where  /*'  and  h"  are  factors  having  similar  properties  as  the  above 
coefficient  a.  Then  the  phenomena  in  the  body  $  correspond  to 
those  in  a  body  g0  in  which  the  electrons  would  have  a  mass 

h' 
j»™0 

with  respect  to  accelerations  parallel  to   OX,  and  a  mass 

h" 
km« 

with  respect  to  accelerations  at  right  angles  to  that  line.  A  body 
of  this  kind  would  undoubtedly  show  a  double  refraction,  and  so 
would  the  moving  body  g  corresponding  to  it.  If,  for  example,  a 
ray  of  light  were  propagated  along  a  line  perpendicular  to  OX,  say 
in  the  direction  of  0  Y,  the  velocity  of  propagation  would  be  different 
according  as  the  vibrations  were  parallel  to  OX  or  to  OZ.  The 
frequency  of  the  light  used  being  denoted  by  n,  the  velocity  of  pro- 
pagation of  one  vibration  would  be  (by  the  theorem  with  which  we 
have  begun  this  paragraph)  as  if,  the  frequency  were 

fc'Vijfc-**!,, 
and  that  of  the  other  as  if  it  were 


the  masses  being  taken  equal  to  m0  in  both  cases. 

185.  For  a  spherical  electron  we  have,  according  to  the  for- 
mulae (70)  and  (71),  if  we  neglect  terms  of  an  order  higher  than 
the  second, 


and,  as  we  may  put 
the  above  values  become 


and     (l-±/J»)», 


SEARCH  FOR  DOUBLE  REFRACTION  CAUSED  BY  TRANSLATION.    219 
showing  a  difference  of 


since  the  velocity  of  the  earth  is  one  ten-thousandth  part  of  the 
speed  of  light.  In  the  case  of  water,  and  for  yellow  light,  this 
change  of  frequency  would  produce  a  change  in  the  index  of  refrac- 
tion of  about  2  •  10~u,  and  this,  therefore,  would  be  the  difference 
between  the  two  principal  refractive  indices  which  we  might  expect 
in  the  double  refraction  experiment. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  Rayleigh's1)  and  Brace's2) 
observations  were  conducted  in  such  a  manner  that  a  double  refrac- 
tion in  which  one  of  the  principal  directions  of  vibration  would  be 
parallel  to  the  earth's  motion  could  manifest  itself.  As  I  mentioned 
already,  the  results  were  invariably  negative,  though  Brace's  means 
of  observation  were  so  sensitive  that  a  difference  between  the  prin- 
cipal refractive  indices  of  10~12  could  not  have  escaped  him.  This  is 
about  the  twentieth  part  of  the  value  which  we  have  just  computed. 

It  is  true  that  we  have  based  our  calculations  on  certain 
assumptions  that  could  be  changed  for  others,  and  Brace  himself 
has  made  the  calculation  in  a  different  manner.  Yet,  I  think,  we 
may  confidently  conclude  that  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile 
the  result  of  his  observations  with  the  idea  of  rigid  spherical  electrons. 

It  must  be  added  that,  if  we  adhered  to  this  idea,  our  con- 
siderations concerning  the  molecular  motions  in  a  moving  system 
would  also  require  some  modification. 

186.  We  have  seen  in  §  184  that  there  would  be  no  contradic- 
tion with  Brace's  results,  if  the  ratio  between  the  longitudinal  and 
the  transverse  mass  had  the  value  k2.  This  raises  the  question  as 
to  whether  this  latter  ratio  can  be  obtained  without  the  assumption 
1=1,  which  has  been  the  origin  of  all  our  difficulties.  Unfortunately, 
this  way  out  is  barred  to  us,  the  equation 


- 

dw 

being  satisfied  only  by  a  constant  value  of  I. 

For   this    reason   the    optical    experiments    do    not    allow   us   to 
suppose,  as  has  been  done   by  Bucherer3)  and  Langevin4),  that  a 

1)  Rayleigh,    Does   motion   through   the   aether  cause  double  retraction? 
Phil.  Mag.  (0)  4  (1902),  p.  678. 

2)  D.  B.  Brace,  On  double  refraction  in  matter  moving  through  the  aether, 
Phil.  Mag.  (6)  1  (1904),  p.  317. 

3)  A.  H.  Bucherer,   Mathematische  Einfuhrung  in  die  Elektronentheorie, 
Leipzig,  1904,  p.  67  a.  58. 

4)  P.  Langevin,  La  physique  des  electrons,  Revue  "generate  des  sciences 
pures  et  appliquees  10  (1905),  p.  257. 


220  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

moving  electron  is  deformed  to  an  ellipsoid  of  the  form  and  orien- 
tation which  I  have  assigned  to  it,  but  having  the  original  volume, 
instead  of  the  original  equatorial  radius.  This  assumption  obviously 
amounts  to  putting  I  =  7c~  1/s  ,  so  that  the  dimensions  of  the  electron 
would  be  altered  in  the  ratios  fc~2/3,  A;1/3,  /c1/3.  When  we  use  this 
value  of  I,  the  two  electromagnetic  masses  become 


m"=(l  -/?*)-'/»  „,„, 
giving  for  the  ratio 


instead  of 

** 


1- 


If  we  apply  to  this  hypothesis  the  same  mode  of  calculation  as 
to  that  of  rigid  spheres,  we  are  led  to  a  double  refraction  that  is 
even  a  little  stronger,  so  that  the  contradiction  with  Brace's  experi- 
ments would  remain  the  same. 

This  is  certainly  to  be  regretted  as  the  new  assumption  has 
unmistakeable  advantages  over  my  original  one.  It  is  in  sufficient 
agreement  with  Kaufmann's  results,  and  the  idea  of  a  constant  vo- 
lume is  indeed  very  simple.  Following  it  we  should  not  be  obliged,  as 
we  were  in  §  180,  to  admit  the  existence  of  another  energy  than  the 
ordinary  electromagnetic  one.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  magnitude 
of  the  electromagnetic  energy1) 


and  the  expression 


derived  from  (318),  for  the  work  of  the  force,  in  case  the  electron 
has  a  rectilinear  motion  of  variable  velocity.  The  latter  quantity  is 
equal  to  the  increment  of  the  former  in  the  time  dt. 

187.  It  is  interesting,  now  to  turn  once  more  to  the  hypo- 
thesis I  =  1  ,  combined  with  the  formulae  (305)  for  the  masses  (assu- 
ming as  a  matter  of  fact  the  influence  of  the  translation  on  the 
masses  expressed  by  these  equations),  and  to  consider  the  equations 

1)  Note  81. 


GENERAL  ELECTROMAGNETIC  EQUATIONS  FOR  A  MOVING  SYSTEM.  221 


for  the  propagation  of  light  in  moving  transparent  bodies  to  which 
it  leads.  We  have  seen  that  the  vectors  d',  h',  p'  can  be  the  same 
functions  of  x',  y ,  z,  t'  both  in  a  moving  system  g  and  in  a  statio- 
nary one  j«50.  The  same  must  be  true  of  some  other  vectors  that 
can  be  derived  from  them,  viz.  1.  the  vector  E'  which  we  define  as  the 
mean  value  d'  of  d',  taken,  in  ^0  for  a  spherical  space,  infinitely 
small  in  a  physical  sense,  with  its  centre  at  the  point  considered, 
and  in  $  for  the  space  corresponding  to  that  sphere,  2.  the  mean 
value  h'  defined  in  the  same  way,  and  to  be -denoted  by  H',  3.  the 
vector 

P'  =  Np',  (319) 

where,  in  the  formulae  for  both  systems,  we  understand  by  N  the 
number  of  molecules  which  gc  contains  per  unit  of  volume,  and 
4.  a  vector  D'  defined  by  the  equation 

D'=E'+P'.  (320) 

Since  all  these  vectors  can  be,  in  §0  and  in  g,  the  same  functions 
of  x',  y',  z',  t',  the  equations  by  which  they  are  determined  must  be 
such  that  they  can  be  written  in  the  same  form. 

Now,  for  the  system  $0,  x,  y,  /,  t'  are  the  true  coordinates  and 
the  true  time,  whereas  the  above  vectors  are  what  we  formerly  called 
E,  H,  P  and  D.  As  we  know  that  they  satisfy  the  equations 

div  D  =  0, 
div  H  =  0, 

1    SO 

~c   W 


rot  H 


(321) 


rot  E  =  — 

c    St  ' 

we  may  be  sure  that,  for  the  moving  system, 

div'  D'  =  0, 
div'  H'  =  0, 

i  /    I  I '  1       (    U 

rot  H  = 


rot'  E'  = 


i   dHT 

c    df  ' 


(322) 


where  the  symbols  div'  and  rot'  have  the  meaning  that  has  been  ex- 
plained in  §  109. 

To  (321)  must  be  added  the  relation  between  E  and  D,  and  to 
(322)  a  corresponding  relation  between  E'  and  D',  so  that,  if  we  write 

D  =  J(E),  (323) 


222 


V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 


we  shall  also  have 

D'  =  F(ET).  (324) 

Here,  the  symbol  F  must  be  understood  in  a  very  general  sense; 
it  is  meant  to  include  all  forms  which  the  equations  may  take 
according  to  the  special  properties  of  the  body  considered.  If  the 
first  formula  contains,  as  may  very  well  be1),  differential  coefficients 
with  respect  to  t,  we  shall  find  in  the  second  the  corresponding 
differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  t'. 

Putting  D  =  E,   and   similarly  D'  =  E',   we   obtain   the   equations 
for  the  free  ether.     These,  however,  may  be  left  in  the  form 


div  d  =  0, 
div  h  =  0, 

rot  h  = 


rot  d  =  — 


dt' 

L  111 

c    dt 


(325) 


for   the   system   g0,    there    being   no    necessity    for   considering    mean 
values  when  there  are  no  molecules,  and  we  may  write  for  them 

div'  d'  =  0, 
div'  h'  =  0, 


rot'  h'  =  -    „-,- , 


rot'  d'  -  - 


i    ah' 


(326) 


when  we  are  concerned  with  |§. 

As  the  ether  does  not  share  the  translation  w,  the  two  last  sets 
of  equations  serve  for  exactly  the  same  phenomena.  The  one  is 
derived  from  the  other  by  purely  mathematical  transformations,  the 
only  difference  between  the  two  being,  that  the  electromagnetic  field 
is  referred  to  axes  fixed  in  the  ether  and  to  the  ,,true"  time  in  (325), 
but  to  moving  axes  and  ,,local"  time  in  (326),  and  that  it  is  de- 
scribed in  the  two  cases  by  means  of  different  vectors.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  phenomena  to  which  the  equations  (321,  323)  and  (322, 
324)  apply,  though  corresponding  to  each  other,  cannot  be  said  to  be 
identical. 

188.  Having  got  thus  far,  we  may  proceed  as  is  often  done  in 
theoretical  physics.  We  may  remove  the  scaffolding  by  means  of 
which  the  system  of  equations  has  been  built  up,  and,  without 
troubling  ourselves  any  more  about  the  theory  of  electrons  and  the 


1)  Note  82. 


EINSTEIN'S  THEORY.  223 

difficulties  amidst  which  it  has  landed  us,  we  may  postulate  the 
above  equations  as  a  concise  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  accurate  de- 
scription of  the  phenomena.  From  this  point  of  view,  E,  H,  D 
in  one  system,  and  E',  H',  D'  in  the  other,  are  simply  ,,certaiu" 
vectors,  about  whose  meaning  we  say  just  so  much  as  is  necessary 
for  fixing  unequivocally  for  every  case  their  directions  and  magni- 
tudes. 

As  to  the  grounds  on  which  the  equations  recommend  them- 
selves, these  are:  1.  that  the  formulae  (321),  combined  with  suitable 
assumptions  concerning  the  relation  between  E  and  D,  can  serve  for 
the  explanation  of  optical  phenomena  in  transparent  bodies,  whether 
singly  or  doubly  refracting,  2.  that  the  identity  in  form  of  (321,  323) 
and  (322,  324)  accounts  for  the  failure  of  all  attempts  to  discover 
an  influence  of  the  earth's  motion  by  experiments  with  terrestrial 
sources,  and  3.  that  the  equations  (322,  324)  give  the  right  value 
for  Fresnel's  coefficient. 

189.  The  denominations  ,,effective  coordinates",  ,,effective  time" 
etc.  of  which  we  have  availed  ourselves  for  the  sake  of  facilitating 
our  mode  of  expression,  have  prepared  us  for  a  very  interesting 
interpretation  of  the  above  results,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to 
Einstein.1)  Let  us  imagine  an  observer,  whom  we  shall  call  A0  and 
to  whom  we  shall  assign  a  fixed  position  in  the  ether,  to  be  engaged 
in  the  study  of  the  phenomena  going  on  in  the  stationary  system  g0. 
We  shall  suppose  him  to  be  provided  with  a  measuring  rod  and  a 
clock,  even,  for  his  convenience,  let  us  say,  with  a  certain  number 
of  clocks  placed  at  various  points  of  ^0,  and  adjusted  to  each  other 
with  perfect  accuracy.  By  these  means  he  will  be  able  to  determine 
the  coordinates  x,  y,  z  for  any  point,  and  the  time  t  for  any  instant, 
and  by  studying  the  electromagnetic  field  as  it  manifests  itself  at 
different  places  and  times,  he  will  be  led  to  the  equations  (321,  323). 

Let  A  be  a  second  observer,  whose  task  it  is  to  examine  the 
phenomena  in  the  system  j*},  and  who  himself  also  moves  through 
the  ether  with  the  velocity  w,  without  being  aware  either  of  this 
motion  or  of  that  of  the  system  jjj. 

Let  this  observer  use  the  same  measuring  rod  (or  an  exact  copy 
of  it)  that  has  served  A0,  the  rod  having  acquired  in  one  way  or 
another  the  velocity  w  before  coming  into  his  hands.  Then,  by  our 
assumption  concerning  the  dimensions  of  moving  bodies,  the  divisions 
of  the  scale  will  in  general  have  a  length  that  differs  from  the  ori- 

1)  See  Ann.  d.  Phys.  17  (1905),  p.  891;  18  (1906),  p.  639;  20  (1906),  p.  627; 
21  (1SI06),  p.  683;  23  (1907),  p.  197,  371,  and  the  comprehensive  exposition  of 
Einstein's  theory:  t)ber  das  Relativitatsprinzip  und  die  ana  demselben  ge- 
zogenen  Folgerungen,  Jahrb.  d.  Radioaktivitiit  u.  Elektronik  4  (1908),  p.  411. 


224  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

ginal  one,  and  will  even  change  whenever  the  rod  is  turned  round, 
the  law  of  these  changes  being,  that,  in  corresponding  positions  in 
^0  and  $,  the  rod  has  equal  projections  on  the  plane  YOZ,  but 
projections  on  OX  whose  ratio  is  as  7c  to  1.  It  is  clear  that,  since 
the  observer  is  unconscious  of  these  changes,  he  will  be  unable 
to  measure  the  true  relative  coordinates  xr  of  the  points  of  the 
system.  His  readings  will  give  him  only  the  values  of  the  effec- 
tive coordinates  x  and,  of  course,  those  of  y,  a  which,  for  1=  1, 
are  equal  to  yr,  zr.  Hence,  relying  on  his  rod,  he  will  not  find  the 
true  shape  of  bodies.  He  will  take  for  a  sphere  what  really  is  an 
ellipsoid,  and  his  cubic  centimetre  will  be,  not  a  true  cubic  centi- 
metre, but  a  parallelepiped  k  times  smaller.  This,  however,  contains 
a  quantity  of  matter,  which,  in  the  absence  of  the  translation,  would 
occupy  a  cubic  centimetre,  so  that,  if  A  counts  the  molecules  in  his 
cubic  centimetre,  he  will  find  the  same  number  N  as  A0.  Moreover,  his 
unit  of  mass  will  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  stationary  observer,  if 
each  of  them  chooses  as  unit  the  mass  of  the  water  occupying  a 
volume  equal  to  his  cubic  centimetre. 

With  the  clocks  of  A  the  case  is  the  same  as  with  his  measu- 
ring rod.  If  we  suppose  the  forces  in  the  clock-work  to  be  liable 
to  the  changes  determined  by  (300),  the  motion  of  two  equal  clocks, 
one  in  $„  and  the  other  in  j»j,  will  be  such  that  the  effective  coordi- 
nates of  the  moving  parts  are,  in  both  systems,  the  same  functions 
of  the  effective  time.  Consequently,  if  the  hand  of  the  clock  in  J>0 
returns  to  its  initial  position  after  an  interval  of  time  &,  the  hand 
of  the  clock  in  $  will  do  so  after  an  increment  equal  to  &  of  the 
effective  time  t'.  Therefore,  a  clock  in  the  system  g  will  indicate 
the  progress  of  the  effective  time,  and  without  his  knowing  anything 
about  it,  A's  ciocks  will  go  k  times  slower  than  those  of  A0. 

19O.  It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that,  if  the  moving 
observer  measures  the  speed  of  light,  by  making  a  ray  of  light  travel 
from  a  point  P  to  a  point  Q,  and  then  back  to  P,  he  will  find  the 
value  c.  This  may  be  shown  for  every  direction  of  the  line  PQ1), 
but  it  will  suffice  to  give  the  proof  for  the  case  that  the  line  is 
either  parallel  to  OX,  or  at  right  angles  to  it.  If  L  is  the  distance 
between  P  and  Q  as  measured  by  A,  then  in  the  first  case  the  true 

distance  is  ,  and,  as  both  points  move  through  the  ether  with  the 
velocity  w,  the  time  required  by  the  ray  of  light  is 

L  (     1        .        1     \  *cL  ML  -.a-- 

k  \  c  +  w  +  c  -  «'/       A-(cs  —  ~w*)          c 


1)  Note  88. 


MEASUREMENTS  IN  A  MOVING  SYSTEM.  225 

In  the  second  case  the  light  has  to  travel  along  two  sides  of  an 
isoscele  triangle  (cf.  §  167),  whose  height  is  L  and  whose  half  base  is 
to  one  of  the  sides  as  iv  to  c.  The  side  is  therefore 


and  the  time   taken  by  the  beam  of  light  to  return  to  its  starting 
point  is  again  given  by  (327).    As  A's  clock  goes  k  times  too  slow, 

it  will  mark  an  interval  of  time        .   so  that  the  observer  will  con- 

C 

elude  that  the  velocity  of  the  rays  is  equal  to  c. 

Let  us  now  suppose  him  to  be  provided  with  a  certain  number 
of  clocks  placed  at  different  points  of  his  system,  and  to  adjust  these 
clocks  to  each  other  by  the  best  means  at  his  disposal.  In  order  to 
do  so  with  two  clocks  placed  at  the  points  P  and  Q,  at  a  measured 
distance  L  from  each  other,  he  may  start  an  optical  signal  from  P 
the  moment  at  which  the  first  clock  marks  the  time  t'  =  0,  and 
so  set  the  second  clock  that,  at  the  arrival  of  the  signal,  it  marks 

the  time  —  ,  making  allowance  in  this  way  for  the  time  of  passage 

of  the  light  which  he  judges  to  be  —  « 

Let  us  suppose  that  P  lies  at  the  origin  of  coordinates,  and  Q 
on  the  positive  axis  of  x;  further,  that  a  clock  without  translation  and 
therefore  indicating  the  true  time,  marks  the  instant  0  at  the  moment 
of  signalling.  Then,  on  account  of  the  different  rates  of  a  moving 
and  a  stationary  clock,  we  shall  have  continually  for  the  clock  at  P 


At  the  moment  of  arrival  of  the  signal  the  true  time  will  be 


k(c  —  w)' 

since    this    is    the   interval   required   for  the   passage  of  the  light  be- 
tween  the   points  P  and   Q,   which   move   with   the   velocity  w  and 

whose  true  distance  is    ;  • 

Now,  since  at  this  moment  the  time  indicated  by  the  clock  at  Q 
is      ,  its  indication,  at  any  other  true  time  t,  will  be 

/'_  L  +  1  [t  L     1 

T+     k    L  t(c-«7)J' 

or,  since  L  =  x 


Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  15 


226  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

This  agrees  exactly  with  (288),  so  that  we  see  that  when  the 
clocks  are  adjusted  by  means  of  optical  signals,  each  of  them  will 
indicate  the  local  time  t'  corresponding  to  its  position. 

The  proof  may  easily  be  extended  to  other  directions  of  the 
line  joining  the  two  places.1) 

191.  It  is  of  importance  not  to  forget  that,  in  doing  all  that 
has  been  said,  the  observer  would  remain  entirely  unconscious  of 
his  system  moving  (with  himself)  through  the  ether,  and  of  the 
errors  of  his  rod  and  his  clocks. 

Continuing  his  researches  he  may  now  undertake  a  study  of  the 
electromagnetic  phenomena  in  his  system,  in  exactly  the  same  manner 
in  which  A0  has  done  so  in  his.  We  can  predict  what  his  results 
will  be,  because  we  know  the  phenomena  by  our  theorem  of  corre- 
sponding states.  From  this  we  can  infer  that,  if  the  moving  observer 
determines  velocities  and  accelerations  in  terms  of  his  effective  co- 
ordinates and  his  effective  time,  if  he  deduces  the  intensity  of  forces 
from  the  acceleration  which  they  give  to  unit  of  mass,  and  if  he 
measures  electric  charges  in  the  ordinary  way  by  means  of  the  electro- 
static actions  which  they  exert  on  each  other,  his  unit  of  electricity 
will  be  equal  to  that  chosen  by  A0.  His  density  of  charge,  on  the 
contrary,  will  not  be  the  true  density  Q,  but  what  we  have  called 
the  effective  density  p'.  Further,  if  he  determines  the  force  acting 
on  unit  charge  at  some  point  of  the  electromagnetic  field,  he  will 
find  the  vector  d'.-)  Similarly  he  will  be  led  to  consider  the  vector  h', 
and,  pursuing  his  study,  he  will  sooner  or  later  come  to  establishing 
the  equations  that  determine  the  field,  namely  the  formulae  (326)  for 
the  free  ether  and  (322,  324)  for  a  ponderable  body. 

He  may  attain  this  latter  object  by  different  courses.  Perhaps  he 
will  be  satisfied  with  the  idea  that  D'  is  a  certain  vector  which  he  has 
for  the  first  time  occasion  to  introduce  when  working  with  a  charged 
condensor.  Or,  if  he  develops  a  theory  of  electrons,  he  will  get  the 
notion  of  the  electric  moment  of  a  particle,  whose  components  he 
will  naturally  define  by  the  expressions  ^cx,  Vej/',  "£ez,  so  that 
what  he  calls  the  moment  is  in  reality  the  vector  p'  of  our  equa- 
tions (306).  After  having  introduced  it,  the  moving  observer  will 
define  P'  and  D'  by  the  formulae  (319)  and  (320). 

We  may  sum  up  these  considerations  by  saying  that,  if  both  A0 
and  A  were  to  keep  a  record  of  their  observations  and  the  con- 
clusions drawn  from  them,  these  records  would,  on  comparison,  be 
found  to  be  exactly  identical. 

192.  Attention  must 'now  be  drawn  to  a  remarkable  reciprocity 
that  has  been  pointed  out  by  Einstein.  Thus  far  it  has  been  the 

1)  Note  84.     2)  Note  85. 


EINSTEIN'S  THEORY.  227 

task  of  the  observer  A0  to  examine  the  phenomena  in  the  stationary 
system,  whereas  A  has  had  to  confine  himself  to  the  system  g.  Let 
us  now  imagine  that  each  observer  is  able  to  see  the  system  to  which 
the  other  belongs,  and  to  study  the  phenomena  going  on  in  it.  Then, 
AQ  will  be  in  the  position  in  which  we  have  all  along  imagined 
ourselves  to  be  (though,  strictly  speaking,  on  account  of  the  earth's 
motion,  we  are  in  the  position  of  -4);  in  studying  the  electromagnetic 
field  in  g,  he  will  be  led  to  introduce  the  new  variables  x,  y,  /, 
d',  h',  etc.  and  so  he  will  establish  the  equations  (326)  and  (322,  324). 
The  reciprocity  consists  in  this  that,  if  the  observer  A  describes  in 
exactly  the  same  manner  the  field  in  the  stationary  system,  he  will 
describe  it  accurately. 

In  order  to  see  this,  we  shall  revert  to  the  equations  (287)  and 
(288),  which  in  our  present  hypothesis  I  —  1  take  the  form 


x'-Kx-wt),    y'-y,    *'-*,     f-kt-z.         (328) 

Let  P  be  a  point  belonging  to  the  system  g0  and  let  us  fix 
our  attention  on  the  coordinate  x'  which  it  has.  with  respect  to  the 
moving  axes  of  $,  for  two  definite  values  t'  and  t'  +  A£'  of  the 
local  time.  Since  x  is  constant  for  this  point  P,  we  have  by  the 
last  of  the  above  equations 

At-yAf, 

and  by  the  first 


Judging  by  his  means  of  observation,  the  observer  A  will  therefore 
ascribe  to  the  system  g0  a  velocity  w  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that 
of  the  positive  axis  of  x'. 

Just  as  A0,  in  his  theory  of  the  electromagnetic  field  in  j^,  nas 
changed  the  coordinates  x,  y,  s,  the  time  t  and  the  electromagnetic 
vectors  d,  h,  E,  H,  P,  D  for  the  variables  (328),  the  vectors  d',  h', 
whose  components  are 


and  the  vectors  E',  H',  P',  D',  so  the  observer  A  will  introduce,  in- 
stead of  the  quantities  x,  y,  /,  t',  d',  etc.  which  belong  to  his  system, 
certain  new  quantities  which  we  shall  distinguish  by  double  dashes, 
and  which  will  serve  him  in  his  theory  of  the  system  g0. 

He  will  define  these  new  quantities  by  equations  analogous  to 
(328)  and  (329),  replacing  w  by  —  w,  which  however  does  not  affect 
the  constant  U.  His  transformation  will  therefore  be  as  follows 

15* 


228  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

x"=k(x'+wf),    y"  =  y,    /'=/,    *"  =  ft  (f  +  -*U'),     (330) 


c-c  -,"-*+",  C->*:-T 


If  he  also  defines  the  vectors  E",  H",  D"  similarly  to  ^40's  definition 
of  E',  H',  D',  the  observer  A  will  finally  find  the  following  equations, 
to  be  applied  to  tbe  system  g0,  and  corresponding  to  (326),  (322, 
324);  for  the  ether 

div"d"=0, 
div"  h"  =  0, 

I 

rot"  h"  = 


c   St"  '• 

,„  ,„  i   dh" 

rot    d    = -„- „  , 

c    ct    • 


(332) 


and  for  a  ponderable  body 

div  D"  -  0, 
divH"=0, 

rot"  H"  = 

rot"  E"  = 

D  = 

The  symbols  div"  and  rot"  will  require  no  further  explanation. 


1  ?H" 


(333) 


(334) 


193.  It  remains  to  show  that  these  formulae  contain  an  accurate 
description  of  the  phenomena  in  ^0.  The  proof  of  this  is  very 
simple,  because,  if  we  look  at  them  somewhat  more  closely,  the 
equations  are  found  to  be  the  same  which  A0  has  used  for  the 
purpose. 

Indeed,  if  we  solve  x,  y,  z,  t  from  the  equations  (328)  and  Ax, 
dy,  dz,  h.,.,  hy,  h.  from  (329),  we  find  values  agreeing  exactly  with 
(330)  and  (831),  so  that 


x  =  x,    y  = 


r-t, 


y  =y,    z  = 
d"=d,    h"=h, 

by  which  the  identity  of  the  sets  of  equations  (332)  and  (325)  is 
demonstrated.  As  to  the  equations  (333,  334)  and  (321,  323),  the 
only  difference  between  the  two  sets  is,  that  one  contains  the  vectors 
E"  and  D",  and  the  other  the  vectors  E  and  D.  If  these  four  quan- 
tities are  considered  simply  as  ,,certain"  vectors  (represented  by 


PRINCIPLE  OF  RELATIVITY.  229 

symbols  the  choice  of  which  is  immaterial),  this  similarity  in  form, 
together  with  our  knowledge  that  in  free  ether  E"=E,  D"=D, 
H"=H  (since  for  this  medium  E"=D"=d",  E  =  D  -  d,  H"=h", 
H  =  h)  must,  and  can,  suffice  for  our  conclusion  that  the  phenomena 
in  the  system  ^0  can  be  described  by  means  of  the  equations  (333, 
334)  just  as  well  as  by  (321,  323). 

We  may  go  a  step  farther  if  we  suppose  that  the  moving  and 
the  stationary  observer,  or  rather  theorist,  as  they  have  now  become, 
establish  a  theory  of  molecules  and  of  electrons.  A$  has  defined 
E',  H'  as  the  mean  values  of  d',  h',  and  for  the  other  vectors  he  has 
used  the  equations 


P'  »  Nf', 
D'  =  E'  +  P'. 

Similarly,  A  will  define  E"  and  H"  as  the  mean  values  of  d"  and  h", 
so  that  these  vectors  become  equal  to  the  mean  values  of  d  and  h, 
i.  e.  to  E  and  H.  He  will  put  for  each  molecule 


and  further 

P"  ,-  JVp", 

D"  =  E"  +  P". 

Comparing  these  formulae  with  (307)  (for  which  we  may  write 
p,,.  =  ^ex,  etc.)  and  the  equations  P  =  Np,  D  =  E  +  P,  and  keep- 
ing in  mind  that  x"  =  x,  y"=y,  z"=e,  we  see  that  really 

p"=p,    P"=P,    D'=D. 

194.  It  will  be  clear  by  what  has  been  said  that  the  impressions 
received  by  the  two  observers  A0  and  A  would  be  alike  in  all  re- 
spects. It  would  be  impossible  to  decide  which  of  them  moves  or 
stands  still  with  respect  to  the  ether,  and  there  would  be  no  reason 
for  preferring  the  times  and  lengths  measured  by  the  one  to  those 
determined  by  the  other,  nor  for  saying  that  either  of  them  is  in 
possession  of  the  ,,true"  times  or  the  ,,true"  lengths.  This  is  a  point 
which  Einstein  has  laid  particular  stress  on,  in  a  theory  in  which 
he  starts  from  what  he  calls  the  principle  of  relativity,  i.  e.  the  prin- 
ciple that  the  equations  by  means  of  which  physical  phenomena  may 
be  described  are  not  altered  in  form  when  we  change  the  axes  of 
coordinates  for  others  having  a  uniform  motion  of  translation  rela- 
tively to  the  original  system. 

I  cannot  speak  here  of  the  many  highly  interesting  applications 
which  Einstein  has  made  of  this  principle.  His  results  concerning 
electromagnetic  and  optical  phenomena  (leading  to  the  same  contra- 


230  V.  OPTICAL  PHENOMENA  IN  MOVING  BODIES. 

diction  with  Kaufmann's  results  that  was  pointed  out  in  §  179)  agree 
in  the  main  with  those  which  we  have  obtained  in  the  preceding 
pages,  the  chief  difference  being  that  Einstein  simply  postulates 
what  we  'have  deduced,  with  some  difficulty  and  not  altogether  satis- 
factorily, from  the  fundamental  equations  of  the  electromagnetic  field. 
By  doing  so,  he  may  certainly  take  credit  for  making  us  see  in  the 
negative  result  of  experiments  like  those  of  Michelson,  Rayleigh 
and  Brace,  not  a  fortuitous  compensation  of  opposing  effects,  hut 
the  manifestation  of  a  general  and  fundamental  principle. 

Yet,  I  think,  something  may  also  be  claimed  in  favour  of  the 
form  in  which  I  have  presented  the  theory.  I  cannot  but  regard  the 
ether,  which  can  be  the  seat  of  an  electromagnetic  field  with  its 
energy  and  its  vibrations,  as  endowed  with  a  certain  degree  of  sub- 
stantiality, however  different  it  may  be  from  all  ordinary  matter.  In 
this  line  of  thought,  it  seems  natural  not  to  assume  at  starting  that 
it  can  never  make  any  difference  whether  a  body  moves  through  the 
ether  or  not,  and  to  measure  distances  and  lengths  of  time  by  means 
of  rods  and  clocks  having  a  fixed  position  relatively  to  the  ether. 

It  would  be  unjust  not  to  add  that,  besides  the  fascinating 
boldness  of  its  starting  point,  Einstein's  theory  has  another  marked 
advantage  over  mine.  Whereas  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  for 
the  equations  referred  to  moving  axes  exactly  the  same  form  as  for 
those  which  apply  to  a  stationary  system,  Einstein  has  accomplished 
this  by  means  of  a  system  of  new  variables  slightly  different  from 
those  which  I  have  introduced.1)  I  have  not  availed  myself  of  his 
substitutions,  only  because  the  formulae  are  rather  complicated  and 
look  somewhat  artificial,  unless  one  deduces  them  from  the  principle 
of  relativity  itself.2) 

1)  Note  86.        2)  Note  87. 


NOTES.1) 

1  (Page  6).     Equation  (4)   is   equivalent  to  the  three  formulae 
dhz       ghy  =  1  8tx 

2y        oz  ~  c    8t  ' 

Sb*  _  ah,  =  £  8dj, 

~8z       '8x        c    8t  ' 

^y  _  ih*  =  A.  SA> 

8x       8y        c    8t 

When  the  second  of  these,  differentiated  with   respect  to  g,  is 
subtracted  from  the  third,  differentiated  with  respect  to  y,  we  find 

d  (8hx  ,  0b,      8N,\       Ah        i  J>_  M  _  0d,\  (f 

8cc\Jx+  8y  +  dz)         y  *  ~  c    8t\8y        dt)> 

or,  if  (3)  and  (5)  are  taken  into  account, 


Corresponding  formulae  for  hy,  h2  and  for  the  components  of  d 
are  obtained  in  a  similar  manner. 

It  may  be  noticed  that  the  quantity 

d_  /8hj,  _  2JU  _    S_  /ah*  _  ah,N 
8y\cx       ~8y)       dz\dz        da)' 

which  we  have  calculated  in  the  above  transformation,  is  the  first 
component  of  the  rotation  of  rot  h,  or,  as  we  may  say,  of  rot  rot  h, 
and  that  the  expression  on  the  left-hand  side  of  (i)  is  the  first  com- 
ponent of  the  vector 

grad  div  h  —  Ah. 

In  general,  denoting  by  A  any  vector,  we  may  write 

rot  rot  A  =  grad  div  A  —  A  A,  (.2) 

a  theorem  which  enables  us  to  perform  in  the  terms  of  vector  ana- 
lysis the  elimination  of  d  from  the  fundamental  equations.  Indeed, 
we  may  deduce  from  (4) 

rot  rot  h  =        rot  d, 


1)  The  numbers  of  the  formulae  in  this  Appendix  will  be  printed  in  italics. 


232  NOTES. 

rot  d  =  -£j  rot  d, 

L  1 
c    8t 


grad  div  h  —  Ah  =  -  -  -~r  rot  d, 


i.  e.,  if  we  use  (3)  and  (5), 


Similarly,  the  equation 

Ad  =  -J,-  -~ 

is  obtained  il  we  begin  by  considering  the  vector  rot  rot  d. 

2  (Page  16).  The  definitions  given  in  §  2  lead  to  the  general 
formula 

div  rot  A  =  0. 

Hence  the  equation  (19)  requires  that 

div  C  =  div  (d  +  pV)  =  0,  (3) 

i.  e.  that  the  total  current,  which  is  composed  of  the  displacement 
current  d  and  the  convection  current  pV,  be  solenoidally  distributed. 
In  order  to  show  that  it  is  so  whenever  the  condition  mentioned  in 
the  text  is  fulfilled,  we  shall  fix  our  attention  on  an  element  of  the 
charged  matter,  situated  at  the  time  t  at  the  point  (x,  y,  z),  and 
therefore,  at  the  time  t  +  dt,  at  the  point  (x  +  Vxdt,  y -\- Vydt, 
z  -f-  V2f?<).  By  a  well  known  theorem  of  the  theory  of  infinitely 
small  deformations,  the  volume  of  the  element,  if  initially  equal  to  dS, 
will  have  become 

f  1    i    /dvx   ,    9v»   ,   e'V.Nj,)  ,„ 

1  +  (-„-  *  +  -*-  +  ~)dt\dS  (4) 

{          \cx       cy        cz)      } 

at  the  end  of  the  interval  dt. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  time  having  changed  by  dt  and  the 
coordinates  by  Vxdt,  Vydt,  V.dt,  the  density  of  the  charge,  which  at 
first  was  p,  has  become 


The   product   of  this   expression   by   (4)   must  be  equal  to  the 
original  charge  gdS  of  the  element,  so  that  we  have 


or 

0,  (5) 


3,  4  NOTES.  233 

from   which,   taking   into   account  (17),   we   are   at  once  led  to  the 
equation  (5). 

3  (Page  17).     The  method  of  elimination  is  exactly  like  that 
which  we  used  in  Note  1.     We  may  infer  from  (20)  and  (19) 

rot  rot  d  =         n  rot  h, 
or,  using  (2), 


^ 


rot  rot  h  =       rot  d  +       rot(pv), 


grad  div  d  —  Ad  =  j-  (rot  h), 

grad  div  h  -  Ah  =  1  A  (rot  d)  +  j-  rot  (Q  v), 

and  we  get  the  formulae  (24)  and  (25),  if  we  substitute  the  values 
of  div  d,  rot  h,  div  h  and  rot  d  taken  from  (17),  (19),  (18)  and  (20). 

4  (Page  18).  The  following  considerations,  showing,  not  only 
that  the  function  (30)  satisfies  the  differential  equation  (29)  (which 
might  be  verified  by  direct  differentiation),  but  also  under  what  con- 
ditions it  may  be  said  to  be  the  only  solution,  are  taken  from  a 
paper  by  Kirchhoff  on  the  theory  of  rays  of  light.1) 

They  are  based  on  Green's  theorem  and  on  the  proposition 
that,  if  r  is  the  distance  from  a  fixed  point,  and  F  an  arbitrary 
function,  the  expression 


has  the  property  expressed  by 


This  follows  at  once  from  the  formula 


_- 

*       dr*  ""  r    or  ""  r      cr*   ' 

which    is   true   for  any  function    of  r,   not   explicitly   containing   the 
coordinates,  and  in  virtue  of  which  (£)  assumes  the  form 


=  _ 
dr*    '      cs     df 

It  is  well  known  that 


and 
are  solutions  of  this  equation. 


1)  Ann.  d.  Phys.  u.  Chem.  18  (1883),  p.  063. 


234  NOTES.  4 

Let  6  be  the  bounding  surface  of  a  space  S  throughout  which 
ip  is  subjected  to  the  equation  (29),  P  the  point  of  S  for  which  we 
want  to  determine  the  function  ,  </S  an  element  of  volume  situated 
at  the  distance  r  from  P,  £  a  small  spherical  surface  having  P  as 
centre,  «  and  N  the  normals  to  <y  and  2,  both  drawn  towards  the 
outside. 

Introducing  the  auxiliary  expression 

'-!*('+  f).     . 

where  F  is  a  function  to  be   specified  further  on,  we  shall  consider 
the  integral 


extended  to  the  space  between  6  and  2?. 

In  the  first  place  we  have  by  Green's  theorem 


and  in  the  second  place,  on  account  of  (29)  and  (C), 


Hence,  combining  the  two  results, 


This  equation  must  hold  for  all  values  of  £.  After  being  mul- 
tiplied by  dt,  it  may  therefore  be  integrated  between  arbitrary 
limits  £j  and  t2,  giving 


'2 

/'  /*,  n 

/  /   /  (7^                 c  t|) 

t/  t/  \  3»                CW 


From  this  equation  we  may  draw  the  solution  of  our  problem 
by  means  of  a  proper  choice  of  the  function  F,  which  has  thus  far 
been  left  indeterminate. 


4  NOTES.  235 

We  shall  suppose  that  -F(f)  differs  from  zero  only  for  values 
of  s  lying  between  0  and  a  certain  positive  quantity  d,  this  latter 
being  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  the  change  which  any  of  the 
other  quantities  occurring  in  the  problem  undergoes  during  an  interval 
of  time  equal  to  s.  As  to  the  function  F  itself,  we  shall  suppose 
its  values  between  s  =  0  and  £  =  d  to  be  so  great  that 

ds=l. 


Since,  for  a  fixed  value  of  r, 

t, 


«, 

•1  T  -- 

it  is  clear  that  on  the  above  assumptions 


^    \-~)dt=l, 
and 


if  we  understand  by  %  one  of  the  functions  of  t  with  which  we  are 
concerned,  and  by  tt  and  <2  values  of  t,  such  that 


It  will  presently  be  seen  that,  in  the  discussion  of  the  equation  (7), 
the  formula  (<5)  enables  us  to  select  as  it  were  the  values  of  if>  and  o> 
corresponding  to  definite  moments. 

Let   t2   have   a  fixed   positive  value  and  ^    a  negative   one,    so 

great  that  even  for  the  points  of  a  most  distant  from  P,  ^  +  -  <0. 
Then  all  values  of  %  occurring  in  the  last  term  of  (7)  are  zero.  So 

are  also  the  values  of  •**•  in  that  term.     Indeed. 

ct 

&X         !  W/_L  ''  \ 

jf"Tr(t+T) 

and  this  vanishes  for  t  =  tL  and  t  =  ta  because  F'(e),  like  f  (s)  itself 
vanishes  for  all  values  of  s  outside  the  interval  (0,  d).  The  last 
term  on  the  right-hand  side  of  (7)  is  thus  seen  to  be  zero. 


236  NOTES. 

The  term  containing  co  may  be  written 


where 

/*       ,        .. 

\dt 


', 

relates   to    a    particular   element    of  volume   dS,   at   the    distance    r 
from  P.     Hence,  on  account  of  (8) 
d 


By  similar  reasoning  it  is  found  that 


We   have   next   to   consider  the   integral   containing  ~-  •     This 
differential  coefficient  being  equal  to 


we  have 


The  first  integral  is 


and  the  second  expression  may  be  integrated  by  parts: 


=  T1  ?r-rftf  tF(t+  '-\[-  C1   ?'d* 
J  r   on  \         c  J  ti     J   r   on      J 

=  —  /       -  -ii>/       r\  de. 

J    r    '«     ('—7) 

because  both  Fu,  +  —  J  and  F(t^+  j\  vanish. 


dt 


4  NOTES.  237 

Combining  these   results    we   find   for   the    right-hand    member 

of  (7) 


/*(  1  /ei|>\  8   fl\  .                       1    or  .               } 

r\    ~  —  \  —  \1>l           r\   +             r~i>/           r\  > 

/If  \dn   (t=--\  8n\r/    («--—)        cr  on^l/--—  )  I 

l/     I                       \,            c  /  \            c  /                               V            c  /  I 


We  shall  now  suppose  the  radius  R  of  the  sphere  21  to  diminish 
indefinitely.  By  this  the  first  integral  in  our  last  expression  is  made 
to  extend  to  within  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  point  P. 
The  remaining  terms  remain  unchanged,  but  for  the  quantity  on  the 
left-hand  side  of  (7)  we  must  take  its  limiting  value  for  lim  H  =  0. 

As  the  integral  over  the  sphere  has  the  same  form  as  that  over 
the  surface  «?  which  we  have  just  considered,  we  may  write 


».. 

3%  04? 


)dZ 


1     8r  . 


or,   since   the   normal  N  has   the  direction   of  r,   and  since,   at   the 
sphere,  r  =  R, 


Now,  when  R  tends  towards  0,  the  integrals  with    „    vanish,  so 
that  the  expression  reduces  to 


Let  i/>j  and  fa  be  the  extreme  values  of  ty j       R\  on  the  surface 
of  the  sphere.     Then  (ff)  is  included  between 

(>!     and 


But  both  ^t  and  i/>2  have  for  their  limit  the  value  of  ^  at  the 
point  P  for  the  instant  t  =  0,  say  ^>p(,_^  so  that  the  limit  of  (5) 
is  seen  to  be 


and  equation  (~)  ultimately  becomes 


238  NOTES. 


1      /'(  1    /01/A  a    /I  \   ,  1    Sr  .  \ 

^J   7V*sk.-i)  -  J5W*(,.--)  +  c''  «"«*('—') 
«/    l  V       «  /  \       «  /  \       «  /  J 


, 

This  determines  the  value  of  ^  at  the  chosen  point  P  for  the 
instant  t  =  0.  We  are,  however,  free  in  the  choice  of  this  instant, 
and  therefore  the  formula  may  serve  to  calculate  the  value  of  typ 
for  any  instant  t;  for  this  we  have  only  to  replace  the  values  of  w, 

V>,  -^-  and  ifj  on  the  right-hand   side  by  those  relating  to  the  time 

t  ---     Distinguishing  these  by  square  brackets,   and  omitting  the 
index  P,  we  find 


_ 

lit 

The  formula  (30)  given  in  the  text  is  obtained  by  making  the 
surface  0  recede  on  all  sides  to  infinite  distance,  by  which  in  many 
cases  the  surface  integral  is  made  to  vanish.  We  may  suppose,  for 
example,  that  in  distant  regions  of  space,  the  function  #  has  been 

zero  until  some  definite  instant  tn.     The  time  t  --    to  which  the 


n. 


c 


quantities  [t/>],  |      -J,    [^]    relate,    always    falls    below    t0   when   r   in- 
creases, so  that,  finally,  all  the  quantities  in  square  brackets  become  0. 

5  (Page  19).  When  a  vector  A,  whose  components  we  shall 
suppose  to  be  continuous  functions  of  the  coordinates  (cf.  §  7)  is 
solenoidally  distributed,  so  that 

div  A  =  0,  (17) 

we  can  always  find  a  second  vector  B  such  that 

A  =  rot  B. 
It  suffices  for  this  purpose  to  put 


Indeed,  we  find  from  this,  if  we  use  equation  (2}  of  Note  1  and 
the  above  equation  (11),  that 


1      Trotro 
=  T 

4jrJ          r 


rotrotA 
rot 

r 


and  this  is  equal  to  A  in  virtue  of  Poisson's  theorem. 


5  NOTES.  239 

In  this  demonstration  we  have  used  the  theorem  that,  if  o  is 
continuous,  a  potential  function  of  the  form 

°<*<s 

may  be  differentiated  with  respect  to  one  of  the  coordinates  by  simply 
differentiating  o  under  the  sign  of  integration  with  respect  to  the 
corresponding  coordinate  of  the  element  dS. 

Now,  equation  (18)  shows  that  the  magnetic  force  h  is  solenoi- 
dally  distributed.  Therefore  we  can  always  find  a  vector  a  such  that 

h  =  rot  a.  (12) 

After  having  done  so,  we  may  write  for  the  equation  (20) 

rot(d+c1a)=0, 
showing  that  the  vector 

d-f  le& 

must  be  the  gradient  of  some  scalar  function  —  q>,  so  that 

d  =  -  *  a-grad?.  (13) 

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the  vector  a  and  the  scalar 
function  <p  are  left  indeterminate  to  a  certain  extent  by  what  precedes 
(though  in  each  special  case  h  and  d  have  determinate  values). 
Understanding  by  a0  and  (JPO  special  values,  we  may  represent  other 
values  that  may  as  well  be  chosen  by 

1  . 


where  %   is   some   scalar  function.     We   shall   determine   it   by   sub- 
jecting a  and  (p  to  the  condition 

diva  =  -*-<p, 
which  can  always  be  fulfilled  because  it  leads  to  the  equation 


which  can  be  satisfied  by  a  proper  choice  of  %. 

The  differential  equations  (31)  and  (32)  follow  immediately 
from  (17)  and  (19),  if  in  these  one  substitutes  the  values  (1H)  and  (12). 
Indeed,  (17)  assumes  the  form 

--diva-  Aqp  =  p, 
i.  e.,  in  virtue  of  (14) 

r<jP=  -p, 


240  KOTES.  6,  7 

and  (19)  becomes 

rotrota=          s  a  -        gradep  +  -    pV, 
c  c  c 

or  (cf.  Note  1) 

grad  div  a  —  Aa  =  -  -r  a  -        grad  <p  4  ---  p  V, 

for  which,  on  account  of  (14),  we  may  write 

Aa      *,  a  =  —  1  pv. 

c8  c  v 

6  (Page  20).  Our  solution  is  not  a  general  one  because  we 
have  made  the  assumption  that  the  surface  integral  in  (Iff),  Note  4 
vanishes  when  the  surface  G  recedes  to  infinite  distance.  It  is  to  be 
observed,  however,  that  any  other  solution  may  be  put  in  the  form 


where  ty'  is  some  function  satisfying  the  equation 


In  the  terms  of  the  physical  problem  with  which  we  are  con- 
cerned, we  may  say  that  the  electromagnetic  field  determined  by 
(33)  —  (36),  (which  may  be  considered  as  produced  by  the  electrons), 
is  not  the  only  one  that  can  exist;  we  can  always  add  a  field  satis- 
fying at  all  points  of  space  the  equations  (2)  —  (5)  for  the  free  ether. 
Additional  terms  of  this  kind  are  excluded  by  the  assumption  made 
in  the  text. 

Of  course,  a  state  of  things  for  which  the  formulae  (2)  —  (5) 
hold,  can  exist  in  a  limited  part  of  space;  the  beam  of  plane  polarized 
light  represented  by  the  equations  (7)  is  a  proper  example.  Such  a 
beam  must  however  be  considered  as  having  its  origin  in  the  vibra- 
tions of  distant  electrons,  and  it  is  clear  that,  if  we  wish  to  include 
the  source  of  light,  we  must  have  recourse  to  equations  similar  to 
(33)-(36). 

7  (Page  21).  Let  the  centre  of  the  electron  move  along  the 
axis  of  x.  Then  it  is  clear  that  a^  =  0,  32  =  0,  and  that  <p  and  ax 
may  be  regarded  as  functions  of  t,  x  and  the  distance  r  from  the 
origin  of  coordinates.  Indeed,  q>  and  ax  must  be  constant  along  a 
circle  having  OX  for  its  axis. 

Putting 

<P  =  /i  (t,  r,  x),     ax  =  f2  (t,  r,  x), 


H  NOTES.  241 

one  finds 

H  I  ^    _  2?  =       1  8(*  _  M  _  5  3/i 

1  o    »      Fa  c    at        3a;        r    tfr  ' 

el  .    _^  =  _i_M    d  .   _?*  =  _lM. 

y  gy  r    dr'  cz  r   8r 

Hence,  fl  may  be  considered  as  the  resultant  of  two  vectors,  one 

1      x)  f  P5  f 

having  the  direction  of  OX  and  the  magnitude  -  -*-•  -,   and 

cot        ox 

Q  /> 

the  other  the  direction  of  r  and  the  magnitude  —  J~  • 
The  components  of  the  magnetic  force  are 

h  _  i5i  _  ^  _  o 

I"™.  -    ^  ^T  —    v  • 

1       8y        00 

h    =ga^       3a^  =_z    g/2 
y        a«         ga;         r     8r  ' 

h    =^aj,_8a?_    _1_^ 
*       dx        dy  r    8r  ' 

so  that  h  is  at  right  angles  both  to   OX  and  to  the  line  r. 

What  is  said  in  the  text  about  the  electric  and  the  magnetic 
lines  of  force  follows  immediately  from  these  results. 

8  (Page  22).  In  establishing  the  equation  of  energy  we  shall 
start  from  the  formula  (23).  For  an  element  of  time  dt  the  work 
of  the  force  exerted  by  the  ether  on  an  element  dS  of  the  charge 
is  represented  by  the  scalar  product  of  the  force  fprZ/S  and  the  path 
\dt.  Hence,  the  integral 


represents  the  total  work  done  by  the  ether  per  unit  of  time,    but 
this  work  depends  entirely  on  the  first  part  of  the  vector  (23),  since 

the  second  part      [V  •  h]  is  perpendicular  to  the  velocity  V.  Consequently 

C 

A  =/!>(f  •  v)rfS  =/e(d  •  v)«ZS  =j"(d  •  Q  v)dS, 

and,  if  the  value  of  pV  is  taken  from  the  equation  (19), 

A  -  c/(d  •  rot  h)  dS  -f(d  •  &)dS.  (15) 

Written  in  full,  and  with  the  terms  rearranged,  the  first  integral  is 

/(  (",  %  -  -v  §)  +  (<.  %  -  '.  t)  +  (",  %  -  "•  •£))"•  w 

and  here  each  term  may  be  integrated  by  parts.     Thus,  denoting  by 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  16 


242  NOTES.  9 

K,  ft,  y  the  angles   between  the  normal  n  to  the  surface  6  and  the 
positive  axes, 


where  [d  •  h]^  means  the  first  component  of  the  vector  product  [d  •  h  j. 
If  the    remaining  parts   of   (16)    are    treated   in    a    similar  way, 
the  first  integral  in  (15)  becomes 


(17) 


-J  {[d-hkcosa  +  [d-h]ycos|3  +  [d-h]2cos  y}d 
+f(h  •  rot  d)  dS  =    -J[d  •  h].rfff  +f(h  •  rot  d)  dS. 


The  formula  (37)  is  now  easily  obtained  if  it  is  taken  into 
account  : 

1°  that,  in  virtue  of  (20),  the  last  term  of  (17)  may  be  re- 
placed by 


2°  that 


We  may  notice  in  passing  that  the  equation  (17)  expresses  a 
general  theorem.  Denoting  by  A  and  B  any  two  vectors,  and  by  6 
the  bounding  surface  of  a  space  S,  we  always  have 

f(k  •  rot  B)  dS  -  -/[A  •  B].rftf  +f(B  •  rot  A)dS. 

B  (Page  26).  The  deduction  of  the  formulae  for  F  is  much  like 
that  of  the  equation  of  energy.  Instead  of  (43)  we  may  write 


and  here,   in  virtue  of  (17)  and   (19),  me  may  replace  p  by  divd, 
and  0V  by  c  rot  h  —  d.      Hence 

F  =  /"{div  d  •  d  +  [rot  h  •  h]  -   *  [d  •  h]  j  dS. 


10  NOTES.  243 

But 


so  that,   if  we  determine  the  part  F2  of  the  resultant   force  by  the 
formula 


the  remaining  part  is  given  by 

F,  =/{  div  d  •  d  +  [rot  h  h]  +  [rot  d  •  d]  }  dS. 

Leaving  aside  for  a  moment  the  term  depending  on  the  magnetic 
force,  we  have  for  the  first  component  of  Ft 


=  /  { 2  (d*2  —  d/  —  d/)  cos «  +  d^d,,  cos  ^(  -h  d^d^,  cos  y }  da 


The  part  of  f1  that  depends  on  h  leads  to  a  result  of  the  same 
form,  the  reason  being  that  Fj  becomes  symmetrical  in  d  and  h  when 
we  add  the  term  div  h-h,  which  is  zero  on  account  of  (18). 

10  (Page  29).  The  stress  on  a  surface  element  of  any  direction 
and  situated  anywhere  in  the  space  considered  can  be  calculated  by 
means  of  the  formulae  (48);  if  one  takes  the  mean  values  for  a  long 
lapse  of  time,  it  will  be  found  to  be. at  right  angles  to  the  element. 
In  other  terms,  there  is  a  normal  pressure  whose  magnitude  is  given  by 

P  =  i  ( (V)  +  (d/)  -  (O }  +  *  I  (h,1)  +  (h/)  -  (h,2)  1 ,      (18) 

if  we  lay  the  axis  of  x  normally  to  the  element,  and  denote  by  (d,/), 
etc.  the  mean  values  in  question. 

We  shall  now  apply  to  two  particular  cases  the  result  found  in 
§  19.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  take  for  0  a  closed  surface  wholly 
lying  within  the  envelop.  Then  (cf.  §  20,  b),  since  F  =  0  and,  in  the 
mean,  F2  =  0,  the  pressures  p  acting  on  the  surface  must  destroy 
each  other.  This  requires  that  p  be  constant  all  through  the  ether. 

Next,  considering  a  flat  cylindrical  box  that  contains  an  element 
of  the  wall  (cf.  Fig.  1,  p.  28),  we  can  show  that  the  pressure  p  really 
may  be  said  to  be  the  force  exerted  on  the  walls. 

16* 


244  NOTES.  11,  12 

The  pressure  p  having  the  same  intensity  at  all  points,  we  may 
as  well  replace  it  by  the  mean  of  the  values  which,  for  determinate 
directions  of  OX,  OY,  OZ,  the  expression  (18)  has  at  different  pla- 
ces. Hence,  if  mean  values  of  this  kind  are  denoted  by  a  horizontal  bar 

p  =  *  {  (  V)  +  (O  -  (««7)  I  +  *  {  (V)  +  (H7)  -  (fi7)  }  - 


But  it  is  easily  seen  that  the  order  of  the  two  operations  of 
taking  the  mean  -  -  one  relating  to  time  and  the  other  to  space  - 
may  be  inverted,  and  that  in  the  stationary  state  which  we  are  con- 
sidering the  mean  values  indicated  by  tixa  etc.  are  independent  of  the 
time,  so  that,  after  having  calculated  them,  it  is  no  longer  necessary 
to  take  their  time-averages.  Our  formula  therefore  takes  the  form 


11  (Page  HO).  The  formula  (51)  is  obtained  if,  in  the  trans- 
formations given  in  Note  9,  we  omit  all  terms  containing  Q.  We 
may,  however,  also  proceed  as  follows. 

The  resultant  force  in  the  direction  of  a;,  so  far  as  it  is  due  to 
the  electric  field,  is  given  by  the  surface  integral 


|{  2  djn-d8  cos  «}<*(>, 

for  which  we  may  write  (see  the  end  of  Note  9)  the  first  component  of 
f  {  div  d  •  d  +  [rot  d  •  d]  }  dS, 

and  to  which  we  must  add  a  similar  expression  depending  on  the 
magnetic  field.  Hence,  since  div  h  =  0,  and,  on  the  assumption  now 
made,  div  d  =  0, 


or,  if  we  use  equations  (4)  and  (5), 


12  (Page  32).  Let  u,  v,  w  be  the  components  of  the  velocity 
of  the  ether  at  the  point  (x,  y,  2)  and  the  time  t.  Then,  by  a  well 
known  theorem,  the  acceleration  in  the  direction  of  x  is  given  by 

Su   ,       8u    .       d*   .       8u 
—  +  u  „  -  +  v^  —  \-w-~-, 
dt  dx    '       dy  da' 


13,  14  NOTES.  245 

so  that,  if  ft  is  the  density,  and  X  the  force  acting  on  the  element 
dS  in  the  direction  of  x,  we  have 


/8u  8u    .       &U    .       cu\  ,c< 

«•>  Itl-irr  +  u  A  --  \-  v  -»  —  \-  w-  —  I  rto. 
f  \0t  8x    '      dy          o*J 


-» 
dy 

When  u,v,w  are  very  small,  we  may  neglect  the  terms  u  -„---  etc., 
and  add  the  term  ti-£,   which  is  likewise   of  the  second  order  of 

C  v 

magnitude,  because  in  the  case  of  slow  motions,  the  change  of  the 
density  per  unit  of  time  is  very  small.     It  follows  that 


the  mathematical  expression  for  the  statement  made  in  the  text. 

13  (Page  35).  The  value  tp  of  the  scalar  potential  that  exists 
at  the  time  t  at  the  point  (x,  y,  z)  of  the  ether,  will  be  found  at 
the  time  t  +  At  at  a  point  whose  coordinates  are  x  +  wdt,  y,  z.  As 
the  value  of  the  potential  for  these  new  values  of  the  independent 
variables  may  be  represented  by 


we  have 

rrdt  +  :  —  W  dt  =  0, 
Ot  OX 

o  f  0  <p 

Applying  the  same  reasoning  to  the  function  -^- ,  one  finds 

8  cp  8    /8ty\  Q  c  cp 

-o^J-  =  —  W  j~  l-Tj-H  =  W    K -j  • 

14:  (Page  36).  Let  S'  be  a  system  without  translation,  and  let 
two  points,  the  one  in  the  moving  system  S,  with  the  coordinates 
x,  y,  z,  and  the  other  in  S'  with  the  coordinates  x,  »/,  z  —  the  re- 
lation between  x  and  x  being  as  shown  in  (58)  —  be  said  to  cor- 
respond to  each  other.  Then  corresponding  elements  of  volume, 
dS  and  dS',  are  to  each  other  in  the  same  ratio  as  x  and  x',  so  that 


and  if  they  are  to  have  equal  charges,  the  density  p'  in  dS'  must  be 
related  to  the  density  p  in  dS  as  follows: 


246  NOTES.  14 

Poisson's  equation,  which  determines  the  scalar  potential  (f    in 
the  stationary  system  may  therefore  be  written  in  the  form 


+        +  _  _     _ 

dx*        dy*          dz* 
showing,  on  comparison  with  (59),  that  at  corresponding  points 

p-(l-/P)-VV  (19) 


The    quantities    relating    to   the   moving  system  S  may  now  be 
expressed  in  terms  of  those  that  belong  to  S'. 

In  the  first  place  we  have,  on  account  of  (58)  and  (19), 


Further,  by  (33)  and  (34),  since 


rl                     ^     "            ^^                 M  fl2\  ^y 

x             c     x      d  x  •  3  x 

.           A         i           ^^x        a^*P          \  v^x 

x                y       c z         ds  '  fiy 

The  electric  energy  is  therefore  given  by 


and  the  magnetic  energy  by 


Finally,  we  have  for  the  components  of  the  flow  of  energy 


15  NOTES.  247 

and  for  those  of  the  electromagnetic  momentum 


15  (Page  37).  A  charge  uniformly  distributed  over  the  surface 
of  a  sphere  may  be  considered  as  the  limiting  case  of  a  charge  distri- 
buted with  uniform  volume  density  over  an  infinitely  thin  spherical 
shell  having  the  same  thickness  at  all  points.  When  the  moving 
system  S  is  of  this  kind,  the  stationary  system  S'  of  which  we  have 
spoken  in  the  preceding  Note,  is  an  elongated  ellipsoid  of  revolution 
whose  semi-axis  a  and  equatorial  radius  b  are  equal  to 

a  =  (l-/32)-1/2.R,     b  =  R,  (23} 

and  which  carries  a  charge  uniformly  distributed  through  an  infinitely 
thin  shell  bounded  by  the  ellipsoid  itself  and  another  that  is  similar 
to  it  and  similarly  placed  with  respect  to  the  centre.  The  total 
charge  must  be  taken  equal  to  e,  the  charge  of  the  sphere,  because 
corresponding  elements  of  volume  in  S  and  S'  have  been  supposed  to 
carry  equal  charges. 

Let  the  centre  of  the  ellipsoid  be  chosen  as  origin  of  coordina- 
tes, OX'  being  placed  along  the  axis  of  revolution,  and  let  x  ',  y,  z 
be  the  coordinates  of  an  external  point  P.  If  we  understand  by  i. 
the  positive  root  of  the  equation 

*'•     ,  y'  +  **  _  *  (24} 

P'+I^      i 

where 

/  =  a2  -  6s, 

the  potential  at  P  is  equal  to 

e  1/p8  -f-  I  +  p 

m  =          log  "-  —  • 

Snp      °yps+i_p 

It  is  to  be  noticed  that,  for  a  given  value  of  Z,  the  equation 
(24}  represents  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution  confocal  with  the  given  one; 
therefore,  the  equipotential  surfaces  are  ellipsoids  of  this  kind.  The 
charged  surface  itself  is  characterized  by  the  value  A  =  bs,  and  Z  in- 
creases from  this  value  to  oo  as  we  pass  outwards.  The  potential 

is  equal  to 

,         e    ,      a  4-  p 

<Pn    =  o-     -  log 

%-np     °a—p 


248  NOTES.  15 

at  the  charged  surface,  and  has  the  same  value  at  all  internal  points. 
The  integrals  to  which  we  have  been  led  in  the  preceding  Note  need 
therefore  only  be  extended  to  the  outside  space. 

In  effecting  the  necessary  calculations  we  shall  avail  ourselves  of 
the  theorem  that  the  integral 


is  equal  to  the  electric  energy  ^eqo0'  of  the  charged  ellipsoid.    Hence, 
putting 


we  have 


In  order  to  find  the  integral  J1}  we  shall  divide  the  plane  X'OY 
into  infinitely  small  parts  by  the  series  of  ellipses 


and  the  system  of  hyperbolae 


where  /i  ranges  from  0  to  p2.  Confining  ourselves  to  the  part  of  the 
plane  where  x  and  y  are  positive,  we  have  for  the  coordinates  of 
the  point  of  intersection  of  (26)  and  (27) 


-p),    y  — irV*/*>  O9) 

*  J' 

and  for  the  area  of  the  element  bounded  by  the   ellipses   A,  i  -\-  di 
and  the  hyperbolae  ft,  ft  +  dfi 

\  C  3C       0  OC 


„  =dida. 

^\nt  p  Hi  <*    ~*fl  -•  /-«2      I      1\  /^8  ..\ 

oy     cy 


We  shall  now  take  for  dS'  in  our  integral  the  annular  element 
that  is  generated  by  the  revolution  of  this  plane  element  around  OX', 
so  that 


Since  cp'  depends  on  A,  only,  we  have 

8<p'  _  dcf   oi 
dx'  =  dl  dx'' 


15 


NOTES. 


249 


and  here  the  last  factor  has,  in  all  parts  of  the  ring,  the  value  de- 
duced from  (26)  for  a  constant  y, 


dx' 


or,  in  virtue  of  (28), 


It  follows  from  these  results  that,  in  order  to  find  J,,  we  must 
integrate  the  expression 


If  we  take  0  and  p2  as  the  limits  of  ft,  62  and  oo  as  those  of  I, 
we  shall  find  the  part  of  Jl  that  is  due  to  the  field  on  the  positive 
side  of  the  «/#-plane;  we  must,  therefore,  multiply  the  result  by  2. 

Since 


and 


the  final  result  is 


,a<f\* 

(dl)  ' 


The  indefinite  integral  is 


and  since  this  vanishes  for  K  =  oo,   and  is  equal  to 


0  a  —  p 
for  A  =  6s,  the  integral  Jt  has  the  value 

e8 


In  our  present  problem  the  values  of  a  and  b  are  given  by  (23), 
so  that 


250  NOTES.  16,  17 

p-.EftQ.-fl-1*, 


'ay  C1  -  ^  [-  *  0  +  a  +  «  i«g  I  i  Jl  • 


Substituting  these  values   in  the  formulae   (.20),   (£1)   and  (£2), 
we  get  the  equations  (61),  (62)  and  (63). 

16  (Page  38).    The  electromagnetic  momentum  G  and  the  velo- 
city W  having  the  same  direction,  we  may  write 

G  =  «w, 

where  K  is  the  ratio  between  their  magnitudes    G    and  jw  .     It  is  a 
function  of  |  W  |  . 

Differentiating  with  respect  to  t,  we  find 


F-  -         a-flw-       Ci^L          ai 

At  U  dt         dt*  K  dt        af|w| 


But 
so  that 


-•cr+n-iwirar-  -TOit-wiir—r 


w 


17  (Page  48).  Take  the  simple  case  of  an  infinitely  long  cir- 
cular metallic  cylinder  of  radius  a1,  surrounded  by  a  coaxial  tube 
whose  inner  radius  is  a2.  When  a  current  i  is  passed  along  the  core 
and  returned  through  the  tube,  the  magnetic  energy,  so  far  as  it  is 
contained  in  the  space  between  the  two  conductors,  is  equal  to 


per  unit  of  length;  this  expression  is  of  the  order  of  magnitude 


when  a-    is  some  moderate  number. 
o, 

On  the  other  hand,  if,  per  unit  of  length,  the  two  conductors 
contain  N^  and  N%  electrons,  moving  with  the  velocities  »j  and  v3, 
the  sum  of  the  amounts  of  energy  that  would  correspond  to  the  mo- 
tion of  each  of  them  is 


18  NOTES.  25  1 


if  we  suppose  the  mass  of  the  corpuscles  to  be  wholly  electromagnetic. 
The  current  being 

i  =  eNlvi  =  e-ZV2t)2, 

we  may  write  for  our  last  expression 


The  experiments  on  self-induction  have  never  shown  an  effect 
that  may  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  ordinary  formulae  for  this 
phenomenon.  Therefore,  in  ordinary  cases,  the  value  of  (30)  must  be 
much  smaller  than  that  of  (29),  from  which  it  may  be  inferred  that 
JVj.7?  and  N%R  are  great  numbers. 

18  (Page  49).  In  the  following  proof  of  the  formula  (76)  we 
shall  confine  ourselves  to  an  electron  having  a  rectilinear  translation 
parallel  to  OX  with  variable  velocity  v.  Let  Q  be  a  definite  point 
of  this  electron  and  P  a  point  of  the  ether,  within  the  space  occu- 
pied by  the  particle  at  the  time  t  for  which  we  wish  to  calculate 
the  force.  Let  x,  y',  z  be  the  coordinates  of  P,  and  x,  y,  z  those  of 
the  point  Q  at  the  time  t. 

Among  the  successive  positions  of  Q  there  is  one  Qe  such  that 
an  action  proceeding  from  it  the  moment  it  is  reached,  and  travelling 
onward  with  the  speed  of  light  c,  will  arrive  at  the  point  P  at  the 
time  t.  If  we  denote  by  t  —  r  the  time  at  which  this  ,,efFective"  posi- 
tion, so  we  may  call  it,  is  reached,  we  have  for  the  coordinates  of  Qe 

X,  =  X  —  Vt-\-%Vr*  —  i»T3H  ----  (31) 

ye  =  y>    *<  =  z> 

and,  since  QeP  must  be  equal  to  cr, 

(xe  -  xj  +  (y.  -  y')*  +  (,.  -  ,')'  =  c  V  .  (32} 

By  means  of  these  relations  xe  and  r  may  be  expressed  in  terms 
of  x,  y,  2.  Putting  QP  =  r,  so  that 


and  considering  v,  v,  'J,  ...  as  so  small  that  terms  of  the  second  order 
with  respect  to  these   quantities   may   be  neglected,  we  may  substi- 

tute  in   (31)  T  —  --,  by  which  we  find 


252  NOTES.  18 

Substituting  this  value  in  (32),  we  get 

r        v  f  r\    ,     v   /          ,\          'o,          ,\  o 

r  =  ---  w(x  —  x  )  +  =—.(x  —  x  )r  —  •  —.(x  —  x  )rz  ---- 
c         c*  ^  '        2s  v  ti      v 


It  follows  from  (33)  that  the  points  Q  which,  at  the  time  t, 
are  situated  in  an  element  dxdydz,  have  their  effective  positions  in 
an  element  dxedydz,  where 


Hence,  to  each  element  dS  of  the  electron  taken  in  the  position 
which  it  has  at  the  time  t,  there  corresponds  an  element  of  space 

jci  (1  v    x  —  x  V   /  '\  V     r  >\  )    i 

aoe  =  1 1 +  -  t(x  —  x  )  —  9  i  (#  —  x)F  •{••••]  «o , 

in  which,   at   the  time  t  —  r,   there  was   a  density   p  equal  to  that 
existing  at  the  time  t  in  the  element  dS,  this  charge  having  a  velocity 

v  —  v  r  +  $  v  r2  —  •  •  • , 
or,  with  a  sufficient  degree  of  approximation 


The  distance  of  the  element  dSe  from  the  point  P  is  given  by 

V     X  —  X,        V      ,  ...  V      ,  ,^ 


so  that  the  quotient  -  -  in  the  equation  (35)  must  be  replaced  by 

ctr  2  c'  3c" 


The  factor  here  enclosed  in  square  brackets  may  be  omitted  in 
the  formula  for  the  first  component  of  the  vector  potential;  here, 
however,  we  must  replace  v  by  the  expression  (34).  In  this  way 
we  find 


1    C 

<f>  =  ^J  Q 


the  integrations  being  extended  to  the  space  occupied  by  the  electron 
at  the  time  t. 

We    shall   now   proceed   to   calculate   the  electric  force  f  at  the 
point  P.    It  may  be  observed  in  the  first  place  that  we  need  not  con- 


18  NOTES.  253 

sider  the  term  —  [v-h]  in  (23),  because  the   magnetic  force  h  itself 

is  proportional  to  v.     Hence,   by  (33),  the  first  component  of  f,  to 
which  we  may  limit  ourselves,  is  equal  to 

f  -     _  l£_    1  -A 
*~       dx        e  "•' 

As  the  differentiations  may  be   effected  under  the  sign  of  inte- 
gration, we  have 


d<f        if  x  —  x,a         v      /'    f       1 
F*  =  1^  J  *  —yr-  dS  +  gVc,  J  <?{- 


and,  since 


/  gdS  =  e, 


In  order  to  find  the  resultant  force  we  must  multiply  this  by 
y'dS',  where  dS'  is  an  element  of  volume  at  the  point  P,  and  p'  the 
density  at  this  point;  we  have  next  to  integrate  with  respect  to  dS' 
From  the  first  term  in  (55)  we  find  0,  and  from  the  last  term 


e'  v 

!? 


agreeing  with  the  expression  (76);  these  results  are  independent  of 
the  shape  of  the  electron  and  the  distribution  of  its  charge.  As  to 
the  middle  term  in  (55),  it  leads  to  the  force 


In  the  case  of  a  spherical  electron  the  charge  of  which  is  distri- 
buted symmetrically  around  the  centre,  we  may  write  •?,  r2  instead  of 
(x  —  x'")*,  so  that  we  get 


the 


Now,  if  the  charge  lies  on  the  surface,  the  integral    I  -ro^  has 

t/    ' 

value  „  at  all  the  points  where  the  density  Q    is  different  from  zero. 
Therefore    5tf    becomes 


254  NOTES.  19 


in  accordance  with  the  result  expressed  in  (72). 

What  has  been  said  in  §  37  about  the  representation  of  the  re- 
sultant force  by  a  series,  each  term  of  which  is  of  the  order  of 

magnitude  —  in  comparison  with  the  preceding  one,  is  also  confirmed 
by  the  above  calculations. 

19  (Page  50).  Let  us  fix  our  attention  on  the  effective  posi- 
tion M  (cf.  Note  18)  of  a  determinate  point  of  the  electron,  for  in- 
stance of  its  centre.  If  this  position  is  reached  at  the  time  t0,  pre- 
vious to  the  time  t  for  which  we  wish  to  calculate  the  potentials  at 
the  distant  point  P,  and  if  the  distance  M  P  is  denoted  by  r,  we  have 

r  =  c(<-O.  (37) 

Choosing  M  as  origin  of  coordinates,  we  shall  understand  by 
xp,  yp,  zp  the  coordinates  of  P. 

Let  us  further  seek  the  effective  position  (xe,  ye,  ze)  of  a  point 
of  the  electron  whose  coordinates  at  the  time  t0  are  x,  y,  z.  This 
effective  position  M'  will  be  reached  at  a  time  te,  a  little  different 
from  tf0;  if  we  put 


the  interval  r  will  be  very  small.  The  coordinates  x,  y,  s  are  so 
likewise,  and  a  sufficient  approximation  is  obtained  if,  in  our  next 
formulae,  we  neglect  all  terms  that  are  of  the  second  order  with 
respect  to  these  four  quantities. 

The  condition  that  M'  be  the  effective  position  of  the  point  con- 
sidered is  expressed  by 

M'P  =  c(t-te)  =  c(t-t0-T).  (38) 

But,  if  V  is  the  velocity  of  the  electron  at  the  time  tQI  we  may 
write  for  the  coordinates  of  M' 

xe  =  x  +  \x-c,     .v.  =  y  +  V,     *.  =  *  +  V,T,  (39) 

so  that  (38)  becomes 

(Xp  -x-  VxrY  +  (yp  _  ,,  _  V)2  +  (^  -  *  -  VIT)*  =  C\t  -  ta  -  T)*, 
or,  on  account  of  (57),  and  because 


20  NOTES.  255 

is  the  component  Vr  of  V  along  the  line  MP, 

2(xpx  +  ypy  +  gpg)  +  2vrrt  =  2  err, 
giving 

r_5^±J^±4  ^ 

The  points  of  the  electron  which,  at  the  time  ta,  lie  in  an  ele- 
ment dS,  have  their  effective  positions  in  an  element  of  space  dSe, 
whose  magnitude  is  equal  to  the  product  of  dS  by  the  functional 
determinant  of  the  quantities  (5,9)  with  respect  to  x,  y,  z.  The  value 
of  this  determinant  is 

or,  in  virtue  of  (40), 


i     I    'i-^f  T  'yyFT  *z"p -11        "r " 

ic vlr  m        '    e v         r^V  ' 

w        "rt '  vr  —  "r 

As  to  the  distance  r  in  the  denominators  of  (35)  and  (36),  we 
may  take  for  it  the  length  of  M  P,  and  in  the  latter  of  the  two  for- 
mulae we  may  understand  by  V  the  velocity  of  the  electron  at  the 
instant  £0.  In  this  way  the  general  equations  take  the  form 


which  is  equivalent  to  (79)  because  (p  being  equal  to  the  density 
existing  at  the  time  t0  in  the  element  dS) 


2O  (Page  51).  As  the  field  depends  on  the  differential  coefficients 
of  the  potentials,  we  have  first  to  determine  these.  In  doing  so,  we 
shall  denote  by  x,  y,  z  the  coordinates  of  the  distant  point  P  for 
which  we  want  to  know  tl  and  h. 

If  we  change  by  dt  the  time  t  for  which  we  seek  <p  and  a, 
keeping  x,  y,  z  constant,  it  will  no  longer  be  the  same  position  of 
the  electron  which  is  to  be  called  the  effective  one.  Besides,  the  new 
effective  position  will  be  reached  at  a  time  slightly  differing  from  t0 
and  will  lie  at  a  distance  from  P  different  from  r,  the  changes  being 
connected  with  each  other  by  the  formula 

dr  =  —  Vrdt0, 

where  vr  has  the  meaning  explained  in  §  38. 
Differentiating  equation  (57),  we  find 


dt0  =  —  ?—  dt. 

— 


256  NOTES.  20 

It  appears  from  this   that,   by  the  change  now  considered,  the 
value  of  some  quantity  ip  corresponding  to  the  time  t0,  is  altered  by 


0       c  —  vribt 
so  that  we  may  write 


c 
d  t    ""  c^-1 

the    square   brackets    always    having   the    meaning   formerly    assigned 
to  them. 

In  applying  this  to  the  expressions  (79),  we  shall  suppose  the 
distance  r  =  MP  to  be  so  much  greater  than  the  dimensions  of  the 
electron  that,  in  the  final  formulae  for  d  and  h,  we  may  neglect  all 

terms   of  the   order    ., .     Doing    so    we   may  treat  as   constants   the 
three  cosines  in  the  equation 

Vr  =  V^  cos  (r,x)  +  Vy  cos  (r,  y)  +  \2  cos  (r,  z); 

indeed,  their  differential  coefficients  are  of  the  order  — ,  and  in  <p  there 
is  already  a  factor      .     Consequently, 
dv 

dt    =  L  COS  (r,  X}  +  ly  COS  (r>  y)  +  L  COS  (^  l)  =  \r> 

and  since  the  factor  —  in  93  may  be  considered  as  constant 
Stp  e  d[vr~\  e  ,.  -, 


'at  vr\-n    dt 


If,  finally,  we  neglect  all  terms  that  are  of  the  second  order 
with  respect  to  the  velocity  and  the  acceleration  of  the  electron/  we 
have  the  further  simplification 

dtp          e     p.  -, 
Similarly  one  finds  from  the  second  of  the  formulae  (79) 

—  -     '   r  n 

We  have  next  to  calculate  the  differential  coefficients  with  respect 
to  the  coordinates.  Consider  first  an  infinitely  small  displacement  of 
P  in  a  direction  /;  at  right  angles  to  M  P.  The  distance  MP  not 
being  altered  by  this,  and  t  being  kept  constant,  neither  the  instant  £0 
nor  the  effective  position  M  are  changed.  As  we  may  again  leave 


21  NOTES.  257 

out  of  account  the  change  in  the  direction  of  r,  we  conclude  that 

^  =  0        -^  =  0 
'oh       u>       dh 

The  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  the  direction  of  r 
are  easily  found  by  the  following  device.  If  P  is  displaced  over  a 
distance  dr  along  MP  prolonged,  t  being  increased  at  the  same  time 

by  dt  =  —  ,  the  effective  position  of  the  electron  and  the  time  t0  re- 

main unaltered,  so   that,  since  the  denominator  r  need  not  be  diffe- 
rentiated , 

Of  ,      .    89  dr  _  „         8<p  _     _  ji_  dtp         da.  1   2a 

37  a      h  a?  "7  =~  U>       3r  ~      "  T  Tt  '       Tr~      ~~^Ji' 

Combining  this  with  the  former  result,  we  find  for  any  di- 
rection k,  in  the  case  both  of  the  scalar  and  of  the  vector  potential, 

d  f     T\  8 

and  particularly 

8  / 

3S  -*»(»•»  a^p     ^  =  cosr'2>Fr'     Tz=COBr'r- 

Using  these  relations  one  will  find  without  difficulty  the  for- 
mulae (80)  and  (81). 

21  (Page  51).  In  the  formulae  (80)  each  component  of  d  is 
represented  as  the  difference  of  two  terms.  The  terms  with  the 
negative  sign  may  be  considered  as  the  components  of  the  vector 

i 

J 


and  the  terms  with  the  positive  sign  as  those  of  the  vector 


where  we  have  used  the  parentheses  in  order  to  indicate  that  the 
component  jr  is  here  itself  regarded  as  a  vector.  Understanding  (jp) 
in  a  similar  sense,  so  that 

j  =  (jr)  +  (U 

we  have 


The    magnetic    force    is    therefore    perpendicular   both   to    d    and 

Lorentz,  Theory  of  electrons.  17 


258  NOTES.  22 

to  k,  and  its  direction  is  such  that  the  flow  of  energy  c  [d  •  h]  has 
the  direction  of  k,  away  from  the  electron.  The  intensity  of  the 
flow  is  c|d  |h|  =  cd2. 

22  (Page  53).  As  an  interesting  application  of  the  formula 
found  for  the  resistance,  we  shall  calculate  the  damping  of  the 
vibrations  of  an  electron.  Suppose  the  particle  to  be  subjected  to 
an  elastic  force  —  /'q,  where  q  is  the  displacement  from  the  position 
of  equilibrium,  and  f  a  positive  constant.  The  motion  in  the  direc- 
tion of  OX  is  determined  by  the  equation 


a  particular   solution   of  which   is    found  by   taking  for  q.,.  the  real 
part  of 

£at 

where  f  is  the  basis  of  natural  logarithms,  and  «  a  complex  constant 
determined  by  the  condition 


If  the  last  term  has   but   a  small  influence,   we  may  replace  in 
it  a  by  the  value  given  by  the  equation 


mo?  =  —  /'. 
Hence,  putting 

/      9 

m 
we  have 

e'n" 
«  =  in  - 


and,  introducing  two  constants  a  and  p, 

t\x  =  ae    i2»»»«'    cos(nt+p). 
This  formula  shows  that  in  a  time  equal  to 


the  amplitude  falls  to  --  of  its  original  value. 

Taking  for  m  the  value  (72),   and   writing  T  for  the   time  of 
vibration  — ,  I  for  the  wave-length,  we  find 


23  NOTES.  259 

If  we  substitute  for  R  the  value  given  in  §  35  we  have  for 
yellow  light  (J,  =  0,00006  cm) 

t  =  2  •  107  T, 

showing  that  the  damping  would  be  very  feeble,  and  that  we  have 
been  right  in  supposing  the  last  term  in  (41)  to  be  very  small. 

This  question  of  the  damping  of  the  vibrations  is  important  be- 
cause, the  slower  the  damping,  the  more  will  the  radiation  present 
the  character  of  truly  homogeneous  light.  We  can  form  an  opinion 
of  the  degree  of  homogeneousness  by  making  experiments  on  the 
visibility  of  interference  fringes  for  various  values  of  the  difference 
of  phase;  in  fact,  when  this  difference  is  continually  increased,  the 
fringes  can  remain  clearly  visible  for  a  long  time  only  if  the  light  is 
fairly  homogeneous.  A  small  degree  of  damping  is  thus  found  to  be 
conducive  to  a  good  visibility  of  the  fringes,  a  conclusion  that  is 
readily  understood  if  one  considers  that  the  interference  becomes  in- 
distinct when  the  intensities  of  the  two  rays  are  very  different.  This 
must  be  the  case  whenever  the  vibrations  in  the  source  have  con- 
siderably diminished  in  amplitude  between  the  instants  at  which  the 
interfering  rays  have  been  emitted. 

The  result  of  the  above  calculation  is  in  satisfactory  agreement 
with  the  experiments  of  Lummer  and  Gehrcke  in  which,  under  fa- 
vourable conditions,  interferences  up  to  a  phase  difference  of  two 
millions  of  periods  were  observed. 

23  (Page  56).  In  each  successive  differentiation  with  respect  to 
one  of  the  coordinates,  of  the  expression  found  for  -  ,  we  have  to 
differentiate  both  the  goniometric  function  and  the  factor  preceding  it. 
These  operations  introduce  factors  of  the  order  of  magnitude  —  =  -r- 

(if  i  denotes   the  wave-length)  and       •     Consequently,   in   as    much 

as  r  is  very  much  greater  than  A,   we   may  confine  ourselves  to  the 
differentiation  of  the  goniometric  function. 
Thus,  for  example, 

_!_    9_  [p J  =  nb 

ladx    r  liter 

a  ,    -i-JL&J,      _?*- 

*       Inc  dt     r  liter 


sin{»(*-y)  +  pj, 


dtp        1   d&r          n'b     /      x*    .   .,\         f     /,        r  \    . 
y  rrMlCOglnU  --  )+P 

dx        c    dt         lnc*r  \      r*         /         [    \         c] 


It  is   easily   verified  by  means   of  the  expressions  (95)   that  d 
and  h  are  at  right  angles  both  to  each  other  and  to  the  line  r,  and 

17* 


260  NOTES.  24 

that  they  have  equal  amplitudes.  The  formulae  represent  a  system 
of  plane  polarized  waves,  whose  amplitude  changes  in  the  inverse 
ratio  of  the  distance  r  as  we  pass  along  a  straight  line  drawn  from 

the  radiating  particle.     The  flow  of  energy  changes  as    .,  • 

24  (Page  58).  Considering  any  one  of  the  dependent  variables, 
say  fy,  first  as  a  function  of  x,  y,  z,  t,  and  then  as  a  function  of 
x,  y',  z,  <',  we  have  the  following  relations,  arising  from  (96)  com- 
bined with 

' 


as  we  may  write  instead  of  (97)  if  the  square  of  -     is  neglected, 

cV_  =  dy_  dx_   .dy  8y'       dij>  dz        dip  dt'  =  dy        wx  dip 
dx  ~  ox'  8x  +  cy'  dx  "•"  g/  dx  "*"  dt'  dx  ~  dx'       c*   dt'  ' 

8^)==8j/y__Wj,_at(>       dq  =  o^  _  w,  gi/> 
dy  ""  8y'       c'   dt'  >      dz  ~  dz'        c*   dt'  ' 


__        .  _          _ 

dt  °~  cf  '    W*  dx'       wy  dy  *  dz' 

By  this  the  equation  (17)  becomes 


In  the  terms  multiplied  by  Wc,  W^,  Wz  we  need  not  distinguish 
between  the  differential  coefficients  with  respect  to  t',  x',  y,  z,  and 
those  with  respect  to  t,  x,  y,  z.  Hence,  in  virtue  of  (19),  we  write 
for  the  terms  enclosed  in  square  brackets 


|*!-^)  -  (w-  v),. 

8x       cy/ 


cw        -  ,  . 

x\8y       dz  v\z        of/  -\x       cy 

In  the  last  term  V  may  be  replaced  by  u.  because  we  are  con- 
stantly neglecting  the  square  of  w,  and  we  are  led  at  once  to  equa- 
tion (100)  if  we  keep  in  mind  that 

d*+y(w,ht-w.li,)==d*'»  etc. 

Let  us  next  transform  the  first  of  tlie  three  equations  taken 
together  in  (19),  namely 


37       "07-  e  VW"T  dt 
It  assumes  the  form 


25  NOTES.  261 


or,  if  pW.,.  is  replaced  by 


and  if  the  terms  are  arranged  in  a  different  order, 

|  h.  -  ;  (w,d,  -  wy«U  -         hy  -  1  (w,d.  -  w,d.) 


This  is  the  first  of  the  equations  contained  in  (102). 

25  (Page  59).    We  shall  begin  by  observing  that  the  potentials 
<p'  and  a'  satisfy  the  differential  equations 


(cf.  Note  4j;  where  A  is  now  an  abbreviation  for  ^-—-s  +  5-7.+  O-TSI 

<7iC  6/1/  v   "^ 

and  that  they  are  mutually  connected  in  the  following  manner: 


In  order  to  prove  this  latter  formula  we  shall  start  from  equa- 
tion (5)  of  Note  2,  which,  in  terms  of  the  new  variables,  may  be 
written 


or,  if  the  square  of  W  is  again  neglected, 


If,   in   an   integral   of  the  form   (104)  or  (105),   the   factor   by 
which    '     is   multiplied  is  a  continuous  function  of  the  local  time  t' 

and  the  coordinates  x',  y,  e  of  the  element  dS,  the  partial  derivatives 
of  the  integral  with  respect  to  t'  or   to  the  coordinates  of  the  point 


262  NOTES.  25 

for   which   it   is  calculated,   are  found  by  simply  differentiating  the 
said  factor  with  respect  to  t',  or  x,  y,  z',  the  differential  coefficient 

being  again  taken  for  the  value  t'  —    -of  the  local  time. 
According  to  this  rule 
dtp' 


from  which  we  infer  that 


In  virtue  of  (45)  these  values  verify  the  equation  (44)  and  it  is 
further  found  by  direct  substitution  that  the  fundamental  equations 
(100)— (103)  are  satisfied  by  (106)  and  (107)  (see,  however,  Note  6). 
We  have,  for  example, 


divd'=-  -1  diva'-  A<p'+  -1  A(w-aO. 

c  c 


But  by  (44) 


so  that  the  foregoing  equation  assumes  the  form 

divd'=  ^'-Ag,'-  c1s(w-S')+  J  A(w-a'). 
The  two  terms  containing  a'  are  equal  to 
A(w.{Aa'_Va'}), 

c  \        [  c1       I/' 

and  in  virtue  of  (42)  and  (43),  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation 
becomes  identical  with  that  of  (100). 

No  difficulty  will  be  found  in  the  verification  of  (101)  and  (103). 
As  to  equation  (102),  we  find  from  (107)  (cf.  Note  1) 

rot  h'  =  rot  rot  a'  =  grad  div  a'  —  A  a', 
and,  if  we  use  (44),  (43)  and  (106), 

roth'=  -  J  grad^'+  ^  grad  (w-  a')  +  '  Pu  -  ^-S'=  f  (d'+  eu). 


26  NOTES.  263 

26  (Page  59).  The  problem  may  be  reduced  to  that  of  deter- 
mining the  field  due  to  a  single  moving  electron  (cf.  §§  38,  41,  42 
and  Note  19).  Let  P  be  the  distant  point  for  which  we  want  to 
calculate  the  potentials  <p'  and  a'  at  the  local  time  t',  and  M  a  de- 
finite point  of  the  electron,  say  its  centre,  in  its  effective  position, 
so  that,  if  t0'  is  the  time  (local  time  of  M")  at  which  it  is  reached, 
and  r  the  length  of  MP, 


Choosing  M  an  origin  we  shall  call  x'p,  y'p,  s'p  the  coordinates 
of  P,  x',  y,  z  those  of  some  point  Q  of  the  electron  at  the  time  t0' 
(local  time  of  M),  xe',  ye',  ze'  the  coordinates  of  the  effective  position 
Qe  of  this  point,  and  t0'  +  t  (local  time  of  M)  the  time  at  which  it 
is  reached,  so  that,  according  to  (97),  the  local  time  of  Qe  itself  is 
then  represented  by 

*.'  =  C  +  r  -  jr  (W,<  +  Wyy.'  +  W.O- 

The  condition  that  Qe  be  the  effective  position  of  the  point  con- 
sidered is  expressed  by  an  equation  similar  to  (4I>),  namely 


or,  taking  the  square  on  both  sides, 


The  interval  r  being  very  short,  we  may  write 


by  which,  if  terms  of  the  second  order  with  respect  to  x',  y',  e,  T 
are  neglected,  and  if  (46)  is  used,  our  condition  becomes 


—  (XpX  -\-yPy  -\-ZpZ)     ru,.T 
=  -  rcr  +  ~  (w,s'  +  Viyy  +  WX)  +  ~  (w  •  u)r, 

r  =  (^/  +  ^+^)  +  T^a;+V+W^) .  (4/) 


Here   ur   means   the   component   of  u    in   the   direction  of  MP,   the 
product  rUr  having  replaced  the  expression  x'pux  +  y'Puy  +  ^Uz. 

Having  got  thus  far  we  can  again  distinguish   between  an   ele- 
ment d/S  of  the  electron  in  its  position  at  the  instant  t0'  (local  time 


264  NOTES.  26 

of  M)  and  the  element  dSe  which  contains  the  effective  positions  of 
the  different  points  of  dS,  the  ratio  between  the  magnitudes  of  these 
elements  being  given  by  the  functional  determinant  of  xe',  ye',  z' 
with  respect  to  x,  y,  /,  i.  e.  by 


We  shall  retain  only  the  terms  of  the  first  order  with  respect 
to  Ux,  Uy,  u..  Doing  so,  we  may  neglect  in  gp,^>»  j^  the  terms 
containing  these  velocities,  so  that  (47}  gives  for  the  determinant 


Finally  we  have  the  following  equations,  similar  to  those  which 
we  found  in  Note  19, 


Now,  if  we  put 
we  find 


and,  in  virtue  of  (106), 

d'=    -|a'-grad(>').  (50) 

Comparing  the  formulae  (49},  (48),  (50)   and  (107)  with  (79), 
(33)   and   (34),    keeping    in    mind    that,  when   V  is  very  small,   the 

factor  1  -     r   may  be   omitted   in  the   second  of  the  equations  (79), 

y 

and  replaced  by  1  +  -  -  in  the  numerator   of  the  first,  we  see  that 
c 

there  is  perfect  equality  of  form.  Hence,  if  we  speak  of  correspond- 
ing states  when  the  dependency  of  d',  h'  on  x,  y',  z',  t'  in  a  moving 
system  is  the  same  as  that  of  d,  h  on  x,  y,  z,  t  in  a  stationary  one, 
we  may  draw  the  following  conclusion.  The  field  produced  at  distant 
points  of  a  moving  system  by  an  electron  whose  coordinates  x,  y,  z 
are  certain  functions  of  t'  (the  local  time  belonging  to  the  instantaneous 
position  of  the  electron)  corresponds  to  the  field  produced  in  a  system 


27  NOTES.  265 

without  translation  by  an   equal  electron   whose  coordinates  x,  y,  z 
are  the  same  functions  of  t. 

Of  course,  this  theorem  may  be  extended  to  any  number  of 
electrons,  so  that  we  may  also  apply  it  to  a  polarized  particle.  We 
shall  suppose  this  latter  to  be  so  small  that  the  differences  between 
the  local  times  of  its  various  parts  may  be  neglected.  Then  it  makes 
no  difference,  whether  we  say  that  the  coordinates  x',  y',  s  of  an 
electron  moving  in  the  particle  are  certain  functions  of  the  local 
time  t'  belonging  to  the  instantaneous  position  of  the  electron  itself, 
or  that  they  are  the  same  functions  of  the  local  time  belonging  to 
some  fixed  point,  say  the  centre,  of  the  particle,  and  we  have  the 
proposition:  The  field  produced  in  a  moving  system  by  an  electric 
moment  whose  components  are  certain  functions  of  t'  (the  local  time 
of  the  centre  of  the  particle)  corresponds  to  the  field  existing  in  a 
system  without  translation  in  which  there  is  an  electric  moment 
whose  components  are  the  same  functions  of  t.  But,  in  the  latter 
case,  the  field  is  determined  by  (88)  and  (89).  Therefore,  we  shall 
have  for  the  moving  system 

ay  +  j_  [PL!  4  d 

x'    r      h  8y'    r      h  g«' 


and  we  shall  find   d'  and  h'  by  using  the  formulae  (50)  and  (107). 
It  follows  from  this  that  the  expressions  for  the  field  belonging 
to  the  electric  moment  represented  by  (108)  may  be  found  as  stated 
in  the  text. 

27  (Page  60).  In  a  stationary  system  the  condition  at  the  sur- 
face of  a  perfectly  conducting  body  is,  that  the  electric  force  be  at 
right  angles  to  it.  This  follows  from  the  continuity  of  the  tangential 
components  of  the  force,  combined  with  the  rule  that  in  a  perfect 
conductor  the  electric  force  must  be  zero,  because  otherwise  there 
would  be  a  current  of  infinite  strength. 

Now,  in  a  moving  system,  an  electron  that  is  at  rest  relatively 
to  it  is  acted  on  by  a  force  which,  according  to  (23),  is  given  by 


As  this  is  equal  to  the  vector  d'  defined  by  (98),  d'  plays 
exactly  the  same  part  as  d  in  a  system  without  translation,  and  by 
going  somewhat  further  into  the  phenomena  in  ponderable  bodies, 
one  can  show  that,  in  a  moving  system,  d'  must  be  normal  to  the 
surface  of  a  perfect  conductor.  Moreover,  for  the  free  ether,  the 


266  NOTES.  28,  29 

equations  which  determine  d'  and  h',  when  referred  to  moving  axes 
and  local  time,  are  identical  in  form  with  those  which  we  have  for 
d  and  h,  when  we  use  axes  having  a  fixed  position  in  the  ether. 
This  appears  at  once  from  the  equations  (100)  —  (103). 

28  (Page  62).     Since  h,  =  dy  and  h.(r)  =  —  dy(r),  we  have 

dyd!/W  =  -  hA(r)> 
and  for  the  energy  per  unit  of  volume 


29  (Page  67).  Problems  relating  to  the  motion  of  the  innumerable 
electrons  in  a  piece  of  metal  are  best  treated  by  the  statistical  method 
which  Maxwell  introduced  into  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  and 
which  may  be  presented  in  a  simple  geometrical  form  so  long  as  we 
are  concerned  only  with  the  motion  of  translation  of  the  particles. 
Indeed,  it  is  clear  that,  if  we  construct  a  diagram  in  which  the 
velocity  of  each  electron  is  represented  in  direction  and  magnitude 
by  a  vector  OP  drawn  from  a  fixed  point  0,  the  distribution  of  the 
ends  P  of  these  vectors,  the  velocity  points  as  we  shall  say,  will 
give  us  an  image  of  the  state  of  motion  of  the  electrons. 

If  the  positions  of  the  velocity  points  are  referred  to  axes  of 
coordinates  parallel  to  those  that  have  been  chosen  in  the  metal 
itself,  the  coordinates  of  a  velocity  point  are  equal  to  the  components 
|,  TI,  £  of  the  velocity  of  the  corresponding  electron. 

Let  dA  be  an  element  of  volume  in  the  diagram,  situated  at  the 
point  (|,  t],  £),  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  the  changes  of  £,  TJ,  £ 
from  one  of  its  points  to  another,  and  yet  so  large  that  it  contains 
a  great  number  of  velocity  points.  Then,  this  number  may  be 
reckoned  to  be  proportional  to  dL  Representing  it  by 


per  unit  volume  of  the  metal,  we  may  say  that,  from  a  statistical 
point  of  view,  the  function  /'  determines  the  motion  of  the  swarm 
of  electrons. 

It  is  clear  that  the  integral 


extended  over  the  whole  space  of  the  diagram,  gives  the  total  num- 
ber of  electrons  per  unit  of  volume.     In  like  manner  the  integral 


,  6)  <M  (53) 


29  NOTES.  267 

represents  the  stream  of  electrons  through  a  plane  perpendicular  to 
OX,  i.  e.  the  excess  of  the  number  passing  through  the  plane  to- 
wards the  positive  side  over  the  number  of  those  which  go  in  the 
opposite  direction,  both  numbers  being  referred  to  unit  of  area  and 
unit  of  time.  This  is  seen  by  first  considering  a  group  of  electrons 
having  their  velocity  points  in  an  element  dl;  these  may  be  re- 
garded as  moving  with  equal  velocities,  and  those  of  them  which 
pass  through  an  element  ds  of  the  said  direction  between  the  mo- 
ments t  and  t  +  dt,  have  been  situated  at  the  beginning  of  this 
interval  in  a  certain  cylinder  having  da  for  its  base,  and  the  height 
|£  dt.  The  number  of  these  particles  is  found  if  one  multiplies  the 
volume  of  the  cylinder  by  the  number  (of). 

Hence,  if   /   means  an  integration  over  the  part  of  the  diagram 
i 

on  the  positive  side  of  the  TJ£-  plane,  and    /    an  integration  over  the 

2 

part  on  the  opposite  side,  the  number  of  the  electrons  which  go  to 
one  side  is 


and  that  of  the  particles  going  the  other  way 

dadtf-  i/XI,  i,S)dL 
I 

The  expression  (52)  is  the  difference  between  these  values  divided 
by  dddt. 

If  all  the  electrons  have  equal  charges  e,  the  excess  of  the 
charge  that  is  carried  towards  the  positive  side  over  that  which  is 
transported  in  the  opposite  direction  is  given  by 

J=  eft-  fell,  (53) 

and  it  is  easily  seen  that,  denoting  by  m  the  mass  of  an  electron 
and  by  r3  —  |8  +  if  -f  £2  the  square  of  its  velocity,  we  shall  have 

(54) 

for  the  difference  between  the  amounts  of  energy  that  are  carried 
through  the  plane  in  the  two  directions.  The  quantities  (55)  and  (54) 
are  therefore  the  expressions  for  the  flow  of  electricity  and  for  that 
of  heat,  both  in  the  direction  of  OX. 

The  function  f  is  determined  by  an  equation  that  is  to  be  re- 
garded as  the  fundamental  formula  of  the  theory,  and  which  we  now 
proceed  to  establish,  on  the  assumption  that  the  electrons  are  subjected 


268  NOTES.  29 

to  a  force   in  the  direction  of  OX,  giving  them   an  acceleration  X 
equal  for  all  the  corpuscles  in  one  of  the  groups  considered. 

Let  us  fix  our  attention  on  the  electrons  lying,  at  the  time  t, 
in  an  element  of  volume  dS  of  the  metal,  and  having  their  velocity 
points  in  the  element  rfA  of  the  diagram.  If  there  were  no  encounters, 
neither  with  other  electrons  nor  with  metallic  atoms,  these  electrons 
would  be  found,  at  the  time  t  -\-  dt,  in  an  element  dS'  equal  to  dS 
and  lying  at  the  point  (x  +  %dt.  y  +  ydt,  z  -+-  £dt).  At  the  same 
time  their  velocity  points  would  have  been  displaced  to  an  element 
r//L'  equal  to  di  and  situated  at  the  point  (|  +  Xdt,  ij,  £)  of  the 
diagram,  so  that  we  should  have 


The  impacts  which  take  place  during  the  interval  of  time  con- 
sidered require  us  to  modify  this  equation.  The  number  of  electrons 
constituting,  at  the  time  t+rit,  the  group  specified  by  dS'  and  dif, 
is  no  longer  equal  to  the  number  of  those  which,  at  the  time  t,  be- 
longed to  the  group  (dS,  rfA),  the  latter  number  having  to  be  dimi- 
nished by  the  number  of  impacts  which  the  group  of  electrons  under 
consideration  undergoes  during  the  time  dt,  and  increased  by  the 
number  of  the  impacts  by  which  an  electron,  originally  not  belonging 
to  the  group,  is  made  to  enter  it.  Writing  adSdidt  and  bdSdidt 
for  these  two  numbers,  we  have,  after  division  by  dSdk  =  dS'dA.', 

f(l  +  Xdt,  rj,  S,x  +  tdt,y  +  i)dt,e  +  tdt,  t  +  df) 

=  /•(£,  rj,  g,  x,y,  e,t)  +  (b-a)dt, 
or,  since  the  function  on  the  left-hand  side  may  be  replaced  by 


This  is  the  general  equation  of  which  we  have  spoken 
We  have  now  to  calculate  the  values  ot  a  and  b.  We  shall 
simplify  this  problem  by  neglecting  the  mutual  encounters  of  the 
electrons,  considering  only  their  impacts  against  the  metallic  atoms. 
We  shall  further  treat  both  the  atoms  and  the  electrons  as  perfectly 
elastic  rigid  spheres,  and  we  shall  ascribe  to  the  atoms  masses  so 
great  that  they  may  be  regarded  as  unmovable. 

Among  all  the  encounters  we  shall  provisionally  consider  only 
those  in  which  the  line  joining  the  centra  of  the  atom  and  the 
electron  has,  at  the  instant  of  impact,  a  direction  lying  within  a  de- 


29  NOTES.  269 

finite  coue  of  infinitely  small  solid  angle  dot.  If  li  is  the  sum  of 
the  radii  of  an  atom  and  an  electron,  and  n  the  number  of  atoms 
per  unit  of  volume,  the  number  of  electrons  of  the  group  (51)  which 
undergo  an  impact  of  the  kind  just  specified  during  the  time  dt,  is 
equal  to 

rj,  £)r  cos  frdl  do  dt.  (56) 


Here  &  is  the  sharp  angle  between  the  line  of  centra  and  the  direc- 
tion of  the  velocity  r. 

The  velocity  of  the  electron  at  the  end  of  a  collision  is  found 
by  a  simple  rule.  After  having  decomposed  the  original  velocity  into 
a  component  along  the  line  of  centra  and  another  at  right  angles  to 
it,  we  have  only  to  reverse  the  direction  of  the  first  component. 
Hence,  the  new  velocity  point  F  ,  whose  coordinates  I  shall  call  |', 
r[,  £',  and  the  original  one  (|,  rj,  £)  lie  symmetrically  on  both  sides 
of  the  plane  W  passing  through  0  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of 
the  cone  do,  and  when  the  point  P  takes  different  positions  in  the 
element  dA,  the  new  point  P'  will  continually  lie  in  an  element  dX 
that  is  the  image  of  di  with  respect  to  the  plane  W,  and  is  there- 
fore equal  to  dL 

This  last  remark  enables  us  to  calculate  the  number  b,  so  far 
as  it  is  due  to  collisions  taking  place  under  the  specified  conditions. 
By  these,  a  velocity  point  is  made  to  jump  from  dA,'  to  dK,  and  the 
number  of  these  ,,inverse"  encounters  is  found  by  a  proper  change 
of  the  expression  (56').  While  we  replace  |,  ?;,  £  by  |',  rf,  £',  we 
must  leave  the  factor  reoe&di  unaltered,  for  we  have  dJJ  =  di, 
r  =  r  (if  r  is  the  velocity  whose  components  are  £',  r[,  £'),  and  the 
line  joining  the  centra  makes  equal  angles  with  r  and  r. 

We  get  therefore 


Subtracting  (56')  from  this  and  integrating  the  result  over  all 
directions  of  the  axis  of  the  cone  do  which  are  inclined  at  sharp 
angles  to  the  direction  of  r,  we  shall  obtain  the  value  of  (b  —  o)didt. 

When  the  force  which  produces  the  acceleration  X  has  a  con- 
stant intensity,  depending  only  on  the  coordinate  x,  there  can  exist 
a  stationary  state,  in  which  the  function  f  contains  neither  y  nor  z. 
For  cases  of  this  kind,  which  occur  for  instance  when  the  ends  of  a 
cylindrical  bar  are  kept  at  different  temperatures,  or  when  it  is  sub- 
jected to  a  longitudinal  electric  force,  the  fundamental  equation  (55) 
becomes 


r{,  ft  -  f(%,  r,,  g)  }  cos  *  do  =  X        +  £        •        (57) 
In  performing  the  integration  we   must  leave  |,  rj,  £  unchanged, 


270  NOTES.  29 

so  that  r  is  a  constant,  but  we  must  not  forget  that  the  values  of 
£',  tj',  £  depend  on  the  direction  of  the  line  joining  the  centra. 
Denoting  by  f,  g,  h  the  angles  between  this  line  (taken  in  such  a 
direction  that  the  angle  with  r  is  sharp)  and  the  axes,  we  have 

{•'=  |  —  2r  cos>9-  cos/1,  17'=  i]  —  2r  coafr  cos//,   £'=  g  —  2r  cos*  cos/;. 

So  long  as  the  state  of  things  is  the  same  at  all  points  of  the 
metal,  the  electrons  will  move  equally  in  all  directions.  It  is  natural 
to  assume  for  this  case  Maxwell's  well  known  law  expressed  by 

/•(I,  r},  £)  =  As-**,  (58) 

where  A  aud  h  are  constants. 
Using  the  formulae 


we  find  from  (58)  for  the  number  of  electrons  per  unit  of  volume 

00  4-flO  +00 


N  =  A  f  f  ft-  >'  &  +  f  +  «  d\  drjd£  =  AJ,S  =  ^  j/fj  ,         (59} 


—  00  —  00  —  £» 


and  for  the  sum  of  the  values  of  |2,  for  which  we   may  write 
if  we  use  a  horizontal  bar  to  denote  mean  values 


+  00  +00+00 


—  00  —  00  —  00 

It  follows  from  these  results  that 


and   that  the   mean   value    of  the   kinetic   energy   of  an   electron   is 
equal  to 

3m 


But  we  have  already  made  the  assumption  that  the  mean  kinetic 
energy  is  equal  to  aT.     Therefore 


29  NOTES.  271 

an  equation  which,  conjointly  with  (59),  tells  us  in  what  manner  the 
constants  h  and  A  are  determined  by  the  temperature  and  the  number 
N  of  corpuscles  per  unit  of  volume. 

It  is  clear  that  the  formula  (.58)  can  no  longer  hold  when  there 
is  an  external  force  or  when  the  ends  of  a  metallic  bar  are  unequally 
heated.  Yet,  whatever  be  the  new  state  of  motion,  we  shall  always 
have  a  definite  number  N  of  electrons  per  unit  of  volume,  and  a 
definite  value  of  the  mean  square  of  their  velocities,  and,  after  having 

Q 

assigned  to  /(  and  A  such  values  that     ,    is  equal  to  this  mean  square 

i  /fts 
and  A  y  .  3   to  the  number  N,  we  may  always  write 


where  <p  is  a  function  that  remains  to  be  determined.  For  this  we 
have  the  fundamental  equation  (57)  and  in  addition  to  it  the  con- 
ditions 


2dX.  =  0,  (62) 

which  must  be  fulfilled  because  the  term  Af~'"''1  has  been  so  chosen 
that  it  leads  to  the  values  of  N  and  r2  really  existing. 

The  function  qp  is  the  mathematical  expression  for  the  change 
which  an  external  force  or  a  difference  of  temperature  produces  in 
the  state  of  motion  of  the  system  of  electrons.  Now,  this  change 
may  be  shown  to  be  extremely  small  in  all  real  cases,  so  that  the 
value  of  <p  is  always  small  in  comparison  with  that  ot  A£~'"~\ 
Hence,  on  the  right-hand  side  of  equation  (57)  we  may  replace  f 
by  As'1"*.  On  the  left-hand  side,  on  the  contrary,  we  must  use  the 
complete  function  (61),  because  here  we  should  find  zero,  if  we 
omitted  the  part  qp(|,  y,  £). 

The  equation  therefore  becomes 

n,  £) 


Let  us  try  the  solution 

9>(&,if,6)»*z(r),  (64) 

where  %  is  a  function  of  r  alone.  This  assumption  is  in  accordance 
with  the  conditions  (62),  so  that  we  have  only  to  consider  the  prin- 
cipal equation  (63).  Substituting  in  it  the  value  (64)  we  first  find 


/{  p  (r,  n,  0  -  v  (6,  if,  6)  }  c°s  «•  d«>  =  i  W/(6'  -  6)  cos  »  da, 

)  I  cos8<9-  cosfdca. 


272  NOTES.  29 

Let  us  imagine  two  lines  OP  and  OQ,  drawn  from  the  origin 
of  coordinates,  the  first  in  the  direction  of  the  velocity  ({-,  17,  £),  and 
the  second  in  that  of  the  line  of  centra  at  the  moment  of  impact, 
the  angle  POQ  =  &  heing  sharp.  Denoting  by  p  the  angle  POX 
and  by  iff  that  between  the  planes  POX  and  POQ,  we  have 

cos  f  =  cos  11  cos  &  +  sin  //  sin  #•  cos  ^, 


/  cos2#cos/YZ(a  =•/    /  c 
^  V  V 


I 
f  !  ! 

=  2?r  cos  ft  I  cos3^  sm^al)'  =      jr  cos  ft  =  --•  jr 
i/ 


— 
r 


by  which  (63}  assumes  the  form 

zr  =    -  2hAX  +  *     - 


showing  (because  |  disappears  on  division)  that  our  assumption  really 
leads  to  a  solution  of  the  problem. 
If  we  put 

1 

* 

the  result  is 


Finally  we  find  from  (55)  and  (54)  for  the  currents  of  electricity 
and  of  heat 


In  these  formulae  |2  may  be  replaced  by  ^r2  and  rfA  by  4itr*dr; 
the  integration  is  thereby  reduced  to  one  with  respect  to  r  from  0 
to  oo.  Next  substituting  the  value  (65),  and  choosing  s  =  r2  as  a 
new  variable,  we  are  led  to  the  integrals 


f-'"rfs     and 

0  0  0 

The  values  of  these  are 

12  G 

"  and          ' 


29  NOTES.  273 

so  that  the  two  currents  are  given  by 

^         2          7  f    *    (m    A  v         dA\     ,     „  A    dh  ) 

J=  -,-itel  \-j-t  \2hAX  —  -,-    )  +  2-ry      -. 
3  I  ft8  \  dx  J    '       7(3    da;  J ' 

TT?        2         T(  1    fai    AV        dA\    .    0  A    dh\ 
W=  -,  nml  l-r-,  (2hAX—   ,    1+3,, 

3  I  hs  \  dx  J  7(4    dx  ] 

The  coefficient  of  electric  conductivity  6  is  easily  found  from 
the  first  of  these  equations.  Let  the  cylindrical  bar  be  kept  at  uni- 
form temperature  throughout  its  length.  Then  -=—  =  0,  -,—  =  0,  and 
when  there  is  an  electric  force  E  producing  an  acceleration 

y  _eE_ 

~~    m   > 

the  electric  current  will  be 

J 


Shm 

We  conclude  from  this  that 

_ 


Shm     ' 

or,   if  we  use  the  relations  (59*)  and  (60),   introducing  at  the  same 

time  a  velocity  u  whose  square  is  equal  to  the  mean  square  r8,   so 

2*2' 
that  m  =  - 


Y. 


,  •• 2 


In  order  to  find  the  conductivity  for  heat  we  shall  consider  a 
bar  between  whose  ends  a  difference  of  temperature  is  maintained, 
these  ends  being  electrically  insulated,  so  that  no  electricity  can  enter 
or  leave  the  metal.  Under  these  circumstances  the  unequal  heating 
will  produce  a  difference  of  potential  which  increases  until  the  electric 
force  called  forth  by  it  makes  J  vanish.  The  final  state  will  be 
characterized  by 

oj,  A  Y        d^  n  A  dh 

An  A  A.  --  3  —  =  —  £  -r-  -j—  , 
dx  h    dx  ' 

giving 

,„        2          ;     A    dh  SnlAa  AT 

„  It  tyi  t  ' 


„  '  ~-rr  ~5      —  —       -  ,  •       ~~j 

8  h*   dx  9/»*      dx 


where  we  have  also  used  the  relation  (60).     From  this  we  infer  the 
coefficient  of  thermal  conductivity 

SnlAu 


It  remains  to  add  that  the  quantity  I  may  be  considered  as   a 
certain  mean  length  of  free  path. 

L-irrnt/,  Theory  of  electrons.  18 


274  NOTES.  30 

3O  (Page  77).  As  a  preliminary  to  the  deduction  of  Wien's 
law,  we  shall  extend  to  the  case  of  an  oblique  incidence  the  reasoning 
given  in  §  46.  A  beam  of  light  propagated  in  a  direction  lying  in 
the  plane  XOZ  and  making  an  angle  &  with  OX  may  be  represented 
by  expressions  of  the  form 


/,        a;  cos  9  -4-  z  sin  &    ,      \ 
acosntt  —  +  P), 


and  when  it  falls  upon  a  fixed  mirror  whose   surface  coincides  with 
the  plane  YOZ,  we  shall  have  functions  containing  the  factor 


x  cos  &  —  s  sin  «• 


for  the  quantities  relating  to  the  reflected  light. 

Now,  the  theorem  of  corresponding  states  (§  45,  Note  26)  tells 
us  that  when  the  mirror  has  a  translation  with  velocity  w  in  the 
direction  of  OX,  there  can  be  a  state  of  things  represented  by  equa- 
tions in  which  the  above  goniometric  functions  are  replaced  by 

/  ,,      x  cos  &  -f-  z  siu  &        \ 
cosnit  -  +  P)  (GO) 

and 

(,,       x'  cos  &  —  z  sin  &    ,      \ 
'+  c  +  P),  (07} 

where 

x  =  x  —  w  t     and     t  =  I  --  Tx. 

The  frequencies  of  the  beams  are  given  by  the  coefficients  of  t 
in  these  expressions  (66)  and  (6'7) 


— 


cosIN     and     n(l  -    -cos#J, 
so  that,  if  the  frequency  of  the  incident  rays  is 


that  of  the  rays  reflected  by  the  moving  mirror  is  given  by 

(2  w  \ 

1  --  '-  cos-9-j. 

It  follows  from  this  that  a  wave-length  I  is  changed  to 


We  shall  also  have  to   speak  of  the  pressure  acting  on  a  per- 
fectly   reflecting    mirror   receiving   under   the    angle   #•    a   bundle    of 


30  NOTES.  275 

parallel  rays.  As  it  will  suffice  to  know  the  pressure  exerted  on 
the  mirror  when  at  rest,  we  may  apply  the  formula  found  in  §  25. 
Since  all  the  light  is  reflected,  we  have  s"=0,  and  s'|  =  s|,  the 
magnitude  of  these  last  vectors  being  equal  to  the  product  by  c  of 
the  energy  i  existing  in  the  incident  beam  per  unit  of  volume. 
Moreover,  if  A  is  the  area  of  the  mirror,  we  have  22=27  =  A  cos#. 
As  the  vectors  s  and  s'  are  in  the  direction  of  the  rays,  it  is  easily 
seen  that  the  vector  8  —  s'  is  directed  towards  the  mirror  along  the 
normal.  The  resultant  force  is  therefore  a  normal  pressure  whose 
magnitude  is  2Ai  cos2  if-,  or  2«cos2<91  per  unit  of  area. 

Turning  now  to  the  proof  of  Wien's  law,  we  shall  consider  a 
cylindrical  vessel  closed  by  a  movable  piston  and  void  of  ponderable 
matter.  We  shall  conceive  the  internal  space  to  be  traversed  in  all 
directions  by  rays  of  light  or  heat,  it  being  our  object  to  examine 
the  changes  in  intensity  and  wave-length  that  are  brought  about  by 
the  motion  of  the  piston.  We  suppose  the  latter  to  be  perfectly 
reflecting  on  the  inside,  whereas  the  walls  and  the  bottom  of  the 
cylinder  are  ,,perfectly  white",  by  which  we  mean  that  they  reflect 
the  rays  equally  in  all  directions  and  without  any  change  in  wave- 
length or  any  loss  of  intensity.  By  making  these  assumptions,  and 
by  supposing  the  motion  of  the  piston  to  be  extremely  slow,  we 
secure  for  all  instants  the  isotropy  of  the  state  of  radiation. 

Let  us  fix  our  attention  on  the  rays  existing  at  a  certain  time  t 
with  wave-lengths  between  the  limits  i  and  i  +  dt.,  and  let  us  de- 
note by  ti>(^)d).  the  energy  per  unit  of  volume  belonging  to  these 
rays,  or,  as  we  shall  say,  to  the  group  (/I,  i.  +  df/l).  If  A  is  the 
surface  of  the  piston  and  h  its  height  above  the  bottom  of  the 
cylinder,  the  total  energy  belonging  to  the  group  in  question  is 

(68) 


and  we  may  find  a  differential  equation  proper  for  the  determination 
of  ^  as  a  function  of  H  and  t,  by  examining  the  quantities  of  energy 
that  are  lost  and  gained  by  the  group  (/I,  A  -f  c?A). 

In  the  first  place  a  loss  is  caused  by  the  reflexion  of  part  of 
the  rays  against  the  moving  piston,  for  every  ray  which  falls  upon 
it,  has  its  wave-length  changed,  so  that,  after  the  reflexion,  it  no 
longer  belongs  to  the  group  (A,  K  +  rfA).  In  order  to  calculate  the 
loss  we  may  observe  that  the  rays  of  which  we  are  speaking  are 
travelling  equally  in  all  directions;  hence,  if  we  confine  ourselves  to 
those  whose  direction  lies  within  an  infinitely  narrow  cone  of  solid 
angle  do,  we  have  for  the  energy  per  unit  of  volume 


18* 


276  NOTES.  80 

and  for  those  rays  whose  direction  makes  an  angle  between  &  and 
•fr  +  d&  with  the  normal  to  the  piston  (drawn  towards  the  outside) 
the  corresponding  value  is 

ain&d&di. 


During  the  interval  dt  the  piston  is  struck  by  these  rays  in  so 
far  as,  at  the  time  t,  they  were  within  a  distance  c  cos  •&  dt  from  the 
piston,  i.  e.  in  a  part  of  the  cylinder  whose  volume  is  cAcosftdt, 
so  that  the  energy  falling  upon  the  piston  is 

cosftdfrdldt. 


Integrating  from   &  —  0   to   &•  =  -1-jr,   one   finds  for  the  energy 
that  is  lost  by  the  group  (I,  A  + 


(69) 

On  the  other  hand  a  certain  amount  of  energy  is  restored  to 
the  group  because  rays  originally  having  another  wave-length,  get 
one  between  A  and  A  +  rfA  by  their  reflexion  against  the  moving 
piston. 

Let  us  begin  by  especially  considering  the  rays  whose  direction 
before  reflexion  is  comprised  within  a  cone  do  whose  axis  makes 
an  angle  •&(<  \7t)  with  the  normal  to  the  piston.  If  A'  is  their 
wave-length  before  reflexion,  it  will  be  changed  to 


where  w  is  to  be  reckoned  positive  when  the  motion  of  the  piston 
is  outward.  Hence,  if  the  new  wave-length  is  to  lie  between  Ji  and 
i  +  di,  the  original  one  must  be  between  A'  and  I'  -j-  dl',  where 


The  energy  of  these  rays  per  unit  of  volume  is 


and  one  sees  by  a  reasoning  similar  to  that  used  above  that  the 
amount  of  energy  belonging  to  the  group  of  rays  defined  by  dca,  X, 
dX,  which  falls  upon  the  piston  during  the  time  dt,  is  equal  to 

cAi  coB&dt. 

Part  of  this  energy  is  spent  in  doing  work  on  the  piston,  and 
it  is  only  the  remaining  part  that  is  gained  by  the  group  (A,  A  + 


30  NOTES.  277 

The   pressure  exerted   on   the  piston  by   the  rays  of  which  we 
are  now  speaking  being 

2Ai  cos8*, 

and  its  work  during  the  time  dt 

2wAi  cos^&dt, 

the  amount  of  energy  restored  to  the  group  (A,  I  +  AX)  is  given  by 
cAi  cosQ-dt  —  2wAi  cos^&dt.  (70) 

As  we  constantly  neglect  the  square   of  w,  we  shall  replace  i 
in  the  second  term  by 


and  in  the  first  term  by 


dco  di 

_L  {  (i  _  !J£  cos  a)  K/l)  _  *2  cos  » 


snce 


By  this  we  get  for  the  expression  (70) 

'-  \  cos  •&•  •  ty  (i) cos2  & !  2 1[>  (A)  +  X  -~ 

Extending  the  integral  of  this  with  respect  to  do  over  all  direc- 
tions of  the  rays  for  which  &<^-^n,  we  find  the  energy  that  is 
restored  to  the  group  (A,  X  +  AX)  and  must  be  subtracted  from  (69). 

Since 

/"*  f 

cos&dca  =  it,       j  cos*&d<a  =  %  -it, 

the  result  of  the  integration  is 

and  we  have  for  the  change  of  the   energy   existing   in  the   cylinder, 
so  far  as  it  belongs  to  wave-lengths  between  A  and  X  +  rfA, 

dJ  l       .  i n  .  -.\    .    .  Sty  )  j» 

~jf  =  —   Q  w •"-]  ^v(.^)  ~T  ^  ~oy  }  •*« 


dJ 
~dt 

But,  since  -j-  =  w,  we  see  from  (68)  that 


278  NOTES.  30 

so  that 


or,  if  we  put 


(71) 

This  differential  equation  enables  us  to  calculate  the  change 
which  the  motion  of  the  piston  produces  in  the  distribution  of  the 
energy  over  the  different  wave-lengths.  In  order  to  put  it  in  a  form 
more  clearly  showing  its  meaning,  we  shall  first  deduce  from  it  the 
rate  of  change  of  the  total  energy  per  unit  of  volume 


oo 

K—fodL 


For  this  purpose  we  have  only  to  multiply  (7i)  by  rfA,  and  to 
integrate  each  term  from  A  =  0  to  A  =  oo.     Since 


!\ 


8it>  ,,,        dK 

o 
and 

<X>  OO  OO 

0  0  0 

we  find 


dK  .  -,  -„•       dlogK 

-  -  - 


In  deducing  this   equation  I  have  supposed  that  for  A  =  oo  the  pro- 
duct kil>  tends  towards  the  limit  0. 

Now,  when  the  velocity  w  is  given  for  every  instant,  A;  is  a 
known  function  of  the  time  and  so  will  be  K.  We  may  therefore 
introduce  this  latter  quantity  as  independent  variable  instead  of  t. 
Putting 


and  considering  i[>  as  a  function  of  this  quantity  and  of 


we  find  from  (71)  after  division  by  — 

Ab\ogii>       K    . 
t  —  ~-j.  —  =  «J  n  -- 
31 


81  NOTES.  279 

This  is  simplified  still  further  if,  instead  of  §  and  ij,  we  introduce 

I'  =  |     and     rf  =  £  +  4y 
as  independent  variables.     The  equation  then  becomes 


showing  that  the  expression 
and  therefore 


itself  must  be  a  function  of  rf  alone.     But 

,'-.$  +  4^-4  tog  (JUT*), 

so  that  4'K~'^  may  also  be  represented  as   a  function  of  iK*.     The 
solution  of  our  equation  is  thus  seen  to  be 

(72} 


where  we  have  expressed  that  ty  is  a  function  of  A  and  K,  and  where 
the  function  F  remains  indeterminate. 

If,  in  the  course  of  the  motion  of  the  piston,  the  value  K'  of  K 
is  reached,  we  shall  have,  similarly  to  (72),  for  any  wave-length 


The  right-hand  side  of  the  first  equation  becomes   equal  to  that  of 
the  second,  if  we  replace  A  by 


so  that 


Hence,  if  in  the  original  state  the  distribution  of  energy  is  given 
by  the  function  <p(l),  i.  e.  if,  for  all  values  of  A, 


we  find  for  the  corresponding  function  in  the  final  state 


31  (Page  80).     Planck  finds  in  C.  G.  S.-  units 
a  =  2,02-  10-  16, 

(so  that  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule  would  be  2,02  •  10~  16  T 
ergs),  for  the  mass  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen 

1,6  •  10-  u  gramm 


280  NOTES.  32,  33 

and  for  the  universal  unit  of  electricity  expressed  in  the  units  which 
we  have  used 

1,6-  10-»cl/4« 
(see  §  35). 

32  (Page  81).     In    a    first   series    of  experiments   Hagen   and 
Rubens  deduced  the  absorption  by  a  metal  from  its  reflective  power; 
they  found  that  for  A  =  12 ft,  8ft   and  even   for  A  =  4  ft  the  results 
closely  agreed  with  the  values  that  can  be  calculated  from  the  con- 
ductivity.    In  later  experiments  made  with  rays  of  wave-length  25,5ft 
(,,Reststrahlen"  of  fluorite),    which  led  to  the  same  result,  the  emis- 
sivity  of  a  metal  was  compared  with  that  of  a  black  body,   and  the 
coefficient  of  absorption  calculated  by  our  formula  (122)  (p.  69). 

33  (Page  81).     Let  us  choose  the  axis  of  x  at  right  angles  to 
the  plate,  so  that  x  =  0  at  the  front  surface  and  x  =  ^/  at  the  back ; 
further,  let  a  be  the  amplitude  of  the  electric  vibrations  in  the  in- 
cident beam,  this  beam  being  represented  by 


a  cos n (t  -       +  p\ 


The  electric  force  Ey  in  the  interior  of  the  thin  plate  may  be 
considered  as  having  the  same  intensity  at  all  points.  It  produces  a 
current  of  conduction 

and  a  dielectric  displacement  in  the  ether  contained  in  the  metal.  The 
variations  of  this  displacement,  however,  do  not  give  rise  to  any  ther- 
mal effect,  and  the  heat  produced  will  therefore  correspond  to  the 
work  done  by  the  force  Ey  while  it  produces  the  current  Jy.  Per 
unit  of  time  and  unit  of  volume  this  work  is  equal  to 


so  that  the  development  of  heat  in  a  part  of  the  plate  corresponding 
to  unit  of  area  of  its  surface  is  given  by 


Now,  at  the  front  surface,  Ey  is  equal  to  the  corresponding 
quantity  in  the  ether  outside  the  metal  (on  account  of  the  continuity 
of  the  tangential  electric  force),  i.  e.  to  dy  +  dy(r)  where  dy(r)  relates 
to  the  reflected  beam.  Since,  however,  the  amplitude  of  Ay^  is  propor- 
tional to  z/,  and  since  we  shall  neglect  terms  containing  J*,  we  may 
omit  d  ,ry  In  this  way  we  find  for  the  development  of  heat 


34,  35  NOTES.  281 

and  for  its  mean  value  during  a  time  comprising  many  periods 


The  coefficient  of  absorption  A  is  found  if  we  divide  this  by  the 
amount  of  energy  J-a2c  which,  per  unit  of  time,  falls  upon  the  portion 
of  the  plate  considered. 

34  (Page  85).  This  is  confirmed  by  the  final  formula  for  a* 
(p.  89),  according  to  which  this  quantity  is  proportional  to  s2,  and 

therefore  to  -r^- 


35  (Page  87).  The  truth  of  this  is  easily  seen  if  we  consider 
both  the  metallic  atoms  and  the  electrons  as  perfectly  elastic  spheres, 
supposing  the  former  to  be  immovable.  Let  a  sphere  whose  radius  li 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  radii  of  an  atom  and  of  an  electron  be 
described  around  the  centre  0  of  an  atom,  and  let  a  line  OP  be 
drawn  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which  an  electron  strikes 
against  the  atom.  Then,  the  position  of  the  point  Q  on  the  sphere 
where  the  centre  of  the  electron  lies  at  the  instant  of  impact  may 
be  determined  by  the  angle  P  0  Q  =  9-  and  the  angle  q>  between  the 
plane  POQ  and  a  fixed  plane  passing  through  OP.  The  probability 
that  in  a  collision  these  angles  lie  between  the  limits  Q-  and  &  +  d&, 
ip  and  (p  +  d(f>,  is  found  to  be 

---  sin  &  cos  d-dfrdy,  (73) 


where  &  ranges  from  0  to  \it,  and  (p  from  0  to  2  it. 

Let  us  also  represent  the  direction  in  which  the  electron  re- 
bounds, by  the  point  S  where  a  radius  parallel  to  it  intersects  the 
spherical  surface.  The  polar  coordinates  of  this  point  are  &'  =  2<9- 
and  q>'  =  (p,  and  if  these  angles  vary  between  the  limits  &'  and 
%•'  -f  d&',  <p'  and  cp'  +  dip',  the  point  S  takes  all  positions  on  the 
element 


of  the  sphere.     But  we  may  write  for  the  expression  (73) 

-  —  Bm.91'  d&'dq>'. 

4n 

so  that  the  probability  of  the  point  S  lying  on  the  element  de  is 

da 


This  being  independent  of  the  position  of  dd  on  the  sphere,  we 
conclude  that,  after  an  impact,  all  directions  of  the  velocity  of  the 
electron  are  equally  probable. 


282  NOTES.  36 

36  (Page  88).  Considering  a  single  electron  which,  at  the  time  t, 
occupies  the  position  P,  we  can  fix  our  attention  on  the  distance 
PQ  —  l  over  which  it  travels  before  it  strikes  against  an  atom.  If 
an  electron  undergoes  a  great  number  N  of  collisions  in  a  certain 
interval  of  time,  we  may  say  that  the  experiment  of  throwing  it 
among  the  atoms  and  finding  the  length  of  this  free  path  I  is  made 
with  it  N  times.  But,  since  the  arrangement  of  the  atoms  is  highly 
irregular,  we  may  just  as  well  make  the  experiment  with  N  different 
electrons  moving  in  the  same  direction  with  a  common  velocity  u. 
Let  us  therefore  consider  such  a  group,  and  let  us  seek  the  number  N" 
of  it,  which,  after  having  travelled  over  a  distance  I,  have  not  yet 
struck  against  an  atom,  a  number  that  is  evidently  some  function  of  I. 
During  an  interval  dt  a  certain  part  of  this  number  N'  will  be  dis- 
turbed in  their  rectilinear  course,  and  since  this  part  will  be  pro- 
portional both  to  N'  and  to  dt,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing, 
to  the  distance  dl  =  udt,  we  may  write  for  it 

ftN'dl,  (74) 

where  ft   is    a   constant.     Hence,    while   the  distance  dl  is  travelled 
over,  the  number  N'  changes  by 


'  =  -ftN'dl, 
so  that  we  have 

N'  =  Ne-f, 

because  N'  =  N  for  I  =  0. 

The  expression  (74)  ,  which  now  becomes 


gives  the  number  of  electrons  for  which  the  length  of  path  freely 
travelled  over  lies  between  I  and  I  +  dl.  The  sum  of  their  free 
paths  is 


and  we  shall  find  the  sum  of  all  the  free  paths  if  we  integrate  from 
I  =  0  to  I  =  oo  .     Dividing  by  N,   we  get  for  the  mean  free  path 


The  number  (75)  of  free  paths  whose  lengths  lie  between  I  and 
I  -f  dl  is  therefore  equal  to 


37—39  NOTES.  283 

or,  since 

*-•¥-• 

'in 

equal  to 

i 

-jy-  £      >m  dl . 
m 

37  (Page  89).     This  case  occurs  when  the  atoms  and  the  elec- 
trons are  rigid  elastic  spheres,  the  atoms  being  immovable,  for  it  is 
clear    that   an   electron   may  then  move   with   different  velocities  in 
exactly    the    same    zigzag    line.     Other   assumptions  would  lead  to  a 
value  of  lm  depending  on  the  velocity  u,  but  then  we  should  also 
have  to  modify  the  formula  given  in  §  50  for  the  electric  conductivity. 

El 

The  final  formula  for  -.-  would  probably  remain  unaltered. 

38  (Page  90).     It  may   be   noticed  that  the  numbers  given  in 
Note  31   can  be  said  to  be  based  on  the  formula  (148),  if  in  calcu- 
lating them  one  uses  only  the  part  of  the  radiation  curve  correspond- 
ing to  long  waves. 

39  (Page  92).    According  to  what  has  been  said,  the  potential 
and   the  kinetic  energy   may   be    represented    by  expressions   of  the 
form 


immediately  showing  that  the  amounts  of  energy  belonging  to  each 
of  the  M  fundamental  modes  of  vibration  have  simply  to  be  added. 
Since  for  small  vibrations  the  coefficients  a  and  b  may  be  regarded 
as  constants,  each  mode  of  motion  is  determined  by  an  equation  of 
Lagrange 

d/<m  =_3J7 

dt\SpJ  ~       dpk' 
or 


the  general  solution  of  which  is 


where  a  and  |3  are  constants. 

In  this  state  of  motion  there  is  a  potential  energy 


284  NOTES.  40 

and  a  kinetic  energy 


both  of  which  have  the  mean  value 


4O  (Page  94).  Taking  three  edges  of  the  parallelepiped  as  axes 
of  coordinates,  and  denoting  by  f,  y,  h  the  direction  cosines  of  the 
electric  vibrations  of  the  beam  travelling  in  the  direction  (ji1;  ^2;  fts), 
we  may  represent  this  beam  by  the  formulae 


ga  cos  n 


(t- 
d:  =  ha  cos  n  (t  -  * 


£+  C.JL+ 


If  we  assume  similar  formulae  with  the  same  constants  a  and  p  for 
the  seven  other  beams,  replacing  (il}  jt2,  (is  by  the  values  indicated 
in  (149),  and  f,  g,  h  by 

f,  9,  '* 
respectively,  the  total  values  of  Ax,  dy,  dz  are  given  by 

da,.          nu..x    .    niuti    .    nu,.z  ,. 

_  =  —  o/acos— '  —sin          sin          COSMU  +  W). 

C.  /?  f 

(7<J) 


d.    nti.x        nii.y    .    nu,.z  ,.          ,. 

==  —  Bga  sm       -  cos  —  -   sin  —      cos  n  (t  +  p\ 
c 


By  these  the  condition  that  d  be  normal  to  the  walls  is  fulfilled 
at  the  planes  XOY,  YOZ,  ZOX,  for  at  the  first  plane,  for  example, 
s  =  0,  and  consequently  d.,.  =  0,  d,  =0. 

The  same  condition  must  also  be  satisfied  at  the  opposite  faces 
of  the  parallelepiped.  This  requires  that,  if  qt>  q2)  q3  have  the  meaning 
given  in  the  text, 


Therefore, 


41  NOTES.  285 

must  be  multiples  of  -n,   and  since      =   .   > 


must  be  whole  numbers. 

41  (Page  94).  If  one  of  these  states,  say  a  state  A,  is  deter- 
mined by  the  formulae  (75)  of  the  preceding  Note,  in  which  f,  g,  h 
relate  to  any  direction  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  (jtlt  (i3,  fi3~), 
a  state  of  things  A'  in  which  the  polarization  is  perpendicular  to 
the  former  one  is  represented  by  equations  of  the  same  form  (with 
other  constants  a  and  _p'),  in  which  f,g,h  are  replaced  by  the  con- 
stants /",  g',  h'  determining  a  direction  at  right  angles  both  to  (/)  g, 
Ji)  and  to  (^  ,  /i2  ,  j«.3).  It  is  easily  seen  that  any  other  mode  of 
motion  represented  by  formulae  like  (76')  with  values  of  f,  g,  h  such 
that 

0 


may  be  decomposed  into  two  states  of  the  kind  of  A  and  A.  The 
total  electric  field  will  therefore  consist  of  a  large  number  of  fields 
A  and  A',  each  having  a  definite  amplitude  a  and  phase  p.  In 
order  to  find  the  total  electric  energy  we  must  calculate  for  each 
mode  of  motion  the  integral 


and  for  each  combination  of  two  modes 

........      (77) 


Now,  it  may  be  shown  that  all  the  integrals  of  the  latter  kind 
are  zero.  For  a  combination  of  two  states  such  as  we  have  just  now 
called  A  and  A'  (  which  are  characterized  by  equal  values  of  «,,<<.,, 
/is  and  of  the  frequency  n),  this  is  seen  if  one  takes  into  account 
that  in  the  integrals 


I  pr>«s     "     fir       I  sin2    "     rfr       I  cnn*     ^-V  rJu   etc  (7R\ 

tv  JL  >        f    Dill  —  flil.        fL>UH  t*U     CwO«  I  /  O  I 

./  c         '  ./  c  J  " 

000 

the  square  of  the  cosine  or  the  sine  may  be  replaced  by  •£,   so  that 
(77)  becomes 

8(//"  -(-  ^^  +  /(^')  #«'</i QgOs  cos  w(<  +  jp)  cos  w  (<  +  !*')> 


which  is  0  because  the  directions  (f,  g,  }i)  and  (/",  g,  /«')  are  at  right 
angles  to  each  other. 


286  NOTES.  42 

In  any  other  case  at  least  one  of  the  coefficients       '  . 

•  c         c    '     c 

will  be  different  for  the  states  d  and  d'.     Thus,  may  have  the 

value  k  for  one  state  and  the  value  //  for  the  other.     The   integrals 

I  cos  kxvosk'xdx  =  g(jf^5  sin(fc  -f  k") 
o 

A 

j  smkx  sink'xdx  =  -  g^^  sin(fc 
o 

both  are  zero,  because  kqt  and  k'fj1  are  multiples  of  a.    Consequently, 
each  of  the  three  integrals 


into  which  (77)  may  be  decomposed  vanishes. 

It  is  readily  seen  that  similar  results  hold  for  the  magnetic 
energy.  It  will  suffice  to  observe  that,  in  the  state  represented  by 
the  formulae  (76\  the  magnetic  force  has  the  components 


h,  -  8f  a  sin  ?*;  x  cos  "  ^  y  cos  ^  sin  n  (<  +  p)  , 

,   ,  nu,.x    .     nu.,y         nv>*z    •       /. 

hw=8(/acos          sin  cos          smn(t+p), 

h  =  SA'ocos?^-*  cos""'2'  sin  Wft"  sinw 
c  c  c 

where 


are  the   constants   determining  a  direction  perpendicular   both  to  (jiu 
.u2,fis)  and  to  (f,g,li). 

If,  further,  one  takes  into  account  what  has  been  said  of  the  inte- 
grals (78),  it  will  be  found  that  the  parallelepiped  contains  an  amount 


,os*n(t  +  p)  =  4qlq3q3a3coB3n(t  +  p) 

of  electric,  and  an  amount 

4qlq^q3ais'm2n(t  -\-  p} 

of  magnetic  energy.     Each  of  these  expressions  has  the  mean  value 


42  (Tage  97).     On  further  consideration  I  think  that  it  will  be 
very  difficult  to   arrive  at  a  formula  different  from  that  of  Jeans, 


42  NOTES.  287 

so  long  as  we  adhere  to  the  general  principles  of  the  theory  of 
electrons  as  set  forth  in  our  first  chapter.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  must  be  observed  that  Jeans's  theory  is  certainly  in  contradiction 
with  known  facts.  Let  us  compare,  for  example,  the  emissivity  El 
for  yellow  light  of  a  polished  silver  plate  at  15°  C.  with  that  (Ea) 
of  a  black  body  at  1200°  C.,  confining  ourselves  to  the  direction 
normal  to  the  plate.  Silver  reflects  about  90  percent  of  the  in- 
cident light,  so  that  the  coefficient  of  absorption  of  the  plate  is  -^, 
and  by  Kirchhoff's  law,  E1  =  ^E^,  if  Es  denotes  the  emissivity  of 
a  black  body  at  15°.  But,  by  Jeans's  theory  (see  §  74)  the  emissivity 
of  a  black  body  for  light  of  a  given  wave-length  must  be  proportional 

288  1 

to  the  absolute  temperature,    so  that  we   have  E3=~j^E^=     E3, 

and  ^1=  ^E»- 

Now,  at  the  temperature  of  1200°,  a  black  body  would  glow 
very  brilliantly,  and  if  the  silver  plate  at  15°  had  an  emissivity  only 
fifty  times  smaller,  it  ought  certainly  to  be  visible  in  the  dark. 

It  must  be  noticed  that  we  have  based  our  reasoning  on  Kirch- 
hoff's law,  the  validity  of  which  is  not  doubted  by  Jeans.  In  fact, 
the  point  in  the  above  argument  was  that,  at  temperatures  at  which 
a  black  body  has  a  perceptible  emissivity  for  the  kind  of  rays  con- 
sidered, it  can  never  be  that,  for  some  other  body,  only  one  of  the 
coefficients  E  and  A  is  very  small.  The  silver  plate  might  be  ex- 
pected to  emit  an  appreciable  amount  of  light,  because  its  coefficient 
of  absorption  shows  that  in  reality  the  exchange  of  energy  between 
its  particles  and  the  ether  is  not  extremely  show. 

From  facts  like  that  which  I  have  mentioned  it  appears  that, 
if  we  except  the  case  of  very  long  waves,  bodies  emit  considerably 
less  light,  in  proportion  to  their  coefficient  of  absorption,  than  would 
be  required  by  Jeans's  formulae.  The  only  equation  by  which  the 
observed  phenomena  are  satisfactorily  accounted  for  is  that  of  Planck, 
and  it  seems  necessary  to  imagine  that,  for  short  waves,  the  connec- 
ting link  between  matter  and  ether  is  formed,  not  by  free  electrons, 
but  by  a  different  kind  of  particles,  like  Planck's  resonators,  to 
which,  for  some  reason,  the  theorem  of  equipartition  does  not  apply. 
Probably  these  particles  must  be  such  that  their  vibrations  and  the 
effects  produced  by  them  cannot  be  appropriately  described  by  means 
of  the  ordinary  equations  of  the  theory  of  electrons;  some  new  as- 
sumption, like  Planck's  hypothesis  of  finite  elements  of  energy  will 
have  to  be  made. 

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  all  difficulties  can  be 
cleared  in  this  way.  Though  in  many,  or  in  most  cases,  Planck's 
resonators  may  play  a  prominent  part,  yet,  the  phenomena  of  con- 
duction make  it  highly  probable  that  the  metals  at  least  also  contain 


288  NOTES.  43-45 

free  electrons  whose  motion  and  radiation  may  be  accurately  described 
by  our  formulae.  It  seems  difficult  to  see  why  a  formula  like  Planck's 
should  hold  for  the  emission  and  absorption  caused  by  these  particles. 
Therefore,  this  formula  seems  to  require  that  the  free  electrons, 
though  certainly  existing  in  the  metal,  be  nearly  inactive.  Nor  is  this 
all.  If  we  are  right  in  ascribing  the  emission  and  the  absorption  by  a 
metal  to  two  different  agencies,  to  that  of  free  electrons  in  the  case 
of  long  waves  (on  the  grounds  set  forth  in  §  60),  and  to  that  of 
,,resonators"  in  the  case  of  shorter  ones,  we  must  infer  that  for  inter- 
mediate wave-lengths  both  kinds  of  particles  have  their  part  in  the 
phenomena.  The  question  then  arises  in  what  way  the  equilibrium 
is  brought  about  under  these  complicated  circumstances. 

It  must  be  added  that,  even  in  the  case  of  long  waves,  there 
are  some  difficulties.  To  these  attention  has  been  drawn  by  J.  J. 
Thomson.1) 

I  shall  close  this  discussion  by  a  remark  on  the  final  state  that 
is  required  by  Jeans's  theory.  I  dare  say  that  it  will  be  found 
impossible  to  form  an  idea  of  a  state  of  things  in  which  the 
energy  would  be  uniformly  distributed  over  an  infinite  number  of 
degrees  of  freedom.  The  final  state  can  therefore  scarcely  be  thought 
of  as  really  existing,  but  the  distribution  of  energy  might  be  con- 
ceived continually  to  tend  towards  uniformity  without  reaching  it  in 
a  finite  time. 

43  (Page  102).    In  Zeeman's  first  experiments  it  was  not  found 
possible  neatly  to  separate  the  components;  only  a  broadening  of  the 
lines  was  observed,  and  the  conclusions  were  drawn  from  the  amount 
of   this    broadening    and    the    state    of   polarization    observed    at    the 
borders. 

44  (Page  110).    For  great  values  of  the  coordinates,  the  coeffi- 
cients c  might  be  functions  of  them.    They  may,  however,  be  treated 
as  constants  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  very  small  vibrations. 

45  (Page  112).     The   result   of  the   elimination   of  qlr  qz,  .  .  .  qu 
from  the  equations  (176)  is 

-  inclfl  \ 

-inc21,  /'s-m2w8,  .     .,   -  inc3fl 

=  0.  (79} 


-ncfll,      - 


1)  J.  J.  Thomson,  The  corpuscular  theory  of  matter,  p.  85. 


46  NOTES.  289 

Developing  the  determinant  we  get  in  the  first  place  the  principal 
term 

n  =  (/;  —  jwjw2)  (/;  -  ->«X)  •••(/",,-  m^~), 

and  in  the  second  place  terms  containing  as  factors  two  of  the 
coefficients  c.  These  coefficients  being  very  small,  we  may  neglect 
all  further  terms  which  contain  more  than  two  factors  of  the  kind. 
One  of  the  said  terms  is  obtained  if,  in  the  principal  term,  the  two  factors 
fk  —  mkn2  and  /",  —  m,n2  are  replaced  by  —  inckt  •  inclk  =  —  n"cli-  Hence, 
denoting  by  nkl  the  product  which  remains  when  we  omit  from  77 
the  factors  fk—mkn^  and  /)  —  m,«2,  we  may  write  for  (79} 

77-w2J^c*,77H=0,  (80). 

kl 

an  equation  that  can  be  satisfied  by  values  of  n2  differing  very  little 
from  the  roots  n^,  «82,  .  .  .  nfla  of  the  equation 

77=0, 

which  are  determined  by  (172). 
Thus  there  is  a  root 


where  6  is  very  small.  Indeed,  if  this  value  is  substituted  in  (SO), 
we  may  replace  n*  by  nk  in  all  the  products  nkl,  and  the  same  may 
be  done  in  the  factors  of  the  first  term  77,  with  the  exception  only 
of  fk  —  w^w2,  for  which  we  must  write  —  mkd.  By  this  77  becomes 

-mk$IIk(n*), 

where  the  last  term  means  the  product  77  after  omission  of  the  said 
factor,  and  substitution  of  w2  =  nk*  in  the  remaining  ones. 

In  the  sum  occurring  in  (80)  only  those  terms  become  different 
from  zero,  in  which  the  factor  fk  —  mkn2  (corresponding  to  the  par- 
ticular value  we  have  chosen  for  7r)  is  missing.  Our  equation  there- 
fore assumes  the  form 

^  -  n*2cl,nkl(nk*)  =  0, 


from  which  the  value  of  d  is  immediately  found. 

This  value  may  be  positive  or  negative,  but,  as  it  is  very  small, 
the  right  hand  side  of  (81)  is  positive  in  any  case,  and  gives  a  real 
value  for  the  frequency 


46  (Page  113).  Equation  (79)  is  somewhat  simplified  when 
we  divide  the  horizontal  rows  of  the  determinant  by  l/^,  >/m2,etc., 
and  then  treat  the  vertical  columns  in  the  same  manner.  Putting 

Lorcntz,  Theory  of  electrons.  19 


290 


NOTES. 


46 


so  that 

and  using  (172),  one  finds 

—  «jze21,    HJ 

—  ine.,,      — 


"-UI 


—  me. 


if, 


—  inc» 


>*» 


=  0. 


(85) 


(84) 


Let  us  now  suppose  that  a  certain  number  ft,  say  the  first  it, 
of  the  frequencies  nlrna,..  .  have  a  common  value  v,  and  let  iis  seek 
a  value  of  11  satisfying  the  condition  (84),  and  nearly  equal  to  v. 
When  n  has  a  value  of  this  kind,  all  the  elements  of  the  determinant 
with  the  exception  of  w*  +  1  —  «*,  •  •  •  nf*  —  n2  are  very  small  quantities. 
Therefore,  the  part  which  contains  these  p  —  k  elements,  namely  the  part 


(»„'-»") 


n,"—  n',     —  inc. 


— 


n'  - 


greatly  predominates.     We  shall  therefore  replace  (84)  by 


n    '~  n 


wc. 


—  inet 


—  ine 


•*27 


0. 


Finally,  since  the  quantities  e  are  very  small,  we  shall  replace  n 
by  v  wherever  it  is  multiplied  by  an  c,  so  that  we  find 


v2—  ri\      - 


-ive 


II. 


=  0, 


(8$) 


—  ive,. 


—  ive, 


kit 


an  equation  of  degree  7c  in  w8. 

Now,  on  account  of  the    relations    (85),  the  latter   determinant 
is  not  altered    when   we   change   the    signs  of  all   the  elements  con- 


46  NOTES.  291 

taining  an  e  (the  effect  being  merely  that  the  horizontal  rows  become 
equal  to  the  original  vertical  columns).  Hence,  after  development, 
the  equation  can  only  have  terms  with  an  even  number  of  these  ele- 
ments, so  that  it  is  of  the  form 

(V  -  w2)*  +  Pl (V  -  w2)*- 2  +  P2 (v2  -  w2)*-4  +  •  •  •  =  0,       (86) 

where  Pt  is  made  up  of  terms  containing  two  factors  of  the  form 
ive,  P2  of  terms  containing  four  such  factors,  and  so  on. 

It  follows  from  this  that  the  coefficients  P  are  real  quantities. 
But  we  may  go  further  and  prove  that,  if  v2  —  n2  is  considered  as 
the  unknown  quantity,  all  the  roots  of  the  equation  (85)  or  (86) 
are  real. 

For  this  purpose  we  observe  that,  on  account  of  (85),  if  we  take 
for  v2  —  n2  one  of  its  roots,  the  equations 

(v2—  w2)^  —  ivel3x3  —  •  •  •  —  iveitxk  =  0, 
XY  +  (v2—  n2)x2  —  •  •  •  —  ive2tx/c  =  0, 


—  ivekl  x^  —  ivct2x2  —  •••-)-  (v2  —  n2)xt  =  0 

may  be  satisfied  by  certain  values  of  xl}  x2  .  .  .  xk,  which  in  general 
will  be  complex  quantities.  Let  xl,xi,  .  .  .  xk  be  the  conjugate  values. 
Then,  multiplying  the  equations  by  x1}  x3,  .  .  .  xk  respectively  and 
adding,  we  find 

(v8  —  w2)  2xisi  ~  v  -^  *  (en  xi  s'i  +  eu  xi  ^i)  =  0- 

'    i  j' 

Now,  putting 


we  have 

*/*/-v+v» 

and,  in  virtue  of  (83), 

i(ej,xlxj+  e^XjX^  =  2ejt(^j-^. 

The  two    sums    in    (87)   are  therefore    real,    and   v2  —  w2  must  be  so 
likewise. 

We  have  now  to  distinguish  the  cases  of  It  even  and  k  odd. 
In  the  first  case  (86')  is  an  equation  of  degree  -*-£,  when  (v2  —  w2)2  is 
considered  as  the  quantity  to  be  determined,  and,  since  v2  —  n*  must 
be  real,  its  roots  are  all  positive.  Calling  them  a2,  ft2,  y2,  .  .  .,  we 
have  the  solution 

n2—  v2=  ±  «,  +/3,  ±y,--- 
whence 

«-"±£,     "±£»     V±2T'"- 

being  k  values  of  the  frequency. 

19* 


292  NOTES.  47,  48 

When  Jc  is  odd,  equation  (86)  has  the  factor  v2—  w2,  so  that  one 
root  is 

n  =  v, 

corresponding  to  the  original  spectral  line.  After  having  divided  the 
equation  by  v2  —  n~,  we  are  led  back  to  the  former  case,  so  that 
now,  besides  n  =  v,  there  are  k  —  1  roots  of  the  form  (88). 

In  the  particular  case  of  three  equivalent  degrees  of  freedom, 
equation  (86)  becomes 

(9                  9\  1      i       /      9  9\       9  /  t  \  f\ 

qii    W       I  L      I  >l)&    M  -  \  fit"  {  f1  P  1         f>  £>  [         fJ          ft  \     ^-^     II 

"  '*  /       I     \ v  )  ^    \  $ 332    i       31     IS     *       1 2    2 1  / 

giving  n2  —  v*  —  0  and 

-^—        *      23    '       31    '       12' 

from  which  (177)  immediately  follows,  if  we  replace  v  by  nl  and  e23, 
e81,  e12  by  their  values  (^). 

I  am  indebted  to  a  remark  made  by  Dr.  A.  Pannekoek  for  the 
extension  of  the  foregoing  theory  to  cases  of  more  than  three  equi- 
valent degrees  of  freedom. 

47  (Page  113).    That  the  distances  between  the  magnetic  com- 
ponents  of  a    spectral   line  will  be   proportional  to  the  intensity  of 
the   magnetic  field   (for   a  given   direction   of  it)  is   also  seen    from 
the  general  equation  (86).     It  suffices   to  observe  that  each  quantity 
e  is  proportional  to  |  H  ;.     Therefore   Pj  is  proportional  to  H2,  P2  to 
H4,  and   so  on.     The  values    of  w2  —  vs    which   satisfy   the  equation 
vary  as  ]  H     itself,  and  as  they  are  very  small,  the  same  is  true  of 
n  —  v. 

48  (Page  120).    In  the  following  theory   of  the  vibrations  of  a 
system  of  four  electrons  we  shall  denote  by  a  the  edge  of  the  tetra- 
hedron  in  the   position   of  equilibrium,   by   I   the   distance   from   the 
centre  0  to  one  of  the  edges,  by  r  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed 
sphere,  and  by   &  the  angle  between  the  radius  drawn  towards  one 
of  the  angles  and  an  edge  ending  at  that  angle.     We  have 

cos#  = 

In  the  state  of  equilibrium  one  of  the  electrons  A  is  acted  on 
by  the  repulsions  of  the  three  others,  each  equal  to 


and  by   the   force    due   to   the  positive  charge.     The  latter   force  is 


48  NOTES.  293 


the  same  as  when  a  charge  6  =  4  f'Vo  were  placed  at  the  point  0. 
Hence  we  have  the  condition  of  equilibrium 

3e*  ee 

cos  -9-  +  ,      .,=  0. 
'  8 


or 


The  frequency  of  the  first  mode  of  motion  is  easily  found  by  ob- 
serving that,  after  a  displacement  of  all  the  electrons  to  a  distance 
r  +  d  from  the  centre,  where  S  is  infinitely  small,  the  resultant 
force  acting  on  any  one  of  them  would  remain  zero,  if  the  attraction 
exerted  by  the  positive  sphere  were  still  equivalent  to  that  of  a 
charge  e  at  0.  As  it  is,  there  is  a  residual  force  due  to  the  at- 
traction of  the  positive  charge  included  between  the  spheres  whose 
radii  are  r  and  r  +  8.  The  amount  of  this  charge  being  4jr/-2(>$, 
and  the  force  exerted  by  it  on  one  of  the  electrons  cgd,  we  have 
the  equation  of  motion 

giving  for  the  frequency 

w2  =  —      • 
m 

Let  us  next  consider  the  motion  that  has  been  described  in  the 
text  as  a  twisting  around  the  axis  OX.  The  formula  for  this  case  is 
found  in  the  simplest  way  by  fixing  our  attention  on  the  potential 
energy  of  the  system.  When  the  edges  AB  and  CD  are  turned 
around  OX  through  equal  angles  <p  in  opposite  directions,  two  of 
the  lines  AC,  AD,  BC,  BD  are  changed  to 


and  the  two  others  to 


The  potential  energy  due  to  the  mutual  action  of  the  corpuscles 
is  therefore 

*|         (  /j2  a-  \  f>% 

O  __  j_     _  C  '          /•<  |          o  2\ 

''4*1  a(l~—  ±<p  —  tv*)  "*"  a(l+lcp  —    <p8)  I  ~  w  [  • 


The  potential  energy  with  respect  to  the  positive  sphere  having 
not  been  altered  (because  each  electron  has  remained  at  the  distance 
r  from  the  centre),  and  the  kinetic  energy  being  equal  to 


the  equation  of  motion  becomes 


294  NOTES.  48 

3e8 

.Vwa2qr+  ,       <P2=  const., 
Sita  ~ 

giving  for  the  frequency 

3es  ene 


In  examining  the  vibrations  for  which  the  equations  (181)  and 
(182)  are  given  in  the  text,  we  may  treat  the  system  as  one  with 
only  two  degrees  of  freedom,  the  configuration  of  which  is  wholly 
determined  by  the  coordinates  p  and  g. 

This  time  we  shall  apply  the  general  theory  of  a  vibrating 
system,  starting  from  the  formulae  for  the  potential  energy  U  and 
the  kinetic  energy  T  expressed  as  functions  of  p,ff,  !>,{/•  If  we 
ascribe  a  potential  energy  zero  to  two  corpuscles  placed  at  the  distance 
a,  their  potential  energy  at  the  distance  a  +  da  will  be 


''"  e'   I  —  Sa 

Ina  ~  4 


(da)'! 
a3    )' 


The  value  of  Sa  being  2g  for  the  pair  AB,  —  2</  for  CD,  and 
for  the  remaining  pairs,  we  find  the  following  expression  for  the 
mutual  potential  energy  of  the  four  corpuscles 


As  to  the  potential  energy  u  of  a  corpuscle  with  respect  to  the 
positive  sphere,  we  may  write  for  it  e(qp  —  qp0),  if  the  potential  due 
to  the  sphere  has  the  value  qp0  for  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the 
corpuscle  and  the  value  (p  for  its  new  position.  Therefore,  since  cp 
is  a  function  of  the  distance  r  from  the  centre,  we  may  write,  deno- 
ting by  Sr  the  change  of  r, 


Taking  into  account  that,  by  Po  is  son's  equation, 

d*jp         2    d<f  _ 

dr'-  +    rTr~    ~  P' 

and  that  ~~ -r  t  the  electric  force  acting  on  the  electron  in  its  ori- 
ginal position,  is  equal  to 

JL        1 

4*rs~   3  P°r' 
we  find 

2 1 .  (90) 


48  NOTES.  295 

If  A'B'  is  the  line  AB  displaced,  and  E'  its  middle  point,  we  have 


and  therefore  for  the  electron  A 


The  same  value  holds  for  B  and  we  get  those  for  C  and  D  by 
changing  the  signs  of  p  and  g.  Substituting  in  (90)  and  taking  the 
sum  of  the  four  values,  we  find 


which,  added  to  (89),  gives 

V  =  e  ~  (PO  -  Q)     (2lp  +  ag)*  - 


if  we  put 


e<?  „  _  e(g0  —  o)|/2  _  e(e0  — 4 

3m'        M "  3w        '        r  '  6m 


The  square  of  the  velocity  being  pz  +  g"  for  each  electron,  we  have 

T  =  2m  (£»  +  £'), 
and  the  equations  of  motion 

d/ar\     atf 

T 


dt\d~g 
assume  the  form 

p  +  ap  +  pg  =  0,      g  +  ftp  +  yy  =  0. 

If  we  put 

p  =  /j  cos  nt,      g  =  sp, 

the  constants  n  and  s  are  determined  by  the  equations 

-«2  +  («  +  /3s)  =  0,       -  sw2  +  (0  +  ys)  =  0 

from  which  (181)  and  (183)  are  easily  deduced. 

In  the  calculation  of  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  field  on  the  vibra- 
tions to  which  the  formula  (183)  relates,  we  may  consider  the  three 
modes  of  motion,  corresponding  to  a  definite  value  of  s,  which,  in  the 
absence  of  a  magnetic  field,  have  the  same  frequency,  say  w0,  as  the  only 
ones  of  which  the  system  is  capable.  Reverting  to  the  formulae  of  §  90, 


296  NOTES.  48 

we  shall  call  plt  p2,  p3  the  three  displacements,  common  to  all  the 
electrons,  which  occur  in  the  three  modes,  this  displacement  being 
parallel  to  OX  in  the  first  mode,  to  OY  in  the  second  and  to  OZ 
in  the  third.  It  is  to  be  understood  that  p1  is  now  what  is  called 
p  in  §  100,  and  that  in  every  case  the  displacements  p  are  attended 
with  transverse  displacements  g  =  +  sp. 

The  equation  (9T)  gives  for  each  mode 


so    that   the   coefficients    mlt  m2,  m3    introduced    in    §  89   have    the 
common  value 

The  coefficients  f\,  /'2,  /j  are  also  equal  to  each  other,  and  if  we 
substitute 

(cf.  (175)),  we  find  the  following  equations 

I)  V     ft     —          /  Vl  ft    1 2  j[2  0    1  ^  j?  ==^        J 

+  w0  (w02  -  w2)  g3  -  in0c23qs  =  0,  (53) 


corresponding  to  (176)  and  giving  for  the  frequencies  of  the  magnetic 
triplet  (cf.  (177)) 


8  m  (i+8*)  4  +  4  • 

It  remains  to  determine  the  coefficients  c,  for  which  purpose  we 
have  to  return  to  (173). 

The  expression  PlSpl  represents  the  work  done,  in  the  case  of 
the  virtual  displacement  dpl}  by  the  electromagnetic  forces  that  are 
called  into  play  by  the  motion  of  the  electrons  in  the  magnetic  field  H. 
Consequently,  c12pidpl  is  the  work  of  these  forces  in  so  far  as  they 
are  due  to  the  velocities  of  the  particles  in  the  motion  determined 
by  p2.  Calculating  this  work,  we  shall  find  the  value  of  c12. 

It  will  be  well  to  introduce  the  rectilinear  coordinates  of  the 
four  corpuscles  in  their  positions  of  equilibrium.  If  the  axes  are 
properly  chosen,  these  are  for  A:  I,  I,  I,  for  B:  I,  —I,  —I,  for  C: 
-I,  I,  —I,  and  for  D:  —I,  —I,  I. 

When  the  coordinate  p1  is  changed  by  dplt  the  four  particles 
undergo  a  displacement  equal  to  8p^  in  the  direction  of  OX,  com- 
bined with  displacements  sdp1  directed  along  the  line  AB  for  A 
und  B  and  along  CD  for  C  and  D.  Taking  into  acount  that  in 
the  case  of  a  positive  sdpt,  the  distance  from  OX  is  increased  for 


NOTES. 


297 


A  and  B,  and  diminished  for  C  and  D,  and  putting  s  = 
find  for  the  rectangular  components  of  the  displacement 


for  A: 

„    B: 

„     C: 

D: 


dplf         s'dp 


s'8p1} 
-s'Spi,      -s'8p1, 
-s'dplr         s'Splf 
s'8pi}     -s'dpt. 


we 


(95} 


If  here,  instead  of  dplt  we  wrote  plt  we  should  get  the  com- 
ponents of  the  velocities  occurring  in  the  motion  i\.  Similarly,  the 
velocities  in  the  motion  p%  are 


for  A:  s'p2, 

„    B:  -t 

„     C :  t 
D: 


s't, 


(96} 


We  have  now  to  fix  our  attention  ou  the  electromagnetic  forces 
due  to  these  velocities,  and  to  determine  the  work  of  these  forces 
corresponding  to  the  displacements  (95).  The  result  is  found  to  de- 
pend on  the  component  Hz  only,  and  we  shall  therefore  omit  from 
the  beginning  all  terms  with  H^  and  Hy.  Thus  we  write 


0 


for  the  components  of  the  electromagnetic  force  acting  on  an  electron, 
by  which,  taking  v.,.  and  Vy  from  (96},  we  find  the  following  forces 
acting  on  the  corpuscles  in  the  directions  of  OX  and  OY: 


for  A:      —I 

B:      4  I 


Finally,  in  order  to  find  the  work  c^p^Sp^,  we  must  take  the 
products  of  these  quantities  and  the  corresponding  ones  in  the  first 
two  columns  of  (95} ,  and  add  the  results.  This  leads  to  the  value 


and  similarly 


298  NOTES.  49,  50 

=  4  ~  Hl  -  c    =  4      Hl  -  -s8 


3l 


so  that  the  last  term  of  (94)  is  equal  to 


---I 
—  I 


--- 
—  2cm  I          1  +  s*  ' 

Dividing  this  by  the  corresponding  term  in  (  164),  we  find 


from  which  the  values  (184)  and  (185)  are  easily  deduced. 

49  (Page  123).  Let  p  —  00  be  made  to  approach  the  limit  0 
from  the  positive  side,  so  that,  by  (182),  v  =  +  °°-  Taking  into 
account  that 


and  that  the  limit  of 


is  2,  one  will  easily  find  that  the  formulae  (183)  —  (185)  lead  to  the 
values  given  in  the  text. 

The  same  results  are  also  obtained  when  p  —  p0  is  supposed  to 
approach  the  limit  0  from  the  negative  side. 

It  must,  however,  be  noticed  that,  as  (97)  shows,  for  one  of  the 
two  solutions  (namely  for  the  one  for  which  to  =  —  -J-)  the  coefficient 
s  determined  by  (181)  becomes  infinite,  indicating  that  for  this  so- 
lution p  =  0  (since  g  must  be  finite).  The  corresponding  vibrations 
would  therefore  be  ineffective  in  the  limiting  case  (§  99),  because 
the  radiation  is  due  to  the  vibrations  of  the  electrons  in  the  di- 
rection of  OX. 

50  (Page  123).  After  having  found  the  frequency  n,  we  may 
deduce  from  the  equations  (93)  the  ratios  between  ql,  q.2,  qa,  which 
determine  the  form  of  the  vibrations,  and  the  nature  of  the  light 
emitted.  We  shall  abbreviate  by  putting 

4|(l-^»)-tf,  (98) 

so  that 

C2S  =  ^7       C31  =  ff  H,,,       C18  =  (THS, 

and,  by  (94)  and  (92),  for  the  outer  lines  of  the  triplet 

«2-V=  +  ioC  H,  (99) 

where  we  shall  understand  by  |H|  a  positive  number. 


50  NOTES.  299 

If  h  is  a  unit  vector  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  force,  the 
equations  (93)  assume  the  form 


(100) 
Let 

be  a  set  of  complex  values  satisfying  these  conditions  and  let  us  con- 
sider ax>  bx,  etc  as  the  components  of  certain  vectors  a  and  b. 

Separating  the  real  and  the  imaginary  parts  of  (100),  we  find 
the  equations 

+  a-[b-h]  =  0,    +b  +  [a-h]  =  0, 

showing  in  the  first  place  that  the  vectors  a  and  b  must  be  at  right 
angles  both  to  the  magnetic  field  and  to  each  other,  and  in  the 
second  place  that  they  must  be  of  equal  magnitude. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  light 
emitted  by  the  vibrating  system.  As  we  found  in  §  39,  the  radia- 
tion of  an  electron  depends  on  its  acceleration  only.  We  infer 
from  this  that,  when  there  are  a  certain  number  of  equal  electrons, 
the  resultant  radiation  will  be  the  same  as  if  we  had  a  single  corpuscle 
with  the  same  charge,  whose  displacement  from  its  position  of  equi- 
librium were  at  every  instant  equal  to  the  resultant  of  the  displace- 
ments of  the  individual  electrons.  Now,  in  the  first  mode  of  motion 
which  we  have  considered  in  what  precedes,  the  resultant  displace- 
ment is  obviously  4^)  in  the  direction  of  OX.  In  this  way  it  is 
seen  that  the  radiation  going  forth  from  the  tetrahedron  when  it 
vibrates  in  the  manner  we  have  now  been  examining  is  equal  to  that 
from  a  single  electron,  the  ,,equivalentil  electron  as  we  may  call  it, 
the  components  of  whose  displacement  are  given  by  the  real  parts 
of  the  expressions 

4g,  £*"',     4q^tint,     4^>3£'"', 
i.  e.  by 

4  a,  cos  nt  —  41 


4ay  cosnt  —  4by  siant, 


:\ 


4  32  cos  nt  —  4  bj  sin  nt 

The  equivalent  electron  therefore  has  a  motion  compounded  of 
two  rectilinear  vibrations  in  the  directions  of  the  vectors  a  and  b, 
with  equal  amplitudes  4!a|  and  4|b|  and  with  a  difference  of  phase  of 
a  quarter  period.  Hence,  it  moves  with  constant  velocity  in  a  circle 
whose  plane  is  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  force,  and  the  radiation 


300    '  NOTES.  51 

will   be    much   the    same  as  in  the  elementary   theory   of  the  Zee- 
man  -effect. 

When  we  take  the  upper  signs  in  our  formulae  we  have 


from  which  it  follows  that  the  circular  motion  represented  by 
has  the  direction  of  that  of  the  hands  of  a  clock,  if  the  observer  is 
placed  on  the  side  towards  which  the  lines  of  force  are  directed. 
Therefore  in  this  case  the  light  emitted  in  the  direction  of  the  lines 
of  force  has  a  right-handed  circular  polarization.  Its  polarization  is 
left-handed  when  we  take  the  under  signs. 

Now,  the  equation  (9,9)  shows  that,  when  a  is  positive,  the  fre- 
quency is  greatest  for  the  right-handed,  and  least  for  the  left-handed 
circular  polarization,  contrary  to  what  we  found  in  the  elementary 
theory  of  the  Zeeman-  effect.  The  reverse,  however,  will  be  the 
case,  when  6  has  a  negative  value.  Since  the  charge  e  is  negative, 
it  follows  from  (#7)  and  (98)  that  the  signs  of  a  and  <a  are 
opposite.  The  sign  of  the  Zeeman-effect  will  therefore  be  that  which 
we  found  in  the  elementary  theory  or  the  reverse  according  as  &  is 
positive  or  negative. 

51  (Page  12<>).  When  the  particle  has  a  velocity  of  translation  V, 
the  forces  acting  on  one  of  its  electrons  are 


Here,  denoting  by  x,  y,  z  the  coordinates  of  the  electron  with 
respect  to  the  centre  of  the  particle,  and  distinguishing  by  the  index  0 
the  values  at  that  point,  we  may  replace  Hx,  Hy,  Hz  by 

H.,+*8£+y™"+4"*'  etc- 

Substituting  this  in  the  expressions 

eT),  etc 


for  the  components  of  the  resultant  couple   and   using   the  equations 
of  §  104,  we  find 

e  fv.  ™>  Zf  -  V,,  |"^  ZV  -  V,  ™*  2.V  +  V,  ™*  Zz*]  ,  etc. 
c  L  *  cy      J         y  Sy      •'         !  Sz  *  dz         J' 

or,  since 

8Hy   ,    8H,  =  _  cH, 

i  </         cz  dx  ' 


51  NOTES.  301 

•j  ij 

When  the  field  is  constant   and  if  in  the  symbol  -j.    we  under- 

stand by  H  the  magnetic  force  at  the  point  .occupied  by  the  particle 
at  the  time  t,  the  couple  is  given  by 

_eKdH 

c    dt' 

and,  since  the  moment  of  inertia  is  2mK,  the  change  of  the  angular 
velocity  k  is  determined  by 

<Zk_  t     (1H 

dt  2mc  dt 

Hence,   on   the   assumption   that   the   particle  did   not   rotate  so  long 
as  it  was  outside  the  field, 


In  the  above  calculation  no  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  elec- 
tromagnetic forces  called  into  play  by  the  rotation  itself.  In  as  much 
as  the  magnetic  field  may  be  considered  as  homogeneous  throughout 
the  extent  of  the  particle,  these  forces  produce  no  resultant  '-couple, 
just  because  the  axis  of  rotation  is  parallel  to  the  lines  of  force. 
This  is  seen  as  follows.  If  r  denotes  the  vector  drawn  from  the 
centre  to  one  of  the  electrons,  we  have  for  the  linear  velocity  of 
that  corpuscle 

v  =  [k-r], 
and  for  the  electromagnetic  force  acting  on  it 


The  moment  of  this  force  with  respect  to  the  centre  is 

[r-F]  =  -  |(r-H)[r-k], 
so  that  its  components  are 

~(«H,+yHf+#H.)(yk,-*ig,  etc.  (103} 

From  this  we  find  for  the  components  of  the  resultant  moment 

—  -  K(Huk.  —  H,k  ),  etc, 

c  y    * 

from   which   it   is   seen   that   this   moment   is   zero   when  k  has  the 
direction  of  H. 

The  problem  is  more  complicated  when  we  take  into  account 
the  small  variations  of  the  magnetic  field  from  one  point  of  the  par- 
ticle to  another.  I  shall  observe  only  that,  if  we  use  the  values 


302  NOTES.  52,  58 

(103),  we  must  add  to  (103)  terms  of  the  third  order  with  respect  to 
x,  y,  z,  and  that  the  sum  of  these  terms  vanishes  in  many  cases,  for 
instance  when,  corresponding  to  each  electron  with  coordinates  x,  y,  z, 
there  is  another  with  the  coordinates  —  x,  —  y,  —  z. 

52  (Page  126).     Let  k  and  P  have  the  same  meaning  as  in  the 
preceding  Note  and  let  V  be  the  absolute  velocity  of  an  electron,   v' 
its  relative  velocity  with  respect  to  the  rotating  particle,  so  that 

v  =  [k  •  r]  +  v'.  (104) 

From  this  we  find  for  the  acceleration 

q  =  v  =  [k  •  r]  +  v'  =  [k  •  v]  +  v'- 
The  change  of  v'  consists  of  two  parts 
v'=[k.v']  +  q', 

where  the  second  is  the  relative  acceleration  and  the  first  the  change 
that  would  be  produced  in  v'  if  there  were  no  such  acceleration;  in 
this  case  v'  would  simply  turn  round  with  the  particle.  Since,  on 
account  of  (104),  we  may  write 

[k.v']=[k.v], 

when  we  neglect  the  square  of  k,  we  are  led  to  the  formula 

q  =  q'  +  2[k  •  v]- 

53  (Page  135).     In   this   statement  it  has  been  tacitly  assumed 
that  the  bounding  surface  0  of  the  spherical  space  S  does  not  inter- 
sect any  particles.     Suppose,    for  instance,    the   molecules  to  be  so 
polarized  hat  each  has  a  positive  electron  on  the  right  and  a  negative 
one  on  the  left-hand  side,   and  draw  the  axis  OX  towards  the  first 
side.    Then,  when  the  surface  o  passes  in  all  its  parts  through  the  space 
between  the  particles,  the  integral  jpxdS  will  be  equal  to  the  sum 
of    the    electric    moments    of  the   particles  enclosed,   and  may  with 
propriety  be  called  the  moment  of  the  part  of  the   body  within  the 
surface  (cf.  equation  (195)).     If,  on  the  contrary,  molecules  are  inter- 
sected, the  value  of  the  integral  does  not  merely  depend  on  the  com- 
plete particles  lying  in  the  space  S,  but  it  must  be  taken  into  account 
that,    in  addition  to  these,   6  encloses   a   certain  number   of  negative 
electrons  on  the  right-hand  side,  and  a  certain  number  of  positive  elec- 
trons on  the  opposite  side.     Even  when  these  additional  electrons  are 
much  less  numerous  than   those   belonging   to  the  complete  particles 
they  may  contribute  an  appreciable  part  to  the  integral,  because  the 
difference  between  the  values   of  x  for  the  positive  and  the  negative 


64  NOTES.  303 

ones  is  comparable  with  the  dimensions  of  the  space  S  itself,  and 
therefore  much  greater  than  the  corresponding  difference  for  two  elec- 
trons lying  in  the  same  particle. 

The  following  remarks  may,  however,  serve  to  remove  all  doubts 
as  to  the  validity  of  the  relation 

^=  P. 

When  the  molecules  are  irregularly  arranged,  as  they  are  in  li- 
quids and  gases,  some  of  them  (and  even  some  electrons)  are  cer- 
tainly intersected  by  the  spherical  surface  6  used  in  the  definition  of 
the  mean  values  q>.  But,  on  account  of  the  assumptions  made  about 
the  dimensions  of  0,  the  intersections  will  be  much  less  numerous 
than  the  molecules  wholly  lying  within  the  surface,  and  if,  in  calculating 
JvpdS,  we  omit  the  parts  of  particles  enclosed  by  0,  this  will  lead  to 
no  error,  provided  that  the  function  <p  be  of  such  a  kind  that  the 
contribution  to  the  integral  from  one  of  those  parts  is  not  very  much 
greater  than  the  contribution  from  one  of  the  complete  particles. 

This  condition  is  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  the  integral  C()VxdS, 
because  there  is  no  reason  why  the  velocities  V  should  be  exceptio- 
nally great  near  the  surface  0.  Without  changing  the  value  of  the 
integral,  we  may  therefore  make  the  surface  pass  between  the  par- 
ticles (by  slightly  deforming  it),  and  then  we  may  be  sure  that 

/  QVxdS  =  -r-  I  QxdS,  and  that  the  latter  integral  represents  the  total 
electric  moment  of  all  the  complete  particles  in  the  space  S. 

54  (Page  138).  We  shall  observe  in  the  first  place  that  the 
field  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  a  polarized  particle  may  be 
determined  by  the  rules  of  electrostatics,  even  when  the  electric  mo- 
ment is  not  constant.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  treated  in  §  43. 
It  was  stated  in  Note  23  that  at  great  distances  the  terms  resulting 
from  the  differentiation  of  the  goniometric  function  are  very  much 

greater  than  those  which  arise  from  the  differentiation  of  —     These 

latter,  on  the  contrary,  predominate  when  we  confine  ourselves  to 
distances  that  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  wave-length; 
then  (cf.  (88)  and  (89))  we  may  write 


(7))' 


a  =  0, 
d  =  —  gracl  (f,     h  =  0, 

from  which    it  appears  that  the  field  is  identical  with   the  electro- 
static field  that  would  exist,   if  the  moment   p   were  kept  constant. 


304  NOTES.  54 

It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  the  difference  between  the  mean 
electric  force  E  and  the  electric  force  existing  in  a  small  cavity  depends 
only  on  actions  going  on  at  very  short  distances,  so  that  we  may 
deal  with  this  difference  as  if  we  had  to  do  with  an  electrostatic 
system. 

Let  us  therefore  consider  a  system  of  molecules  with  invariable 
electric  moments  and  go  into  some  details  concerning  the  electric 
force  existing  in  it. 

The  field  produced  by  the  electrons  being  determined  by 


=  —  Q, 
d  =    -  grad  <p, 

we  have  for  the  mean  values 


E  =  d  =  -  grad  (p  , 

or,  in  words:  the  mean  electric  force  is  equal  to  the  force  that 
would  be  produced  by  a  charge  distributed  with  the  mean  or,  let  us 
say,  the  ,,effective"  density  p. 

In  the  definition  of  a  mean  value  <p  given  in  §  113,  it  was  ex- 
pressly stated  that  the  space  S  was  to  be  of  spherical  form.  It  is 
easily  seen,  however,  that  we  may  as  well  give  it  any  shape  we  like, 
provided  that  it  be  infinitely  small  in  the  physical  sense.  The  equation 


may  therefore  be  interpreted  by  saying  that  for  any  space  of  the 
said  kind  the  effective  charge  (meaning  by  these  words  the  product 
of  Q  and  S)  is  equal  to  the  total  real  charge. 

We  shall  now  examine  the  distribution  of  the  effective  charge. 
Suppose,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  that  a  molecule  contains  two 
electrons  situated  at  the  points  A  and  S  with  charges  —  e  and  -f  e, 
and  denote  by  r  the  vector  AS.  There  will  be  as  many  of  these 
vectors,  of  different  directions  and  lengths,  as  there  are  molecules.  Now, 
if  the  length  of  these  vectors  is  very  much  greater  than  the  size  of 
the  electrons,  we  may  neglect  the  intersections  of  the  bounding  sur- 
face of  the  space  S  with  the  electrons  themselves,  but  there  will  be 
a  great  number  of  intersections  with  the  lines  AB.  These  may  not 
be  left  out  of  account,  because  for  any  complete  molecule  /p<?$=  0, 
whereas  each  of  the  said  intersections  contributes  to  the  effective 
charge  within  <j  an  amount  —  e  or  +  e  according  as  Tn  (where  n  is 
the  normal  to  0  drawn  outw(irds)  is  positive  or  negative  (cf.  Note  53). 


54  NOTES.  305 

Hence,  the  total  charge  within  6  may  be  represented  by  a  surface 
integral.  In  order  to  find  the  part  of  it  corresponding  to  an  ele- 
ment de  (infinitely  small  in  a  physical  sense)  we  begin  by  fixing  our 
attention  on  those  among  the  lines  AB  which  have  some  definite 
direction  and  some  definite  length.  If  the  starting  points  A  are  ir- 
regularly distributed  and  if,  for  the  group  considered,  their  number 
per  unit  of  volume  is  v,  the  number  of  intersections  with  d<3  will  be 
vrnde  when  rn  is  positive,  and  —  vrndd  when  it  is  negative.  There- 
fore, the  part  contributed  to  the  charge  within  G  is  —  vernda  in 
both  cases,  and  the  total  part  associated  with  da  is  — £vernd0,  the  sum 
being  extended  to  all  the  groups  of  lines  AS.  But  er  is  the  electric 
moment  of  a  particle,  ver  the  moment  per  unit  of  volume  of  the 
chosen  group,  and  Zver  the  total  moment  per  unit  of  volume.  De- 
noting this  by  P,  we  have  for  the  above  expression  —  HveVndG  the 
value  —  PB,  and  for  the  effective  charge  enclosed  by  the  surface  0 

-JP.da.  (105) 

As  the  difference  between  E  and  the  electric  force  in  a  cavity 
depends  exclusively  on  the  state  of  the  system  in  the  immediate  vici- 
nity of  the  point  considered,  we  may  now  conceive  the  polarization  P 
to  be  uniform.  In  this  case  the  integral  (105)  is  zero  for  any  closed 
surface  entirely  lying  within  the  body,  so  that  the  effective  charge 
may  be  said  to  have  its  seat  on  the  bounding  surface  27.  Its  surface 
density  is  found  by  calculating  (105)  for  the  surface  of  a  flat  cy- 
linder, the  two  plane  sides  of  which  are  on  both  sides  of  an  element 
<227  at  a  distance  from  each  other  that  is  infinitely  small  in  compa- 
rison with  the  dimensions  of  d£.  Calling  N  the  normal  to  the  sur- 
face E,  we  have  at  the  outer  plane  Pn  =  0  (if  we  suppose  the  body 
to  be  surrounded  by  ether),  and  at  the  inner  one  Pn  =  —  PA-.  The 
amount  of  the  effective  charge  contained  in  the  cylinder  is  therefore 
given  by  PA-d27,  and  the  charge  may  be  said  to  be  distributed  over 
the  surface  with  a  density  PN. 

Now  consider  a  point  A  of  the  body.  By  what  has  been  said, 
the  electric  force  E  at  this  point  is  due  to  the  charge  P^v  on  the 
bounding  surface  27.  If,  however,  a  spherical  cavity  is  made  around 
A  as  centre,  there  will  be  at  this  point  an  additional  electric  force 
E',  caused  by  a  similar  charge  on  the  walls  of  the  cavity,  and  ob- 
viously having  the  direction  of  P.  The  magnitude  of  this  force  is 
found  as  follows.  Let  a  be  the  radius  of  the  sphere,  da  an  element 
of  its  surface,  &  the  angle  between  the  radius  drawn  towards  this 
element  and  the  polarization  P.  The  surface  density  on  da  being 
cos  #,  we  have  for  the  force  produced  at  A 


_L_r\ 

ina'J    I 


Loreutz,  Theory  of  electrons.  20 


306  NOTES.  55-57 

giving  E,=  ^ 

Our  foregoing  remarks  show  that  the  expression 

E  +  -?,-  P 

may  always  bo  used  for  the  electric  force  at  the  centre  of  a  sphe- 
rical cavity,  even  though  the  polarization  of  the  body  change  from 
point  to  point  and  from  one  instant  to  the  next. 

55  (Page  138).  In  the  case  of  a  cubical  arrangement  all  the 
particles  within  the  sphere  may  be  said  to  have  equal  electric  mo- 
ments p.  Taking  the  centre  A  of  the  sphere  as  origin  of  coordinates, 
we  have  for  the  force  exerted  in  the  direction  of  a;  by  a  particle  si- 
tuated at  the  point  (x,  y,  z),  at  a  distance  r  from  the  centre, 


Sxy       j^    3xz 

~~*    >  '      6 


But  the  sums 


are  zero,  when  extended  to  all  the  particles  within  the  sphere.  For 
the  second  and  the  third  sum  this  is  immediately  clear  if  we  take 
the  axes  of  coordinates  parallel  to  the  principal  directions  of  the 
cubical  arrangement.  Further,  for  axes  of  this  direction, 

32*  —  r' 

— 


showing  that   each   of  these   expressions  must  be  zero,  because  their 
sum  is  so. 

56  (Page  139).     It  must  be  noticed  that  this  magnetic  force  H 
produces  a  force 


acting  on  an  electron.  Since,  in  a  beam  of  light,  H  is  in  general  of 
the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  electric  force  E  (cf.  the  equations  (7)), 

v  \ 
this  force  is  of  the  order  of  magnitude          in  comparison  with  the 

force  eE.  It  may  therefore  be  neglected  because  the  amplitudes  of 
the  electrons  are  extremely  small  with  respect  to  the  wave-length, 
so  that  the  velocity  of  vibration  is  much  smaller  than  the  speed 
of  light. 

57  (Page  141).    In  order  to  compare  the  effect  of  the  collisions 
with  that  of  a  resistance  of  the  kind  represented  by  (197),  we  shall 


67  NOTES.  307 

first    consider    the    vibrations    set    up    in   an    isolated  particle  whose 
electron  is  subjected  to  a  periodic  electric  force 

E.,.  =  p  cos  nt 


and    to    the    forces    determined    by  (196)   and   (197).     The    equation 
of  motion 


is  most  easily  solved  if,  following  the  method  indicated  in  §  119,  we 
replace  (106)  by 

In  this  way  we  find  for  the  forced  vibrations 
pe  ,  ,  pe 

t   =  —  : £          =  —  —  8 

f —  mn*  -f-  ing  ***("o   —  **  )  -f-  ing 

where 


Let  us  next  suppose  that  there  is  no  true  resistance,  but  that 
the  vibrations  of  the  electrons  are  over  and  over  again  disturbed  by 
impacts  occurring  at  irregular  intervals.  In  this  case  the  motion  of 
each  particle  from  the  last  collision  up  to  the  instant  t  for  which  we 
wish  to  calculate  £,  is  determined  by  the  equation 


the  general  solution  of  which  is 

5  -  ffl(V-n«)  £""  +  CI£''BO<  +  C'e~"''1' 

where  the  integration  constants  (7t  and  C2  will  vary  from  one  par- 
ticle to  another.  These  constants  are  determined  by  the  values  of  £ 

and  -JT  ,  say  (£)0  and  (--)  ,  immediately  after  the  last  collision.    Now 

among  the  great  number  of  particles,  we  may  distinguish  a  group, 
still  very  numerous,  for  which  the  last  collision  has  taken  place  at  a 
definite  instant  tr  Supposing  that,  after  the  impact,  all  directions  of 
the  displacement  and  the  velocity  are  equally  probable,  we  shall  find 
the  mean  value  of  £  for  this  group,  if  in  (108)  we  determine  C^  and 

C2  by  the    conditions    that  for  t  =  tt   both   £   and     ,'    vanish.      The 

''  ' 

result  is 


or,  if  we  put 

20* 


308  NOTES.  58 


(109) 


This  is  the  mean  value  of  |  taken  for  a  definite  instant  t  and  for 
those  particles  for  which  a  time  #  has  elapsed  since  their  last  col- 
lision, and  we  shall  obtain  an  expression  that  may  be  compared 
with  (107),  if  we  take  the  mean  of  (109)  for  all  the  groups  of  par- 
ticles which  differ  from  each  other  by  the  length  of  the  interval  ft. 
Let  N  be  the  total  number  of  particles  considered,  and  A  the 
number  of  collisions  which  they  undergo  per  unit  of  time,  so  that 
the  time  r  mentioned  in  the  text  is  given  by 

N  _ 

The  collisions  succeeding  each  other  quite  irregularly,  we  may  reckon 
that  the  number  of  the  particles  for  which  the  interval  #•  lies 
between  &  and  &  +  d#  is 

N  -- 

Ae  td&  =  —£   *  d&;  (110) 

this  is  found  by  a  reasoning  similar  to  that  which  we  used  in  Note  36. 
We  must  therefore  multiply  (109)  by  (110),  integrate  from  &  =  0 
to  &  =  oo,  and  divide  by  N.    In  this  way  we  get  for  the  final  mean 
value  of  the  displacement 

tint  • 


*""* 


Neglecting  the  term     2  in  the  denominator  we  see  that  under  the 

influence  of  the  collisions  the  phenomena  will  be  the  same,  as  if  there 
were  a  resistance  determined  by 


58  (Page  147).  In  the  case  of  a  mixture  the  electric  moment 
P  is  made  up  of  as  many  parts  P1;  P2,  ...  as  there  are  constituents. 
Reasoning  as  in  §§  116 — 119  we  can  establish  for  each  component 
formulae  like  (200),  so  that,  if  we  put  a  =  J-,  we  have  for  the  first 
substance 

for  the  second 

mz   it*   =  ^  +  -5-  r  —  / 2  P 2 , 


59,  60  NOTES.  309 

and  so  on.     Hence,  if  all  the  dependent  variables  vary  as  «*"', 
P      _E±ip_     P        E  +  4P 

ri       K-m^n*'        *       ft'—ms'n"' 
and,  if  we  put 

77  --  /—  5  +  TTT  --  ;  —  i  +  •  •  •  =  OJ  . 
f,--ml  n*    '    /;  —  m,  n- 

P-«(t  +  fP). 

Combining  this  with  (192)  we  find 


I— 

and  for  the  index  of  refraction 


1  —  $  CO  ' 


__  _    _  _         __  _ 

fi»+  2  ~~   3          =   3  V/-  Mj'n'       fs'—mt'n*  " 

^  »s  _  ^ 

Now  each  term     -r~  -  s~sc  gives  the  value   of  -        -  for  one  of 
8(r—  m  n!)  e  f*  +  2 

the  constituents  taken  with  the  density  mg  which  it  has  in  the 
mixture,  a  value  that  is  found  when  we  multiply  the  constant  r  for  the 
constituent  in  question  by  the  density  mp.  This  immediately  leads 
to  equation  (218). 

59  (Page  149).     According  to   the   equations   (220),   if  we  put 
a  =  -?,,  the  displacements  |u  |2,  ...  are  determined  by 

(f,-%«>)$i-«i(E;+*p.),«tc. 

Consequently 


with  similar  formulae  for  Ne1f]l,  Ne1^1,  etc.    Hence,  taking  the  sums, 


from  which  the  formula  (222)  is  easily  found. 

60  (Page  153).     The  direct  result  of  the  substitution  is 

(_          \  V  =14- =  1   4- C_ 

»'          n*  I        *    vn  ^  a  +  i3         '  ^  «»  +  «»' 


\v 
giving 


from  which  the  equations  (227)  and  (228)  are  easily  deduced. 


310  NOTES.  61,  62 

61  (Page  154).     The  expression     s  .   „.  considered  as  a  function 

of  a  has  a  maximum  value  ^  for  «  =  /3;  it  is  therefore  very  small 
when  /3  is  large.  It  follows  from  this  that  even  the  greatest  values 
of  8<V"o2  are  of  the  order  of  magnitude  -^  ,  so  that  we  may  ex- 
pand the  square  root  in  (227)  and  (228)  in  ascending  powers  of 
that  quantity.  Hence,  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  ,3 , 


I/' 


1+  ^L^  =  l  +    *   .  ™ T 
and  this  may  be  replaced  by 

1  +  Y  •  sq^  -  2  •  (, 

because  the  quantity  rrxWi  never  has  a  value  greater  than  one  of 

the  order  -p-  • 
Finally 

p'-i  +  sr^  +  T^T^' 


We  are  therefore  led  to  (229)  and  (230)  if  in  /t  we  neglect  terms  of 
the  order  ^5  and  in  /.•  terms  of  the  order  fl,/s.     Indeed,    if  we  want 

to  know  Jc  with  this  degree  of  approximation,  we  may  omit  in  &2  and 

ciki  1 

in       ,    quantities  of  the  order  -3,,  as  we  have  done  in  (111). 

62  (Page  156).  If  Jdn  is  the  intensity  of  the  incident  light, 
in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  frequencies  between  n  and  n  +  dn,  the 
amount  of  light  that  is  absorbed  by  a  layer  with  the  thickness  z/, 
upon  which  the  rays  fall  in  the  direction  of  the  normal  is  given  by 
the  integral 


where  we  have  taken  into  account  that  the  intensity  is  proportional 
to  the  square  of  the  amplitude.  If  the  absorption  band  is  rather 
narrow,  we  may  put 

fc_V.       f 

2c     a*  +  P> 
and,  in  virtue  of  (231), 

dn  =  —  -    —  -,  da  • 
2m  n 


63  64,  NOTES.  311 

Further,  we  may  extend  the  integration  from  K  =  —  oo  to  «  =  +  oo, 
considering  ft  =  n0'  g  and  J  as  constants.  The  calculation  is  easily 
performed  for  a  thin  layer,  for  which 


It  is  found  that  the  part  of  A  that  is  due  to  the  first  term  is 
independent  of  g  or  g.  When,  however,  the  second  term  is  retained, 
A  increases  with  the  resistance  g. 

63  (Page  161).  This  is  easily  found  if  the  denominator  of  (239) 
is  written  in  the  form 


and  then  multiplied  by  the  conjugate  complex  expression. 

64  (Page  167).  The  explanation  of  magneto-optical  phenomena 
becomes  much  easier  if  the  particles  of  a  luminous  or  an  absorbing 
body  are  supposed  to  take  a  definite  orientation  under  the  action  of 
a  magnetic  field.  On  this  assumption,  which  makes  it  possible  to 
dismiss  the  condition  of  isotropy  of  the  particles  (§  93),  Voigt1)  has 
been  able  to  account  for  many  of  the  more  complicated  forms  of 
the  Zeeman-effect;  it  was  found  sufficient  to  suppose  that  each  par- 
ticle contains  two  or  more  mutually  connected  electrons  whose  motion 
is  determined  by  equations  similar  to  our  formulae  of  §  90,  the  recti- 
linear coordinates  of  the  electrons  now  taking  the  place  of  the  general 
coordinates  p.  The  theory  thus  obtained  must  undoubtedly  be  con- 
sidered as  the  best  we  possess  at  present,  though  the  nature  of  the 
connexions  remains  in  the  dark,  and  though  Voigt  does  not  attempt 
to  show  in  what  manner  the  actions  determined  by  the  coefficients  c 
are  produced  by  the  magnetic  field. 

I  must  also  mention  the  beautiful  phenomena  that  have  been 
discovered  by  J.  Becquerel.  2)  Certain  crystals  containing  the  ele- 
ments erbium  and  didymium  show  a  great  number  of  absorption 
bands,  many  of  which  are  so  sharp,  especially  at  the  low  tempera- 
tures obtainable  by  means  of  liquid  air  or  liquid  hydrogen3),  that 
they  may  be  compared  with  the  lines  of  gaseous  bodies,  and  these 
bands  show  in  remarkable  diversity  the  Zeeman-effect  and  the 
phenomena  connected  with  it.  Of  course,  in  the  case  of  these  crystals 


1)  W.  Voigt,  Magneto-  und  Elektrooptik,  Leipzig,  1908. 

2)  J.  Becquerel,  Comptes  rendus  142  (1906),  p.  776,  874,  1144;  143(1906), 
p.  769,  890,  962,  1133;  144  (1907),  p.  132,  420,  682,  1032,  1336. 

3)  H.  Kamerlingh   Onnes  and  J.  Becquerel,  Amsterdam   Proceedings 
10  (1908),  p.  592. 


312  NOTES.  65 

the  hypothesis  of  isotropic  particles  would  be  wholly  misplaced.  Voigt 
and  Becquerel  found  it  possible  to  explain  the  larger  part  of  the 
observed  phenomena  on  the  lines  of  Voigt's  new  theory  to  which 
I  have  just  alluded. 

In  §  91  it  was  stated  that  a  true  magnetic  division  of  a  spectral 
line  is  to  be  expected  only  when  the  original  line  is  in  reality  a 
multiple  one,  i.  e.  when,  in  the  absence  of  a  magnetic  field,  there  are 
two  or  more  equal  frequencies.  Voigt  has  pointed  out  that,  when 
originally  there  are  two  frequencies,  not  exactly  but  only  nearly 
equal,  similar  effects  may  occur,  sometimes  with  the  peculiarity  that 
there  is  a  dissymmetry,  more  or  less  marked,  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
components  observed  under  the  action  of  a  magnetic  field.  Cases  of 
this  kind  frequently  occur  in  Becquerel's  experiments,  and  Voigt 
is  of  opinion  that  many  of  the  dissymmetries  observed  with  isotropic 
bodies  (§  142),  if  not  all,  may  be  traced  to  a  similar  cause. 

It  is  very  interesting  that  some  of  Becquerel's  lines  show  the 
Zeeman-effect  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the  ordinary  one  (i.  e.  with 
a  reversal  of  the  circular  polarization  commonly  observed  in  the  lon- 
gitudinal effect)  and  to  a  degree  that  is  equal  or  even  superior  to  the 
intensity  of  the  effect  in  previously  observed  cases.  These  phenomena  and 
similar  ones  occurring  with  certain  lines  of  gaseous  bodies1)  have  led 
some  physicists  to  admit  the  existence  of  vibrating  positive  electrons,  for 

which  the  value  of  --  would  be  comparable  with  or  even  greater  than 

the  value  found  for  the  negative  electrons  of  the  cathode  rays.  They 
may  also  be  explained  by  the  assumption  that  in  some  systems  of 
molecules,  under  the  influence  of  an  external  magnetic  field,  there  are 
motions  of  electricity  such  as  to  produce  in  the  interior  of  the  par- 
ticles a  field  that  is  opposite  to  the  external  one.  To  this  latter  hypothesis 
Becquerel,  however,  objects  that,  like  all  phenomena  of  induced 
magnetization,  the  internal  fields  in  question  would  in  all  probability 
be  liable  to  considerable  changes  when  the  body  is  heated  or  cooled, 
whereas  the  magnetic  division  of  spectral  lines  remains  constant 
through  a  wide  range  of  temperatures. 

The  possibility  of  a  third  explanation,  though  one  about  which  I 
am  very  doubtful,  is  perhaps  suggested  by  what  we  found  in  §  102, 
namely  by  the  reversion  of  the  ordinary  direction  of  the  effect  caused 
by  a  particular  arrangement  of  a  number  of  negative  electrons. 

66  (Page  171).  If  x,  y,  z  are  the  coordinates  of  a  particle  of 
the  medium  at  the  time  t,  its  coordinates  at  the  time  t  +  dt  will 
be  equal  to 


1)  J.  Becquerel,  Comptes  rendus  146  (1908),  p.  683;  A.  Dufour,  ibidem, 
p.  118,  229,  634,  810;    R.  W.  Wood,  Phil.  Mag.  (0)  15  (1908),  p.  274. 


66,  67  NOTES.  313 

x  =  x  +  Qxdt,     y  =  y  +  Qydt,     z  =  s  +  Qtdt. 

Here  g.,.,  gy,  gz  may  be  regarded  as  linear  functions  of  x,  y,  z, 
so  that,  for  instance, 

or,  as  we  may  write  as  well 

gx  =  K  +  fix  +  yy'  -f  ds. 
The  particles  which  originally  lie  in  the  plane 

x  =  a 
will  have  reached  the  plane 

x  =  a  +  (K  +  ftx  +  yy  +  dz'}  dt 

at  the  end  of  the  interval  considered.    The  direction  constants  of  the 
normal  to  this  plane  are  proportional  to 

1  -  ftdt,      -  ydt,      -  Sdt 
or  to 

'dx  dy  dz 

66  (Page  173).  Let  a  sphere  of  radius  H  move  with  the  con- 
stant velocity  iv  through  an  incompressible  medium,  and  let  us  sup- 
pose the  motion  of  the  latter  to  be  irrotational.  Then,  if  the  centre 
of  the  sphere  is  taken  as  origin  of  coordinates,  and  the  line  of  mo- 
tion as  axis  of  x,  the  velocity  potential  is  given  by 


giving  for  the  components  of  the  velocity 


-      R3w 
dz  "Y-*     V~ 

At  a  point  of  the  intersection  of  the  surface  with  the  plane  YOZ, 
these  values  become 

-*«>,       0,      0, 

so  that  the  relative  velocity  of  sliding  is  —  -$w. 

67  (Page  173).  Instead  of  considering  a  uniform  translation  of 
the  earth  through  the  ether,  we  may  as  well  conceive  the  planet  to 
be  at  rest,  and  the  ether  to  flow  along  it,  so  that,  at  infinite  di- 
stance, it  has  a  constant  velocity  iv0  in  the  direction  of  OZ. 


314  NOTES.  G7 

Let  the  ether  obey  Boyle's  law,  and  let  it  be  attracted  by  the 
earth  with  a  force  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance 
r  from  the  centre.  Then,  when  there  is  no  motion  of  the  medium, 
the  density  k  and  the  pressure  p  will  be  functions  of  r,  determined 
by  the  equation  of  equilibrium 

dp  _  a>k 
'  ~dr  ~=  7*"' 
and  the  relation 

k  =  up, 
where  K>  und  n  are  constants. 

These  conditions  are  satisfied  by 


ifc0  being  the  density  at  infinite  distance. 

Now,  there  can  be  a  state  of  motion  in  which  there  is  a  velo- 
city potential  y>,  and  in  which  the  density  k  has  the  value  given  by 
the  above  formula.  Indeed,  if  we  put 

»— 

(understanding  .by    a    and  b   constants  and  taking  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  as  origin  of  coordinates),  the  components  of  the  velocity 

9qp  off  d<s 

u  =  ^-,       v  =  ^r,      w  =  ^-L 

cx'  dy'  dz 

satisfy  the  equation  of  continuity 


,_ 
dx  dy  de 


for  r-oo:    -?  =  0,      ?--0,         =  u>0, 
Cx  dy  da 


The  form  of  <p  has   been   chosen  with   a  view  to  the  remaining 
conditions  of  the  problem,  namely: 

3<P 

iur    /   =  uv ;    > -  -  =  V7. 
CX 

and 

for  r  =  E  (i.  e.  at  the  surface  of  the  earth):  ^  =  0. 

These  conditions  lead  to  the  equations 
-  a  +  6  =  w0, 

/*  cu 
~^l 


(a8(Q* 
*K'- 


Along  the  intersection  of  the  planet's  surface  with  the  #»/-plane 
there  is  a  velocity  of  sliding 

fi  (')  /*  (O 

~"  ~ 


68  NOTES.  315 

This  is  found  to  be  0,011  w0  if  ^  =  10,  and  0,0056  w0  if  ^  =  11. 

' '  / ' 

In   these    cases   the   ratio   between  the   density  near  the  surface  and 
that  at  infinite  distance  would  be  e10  or  e11  respectively. 


68  (Page  181).  Let  the  relative  rays  converge  towards  a  point  0, 
which  we  take  as  origin  of  coordinates,  and  let  us  determine  the  form 
of  the  waves  by  the  construction  explained  in  §  153.  We  have  to 
compound  a  vector  in  the  direction  of  the  relative  ray  and  having 

the  magnitude  v    with  a  vector  -    — ,.     Neglecting  quantities  of  the 

second  order,  we  may  also  make  the  first  vector  equal  to  v,  the  wave 
velocity  in  the  medium  when  at  rest,  and  we  may  consider  this  ve- 
locity as  constant  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  point.  0. 
Moreover,  the  second  vector  may  be  regarded  as  having  a  constant 
magnitude,  say  in  the  direction  of  OX. 

Now,  at  a  point  (x,  y,  z),  at  a  distance  r  from  0,  the  compo- 
nents of  the  first  vector  are 


and  those  of  the  second 


0        0 
~i }      u>      u> 


so  that  the  components   of  the  resultant  vector,    which    is  at  right 
angles  to  the  wave-front,  are 


IX  Hi  II  Z 

—  9  +  at\>        -—V, V. 

[  r  (i*  I  '  r  r 


The   equation    of  the    surface   normal   to    the  resultant  vector  is 
therefore 


This  is  the  equation  of  an   ellipsoid,   the    centre    of  which  has 
the  coordinates 

_    t«°  „      0,      0, 
if 


and  whose  semi-axes  have  the  directions   of  OX,  OY,  OZ  and  the 

lengths 

vG  C  C 


316  NOTES.  69 

Since  the  square  of  «  is  neglected,  we  may  say  that  the  waves 
are  of  spherical  form.  Their  centre  approaches  the  point  0  as  the 
constant  C  diminishes. 

69  (Page  191).  If  n  is  the  frequency  of  the  source  of  light, 
the  frequency  at  a  fixed  point  in  one  of  the  tubes  will  also  be  n, 
because  the  successive  waves  take  equal  times  to  reach  this  point. 
Hence,  with  reference  to  fixed  axes,  a  beam  of  light  may  be  repre- 
sented by  expressions  of  the  form 


acoen 


u—    - 


where  u  is  the  velocity  in  question. 

Transforming  to  axes  moving  with  the  fluid  -  -  and  confining 
ourselves  to  one  of  the  two  cases  distinguished  in  the  text  —  ,  we 
have  to  put 

x  =  x  +  wt, 

by  which  the  above  expression  becomes 

/  ,      w  .      x    .     \ 
acosn  [t  —      t  ---  r-pl- 
\        u         u      *) 

In  this  way  the  relative  frequency  is  seen  to  be 

/i       w\ 
n  =  n  {  1  ---  1  , 

\         «/  ' 

for  which,   denoting   by  ft   the  refractive  index  for  the  frequency  n, 
we  may  write 


because  u  differs  from  .-'-  only  by  a  quantity  proportional  to  w. 
The  index  of  refraction  corresponding  to  the  frequency  n    is 

n  ir         i!  u 

*-    c    H^> 
and  the  corresponding  velocity  of  propagation 

c  _   c     ,    to     dp,  _    c         w  mdn  ___  c_        w  .dn 

J7.~  =  "7     r  ^r  n  JT:  =  T.          „  •  ~ 


it  i<-     tiii          fi   ~     (i     dn        (t         ft      AT        p         (t      dV 

a n  -^ 

c       dn 

if  A  is  the  wave-length. 

This  is  the  velocity  to  which  we  must  add  the  term  w  ( 1  -      J 
In  the  case  of  water  we  have  for  the  spectral  line  D 

1  -  -j  =  0,438 

P1 
and 


70-72  NOTES.  317 

whereas,  if  the  velocity  relative  to  the   fixed   parts   of  the   apparatus 
is  represented  by 

-  +  ew, 

E  =  0,434    (with    a   possible    error   of  +  0,02)    is  the    value    which 
Michelson  and  Mo r ley  deduced  from  their  experiments. 

70  (Page  191).     For  the   case    of   a   mirror    the    proposition   is 
easily  proved  after  the  manner  indicated  in  §  154.    If,  supposing  the 
mirror  to   be  made  of  a  metallic  substance,    we    want   to   deduce  the 
same  result  from  the  theorem  of  corresponding  states  (§§  162  and  165), 
we  must   first    extend  this  theorem  to   absorbing   bodies.     This    can 
really  be  done.1) 

71  (Page  192).     Beams  of  light  consisting  of  parallel  rays,  in  a 
stationary   and   in    a   moving    crystal,    will    correspond   to  each  other 
when  their  lateral  boundary  is  the  same,  i.  e.  when  the  relative  rays 
have   the   same   direction  s.     In  both  cases  we  may  consider  a  defi- 
nite   line    of   this    direction,    and   write    down  the   equations   for   the 
disturbance  of  equilibrium  at  different  points  of  this  line,   reckoning 
the  distance  s  from  a  fixed  point   of  it.     For    the    stationary    crystal 
the  vibrations  are  represented  by  expressions  of  the  form 


and  the  corresponding  expressions    for   the   other  case  have  the  form 

a  cos  n  (t' h  p] , 

\  M         L  I  ' 

or,  since  along  the  line  considered 

_          i  ,        ,  ,          ^  _          i 

t  =  t       c,  (Wxx  -\-  \Hyy  +  WZ2 )  =  t       ^  Was, 

/,     w.s       s    .     \ 

a  cos  nit 1 \-  p) . 

\        c8        •   '  •*/•' 


from    which  it    appears  that  the  velocity  u    of  the  ray    relative   to 
the  ponderable  matter  is  determined  by 

-^  =  —  +  —;,     «' — «  —  -^  w.. 

u         u    '    c1 '  cs 

72  (Page  194).  Strictly  speaking,  it  must  be  taken  into  account 
that  in  the  moving  system  the  relative  rays  may  slightly  deviate 

1)  See  H.  B.  A.  Bockwinkel,  Sur  les  phenomenes  du  rayonnement  dans 
un  systeme  qui  se  meut  d'une  vitesse  uniforme  par  rapport  a  Tether.  Arch, 
neerl.  (2)  14  (1908),  p.  1. 


318  NOTES.  73 

from  these  lines,  the  theorem  that  their  course  is  not  altered  by  a 
translation  having  been  proved  only  when  we  neglected  terms  of  the 
second  order.  Closer  examination  shows,  however,  that  no  error  is  in- 
troduced by  this  circumstance.1) 

73  (Page  197).  In  virtue  of  (286)  and  (287)  we  have  the 
following  general  relations  between  the  differential  coefficients  with 
respect  to  x,  y,  s,  t  and  those  with  respect  to  x',  y',  s,  t' 

8    _,.,  8      /.7 '"  JL        ^   -/JL       s  =?A        tii?\ 

J^~       9x'~     lc"-dt'>       9l        V?''      3Z         2*' 

£-«$-W«£-  (113) 

The  equation  (17)  therefore  assumes  the  form 

T  i  $d~   ,    T^dy   ,    7  #d,       7  7  w?  0  d~ 

/*  /     *   i   / i    i         _  if  / .  *  —  n 

h> v  x~     /    ~i      *  "7- ?   ~r~   "  ~"o     '    ^^   *v v       *     ^  j' t^  ) 

8 x         cy          of  c    3t 

and  the  first  of  the  three  equations  contained  in  (19)  becomes 


O  j 

Substituting  the  value  of  -j4  taken  from  this  formula  in  (114), 
we  find 

.L  "~~  ~ 


where  1  -  —  j  may  be  replaced  by  -v,. 

Hence,    multiplying   by    ,,  and  taking  into  account   the  values 
of  d^.  etc., 

;   i  a*   i  W      n'_  ™*  „' 

'       '  "  '  '~  e  "    ~'~9' 


dx      '  8y' 
which  is  the  first  of  the  equations  (292). 

i~i    • 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  value  of  -5  x,  drawn  from  (114)  is 
substituted  in  (115),  one  finds 

lw_  8  Ay  _  Iw  dA,  _  /kl_  _  klw*\  80,.        1 
'  ~c    8y'         c  W  =~  U  "  '    c3  /  g?"  "*"  c  *  *' 

or  ,  after  multiplication   by    ',  ; 

1)  Lorentz,  De  1'influence  du  mouvement  de  la  terre  sur  lea  phenomenea 
lumineux,  Arch,  neerl.  21  (1887),  p.  169  —  172  (Abhandlungen  uber  theoretische 
Physik,  1,  p.  389—  392). 


U  NOTES.  319 

^_^  =  A/^  +  p'u'V 

8y'       df        c  \Sf    h?u*; 
This  is  the  first  of  the  equations  contained  in 


The  remaining  formulae  are  obtained  by  similar  transformations. 

74  (Page  198).  The  equations  (292)  have  the  same  form  as 
(100)—  (103)  and  the  proof  of  (295)  and  (296)  is  therefore  almost 
identical  with  that  given  in  Note  25  for  the  formulae  (106)  and 
(107),  the  first  of  which  takes  the  form  of  (295)  if  the  translation 
is  supposed  to  have  the  direction  of  OX.  Therefore,  the  following 
indications  may  suffice  here. 

Since,  in  the  equations  (292),  the  independent  variables  are  t' 
and  the  quantities  x,  y',  z  defined  by  (287),  it  is  convenient  to  regard 
these  latter  as  the  coordinates  of  a  point  in  an  auxiliary  space  /S' 
(cf.  §  170),  and  to  consider  the  potentials  qo'  and  a'  as  quantities  to 
be  defined  in  this  space.  Instead  of  determining  them  by  means  of 
the  differential  equations  (294),  we  may  as  well  assume  the  formulae 


and 


comparable  with  (104)  and  (105).  In  these  formulae  dS'  denotes  an 
element  of  the  auxiliary  space,  r  its  distance  from  the  point  P'  for 
which  we  want  to  calculate  the  potentials,  and  the  square  brackets 
serve  to  indicate  that,  if  we  wish  to  know  <p'  and  a'  for  the  value  t' 
of  the  fourth  independent  variable,  we  must  use  the  values  of  Q'  and 

p'u'  corresponding  to  the  element  dS'   and   to    the  value  t'  -      -  of 

C 

that  variable. 

Starting  from  (116)  and  (117),  we  can  show  (cf.  Note  25)  that 
<p'  and  a'  satisfy  the  equations  (294)  and  that  they  are  connected 
by  the  relation 


Having  got  thus  far,  one  finds  by  direct  substitution  that  the 
values  (295)  and  (296)  satisfy  the  equations  (292)  (see,  however, 
Note  6). 

As  to  the  formula  (118),  the  proof  of  it  depends  on  the  equation 


320  NOTES.  75 

just  as,  in  Note  25,  (44)  was  deduced  by  means  of  (45).  It  remains 
therefore  to  show  that  (119)  holds  true  for  the  case  now  under  con- 
sideration. 

In  order  to  examine  this  point,  we  shall  again  start  from  equation 
(5)  of  Note  2  or 


On  account  of  (287)  and  (288)  we  may  write  for  this 


w 

! 


Q,  ,  ,    W  _   ft 

ST  ~  kl  ^  ~8f~ 
This  leads  to  the  equation  (119),  if,  after  having  combined  the  two 
terms  containing  a^,  we  express  p  and  U  in  g'  and  u',  dividing  at  the 

V  t 

same  time  by  I*. 

75  (Page  203).     The  exact  formulae  are  found   as   follows.     If 
xr,  yr,  zr  are  functions  of  t,  the  quantities 

x'=  Uxr,    y'=  lyr,    e'  =  ler 
may  be  considered  as  functions  of 

t'=lkt-M^xr.  (120) 

We  have  the  following  relations  between  simultaneous  infinitely 
small  changes 

dx'=kldxr,    dy'=ldyr,    dz'=ldzr, 

d(=  \  dt-kl~dxr. 
k  cj 

Hence 

dt'  __  I       H  w  dxr 

i?~i    **Fin  ' 

dxr  ,  dxr 

dx  Kl~di  '    dt 


dt'  ~~  I  w  dxr  tw  dx,. 

k~   "?"5?  c*  dt 


r  ,r 

dt  d  dt 


-  -= 

dt'  ~  ,^w  dxr'    dt'  ,j  w  dxr 

:   T*~di  ~c*   dt 

The  values  of  ^,    |^,  ^  are  found  by  differentiating  the 
last  expressions  with  respect  to  t,  and  dividing  the  results  by  (121). 


76  NOTES.  321 

76  (Page  207).  Beginning  again  with  the  field  produced  by  a 
single  electron,  we  may  repeat  almost  verbally  what  has  been  said 
in  Note  26.  Thus,  let  P  be  the  distant  point,  M  the  ,,active'a) 
position  of  the  centre  of  the  electron,  t0'  the  local  time  (of  M)  at 
which  this  position  is  reached,  r'  the  effective  distance  between  M 
and  P.  Then 


or,  if  x'p,  y'p,  z'p  are  the  effective  coordinates  of  P  (M  being  taken  as 
origin), 


Let  us  further  denote  by  x',  y,  z  the  effective  coordinates  of  some 
point  Q  of  the  electron  at  the  time  t0'  (local  time  of  M),  by  xa', 
ya',  za'  the  effective  coordinates  of  the  same  point  in  its  active  po- 
sition Qa,  and  by  t0'  +  t  (local  time  of  M)  the  time  at  which  this 
latter  position  is  reached,  so  that,  according  to  (288)  (for  which  we 

may  write  t'  =  •-.-  i  ---  ,  x')  the  local  time  of  Qa  itself  is 

K  C 

'.'-V  +•«-"•?**•'  (123) 

The  condition  that  Qa  shall  be  the  active  position  of  the  point 
in  question  is 

(x'f-  x^  +  (y'P-  yaJ  +  ("'P-  O2  =  c\f-  O2-       (124) 

Now,  (x',  y,  z)  and  (xa'}  ya',  za'~)  are  the  effective  coordinates  of 
the  same  point  of  the  electron  at  two  moments  for  which  the  local 
time  of  M  differs  by  r.  The  difference  between  the  corresponding  values 

of  t  is    ,  t,  as  is  seen  from  formula  (120),    if  in  it  we  put  xr=  0, 

as  it  is  for  the  point  M.  But  during  the  interval  .  r  the  relative 
coordinates  of  Q  change  by 

* 


so  that,  on   account  of  (286),  the   effective  coordinates  of  the  same 
point  undergo  the  changes 

k*Uxr,    kuyr,    ku.r, 
or,  in  virtue  of  (289), 

Ux'r,    U/T,    U/T. 

We  may  therefore  write 


1)  This  term   is   chosen   here   because  the  word   ,,eflective"  has  now  been 
used  in  another  sense. 

L  o  r  e  n  t  z  ,  Theory  of  electrons.  2  1 


322  NOTES.  76 

If  these  values,  together  with  (123}  and  (122},  are  substituted  in 
(124},  and  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  second  order  with  respect  to 
r,  x',  y',  z,  we  are  led  to  the  formula 

w    ,  f 

y  9fT    P>'C 


where  Ur'    is  an  abbreviation  for 


We  may  next  consider  two  elements  dS'  and  dSa'  comparable 
with  the  elements  dS  and  dSe,  of  which  we  spoke  in  Note  26.  The 
ratio  between  their  magnitudes  is  given  by  the  functional  determi- 
nant of  xa',  ya',  sa'  with  respect  to  x',  y',  z,  i.  e.  by 


or,   if  we   confine  ourselves  to  terms  of  the  first  order  with  respect 

to  u;,  u;,  u;,  by 


We  have  now  to  use  the  formulae  (110}  and  (117}.    In  the  first 
of  them  we  must  replace  dS'  by 


and,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  dimensions  of  the  electron 
in  comparison  with  the  distance  from  the  point  P,  r  may  be  taken 
equal  to  the  effective  distance  between  M  and  P.  Consequently, 
since,  by  (290)  and  (302)  e'dS'^ydS,  and  fpdS=e,  the  scalar 
potential  is  given  by 

ur, 


where  the  meaning  of  the  square  brackets  will  be  obvious. 
The  vector  potential  is  equal  to 


a'  = 


Finally,  the  electromagnetic  field  produced  by  the  moving  electron 
is  given  by  (295)  and  (296),  the  first  of  these  formulae  taking  the 
simple  form 


77  NOTES.  323 

if  we  put 


or 


Let  us  now  return  to  the  comparison  of  two  systems  g  and  §0,  such 
as  we  have  considered  at  the  beginning  of  §  175,  the  one  moving 
and  the  other  at  rest,  and  in  which  the  effective  coordinates  of  the 
separate  electrons  are  the  same  functions  of  the  effective  time.  It 
has  been  shown  in  §  173  that  for  an  electron  moving  in  {SJ  the  compo- 

d  x' 
nents  of  the  vector  u'  are  equal  to  the  differential  coefficients  -TT>  , 

It'  '   ~df'     Therefore,    the  vector  ll'  occurring   in  the   formulae  (127), 

(125),  (126)  and  (296  )  which  determine  the  field  in  g  is  equal 
to  the  velocity  of  the  electron  in  g0,  from  which  we  may  con- 
clude that  the  values  of  (gp'),  a',  d'  and  h'  in  g  are  equal  to  those 
of  (p,  a,  A,  and  h  in  g0;  indeed,  the  formulae  (.7.27),  (125),  (126) 
and  (296)  are  exactly  similar  to  (79),  (33)  and  (34)  for  this 
latter  system.  If  we  apply  this  to  the  case,  considered  in  §  175, 
that  the  electrons  perform  small  vibrations  in  the  particles  of  the 
body,  we  see  at  once  that  the  field  belonging  to  such  a  particle  in  g 
must  be  determined  by  the  equations  (308),  because  we  know  that 
a  particle  in  g0  gives  rise  to  a  field  determined  by  (88),  (89),  (33) 
and  (34). 

77  (Page  211).  Let  g  be  a  moving  electrostatic  system  and 
&0  the  corresponding  stationary  one.  We  have  a'  =  0,  h'=0,  and, 
if  <p'  is  the  scalar  potential  in  g0,  the  equations  (291)  and  (295)  give 
for  every  point  of  g 

d<p'     j        w  .  I*  d<p'     A    .    w  .  Is  df' 


d 


and  consequently 


~  dz=0, 


(**) 


h—  n                   h   —  7-72          v       h  —        7-72 
_  =  U  .    II.,  =  A- 1 ^ — / .     II..  ===  —  Ki    —  "^ — / 

c    9z  '  c  2y 

From  this  we  find  for  the  first  component  of  the  flow  of  energy  in  jij 


21* 


324  NOTES.  78—80 

and    (by   (53)    and  (302))    for   the   first    component    of  the    electro- 
magnetic momentum,  with  which  alone  we  are  concerned, 


We  have  therefore  merely  to  calculate  the  last  integral  for  the 
field  of  a  sphere  without  translation  with  radius  R  and  charge  c. 
This  is  a  very  simple  problem.  We  may  observe  that  the  three 
integrals 


have  equal  values,  so  that  they  are  each  equal  to   one  third  of  their 
sum,    i.  e.  to    two   thirds   of  the   energy   of  the   system.     The    latter 

e*  e1 

having  the  value  -     ~,  we  have  for  each  of  the  integrals  -g—  ^,  and 


It  is  clear  that  Gy  =  0  and  G8  =  0,  so  that  in  general 


78  (Page  213).    The  equations  (128)  lead  to  the  following  value 
of  the  electromagnetic  energy 


Putting    I  =  1     and    remembering    that    each    of    the    integrals 
'—-A  d&  etc.  has  the  value  T^-p ,  we  find 


which  becomes  equal  to  (315)  when  the  value  of  It  is  substituted. 

79  (Page  214).  Indeed,  when  the  electron  is  at  rest,  the  electric 
force  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  is  E  =  Ri-  As  it  is  at  right 
angles  to  the  surface,  there  is  a  normal  stress  equal  to 


80  (Page  215).     When,  by  some  disturbing  cause,  the  radius  of 
the   sphere  is  increased,    the  electric  stress   acting  on  its   surface  is 


80  NOTES.  325 

diminished,  as  is  seen  from  (13f).  As  the  internal  stress  is  supposed 
to  remain  constant,  it  will  draw  the  points  of  the  sphere  towards 
the  inside,  so  that  the  original  volume  will  be  restored. 

We  shall  next  show  that  the  equilibrium  would  be  unstable 
with  respect  to  changes  of  shape.  Consider  a  deformation  by  which 
the  sphere  is  changed  to  an  elongated  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  the 
magnitude  of  each  element  of  surface  remaining  as  it  was,  and  each 
element  retaining  its  charge.  Then  it  can  be  shown  that  in  the  in- 
terior, at  each  point  of  the  axis,  there  will  be  an  electric  force 
directed  towards  the  centre  if  the  charge  of  the  electron  is  negative. 
Let  this  force  be  equal  to  q  at  a  point  just  inside  the  surface  at 
one  extremity  P  of  the  axis.  By  a  well  known  theorem  the  electric 
force  just  outside  the  surface  at  the  same  extremity  will  be  q  +  ra, 
if  we  denote  by  —  o  the  negative  surface  density  of  the  ellipsoid, 
which  by  our  supposition  is  equal  to  the  surface  density  of  the  ori- 
ginal sphere.  A  surface  element  at  P  will  be  subjected  to  two  nor- 
mal electric  stresses,  -^(q  -\-  o>)s  outward,  and  ^-q*  inward;  besides  these 
there  is  the  constant  internal  stress  which  must  be  equal  to  ^-o2,  be- 
cause, in  the  original  state,  it  counterbalanced  the  electric  stress. 

Since  both  q  and  «  are  positive,  there  is  a  resultant  force  qco 
directed  towards  the  outside  and  tending  still  further  to  elongate 
the  ellipsoid. 

In  order  to  prove  what  has  been  said  about  the  internal  electric 
force,  we  may  proceed  as  follows.  Choose  a  point  A  on  the  semi- 
axis  OP,  and  consider  a  cone  of  infinitely  small  solid  angle  ds, 
having  this  point  for  its  vertex  and  prolonged  through  it.  Let  de^ 
at  the  point  B17  and  d&2  at  B2  be  the  elements  of  the  ellipsoidal 
surface  determined  by  the  intersection  with  the  cone,  •frj  and  &3  the 
angles  between  the  line  Ht  B%  and  the  tangent  planes  at  the  ex- 
tremities, and  let  Sl  be  the  point  nearest  A,  so  that  the  angle  B1AP 
is  sharp.  Then,  since 

AB.'-de  AB'-ds 

(Iff    =  d09=  r1^      —  , 

sin  ft,  BIB'S1, 

the  attractions  exerted  by  the  two  elements  on  a  unit  of  positive  elec- 
tricity at  A  will  be  equal  to 

tods  ,        tads 

and 


It  may  be  shown  by  geometrical  considerations  that 
sin  •frj  >  sin  -9-j , 

from  which  it  follows  that,  of  the  two  attractions,  the  second  is 
greatest,  so  that  there  is  a  residual  force  in  the  direction  A13%.  A  si- 
milar result  is  found  for  any  other  direction  of  the  cone;  the  total 
resultant  electric  force  must  therefore  be  directed  towards  the  centre. 


326  NOTES.  81-83 

81  (Page  220).     The   expressions  (129}  of  Note  78  show  that, 
if  I  is  different  from  1,  the  value  (130}  found  for  the  energy  must  be 
multiplied   by  /.      According    to   the    hypothesis    of  Bucherer    and 

Langevin,  Z=AfTr,  which  leads  to  the  result  mentioned  in  the  text. 

82  (Page  222).    If  in   the   equations   (200),  in  which  we  may 
now  omit  the  terms  depending  on  the  resistance  and  on  the  external 
magnetic   field,   we   substitute  P  =  D  —  E,   they   take  the   form   of  a 
linear  relation  between  the  vectors  D  and  E,    containing  their    diffe- 
rential coefficients  with  respect  to  the  time. 

83  (Page  224).    Let  the  effective  coordinates  of  P  and  Q  be  0,  0,  0 
and  x',y',Z]  then,  by  (286),  the  relative  coordinates  are  0,  0,  0  and 

\r,y',  e'.     Hence,  if  0,  tlt  t%  are  the  values  of  t  at  the  instants  when 

K 

the  signal  is  started  from  P,  received  by  Q  and  again  perceived  at 
P,  we  have  by  (284)  for  the  absolute  coordinates  of  the  points 
where  the  signal  is  found  at  these  moments, 

0,0,0;      Y  +  "^,yV/;     «>/g,0,  0, 

and  since  the  distance  from  the  first  to  the  second  is  travelled  over 
in  an  interval  tit  and  that  from  the  second  to  the  third  in  an  inter- 
val t2  —  \  , 


By  means  of  these  equations  £,    and  t%  can   be  calculated.     It  is 
simpler,  however,  to  consider  the  quantities 


and 

*2'  =  j*2.  (133} 

Indeed,  the  formulae  may  be  transformed  to 


giving 
and 


(135) 


84,  85  NOTES.  327 

But  it  appears  from  equation  (288),  for  which  we  may  now  write 

t'-±t-%x',  (136} 

that  the  variable  tt'  defined  by  (133}  is  the  time  measured  as  local 
time  of  P  that  has  elapsed  between  the  starting  and  the  return  of  the 
signal.  On  the  other  hand,  yV2  +  y*  +  g'*  is  the  length  L  which 
the  observer  A  ascribes  to  the  distance  PQ,  and  -— 7-  is  the  value  of 

h 

the  velocity  of  light  which  he  deduces  from  the  experiment.  Equation 
(135)  shows  that  this  value  will  be  equal  to  c. 

84  (Page  226).    It  is  sufficient  to  observe  that,  as  is  seen  from 
(136}  and  (132},  a  clock  showing  the  local  time  of  Q  will  mark  the 
time  t^    at  the  moment  when  Q  is  reached  by  the  signal,   and  that, 

according  to  (134},  this  time  £/  is  precisely  —  • 

85  (Page  226).    According  to  what  has  been  said  in  §  189,  the 
mass  m  which  the   moving    observer   ascribes   to   a   body   will  be  the 
mass  which   this  body  would  actually  have,   if  it  were  at  rest.     But, 
the  masses  being  changed  by  the  translation  in  the  manner  indicated 
by  (305),  the  real  mass  will  be  Jcsm  if  the  acceleration  has  the  direction 
of  OX,  and  km  if  it  is  at  right  angles  to  that  axis.     Using  the  in- 
dices (0)  and  (r)   to   distinguish   observed   and   real   values,   we   may 
therefore  write 

m(r)  =  (&>  k,  fym(o), 

where  the  factors  enclosed  in  brackets  refer  to  accelerations  parallel 
to  OX,  OF  or  OZ. 

On  the  other  hand  it  appears  from   the  formulae  (303)  that  for 
the  accelerations 


so  that,  if  the  moving  observer  measures  forces  F  by  the  products  of 
acceleration  and  mass,  we  shall  have 

/        i       i  \ 

Now,  let  two  particles  with  equal  real  charges  c  be  placed  at 
the  points  of  the  moving  system  whose  effective  coordinates  are  x^,  y/,0/, 
x*i  y*>  S2  an(l  whose  effective  distance  /  is  therefore  given  by  the 
first  equation  of  §  171.  If  these  particles  had  the  corresponding  po- 
sitions in  a  stationary  system,  the  components  of  the  force  acting  on 
the  second  of  them  would  be 

(xt   —  x^e         (yf   —  yl  )e_        (zt        zl)e  fiaa\ 

>          4»r'8        '  47tr'»  V*0* 


328  NOTES.  86 

Hence,   in  virtue  of  (300),   the  components  of  the  real  force  in 
the  moving  system  will  be 

(a^-jOf^       l_     (y,'  -   y,>«       £     _(*,'  -  0,')_^_ 

' 


_  _ 

4jtr'«  k   '         4»r/s  /, 

and  by  (137)  the  components  of  the  observed  force  will  again  have 
the  values  (138).  The  observer  A  will  therefore  conclude  from  his 
experiments  that  the  particles  repel  each  other  with  a  force 


and  he  will  ascribe  to  each  of  them  a  charge  e  equal  to  the  real  one. 
Let  us  suppose,  finally,  that  a  charge  e  is  placed  in  an  electro- 
magnetic field  existing  in  the  moving  system,  at  a  point  which  shares 
the  translation.  Then,  on  account  of  (293),  the  components  of  the 
force  really  acting  on  it  are 


and   we    may    infer   from  (137)    that  the  components  of  the  observed 
force  have  the  values 

e&x',     eV>     ed*- 

It  appears  from  this  that,  as  has  been  stated  in  the  text,  the 
moving  observer  will  be  led  to  the  vector  d'  if  he  examines  the  force 
acting  on  a  charged  particle. 

86  (Page  230).  Einstein  uses  the  substitutions  (287),  (288) 
and  (291)  (with  I  =  1),  but  he  defines  the  vector  u'  and  the  quantity 
Q'  by  formulae  slightly  different  from  (289)  and  (290),  namely  by 

u;  _  __  *^  u  ;  =  _  _*»L_  „  ;  =  .  _*t_       (139) 

.,  w            a                 w  .  ,  w 

*-*V«              1-*7iu-  i-*1-^"* 
and 


Hence,   if  the   quantities  introduced  by  him    and  by  myself  are 
distinguished  by  the  indices  E  and  L, 


~i* 

giving 
and 


It  appears  from  this  that  the  third  of  the  equations  (292)  remains 
as  we  found  it,  but  that  on  the  right  hand   side  of  the  first  we  get 


78  NOTES  329 

simply  p',  so  that  after  all  the  fundamental  equations  take  exactly 
the  same  form  which  they  have  for  a  stationary  system. 

It  must  be  added  that,  according  to  Einstein's  views,  the  quanti- 
ties x',  y',  is',  t'  play  in  all  respects  the  part  of  the  coordinates  and  the 
time,  that,  in  fact,  they  must  be  considered  as  the  true  coordinates 
and  the  true  time  in  the  moving  system  (if  it  is  examined  by  an 

observer  who  moves  with  it).  Thus,  the  quantities  -,-p-,  -~ry  -,,  deter- 
mined in  Note  75  must  actually  be  regarded  as  the  components  of 
the  velocity,  and  the  vector  u'  whose  components  (139)  are  equal  to 
those  quantities,  as  the  velocity  itself.  Again,  events  taking  place  at 
different  points  of  space  are  considered  as  "simultaneous",  if  they 
occur  at  moments  characterized  by  one  and  the  same  value  of  t'.  The 
quantity  p'  is  now  called  "density  of  charge",  and  the  amount  of  charge 
existing  "at  a  definite  moment  t'"  in  a  space  whose  boundary  is  given 
by  an  equation  between  x,  y,  z',  is  given  by  the  integral 

f-iff. 

Lastly,  by  means  of  the  hypothesis  that  the  action  between 
neighbouring  particles  is  determined  by  their  "simultaneous"  positions, 
i.  e.  by  the  positions  corresponding  to  a  definite  value  of  t',  one  gets 
rid  of  some  complications  which  we  encountered  in  §§  174  and  175. 

87  (Page  230).  Recent  experiments  by  Bucherer1)  on  the  electric 
and  magnetic  deflexion  of  /3-rays,  made  after  a  method  that  permits 
a  greater  accuracy  than  could  be  reached  by  Kaufmann  (§  179)  have 
confirmed  the  formula  (313)  for  the  transverse  electromagnetic  mass, 
so  that,  in  all  probability,  the  only  objection  that  could  be  raised 
against  the  hypothesis  of  the  deformable  electron  and  the  principle 
of  relativity  has  now  been  removed.  In  the  mean  time,  this  principle 
has  already  been  the  subject  of  several  important  theoretical  investi- 
gations. 2) 

1)  A.  H.  Bncherer,  Messungen  an  Becquerelstrahlen.     Die  experimentelle 
Beatatigung    der   Lorentz-Einstein'schen    Theorie,    Phys.  Zeitschr.  9    (1908), 
p.  755;  Ber.  d.  deutschen  Phys.  Ges.  6  (1908),  p.  688. 

2)  M.  Planck,   Zur  Dynamik  bewegter  Systeme,   Sitzungsber.  Berlin  1907, 
p.  542;  Ann.  Phys.  26  (1908),  p.  1.     H.  Minkowski,  Die  Grundgleichungen  fiir 
die   elektromagnetischen   Vorgiinge   in   hewegten    Korpern,    Gott.  Nachr.   Math.- 
phys.  Kl.  1908.  p.  53. 


INDEX. 

(The  numbers  refer  to  pages.) 


Aberration  of  light,  theory  of 
Stokes  169—174;  theory  of  Fresnel 
174—180. 

Abraham,  M.  32,  36,  213,  214. 

Absorption  of  light  and  heat  9; 
coefficient  of  —  68 ;  index  of— 153, 156 ; 

—  bands  155,  156;  intensity  155,  166; 
explained  by  impacts  141. 

Alembert,  J.  d'  17. 
Atom,    model  of  117;    mass   46,    279; 
atom  of  electricity  44,  46,  280. 

Balmer,  J.  J.  103. 
Becquerel,  J.  311,  812. 
Bestelmeyer,  A.  44. 
Black  body  69. 
Bockwinkel,  H.  B.  A.  317. 
Boltzmann,    L.,    law    of  radiation 

72—74,  90. 
Boussinesq,  J.  143. 
Brace,  D.  B.  196,  209,  210,  219. 
Briihl,  J.  W.  150. 
Bucherer,  A.  H.  219,  329. 

Clausius,  R.  145. 

'Combination  of  periodical  phe- 
nomena 128,  129. 

Conductivity  for  electricity  7,  10, 
63,  64;  for  heat  10,  64. 

Corbino,  0.  M.  164. 

Cornu,  A.  108. 

Corresponding  states  in  moving  and 
stationary  system,  for  low  velocity  189 ; 
for  higher  velocity  205,  206. 

Current,  electric,  5,  7;    displacement 

—  5,  7,  9,  135;  —  of  conduction  7,  8; 
convection  —  12,  13;  induction  —  16. 

Damping  of  vibrations  259. 
Dielectric  displacement  5,  136. 
Diesselhorst,  H.  66. 
Dimensions  of  bodies  changed  by  a 

translation  195,  201,  202,  205. 
Dispersion   of  light   143,    144,    160, 

151,  152 ;  anomalous  156. 
Dissymmetry     of    Zeeman  -  effect 

162,  312. 

Doppler's  principle  60,  62,  176. 
Drude,  P.  10,  63-65. 
Dufour,  A.  312. 

Effective  charge  in  moving  system 
201. 


Effective  coordinates  in  moving 
system  200. 

Einstein,  A.  223,  226,  229. 

Electric  force  2,  5,  7,  135;  expressed 
in  terms  of  potentials,  for  a  stationary 
system  19;  for  a  slowly  moving  system 
59;  for  greater  velocity  198. 

Electromagnetic  theory  of  matter 
45,  46. 

Electrons  8;  in  dielectrics  8,  9;  in 
metals  8,  10,  63—67;  their  charge 
11,  16,  46;  mass  38,  39,  44—46;  size 
46;  heat  motion  10,  63;  deformed 
by  translation  to  flattened  ellipsoids 
210 — 212;  deformed  without  change 
of  volume  220;  stability  of  state  214, 
215;  model  of  electron  213,  214. 

Electrostatic  system  at  rest  20; 
moving  with  small  velocity  35,  36; 
with  greater  velocity  199,  200. 

Emission  of  light  and  heat  9. 

Emissivity  69;  ratio  between  —  and 
absorption  69,  89,  90. 

Energy,  electric  23;  magnetic  23;  of 
moving  rigid  electron  86;  of  moving 
deformed  electron  213,  220;  of  radia- 
tion 71,  95,  96:  intrinsic  —  of  an  elec- 
tron 213;  kinetic  —  of  a  molecule  279; 
equation  of  —  22 ;  flow  of  —  23,  25,  26. 

Equations  of  the  electromagnetic 
field  for  the  ether  5;  the  same,  refer- 
red to  moving  axes  222,  228;  for 
ponderable  bodies  7;  in  the  theory  of 
electrons,  referred  to  fixed  axes  12; 
to  slowly  moving  axes  58;  to  axes 
moving  with  greater  velocity  197; 
for  a  system  of  molecules  135, 136, 139, 
140;  for  a  moving  system  221—223; 

-  for  electric  and  magnetic  force  17; 

-  of  propagation  18. 
Equilibrium  of  radiation 70— 72,92. 
Equipartition  of  energy  90 — 92,  97. 
Equivalent  degrees  offreedom  112. 
Ether    230;    pervades    all    matter    11, 

174;  its  immobility  11,  30,  31,  174; 
supposed  motion  30,  31;  considered 
as  having  an  irrotational  motion  171, 
173;  as  condensed  around  the  earth  173. 

Faraday,  M.  1,  98. 

Field   of  an  electron  at  rest  20;   of  a 


INDEX. 


331 


moving  electron  21,  22,  36,  50,  51;  of 
a  slowly  moving  electrostatic  system 
35,  36;  of  a  system  moving  more 
rapidly  199;  of  a  vibrating  electron 
54;  of  a  particle  with  variable  electric 
moment  55,  56;  of  a  vibrating  par- 
ticle moving  with  small  velocity  59, 
60;  with  greater  velocity  207. 
Fitz  Gerald,  G.  F.  195. 
Fizeau,  H.  190. 

Force  acting  on  electric  charge  14,  15, 
198;  resultant  force  acting  on  a  system 
of  electrons  26,  27,  33;  electric  forces 
changed  by  a  translation  199;  similar 
change  of  molecular  forces  20-2. 
Frequency,  relative  176. 
Fresnel,  A.   174;    his    coefficient  176 
deduced  in  the  supposition  of  conti 
nuously  distributed  charges  182—186 
from  the  theory  of  electrons  189, 190 
for  a  crystal  192.     See:  Aberration 
of  light. 

Geest,  J.  165,  166. 

Gehrcke,  E.  259. 

Goldstein,  E.  41. 

Gradient  of  a  scalar  quantity  4. 


Langevin,  P.  86,  219. 

Laplace,  P.  S.  de  144. 

Lebedew,  P.  34. 

Local  time  57,  58,  187,  198,  226. 

Lorentz,  H.  A.  2,  10,  80,  145,  318. 

Lorenz,  L.  145. 

Lummer,  0.  75,  259. 


Hagen,  E.  80,  81. 
Hallo,  J.  J.  164,  166. 
Heaviside,  0.  2. 
Helmholtz,  H.  30,  136,  143. 
Hertz,  H.  2,  57. 
Hull,  G.  F.  34. 
Humphreys,  W.  J.  167. 
Huygens's  principle  168. 

Image,  reflected,  of  an  electromagnetic 
system  130. 

Interference  of  light  in  a  moving 
system  181,  191;  —  experiment  for 
detecting  an  influence  of  the  second 
order  of  the  earth's  motion  192—196, 

Ion8  44-  [201,  202! 

Irrotational  distribution  of  a 
vector  4. 

Jaeger,  W.  65. 

Jeans,  J.  H.   90;    theory    of  radiation 

93—97,  287. 
Julius,  V.  A.  128. 

Kaufmann,  W.  42,  43,  212. 

Kayser,  H.  103. 

Kelvin,  Lord  137. 

Kerr,  J.  98. 

Ketteler,  E.  143.  [tion  69 

Kirchhoff,   G.  72,  233;   law  of  radia- 


Macaluso,  D.  164. 
Magnetic  force  2,  5,  7;  derived  from 
vector  potential,   for    system    at   rest 
19;  for  slowly  moving  system  59;  for 
greater  velocity  198. 
Magri,  L.  146. 

Mass,  electromagnetic,   of  an  electron 
38,  39,  43;  of  deformable  electron  212, 
213;     of    electron    flattened    without 
change  of  volume  220;    of  a   system 
of   electrons    47,    48;    ratio    between 
charge  and  —  41,  42,  44,  45,  102,  103, 
212;  —   changed   by  translation  205. 
Mathematical  notation  3—5. 
Maxwell,   J.  Clerk    1,    2,   27,   30.  67 
80,  90,  143,  266.  [133,  134. 

Mean  values  in  a  system  of  molecules 
Metals;    electric  conductivity   63,    64; 
conductivity  for  heat  64;  ratio  between 
the  conductivities  66—67;  absorption 
by  a  thin  metal  plate  81,  82;  emission 
by  a  plate  82—89. 
Michelson,   A.  A.   190,  191,  192,  196. 
Miller,  D.  C,  195. 
tfinkowski,  H.  329. 
Vtogendorff,  E.  E.  107. 
tfohler,  J.  P.  167.  [203—205. 

tfolecular  motion  in  moving  systems 
Molecules,  number  of,  167. 
Momentum,    electromagnetic,    32;    of 
moving    electron    36;    of    deformable 
electron  211. 
(Torley,  E.  W.  190—192,  195. 
Hossotti,  0.  F.  145. 
Moving  observer   measuring   lengths 
and  times  224;  studying  electromagne- 
tic phenomena  in  moving  system  226- 
in  stationary  system  227,  228. 
Moving  system  compared  with  a  sta- 
tionary one  36;  for  low  velocities  189; 
for  greater   velocities    199,  203—206 
208. 

Nichols,  E.  F.  34. 

Onnes,  H.  Kamerlingh  311. 

Pannekoek,  A,  292. 
Paschen,  F.  107,  108. 


332 


INDEX. 


Planck,  M.  173,  174,  329;  theory  of 
radiation  78—80,  279,  287. 

Poincare,  H.  213,  214. 

Polarization  of  light  observed  in  the 
Zeeman- effect  101,  102,  181. 

Polarized  light  6,  24. 

Potentials  19,  20,  58,  198. 

Poynting,  J.  H.  23. 

Pressure  of  radiation  28,  29,  33,  34. 

Pringsheim,  E.  75. 

Products,  scalar  and  vector,  of  two 
vectors  3,  4. 

Propagation  of  electric  disturbances 
6,  20;  of  light  9;  along  magnetic  lines  i 
of  force  157,  158;  at  right  angles  to 
the  lines  of  force  159—162;  in  a 
system  moving  with  small  velocity 
183—190;  in  flowing  water  190,  191; 
in  a  system  moving  with  greater 
velocity  205—210. 

Purvis,  J.  E.  108. 

Radiation  from  an  electron  50—62; 
from  a  vibrating  electron  52 — 54; 
from  a  polarized  particle  55,  56; 
from  an  atom  120. 

Bay  of  light  169;  relative  ray  169,  177; 
relation  between  ray  and  wave-front 
178;  minimum  property  179;  course 
of  relative  ray  in  a  moving  medium 
178—180;  in  a  moving  crystal  192; 
canal  rays  41;  cathode  rays  41; 
Eontgen  rays  52,  152;  a-rays  41; 
(?-rays  41,  42,  212,  329. 

Rayleigh,  Lord  196,  209,  219. 

Reflexion  by  a  moving  mirror 
60—62. 

Refraction  9;  index  of  refraction  143, 
153, 156;  related  to  density  144—147; 
of  a  mixture  147 ;  of  a  chemical  com- 
pound 147 — 150;  refraction  equivalent 
148;    double   —  in  a  magnetic    field 
165;  double  —  that  might  be  produ- 
ced by  the  earth's  motion  196,  219. 
Reinganum,  M.  65. 
Relativity,  principle  of  229,  230. 
Resistance  to  the  motion  of  an  elec- 
tron 49;    a   cause   of  absorption  136, 
Riecke,  E.  10,  63.  [137,  166. 

Ritz,  W.  107. 
Robb,  A.  A.  114. 

Rotation  of  avector4;  rotation  around 
magnetic  lines  offeree  123;  of  a  par- 
ticle in  a  magnetic  field  124—126; 


magnetic    rotation    of   the    plane    of 

polarization  163,  164. 
Rowland,  H.  A.  13. 
Rubens,  H.  80,  81. 
Runge,    C.  103,  107,  108. 
Rydberg,  J.  R.  103;  formulae  for  series 

of  spectral  lines   104—106,  128,  129. 

Sellmeyer,  W.  143. 
Series   of  spectral  lines  103—106. 
Simon,  S.  44. 

Solenoidal  distribution  of  a  vector  4. 
Statistical  method  266. 
Stefan,  J.  72. 

Stokes,    G.   G.    52,   169.     See:   Aber- 
ration of  light. 
Stresses  in  the  ether  27,  30,  31. 

Terrestrial    sources    of   light   176, 

181,  209. 
Thomson,  J.  J.  10,  11,  39,  44,  52,  63, 

117,  120,  288. 

Units  2,  3. 

Velocity  of  light  in  ether  6;  in  a 
system  of  molecules  142;  measured 
in  a  moving  system  224,  225;  velocity 
of  ray  in  a  moving  medium  177,  178. 

Vibrations  of  electrons  9,  49;  in  a 
magnetic  field,  of  an  electron  99, 100; 
of  a  charged  xystem  109 — 114;  of  an 
isotropic  system  114;  of  charged 
spheres  115;  of  a  system  of  four  elec- 
trons 120  —  123;  of  a  rotating  particle 
126;  electromagnetic  vibrations  in  a 
rectangular  parallelepiped  93  —  95. 

Voigt,  W.  132,  162,  164,  165,  198,  311. 

Waves,  elementary  168,  169,  177;  pro- 
pagation of  a  wave-front  168,  169, 
177;  relation  between  wave  and 
ray  178. 

Weber,  W.   124. 

Wiechert,  E.  52,  165. 

Wien,  W.    law  of  radiation  74—78. 

Wood,  R.  W.  167,  312. 

Zeeman,  P.  98,  102,  103,  132,  162,  164. 

Zeeman -effect,  elementary  theory 
98 — 101;  more  complicated  forms  103; 
in  series  of  spectral  lines  107,  108 ; 
in  the  radiation  from  a  rotating 
particle  126,  127;  inverse  effect  132, 
158,  162;  dissymmetry  162. 


«0 

C 

O 


(C   -^ 

c  « 


"t 
•tf 

81 


g 

O 


O 

0> 


•H    «H     OS 
£     °     g 

8  *• 


S 


o 

S  g 
5-g, 

0)     0) 

X  X 


V 

u 


n   o 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acmp  T  '/rary  Card  Pocket 

I'at.  "Ref.  Index  FUe" 
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
