LOTZE'S

Outlines  of  Philosophy
ii

PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION


OUTLINES

OF  THE

PHILOSOPHY  OF  RELIGION


DICTATED PORTIONS

OF  THE

V

LECTURES  OF  HERMANN  LOTZE


TRANSLATION EDITED BY

GEORGE T. LADD
i

PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  IN  YALE  COLLEGE


,  I


BOSTON

GINN, HEATH, & CO.

1885


<3X


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1885,  by

GEORGE  T. LADD,
in  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington.


J.  S.  Cushing  &  Co.,  Printers,  115  High  Street,  Boston.


EDITOR'S PREFACE.


This  translation  of  Lotze's  '  Outlines  of  the
Philosophy  of  Religion  '  is  made  from  the  German
of  the  second  edition,  for  the  revision  of  which,
as  well  as  for  that  of  the  first  German  edition,
Professor  Rehnisch  of  Gottingen  is  responsible.
In  preference  to  the  first  edition,  the  second  was
selected,  because  it  seems  to  be  at  once  more
compact  (if  that  were  possible)  and  more  compre-
hensive. It  is  composed  of  the  dictated  portions
of  the  Lectures  given  in  the  Summer-Semester  of
1875  and  the  Winter-Semester  of  1878-79.  The
first  eight  chapters  belong  to  the  earlier  date ;
and,  in  fact,  the  course  of  1875  closed  with  them.
It  was  not  until  the  year  1878  that  Lotze  added
to  this  course  the  instruction  on  Religion  and  Mo-
rality (Chapter  IX.)  and  on  Dogmas  and  Confessions
(Chapter  X.).

In  choosing  this  volume  for  the  second  place  in
the  series  of  translations  of  these  Outlines,  I  have
been  guided  to  a  considerable  extent  by  my  own
convenience  as  a  teacher.  It  will  be  found  to  be
very  closely  connected  with,  and  indeed  founded
upon, the conclusions already made accessible in


VI  EDITOR  S PREFACE.

the  translation  of  the  'Outlines  of  Metaphysic.'
The  Philosophy  of  Religion  is,  of  course,  primarily
a  speculative  or  theoretical  treatment  of  the  proofs
for  the  Being  of  God,  of  his  Attributes,  and  of
his  Relations  to  the  World  of  matter  and  of  finite
spirits.  But  Lotze's  metaphysical  thinking  leads
him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  source  and  centre
and  sum  of  all  that  Reality  with  which  it  is  the
business  of  Metaphysic  to  deal,  is  the  Personal
Absolute  whom  —  to  use  the  language  of  Tren-
delenburg—  "faith  calls  God."  The  Philosophy
of  Religion  must  therefore  first  derive  from  Meta-
physic the  results  of  a  critical  treatment  of  those
assumptions  concerning  all  that  is  Real,  which
enter  into  all  experience  ;  it  must  afterwards  dis-
cuss these  same  assumptions  in  that  expanded
form  which  is  the  result  of  taking  into  the  ac-
count the  content  of  a  further  special  experience
of  an  aesthetic,  ethical,  and  definitively  religious
kind.  Readers  who  have  not  already  made  them-
selves somewhat  familiar  with  the  author's  views
on  metaphysical  questions,  should,  in  studying  this
volume,  recur  constantly  to  the  '  Outlines  of  Meta-
physic,' or  to  the  larger  volume  on  Metaphysic  in
his  '  System  of  Philosophy.'

It is my earnest hope that  a  large number  of
those  whose  work  it  is  to  teach  religion  will  make


EDITOR  S PREFACE.  Vll

a  somewhat  careful  study  of  this  brief  philosophi-
cal treatise.  It  seems  to  me  admirably  adapted
for  an  exercise  in  that  fundamental  thinking  on
the  most  important  of  subjects  presented  to  the
human  reason,  which  no  one  can  safely  despise,
and  which  few  are  in  a  position  wisely  to  neglect.
It  is  surely  when  applied  to  such  subjects,  if  at
all,  that  Philosophy  may  make  good  her  claim  to
the  ancient  title  which  ascribed  to  her  something
of  the  '  divine.'

It  is  scarcely  necessary  for  me  to  repeat  what
was  said  in  the  Preface  to  the  '  Outlines  of  Meta-
physic ' ;  namely,  that  my  office  is  solely  that  of
an  interpreter,  and  not  at  all  that  of  a  critic  or
judge,  —  favorable  or  unfavorable  to  any  views  of
the  author.  One  remark,  however,  may  properly
be  added,  simply  with  a  view  to  guard  those
readers  who  are  not  familiar  with  the  writings  of
Lotze,  against  impressions  that  might  lead  to  mis-
understanding him.  This  entire  treatise  is  avow-
edly designed  to  inquire  "how  much  of  the  con-
tent of  religion  may  be  discovered,  proved,  or  at
least  confirmed,  agreeably  to  reason "  (see  p.  2).
It  is  an  effort  to  treat  of  "  Religion  within  the
limits  of  mere  reason."  But  it  is  also  avowedly
very  far  from  that  "barren  rationalism"  which
overlooks the '  aesthetic ' (in the widest sense)


Vlll  EDITOR  S PREFACE.

elements  of  human  nature  (p.  6  f.)  ;  it  makes  con-
stant reference  to,  and  attempts  to  afford  satis-
faction for,  our  indestructible  religious  needs.  Par-
ticularly in  the  last  two  chapters,  therefore,  it
should  be  remembered,  that  what  may  be  said  to
be,  *  speculatively  '  considered,  either  determinable
or  unknowable,  is  by  no  means  necessarily  the
same  when  considered  from  the  point  of  view
occupied  by  the  investigator  of  the  specific  truths
of  Biblical  revelation.  In  other  words,  a  large
amount  of  speculative  agnosticism  is  not  incom-
patible with  a  firm  conviction  as  to  the  truthful-
ness of  the  system  of  doctrines  called  Scriptural,
and  scientifically  formulated  by  dogmatics.

The  first  translation  of  this  volume,  with  the
exception  of  Chapters  II.  to  IV.,  was  made  by
L.  O.  Brastow,  D.D. :  the  editor  is  responsible  for
the  translation  of  those  three  chapters  and  for
the  revision  of  the  whole.  The  nature  of  both
the  subject  and  its  treatment  has  made  it  pos-
sible to  present  this  one  of  the  series,  with  the
exception  of  certain  distinctively  metaphysical  por-
tions, in  a  form  more  easily  intelligible  to  most
readers  than  was  possible  in  the  case  of  the
'  Outlines  of Metaphysic.'

GEORGE  T. LADD.

New  Haven,  January, 1885.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


PAGE

Introduction i

Chapter  I.  —  The  Proofs  for  the  Existence  of  God .  8
II.  — More  precise  Determinations  of  the  Abso-
lute 35

III.  —  The  Metaphysical  Attributes  of  God .  45

IV.  —  Of  the  Personality  of  the  Absolute .  55
V.  —  Of  the  Conception  of  Creation  ...  70

VI.  — Of  Preservation 81

VII.  —  Of  Government  ......  95

VIII.  —  Of  the  Conception  of  the  World-Aim .  114
IX. — Religion  and  Morality . . . .129

X.  —  Dogmas  and  Confessions . . .  143


INTRODUCTION.


§  1.  If  religion  were  a  normal  product  of  the
human  reason  alone,  then  philosophy  would  be
the  sole  legitimate  organ  for  determining  and
interpreting its content.

If,  on  the  contrary,  it  sprung  from  revelation,
then  reason  alone  would  not  be  able,  it  is  true,
to  have  discovered  it ;  but  after  it  were  in  exist-
ence, it  would  still  be  necessary  to  show  that  its
content  is  the  adequate  fulfilment  for  those  re-
ligious needs  which  -our  reason  is  compelled  to  cher-
ish, but  would  not  be  able  of  itself  to  satisfy.  Even
in  this  case,  therefore,  philosophy  would  have  a
work  to  accomplish  by  way  of  such  authenticating.
The  assertion  that  the  content  of  religion  is  a
'mystery'  is  not  convincing.  There  can  be  many
facts  of  religion  of  such  sort  that  the  possibility
of  their  coming  to  pass  may  not  admit  of  rational
apprehension  ;  and  yet  we  should  not  without  ex-
ception take  offence  at  this.  But  a  '  mystery,'
the  significance  of  which  were  not  at  least  sus-
ceptible of  definition,  would  be  a  mere  curiosity
devoid of  all connection with  our religious needs,


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


and,  on  this  account,  an  unworthy  object  of  reve-
lation.

Finally,  if  religion  were  a  morbid  product  of  the
human  spirit,  philosophy,  even  in  that  case,  would
find  occupation.  It  would  have  to  investigate  psy-
chologically and  historically  the  conditions  of  the
origin  of  this  delusion,  as  well  as  the  conditions
of  avoiding  it  in  the  future.

The  principal  object  of  the  following  reflections
is  connected  with  the  first  point  of  view  above
suggested  :  that  is,  we  seek  to  ascertain  how  much
of  the  content  of  religion  may  be  discovered,
proved,  or  at  least  confirmed,  agreeably  to  reason.
The  two  other  points  of  view  we  subordinate  to
this.

§  2.  It  is  customary  to  demand  faith  in  contrast
with  knowledge  as  the  proper  organ  for  the  truths
of  religion.  Such  an  assertion  finds  its  most  exact
expression  in  the  intimation  that,  in  fact,  even
scientific  cognition  always  rests  ultimately  upon
'  faith ' ;  that  is  to  say,  upon  an  immediate  act  of
trust  in  certain  absolutely  simple  and  self-evident
truths,  which  are  neither  in  need  of  any  proof,  nor
capable  of  it.

An  important  distinction  is  overlooked  in  the
above-mentioned view. All such ultimate, self-


THE PROPOSITIONS OF FAITH.


evident  propositions,  upon  which  our  knowledge  is
founded,  are  general  judgments,  which  do  not  tell
us  that  anything  whatever  is  or  takes  place,  but
which  only  declare  what  would  exist  or  would  have
to  take  place,  in  case  definite  conditions  occur  ;  or
—  more  concisely  —  they  all  merely  express  certain
general  rules,  which  we  are  obliged  to  follow  in  the
combination  of  the  content  of  our  ideas.  On  the
contrary,  those  propositions  upon  which  the  most
special  interest  of  religion  depends, — for  example,
that  God  is,  that  He  has  created  the  world,  that
the  soul  survives  death,  etc.,  —  are  all  of  them
declarative  judgments,  which  assert  a  definite,  par-
ticular fact.  With  respect  to  the  before-mentioned
general  propositions,  it  may  be  understood  that
they  are  capable  of  being  objects  of  our  imme-
diate insight  or  evidence  ;  for  they  are  nothing  but
expressions  of  the  forms  of  activity,  in  which  our
reason  according  to  its  own  nature  must  be  exer-
cised. On  the  other  hand,  these  declarative  propo-
sitions of  faith,  which  assert  a  fact  with  respect  to
the  ordering  of  the  world  that  is  foreign  to  our
own  nature,  cannot  with  equal  legitimacy  be  ie-
garded  as  a  natural  or  innate  endowment  of  our
spirit,  but  are  in  some  sort  the  results  of  culture.


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


§  3.  It  would  be  better  to  have  undertaken  a
comparison  of  religious  truth  and  scientific  cog-
nition different  from  the  foregoing.  No  cognition
consists  merely  of  those  general  propositions  of
which  we  have  made  mention  ;  but  every  cognition
originates  by  means  of  the  application  of  these  prop-
ositions to  a  content  which  only  experience  can  fur-
nish ;  more  concisely,  it  is  an  elaboration  of  given
perceptions.  Now  it  might  be  asserted  that  it  is  not
the  external  world  exclusively  which  furnishes  these
necessary  data  by  influence  on  our  senses.  Rather
is  it  quite  as  admissible  to  think  of  a  divine  or
supersensible  influence  upon  our  interior  being,  by
means  of  which  '  intuitions '  of  another  species  fall
to  our  lot,  such  as  the  senses  can  never  supply,
and  such  as  constitute  just  that  religious  cognition
which  obtrudes  itself  upon  us  with  immediate  cer-
tainty.

It  is  to  be  said  in  reply  to  the  foregoing  claim
that,  although  the  aforesaid  divine  influences  are
willingly  conceded,  still,  according  to  the  analogy
of  the  '  sense-impressions '  which  are  brought  into
comparison  with  them,  they  can  consist  imme-
diately in  nothing  but  a  certain  mode  of  our  affec-
tion, or  of  our  experience,  or  of  our  feeling.  Now,
just  as  a  sense-impression,  —  for  example,  a  color
or  a  tone,  —  is after  all no  '  cognition '  whatever ;


ORIGIN OF RELIGIOUS TRUTH.


but  such  a  cognition  originates  only  by  comparing
one  impression  with  others,  and  by  noticing  the
relations  which  occur  between  them,  just  so  would
those  supersensible  impressions  consist  immediately
in  mere  feelings,  moods,  or  movements  of  our  own
mind;  but  they  would  still  represent  in  this  form
no  truth  of  religion.  The  rather  would  such  a
truth,  as  admits  of  being  expressed  in  a  definite
communicable  proposition,  originate  only  through
the  agency  of  an  elaboration  in  thought  of  those
'inner  experiences'  which  go  back  to  the  'grounds'
of  these  states  of  the  mind.

§  4.  The  only  remnant  of  any  useful  result  from
this  opposition  of  science  to  faith  is,  therefore,  the
conviction  that  the  whole  of  our  knowledge  certainly
does  not  originate  from  external  experience,  which
is  mediated  for  us  by  the  senses ;  but  that  there  are
also  inner  states  which  are  available  as  data  for
the  acquisition  of  truth.  The  finishing  of  the
structure  of  religion  depends,  not  exclusively  but
chiefly,  upon  these  latter  data ;  and  of  such  inner
states  there  may  be  distinguished  three  groups  :  —

(i)  The  personal  feelings  of  fear,  of  absolute
dependence  on  unknown  powers,  which  belong  to
the  most  effective,  but  also  to  the  most  crude  of
the fundamental impulses that urge  the mind to


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


seek consolation in a non -empirical view of the
world.

(2)  Then  there  are  the  much  nobler  and  just  as
truly  effective  aesthetic  feelings  that  yield  them-
selves admiringly  to  the  beautiful  which  they  dis-
cover in  the  world,  and  by  means  of  it  are  incited
to  form  a  picture  of  an  ideal  world.  This  they
do  without  any  egoistic  interest  in  the  consolation
desired ;  but  rather  with  the  sure  conviction  that
what  is  so  fair  and  full  of  significance  cannot  be
an  accidental  product  of  that  which  is  without
significance,  but  must  be  either  the  very  Princi-
ple of  the  world  or  closely  related  to  its  creative
principle.

(3)  Finally,  there  are  the  ethical  feelings,  which,
without  being  deducible  from  '  mere  experience,'
necessitate  the  attempt  to  conceive  of  a  construc-
tion of  the  world  in  which  this  fact  of  the  moral
obligation  of  the  will  to  a  definite  form  of  action
finds  an  intelligible  and  rational  place.

If  now  we  conceive  of  the  truth  of  religion  as
developed  from  all  these  data  by  means  of  our
reflection,  then  we  certainly  get  at  what  might  be
designated  as  "  Religion  within  the  limits  of  mere
reason,"  but  still  not  at  that  which  has  been  so
called.  For,  in  most  attempts  of  this  kind,  the
great and weighty  influence of the aforesaid aes-


CAUSES  OF  BARREN  RATIONALISM.


thetic  elements  is  especially  overlooked,  and,  there-
by, a  very  barren  rationalism  takes  the  place  of  that
which  the  whole  reason,  acting  in  all  directions,
would  be  able  to  produce.


CHAPTER  I.

THE  PROOFS  FOR  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD.

§  5.  The  different  attempts  of  reason  to  attain  to
certainty  concerning  the  Supersensible,  by  starting
from  all  the  above-mentioned  points  of  departure,
are  too  manifold  for  direct  statement.  As  often,
however,  as  science  has  undertaken  to  give  an
account  of  its  profits,  it  has  done  this  in  a  doctrine
of  the  "  Proofs  for  the  existence  of  God."  Accord-
ingly we  also  now  present  these  proofs  with  the
design  to  show  how  each  one  of  them  adopts  its
own  special  method  for  discovering  a  portion  of
the  supersensible  truth ;  and  with  the  brief  pre-
liminary remark  that  these  proofs  naturally  cannot,
properly  speaking,  demonstrate  the  existence  of  God
as  necessary,  —  that  is,  as  dependent  on  something
else,  —  but  that  they  are  all  able  merely  to  demon-
strate our  assumption  of  this  existence  as  a  logi-
cally necessary  consequence  of  the  given  facts  of
the  world.

§  6.  The  ontological  argument,  as  ordinarily  ap-
prehended, maintains  that,  while  the  conception  of
other  beings  does not include  their  existence,  the


THE MOST PERFECT BEING.


conception  of  the  most  perfect  Being  of  all  does
include  it  ;  and  that  this  being  would  in  fact  con-
tradict its  own  conception,  if  the  one  perfection
—  to  wit,  existence  itself  —  did  not  belong  to  it.

The  logical  error  of  this  argument  is  sufficiently
well  known.  Not  merely  the  conception  of  the
most  perfect  Being,  but  indeed  that  of  every  living
or  active  being  (as,  for  example,  the  conception  of
an  animal),  includes  existence  also  as  necessary  to
be  added  in  thought  for  defining  it  ;  and  without
this  all  the  rest  of  its  predicates  {e.g.,  sensation,
motion,  propagation,  etc.)  would  be  quite  unthink-
able. But  with  respect  to  no  one  of  these  concep-
tions, does  it  follow  from  the  necessity  of  adding
in  thought  this  mark  (of  existence),  that  after  this
the  total  content  of  the  conception  thus  fully
thought  has  validity  in  the  nature  of  reality  also,
and  that  it  may  not  be  a  merely  thinkable  combi-
nation of  our  imagination.

But  although  logically  this  attempt  at  proof  is
quite  invalid,  it  is  nevertheless  of  interest  in  other
respects.  For  that  which  induces  it  to  regard
existence  as  a  necessary  attribute  of  the  total
content  of  the  conception  of  the  most  perfect
Being,  is  not,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  other
conception  (that  of  the  animal),  the  mere  circum-
stance that  the  rest  of  the  predicates  would  admit


10  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

of  formal  attachment  to  what  is  existent  only,  and
not  to  what  is  non-existent.  This  is  obviously
rather  a  case  where  an  altogether  immediate  con-
viction breaks  through  into  consciousness  ;  to  wit,
the  conviction  that  the  totality  of  all  that  has
value  —  all  that  is  perfect,  fair,  and  good  —  can-
not possibly  be  homeless  in  the  world  or  in  the
realm  of  actuality,  but  has  the  very  best  claim  to
be  regarded  by  us  as  imperishable  reality.  This
assurance,  which  properly  has  no  need  of  proof,
has  sought  to  formulate  itself,  after  a  scholastic
fashion,  in  the  above-mentioned  awkward  argument.

§  7.  The  cosmological  argument  begins  in  an  ap-
prehension of  frequent  occurrence,  yet  withal  wholly
incorrect ;  namely,  that  the  existence  of  each  indi-
vidual Thing  and  of  the  world  in  general  is  contin-
gent, and  therefore  presupposes  not  a  contingent
but  a  necessary  Being.  At  this  point,  the  particular
conceptions  which  are  wrongly  attached  to  this
thought,  must  be  first  subjected  to  a  definition.

The  ordinary  use  of  language  is  not  at  all  ac-
quainted with  the  philosophic  significance  of  the
word  '  contingent,'  according  to  which  it  is  applicable
to  every  existing  thing  whose  non-existence  in  gen-
eral would  be  thinkable  without  contradiction,  and
whose  conception  or  whose  nature  accordingly  offers


IDEA OF THE '  CONTINGENT.  I  I

no  resistance  to  the  cessation  of  its  own  existence.
Rather  does  the  common  usage  in  the  first  instance
merely  contrast  the  'contingent'  with  the  designed,
and  understands  by  it  all  those  secondary  effects
which,  without  being  themselves  designed,  originate
from  action  of  ours  that  is  designed.  This  happens
because  our  actions  themselves  are  for  the  most  part
capable  of  accomplishment  only  by  means  of  some
change  in  the  objects  of  the  external  world  ;  these
objects,  however,  because  of  those  relations  inde-
pendent of  ourselves  in  which  they  stand  to  each
other,  cannot  be  changed  by  us  without  propagating
still  further  in  various  directions  the  impressions
they  have  received.

We  speak,  furthermore,  of  '  contingent '  events,
when  we  have  directed  our  attention  to  a  general
law  of  nature  and  when,  in  its  application  to  a
single  case,  processes  occur  which  do  not  follow
from  the  law  and  from  the  circumstances  necessary
for  its  application,  but  only  from  the  accessory  cir-
cumstances that  are  foreign  to  the  law.  Even
such  a  'contingent,'  as  well  as  the  preceding,  is,
wherever  it  occurs,  necessary  and  inevitable,  and  is
constantly  conditioned  by  its  own  adequate  reasons  ;
only  these  reasons  do  not  reside  in  the  design  nor
in  the  law.

Finally,  we  also call such  facts  'contingent'  as


12  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

are  assumed  by  us  not  to  be  predestinated  in  such
a  plan  of  the  world's  course  as  we  have  rightly
or  wrongly  presupposed,  but  only  to  originate  inci-
dentally through  the  mechanism  of  those  efficient
agencies  which  are  summoned  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  that  plan.

And  with  the  one  just  mentioned  is  connected  the
still  broader  use  of  the  word,  according  to  which  it
becomes  a  mere  determination  of  value,  and  desig-
nates that  whose  nature  and  content  seem  to  de-
serve existence  neither  on  account  of  its  own  value
nor  by  connection  with  other  values  ;  although  it,
nevertheless,  is  in  possession  of  such  existence.  In
this  sense,  the  '  contingent '  is  simply  the  matter
of  fact,  whose  being  does  not  permit  either  of  deri-
vation from  an  effectuating  condition,  or  of  justifi-
cation by  its  own  value.

§  8.  The  other  conception,  namely,  that  of  the
'necessary,'  is,  in  the  only  meaning  of  it  which  is
quite  clear  to  us,  completely  identical  with  that  of
the  ' conditioned.'  That  only  'is'  necessary,  the  ac-
tuality of  which  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  lacking,
whenever  a  definite  presupposed  condition  actually
takes  place.

But  it  is  very  easy  to  understand  whence  comes
the wish to place in opposition to this "  condi-


IDEA OF THE 'NECESSARY.  1 3

tioned  necessary  "  another  of  a  higher  sort.  For  a
given  c,  which  must  of  course  exist  in  case  a  deter-
minate b  exists,  is  '  necessary '  only  in  the  sense  of
its  being  forced.  By  means  of  its  own  nature
merely,  and  without  the  aid  of  b,  this  c  would  not
exist.  The  '  necessary  '  in  that  higher  sense  which
is  sought,  would  therefore  be  such  an  one  as  is  not
dependent  on  anything  else  for  its  existence,  and
consequently  is  not  conditioned.

But  it  is  entirely  incorrect  to  persist  in  designat-
ing such  an  unconditioned  as  is  sought  for,  by  the
predicate  'necessary.'  It  must  rather  be  called
the  absolute  matter  of  fact,  which  exists  for  the
reason  merely  that  it  does  exist ;  which  does  not
need  for  its  existence  any  extraneous  condition ;
but  which,  for  precisely  this  reason,  can  only  be  an
actual  and  never  a  necessary  existence.

§  9.  According  to  the  analysis  made  above,  the
thoughts  of  the  cosmological  argument  do  not  co-
here well.  From  the  so-called  'contingent,' — i.e.
from  that  which  is  conditioned  by  something  else
external  to  it,  and  in  just  this  respect  must  be
called  likewise  necessary,  —  it  is  certainly  possible
to  ascend  to  the  Unconditioned,  whose  existence
is  dependent  on  nothing  else ;  but  for  this  very
reason such an unconditioned is not 'necessary,'


14  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

but  merely  matter  of  fact  or  actual.  The  desire  to
find  something,  which  by  means  of  its  own  nature,
made  its  own  existence  necessary,  is  intrinsically
beyond  the  possibility  of  realization,  —  as  we  saw  it
to  be  in  the  case  of  the  ontological  argument ;  and
to  this  cause  was  due  also  the  failure  of  the  thought
that  the  Unconditioned  which  is  sought  is  to  be
found  in  a  most  perfect  Being.  To  that  merely
actual  (not  necessary)  unconditioned  existence,  the
smallest,  meanest,  and  most  insignificant  thing  has
just  as  good  a  claim  as  the  most  perfect ;  and  that
precisely  for  the  reason  that  it  is  an  unconditioned
existence,  and  therefore  is  dependent  on  no  reasons
of  any  kind.

In  another  direction  also  the  cosmological  argu-
ment goes  farther  than  its  premises  permit.  It  was
legitimate  to  seek  an  Unconditioned  for  the  Condi-
tioned in  the  world ;  but  it  is  an  altogether  arbi-
trary leap  to  assume  that  this  Unconditioned  must
be  One  ;  and,  furthermore,  that  it  can  be  conceived
of  only  in  the  form  of  a  single  real  Being.  It
is  possible  that  this  assumption  may  be  justified
subsequently;  but  just  at  this  point  the  other  as-
sumption, to  which  the  natural  sciences  have  come
through  their  need  of  interpreting  the  world,  obvi-
ously lies  much  nearer  at  hand.  We  refer  to  the
assumption  of a  very  great multiplicity  of uncon-


A SINGLE UNCONDITIONED BEING.  1 5

ditionally  existing  elements,  which  are  independent
of  each  other,  and  are  only  subject  to  a  general
sphere  of  laws  in  accordance  with  which  the  mani-
fold phenomena  proceed  from  their  changeable  posi-
tions with  respect  to  each  other.

One  more  consideration  of  a  logical  character
must  first  qualify  this  view.  It  is  that  we  get  no
insight  as  to  how  a  single  unconditioned  being,
even  though  it  were  in  existence,  would  be  able  to
condition  anything  else,  and  therefore  serve  as  the
desired  initial  member  in  the  conditioned  series  of
the  world's  events.  A  conclusion  or  a  consequence
never  follows  except  from  the  concurrence  of  two
premises,  and  not  from  one  premise  alone.  To  the
one  unconditioned  Being,  therefore,  if  aught  is  to
result  from  it,  there  would  always  have  to  be  added
again  other  accessory  circumstances,  which  do  not
emanate  from  it,  but  which  are  just  as  much  uncon-
ditioned :  the  world  therefore  would  not  be  depend-
ent upon  one,  but  upon  many  unconditioned  begin
nings.

§  10.  The  teleological  argument  proposes  to  make
that  empirical  conformity  to  an  end,  which  appears
in  the  world,  the  point  of  departure  for  an  inference
with  respect  to  a  single  designing  and  creative  rea-
son, as  the  supreme  cause  of  the  world.


l6  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

Let  us  in  the  first  place  investigate  the  con-
ception of  that  which  is  '  conformable  to  an  end,'
as  such.  This  conception  is  entirely  free  from
ambiguity  only  when  we  take  our  start  from  the
conscious  purposes  of  our  own  will,  which  are
fixed  upon  a  determinate  result  as  their  end.  In
that  case,  what  is  '  conformable  to  an  end  '  is  the
selection  or  combination  of  means,  which,  by  their
legitimate  action,  bring  about  the  realization  of  the
aforesaid  end.  To  call  those  means  themselves
'  conformable  to  an  end  '  is,  properly  speaking,  not
correct.  They  are  themselves  merely  serviceable :
that  is  to  say,  their  nature  is  in  itself  calculated
for  no  determinate  end  whatever,  such  as  we  might
set  for  ourselves  ;  but  it  is  merely  of  such  sort
that  a  useful  application  of  it  to  our  ends  be-
comes possible  for  us.

Now  that  this  '  serviceableness '  or  '  accidental
conformity '  of  things  in  the  world  to  an  end,  is
of  very  frequent  occurrence,  proves  nothing  further.
For  when  once  there  exist  Things  with  properties
of  their  own  and  with  established  methods  of  ac-
tion, it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  some  of  our
designs  (which  themselves,  in  the  last  analysis,
always  amount  to  the  same  as  some  alteration
in  the  states  of  Things)  may  be  accomplished  by
means of the activity  to  which other  Things lay


IMMANENT CONFORMITY TO END.  \J

claim.  More  than  this,  however,  does  not  in  reality
take  place.  The  nature  of  Things  is  not  so  emi-
nently useful,  that  it  would  be  sufficient  for  the  ac-
complishment even  of  all  authorized  designs  ;  and  it
is  not  so  absolutely  useful  that  it  might  not  serve
just  as  well  for  the  frustration  of  that  which  is
rational,  and  for  the  production  of  that  which  is
unauthorized.

§  11.  In  contrast  with  the  aforesaid  utility,  an
"immanent  conformity  to  an  end"  is  spoken  of,
which  appears  primarily  in  the  individual  organisms
that  have  no  other  end  beyond  their  own  existence,
but  in  each  one  of  which  all  parts  are  recipro-
cally related  as  end  and  means.  Such  conformity
to  an  end  is  then  transferred  from  these  individ-
ual organisms  to  the  Universe,  as  to  a  "great  or-
ganism."

Now  we  are  accustomed  to  assert  that  these  com-
posite forms  cannot  possibly  be  mere  products  of
the  blind  co-operation  of  many  elements,  without  the
unity  of  one  controlling  design.  Such  a  conclusion
is  decidedly  false.  Even  supposing  a  conscious  de-
sign to  be  demonstrably  at  work,  still  the  realiza-
tion of  its  end  is  always  dependent  on  the  fact,  that
every  particle  of  this  end  is  likewise  the  inevita-
ble and  undesignedly  necessary  product  of  the  co-


1 8  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

operation  of  the  means  summoned  to  aid.  The
end  would  not  be  possible  at  all  if  it  were  impossi-
ble in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  mechanism
which  these  means  follow ;  and  it  would  not  be
actual,  if  it  were  not  also  necessary  in  accordance
with  these  laws,  at  the  very  instant  when  the  afore-
said means  are  applied.

But  still  further :  It  is  supposed  that  at  least  the
bringing  together  of  the  means  themselves,  into
those  positions  in  which  they  are  of  necessity  com-
pelled to  realize  the  end,  is  impossible  without  a
controlling  design.  But  again  it  may  be  answered :
Even  where  this  design  actually  exists,  it  is  unable
to  bring  the  usable  means  into  those  useful  posi-
tions by  its  own  mere  volition ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is
able  to  accomplish  this  only  by  summoning  physical
agencies  and  forces  of  a  sort  similar  to  the  means
themselves.  Therefore  the  state  attained  at  any
given  instant,  when  the  end  is  accomplished,  must
be  regarded  as  the  necessary  resultant  of  the  co-
operation of  these  forces  at  the  preceding  instant ;
and  instead  of  an  intelligence  which  might  ex-
plain the  state  of  the  case  belonging  to  this  pre-
ceding instant,  there  may  always  be  substituted  a
combination  of  other  blind  elements  and  forces
which  were  compelled  to  have  precisely  the  same
result.


IMMANENT CONFORMITY TO END.


To  state  the  same  thing  briefly  :  The  completely
automatic  blind  origin  even  of  the  system  most
conformable  to  an  end,  is  never  impossible ;  it  is
only  improbable.  And  now  the  question  comes,
what  is  meant  by  this  latter  expression  ?

§  12.  If  we  take  for  granted,  that  an  indefinite
multitude  of  different  elements  act  upon  one  an-
other entirely  in  accordance  with  mechanical  laws,
and  that  they  were  aboriginally  in  reciprocal  mo-
tions which  were  not  regulated  by  any  design,  then
there  might  issue  from  such  conditions  innumera-
ble possible  consequences.  The  forms  possessed  of
an  immanent  conformity  to  an  end  would  represent
only  a  very  insignificant  number  among  these  pos-
sible consequences ;  and  therefore  they  would  have
very  little  probability  of  coming  into  existence.  But
to  reason  back  from  this  to  a  design  proposing
an  end,  would  be  valid  only  in  case  the  forms  con-
formable to  the  end  alone  appeared  in  the  world ;
and  in  case  those  other  results  that  are  without
an  end,  or  in  contradiction  to  an  end,  were  neither
present  in  experience,  nor  needed  to  be  assumed
even  as  having  existed  in  the  past.

Neither  of  the  above-mentioned  suppositions  cor-
responds with  the  facts.  In  our  actual  observation
there  occur  innumerable  cases  of  disease  and  of  the


20  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

failure  of  rational  life-ends;  —  to  say  nothing  what-
ever of  the  very  many  facts  and  occurrences  which,
so  far  as  our  discernment  extends,  are  at  least  with-
out an  end,  even  if  they  disturb  no  other  end.  But
with  reference  to  the  past  we  are  at  liberty  to  as-
sume, that  at  first  an  innumerable  multitude  of  in-
harmonious forms,  intrinsically  hostile  to  any  end,
actually  emerged  from  the  reciprocal  impact  of  blind
elements  ;  that  these  forms,  however,  were  not  able
to  maintain  themselves  in  the  course  of  nature,  as
against  the  constant  assaults  from  without ;  that,  on
the  contrary,  only  those  few  held  out,  which  had
chanced  to  be  the  more  fortunate  ;  that  then  these
fortunate  ones  exerted  more  and  more  a  determin-
ing influence  upon  the  rest ;  and  that  thus  gradu-
ally it  has  come  to  pass,  that  nature  runs  its  course,
not  indeed  in  complete  perfection  and  conformity  to
an  end,  but  after  all  to  such  an  extent  that  there
still  remain  but  few  disturbances  or  interferences
by  which  the  development  and  perpetuation  of  the
structures  that  are  conformable  to  an  end,  is  en-
dangered. In  this  way,  therefore,  it  would  not  be
unthinkable  that  an  original  chaos  gradually  shaped
itself  into  a  nature'  that  is  arranged  in  conformity
to  ends.


INTELLIGENT ELEMENTS OF REALITY.  21

§  13.  Moreover,  it  is  not  necessary  to  stop  with
the  altogether  meagre  assumptions  which  we  have
made.  If  it  is  once  held  to  be  conceivable  that
a  single  supreme  intelligence  may  exert  an  influ-
ence upon  the  reciprocal  relations  of  the  elements
of  the  world,  then  similar  intelligence  may  also  be
imagined  as  immediately  active  in  all  these  indi-
vidual elements  themselves ;  and,  instead  of  con-
ceiving them  as  controlled  merely  by  blindly  op-
erative forces,  they  may  be  imagined  as  animated
spiritual  beings,  who  strive  after  certain  states  and
offer  resistance  to  certain  other  states.  In  such
case  there  may  be  imagined  the  gradual  origin  of
ever  more  perfect  relations,  from  the  reciprocal
action  of  these  elements,  almost  like  the  reciprocal
action  of  a  human  society ;  and  that  too  without
necessarily  arriving  at  the  assumption,  to  which  we
are  here  inclined,  of  a  single,  supreme,  intelligent
Being.  Our  reasoning  issues  rather  in  a  sort  of
polytheistic  or  even  pantheistic  conception,  and  that
too  in  quite  tolerable  agreement  with  experience.

§  14.  Against  what  was  said  above  it  may  still
be  objected,  that  the  persistence,  the  power  of  self-
maintenance,  and  the  equipoise  of  the  more  for-
tunate forms,  which  we  previously  admitted  to  have
originated in the  blind course of nature, are  not


22  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

identical  with  that  conformity  to  an  end,  the  ad-
miration for  which  was  our  point  of  departure  in
the  teleological  argument.  The  aforesaid  mere  equi-
poise, and  the  permanence  that  originates  from  it,
might  also  belong  of  themselves  to  altogether  pur-
poseless forms ;  that  is  to  say,  to  forms  whose  entire
existence  would  have  absolutely  no  immediate  value
and  no  rational  significance.  Both  these  character-
istics however  we  suppose  we  recognize  in  those
structures  conformable  to  an  end,  which  we  are  here
making  our  point  of  departure.

There  is  a  remainder  of  truth  in  the  above-men-
tioned view;  but  the  thought  does  not  prove  what
it  was  assumed  to  prove.  To  wit,  so  soon  as  we
confine  ourselves  simply  to  admiration  for  an  imma-
nent conformity  to  an  end,  we  are  in  fact  scarcely
ever  able  to  demonstrate  conclusively  that  the  total
result  which  is  produced  by  it  is  actually  anything
of  absolute  value ;  —  a  value  which  would  have  to
be  apprehended  either  as  being  generically  its  own
end,  or  as  being  such  an  end  as  to  admit  of  our
understanding  that  it  could  have  been  devised  only
by  a  designing  wisdom,  and  that  it  only,  rather  than
one  of  its  opposites,  was  worthy  of  this  wisdom.

We  admire,  for  example,  the  stability  of  the  plan-
etary system ;  we  believe  that  only  a  Providence
has  been  able  to  choose  from  among  the  innumer-


MEANS AND END IN ORGANISM.  23

able  possible  arrangements  of  its  masses,  precisely
that  one  on  which  this  stability  depends.  But  it
may  be  questioned  whether  after  all  this  constant
repetition  of  the  same  occurrences  is,  as  a  matter
of  course,  a  supreme  end  ;  and  whether  it  may  not
rather  be  a  tedious  arrangement ;  so  much  so  that
there  might  conceivably  have  been  innumerable
arrangements,  that  never  occur  in  the  actual  world,
which  the  one  succession  of  different  developments
of  the  heavenly  bodies  might  have  established,  —
something  much  more  manifold,  novel,  and  inter-
esting. In  plants,  after  they  once  exist,  everything
harmonizes  as  means  and  end.  But  what  is  the
value  of  their  entire  existence  ?  Ends  external  to
themselves,  which  they  serve,  are  accomplished  by
them  ;  but  they  might  possibly  have  been  accom-
plished by  a  shorter  method.  Their  own  growth
and  bloom  is  in  the  estimate  of  our  understanding
an  entirely  purposeless  fact,  in  which  nothing  fur-
ther actually  appears  than  that  equipoise  which  the  '
mechanical  course  of  nature  is  capable  of  produc-
ing, and  from  which  the  conformity  to  an  end  here
assumed  should  be  quite  essentially  distinguished.

The  above-mentioned  consideration  may  be  ex-
tended to  the  world  of  animals  and  men  :  so  long
as  there  are  still  among  the  latter  so  many  com-
plaints about unrealizable  ideals,  the  thought  that


24  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

much  of  the  beauty  we  conceive  has  no  existence
will  continue  to  nullify  the  conclusiveness  of  the
teleological  argument.

§  15.  If  we  summarize  our  thoughts,  there  re-
mains but  one  point  of  a  positive  character,  and
this  is  the  conviction  that  there  is  in  the  world
at  all  events  a  great  deal  of  that  which  is  beautiful
and  great  and  excellent,  —  admiration  for  which  was
the  point  of  departure  for  this  teleological  argu-
ment ;  and  that  it  is  by  no  means  possible  to  get  rid
of  this  argument  by  deducing  all  its  examples  from
the  undesigned  reciprocal  actions  of  innumerable
elements,  working  in  accordance  with  law.  By  such
deduction  we  merely  change  the  location  of  that
which  has  value.  We  are  necessitated  then  to  as-
sert of  just  that  aforesaid  original  nature  of  the
elements,  and  of  their  general  laws  of  action,  that
they  themselves  from  the  very  first  include  within
themselves  the  ground  capable  of  developing  that
which  has  value.

But  the  course  of  thought  given  above  has  ut-
terly failed  as  an  argument  for  the  existence  of  God.
That  Intelligence,  of  which  we  cannot  be  wholly
rid,  admits  just  as  well  of  being  apprehended  as  a
property  adhering  imraanently  to  all  Things ;  or
even,  if  one  is  pleased  to  seek  it  outside  of  Things,


FATE OF THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT.  25

as  a  multiplicity  of  spiritual  beings  or  demons,  who
share  with  each  other  in  the  creation  and  control
of  the  world.  And  each  of  these  assumptions  really
harmonizes  better  with  the  immediate  impression
of  experience  than  the  hasty  assumption  of  one
only  supreme  wisdom,  from  which  as  their  source
the  imperfections  of  the  world,  that  in  fact  are
manifest  to  us,  are  much  more  difficult  to  compre-
hend.

§  16.  The  teleological  argument  was  wrecked  by
the  fact  that  it  was  unable,  with  sufficient  certainty
and  to  a  sufficient  extent,  to  prove  empirically  the
empirical  datum,  which  it  assumed  to  make  its  point
of  departure,  —  namely,  the  world's  conformity  to
an  end.

We  attempt  therefore  to  find  our  point  of  depart-
ure in  a  simpler  datum,  which  is  not  so  doubtful,
and  which  is  quite  as  generally  acknowledged.  And
we  attempt  to  deduce  from  it,  not  exactly  the
existence  of  God,  but  a  more  modest  conclusion,
which  shall  serve  us  as  a  preliminary  condition  for
that  other  conclusion.

This  datum  is  in  substance  the  assumption  that
all  the  elements  of  the  world,  without  exception,
act  upon  each  other,  no  matter  whether  adapted  to
an end or the reverse ; and therefore that each


26  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

exerts  influences  upon  the  rest,  or,  in  turn,  receives
influences  from  them.  So  far  as  our  experience
extends,  it  confirms  this  assumption.  The  objec-
tion against  it,  that  we  know  little  of  the  past,  and
absolutely  nothing  of  the  future,  and  that  even  in
the  present  perhaps  individual  elements  do  not
stand  in  any  relation  of  reciprocal  action  with  each
other,  cannot  refute  the  assumption.  For  this  in-
difference just  mentioned  between  two  elements  —
a  and  b  —  at  the  same  time  that  each  individual
element  stands  in  a  relation  of  reciprocal  action
with  many  others,  we  should  after  all  never  be  com-
pelled to  regard  as  a  fact  devoid  of  all  principle,
but  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  same  'law/
in  accordance  with  which  a  and  h  exercise  the  afore-
said other  reciprocal  actions.  And  just  so,  if  in
the  past  or  future  these  actions  of  the  elements
with  respect  to  each  other,  were  different  from
what  they  are  now ;  yet  we  should  not  regard
even  this  as  a  fact  independent  of  conditions,  but
as  conditioned  by  some  fixed  law,  which  sooner  or
later  would  demand  other  actions  with  the  same
consistency  with  which  it  now  demands  the  ones
in  question.

If  what  was  said  above  be  not  acknowledged,  but
if  it  were  maintained  rather  that  the  elements  of  the
world,  without  any  cause,  have  sometimes  acted  upon


THE ORIGINAL ELEMENTS RELATED.  2J

each  other,  in  general,  and  at  other  times  not  at
all,  at  one  time  thus  and  at  another  time  otherwise  ;
then  the  very  basis  for  every  investigation  would
be  abolished.  Such  a  world  would  furnish  no  data
whatever  for  any  conclusion,  even  with  respect  to
an  event  that  is  to  be  anticipated  within  its  own
limits  merely,  still  less  for  any  conclusion  with  re-
spect to  anything  external  to  itself,  which  might  be
regarded,  as  in  any  sense,  its  ground,  its  cause,  its
end,  or  its  principle.

§  17.  From  the  foregoing  it  follows  now  that
the  individual  elements,  of  which  the  world  is  com-
posed, are  by  no  means  able  to  exist  as  they  will ;
and  that  therefore  a  course  of  the  world  cannot
be  deduced,  from  real  beings,  which  are  from  the
beginning  wholly  without  relation  to  each  other.

If,  for  example,  all  things  were  as  incomparable
with  each  other  or  as  disparate  as  perhaps  '  red '
or  '  sweet '  (and  nothing  would  prevent  the  making
of  such  an  assumption,  in  case  each  real  being  is
completely  independent,  and  has  to  pay  no  regard
whatever  to  all  the  others),  it  is  evident  that  no
definite  result  could  possibly  spring  from  any  rela-
tion between  two  such  beings  (supposing  one  to  be
at  all  able  to  conceive  of  such  a  '  relation ')  with
any  more  right  than  any  other  could  claim. For,


28  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

in  order  that  the  result  m  must  originate  from  a
and  b,  while  the  same  result  m  could  not  originate
from  a  and  c,  it  is  necessary  that  there  first  exist
between  lb  and  c,  not  a  complete  incomparability,
but  a  definite  contrariety,  or  a  difference  of  definite
magnitude,  —  a  thing  which  is  not  thinkable,  unless
fa  and  c  are  comparable.

The  further  development  of  these  considerations
would  show  then,  that  this  comparability  must  ob-
tain, not  merely  between  fa  and  c,  but  between  all
the  real  elements  of  the  world  ;  and  this  in  such
manner,  that  these  elements  constitute  collectively,
not  members  of  a  single  series,  indeed,  but  rather
members  of  a  system  of  series  intersecting  each
other ;  and  also  in  such  manner  that  it  should  be
possible  for  one  to  proceed  from  the  nature  of  each
individual  element  to  the  nature  of  every  other,  by
a  definite  number  of  steps,  taken  within  this  net-
work of  system.  Such  a  state  of  the  case  lies,  as
a  silent  assumption,  just  as  if  it  were  utterly  im-
possible to  be  otherwise,  at  the  foundation  of  our
entire  view  of  the  world  ;  and,  on  this  account,  the
importance  of  this  wonderful  circumstance  is  com-
monly overlooked.

§  18.  It  would  be  over-rash  to  infer  from  this,
without  further  question,  a  common origin for  all


ALL  ELEMENTS  ARE  COMPARABLE. 29

these  elements.  For  although  this  comparableness
of  theirs  seems  like  a  single  select  case  from  among
many  in  contrast  with  the  empty  possibilities  which
we  might  be  able  to  imagine  (as,  for  example,  that
'all  the  elements  were  as  totally  different  as  '  red/
'sweet,'  or  'warm'),  nevertheless  there  is  appli-
cable to  the  case  no  calculation  of  probabilities,  in
accordance  with  which  it  would  be  impossible  to
accept  the  existence  of  this  particular  case  as  a
mere  matter  of  fact  independently  of  a  common
cause  for  all  the  elements.

On  the  contrary,  a  different  conclusion  is  justi-
fied. It  is  not  enough  that  the  natures  of  Things
are  homogeneous,  unless  the  same  natures  stand
in  some  other  connection  besides.  From  such  ho-
mogeneity it  would  barely  follow  what  result  (c)
must  originate  from  the  meeting  of  two  beings  a
and  h,  —  taking  it  for  granted  that  there  were  in
general  some  reason  why  something  new  must
originate,  and  why  the  mere  existence  of  a  and  1>
and  their  conjunction  could  not  have  been  enough.
Or,  as  expressed  in  other  words  :  The  most  that  fol-
lows from  the  comparable  natures  a  and  b  concerns
the  result  which  they  are  necessitated  to  produce,
or  the  manner  in  which  they  are  necessitated  to
act  upon  one  another  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that
they  must  produce  anything  whatever,  or  that  they
must  act  at  all  upon  each  other.


30  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

In  case  we  draw  a  conclusion  c  from  two  premises
a  and  b,  the  meaning  is  as  follows  :  In  the  unity
of  our  thinking  ego,  the  two  thoughts  a  and  b  can-
not appear  as  states  of  this  ego  without  the  thought
c  being  attached  to  them, — and  this  just  on  account
of  the  nature  of  this  one  subject.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  the  thought  a  were  conceived  by  one  person,
and  the  thought  b  by  another,  then  the  thought  c
would  not  originate  as  a  consequence  in  either  one
of  the  two,  although  c,  and  c  alone,  would  be  the
necessary  result  of  a  and  b  provided  they  came  to-
gether at  all.  The  case  is  exactly  so  with  Things.
From  the  mere  fact  that  one  Thing  a  exists,  and
another  b  exists,  c  does  not  by  any  means  follow,
of  course ;  and  this,  although  c  would  be  the  only
effect  which  could  follow,  provided  a  and  b  acted
upon  each  other.  We  must  investigate  the  ques-
tion what,  in  such  a  case,  would  correspond  to
that  identity  of  the  thinking  subject  by  means  of
which  the  thoughts  a  and  b  alone  are  necessitated
to  produce  a  result.

§  19.  We  derive  from  Metaphysic  the  conviction,
that  this  fact  of  the  reciprocal  influence  of  two
Things  a  and  b  is  impossible,  so  long  as  both  were
conceived  of  as  entirely  self-sufficient  and  in  such
sort  independent  of  each  other,  that  a  might  exist


THINGS AS MODES OF ONE BEING.  3 1

and  be  what  it  is,  even  though  b  had  no  existence.
It  remains  a  completely  insolvable  contradiction,
that  a  and  b  accommodate  themselves  to  each  other
(that  b,  therefore,  enters  into  a  state  p,  as  soon  as
a  enters  into  the  state  a),  if  a  and  b  have  no  con-
cern with  each  other.

We  derive  moreover  from  Metaphysic  the  further
conviction,  that  all  middle  terms,  which  are  inter-
polated between  a  and  b,  such  as  the  •  transition '
of  a  'substance,'  of  an  'influence,'  or  of  a  'force,'
are  either  essentially  inconceivable  ideas,  or  at  any
rate  do  not  at  all  explain  the  action,  but  always
leave  unanswered  the  same  question ;  namely,  how
x  after  its  transition  from  a  to  b  can  begin  the
production  of  a  change  in  b,  —  that  is  to  say,  how
x  can  act  upon  b,  or  how  in  general  one  Thing  can
act  upon  another.

Finally,  we  derive  the  conviction  that  the  afore-
said inconceivableness  can  be  removed  only  by  the
negation  of  the  independence  of  individual  Things  :
a  and  b  cannot  be  absolutely  different  beings,  but
only  modifications  of  one  and  the  same  Being  M,
which  is  in  them  all,  in  a,  b,  c,  d,  .  .  .,  the  truly
Existent ;  and  which  has  indeed  assumed  different
forms  in  all  these  different  Things,  but  still  re-
mains indivisibly  one  and  the  same  individual  M.

If, then, in the single  Thing  a there  occurs  a


32  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

change  a,  this  a  is  eo  ipso,  is  of  itself  already  be-
sides a  change  of  M,  and  has  no  need  first  to
become  such  a  change.  If  then  we  conceive  the
nature  of  M  as  always  endeavoring  to  maintain  its
own  identity,  M  will  now  produce  within  itself  a
second  state  p,  which  occurs  as  a  compensation  to
a,  and  in  connection  with  it  forms  again  an  expres-
sion of  the  whole  nature  of  M.

It  is  not  necessary,  however,  that  this  p  should
appear  in  our  observation  as  a  change  of  a,  but  it
may  appear  as  a  change  of  the  other  individual
Thing  b.  And,  this  would  then  be  the  procedure
which  we  conceive  as  an  "action  of  a  upon  1>."

§  20.  For  the  sake  of  elucidation  the  following
remark  must  be  added :  What  this  one  Being,  or
—  according  to  the  common  expression  —  what  'the
Absolute '  is,  remains  at  first  completely  indeter-
minate. From  the  fact  of  the  reciprocal  action  of
individual  Things,  the  only  conclusion  at  which  we
arrived  was  that  of  the  necessary  unity  of  this
Absolute.  What  it  is,  is  left  for  further  determi-
nation.

Furthermore,  in  designating  Things  as  "  modifi-
cations of  the  Absolute,"  it  is  to  be  acknowledged
that  such  an  expression  contains  no  explanation
whatever  of  the  precise  sort  of  unity  which  obtains


THINGS AS MODES OF ONE BEING.  33

between  Things  and  the  Absolute ;  or  of  the  sort
of  dependence  in  which  they  stand  with  reference
to  that  Absolute.  The  expression  has  rather  the
distinct  negative  meaning  which  denies  the  self-
dependence  of  individual  Things.  With  something
of  like  sort  we  are  frequently  compelled  to  be  sat-
isfied. We  are  very  often  obliged,  for  the  purpose
of  removing  a  contradiction  or  of  explaining  an
occurrence,  to  postulate  a  fact,  with  respect  to
which,  however,  we  are  never  able  to  say  how  it
were  possible  for  it  to  exist,  or  to  have  been
brought  to  pass;  —  and  this,  even  in  case  it  can
be  yet  more  accurately  defined  than  the  fact  that
is  just  now  assumed  by  us.  We  postpone  to  a
subsequent  chapter  whatever  more  there  is  to  be
said  upon  this  point.

Finally ;  even  the  elasticity,  or  self-maintenance,
that  we  attribute  to  the  Absolute,  is  used  in  a
preliminary  way  merely  as  a  not  unimaginable  ex-
pression to  which  different  significations  may  be
given.  It  is  not  necessary  to  conceive  of  the  reac-
tions of  the  Absolute  against  the  changes  that
occur,  as  directed,  in  a  merely  mechanical  way,  to
the  preservation  of  the  status  quo ;  instead  of  this,
we  might  assume  even  an  impulse  of  development
in  progress  towards  a  definite  goal ;  and  that  this
impulse,  likewise, by  means of any  state  a  which


34  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

had  originated  either  elsewhere  or  in  the  prosecu-
tion of  this  purposeful  activity,  would  occasion,  the
production  of  a  further  state  p,  by  which  such  pur-
poseful activity  would  be  propagated  further.  Such
an  assumption,  made  in  a  preliminary  way,  is  a  mat-
ter of  indifference.  It  is  certain  only  that  if  there
is  to  be  any  reciprocal  action  whatever  of  individual
Things,  there  must  be  in  the  Absolute  some  such
consistent  sensibility  as  is  necessitated  to  produce
by  means  of  a  its  consequence  p,  no  matter  whether
it  be  for  self-maintenance  or  for  progress.


CHAPTER II.

MORE PRECISE DETERMINATIONS OF THE ABSOLUTE.

§  21.  It  is  not  our  present  design  to  dissect
logically  the  conception  of  an  *  Absolute,'  and  to  lay
down  the  conditions  under  which  aught  would  be
held  to  be  the  Absolute  or  acknowledged  as  such.
As  far  as  this  is  a  matter  of  interest,  it  is  too
difficult  for  the  present  moment.  Just  now  we  are
rather  making  the  attempt  to  specify  by  name  that
which  is  by  its  own  nature  adapted  to  fulfil  the
conditions  above  alluded  to  ;  and,  of  course,  fulfil
them  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be  recognized  as
the  absolute  Principle  of  that  world  which  is  given
in  experience  as  bare  matter  of  fact.  Not  to  stray
too  far  abroad,  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  two
contraries  between  which  it  has  long  been  custom-
ary to  distribute  the  consistence  of  whatever  is
actual  ; namely,  Matter  and  Spirit.

§  22.  The  assumption  that  the  common  substance'
of  the  world  is  only  matter,  and  matter  as  endowed
only  with  those  properties  which  we  in  physical
science attribute to every portion of the same,


2)6  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

has  probably  never  been  made  in  earnest  by  any
one.

Such  an  assumption  would  take  upon  itself  the
difficult  problem  of  showing  how,  from  these  mere
properties  of  space-filling,  inertia,  divisibility,  and
mobility,  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  therefore
even  its  spiritual  constituents,  could  be  developed
as  a  matter  of  course,  —  that  is  to  say,  as  the  mere
consequences  of  such  properties  and  without  admix-
ture of  any  other  principle  whatever.

Now  Psychology  has  compelled  us  to  the  convic-
tion that  the  states  of  motion  —  which  can  only  be
considered  as  events  that  happen  to  masses  of  the
kind  referred  to  above  —  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
the  occasions  upon  which  there  arise  in  us  spiritual
processes,  such  as  sensations  or  feelings.  But  in
what  way  these  occasions  bring  after  them  these
results  so  unlike  themselves,  is  not  only  not  a  sub-
ject of  empirical  knowledge,  but  it  is  even  possible
to  see  that  we  can  never  reach  the  point  where  it
would  be  for  us  a  matter  of  course  that  a  mode
of  the  motion  of  these  masses,  however  wondrously
intricate,  would  now  have  to  cease  to  remain  such,
and  would  be  necessitated  to  transmute  itself  into
quite  a  different  process,  of  sensation  or  of  feeling.
According  to  all  the  axioms  of  which  we  avail  our-
selves elsewhere  in  the  mechanical  consideration  of


SPIRITUAL AND PHYSICAL PROCESSES.  37

nature,  from  motions  alone  nothing  but  a  transfer-
ence, new  distribution,  propagation  or  arrest,  of
motions  can  originate.  A  spiritual  effect  can  be
attached  to  them  only  indirectly ;  to  wit,  by  means
of  the  action  of  the  aforesaid  physical  processes  on
a  subject  which,  in  its  own  nature,  possesses  that
capacity  for  the  production  of  psychical  processes  in
which  the  motions  themselves  are  wanting.

As  here  in  the  small,  so  also  in  the  totality  of
the  world,  a  Principle  of  barely  material  nature
would  be  in  no  condition  to  produce  from  itself
the  world  of  spiritual  processes.

§  23.  Now  although  each  of  these  two  series  of
events,  the  spiritual  and  the  physical  processes,  re-
quires its  own  peculiar  '  ground '  in  reality,  it  is
nevertheless  not  necessary  that  the  'ground'  of
the  two  be  divided  into  two  different  species  of
reality,  in  such  a  manner  that  there  may  be  mate-
rial Things  devoid  of  all  spiritual  susceptibility,  and
spirits  devoid  of  all  physical  property  and  activity.
The  rather  may  we  first  examine  the  thought  that
both  of  these  original  properties  are  in  fact  insep-
arably united  in  every  existence ;  and  that,  on  ac-
count of  one  of  them,  the  Existent  is  able  to  appear
as,  and  to  pass  for,  matter  ;  while,  on  account  of
the  other,  contrariwise,  it  leads  an  inner  life  and
develops  spiritual  states  within  itself.


38  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

For  the  psychology  of  the  individual  being,  this
assumption,  on  closer  inspection,  is  shown  to  be  un-
productive. For  the  consideration  of  the  world  as  a
whole  it,  at  first,  has  more  to  recommend  it ;  and  it
forms  the  text  of  the  spirited  descriptions  in  which
Pantheism  glorifies  the  unresting  life  of  the  eter-
nally One  Substance,  both  corporal  and  spiritual,
which  in  ceaseless  vicissitude  fashions  its  individual
shapes,  and  lets  them  be  absorbed  again  into  itself.

The  more  definite  formulating  of  these  thoughts,
in  the  case  of  Spinoza  and  Schelling,  arouses  our
scruples  against  them.  When  the  former  (Spinoza)
ascribes  to  the  Absolute  innumerable  kinds  of  doing
and  acting  ('  Attributes ')  that  admit  of  no  compari-
son with  each  other,  —  of  which,  to  be  sure,  only
two,  namely  Thought  and  Extension  {cogitatio  and
extensio)  are  familiar  to  us  men,  —  such  manifold-
ness  obviates  in  some  degree,  at  least  for  the
imagination,  the  difficulty  which  lies  in  the  sin-
gular circumstance,  that  just  those  two  attributes
which  are  not  reducible  to  each  other  are  assumed
to  form  the  essence  of  all  the  Existent.  To  find,
however,  for  both  of  these  attributes  a  still  '  higher
common  root,'  from  which  both  issued  as  mere  con-
sequences, but  did  not  themselves  constitute  such
root  (so  Schelling,)  is  a  problem  that  surpasses  all
human  power  of  comprehension. It  is  indeed  pos-


THE ABSOLUTE AS SPIRIT.  39

sible  to  fashion  the  name  of  such  a  '  First  Absolute,'
which  is  neither  real  nor  ideal,  and  yet  is  the  ground
of  both.  But  it  is  not  possible  to  discover  any-
thing in  the  entire  world,  of  which  it  could  be  said
that  it  belongs  to  this  thing,  by  virtue  of  its  own
nature,  to  be  esteemed  as  such  a  common  root.

Since,  therefore,  the  goad  of  this  Dualism  cannot
be  got  rid  of,  and  a  substance  that  is  merely  real
and  acts  blindly  does  not  suffice  for  explaining  the
world,  we  find  herein  one  of  the  motives  that  lead
us  to  the  opposite  attempt,  —  to  the  pure  Spiritual-
ism which  undertakes  to  comprehend  the  spirit
alone  as  truly  existent,  and  all  else  as  its  product.

§  24.  The  above-mentioned  views,  on  being  carried
out  further,  are  wont  by  preference  to  invalidate  yet
more  the  spiritual  element  of  the  Absolute.  Such
views  customarily  announce  this  element  as  a  rea-
son that  is  'per  se  unconscious '  ;  that  only  in  indi-
vidual points  of  its  extreme  altitude,  in  individual
spiritual  beings,  raises  itself  to  consciousness.

Such  a  form  of  conception  as  the  foregoing  ap-
pears inadmissible.  We  have  no  right  to  strip  off
from  the  Reason,  which  we  invariably  first  learn
by  experience  to  know  as  conscious,  this  predicate
of  consciousness,  and  then  persuade  ourselves  that
aught  intelligible  is  left still  remaining. Rather  is


40  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

it  true  that  only  one  definite  thought  admits  of
being  connected  with  the  expression,  a  reason  act-
ing unconsciously  in  the  world ;  to  wit,  the  thought
that  blind  forces  act  in  the  world,  which  are  not  in
any  respect  reason,  but  which  in  fact  act  so  that
their  results  are  the  same  as  those  which  a  reason
acting  in  the  world  would  have  been  compelled  to
desire.

At  this  point  the  additional  misfortune  comes  to
view,  that  the  aforesaid  proposition  does  not  ad-
mit of  being  proved  with  reference  to  any  kind  of
nature's  action.  For,  in  order  to  do  this,  it  were
necessary  to  show  that  the  results  of  her  action  are
the  fulfilment  of  those  absolute  ends  which  reason
would  have  been,  not  merely  able  to  propose  to  itself,
but  compelled  to  propose  as  the  ones  justified  in
the  highest  degree.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  appraise
what  is  actually  achieved  in  nature  at  a  lower  value,
and  assume  that  it  could  have  been  still  better,  but
is  not  so,  then  we  should  be  quite  as  much  justified
in  speaking  of  an  treason  acting  blindly  in  the
world.

But  apart  from  this,  it  is  clear  according  to  what
was  said  above,  that  a  self-conscious  reason  could
never  originate  as  a  final  product  from  such  powers  ;
rather  should  we  have  to  be  satisfied  with  uncon-
sciousness throughout  the  entire  world.


IMPERSONAL SPIRIT IMPOSSIBLE.  41

It  is  wrong  also  to  appeal  to  the  analogy  of  our
own  spirit,  which,  without  conscious  design,  in-
stinctively produces  many  of  its  rational  works ;
such,  for  example,  as  those  of  art.  We  admit
the  existence  of  such  activities ;  but  we  know
of  them  in  absolutely  no  other  case  than  that  of
spirits  whose  nature  it  is  to  be  self-conscious :
moreover,  they  appear  in  this  case  as  actions  ac-
companying or  following  excitations  and  states
which  were  originally  possible  only  in  conscious-
ness, but  which  in  time  vanish  from  consciousness
by  reciprocal  inhibition.  How,  on  the  other  hand,
anything  similar  could  take  place  in  a  subject,  in
whose  nature  no  consciousness  had  ever  preceded
such  activities,  is  not  in  the  slightest  degree  com-
prehensible.

§  25.  In  connection  herewith,  the  same  view  is
fond  of  speaking  of  an  impersonal  Spirit.

This,  too,  is  much  easier  to  say  than  by  it  men-
tally to  represent  anything.  It  is  quite  correct
that,  in  our  own  spiritual  life,  we  experience
manifold  states  in  which  all  attention  to  our  own
self,  and  all  positing  of  that  self  over  opposite  to
an  external  world,  are  completely  gone  ;  and  we
so  lose  ourselves  in  the  content  of  a  sensation,
an idea, a feeling, or an effort, that we (so to


42  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

speak)  are  for  a  time  nothing  but  this,  as  it  were,
self-apprehending  content,  and  not  a  subject  which
had  this  content  as  an  object  of  its  consciousness
and  distinguished  it  from  itself.

But  it  is  just  as  certain  that  we  know  such
states  only  as  occurrences  in  an  otherwise  per-
sonal spirit.  They  merely  prove  that  it  is  not
necessary  for  the  personal  spirit  at  every  moment
to  think  of  itself  as  different  from  the  content
which  exactly  fills  out  its  consciousness.  But  they
cannot  prove  that  anything  similar  is  possible
without  the  personality,  which,  in  such  a  case,
does  not  indeed  mentally  represent  itself,  but
none  the  less  remains  in  fact  the  condition  of
the  possibility  of  such  a  self-forgetfulness.  For
all  the  aforesaid  sensations,  ideas,  or  feelings,
in  which  we  thus  lose  ourselves,  are  after  all
never  thinkable  except  as  states  of  a  definite,
self -identical  and  separate  spiritual  subject  ;  and
not  the  least  consecutiveness,  nor  any  coherency
according  to  law  between  these  different  spiritual
states,  would  be  possible,  unless  the  personal  unity
of  the  spirit,  which  is  by  no  means  apparent  in
them,  were  for  all  that  the  real  ground  which
unites  them  with  one  another.


IMPERSONAL SPIRIT IMPOSSIBLE.  43

§  26.  It  is  further  adduced  in  support  of  the
above-mentioned  view  that  even  the  'personality'
with  which  we  have  an  acquaintance,  —  to  wit,
that  of  the  human  soul,  —  first  originates  in  the
course  of  its  development.  As  originally  given
there  exist,  it  is  said,  only  common  spiritual  capa-
cities which,  by  means  of  favorable  circumstances,
are  aroused  to  expression  in  such  manner  that,
from  the  combination  of  these  expressions,  a
reflection  directed  toward  self  and  a  self-con-
sciousness  can also originate.

Just  so,  it  is  claimed,  the  Absolute  at  first  is
impersonal  Spirit.  At  this  point  views  are  di-
vided :  one  makes  the  Absolute,  just  like  the
finite  spirit,  attain  to  a  personality  of  its  own ;
the  other  makes  it  always  remain  of  itself  imper-
sonal and  only  assume  personal  form  in  individual
ones  of  its  products,  that  is  in  finite  spirits.

The  first  view  is  for  the  present  time  a  useless
curiosity.  For  us  it  would  hardly  be  of  any
value  religiously,  that  the  Absolute  has  attained
to  personality  at  the  conclusion  of  its  develop-
ment. On  the  contrary,  an  account  of  the  way
in  which  this  result  is  reached  is  demanded  by
no  religious  need,  but  at  the  very  most  only  by
speculative  curiosity.

The other view would be compelled to assert


44  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

that  the  Absolute,  of  itself  unconscious  and  imper-
sonal, produces  even  in  its  blind  development  the
favoring  conditions  under  which  its  own  products,
the  finite  spirits,  developed  the  personality  denied
to  itself.  This  is  likewise  an  opinion  that  answers
to  no  religious  need ;  and  least  of  all  to  the  neces-
sity of  making  intelligible  from  a  single  real  prin-
ciple, not  merely  the  external  course  of  the  world,
but  also  its  moral  order,  and  the  fact  that  it  fur-
nishes us  with  obligatory  ideals  of  the  Good  and
the Holy.

In  this  way  it  is  made  apparent  that  very  pow-
erful motives  impel  the  religious  spirit,  at  last,
straight  to  the  conception  of  a  personal  God,  and
do  not  permit  it  to  shrink  back  from  the  many
difficulties  that  lie  in  this  conception  also.


CHAPTER III.

THE METAPHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES OF GOD.

§  27.  We  abandon  the  previous  train  of  thought
and  now  consider  the  conception  of  God  as,  on
the  basis  of  the  incentives  depicted  in  the  last
chapter,  by  means  of  a  long  spiritual  labor  of  the
centuries  and  essentially  harmonious,  it  lies  before
us  perfected  in  the  monotheistic  religions.  We
consider,  first,  the  formal  or  metaphysical  deter-
minations.

That  God  is  but  One,  and  that  polytheism  is
therefore  excluded,  we  pass  with  a  bare  allusion.
Many  Gods,  if  each  lived  independent  in  his  own
world,  would  be  a  useless  and  adventurous
thought  ;  but  if  they  met  each  other  with  their
activity  in  one  and  the  same  world,  then  they
would  necessarily  be  finite  beings,  which  acted
on  each  other  and  suffered  effects  from  each
other  in  accordance  with  certain  laws  appointed
over  them.

The  religious  nature  does  not  understand  the
1  Unity  of  God '  in  the  aforesaid  numerical  mean-
ing. It  does  not  intend  to  affirm  that  God  is
in fact only one, while by way of imagination


46  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

there  might  possibly  be  beside  him  still  others
of  his  own  kind.  It  means  rather  that  God  is
an  only  God  ;  that  is  to  say,  there  is  no  superior
general  concept  of  a  God,  of  such  sort  that  all
the  predicates  which  might  belong  to  the  actual
God  as  an  example  of  this  concept  of  species,
would  ensue  from  it  just  as  much  conditioned  and
prescribed  as  in  the  case  of  every  finite  creature,
from  whose  concept  of  species  ensues  the  limit
within  which  its  properties  and  their  reciprocal
combination  can  vary.

This  absolute  independence  of  the  Highest  Prin-
ciple, which  does  not  admit  of  its  being  in  any
way  subordinated  to  one  still  higher,  —  as  though
it  were  effect  or  even  mere  example  of  the  latter,
—  will  appear  to  us  subsequently  in  the  different
consequences  which  are  to  be  drawn  from  it,  as
one  of  the  most  important  of  the  formal  deter-
minations.

§  28.  To  a  second  formal  predicate,  that  of
Unchangeableness,  the  religious  feeling  does  not
attach  the  same  meaning  as  seems  to  accord  with
this  title.

Perfectly  unchangeable  substances  would,  of
course,  be  philosophically  useless  assumptions  even
for the explanation of nature ; but still, if one


THE PREDICATE OF OMNIPRESENCE.  47

chooses  to  avoid  certain  questions  as  to  first  prin-
ciples, such  substances  always  admit  of  being  em-
ployed for  the  intermediate  explanation  of  processes
one  from  the  other.  A  God,  on  the  contrary,  who
should  be  without  changeable  inner  states  forever
perfectly  self-identical,  would  answer  to  no  religious
need.

We  need,  in  brief,  a  living  God ;  and,  there-
fore, by  his  '  unchangeableness '  nothing  further  is
meant  than  the  consistency  with  which  all  these
inner  states  proceed  from  a  nature  that  remains
the  same.  On  this  point  we  are  in  accord  with
Metaphysic  also,  which  requires  of  the  nature  of
all  substances  —  even  of  such  as  are  finite  —  only
this  consistent  exclusiveness  of  the  series  of  forms
within  which  each  being  among  them  varies ;  it
does  not,  however,  require  the  monotony  and  rigid-
ity of  a  perfect  unchanging  self-likeness.

§  29.  A  third  formal  predicate,  Omnipresence,
seems  only  at  first  sight  to  ascribe  to  God  an  at-
tribute of  spatiality  such  as  we  otherwise  impute
merely  to  matter.  The  religious  meaning  of  this
expression  signifies  rather  the  opposite.

Concerning  finite  things  we  know  that  if  they
act  upon  each  other  immediately,  it  is  only  when
in spatial contact, and  therefore  where  they  are ;


48  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

on  the  contrary,  if  they  act  at  a  distance,  it  is  only
mediately  (by  means  of  the  propagation  of  their
first  action  to  elements  lying  between)  :  or  we  know
that,  if  we  concede  to  them  an  immediate  action
from  afar,  this  action  at  least  has  its  maximum
when  the  nearness  is  greatest,  and  diminishes  as
the  distance  increases.

Both  limitations  are  supposed  not  to  be  true  of
God.  If  he  wills  to  act  upon  any  element  of  the
world,  then  his  activity  is  supposed  not  to  have  to
traverse  any  way,  long  or  short,  up  to  the  point
where  such  element  exists.  Conversely,  if  an  ele-
ment of  the  world  —  for  example,  a  finite  spirit
with  his  prayer  —  wills  to  act  upon  God,  then  it  is
not  necessary  to  traverse  any  way  in  order  to  dis-
cover God,  as  though  he  had  a  definite  position  in
space.  The  rather  is  the  activity  of  God  everywhere
alike  immediately  and  perfectly  present,  without  dif-
ference of  degree.

Only  this  is  meant  by  'Omnipresence.'  On  the
contrary,  no  one  ever  had  any  interest  in  ascribing
positively  to  God  himself,  as  one  of  his  attributes,
the  predicate  of  an  infinitely  great  extension  in
space.  Quite  the  opposite,  the  simple  design  has
been  held  of  denying  with  reference  to  him  in
every  respect  that  power  to  put  under  conditions
which  space-limitation  exercises  upon  the  recipro-
cal action  of  finite  beings.


THE PREDICATE OF OMNIPOTENCE.  49

§  30.  The  predicate  of  Omnipotence  obviously
presupposes  that  conceptions  of  activity,  either
barely  transforming  or  else  creative,  have  some
applicability  to  God ;  and,  under  this  presupposi-
tion, it  is  then  sought  to  exalt  the  power  of  God
absolutely  above  all  bounds ;  but  in  the  ordinary
conception  of  this  attribute  such  a  result  is  not
obtained.

The  simplest  interpretation  of  Omnipotence,  that
"  God  can  do  all  possible,"  does  not  satisfy  the
religious  feeling ;  we  should  thus  obtain  only  the
relatively  greatest  one  of  those  finite  forces  which,
collectively,  are  obliged  to  acknowledge  certain  lim-
its of  'possibility'  that  stand  fixed  independently
of  them.  God  would  therefore  be  subjected  to  a
sphere  of  laws  antecedent  even  to  himself,  which
would  determine  for  him  the  free  scope  of  his  power.

The  other  explanation  — "  God  can  make  even
the  impossible  to  be  possible  and  actual"  —  without
doubt  expresses  the  real  heart-meaning  of  the  re-
ligious feeling,  but,  in  the  aforesaid  way  of  formu-
lating it,  appears  absurd  and  unthinkable.  For  all
order,  all  consistency  and  all  coherency  of  the  world
appear  to  depend  upon  the  limits  between  the
possible  and  the  impossible  being  absolutely  im-
movable. If  that  which  is  of  itself  impossible  can
once be made possible by any power whatever,


5<D  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

then  every  sure  foundation  for  making  any  conclu-
sion whatever  in  relation  to  the  coherency  of  the
world  falls  away.

But  even  this  last  explanation  does  the  very
thing  for  which  it  finds  fault  with  the  first ;  it
assumes  that  this  distinction  of  the  impossible
from  the  possible  already  exists  independently  of
God.  God  finds  them  both  already  determined  and
authenticated  by  means  of  a  truth  that  is  independ-
ent of  himself ;  and  only  in  practice  does  the  ca-
pacity belong  to  him  of  withdrawing  aught  that  is
subordinated  to  the  self-authenticated  conception
of  the  impossible,  from  the  domain  of  this  concep-
tion, and  of  disposing  it  under  the  conception  of
the  possible.

The  thought  mentioned  above  is  neither  sound
in  general,  nor  is  such  an  omnipotence  actually
unlimited.  Rather  must  we  arrive  at  such  an
apprehension  of  God  as  makes  God  himself  to  be
the  prime  reason  for  the  opposition  of  the  possible
and  the  impossible  having  any  significance  at  all
in  the  world  of  actual  existence.

This  thought,  which  is  hard  to  define  in  the
present  connection,  we  shall  pursue  further  later
on.  For  our  immediate  purpose,  that  which  is  of
religious  value  in  it  permits  of  being  most  simply
and  effectively  expressed  in  the  not quite  correct


THE  PREDICATE  OF  ETERNITY.  5  I

form  that  "  God  can  do  even  the  impossible."
This  form  at  least  states  one  thing  clearly,  —  to
wit,  that  the  impossible  is  no  barrier  for  God.

§  31.  The  predicate  of  Eternity  in  time  depends
upon  different  motives ;  first,  as  may  be  readily
understood,  upon  the  need  that  we  be  able  to  re-
gard what  is  to  be  our  support  and  our  consolation
as  at  no  time  ready  to  fail.  But  then,  apart  from
every  religious  need,  eternal  duration  is  aestheti-
cally an  imposing  idea  on  account  of  a  sublimity
which  is  worthy  of  the  Absolute  Principle.

But  the  aforesaid  expression,  nevertheless,  does
not  itself  depend  upon  our  seeing  any  value  or  any
advantage  in  the  bare  filling-up  of  infinite  time.
Just  as  we  did  not  apprehend  omnipresence  as  a
positive  magnitude  in  space,  but  only  as  the  nega-
tion of  all  restrictive  significations  of  space  for  the
action  of  God;  just  so,  'infinite  duration'  signifies
only  the  perfect  independence  of  all  those  condi-
tions that  change  in  time,  by  which  finite  beings
are  constantly  confined  within  a  definite  tract  of
their  possible  existence.

§  32.  Moreover  'Time'  also,  like  Space,  is  not
to  be  thought  of  as  though  it  were  a  somehow
self-existing form, and as though God had only


52  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

the  capacity  of  filling  it  up  by  his  existence,  how-
ever far  it  may  extend.  But  the  difficult  at-
tempts which  have  been  made  to  apprehend  this
relation  otherwise, — to  consider  time  as  in  God,
or  God  as  above  time,  —  we  must  defer  pro-
visionally and  make  prominent  another  point  in-
stead.

God,  as  filling  eternal  time  in  a  perfectly  un-
changeable way,  would  be  a  mental  representation
of  no  service  for  religious  interests.  But  if  God
is  living  and  the  subject  of  change,  —  that  is,  if
anything  whatever  takes  place  within  him,  then
it  follows  that  he  is  in  every  second  instant  an
other  than  he  was  in  the  first  instant  preceding  ;
—  unless  it  can  be  demonstrated  on  other  grounds
in  what  way  that  '  Unity  '  of  his  Being  which  is
for  us  indispensable  is  maintained  continuously
through the course of his changes in time.

Now,  at  this  point  we  derive  from  Metaphysic  the
conviction  that  such  '  Unity  of  a  Being  with  itself '
certainly  presupposes  all  its  successive  states  to  be
comprehensible  as  different  consequences  of  one  and
the  same  nature,  and  —  in  brief — to  cohere  together
in  accordance  with  one  and  the  same  formula ;  but,
likewise,  the  conviction  that  this  presupposition  is
not  at  all  adequate.  For  if  we  also,  the  thinking
subjects,  in  the  series  of  states  a,  av  a2,  a3J  .  .  .,  every-


THE UXITY OF SELF-CONSCIOUS SPIRIT.  53

where  observe  the  secondary  effect  of  the  original
nature  a  of  a  being ;  and  if  we,  on  this  account,
apprehend  such  a  series  as  the  history  of  one  and
the  same  being  a :  still  it  is  in  this  way  by  no
means  yet  proved,  that  this  is  more  than  a  subjec-
tive apprehension  on  our  part  ;  —  that  is  to  say,
that  the  a,  av  a2,  .  .  .,  are  not  different  successive
beings  instead  of  only  successive  states  of  one  and
the  same  Being  (a).

If  the  latter  conclusion  is  to  be  proved,  then  only
the  Being  a  itself  can  prove  it ;  and,  of  course,  only
by  itself  doing  what,  previously,  merely  we,  the
investigating  subjects,  have  done.  The  Being  a
must  comprehend  itself  as  a  'unity';  must,  as
such,  set  itself  over  against  the  series  a,  ax,  .  .  .,  as
mere  states  of  its  own,  and  be  able  to  unite  these
successive  states  into  one  synchronous  state  by
means  of  recollection.  Expressed  in  simple  man-
ner :  In  no  respect  can  we  assert  of  selfless
'Things,'  but  only  of  a  self-conscious  'Spirit,'  that
it  remains  in  the  course  of  its  history  one  and  the
same ;  and,  for  the  very  reason  that  only  it  actual-
izes the  aforesaid  unity  by  means  of  this  deed  of
self-consciousness.  Of  a  'Thing,'  on  the  contrary,
—  since  it  is  merely  subject  to  different  states  one
after another, although in a sequence according


54  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

to  law,  —  there  is  no  decisive  test  by  which  to
prove  the  fact  and  the  means  of  its  distinguishing
itself  from  a  succession  of  different  and  merely
related  Things.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE.

§  33.  The  paradoxical  result  of  the  previous  re-
flections is  as  follows :  If  all  the  predicates  of
'unconditionateness'  are  to  be  valid  for  the  Highest
Being,  then  one  condition  of  this  validity  lies  pre-
cisely in  the  addition  of  a  last  formal  predicate,  —
namely,  that  of  Personal  Existence.

At  the  faith  in  this  ' personality  of  God'  the
religious  faculty,  naturally  enough,  has  not  arrived
by  the  ^above-mentioned  way,  but  from  familiar
motives  that  lie  nearer  at  hand.  Against  this
faith,  however,  philosophic  reflection  has  subse-
quently been  very  unanimously  directed  with  the
assertion:  'Personality'  is  conceivable  only  in  finite
spirits,  and  in  this  case  rests  on  conditions  which
can  have  no  significance  for  the  Absolute.

The  above-mentioned  investigations  concerning
the  possibility  or  impossibility  of  the  assumption
of  a  '  personal  God '  should  be  briefly  repeated  in
this  connection.

§  34.  Two  thoughts  which  we  believe  ourselves
obliged  to  distinguish,  lie  in  the  conception  of  'per-
sonality.'


56  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

First:  No  'personality,'  or  —  what  can  for  the
moment  pass  as  identical  with  it  —  no  '  self-con-
sciousness '  is  conceivable  without  our  ascribing  to
the  spiritual  subject,  to  which  it  is  to  belong,  an
image  of  cognition  or  an  image  of  representation,
of  that  which  this  subject  itself  is,  and  by  means
of  which  it  distinguishes  itself  from  others.  Since
these  images  of  cognition,  as  well  as  those  which
we  project  for  ourselves  from  other  objects,  may
be  more  or  less  either  correct  or  false ;  therefore,
self-consciousness  is  by  no  means  identical  with
'adequate  self-cognition.'  We  are  rather  to  esti-
mate the  different  degrees  of  its  clearness  and  per-
fection exactly  according  to  the  measure  of  the
conformity  of  its  content  with  the  actual  nature  of
the  subject.

But  the  mental  representation  of  the  aforesaid  pic-
ture will  always  deserve  the  title  of  '  self -conscious-
ness '  so  long  as  it  contains  this  second  factor:  —
to  wit,  so  long  as  the  other  additional  thought  is
present,  that  this  mental  image  is  the  image  of
ourselves,  and  is  by  no  means  distinguished  from
any  other  image  merely  in  the  same  way  that  a
second  object  is  distinguished  from  a  third;  but
that  it  is  rather  significant  of  somewhat  which,  as
'ego,'  is  to  be  placed  in  a  fundamental  and  incom-
parable opposition  to  all  else.  This  second  trans-
action we  consider  in  the  first  place.


DEVELOPMENT OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.  57

§  35.  It  is  a  very  common  opinion  that  '  self-con-
sciousness '  is  a  spiritual  phenomenon  which  develops
very  gradually,  and  the  origin  and  necessary  con-
ditions of  which,  accordingly,  have  a  history.

Such  an  opinion  we  recognize  as  correct  only  in
relation  to  the  first  of  the  points  distinguished
above.  To  wit :  We  doubtless  do  not  arrive  at  the
knowledge  of  the  properties  of  which  we  compose
the  before-mentioned  mental  image,  or  at  the  con-
tent of  the  image  of  ourselves  which  we  construct
for  ourselves,  except  by  means  of  an  accumulation
of  external  and  internal  experiences.

But  in  relation  to  the  other  point  we  cannot
assent  to  this  opinion.  It  does  not  admit  of  being
shown  intelligibly,  how,  in  the  course  of  the  pro-
jection of  manifold  mental  representations,  the
moment  must  necessarily  at  some  time  arrive,  when
we  should  be  compelled  to  consider  one  of  these
representations,  not  merely  as  image  of  one  object
which  is  distinguished  from  a  second  only  in  the
same  way  as  the  latter  from  a  third,  but  precisely
as  the  image  of  our  'ego,'  which  stands  in  that
absolute  opposition  to  every  non-ego,  so  easily  in-
telligible but  so  difficult  further  to  describe.

It  will  be  found  that  the  apparent  '  origin '  of
self-consciousness  in  this  sense  always  presupposes
the  latent  previous  existence  of  its  most  essentia]


58  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

element,  —  namely, of a self-feeling in the same
sense.

§  36.  The  materialistic  attempts  to  generate  self-
consciousness  from  all  manner  of  motions  in  brain-
atoms  returning  upon  themselves,  are  deserving  of
no  respect.  As  they  are  unable  in  general  to  de-
duce any  '  consciousness '  from  motions,  so  is  this
return  of  the  motions  also  unable  to  generate  any
^^consciousness.

But,  on  the  whole,  the  frequent  philosophical
assertions  —  Personality  can  only  be  generated  by
an  activity  of  the  ego  proceeding  outward,  and  by
a  resistance  of  the  non-ego  which  '  reflects '  this
activity  upon  its  own  point  of  issue  —  are  not  a
whit  better.  These  modes  of  speech  correspond
to  absolutely  no  demonstrable  and  real  transaction.
Such  an  activity  of  the  ego  proceeding  outward
nowhere  admits  of  being  designated  by  name.
The  analogy  that  it  is  thrown  back  like  rays  of
light  from  the  non-ego,  is  a  mental  image  utterly
without  real  motif  and  one  under  which  it  is  not
possible  to  bring  any  actual  procedure.  The  con-
clusion finally,  that  this  activity  becomes  '  self-con-
sciousness '  by  means  of  such  *  reflection,'  is  a  bare
subreption.  For  it  is  precisely  by  this  means  that
the  mere  return  of  the  activity  to  its  own  point  of


THE IDEA OF THE EGO.  59

issue  is  occasioned.  But  that  it  should  now  be
compelled  to  apprehend  this  point  as  its  own  self,
—  and  hence  the  precise  origin  of  self-conscious-
ness,—  is  a  mere  supplement  of  thought  devoid  of
all  basis.

Only  those  attempts  would  deserve  consideration
which  aim  to  show  how  the  soul  originally  pro-
duces merely  intuitive  ideas,  and  then,  in  the  course
of  the  reciprocal  actions  of  these  its  individual
products,  projects  also  conceptions  of  non-intuitive
subjects  to  which  the  aforesaid  ideas  belong  as
predicates  ;  that  it  finally  succeeds  also  in  assign-
ing by  thought  one  subject  to  the  totality  of  all
its  inner  states ;  and  that  it  thus  generates  the
consciousness  of  the  *  ego '  as  of  that  one  which
is  at  the  same  time  subject  and  object  of  the  act
of  ideation.

§  37.  It  is  to  be  alleged,  in  the  first  place,  against
such  attempts  as  the  foregoing,  that  identity  of
ideating  subject  and  ideated  object  is  the  general
notion  of  every  personality  ;  and  that,  therefore,  c  I '
is  not  by  this  means  distinguishable  from  'thou'
and  '  he.'  And  yet  '  self -consciousness  '  or  '  person-
ality '  obviously  does  not  consist  in  subsuming
ourselves,  together  with  all  others  under  one  and
the same general notion  : but it consists in our


60  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

distinguishing  ourselves  from  all  others  within  this
general  notion.

It  might  now  be  said:  'I'  am  subject  and  ob-
ject of  my  thoughts,  'thou'  art  subject  and  object
of  thine,  etc.  If  distinguishing  thus  is  not  to  bring
us  round  and  round  in  a  constant  circle,  then  the
distinction  between  '  mine  '  and  '  thine  '  —  the  one
we  need  to  make  - —  cannot  be  deduced  from  the
fact  that  the  '  mine '  belongs  to  the  '  I,'  and  the
1  thine '  to  the  '  thou ' ;  but  between  both  of  them
there  must  already  exist  a  distinction  that  is  abso-
lutely clear,  immediately  given,  and  in  need  of  no
deduction  at  all.

Such  now  is  actually  the  case ;  and  the  distinc-
tion depends  upon  this,  that  we  are  in  general
unable  to  think  of  any  soul  exclusively  as  a  being
active  merely  in  the  formation  of  ideas.  Every
soul  is  rather  likewise  capable  of  experiencing
feelings  of  pleasure  and  of  pain,  and  of  combining
these  feelings  with  the  content  of  ideas.  Simply
by  means  of  the  fact  that  the  idea  of  any  state
whatsoever  is  combined  with  a  feeling  of  pleasure
or  pain,  is  such  state  authenticated  as  our  own,
and  no  longer  passes  merely  as  the  state  of  some
being  or  other.

We  express  the  matter  simply  by  means  of  the
following antithesis : Granted that some superior


FEELING AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS.  6 1

spirit  possesses  so  perfect  an  intelligence  as  to
have  a  quite  adequate  cognition  of  all  things,  and
of  its  own  being  as  well,  and  yet  is  utterly  lack-
ing in  the  faculty  for  pleasure  and  pain ;  and  that
every  conceivable  content  is  therefore  as  indif-
ferent to  it  as  is  every  other.  Then  such  a  spirit
will  not  merely  cognize  itself,  but  will  also  know
that  in  this  case  the  cognizing  subject  is  identical
with  the  object  cognized.  It  will,  however,  at  the
same  time  cognize  the  fact,  that  the  case  of  such
identity  may  occur  precisely  so  millions  of  times
in  other  beings ;  and  it  will  have  no  motive  at  all
to  regard  one  of  these  cases  —  just  that  one  which
occurs  in  its  own  self  —  as  something  special,  and
to  distinguish  this  case  from  those  others ;  it  will
not,  therefore,  apprehend  itself  as  an  '  ego '  set
over  against  some  other  as  the  'non-ego.'  On
the  other  hand,  an  animal  of  the  lowest  order,
that  has  scarcely  any  cognition  of  itself  at  all,
but  has  indeed  feeling  for  pleasure  and  pain,  will
never  confound  itself  with  the  external  world.
When  it  feels  a  smart,  it  will  experience  this
state  as  one  belonging  to  itself  alone ;  and  just
by  this  means  will  it  feel  itself  as  an  '  ego '  in
opposition  to  the  whole  world,  although  it  would
not  know  at  all  how  to  specify  precisely  in  what
its  own  being  consists.


62  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

§  38.  We  arrive  at  the  same  goal  by  another
way.  We  often  hear  it  said :  '  Ego '  and  *  non-
ego*  are  two  correlative  conceptions,  neither  of
which  has  in  general  any  significance  apart  from
its  opposition  to  the  other.  Therefore, —  it  is  said,
—  even  the  idea  of  the  '  ego '  can  originate  only  at
the  moment  when  that  of  the  '  non-ego '  likewise
originates.  On  this  account,  'personality'  is  pos-
sible only  for  finite  beings  which  can  be  limited
by  a  non-ego.

The  foregoing  three  propositions  have  really  no
inner  connection  with  each  other.  The  first  of
them  must  be  pronounced  perfectly  absurd.  Two
conceptions,  each  of  which  should  have  a  meaning
only  as  a  negation  of  the  other,  and  should  signify
nothing  further,  would  both  of  them  have  no  mean-
ing at  all,  and  would  not  even  acquire  any  by  their
being  opposed  to  each  other.  One  of  the  two
must  necessarily  be  independently  determined  and
signify  something.

On  consideration  of  our  case  we  find  the  ques-
tion to  be  :  If  '  ego '  and  '  non-ego '  were  two
such  conceptions,  each  of  which  contained  barely
the  negation  of  the  other :  by  what  means  would
the  soul  then  be  induced,  at  the  moment  of  the
simultaneous  origin  of  both,  to  rank  itself  under
the  conception  of  the  '  ego '  rather  than  under  that


THE  TERM  '  NON-EGO  '  RELATIVE. 6$

of  the  '  non-ego '  ;  and  what  does  it  gain  thereby  if
it  does  the  one  and  forbears  the  other?  To  such
a  question  no  answer  is  possible  but  just  this ;
that  one  of  the  two  conceptions  signifies  some-
what independently  determined,  and  on  this  ac-
count the  spirit  applies  it  to  itself,  or  does  not  so
apply  it.  Now,  without  going  further,  the  expres-
sions themselves  show  that  this  independent  sig-
nificance belongs  only  to  the  '  ego '  as  positively
apprehended.  What  is  meant  by  the  term  is
directly  obvious :  what,  on  the  contrary,  is  meant
by  the  negative  expression  '  non-ego '  is  in  a  pre-
liminary way  obscure ;  and  only  thus  much  is
known  about  it,  —  namely,  that  it  is  not  the  'ego.'
But  this  is  just  what  would  be  achieved  by  the
aforesaid  immediate  feeling,  by  which  the  ego  posi-
tively apprehends  what  belongs  to  it  as  its  own;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  at  first  excludes  from
'  itself  in  a  merely  negative  way  what  does  not
belong  to  it.

§  39.  The  above  position  being  conceded,  it  is
still  always  possible  to  say :  This  '  feeling  of  the
ego,'  although  in  itself  of  a  definite  content,  which
does  not  primarily  originate  by  means  of  its  op-
position to  the  non-ego,  nevertheless,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  cannot  actually  occur  except  at  the  moment


64  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

of  such  an  opposition.  To  see  colors  is  also  an
original  capacity  of  the  soul,  and  could  not  be  pro-
cured for  it  by  means  of  any  waves  of  ether,  if  it
did  not  of  itself  possess  the  capacity ;  yet  we  do
see  colors  solely  in  case  waves  of  ether  act  on  us.
Just  so  we  feel  ourselves  as  'ego/  only  in  case  an
opposed  non-ego  acts  on  us.

On  this  point  it  is  now  to  be  observed,  that  the
possibility  of  personality  is  in  any  case  erroneously
attached  to  the  opposition  to  a  real  non-ego ;  as
though  by  means  of  it  that  being,  which  in  conse-
quence thereof  then  feels  itself  as  'ego/  became
really  limited.

A  reciprocal  action  with  a  real  non-ego,  of  such
kind  that  this  as  such  might  enter  into  consciousness
and  the  ego  thus  be  posited  in  opposition  to  this  per-
ceived non-ego,  never  occurs  at  all.  In  all  sensations
and  perceptions,  what  enters  consciousness  in  con-
sequence of  such  an  influence,  is  invariably  nothing
but  some  inner  state  belonging  to  the  spiritual
being, — the  sensation  or  mental  representation  it-
self; it  is  never  the  reality  by  means  of  which  the
state  is  brought  about.

From  these  inner  states  the  entire  subsequent
development  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  therefore  that
of  the  personality,  proceeds.  It  suffices  for  laying
the  foundation  of  the  latter,  if  a  spiritual  being  has


THE EXCITATION OF THE EGO.  65

the  faculty  of  apprehending  itself  as  'I'  in  opposi-
tion to  its  own  states,  which  are  only  its  '  states '
and  not  'I.'  A  relation  to  an  external  reality  is  not
necessary ;  and,  consequently,  '  personality '  also  is
not  bound  to  the  condition  of  Jiniteness,  —  to  wit,
to  that  of  being  limited  by  another  reality  of  the
same  kind.

§  40.  It  may  nevertheless  always  be  said:  Even
if,  in  a  course  of  thought  that  is  once  in  process,
this  world  of  thoughts  can  serve  as  the  non-ego
in  opposition  to  which  the  thinking  spirit  knows
itself  as  the  ego,  still  the  first  excitation  of  such
process  of  thought  needs  the  influence  from  without
which  can  only  be  given  by  an  actual  reality  affect-
ing the  senses.  But  this  objection  unwarrantably
carries  over  what  takes  place  as  a  matter  of  fact
in  the  case  of  us  men,  as  though  it  were  indispen-
sable to  every  personality.

In  all  attempts  at  a  physical  explanation  of  the
world,  we  are  at  last  under  the  necessity  of  recog-
nizing, not  merely  certain  real  elements,  but  also
certain  motions  of  the  same,  as  original  data;  and
it  is  of  no  advantage  to  search  further  for  the
causes  of  these  motions  also,  —  since  they  could
only  consist  of  still  other  motions  ;  nor  is  it  con-
ceivable how  we are ever  to get from  a  state  of


66  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

equilibrium or  rest as originally  assumed, to dis-
turbance of  equilibrium  or  to  motion.

Only  the  same  concession,  and  no  more,  is  re-
quired in  relation  to  the  Infinite  Spirit.  It  is  not
to  be  thought  of  as  somewhat  which  it  were  barely
possible  to  imagine,  but  as  somewhat  which  is  im-
agined as  eternally  and  unceasingly  actual ;  —  some-
what to  which  no  such  state  of  rest  was  ever
antecedent,  as  a  state  from  which  it  would  have
been  obliged  to  be  extricated  by  means  of  special
influence.

§  41.  All  further  inquiries  concerning  this  mat-
ter (as  to  what,  perhaps,  gives  conditions  to  this
eternal  movement  of  thought  with  respect  to  its
content  and  its  direction)  must,  of  course,  remain
unanswered.  Nevertheless  it  can  be  shown  —  not,
indeed,  with  a  strictness  that  satisfies  the  demands
of  science,  but  still  in  a  manner  intelligible  to
imagination,  —  why  the  matter  stands  with  us  men
in  that  different  fashion  which  we  should  not  be
justified  in  wanting  to  carry  over  and  apply  to
God.

When  treating  of  'Omnipresence'  allusion  was
made  to  the  truth,  that  God,  who  is  the  truly
Existent  in  all  Things  and  comprises  them  all  as
mere  modifications  of  his  Being,  stands  in  need  of


FINITE SPIRITS DEPEND ON THINGS.  6j

no  mediation  through  transmitted  effects,  in  order
to  be  acquainted  with  the  individual  elements  of
the  world  and  the  states  belonging  to  them.  Every
finite  spirit,  however,  has  its  existence  only  from
a  definite  point  of  time  onward,  and  has  in  the
coherence  of  all  Things  a  determinate  position  in
the  system,  which  assigns  to  it  also  a  limited  place
in  space.

Now  it  follows  from  the  above-mentioned  truth,
that  finite  spirits,  who  have  very  much  outside  of
themselves  which  they  themselves  are  not,  stand
in  absolute  need  of  a  real  outside  world  and  of  its
effects,  in  order  to  attain  to  the  development  of
the  life  of  thought  possible  to  them.

It  is  intelligible,  further,  that  finite  spirits  who
are  not  the  Absolute  itself  but  only  modifications
or  fragments  of  the  same,  and  yet  likewise  possess
all  their  existence  only  through  this  Absolute,  do
constantly,  in  case  they  reflect  upon  themselves,
suppose  that  they  find  an  obscure  germ  in  their
own  being,  — to  wit,  just  this  power  of  the  Absolute
itself.  This  power  it  is  which  works  through  and
through  them,  and,  without  their  own  assistance,
prescribes  for  them  the  universal  forms  of  their
spiritual  activity,  their  sensation,  imagination,  judg-
ment, etc.  ;  and  which  permits  them  only  within  nar-
row  limits to dispose further of this dowry,  and


68  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

to  pursue  their  special  ends.  That  is  to  say,
therefore :  '  Personality '  is  in  them  only  very  im-
perfectly accomplished.  There  remains  something
back  in  the  ego,  which  it  cannot  itself  explain.
This  is  a  fact  which  is  corroborated  by  the  course
of  Psychology,  wherein  always  at  last  the  question
recurs,  —  What  then  really  are  we  ?  and  can  never
be  answered  to  our  perfect  satisfaction.

Finally,  it  does  not  indeed  admit  of  direct  proof,
but  is  none  the  less  a  probable  assumption,  that
the  laws  of  the  psychical  mechanism  to  which  our
inner  life  is  subjected  are  also  connected  with  this
'finiteness.'  From  them  it  follows,  however,  that
our  ideas  inhibit  one  another ;  that  only  a  small
number  of  them  is  at  any  time  present  in  con-
sciousness ;  that  the  forgotten  ones  return,  indeed,
to  our  recollection  in  accordance  with  general  laws,
but  not  always  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  our
momentary  need.  Hence  it  comes  about  that  we
frequently  over-hasten  ;  that  we  permit  certain
measures  of  conception  which  are  just  present  in
consciousness,  partially  to  pass  over  into  transac-
tions which  we  later,  when  we  have  collected  our-
selves, may  no  longer  recognize  as  our  own  ;  that,
finally,  we  forget  very  much,  and  with  increasing
age  can  no  longer  transport  ourselves  back  into
the  frames  of  mind,  feelings  and  enthusiasms  of
the earlier  epochs  of  life.


THE INFINITE A PERFECT PERSONALITY.  69

All  these  hindrances  of  a  perfect  'personality'
we  can  imagine  as  not  existent  in  the  Infinite
Spirit.  On  this  account,  we  conclude  with  the
assertion  which  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  the
customary  one :  Perfect  personality  is  reconcilable
only  with  the  conception  of  an  Infinite  Being;  for
finite  beings  only  an  approximation  to  this  is  at-
tainable.


CHAPTER  V.

OF  THE  CONCEPTION  OF  CREATION.

§  42.  We  reserve  the  further  concrete  predi-
cates, chiefly  of  an  ethical  kind,  by  which  we
have  to  complete  the  still  abstract  conception  of
an  infinite  personality,  until  after  we  have  consid-
ered the  relation  of  this  personality  to  the  world.
And  this  relation  itself  we  treat  for  convenience
under  the  three  distinctive  names  of  Creation,
Preservation and Government.

In  relation  to  the  first  topic,  we  omit  all  ancient
and  modern  cosmogonies,  such  as  intend  to  fur-
nish an  intuitive  picture  of  the  process  of  '  crea-
tion '  and  of  the  succession  of  particular  creative
acts  ;  —  a  picture,  which  is  in  general  impossible,
and  in  particulars  not  to  be  established  with  any
certainty.  Our  design  is  merely  to  show  what
fundamental  conceptions  admit  of  being  formed
concerning  that  relation  of  God  to  the  world
from  which  the  creation  proceeds,  or  in  which  it
consists, or  which is established by means of it.

We  divide  the  essentially  different  views,  which
are  possible  on  this  subject,  into  the  three  fol-
lowing : the  first of  which attempts to trace the


CREATION NOT DEVELOPMENT.  7 1

world  to  the  "consistent  development  of  the
nature  of  God,"  the  second  to  his  will,  the  third
to  a  creative  act.

§  43.  The  first  view,  crudely  elaborated  and
satisfying  merely  to  the  imagination  but  not  to
speculation,  appears  in  all  the  emanation  theories
of  ancient  and  modern  times.  This  we  exclude
from  our  investigation.

On  the  contrary,  the  conception  of  the  world
as  a  '  necessary,  involuntary,  and  inevitable  devel-
opment of  the  nature  of  God,'  which  rests  essen-
tially upon  the  foundation  of  modern  scientific
views,  is  worthy  of  consideration.

So  far  as  this  view  endeavors  to  exclude  a  God
who  rules  without  principle  in  blind  arbitrariness,
it  is  correct ;  and  in  this  respect  corresponds  also
to  our  religious  need.  But  we  must  resist  with
the  greatest  possible  decisiveness  the  further
apotheosis  of  the  notion  of  '  development '  conse-
quent upon  this  view,  which  it  is  customary  just
now  to  express  and  to  extol  with  such  great  em-
phasis, as  though  it  were  identical,  as  a  matter  of
course,  with  all  that  is  great  and  sublime  and  holy.

If  it  were  only  a  question  concerning  a  theo-
retic explanation  of  the  course  of  the  world,  then
such a conception  would be satisfactory. But it


72  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

is  wholly  useless  from  the  religious  point  of  view,
because  it  leads  consistently  to  nothing  but  a
thorough-going  Determinism,  according  to  which
not  only  is  every  thing  that  must  happen,  in  case
certain  conditions  occur,  appointed  in  pursuance  of
general  laws  ;  but  according  to  which  even  the  suc-
cessive occurrence  of  these  conditions,  and  conse-
quently the  whole  of  history  with  all  its  details,  is
predetermined.

In  such  a  mechanical  contrivance  there  is  no
place  whatever  for  any  'freedom'  or  ' activity,'  or
for  an  effort  that  shall  produce  aught  which  does
not  originate  from  the  mechanism  itself.  Religious
opinion  assumes  rather  that,  while  there  are  uni-
versal laws,  without  whose  efficacy  no  '  design '
whatever  would  be  able  by  definite  means  to  attain
to  a  definite  goal,  there  is  however  at  the  same
time,  on  the  basis  and  in  the  domain  of  this  reign
of  law,  a  free,  voluntary  activity,  which,  by  the
use  and  combination  of  the  given  elements  acting
in  accordance  with  law,  produces  that  even,  which
would  have  no  existence  without  such  activity.

The  above-mentioned  assumption  has  its  diffi-
culties. Until,  however,  it  is  shown  decisively  to
be  impossible,  the  religious  feeling  will  never  re-
turn to  the  thought  of  an  '  undesigned,  inevitable
development '  of  the  world  from  the  nature  of  God,


CREATIVE WILL NOT MOMENTARY.


but  will derive it from an act of  the divine  will,
without  which  it  would  not  have  existed.

§  44.  In  speaking  of  the  will  of  God,  we  natu-
rally think  first  of  the  analogy  of  our  own  will ;
we  may  not  however  summarily  transfer  to  the
former  that  which  is  peculiar  to  the  latter.

Now  the  aims  to  which  our  will  can  be  directed,
are  only  given  to  us  finite  beings  progressively
by  means  of  experience.  Hence  under  the  term
'  will '  we  conceive  primarily  of  a  spiritual  activity
momentarily  awakening,  which  is  directed  chiefly  to
the  production  of  a  state  not  yet  existing,  or  to
the  change  of  a  state  already  existing.  Even  in
those  cases  in  which  we  '  will '  nothing  new  but
merely  the  status  quo,  we  become  conscious  of
this  act  of  will,  at  least  distinctly  so,  only  if
something  threatens  to  disturb  this  state  that  has
been  '  willed '  by  us.

The  foregoing  conceptions  are  not  applicable  to
the  creative  will  of  God.  Although  the  imagi-
nation naturally  represents  the  dependence  of  the
world  upon  the  will  of  God  in  the  most  forcible
manner  by  making  a  period  of  time  precede  in
which  even  this  creative  will  of  God  had  no
existence ;  still  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for
forming a philosophical tenet out of this view,


74  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

—  harmless  as  it  is  to  religion,  —  and  for  speaking
of  an  inner  life  in  God,  which,  after  this  period,
has  proceeded  to  the  decision  to  create  and  to  its
execution.  Besides  it  would  be  impossible  to  fill
this  space  of  time  with  anything  but  a  delusive
history  of  development,  in  which  the  systematic
coherence  of  all  the  thoughts,  by  uniting  which
we  endeavor  to  interpret  for  ourselves  the  being
of  God,  would  be  fictitiously  converted  into  a  chro-
nological sequence  ;  and  by  this  means  the  nature
of  God  would  for  the  first  time  become  completely
realized.

This  is,  philosophically  considered,  erroneous,
and  religiously  devoid  of  all  significance :  we  abide
therefore  by  the  assumption,  that  the  'will  to
create '  is  an  absolutely  eternal  predicate  of  God,
and  ought  not  to  be  used  to  designate  a  deed  of
his  so  much  as  the  absolute  dependence  of  the
world  upon  his  will  in  contradistinction  to  its  in-
voluntary '  emanation '  from  his  nature.

§  45.  With  the  foregoing  assertion,  however,
there  seems  to  vanish  something  which  we  regard
as  necessary  for  the  religious  conception  of  crea-
tion ;  to  wit,  a  will  which  is  constantly  existent,  has
no  longer  the  character  of  a  deed.  In  order  that
will may be distinguished from that involuntary


WILLING CONSIDERED AS DEED.  75

development,  from  which  we  intended  to  distin-
guish it,  it  seems  necessary  that  some  deed  or
work  be  added  to  the  act  of  will,  by  whose  accom-
plishment alone  that  which  is  willed  truly  becomes
the  complete  possession  of  the  one  who  wills,  and
at  the  same  time  becomes  a  reality.  There  is  in-
volved herein  an  undoubtedly  genuine  religious
need,  but  it  is  wrongly  formulated  in  dependence
upon  analogies  derived  from  our  own  willing  and
doing,  which  are  not  transferable  to  God.

In  the  first  place  as  regards  the  efficacy  of  our
own  will,  we  know  psychologically  that  our  'will-
ing '  can  never  do  anything  else  but  produce  a
definite  psychical  state  within  us  (an  idea,  a  feel-
ing, a  wish).  With  this  state,  as  soon  as  it  is
once  in  existence,  an  order  of  nature  under  the
control  of  general  law,  wholly  independent  of  our
volition  and  hardly  accessible  to  our  intelligence,
has  connected  a  definite  result ;  and  this  result
then  originates  without  our  being  able  to  compre-
hend the  process  of  its  origination  or  to  con-
tribute anything further  to it.

Now  we  believe  to  be  sure  that,  in  the
performance  of  our  corporal  movements,  we  feel
at  once  the  transition  of  our  will  to  the  limbs,
and  that  to  a  certain  extent  we  observe  the
will at its  work,  by  which it brings to pass the


j6  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

effect.  But  it  is  known  psychologically,  that  we
actually  feel  in  this  case  only  the  changes,  which
the  will,  in  a  manner  wholly  beyond  the  power
of  observation,  has  already  produced  in  the  limbs,
and  from  which,  in  a  supplemental  way,  the  sen-
sations of  weariness  and  exertion  are  produced  in
the  consciousness.  These  feelings  therefore  do  not
show  us  how  those  movements  are  produced  by
us  ;  but  they  only  show  how  much  disturbance  our
organism  has  experienced,  in  consequence  of  those
movements  having  been  attached  to  the  action  of
our  will,  in  accordance  with  an  order  of  nature
unknown  to  us.

If  therefore  we  recognize  as  our  own  '  deed '
an  effect  which  issues  from  us  only  in  case  we
have  had,  at  the  time  of  its  accomplishment,  all
the  aforesaid  feelings,  then  this  analogy  of  the
human  will  cannot  be  transferred  to  God.  For
this  apparent  activity  in  accomplishing  something
beyond  the  bare  action  of  willing  is  in  truth
merely  a  witness  to  the  powerlessness  of  our
will,  which  effects  something  only  in  case  a
higher  power  has  united  with  it  the  origination
of changes in external objects.

In  this  sense,  therefore,  we  may  not,  in  addi-
tion to  the  creative  will  of  God,  still  further
postulate a special creative deed ; but we must


REALIZATION OF THE DIVINE WILL.  jj

be  satisfied  with  the  thought  that  the  will  of  the
Supreme  Being  is  without  further  procedure  the
realization of that which He wills.

§  46.  But  after  all  there  remains  a  genuine
religious  need,  which  was  expressed,  although
wrongly,  by  the  demand  for  a  divine  work  of
creation.

The  value  of  the  feelings,  to  which  we  referred,
does  not  consist  in  the  fact  that  they  brought  to
our  view  the  modus  agendi  of  our  will,  but  that  at
each  minutest  instant  they  furnished  us  the  knowl-
edge as  to  how  far  the  realization  of  its  activity
had  already  advanced.  Suppose,  for  example,  that
we  give  our  arm  a  wide  swing,  then  we  have  at
each  minutest  point  of  time  a  new  sensation  which
discloses  to  us  the  magnitude  of  the  breadth  of
the  movement  already  executed  ;  and  therefore
the  progress  of  our  wills'  mode  of  operation,
although  in  itself  unobserved,  is  noted  by  us
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  move-
ment. Now  it  is  precisely  because  in  such  a
case  our  consciousness  always  has  an  immediate
feeling  in  conjunction  with  the  product  of  the
will,  that  such  movements  appear  as,  in  the  strict-
est sense,  our  own  living  deed.  On  the  contrary,
in  the  case  of  the  stone that  flies  away  from  the


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


hand  at  the  completion  of  that  movement  of  the
arm,  although  it  has  in  fact  got  its  velocity  by
means  of  us,  still  we  have  no  immediate  sensation
of  its  further  movement.  While  this  movement,
therefore,  as  well  as  its  subsequent  effects  upon
other  objects,  seem  to  us  to  be  consequences  of
our  deed,  they  no  longer  seem  to  be  our  own  ac-
tivity itself.

Now  it  is  the  counterpart  of  just  this,  which
it  is  really  intended  to  exclude  from  the  concep-
tion of  the  divine  creative  work.  It  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  the  act  of  will  originates  a  bare
result  in  which  the  consciousness  of  the  one  who
wills  were  no  longer  present ;  but  it  is  to  be  sup-
posed that  the  creative  will  remains  in  that  con-
stant feeling  in  conjunction  with  the  state  of  its
product,  which  we  men  experience  only  on  occasion
of  the  movements  of  our  own  body,  and  not  on
occasion  of  the  movements  of  external  objects  in-
directly produced.

Now  because  this  feeling  in  our  case  is  psycho-
logically connected  with  the  effort  and  labor,  which
are  simply  a  consequence  of  our  finite  nature,  some
have  arrived  at  the  false  conception  that  this  must
be  so  even  in  the  case  of  God  Himself ;  and  on
this  account  have  demanded  the  aforesaid  special
work  of  creation.


XO PROCESS OF CREATION.  79

§  47.  The  sum  and  substance  of  the  preceding
discussion  is,  that  the  conception  of  creation  prop-
erly signifies  nothing  more  than  this  ;  that  the  world,
with  respect  to  its  existence  as  well  as  its  content,
is  completely  dependent  upon  the  will  of  God,  and
not  a  mere  involuntary  '  development '  of  his
nature ;  that  it  proceeds,  however,  only  from  the
will  and  not  from  a  special  work  of  God,  —  this
latter  conception  being  always  applicable  only  in
cases  where  a  will  endeavors  to  realize  its  pur-
pose in  conflict  with  an  existing  world  that  is
independent  of  it  ;  whereas  of  God  we  in  fact
assert  that  He  "  has  created  the  world  out  of
nothing,"  —  a  strange  expression,  which  strictly
interpreted  means  to  say,  in  a  merely  negative
manner,  that  there  is  nothing  out  of  which  God
constructed  the  world  ;  and  which  then  whimsi-
cally makes  this  Nothing  appear  again  as  a  sort
of  '  stuff '  from  which  it  is  created.

There  can  be  no  consistent  description  of  the
process  of  creation,  for  the  reason  that  there  is
no  such  process.  Such  process  in  fact,  whenever
the  attempt  has  been  made  to  imagine  it,  has
always  presupposed  in  turn  the  existence  of
another  world,  and  of  certain  forms  of  happening
already  in use in it.

In regard still further  to the content of crea-


80  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

tion,  it  would  be  from  a  religious  point  of  view
an  object  of  interest  for  us,  only  in  case  we  con-
ceive withal  of  a  plan  which  is  to  be  realized  in
the  world  ;  and  this  subject  is  to  be  discussed
under  the  head  of  the  conception  of  'Government.'


CHAPTER  VI.


OF PRESERVATION.


§  48.  To  ascribe  the  preservation  of  the  world
to  a  special  divine  activity,  may  seem  to  be  a  super-
fluous thought.  In  fact,  the  common  opinion  of
natural  philosophy  amounts  to  this,  that  the  world,
when  once  in  existence,  maintains  itself  as  a  mat-
ter of  course  by  the  efficacy  of  the  laws  which
have  once  gained  prevalence  in  it.  The  utmost
that  is  conceded  is,  that  the  origination  of  the
world  may  be  the  object  of  an  action,  but  not  its
continuation  after  it  has  once  originated.

The  foregoing  opinion  only  serves  to  remind  us
that  we  really  have  already  before  us,  even  with  re-
spect to  creation,  a  difficulty  of  which,  in  the  ordi-
nary reflection,  we  are  less  sensible  only  in  relation
to  this  conception  of  preservation.  To  wit,  the  ques-
tion is  raised,  in  what  way  God,  in  the  action  of
his  will,  has  arrived  at  a  decision  concerning  that
which  should  be  or  should  not  be.

The  readiest  answer,  —  namely  that  He  has
summoned  into  actual  existence  only  that  which
is  in  itself  possible,  —  as  well  as  the  other
answer,  —  that He has summoned into actual


82  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

existence  the  best  among  many  possible  worlds,
both  contain  the  thought  that  what  is  good  or
not  good,  possible  or  not  possible,  has  already
been  decided  independently  of  the  will  of  God ;
and  therefore  that,  after  all,  there  precedes  God,
the  Supreme  Principle,  a  certain  realm  of  eternal
truths  as  a  still  higher  Principle,  to  which  He
together  with  his  activity  is  now  obliged  to
become subordinate.

This  strange  idea  is  not  improved  by  the
immediate  reply  that,  in  the  use  of  a  distinction
frequently  made,  we  designate  those  '  eternal
truths '  merely  as  the  '  content  of  God's  under-
standing,' and  not  as  a  necessity  foreign  to  Him
and  which  stands  over  against  Him  objectively.
No  improvement  of  the  idea  is  attained  so  long
at  least  as  we  have  in  mind  in  this  connection
our  own  spiritual  life,  in  which  of  course  all
these  general  truths  appear  as  something  pro-
ceeding from  a  higher  power  and  not  connected
with  our  personality ;  or,  at  all  events,  as  some-
thing  not deducible  from  it.

Concerning  these  difficulties  we  must  make  the
following  somewhat  detailed  reflections.

§  49.  It  has  already  been  observed,  in  dis-
coursing of the possibility of the reciprocal


LAWS NOT INDEPENDENT OF GOD.  83

actions  of  the  elements  of  the  world,  that  the
prevalent  method  of  speaking  of  the  "  authority
of  general  laws  of  nature  over  Things  "  has  noth-
ing properly  corresponding  to  it  in  the  actual
state of  the  case.

Laws  can  exist  only  in  a  twofold  manner :  they
may  either  exist  at  the  instant  when  they  are
obeyed,  as  the  activity  of  the  elements  them-
selves, which  seem  to  follow  them ;  or,  in  the
observing  spirits  which  compare  the  events,  as
conscious  rules  for  the  combination  of  the  ideas,
by  which  we  (the  observing  spirits)  are  enabled,
in  accordance  with  the  reality,  to  determine
beforehand  from  given  states  those  which  suc-
ceed them.

On  the  contrary,  laws  never  exist  outside,  between,
beside,  or  above  the  Things  that  are  to  obey  them.
And  if  we  ourselves  should  intend  to  assume
that  a  ghost-like  existence,  of  a  sort  that  is  wholly
beyond  the  power  of  representation,  belongs  to
them,  the  question  would  be  left  the  more  un-
answerable, how  in  that  *case  they  went  to  work
to  secure  obedience  from  the  elements  which  were
wholly  foreign  to  them.

This  first  mode  of  representation,  then,  accord-
ing to  which  God  even  would  have  'found  at
hand '  a  sum  of  self-existing  truths,  must  be  wholly
abandoned.


84  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

§  50.  The  first  modification  of  the  thought  we
are  considering,  to  the  effect  that  the  eternal
truths  were  nothing  else  but  the  mode  of  the
action  of  God's  own  nature  and  intelligence,  we
found,  just  at  the  close  of  the  last  paragraph  but
one,  to  be  not  altogether  satisfactory.

To  wit  :  we  find  in  ourselves  such  truths  (as
for  example  the  law  of  identity,  or  the  simple
geometrical  intuitions,  or  the  fundamental  ethical
judgments  of  our  conscience),  as  do  not  present
themselves  to  us,  at  any  rate  when  considered
individually,  as  something  foreign  to  our  nature,
but  as  the  mode  of  our  own  experience  or  the
form  of  our  own  activity.  But  we  find  several  of
such  truths  within  us,  and  we  find  no  connection
between  them.  For,  from  the  fact  that  the  propo-
sition of  identity  is  a  necessity  of  our  thought,  it
by  no  means  certainly  follows  that  we  must  also
have  an  intuition  of  space,  or  must  make  a  distinc-
tion between  good  and  evil.  Hence  the  aggregate
of  these  truths  seems  to  us  after  all  to  be  some-
thing foreign  to  our  own  being,  and  not  deducible
from  it;  or  at  least  something  whose  origin  from
it  cannot  be  known.

If  it  were  thus  with  God,  it  would  seem  to  us
as  if  He  met  with  these  eternal  truths,  not  to  be
sure as forces  external  to Himself, but as some-


ETERNAL TRUTHS DO NOT LIMIT GOD.  85

thing  within  Himself,  which  He  could  regard  only
in  the  light  of  a  gift  bestowed  upon  Him  as  it
were.

Now  we  can  of  course  never  give  a  positive  de-
scription of  the  manner  in  which  those  truths,  that
to  our  discernment  are  disparate,  are  united  with
each  other  in  God,  and  are  experienced  as  belong-
ing together  in  the  unity  of  a  single  thought.  But,
for  all  that,  there  is  no  contradiction  in  the  as-
sumption that  with  God  it  is  so ;  and  that  only
we  finite  beings,  who  are  able  to  possess  nothing
but  fragments  of  the  whole  of  truth,  fail  to  grasp
the  inner  connection  by  which  these  truths  are
perfected  into  one  whole.

§  51.  The  above-mentioned  view  of  the  case  also
often  proves  unsatisfactory.  The  assumption,  that
the  eternal  truths  are  the  proper  modus  agendi  of
the  divine  understanding  itself,  has  always  seemed
to  many  to  involve  after  all  a  limitation  of  his  un-
conditionateness  and  omnipotence.  In  such  case
we  should  not  be  content  with  anything  less  than
the  statement  that  God  did  not  possess  this  modus
agendi,  but  that  He  first  bestowed  it  upon  Himself.
Indeed  even  in  such  case  it  might  perhaps  still  be
doubted,  whether  in  the  choice  of  such  a  modus
from among many that are conceivable and now


86  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

excluded,  there  were  not  after  all  again  involved  a
limitation  of  his  unconditionateness,  although  a
self-chosen  limitation.

In  one  view  of  the  matter,  however,  it  may  be
remarked  that  in  this  way  the  conception  of  God
loses  all  content  whatever ;  and  that,  instead  of
conceiving  of  that  concrete  Being  to  whom  uncon-
ditionateness in  respect  to  his  conduct  belongs,
we  have  made  the  empty  conception  of  uncondi-
tionateness itself  the  subject  or  the  principle  of
the  world.  To  do  this  is,  fundamentally  consid-
ered, just  the  same  mistake  that  is  made  when
we  content  ourselves  with  the  abstract  expressions,
the  '  One,'  the  '  Existent,'  the  •  Absolute,'  etc.,  and
suppose  that  by  them  we  have  expressed  the  Su-
preme Principle,  instead  of  designating  by  name  or
representing  that  which  deserves  to  be  acknowledged
as  the  Real  Principle  of  the  world,  because  it  pos-
sesses in  virtue  of  its  own  concrete  nature  the
alleged  predicates.

But  the  misunderstandings  that  arise  in  this  con-
nection admit  of  being  analyzed  somewhat  further
in  detail.

§  52.  If,  in  the  first  place,  we  see  a  limitation  of
omnipotence  in  the  fact,  that  even  omnipotence,
from  its  very  beginning  onward,  follows  a  definite


CAPACITY NEVER INDETERMINATE.  87

modus  agendi,  then  we  may  in  the  next  place  be
reminded  that  we  in  fact  never  mentally  represent
even  any  finite  'power'  or  'capacity'  as  a  predicate
which  would  inhere  in  a  Thing  without  connection
with  its  remaining  n  predicates  as  an  (n-t-l)th.
Just  as  little  do  we  represent  such  a  power  as  a
'being  able  in  general,'  which  would  still  have  no
direction  whatever ;  so  that  it  would  only  be  de-
termined subsequently  by  secondary  circumstances,
what  sort  of  activity  this  '  being  able '  will  exercise,
and  with  reference  to  what  objects.

On  the  contrary  every  'power'  or  'capacity'  is
conceivable  only  as  one  that  is  quite  definitely
fixed  in  reality.  And  the  abstract  conception  of
'capacity  in  general,'  which  we  may  form  just  as
legitimately  as  the  conception  of  'motion  in  gen-
eral,' can  just  as  little  signify  something  real  as  can
the  latter  before  it  is  again  furnished  with  a  '  direc-
tion'  and  a  'velocity,'  from  which,  in  the  forma-
tion of  the  general  conception,  the  abstraction  was
made.

If  now  this  conception  of  'power'  is  to  be  ex-
alted to  that  of  'omnipotence,'  it  cannot  be  ac-
complished by  omitting  every  such  act  of  determi-
nation as  would  fix  some  modus  agendi ;  but  only
by  representing  just  this  modus  as  one  so  compre-
hensive, that all actual capacities and powers


PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.


whatever,  which  appear  in  the  world,  originate  from
it.  In  that,  we  should  have  substituted  the  mere
general  conception  of  power  for  the  supreme  actual
Power.  But  still  further,  omnipotence,  even  in  this
case,  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  a  predicate  addi-
tional to  the  rest  of  the  predicates  of  God ;  but  it
is  only  an  expression  for  the  efficacy  in  action  of
just  these  predicates,  and  therefore  of  that  concrete
nature  of  God  in  which  all  reality  is  comprehended.

§  53.  We  may  now  be  tempted  for  the  last  time
to  inquire  :  If  God's  omnipotence  is  only  co-exten-
sive with  his  nature,  why  then  has  God  this  de-
terminate nature  a  and  not  another  b  or  c  ?  and
does  not  the  fact  that  He  is  not  this  h  or  c
involve  again  a  limitation  of  his  being  ?

In  support  of  such  thoughts  an  appeal  is  also
made  perhaps  to  the  celebrated  proposition  "  Omnis
determinatio  est  negatio" ;  the  meaning  of  which  is
often  enough  thought  to  be,  that  all  determination
is  limitation,  because  it  is  the  product  of  the  nega-
tion of  innumerable  other  possibilities.

Thus  understood,  the  proposition  would  be
thoroughly  false.  It  is  only  in  cases  where  a  com-
pletely disjunctive  judgment  is  already  validated,
in  accordance  with  which  a  subject  s  must  be
either  a  orb  or  c,  that  the  affirmation  of  a can


NEGATION AND AFFIRMATION.  89

originate  from  the  negation  of  b  and  c.  And  even
in  such  cases  this  negation  is  nothing  more  than
a  reason  for  our  cognition,  from  which  we  conclude
that  s  is  a,  but  is  not  a  reason  in  reality  why  s  is
actually  a.  That  is  to  say ;  It  is  not  the  real  de-
termination, but  our  subjective  certainty  of  its
existence,  that  follows  from  the  negation  of  other
possibilities.

But  in  other  cases,  as  a  rule,  the  above-men-
tioned proposition  can  only  signify,  not  that  every
determination  originates  from  a  negation  of  that
which  is  different  from  it,  but  that  it  is  accessory
to,  or  consequent  upon,  such  negation.

If  we  thus  apprehend  the  proposition,  the  doubt
above  suggested  will  subside  ;  the  doubt,  namely,
whether  after  all  there  is  not  again  involved  a  limi-
tation of  a,  in  the  very  fact  that  something  can  now
no  longer  be  b  or  c,  because  it  is  originally  a.  This
thought  has  some  significance  for  us  finite  beings,
to  whom  a  determinate  nature  a  is  given,  beside
and  outside  of  which  the  natures  p  and  y  of  other
beings  —  as  for  example  those  of  other  species  of
animals — are  likewise  met  with  as  actualities.  Since
then  we  are  unable  to  transpose  ourselves  out  of
our  own  nature  into  the  p  and  y  foreign  to  us,  this
incapacity  seems  to  us  a  limitation  which  prevents
our  enjoyment  of  a  good  that  actually  exists.


Cp  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

But  the  foregoing  analogy  is  not  transferable
to  the  nature  of  God.  For  this  nature  a  is  pre-
cisely such  an  one  as  is  not  the  product  of  a
still  higher  nature  M,  among  the  consequences
of  which  it  would  find  itself  coordinated  with
the  other  equally  real  products  b  and  c :  and
at  the  same  time  excluded  from  them.  But  out-
side of  this  a  nothing  exists  :  a  is  rather  the
primal  source  of  the  sum-total  of  reality ;  and,
indeed,  a  source  of  such  sort  that,  owing  to  its
concrete  nature,  thinking  beings  also  are  met
with  in  this  realm  of  reality,  who  are  able  to
distinguish  a  from  a  never-existent,  but  con-
ceivable non-a ;  and  who  now  are  able  to  raise
the  wondrous  question,  why  all  the  world  bears
the  character  of  this  a  and  not  the  other  char-
acter of  a  non-a.

The  noteworthy  capacity  for  denying  in  thought
what  actually  exists,  —  a  capacity  which  is  itself
only  a  product  of  the  laws  that  are  valid  in
actuality  upon  the  basis  of  that  a,  —  misleads
us  into  the  acceptance  of  this  strange  and  utterly
unthinkable  idea :  before  God  was  and  before  the
world  was,  there  was  already  a  multitude  of  coor-
dinate, possible  future  Gods  and  worlds ;  and  there
was  possible  and  necessary  a  choice  between  them,
by  which  the  total  character  a  of  the  actual  God,


GOD AND ETERNAL TRUTH.  9 1

and  of  the  actual  World  was  established ;  but  at
the  same  time  there  was  by  this  means  intro-
duced a  limitation  of  both  of  them,  because  now
they  could  no  longer  be  b  and  c.

§  54.  We  arrive  at  the  same  result,  if  we
undertake  to  think  through  one  of  the  two  fol-
lowing propositions  :  '  God  has  only  recognized  the
truth '  ; or, '  He  has  created  it.'

Arbitrary  statutes  admit  of  being  ( recognized '
in  so  far  as  our  transactions  are  willingly  or
reluctantly  accommodated  to  them.  But  in
thinking  we  can  only  '  recognize '  as  truth  that
which  accords  with  the  laws  of  such  thinking,  —
that  is,  with  its  modus  agendi.  And  thus  even  God
would  have  been  able  to  '  recognize '  any  '  truth  '
that  he  met  with,  as  truth,  only  because  it  had
already  belonged  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  his  own
thought.

Moreover  statutes  of  all  sorts  admit  of  being
'made/  and  a  practical  obedience  to  them  may  be
enforced :  but  to  make  something  which,  after  it  is
done,  should  constitute  a  truth,  is  only  possible  in
case  the  productive  energy  itself  is  already  of  itself
fulfilling,  as  rules  of  its  own  action,  precisely  the
same  conditions  as  those  that  are  conditions  of  the
truth  to  the  intelligence  associated  with  the  energy.


92  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

By  both  paths,  then,  we  return  to  the  propo-
sition, that  eternal  truths  are  neither  antecedent
norms  nor  subsequent  products  of  the  divine  activ-
ity ;  but  are  nothing  else  than  the  actual  form
of  this  very  energizing ;  and  that,  in  the  special
sense  of  the  word  '  truth,'  they  appear  as  com-
mands, which  something  not  yet  existent  must
satisfy,  only  in  our  subjective  reflection,  in  case
we  attempt  to  bring  the  future  into  combination
with  the  present.

§  55.  The  foregoing  considerations  are  con-
nected with  the  conception  of  the  Preservation
of  the  world  in  the  following  manner.

The  common  view  of  nature,  in  modern  times,
either  asserts  that  God  indeed  created  the  world
at  the  beginning,  but  after  it  was  created  left  it
to  itself  and  to  the  further  development  of  the
general  laws  which  He  established  in  it.  Or,  in
the  other  case,  since  the  act  of  creation  can
never  be  made  apprehensible,  such  act  is  entirely
left  out  ;  and  it  is  simply  asserted  that  the  world
which  lies  ready-made  before  us,  is  maintained
by  the  constant  prevalence  of  its  general  laws,
and needs no divine support.

In  opposition  to  this  the  proposition  of  religion
is  heard  :  "  Preservation  is  continual  new-creation."


SUBSTANCE  AS  INDESTRUCTIBLE. 93

It  is  not  conceivable  that  this  can  be  intended
to  mean  :  The  world  of  the  next  instant  is,  as  to
its  content,  entirely  new  and  foreign  to  that  of
the  preceding  instant.  So  far  from  this,  we
naturally  accept  the  assumption  that,  in  the  divine
activity,  there  is  unity  and  coherence ;  and,  for
this  reason,  the  creative  act  of  the  next  instant
also  is  a  consequence  of  that  of  the  preceding.
But,  nevertheless,  the  aforesaid  proposition  would
deny  that  the  world  of  one  instant  perpetuates
itself  by  its  own  agency  and  by  its  general  laws
into  the  next  instant.

For  that  very  reason  it  will  be  superfluous,  as
regards  all  special  inquiries  into  the  coherence  of
the  processes  of  nature,  to  come  back  to  the  'co-
working  of  God ' ;  and  it  is  sufficient  to  speak  of
the  consecutive  order  of  nature  which  He  has
established.  Still,  in  our  idea  of  the  whole,  we
must  decidedly  guard  against  the  view  which  speaks
of  an  actual  self-sufficiency  of  nature,  and  which,
from  this  as  from  a  secure  stand-point,  exercises  a
negative  criticism  in  opposition  to  the  religious  in-
tuitions.

It  must  rather  be  asserted  that  if  corporal  'sub-
stance '  is  indestructible,  it  is  not  so  by  its  own
agency  or  in  accordance  with  a  claim  to  the  right
growing out of its own nature, but because the


94  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

divine  creative  power  preserves  it  continuously  at
each  instant ;  and  that  if,  in  the  course  of  nature,
the  same  forces  always  act  according  to  the  same
laws,  this  does  not  come  to  pass  because  these
forces  were  of  themselves  eternal  and  these  laws
of  themselves  efficient,  but  because  it  lies  within
the  plan  of  the  divine  efficiency  to  employ,  at  each
instant  of  the  course  of  the  world,  this  number  of
homogeneous  actions,  as  means  for  the  production
of  more  composite  products.

In  a  word :  The  entire  interior  consistency  of
the  cohering  order  of  nature,  upon  which  the
natural  sciences  are  supported,  is  conceded  as  a
matter  of  fact  ;  but  taken  as  a  whole  and  at  large
it  is  regarded  as  a  system  of  mutually  condition-
ing actualities,  utterly  dependent  upon  the  divine
power ;  so  that  ultimately,  therefore,  the  World
does  not  preserve  itself  but  is  preserved  by  God.


CHAPTER VII.

OF GOVERNMENT.

§  56.  We  can  only  speak  of  Government  in
case  there  are  elements  that,  with  a  certain  inde-
pendence of  behavior  on  their  part,  threaten  to
withdraw  from  a  plan  prescribed  to  them,  which
the  governing  principle intends to realize.

The  considerations  to  which  we  last  referred
therefore  seem  to  leave  no  place  for  the  application
of  this  conception.  Indeed,  in  proportion  as  these
considerations  themselves  make  the  preservation
of  the  world  dependent  upon  the  constant  action
of  the  will  of  God,  do  they  obscure  the  thought
to  which  we  would  firmly  hold;  —  namely,  that  the
World  is  not  a  mere  immanent  development  of
God,  but  a  product  of  his  will.

In  order  that  this  contradiction  may  have  any
significance,  the  product  of  the  will,  after  it  is
created,  would  have  to  possess  a  certain  independ-
ence. Or,  to  use  a  well-known  mode  of  expres-
sion, the  world  would  have  to  be  'outside'  of  God
and  not  merely  a  process  '  in '  Him.

We  need  not  adhere  to  these  last  mentioned
expressions in terms of space which would lead


g6  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

to  such  endless  and  perfectly  empty  disputes  ;  but
the  inquiry  must  be  made  as  to  what  must  really
constitute  that  'mode  of  behavior'  which  it  is  sup-
posed may  be  figuratively  designated  by  these
expressions.  And  to  this  question  the  only  answer
will  probably  be,  that  only  that  Reality  possesses
the  independence  obviously  here  intended,  which
is  able  to  have  its  own  states,  —  such,  that  is,  as
are  not  immediately  states  of  the  '  Universal  Sub-
stance ' ;  and  to  initiate  processes  which  do  not
proceed  from  that  Substance.

If  now  we  consider  how  these  abstract  postulates
might  be  fulfilled,  we  find  but  one  Reality  which
actually  fulfils  them  ; namely,  spiritual  life.

A  being  which  has  experience  of  itself  as  an
individual  subject  for  its  own  states,  and  which
distinguishes  these  states  from  those  of  other
beings,  may,  it  is  true,  be  nothing  whatever  as  to
its  entire  existence  but  a  product  of  the  Infinite
Being.  But  after  it  is  once  in  existence,  it  is,-  by
the  very  form  of  its  existence,  by  this  conscious-
ness which  places  itself  in  relation  to  itself,  dis-
tinguished as  an  individual  ego  from  the  very
Absolute,  that  in  reality  conditions  it,  and  that
now,  as  posited  over  against  itself,  belongs  to  the
non-ego.  And  by  this  act,  or  by  this  form  of  its
existence, does it possess that relative independ-


NATURE OF THE 'WORLD-STUFF.'  97

encc which we designate when we  say  that it  is
'outside'  of  God.

§  57.  Hence  it  would  follow  (what  we  now
remark  only  incidentally)  that,  with  respect  to
our  entire  view  of  the  World,  we  find  ourselves
in the presence  of an alternative.

If  spiritual  life  is  the  only  form  in  which  we
can  conceive  of  a  reality  that  is  not  a  mere  state
of  some  other  real  being,  then  our  current  idea
of  a  motionless,  blind  and  lifeless  'stuff,'  which
should  exist  outside  of  us,  can  signify  nothing
that is actual.

We  must  either  assume,  as  the  Idealist  does,
that  what  we  regard  as  such  a  '  stuff '  has  no
existence  external  to  spirits,  but  that  the  self-
coherent  semblance  of  such  a  'world-stuff'  (com-
pare especially  J.  G.  Fichte),  is  merely  produced
within  these  spirits,  and  for  them  only,  by  a
universal  power  which  works  in  all  spirits.  Or
else  we  must  conclude,  in  entire  agreement
with  the  Spiritualists,  that  each  atom  of  that
which  appears  to  us  as  mere  '  stuff,'  is  after  all
something  better  than  this ;  that  is  to  say,  it
participates  in  the  most  general  characteristic  of
the  spiritual  life :  and  this  characteristic  consists
in somehow  (either  in  distinct  consciousness  or  in


98  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

the  mere  feeling  of  pleasure  and  pain)  '  being  for
self,'  and  not  in  merely  forming  an  object  of  con-
templation  for  others.

It  is  only  the  common  realistic  opinion  on  this
subject  that  would  seem  to  us  impossible,  accord-
ing to  which  an  entirely  'selfless  stuff'  would  be
just  as  actually  existent  outside  of  us  as  we  are
wont  commonly  to  represent  it.

There  is  no  doubt  that  either  of  the  two  fore-
going views  may  be  formed  into  an  entirely  con-
sistent apprehension  of  the  world.  But  from  the
religious  point  of  view,  we  are  not  necessarily
required to choose between them.

§  58.  If  however  there  were  in  existence  noth-
ing more  than  an  indefinite  number  of  such  inde-
pendent, created  beings,  there  would  still  be  no
foundation  for  the  conception  of  a  government  of
the  world.  It  would  still  be  thinkable,  that  the
world  might  develop  itself  in  a  perfectly  impertur-
bable harmony ;  and  the  problem  for  all  spirits
would  consist  in  merely  looking  on,  and  in  con-
sciously and  admiringly  rejoicing  in  this  fact.

In  point  of  fact,  however,  religious  sentiment
has  never  been  satisfied  with  this,  but  has  always
insisted,  at  the  outset  very  obscurely  although  vig-
orously, that something  new  also  must  happen  in


POSSIBILITY OF SOMETHING NEW.  99

the  world,  —  something  that  is  not  a  mere  conse-
quence of  what  has  gone  before;  —  and  that' there
must  exist  in  individual  spirits  just  this  capacity
to  initiate  a  new  series  of  events  ;  and  therefore  in
brief  a  freedom  of  acting  or  primarily  of  willing,
by  which  they  separate  themselves  from  the  Uni-
versal Substance  in  a  still  more  decided  manner
than  by  their  mere  'Being  for  self  as  relatively
independent beings.

In  this  way  then  has  the  problem  originated
which  leads  to  the  conception  of  a  government.
For  only  after  this  is  there  any  possibility  of
events  by  which  the  continuous  realization  of  a
predeterminate  plan  of  the  world  might  be  inter-
rupted.

§  59.  Even  the  above-mentioned  demand  for  free-
dom would  have  no  religious  significance,  if  it  were
directed  in  a  merely  formal  way  to  the  possibility
of  new  beginnings.  For  that  something  new  hap-
pen in  the  world,  has  of  itself  no  more  value  than
that  the  whole  course  of  the  world  be  an  unin-
terrupted, consecutive  process  of  development  ;  in
which  of  itself  also,  as  we  have  already  previously
suggested,  there  is  involved  nothing  that  is  worthy
of  adoration.

But we  know surely,  that  we only  demand  this


IOO  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

formal  '  freedom  '  because  we  regard  it  as  the  con-
ditio sine  qua  non  for  the  fulfilment  of  ethical  com-
mands, whose  obligatory  majesty  we  consider  to  be
the  most  absolute  certainty  and  one  that  needs
no  derivation  from  any  other  source  whatever.

This  conviction  is  the  absolutely  fundamental
point  upon  which  the  entire  religious  character  of
our  view  of  the  world  depends.  And  for  him  who
does  not  directly  experience  and  acknowledge  this,
all  questions  of  religious  philosophy  are  altogether
superfluous.

§  60.  The  ideas  of  freedom  are  not  induced  by
speculation  ;  but  they  rest  entirely  upon  the  fact
of  that  penitence  and  self-condemnation  in  which
we  believe  we  find  the  immediate  assurance  of  the
possibility,  that  the  choice,  whose  failure  is  now
repented  of,  might  have  been  reached  even  sooner
than  it  was.

This  idea  is,  in  an  obscure  way,  the  first  and
most  natural,  the  one  that  has  precedence  in  hu-
man culture.  It  was  not  till  a  later  period  that  the
scientific  contemplation  of  nature  disclosed  the  con-
ception of  a  '  necessary  causal  connection,'  and  then
extended  it  over  the  whole  course  of  the  world,
so  that  now  the  idea  of  freedom  seems  like  a
strange exception and as such is denied. It is


POSSIBILITY OF FREE CHOICE.  IOI

acknowledged  that  even  the  ethical  ideals  origi-
nate in  the  mechanical  course  of  psychical  develop-
ment. But  how  much  influence  they  have  upon
our  action,  depends  entirely  upon  the  involuntary
states  and  movements  within  our  own  interior
being.  It  is  therefore  due  to  a  process  of  nature,
that  the  impulse  to  good  actions,  or  even  to  bad
actions,  preponderates  within  us  ;  and  the  mechan-
ical conditions  for  such  result  may  be  strengthened
by  a  correct  or  by  a  perverted  education.  But,
to  be  consistent  and  candid  about  it,  an  action  in
the  proper  sense,  such  as  would  issue  from  our
own  ego,  will  then  no  longer  exist.  And  even  the
inducement  to  all  such  reflection  —  that  is,  the  feel-
ing of  penitence  —  will  be  regarded  as  a  disagree-
able state,  about  like  a  feeling  of  sickness ;  and
it  will  be  maintained  that  the  wish  involved  in
this  feeling,  —  the  wish  that  one  had  acted  differ-
ently, —  gives  no  assurance  whatever  of  this  hav-
ing been  possible  at  an  earlier  moment.

Such  views  as  the  foregoing  are  not  to  be
got  at  by  speculation  ;  they  involve  no  contra-
diction of  cognition.  If  they  are  abandoned,  it
can  be  done  only  upon  the  basis  of  an  undemon-
strable  belief,  that  after  all  there  is  directly  dis-
closed in  the  aforesaid  self-condemnation,  the  pos-
sibility of a free choice,  without which 'the bad


102  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

conscience'  and  the  pain  of  'penitence'  would  con-
tinue to  be  totally  inexplicable  phenomena  in  a
rational order  of  the  world.

§  61.  We  cannot  think  of  doing  more  than  refute
the  objections  against  the  possibility  of  the  con-
ception of  freedom  ;  we  cannot  think  of  proving  its
actual  validity.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  should  be  remembered
that  'freedom'  and  'causality'  are  not  absolutely
opposed  to  each  other,  but  are  compatible  with
each  other ;  that  is  to  say,  the  former  would  pos-
tulate the  latter,  but  of  course  the  latter  would
not  the  former.  For  every  free  beginning  of  an
action  must  demand  that,  in  the  world  into  which
it  intends  to  introduce  an  event  a,  all  Things
cohere  firmly  and  according  to  law ;  so  that  from
a  only  the  intended  result  z  can  follow,  and  not
any  other  at  pleasure.  Consequently  '  freedom  '  is
only  to  be  accepted  in  the  sense  of  an  influence
upon  a  world  causally  ordered.

Since  however  the  free  action  ought  to  be  sub-
jected to  an  ethical  judgment,  it  must  be  added
that  the  decision  with  respect  also  to  what  is
'good'  or  'bad/  is  made  in  entire  independence
of  the  will.  Therefore,  freedom  also  is  to  be
accepted only in the sense of a choice between


POSSIBILITY OF UNCONDITIONED CHOICE. IO3

what  has  value  and  what  has  not  value,  —  perma-
nently, and  for  its own sake.

The  further  objection,  —  namely  that  a  freedom,
in  the  sense  intended  by  us,  that  is  in  the  disrep-
utable sense  of  a  completely  '  unconditioned '  choice
between  a  and  non-a,  is  in  respect  of  the  process
of  its  action  incomprehensible, — is  likely  to  be  mis-
understood :  it  does  not  raise  a  special  obstacle
such  as  positively  to  prohibit  the  conception  of
freedom,  but  simply  and  absolutely  denies  its  valid-
ity. For,  assuming  that  there  is  freedom,  it  is
involved  in  its  very  conception,  that  the  process  of
the  decision  it  makes  cannot  be  a  '  comprehen-
sible '  one ;  because  this  would  presuppose  that  the
decision  follows  as  the  consequence  of  a  succes-
sion of  reciprocally  conditioning  circumstances,  and
therefore  does  not  follow  freely.  If  now  offence
is  still  taken  at  this  incomprehensibility  of  freedom,
it  may  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  process  of  causal
action  would  be  no  less  obscure,  and  the  fact  of
something  effectuating  something  else,  as  regards
its  succession  of  events,  just  as  incomprehensible.

If  then  it  is  still  argued,  that  at  all  events  such
a  capacity  of  choosing  arbitrarily  and  blindly  be-
tween a  and  non-a  is  irrational  and  unworthy  of
any  respect,  it  is  to  be  considered  that  we  in
fact  neither  commend  nor  venerate  the 'freedom  '


104  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

that  has  not  yet  decided.  It  is  only  the  '  will  '
which  is  no  longer  free,  but  has  made  its  decision,
that  merits  commendation  or  censure.  '  Freedom  '
is  simply  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  for  the  possibility
of  the  subsequent  valuation  of  the  determinate
act of willing.

For  although  we  may  concede  that  it  is  just  the
volition  itself  which  we  commend  or  censure,  while
we  do  not  demand  that  this  volition  itself  be  re-
peated once  more,  still  we  after  all  tacitly  pre-
suppose in  such  a  case,  that  just  this  '  volition  '
from  the  very  outset  has  the  significance  of  a
decision  sprung  from  'freedom.'  If  this  is  denied
us,  and  the  will  is  defined  as  an  emotion  which
originates  mechanically  within  us,  then  we  deny
that  ethical  predicates  are  at  all  applicable  to  the
will  as  a  mere  process  of  nature.

On  the  other  hand  it  is  objected,  that  the  Good
ought  to  be  chosen  for  its  own  sake,  but  not  in  an
entirely  arbitrary  manner :  a  blind  freedom  there-
fore would  be  just  as  little  conducive  to  actions
which  may  be  judged  ethically.  In  reply  to  this
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  we  can  never  speak  of  a
'  blind  '  will ;  since  all  volition  belongs  to  the  same
spiritual  subject,  which  on  the  other  hand  is  en-
dowed likewise  with  the  consciousness  of  the  pos-
sible modes  of its  action and  of their  values. If


VARYING INFLUENCE OF WILL.  105

such  a  subject  in  possession  of  this  consciousness
makes  a  choice,  its  choice  at  all  events  is  not
1  blind.'  But  there  is  no  necessity  for  apprehending
the  presence  in  consciousness  of  the  correct  esti-
mate of  the  possible  modes  of  action  as  at  the
same  time  a  determining  influence  which  neces-
sarily conditioned  the  direction of  the  will.

One  difficulty  however  remains.  The  act  of  voli-
tion, although  itself  not  causally  conditioned,  would
still,  if  there  is  to  be  any  corresponding  result,
be  obliged  to  have  a  varying  influence  upon  the
existing  states  of  the  mind.  And  now  the  ques-
tion comes,  as  to  the  means  that  determined  the
intensity  with  which  the  '  freely '  originated  will
either  overcomes  the  states  of  passion  that  strug-
gle against  it,  or  else  yields  to  them.  It  would
be  a  somewhat  sophistical  piece  of  information
to  affirm  unqualifiedly  that  only  the  volition,  but
not  the  accomplishment  of  it  is  free ;  and  indeed
to  carry  this  to  such  extent,  that  not  only  the  pos-
sibility of  the  execution  of  an  external  action  when
willed  would  be  doubtful,  but  that  even  the  inner
states  of  the  mind  also  would  form  for  the  will  a
sort  of  external  world,  in  which  it  could  validate
itself  only  in  case  the  states  of  the  same  are  more-
over in harmony  with its demands.

In  a  somewhat  indefinite  form this  thought  ap-


106  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

pears  in  the  sphere  of  religion  :  we  pray  God  to
grant  strength  to  the  well-disposed  but  weak  will ;
we  therefore  certainly  ascribe  volition  to  the  hu-
man spirit,  and  only  doubt  about  its  needful
power.

A  decisive  judgment  upon  this  question  it  is
hardly  possible  to  find.  To  assume  an  entirely
free  i volition'  and  to  include  in  the  conception
of  it  its  complete  ineffectiveness  seems  almost
absurd  :  on  the  contrary  the  other  extreme  opin-
ion is  a  very  bold  one  and  hardly  to  be  accepted ;
namely,  that  just  as  the  will  freely  determines  its
own  direction,  so  also  is  it  able  to  determine  its
own  intensity,  and  that  it  is  always  the  willing
spirit's  own  fault,  if  it  has  too  little  intensity  of
volition  to  overcome  the  involuntary  psychical  im-
pulses to  action.

§  62.  According  to  the  entire  foregoing  discus-
sion, acceptance  or  rejection  of  freedom  will  ulti-
mately be  a  matter  of  decision,  and  not  the  result
of  a  theoretical  demonstration.

It  is  only  on  the  assumption,  that  we  do  not
hold  the  speculative  difficulties  which  we  encounter
to  be  insuperable,  and  that  we  therefore  believe  in
the  freedom  of  spiritual  beings,  that  there  is  any
further  interest  in  discussing  the  conception  of  a
government  of  the  world.


GOVERNMENT AND PRESERVATION.  107

Government,  in  contradistinction  to  Preservation,
could  only  consist  in  immediate  influences  of  God
upon  the  order  of  nature,  such  as  were  not  included
in  the  proper  consequences  of  this  order.  And
these  influences  could  only  be  occasioned  by  the
free  actions  which  threaten  to  turn  the  prog-
ress of  the  world's  course  aside  from  a  prescribed
line.

Such  divine  influences  are  comprehended  under
the  name  of  Miracles.

In  order  to  estimate  this  conception,  it  must
not  be  defined  as  an  abolition  of  the  order  of
nature  in  general,  or  of  the  general  laws  of  na-
ture. For  then  the  conception  would  not  at  all
correspond  to  what  we  mean  by  it.  '  General '  su-
spension of  the  '  laws  of  nature '  would  only  occa-
sion a  chaos  which  is  utterly  beyond  the  power
of  representation.

The  '  miracle '  however  is  supposed  to  be  a
definite  event,  in  which,  in  a  single  instance  and
with  reference  to  definite  things  and  for  definite
moments,  the  physical  laws  are  invalidated  which,
contemporaneously  or  previously  and  subsequently,
continued  to  be  valid  with  respect  to  all  other
things.

This  however  means  nothing  but  that  the  nature
a  of  some  one  element  experiences  a  change  into


108  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

a,  by  which  it  now  no  longer  falls  under  the  do-
main of  the  natural  law  g,  but  under  that  of  an-
other y ;  and  in  consequence  of  this  it  no  longer
produces  the  ordinary  effect,  but  another  and  ex-
traordinary one.  According  to  this  definition,  there-
fore, the  miracle  in  general  would  involve  no
alteration  whatever  of  the  laws  of  nature,  but
only  the  change  of  one  or  more  magnitudes  to
which  those  laws  are  applied.

Now  it  cannot  be  disputed,  that  such  a  change
of  the  natures  of  single  elements  by  the  influence
of  a  divine  intervention  is  just  as  thinkable  as  it
would  be  if  accomplished  by  the  intervention  of
another,  and  that  a  physical  force.  And  particu-
larly under  the  presupposition,  that  the  Things  of
nature  are  not  independent,  but  are  products  con-
stantly supported  by  a  divine  power,  does  this
general  conception  of  the  miracle  contain,  on  the
one  hand,  all  that  can  be  demanded  in  the  re-
ligious interest,  and,  on  the  other,  nothing  that
would  be  theoretically  contradictory  or  impossible.

§  63.  There  is  no  cause  for  overmuch  rejoicing
on  account  of  this  proof  of  the  mere  abstract
conceivableness  of  the  miracle.  On  the  contrary
it  must  be  lamented,  that  we  lack  every  decisive
scientific regulative for determining the limits,


MIRACLES AS RELATED TO SPIRITS.  IOO,

within  which  we  may  have  confidence  in  this
possibility  of  thought,  as  valid  in  actuality.  Only
very  indefinite  thoughts  upon  this  question  admit
of  being  presented.

That  the  order  of  nature  for  its  own  sake  is  in
need  of  no  corrections,  is  obvious.  And  the
changes,  which  the  free  actions  of  spirits  are  able
to  produce  in  it,  are  so  narrowly  limited  and  may
be  so  easily  compensated  for  by  the  general
economy  of  nature,  that  even  for  their  sake
'  miraculous ' interventions are incredible.

Although,  on  the  other  hand,  we  feel  a  certain
aesthetic  inclination  to  behold  great  crises  of
history,  in  which  a  new  phase  of  spiritual  devel-
opment has  its  beginning,  made  glorious  by
extraordinary  changes  of  physical  conditions  also  ;
still  we  must  acknowledge  that  we  can  prove
neither  the  necessity  nor  the  real  benefit  which
would  result  from  satisfying  our  fancy  by  this
summons of  the miraculous.

It  seems  therefore,  that  it  is  not  at  all  nature
directly,  but  primarily  the  inner  life  of  the  world
of  spirits  only,  that  forms  the  object,  to  which
immediate  interventions  in  the  government  of  the
world  could  have  relation  ;  and  this  in  such  manner
that  the  interventions  would  not  make  use  of  the
individual  spirits  merely  as  passive  points of  tran-


IIO  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

sition,  but  would  supply  their  own  activity  with
inducements  and  incentives,  which  the  external
course  of  nature  cannot  offer  them.  Moreover,
by  means  of  these  inducements  and  incentives
they  would  succeed,  in  accordance  with  the  ordi-
nary laws  of  the  spiritual  life,  in  introducing  into
the  world  new  beginnings  of  spiritual  movement
that  are  in  conformity  with  the  plan  of  the  world.
If  in  these  events  we  include  among  others  re-
ligious visions  also,  then  we  do  not  conceive  them
to  be,  as  Rationalism  does,  merely  subjective  delu-
sions to  which  nothing  in  external  nature,  and
consequently  nothing  whatever  corresponds.  On
the  contrary,  we  think  of  them  as  products  of  a
reciprocal  action  of  God  with  individual  spirits  by
means  of  which  there  is  brought  to  pass  in  them
an  ideal  appearance  of  a  truly  valid  content ;  and
this  content  would  gain  nothing  whatever  in  dig-
nity, value  or  reality,  if  it  were  realized,  not
merely  as  such  appearance,  but  as  physical  or  ma-
terial actuality  besides.

§  64.  Accordingly  it  is  impossible  speculatively
to  determine,  how  far  within  the  limits  of  proba-
bility, faith  in  the  applicability  of  the  not  essen-
tially impossible  conception  of  miracle  ought  to
be  extended.


HISTORY NOT MERE DEVELOPMENT.  Ill

The  entire  thought  however,  in  which  the  in-
clination towards  this  faith  has  its  source,  is  still
further  in  harmony  with  the  idea  of  a  history  for
the  world  in  which  we  come  to  participate  with
God  in  some  common  experience.  And  while
this  is  something  which  is  determined  in  accord-
ance with  his  most  general  plan,  it  is  still  in  its
details  by  no  means  the  mere  result  of  original
predestination.  It  is  therefore  not  merely  '  de-
velopment '  according  to  the  law  of  reason  and
consequent,  but  actual  history  ;  and  this  history  is
without  exception  found  only  where  general  laws
or  a  general  plan  are  not  executed  with  perfect
constancy,  but  in  alternate  action  with  innumerable
lawless obstacles  or  free  counteractions.

This  summing-up  of  actuality  into  a  history  which
has  beginning,  middle  and  end,  is  very  natural
to  all  religions.  And  yet  there  are  no  doubt  dif-
ficulties involved  in  such  an  idea  in  itself  con-
sidered.

That  is  to  say,  it  seems  to  us  at  first  as  if  the
proper  determination  of  actuality  consists  in  the
historical  actualization  of  a  "  world-aim  "  or  in  the
struggle  toward  it.  And  with  this  understanding
of  the  matter,  it  is  altogether  natural  to  regard  the
creation,  the  history  of  the  world,  and  the  judg-
ment of  the  world,  as  three  successive  acts  of  such


112  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

a  concluded  drama.  But  upon  closer  consideration
after  all  this  view  is  in  contradiction  to  our
needs.

If  the  world  was  created  in  time,  so  that  reckon-
ing from  this  (present)  moment  a  retrogressive
cognition  should,  after  a  finite  number  of  steps,
discover  its  beginning,  then  we  are  troubled  by  the
emptiness  of  infinite  time  before  this  beginning ;
and  we  know  of  nothing  with  which  to  fill  it  out.
For  even  the  thought  of  a  solitary  preexistence  of
God  is  an  obscure  one,  supposing  that  the  creation
of  the  world  is  made  to  originate  from  an  act  of
the  will  of  God,  which  could  have  no  need  of  this
preparatory  period  either  for  its  origination  or  for
its  execution.

Just  so  if  the  judgment  of  the  world  is  the
conclusion  of  history,  it  certainly  cannot  be  under-
stood to  mean  that  the  created  actuality  would
now  vanish  again  into  nothingness.  Rather  is  it
only  by  this  judgment  of  the  world  that  there  is
established  an  order  of  things  which  fulfils  the
aim  of  the  world,  and  which  would  then  naturally
be  perpetuated  ad  infinitum  as  the  actuality  of
that  which  ought  to  be ;  —  and  this  without  ex-
periencing any  further  history  of  that  development,
which  would  now  be  superfluous.  .

Such considerations convince us  that the idea


THE PERIODS OF THE WORLD.  II3

of  these  three  successive  periods  of  Beginning,
Realization  and  Completion  of  an  aim,  —  derived
as  it  is  from  our  human  endeavors,  —  is  not  ap-
plicable to  the  totality  of the  world.


CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE CONCEPTION OF THE '  WORLD-AIM.'

§  65.  The  conception  of  a  'world-aim,'  which,
according  to  the  remarks  we  have  just  made,  would
not  be  realized  all  at  once  at  the  conclusion  of  a
history,  but  progressively  in  the  course  of  the
world,  we  have  simply  introduced  without  any
question  as  to  its  validity.  Speculatively  it  is  by
no  means  to  be  demonstrated  ;  it  continues  to  be
perfectly  possible  to  think  of  the  course  of  the
world  as  an  entirely  purposeless,  although  more
or  less  living  development  of  an  Absolute.

But  religious  feeling  has  an  immediate  evidence
that  the  case  is  not  so,  and  that  all  the  phenomena
of  inspiration,  of  adoration,  and  of  the  feeling  of
obligation  to  an  ideal,  are  not  explicable  as  casual
effects  in  the  development  of  a  purposeless  Prin-
ciple.

But  if  the  conception  of  a  supreme  aim  for
the  world  is  once  acknowledged,  then  the  other
ideas,  which  form  its  necessary  points  of  relation,
comport  with  it ;  and  especially  the  idea  of  a  per-
sonal God,  in  whose  consciousness  and  will  alone
this  aim,  previous  to  its  full accomplishment, can


PLACE OF THE SUPREME AIM.  II5

have  any  actuality  by  means  of  which  it  becomes
effective  as  guiding  principle  for  the  course  of
the  world  itself.  To  this  subject  however  we  are
not  going  to  return.  The  most  urgent  question
is,  wherein  are  we  to  place  this  '  supreme  aim.'

§  66.  The  answer  to  the  foregoing  question  is
to  this  extent  self-evident,  that  naturally  this  aim
cannot  be  placed  in  the  realization  of  a  fact,  with
respect  to  which  the  further  question  were  possi-
ble ;  why  just  this,  and  not  other  conceivable
aims  of  like  nature,  is  to  fill  this  supremely
exalted  position  in  the  world.  The  aim  must
obviously  be  that  which  has  supreme  value,  and
with  respect  to  which  the  aforesaid  question
becomes senseless.

Now  as  to  what  this  aim  is,  the  common,  unphil-
osophical  religious  view  is  not  at  all  uncertain  :
nothing  but  the  conception  of  blessedness  seems
to  it  to  express  this  value,  with  respect  to  which
it  is  absurd  to  raise  the  question,  why  this  and
why  nothing  else  constitutes  the  supreme  aim.
It  may  be  incidentally  remarked,  that  the  exist-
ence of  a  world  of  spirits  is  connected  with  the
foregoing  view  as  something  conceivable.  For  only
such  a  world  could  contain  the  subjects  whose  states
this  supreme  aim  may  be  conceived  to  be. On  the


Il6  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

other  hand,  this  view  by  no  means  also  furnishes
at  once  an  explanation  of  the  existence  of  this
determinate,  z/zanimate  world.

§  67.  The  above-mentioned  view  is  combated  in
vain  from  the  side  of  an  ethical  Rigorism,  which,
through  its  well-known  undervaluation  of  all  'pleas-
ure/ always  in  the  practical  domain,  regards  noth-
ing but  disinterested  obedience  to  the  universal
commands  of  duty  as  ethical  ;  and  therefore  in
the  religious  domain  also  would  not  in  any  case
be  disposed  to  acknowledge  '  supreme  blessedness  '
as  the  final  purpose  of  the  world,  —  perhaps  not,
with  any  readiness,  even  as  a  tolerable  conse-
quence of that purpose.

With  respect  to  this  point  we  briefly  remark
as  follows  :  If  obedience  or  disobedience  to  an
ethical  law  were  to  occasion  not  a  trace  of  pleas-
ure or  pain  to  any  sensitive  being  in  the  world,
—  whether  God,  angels,  or  men,  —  it  would  be
utterly  incomprehensible,  why  it  is  just  the  obedi-
ence and  not  the  disobedience  to  the  law  that
must  have  an  obligatory  force  ;  since  after  all
the  effects  of  the  two  modes  of  conduct  consist
only  in  the  production  of  different  states  of  fact,
one  of  which  would  be  as  indifferent  as  the  other.

In a  word,  it is impossible to understand  what


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  GOOD.  1 17

is  to  constitute  the  '  value '  of  any  action,  if  its
results  are  not  able  to  produce  some  'Good'  some-
where in  the  world,  or  to  increase  the  sum  of
already  existing  'Good.'  But  while  we  designate
Things,  States  and  Events  as  '  Good,'  it  is  after
all  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  means  for  obtain-
ing the  only  real  and  substantial  '  Good ' ;  and
this  latter  always  exists  only  in  the  pleasure  of
some,  sensitive  spirit,  and  would  vanish  with  the
world  of  spirits  completely  from  the  realm  of  ac-
tuality.

No  Ethics  can  avoid  having  regard  to  a  pur-
pose that  is  final  and  in  itself  of  absolute  value.
No  matter  to  what  extent  many  rigorous  systems
formulate  their  highest  ethical  laws  apparently
without  any  such  regard,  still,  in  addition  to  the
assurances  that  they  are  the  highest  laws,  the
conclusion  must  always  be  supplied :  What  then
would  be  the  result,  if  these  laws  were  not  obeyed  ?

§  68.  The  foregoing  assertions  do  not  degrade
morals.  It  is  not  meant  by  them,  that  the  direct
endeavor  after  happiness  —  and  that,  too,  after  one's
own  happiness  —  should  be  the  ethically  praise-
worthy motive  of  our  action.  On  this  point  our
conscience  gives  us  sufficient  instruction ;  since
it interprets this endeavor as in itself considered


Il8  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

indifferent  and  merely  natural,  but  on  the  con-
trary interprets  as  ethically  laudable  only  the
endeavor  to  secure  the  happiness  of  others.  Thus
(as  might  be  further  proved)  the  command  of
'  benevolence '  is,  among  all  ethical  commands,
really  the  fundamental  one ;  and  only  upon  the
assumption  of  it  do  all  the  rest  receive  their  ob-
ligatory value.

On  the  other  hand,  in  seeking  a  coherent  view
of  the  world,  we  have  a  speculative  interest  in  the
fact  that  the  ethical  commands,  which  we  are  able
in  practice  to  obey  without  any  further  question
as  to  their  origin,  are  not  wholly  lacking  in  co-
herence with  the arrangement  of  the  world.

That  such  arrangement  therefore  be  reckoned  to
the  account  of  the  final  purpose  of  blessedness,  is
a  speculative  claim,  which  we  set  up  in  the  in-
terest, to  a  certain  extent,  of  our  reverence  for
the  world,  but  not  for  the  satisfaction  of  our  own
wishes  for  happiness.  We  are  naturally  unable  to
avoid  including  our  own  welfare  also  in  this  com-
prehensive final  purpose.

The  foregoing  are  perhaps  the  incentives  which
in  religious  thought  have  led  to  this  doctrine  of
blessedness.  From  these  incentives  are  distin-
guished, and  not  to  their  advantage,  at  least  as
regards the intention, the philosophical systems


BLESSEDNESS AS AN ABSTRACT NOTION.  I  19

which  only  in  a  practical  way  set  up  claims  upon
our  obedience  to  universal  ethical  laws,  but  specu-
latively give  us  no  enlightenment  with  respect  to
the  ultimate  end,  to  which  properly  this  ceaseless
expenditure  of  ethical  energy  is  to  lead.

§  69.  Certainly,  the  laudation  alluded  to  above
holds  good  only  of  the  intention  and  not  of  the
performance  of  this  religious  opinion.  It  is  wrecked
rather  in  the  attempt,  actually  to  deduce  the  neces-
sity of  the  present  world  from  the  supreme  purpose
of  blessedness.

The  first  objection  certainly  might  be  disre-
garded ;  namely,  why  this  purpose  could  be  accom-
plished at  all  only  as  a  result  of  a  course  of  the
world,  and  why  it  could  not  be  accomplished  as
well  from  the  very  beginning.  At  the  foundation
of  such  a  question  there  really  lies  the  logical  error
of  regarding  the  conception  of  '  blessedness '  or  of
1  pleasure  in  general '  in  this  universal  sense  of  it,
as  something  realizable.  But  the  'pleasure'  that
is  without  content  can  no  more  exist  than  a  sen-
sation of  '  color  in  general,'  which  were  neither
green  nor  blue.  Every  '  pleasure '  is  rather  an
altogether  determinate  one,  which  is  distinguished,
as  to  its  intensity  and  coloring,  from  others,  and  in
both  respects  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  the
content  of  which  it  is  an  enjoyment.


120  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

Hence  it  may  be  made  evident,  that  we  are
utterly  unable  to  form  any  real  idea  of  a  blessed-
ness without  content,  although  we  can  form  the
name  of  it ;  that  it  is  capable  of  realization  rather
only  upon  the  supposition  that  there  are  actual
relations  of  some  sort,  which  constitute  the  object
of  enjoyment  in  this  pleasure ;  and,  finally,  that
even  these  relations  cannot  be  as  they  will,  but
together  must  form  an  orderly  arrangement  of  the
world.

But  no  progress  is  made  in  the  foregoing  way ;
the  postulates  which  are  set  up  with  respect  to
such  an  arrangement  of  the  world,  are  always  after
all  general  and  abstract.  That  they  had  to  be
realized  now  by  means  of  just  these  substances,
forces,  organisms,  and  kinds  of  occurrence,  which
we  discover  empirically  in  the  world,  is  in  nowise
to  be  proved.

Wonder  at  the  fact  that  so  many  other  kinds
of  existence  were  still  possible,  which  however  do
not  exist,  can  be  modified  but  imperfectly  by  the
intimation  that  our  range  of  experience  is  narrow,
and  that  perhaps  there  are  realized  in  the  extra-
earthly  world  all  the  possibilities  which  we  miss
upon  the  surface  of  the  earth.  For  since  we  have
reason  to  think  that  the  most  general  physical  laws,
which  are  valid  with  us,  are  valid  also  for  all  distant


THE EXISTENCE OF EVIL.  121

parts  of  the  world,  therefore  the  organizations  also
which  are  there  found  can  only  be  such  as  are  in
accordance  with  these  laws.  There  always  remains
as  conceivable,  however,  an  infinite  manifoldness
that  might  exist,  if  those  laws  were  only  different.
We  are  therefore  brought  round  to  the  new
question  :  Why  are  the  laws  of  nature,  which  are
not  necessities  of  thought  but  empirical,  precisely
as  they  are  and  not  otherwise  ?  This  question  is
unanswerable  ;  and  in  our  religious  faith  we  must
be  content  to  think  of  the  given  world  as  in
fact  called  to  the  realization  of  the  supreme  pur-
pose, without  being  able  to  investigate  any  further
the  grounds  of  this  calling.

§  70.  The  existence  of  evil  in  the  world  —  and
that  too  primarily  of  mere  physical  evil  —  brings
our  general  assumptions  still  further  into  inex-
plicable contradiction with our  data of facts.

It  is  sufficient  to  indicate  in  a  word,  how  utterly
fruitless  are  those  ways  of  speaking  which  seek
to  apologize  for  evil  by  recognizing  it  only  "  in
particulars,"  but  maintaining  "  the  harmony  of
the  world  as  a  whole."  One  needs  only  to  reverse
these  utterances  :  "  On  the  whole  the  world  makes
a  beautiful  figure  indeed,  but  in  particulars  it  is
wretched,"  —  in  order  to  understand  that  such  ex-


122  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

pressions  give  evidence  merely  of  the  good  inten-
tion of  the  apology,  but  specify  no  ground  for
such  an  apology.

Moreover  the  assertion  of  that  "  harmony  on  the
whole "  is  in  fact  by  no  means  whatever  to  be
demonstrated.  We  merely  know  that  the  world
does  not  perish  on  account  of  its  imperfections,
but  that  both  it  and  they  continue  together.

§  71.  All  efforts  to  attain  to  clearness  upon  the
above-mentioned  subject,  can  only  try  to  apologize
for  the  evil  that  does  not  admit  of  being  done
away  with  by  denial.

The  first  onset  for  this  purpose  consists  in  the
assumption  that  evil  is  necessary ;  in  other  words
that  God,  although  having  in  view  only  the  High-
est Good,  has  nevertheless  been  bound  in  his
creation  to  laws  which  have  not  permitted  the  un-
conditioned Good,  but  only  the  choice  of  the  best
world  among  many,  all  of  which  were  imperfect.

The  limitation  of  the  divine  Omnipotence  which
is  involved  in  this  view,  might  be  tolerated  to  a
certain  extent,  if  the  aforesaid  general  laws  were
really  understood  to  be  simply  the  eternal  truths,
which,  as  we  saw,  are  nothing  extraneous  to  God,
but  are  only  the  proper  modus  agendi  of  his  own
spiritual  activity. But  there is nothing  whatever


THE ORIGIN OF EVIL.  123

in  the  whole  world  by  which  to  prove  that  these
eternal  truths  were  to  blame  for  the  evils  that
are  in  the  world.  So  far  as  we  are  in  any  way
empirically  acquainted  with  the  course  of  things,
and  are  able,  according  to  its  analogy,  to  judge
of  non-realized  possibilities,  an  absolutely  faultless
world  would  not  be  at  all  inconsistent  with  those
'eternal  truths.'  The  ground  of  evil,  so  far  as
we  know,  lies  rather  in  those  special  facts  and
arrangements,  which  are  in  actual  existence,  but
instead  of  which  there  might  as  well  be  others
that  were  also  on  friendly  terms  with  the  afore-
said truths  and  yet  would  not  lead  to  these  evils.

Since  now  we  must  attribute  the  establishment
of  these  special  actualities  to  the  creative  will  of
God,  the  attempt  in  this  way  to  make  the  origin
of  evil  independent  of  the  divine  will  would  not
succeed ;  for  his  omnipotence  would  have  still
further  to  be  so  limited  that  even  the  actual  ele-
ments of  the  world  and  their  original  combina-
tions would  be  regarded  as  something  taken  for
granted,  in  the  midst  of  which  God  would  have
to  find  himself  existing,  and  from  which  He  then
would  have  to  endeavor  to  secure  the  best  result
still  possible  (Leibnitz).

This  would  be  not  only  a  degradation  of  our
conception  of  God  from a  religious  point  of  view,


124  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

but  it  would  also  be  speculatively  fruitless.  For
in  order  that  the  measurable  influence  upon  the
world,  which  is  still  attributed  to  such  a  God,
might  be  able  to  exist  at  all,  a  second  superior
God  would  have  to  be  assumed,  who,  in  the
manner  previously  discussed  (§§  16  ff.),  would  com-
prehend both  of  these  now  mutually  indifferent
members  in  one  reciprocal  action,  and  would  pre-
vail upon  them  to  act  upon  each  other.

§  72.  After  the  foregoing  explanation  which  is
intended  as  metaphysical,  there  is  one  of  a  peda-
gogic sort,  that  regards  evil  as  a  means  of  Good,
that  is  of  education  and  improvement.

But  in  the  first  place  this  view  merely  contem-
plates men,  who  alone  are  capable  of  education.
But  in  the  animal  world  as  well  physical  evils
appear  ;  and  that  not  at  all  in  a  sporadic  manner,
but  so  systematized  that  the  terrible  torture  and
destruction  of  one  class  of  creatures  by  the  rest
belongs  directly  to  the  so-called  order  of  Nature.
No  pedagogic  can  make  this  comprehensible.  We
can  much  sooner  comprehend  how  earlier  times  in
despair  over  this  very  fact  set  a  '  bad  Principle '
in a  dualistic  manner  over  against  the  Good.

But  even  leaving  this  out  of  the  account, —
any education makes use of evil simply because


MORAL AND PHYSICAL EVIL.  125

the  minds  which  it  intends  to  affect,  are  psycho-
logically so  defectively  organized,  that  without
this  intrinsically  objectionable  means  the  end
would  no  longer  be  realized.  If  it  were  applied
to  the  entire  world,  it  would  lead  back  to  the
previous  thought  :  God  did  not  have  it  in  his
power  to  make  the  world  so  perfect  that  it
would  attain  its  end  without  corrections  by
means of evil.

§  73.  A  view  which  has  been  elaborated  rather
in  a  religious  and  mystical  way,  regards  the  mor-
ally Bad  as  prior  and  physical  evil  as  a  consequence
of  its  becoming  actual.

Now  the  circumstance  that  the  truly  Good  was
not  to  be  actualized  without  the  possibility  of  the
Bad,  and  therefore  that  the  freedom  of  the  world
of  spirits  was  to  be  conceded,  we  can  consider
as  a  necessity  which  need  >not  be  foreign  even
to  God's  own  nature.  But  after  all  we  do  not
understand,  why  the  bad  disposition  which  entered
the  world  in  consequence  of  such  freedom  needed
to  have  any  physical  result  at  all ;  and  why  the
danger  which  it  threatened  to  the  undisturbed
continuance  of  the  world,  was  not  averted  by
one  of  those  self-compensations,  by  means  of
which so frequently elsewhere in nature the be-


126  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

ginning  of  a  disturbed  equipoise  cancels  itself
again.

The  necessary  existence  of  freedom  would  there-
fore by  no  means  show  that  the  innocent  must
suffer  by  its  misuse.  But  in  addition  to  this  also
the  view  does  not  cover  the  whole  question.

For  the  further  assumption  that  nature  was
originally  without  evil  and  that  sin  first  brought
it  into  the  world,  not  only  lacks  all  empirical
foundation,  but  is  even  in  itself  considered  un-
tenable. We  cannot,  just  because  individual  spirits,
or  even  very  many  of  them,  erred,  regard  '  sin '  as
a  unit-principle  or  a  power  which  would  have  a
legitimate  influence  upon  the  course  of  nature  in
general  ;  still  less  is  it  to  be  understood,  why  na-
ture did  not  endeavor  to  overcome  singly  the  dis-
turbances which  the  sin  that  is  foreign  to  it  had
introduced,  instead  of  admitting  physical  evils,  as
a  kind  of  solidaric  totality,  into  the  very  plan  of
its  operations.

The  incomprehensibleness  of  the  foregoing  views
is  not  lessened  by  their  being  proclaimed  with  still
greater  emphasis  ;  thus,  for  example,  by  speaking
of  a  "  voluntary  fall  of  the  entire  creation "  which
now  extends  "the  curse  of  its  imperfection  to  all
creatures  that  still  spring  from  it."  In  whatever
way  the  picture may  be  painted,  to  attribute  this


EVIL AN INSOLVABLE ENIGMA.  12J

act  of  a  'fall'  to  the  collective  conception  of  a
creation  means  after  all  nothing  whatever.  It  is
intelligible  only  as  regards  each  particular,  indi-
vidual, free  and  conscious  being.  But  if  we  refer
it  to  such  a  being,  then  it  is  a  perfect  monstrosity,
at  variance  with  the  simplest  sense  of  justice,  to
assume  that  the  consequences  of  this  act  pass
over,  as  an  inheritance  which  it  is  impossible  to
shake  off,  to  all  later  generations,  although  they
are  according  to  their  very  conception  destined
to  like  'freedom.'

In  very  different  forms  have  Mythology,  Mysti-
cism and  Dogmatics  represented  such  a  primaeval
history  of  the  world.  But  none  of  these  attempts
has  been  able  to  eliminate  the  aforesaid  manifest
incongruities.

§  74.  The  above-mentioned  incapacity  of  our  spec-
ulative cognition  for  the  solution  of  this  enigma  of
evil  had  to  be  very  plainly  expressed.  For  there
ought  not  to  remain  any  seeming  as  if  there  were,  in
expressions  which  cannot  be  understood  and  which
only  commend  themselves  to  the  imagination  through
intuitive  images,  any  real  speculative  proof  for  the
correctness  of  the  religious  feeling  upon  which
rests  our  faith  in  a  good  and  holy  God,  and  in  the
destination  of  the  world  to  the  attainment  of  a
blessed  end.


128  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

He  who  does  not  share  this  religious  conviction,
may,  on  account  of  these  last  considerations  of
ours,  very  easily  from  a  speculative  point  of  view-
reach  that  Pessimism,  which  is  just  now  the  order
of  the  day,  and  for  which  there  will  be  on  specu-
lative grounds  no  refutation.  But  this  Pessimism,
which  reverts  to  the  thought  of  an  original  energy
without  will,  that  produces  the  Good  and  the  Bad
alike  without  design,  is  not  a  profound  view  but  is
just  that  cheap  and  superficial  kind  of  view,  by
which  all  enigmas  are  conveniently  disposed  of  —
by  simply  sacrificing  all  that  is  most  essential  and
supreme  to  the  unprejudiced  mind.

In  contrast  with  this  Pessimism,  the  more  diffi-
cult problem  is  the  firm  confidence  that,  in  spite
of  all  that  is  incomprehensible  to  us,  the  striving
after  a  supreme  end  is  at  all  events  extant  in  the
world.  For  this  confidence  takes  upon  itself  the
great  and  ever  unavoidable  task  of  always  making
renewed  attempts  to  fill  the  gap  which  lies  be-
tween this  content  of  our  faith  and  our  actual
experiences.

If  we  call  every  attempt  of  this  sort  in  thought
or  action  '  Religion,'  then  '  religion '  is  never  ex-
actly a  demonstrable  theorem,  but  the  conviction
of  its  truth  is  a  deed  that  is  to  be  accredited  to
character.


CHAPTER IX.


RELIGION AND MORALITY.


§  75.  If  there  is  no  speculative  argument  for
religious  conviction,  still  there  must  be  a  motive
for  holding  fast  this  conviction.  And  in  fact  an
appeal  has  constantly  been  made  to  an  '  immediate
inner  experience,'  which  attests  the  truth  of  the
content  of  religion,  as  directly  and  independently
of  the  intervention  of  logic  as  perception  by  the
senses  attests  the  reality  of  external  objects.  It
has  already  been  said  in  the  Introduction  however,
that  there  by  no  means  exists  an  harmonious
inner  experience  as  regards  that  divine  order  of
the  world  which  is  not  perceivable  by  the  senses ;
but  rather  that  (compare  also  §  59)  the  only  ele-
ment common  to  men,  to  which  an  appeal  may
be  made  for  the  confirmation  of  religion,  consists
in  those  '  utterances  of  the  conscience '  that  pri-
marily only  say  what  ought  to  be,  and  yet  after
all  permit  an  indirect  inference  from  this  as  to
what  is.

§  76.  There  are  different  ways  of  apprehend-
ing  this real function of the '  conscience ' also.


130  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  conscience
is  not,  prior  to  all  experience,  a  coherent  revela-
tion of  the  commands  to  which  our  future  conduct
ought  to  conform  ;  the  rather  is  it  like  our  capa-
city of  cognition.  The  supreme  principles  to
which  this  capacity  reduces  its  judgment  of
Things,  are  also  no  original  ready-made  posses-
sion of  our  consciousness.  Particular  perceptions
rather  induce  us,  in  the  first  place,  as  a  sort  of
immediate  reaction,  to  effect  their  combination  so
as  to  give  them  a  definite  significance.  It  is
only  subsequent  reflection  upon  many  such  par-
ticular cases,  that  shows  us  in  accordance  with
what  '  principles '  our  conduct,  which  was  pre-
viously only  instinctive,  has  proceeded.  And
now  for  the  first  time  are  they  conscious  prin-
ciples, to  which  we  conform  in  our  subsequent
cognition.

Just  so  '  conscience '  is  first  induced,  by  consid-
ering cases  that  are  quite  definite,  to  pass  par-
ticular judgments  of  approval  or  disapproval  upon
actions  which  are  brought  before  it.  It  is  only
by  reflective  comparison  of  these  particular  judg-
ments, that  there  is  formed  from  them  those
general  ethical  precepts,  which  it  is  then  cus-
tomary to  designate  as  the  'immediate  voice  of
conscience.'


THE VIEW OF EGOISM.  I3I

§  77.  This  necessary  concession  with  respect  to
the  psychological  development  of  our  conscience,
is  now  made  use  of  to  support  in  the  first  place
a  view,  which  annuls  the  obligatory  value  and  the
proper  majesty  of  ethical  commands.

It  is  the  view,  namely,  that  the  sensibility
which  induces  the  spirit  to  approve  or  disapprove
of  some  definite  act  itself  rests  in  turn  merely
upon  the  immediate  well-being  or  ill-being,  which
the  spirit  experiences  from  it.  When  however
this  sensibility  proceeds  to  the  formation  of  gen-
eral propositions,  it  comprises  only  those  maxims,
constant  obedience  to  which  experience  has  taught
secures  on  the  average  the  highest  degree  and
steadiest  permanence  of  that  well-being  which  is
at  all  attainable.  All  ethical  commands  accord-
ingly appear  merely  as  maxims  of  that  Egoism
which  seeks  its  own  self-preservation ;  they  appear
however  as  general  laws  simply  for  the  reason
that  the  limitation  of  our  cognition  of  the  past,
present  and  future,  does  not  in  every  case  permit
that  mode  of  action  which  is  specially  suited  to
these  different  periods,  for  the  attainment  of  the
highest  possible  good.

To  this  entire  mode  of  apprehending  the  sub-
ject we  must  now  concede  this  one  point, —
namely,  that  the  mere  experience  of  human  inter-


132  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

course  certainly  may  furnish  us  with  the  concrete
and  determinate  particular  content  of  those  pre-
cepts, in  conforming  to  which  ethical  behavior
consists ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  all  at-
tempts in  a  reverse  direction  to  deduce  those
specialized  precepts  from  the  general  conceptions
of  the  Good,  the  Ethical,  the  Holy,  or  the  Just,
are  in  vain.  Such  general  conceptions  express
nothing  whatever  but  the  peculiar  character  of
the  impression,  which  definite  kinds  of  conduct
will  make  upon  our  feelings,  as  soon  as  we  shall
become  acquainted  with  them  :  on  the  other  hand,
they  do  not  acquaint  us  with  just  those  forms  of
the  conduct  itself,  to  which  this  impression  will
apply.

§  78.  A  disposition  which  insists  upon  endeavor-
ing to  find  in  ethical  precepts  nothing  but  pru-
dential maxims  acquired  by  experience,  and  to  find
back  of  all  actions  nothing  but  egoistic  motives,  can
in  no  way  be  gainsaid  by  mere  speculation.  So
much  only  is  clear,  namely,  that  such  an  interpre-
tation of  moral  commands  is  arbitrary.  For  in  that
case  also,  supposing  us  to  assume  that  a  worth
and  sacredness  of  their  own  belongs  to  these  com-
mands, everything  would  still  be  exactly  the  same.
That  is  to  say,  these  commands  would  in fact be


THE VIEW OF EGOISM.  1 33

the  maxims,  conforming  to  which  produces  the
greatest  amount  of  happiness.  The  content  more-
over of  that  which  they  command  would  always
be  learned  first  by  experience,  as  was  previously
mentioned.  And  for  just  this  reason  it  would  always
be  possible  to  represent  them  as  though  they  were
nothing  more  than  such  lessons  of  experience  with
respect  to  what  is  expedient.

But  on  the  other  hand,  he  who  prefers  this
interpretation  overlooks  the  fact,  that  we  all  of  us
none  the  less  set  over  against  the  conduct  which
simply  conforms  to  these  maxims  of  prudence,
another  of  an  altogether  different  sort,  as  being
the  only  one  of  value ;  and  this  latter  conduct  con-
forms to  these  same  maxims,  although  with  differ-
ent sentiments  ;  and  indeed  with  such  sentiments
as  either  have  disinterested  regard  to  the  estab-
lishment of  the  Good,  in  precisely  the  same  way,
for  instance,  in  which  we  reverence  beauty  as  having
objective  value  without  advantage  to  ourselves  —
or  else  with  such  sentiments  as  find  happiness,  so
far  as  they  make  the  production  of  it  an  object
of  pursuit,  only  in  benevolence  towards  others  and
not in selfishness.

This  also  may  be.  denied ;  but  in  denying  it
there  is  involved  the  denial  of  an  inner  experience,
upon  the acknowledgment of  which every  further


134  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

upward  flight  of  religion  depends.  Conversely,
therefore,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  gainsay  those
who  are  conscious  of  this  inner  experience.

§  79.  But  even  the  recognition  of  the  peculiar
worth  and  sacredness  of  ethical  commands  does  not
lead  at  once  to  a  religious  view  of  the  world  ;  on  the
contrary  this  recognition,  in  ancient  as  well  as  mod-
ern times,  has  been  put  in  express  opposition  to
religious  thoughts,  which  seemed  like  a  needless
and  false  supplement  to  it.  It  is  not  to  be  denied,
that  practically  even  this  Stoicism,  or  the  Rational-
ism which  disdains  any  connection  with  religion,
may,  by  mere  subordination  to  the  general  demands
of  morality  and  of  the  course  of  the  world,  furnish
the  basis  for  a  conduct  of  life  well  deserving  of  rec-
ognition. But  there  are  involved  in  this  conception
(compare  §  68)  peculiar  speculative  contradictions.

It  is  maintained  in  the  first  place,  that  all
thoughts  about  an  origin  at  some  time  or  other,
or  about  an  ultimate  aim  of  moral  laws,  are  to  be
avoided,  because  they  could  only  serve  to  corrupt
the  conception  of  the  peculiar  sacredness  and  un-
conditioned obligation  of  these  laws,  which  demand
rather  an  altogether  immediate  -recognition  as  being
absolutely  obligatory.  Worthy  of  respect  as  is  the
sentiment  which  is  thus  expressed,  yet  the specu-


AN 'UNCONDITIONED OUGHT.  135


lative  thought,  by  which  it  would  like  to  sustain
itself,  is  utterly  unserviceable.  Laws  that  are  com-
pletely unconditioned  may  be  conceived  of,  so  far
forth  as  they  in  fact  govern  all  actuality,  like  the
laws  of  nature,  and  are  consequently  expressions  of
a  'must'  which  knows  no  exceptions.  On  the  con-
trary the  thought  of  an  '  unconditioned  Ought,'  that
is,  of  a  law  to  which  actuality  in  no  wise  of  itself
corresponds,  is  incomprehensible.

There  must  be  a  difference  between  the  reality
of  that  which  ought  to  be  and  of  that  which  ought
not  to  be ;  and  this  difference  cannot  consist  in
the  mere  repetition  of  these  two  antithetical  predi-
cates. Rather  must  the  very  consideration,  that  the
one  ought  to  be  and  the  other  ought  not  to  be,
have  a  practical  validity.  In  other  words  and  more
simply  :  An  unconditioned  '  Ought '  is  unthinkable  ;
and  only  a  conditioned  Ought  is  possible,  which
attaches  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  the  ob-
servance or  non-observance  of  what  is  prescribed.
These  very  consequences,  however,  may  still  con-
sist ultimately  only  in  pleasure  or  pain.  And  in
this  alone  also  consists  the  *  absolute  value,'  as  it  is
called,  which  the  ideals  of  conduct  designated  by
moral  laws  possess.  A  value,  which  is  valued  by
no  one,  and  therefore  causes  no  one  pleasure  or
pain,  is,  according  to  our  previous  explanation
(§  67), an  essentially  self-contradictory  thought.


I36  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

Now  the  advantage,  which  must  be  inseparably
connected  with  the  claim  to  validity  for  the  moral
laws,  could  be  sought  primarily  in  that  immobility
of  feeling,  that  ataraxy,  which  Stoicism  regards  as
the  ideal  of  life  for  the  wise  man.  But  if  this  is
commendable  so  far  as  it  does  not  permit  disturb-
ance by  the  passions,  still  there  is  little  that  is
commendable  in  its  consequence,  which  would  also
exclude  living  enthusiasm  for  the  Good  and  Beauti-
ful, and  would  virtually  degrade  the  feeling  spirit
to  the  form  in  which  an  impersonal  substance  ex-
ists. The  moral  laws,  however,  so  far  as  this
ataraxy  would  be  attained  by  observing  them,  would
in  fact  still  be  mere  maxims  of  utility,  which  would
be  designed  for  the  attainment  of  a  completely  ego-
istic well-being.

It  is  manifestly,  however,  not  this  tranquillity
of  mind  alone  that  has  been  in  view  as  the  ulti-
mate goal  and  good,  but  the  self-esteem  which  is
secured  by  observance  of  the  moral  laws.  Now
this  may  without  doubt  be  very  well  meant,  but
to  say  the  least  it  is  not  compatible  with  the
refusal  of  all  further  religious  views.  If  we  regard
the  individual  personality  as  only  a  product  of
nature,  which  transiently  appears  and  then  van-
ishes, it  is  not  possible  to  understand  just  why
we attach any value to the fact that what we


PRINCIPLES OF ALL RELIGION.  1 37

revere  as  good  and  holy  must  have  its  realization
in  just  such  an  '  Ego '  as  this.  Self-esteem  also
would  therefore  be  immediately  intelligible  as  an
ultimate  goal  only  in  case  it  were  brought  under
the  conception  of  that  which  ministers  to  our
egoistic  well-being,  in  the  same  way  as  does
every  sensuous  satisfaction.  It  would  be  possi-
ble for  it  to  have  a  different  significance  only  in
case  our  view  of  our  own  personality,  and  of  its
position  in  the  totality  of  the  world  be  changed.

§  80.  The  foregoing  reflections,  which  con-
fessedly have  not  the  value  of  demonstrations  in
the  proper  sense,  but  are  merely  intended  to
make  us  sensible  of  the  connection  by  which
the  particular  thoughts  here  mentioned,  first  get
their  complete  satisfaction,  lead  us  now  to  three
propositions  which  we  may  regard  as  the  character-
istic convictions  of  every  religious  apprehension,  in
contradistinction  to  a  merely  intellectual  view  of
the  world,  —  namely  :

(1)  Ethical  laws  we  designate  as  the  will  of  God  ;

(2)  Individual  finite  spirits  we  designate  not  as
products  of  nature,  but  as  children  of  God ;

(3)  Actuality  we  designate  not  as  a  mere  course
of  the  world,  but  as  a  kingdom  of  God.  These
three  propositions  are  to  be  elucidated  and  their
consequences  investigated.


I38  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

§  81.  The  first  of  the  above-mentioned  propo-
sitions has  raised  objections,  which  ultimately
lead  to  the  well-known  scholastic  alternative  :  '  Is
the  Good  good,  because  God  wills  it  ?  or  docs
He  will  it,  because  it  is  good  ? '  This  point  is
to  be  decided  according  to  the  analogy  of  the
similar  question  as  to  the  validity  of  eternal
truths.

If  one  would  answer  the  first  member  of  the
alternative  in  the  affirmative,  the  question  would
be  asked  :  What  then  is  comprehended  under  the
thought  of  that  God,  who  appears  here  as  the  sub-
ject of  this  will?  He  would  be  nothing  but  an
infinite  Power,  as  yet  wholly  devoid  of  content  ;
and  the  affirmation,  that  He  has  willed  the  Good
(if  it  meant  a  determination  of  will  issued  in  time,
quite  as  much  as  if  it  declared  this  will,  to  be  one
without  beginning  and  eternal)  would  really  be
precisely  identical  with  the  other  assertion,  —
namely,  the  Good  is  assumed  to  be  once  for  all  in
existence,  and  a  '  positing  '  or  '  affirming,'  wholly
without  origin,  is  the  basis  of  this  assumption.
It  is  moreover  obvious,  that  every  such  deed  of
mere  power,  while  it  may. impart  necessity,  cannot
impart  worth  to  the  command.

But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  just  as  fruitless
to assert that God  wills the Good  because it is


GOD THE INTRINSICALLY GOOD.  1 39

'intrinsically  good.'  For,  to  say  nothing  about
the  ambiguity  of  this  latter  expression,  an  ac-
knowledgment of  the  Good,  which  is  not  a  merely
enforced  decree  in  subordination  to  a  statute,
would  after  all  be  possible  only  in  case  the  con-
tent to  be  acknowledged  already  possesses  for  the
nature  of  the  acknowledging  spirit  the  truth  and
the  value  which  is  to  be  awarded  to  it.

We  are  convinced  therefore,  that  the  above-
mentioned  alternative  separates  again  two  thoughts,
which  must  be  thought  together  in  absolute  insep-
arableness  as  the  expression  of  a  single  fact  ;  and
that  we  always  run  against  absurdities,  whenever
we  make  one  of  these  alternatives  the  condition
for  the  other.

We  therefore  come  to  the  following  decision  :
God  is  nothing  else  than  that  Will,  whose  con-
tent and  modes  of  procedure  are  comprehended  in
our  reflection  as  the  '  intrinsically  Good '  ;  and
which  may  by  abstraction  be  separated  from  that
living  form  of  existence  which  it  nowhere  else
possesses  but  precisely  in  the  real  God.  In  truth,
however,  such  will  of  God  no  more  follows  from
his  nature  as  secondary  to  it,  or  precedes  it  as
primary  to  it,  than  in  motion  —  say  direction  can
be  antecedent  or  subsequent  to  velocity.

It  is  therefore an entire  mistake to object that


140  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

the  peculiar  majesty  of  moral  laws  suffers  detri-
ment if  they  are  regarded  as  the  will  of  God.  For
we  take  this  view  of  the  matter,  not  precisely
with  the  design  of  laying,  by  the  specification  of
their  origin,  a  basis  for  that  worth  of  those  com-
mands which  we  directly  recognize  ;  but  we  do  it
in  order  to  add  to  this  worth  —  which,  although
it  stands  on  its  own  foundation,  we  were  neverthe-
less obliged  to  regard  speculatively  as  an  incom-
plete thought,  —  this  supplement,  by  which,  as  we
remarked,  its  worth  is  not  enhanced  but  becomes
intelligible  and  compatible  with  the  totality  of  our
view  of  the  world.

§  82.  As  regards  the  second  proposition  "(§  80),
the  somewhat  sentimental  way  in  which  it  is  ex-
pressed need  not  deceive  us  with  respect  to  the
weightiness  of  the  thought.  It  has  a  twofold  mean-
ing. That  is  to  say,  on  the  one  hand  there  is
involved  in  it  the  recognition  of  the  finiteness  of
the  personal  spirit  and  of  its  subjection  to  the
power  and  wisdom  of  God.  And  herein  is  found
the  reason  for  that  opposition  which  the  Christian
Religion  especially  has  expressed  against  the  pride
of  speculative  systems  of  morality,  that  seek  to
attain  as  their  ideal  the  self-satisfaction,  self-esteem,
and  self -righteousness  of  the  'wise  man.'


RELATION OF MAN TO GOD.  I4I

The  other  part  of  this  twofold  meaning  is  the  no
less  lively  opposition  to  that  depreciation  of  per-
sonality, which  sees  in  it  merely  a  transient  prod-
uct of  the  course  of  nature.  The  assertion  is
therefore  expressed  in  this  connection,  that  there
exists  between  man  and  God  a  relation  of  piety ;
that  this  relation  is  always  a  vital  one  ;  and  that
by  means  of  it  —  but  also  only  by  means  of  it  —
the  finite  spirit  ceases  to  be  such  absolutely  de-
pendent product  of  the  course  of  nature.

The  hope  of  being  loved  by  God,  however,  takes
the  place  of  mere  self-satisfaction  as  the  Highest
Good.  Such  approval  by  the  Supreme  Spirit  sup-
plants the  proud  claim  of  having  one's  satisfaction
in  one's  own  self-esteem.

§  83.  With  relation  to  the  third  proposition
(§  80),  we  have  already  been  obliged  to  confess  that
we  do  not  know  the  content  and  plan  of  the  divine
government  of  the  world  :  and  the  consequence  of
this  with  respect  to  religion  is,  that  the  entire  con-
sideration of  external  reality  is  withdrawn  from  its
domain,  and  is  regarded  as  an  object  for  science,
which  has  to  ascertain  its  consistence  by  methods
entirely  free  from  prejudice,  and  therefore  not  at
all  influenced  even  by  religious  considerations.
This attitude, too, is  distinctive of Christianity.


142  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

The  religions  of  heathenism  possess  a  mythology,
which  seeks  to  explain  and  interpret,  in  a  very  cir-
cumstantial manner,  the  facts  of  reality.  Chris-
tianity has  no  mythology  and  rests  all  its  reflec-
tions entirely  upon  considerations  of  the  spiritual
world,  of  which  we  have  an  inner  experience.


CHAPTER X.

DOGMAS AND CONFESSIONS.

§  84.  Nothing  more  than  the  content  of  the  three
propositions  already  cited  is  in  fact  revealed,  even
by  the  Christian  Revelation.  To  be  penetrated  by
their  influence,  and  to  be  voluntarily  subject  to  the
divine  will,  as  they  require,  constitutes  a  living,
consolatory  religious  state,  —  or  religion  as  a  condi-
tion of  mind.

It  is,  nevertheless,  quite  impossible  to  avert
attempts  to  transform  this  religious  content,  which
was  originally  apprehended  only  in  living  presenti-
ment, into  a  series  of  formulated  and  communicable
propositions.

To  such  attempts  we  are  impelled  on  the  one
side  by  our  own  life-experience,  which  desires  to
answer  the  doubts  that  have  arisen,  not  always  by
a  mere  appeal  to  the  same  frame  of  mind,  but  also
by  convictions  that .  enter  upon  the  special  content
of  the  doubts  raised.  Under  the  name  of  religious
Mysticism  may  be  summed  up  the  whole  of  these
attempts  at  theory  which  are  based  exclusively  upon
one's  own  inner  religious  experience,  and  which
also primarily claim no other validity than that


144  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

which  exists  for  the  personal  subject  who  finds
out  of  the  depth  of  his  own  mind  the  desired
answers  to  those  doubts.

§  85.  Over  against  this  first  impulse  stands  a
second.  It  is  essentially  self-contradictory  for  one
to  stand  alone  with  his  religious  conviction,  since
it  is  just  this  condition  which  unites  man  to  the
entire  universe.  Religion  is  not  merely  union  of
the  individual  with  God,  but  in  and  by  this  union
it  is  at  the  same  time  union  with  all  other  men.

In  this  impulse  lies  the  one  respectable  root  of
religious  Fanaticism.  What  we  acknowledge  as  the
Supreme,  would  not  be  such  Supreme,  unless  it
were  acknowledged  by  all.  Hence  now  there  fol-
lows, not  the  warrant  to  be  sure  to  force  one's
subjective  views  upon  others,  but  rather  that  need
of  a  religious  community  —  now  so  frequently  mis-
taken—  within  which  each  one  finds  again,  not
indeed  the  complete  content  of  his  own  individual
mysticism,  but  at  least  the  outlines  of  the  convic-
tion to  which  he  is  able  to  subordinate  or  to  attach
his  own.

Such  therefore  is  the  necessity  of  generally  ac-
cepted Dogmas  and  Symbols.


TWOFOLD DESIGN OF DOGMA.  I45

§  86.  Without  doubt  the  historic  development
of  such  thoughts  will  embrace  the  content  of
religion  more  completely  than  the  life-experience
of  an  individual ;  although  this  latter  pervades  with
greater  intensity  that  which  has  once  become  ob-
ject of  such  personal  experience.

Generally  accepted  objective  dogmas  will  there-
fore have  the  twofold  design,  —  on  the  one  hand,
to  hold  fast  those  solutions  of  doubt  which  have
been  gained  in  the  course  of  time ;  but,  on  the
other  hand,  to  designate  certain  outlines  of  thought
beyond  which  our  subjective  fancies  are  not  to  go
without  exposing  themselves  to  error.

According  to  our  previous  considerations,  no  one
of  these  dogmas  would  be,  properly  speaking,  a
speculatively  or  scientifically  conclusive  answer  to
a  proposed  question  ;  they  would  all  be  mere  sym-
bols rather,  which  acknowledge  the  existence  of
an  enigma  and  which  by  means  of  an  insufficient
figurative  designation  only  fix  the  limits  of  that
range  of  thoughts,  beyond  which  the  fulfilment
of  such  postulates  must  not  be  sought.

It  would  therefore  be  reckoned  a  mistake  for  us
to  demand  of  the  one  who  purposes  to  belong  to  a
religious  community,  an  obligation  binding  him  to
the  literal  purport  of  such  dogmas.  It  is  just  ac-
cording to  their  literal  purport  that  they  cannot  be


I46  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

objects  of  a  confession  or  non-confession  at  all.  In
order  that  this  question  of  confession  may  be  raised,
the  dogmas  need  at  all  times  an  interpretation  of
their  real  meaning,  —  a  meaning  which  they  always
indicate  but  'imperfectly,  by  figures  or  symbols.
Such  interpretation  however  is  not  given  objec^
tively,  but  each  individual  is  in  fact  to  find  it  by
the  activity  of  his  own  mind.

It  appears  therefore  that  the  only  question  to
be  put  to  the  one  who  proposes  to  belong  to  a
religious  community  is,  whether  he  in  his  own
heart  experiences  and  confesses  a  religious  truth,
which  admits  of  being  comprehended  as  the  im-
port of  this  objectively  formulated  dogma,  and
which  it  is  worth  while  to  have  acknowledged
in  this  particular  form  as  a  bond  of  union  for
the  religious conviction of  a collective body.

§  87.  It  may  be  objected,  that  there  is  involved
in  this  a  sort  of  dissimulation.  But  above  all
things  we  do  not  maintain  that  religion  and  its
dogmas  are  obligatory  'only  for  the  uncultivated.'
The  truth  of  religion  rather  is  absolutely  valid  for
all  alike ;  on  the  contrary,  the  speculative  expres-
sions which  have  been  discovered  for  it,  are  alto-
gether inadequate.  And  for  just  this  reason  it  is
permitted  to  agree  upon  a  formula,  to  which each


INEXPRESSIBLE BUT TRUE RELATIONS.  \/\J

one  gives  that  theoretical  construction  by  which
he  believes  its  essential  meaning  is  best  compre-
hended.

In  other  departments  of  life  also  we  are  not
able  to  discard  methods  of  apprehending  the
world,  which  within  the  sphere  of  philosophy  we
nevertheless  recognize  as  inadequate.  The  exist-
ence of  a  space-world  outside  of  us,  the  atoms,  and
the  forces  of  matter,  —  all  these  are  ideas,  without
the  use  of  which  not  only  the  common  understand-
ing, but  even  philosophy,  which  denies  their  cor-
rectness, would  not  be  at  all  able  to  find  its  way
in  its  observation  and  treatment  of  the  external
world.  In  all  these  cases  it  is  not  so  much
that  we  get  at  the  truth,  as  that  we  get  at  such
an  intuitive  'seeming'  as  is  able  to  make  intelli-
gible to  us  the  essentially  inexpressible,  but  true
relations  of  the  Actual.

Just  so  in  the  case  of  religion  it  is  not  re-
quired that  there  be  found  a  speculatively  unob-
jectionable expression  for  that  which  is  essentially
Transcendent,  but  that  we  have  figurative  expres-
sions to  which  the  mind  may  attach  the  same
feelings  that  are  appropriate  to  the  proper  con-
tent  of  religion.

Now  it  is  of  course  to  be  conceded  that  we
could speak as simply as we do, only in case


I48  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

these  formulated  dogmas  were  first  to  be  estab-
lished. They  are  however  already  in  existence,
and  historically  considered  they  are  surely  not  in
all  cases  so  perfected,  that  they  admit  of  no  mis-
understanding as  to  their  true  sense.  But  still
this  affords  no  reason  for  a  wilful  separation  from
those  circles  which  acknowledge  the  dogmas ;  it
only  involves  a  summons  not  to  make  of  them
subjects  for  theoretic  instruction,  as  well  as  a
problem  of  pastoral  wisdom  in  combating  the
evils of a false interpretation.

§  88.  The  attempts  at  theory  may  be  reduced  to
three  divisions,  the  first  of  which  only,  Theology  in
the  narrower  sense,  is  sufficiently  accessible  to  phi-
losophy.

We  have  endeavored  in  the  preceding  discussion
to  show,  what  more  precise  determinations  of  the
Divine  Being  philosophy  admits,  what  it  excludes,
and  finally  what  it  demands,  without  being  able  to
present  them  in  the  form  of  adequate  conceptions.
As  the  total  result  of  our  discussion  we  repeat,
that  faith  in  a  personal  God  contradicts  none  of
those  metaphysical  convictions  which  we  are  com-
pelled to  maintain ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  those
assertions  are  entirely  without  foundation  which,
with  decided incredulity  as regards all that  is  re-


THEOLOGY AND THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.  I49

ligious  and  with  frivolous  credulousness  as  regards
the  theories  fashionable  in  physical  science,  conceive
of  an  origin  for  spiritual  life  from  the  forces  of
mere  matter ;  and,  finally,  that  the  charge  of  an-
thropomorphism is  entirely  unjust,  for  the  distinc-
tions between  the  infinite  and  the  finite  spirit  are
by  no  means  overlooked.  But  it  is  certainly  foolish
to  prefer  to  assign  the  Supreme  Principle  of  the
world  to  an  unconscious  blind  substratum,  the  con-
ception of  which  is  for  us,  strictly  speaking,  some-
thing completely  dark  and  inscrutable.

§  89.  Further  speculations  —  as  for  example  con-
cerning the  Trinity — would  be,  as  regards  the
religious  life,  matters  of  complete  indifference,  but
for  the  fact  that  they  have  been  brought  into  con-
nection with  the  position  toward  God,  which  the
human  race  has  come  to  occupy  by  means  of  the
establishment  or  revelation  of  religion.  The  con-
sideration in  general  of  this  position  forms  a  sec-
ond grand  object  of  religious  theories.

According  to  the  conviction  maintained  in  this
discussion  as  to  the  constant  activity  of  God  in  the
world  and  upon  individual  spirits  ;  and  considering
our  acknowledged  ignorance  of  the  precise  plan
which  the  divine  government  follows  ;  there  is  noth-
ing whatever  that  stands  in  opposition  to  the  further


I50  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

conviction  that  God,  at  particular  moments  and
in  particular  persons,  may  have  stood  nearer  to
humanity,  or  may  have  revealed  himself  at  such
moments  and  in  such  persons  in  a  more  eminent
way  than  at  other  moments  and  in  other  persons.

If  therefore  reverence  for  the  founder  of  our
religion  designates  him  as  '  Son  of  God,'  no  se-
rious objection  to  the  essential  thought  which  is
expressed .  by  this  term  is,  in  view  of  the  preced-
ing paragraph,  tenable  ;  it  is  even  without  doubt
legitimate  to  regard  the  relation  in  which  he  stood
to  God,  as  absolutely  unique  not  only  as  to  degree
but  also as  to  its essential  quality.

But  no  one  can  discover  an  adequate  expression
for  that  which  would  exactly  correspond  to  the  con-
notation of  such  a  term  (diesen  Intentionen).  Since
then  Christ  after  all  cannot  be  '  God's  Son  '  in  the
literal  sense,  but  the  true  meaning  of  this  figura-
tive expression  admits  of  no  authentic  interpreta-
tion whatever,  this  entire  proposition  is  not  at
all  adapted  for  the  formation  of  a  speculative
dogma  ;  and  he  who  assents  to  it  in  fact  expresses
merely  his  conviction  of  the  unique  value  which
Christ  has  for  him,  and  which  Christ's  relation  to
God  has  for  humanity,  without  however  being  able
precisely  to  define  either  of  them.


SATISFACTION AND REDEMPTION.  151

§  90.  He  who  in  an  unprejudiced  way  allows
the  teaching  of  Christ  and  the  history  of  Christ's
life  to  influence  his  mind,  without  analyzing  this
impression,  may  be  convinced  that  an  infinitely
valuable  and  unique  act  has  occurred  here  on  earth
for  the  salvation  of  humanity.  But  the  attempts
to  settle  speculatively  the  content  and  value  of
this  fact,  do  not  as  a  whole  lead  to  the  end
designed.

It  is  impossible  to  speak  of  God's  honor  as  re-
ceiving '  satisfaction  '  through  the  sacrificial  death
of  a  single  person,  for  the  injury  done  it  by  the
sin  of  man.  For  such  a  view,  aside  from  its  some-
what crude  conception  of  God,  is  based  upon  the
altogether  impossible  conception  of  a  solidaric
unity  of  the  human  race  and  of  the  possibility
of  a  transfer  of  its  guilt  and  obligation  to  a  single
representative.

The  more  humane  ideas  of  a  '  Reconciliation '  or
a  -  Redemption  '  —  at  least  the  latter  of  them  —
leave  it  undetermined  from  whom  it  is,  precisely,
that  humanity  beholds  itself  delivered  by  this
ransom.  It  could  not  well  be  God,  but  must
rather  be  the  order  of  natural  law,  which  has
connected  sin  with  our  finiteness  and  condemna-
tion with  our  sin.

Now we know that we are redeemed neither


152  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

from  physical  evils  nor  from  the  possibility  of  sin.
The  only  thing  left  therefore  as  the  practically
effective  result  of  redemption  is  the  content  of  a
faith  revealed  and  proffered  to  us,  which  redeems
us  from  the  distress  and  wretchedness  of  Creation,
in  so  far  as  it  teaches  us  to  regard  all  evil  as  only
a  divine  trial ;  teaches  us,  however,  to  regard  the
whole  of  the  earthly  life,  not  to  be  sure  as  insig-
nificant, nor  yet  as  an  irrevocable  finality,  but  as  a
state  of  preparation,  for  the  errors  of  which  there
is  in  the  divine  grace  a  redemption  which  we  are
not  in  the  least  able  speculatively  to  define.

All  further  speculations  which  attach  themselves
to  this  subject  —  as,  for  example,  about  the  origin
of  sin  and  about  its  consequences  —  are  perfectly
useless  as  regards  the  religious  life.

§  91.  Even  the  third  division  of  such  specula-
tions, which  we  may  sum  up  as  Eschatology,
does  not  admit  of  being  cultivated  speculatively.
The  earthly  future  of  the  human  race  as  well  as
the  nature  of  our  immortality  and  of  the  retri-
bution which  the  final  judgment  will  bring,  are
entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  any  concrete  por-
trayal. And  in  this  connection  the  Humanism
of  modern  times  has  in  fact  become  entirely  dis-
used to  such  concrete  representations,  and  has  be-


NECESSITY FOR A RELIGIOUS COMMUNITY. 1 53

come  satisfied,  as  it  must  be,  with  maintaining
the  general  faith  in  continued  existence  and  in
a  constant  process  of  perfection,  as  well  as  in  a
retribution  ;  and  in  just  this  way  it  has  shown
that  for  a  truly  religious  life  there  is  really  no
necessity  whatever  for  that  vast  sum  of  knowl-
edges which  dogmatics,  with  much  liability  to
misunderstanding,  assumes  as  necessary  to  such  a
life.

§  92.  Mention  was  previously  made  of  the  value
attaching  to  the  necessity  that  one  shall  not  stand
alone  in  his  religious  convictions.  The  value  of
this  is  the  more  enhanced  on  account  of  the  fact
that  the  content  of  these  very  convictions  them-
selves  consists  in  faith  in  an  uninterrupted  union
of  men  with  each  other  and  with  God,  into  which
it  is  possible  for  every  one  to  enter  by  his  own
free  choice.

If  we  call  this  communion  the  invisible  Church,
then  the  visible  Church,  on  the  other  hand,  is
certainly  nothing  more  than  a  human  institution
of  the  company  of  believers  :  partly  for  fellowship
in  the  worship  of  God,  partly  for  the  regulation
of  its  earthly  affairs  in  agreement  with  the  de-
mands of its faith. But every pretension which


154  PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION.

such  visible  Church  might  advance,  not  merely  to
teach  the  way  to  eternal  salvation  and  to  guide
to  it,  but  to  open  and  to  shut  this  way  by  virtue
of  its  own  power,  is  quite  unfounded.  As  for  the
rest,  the  Church,  like  every  other  institution,  must
not  fall  into  a  condition  of  opposition  to  the  regu-
lations of  the  State  ;  although  we  cannot  regard  it
as  a  happy  expression  to  say  that  the  Church
must  be  subjected  to  these  regulations  in  anything
else  but  external  matters  of  an  altogether  indiffer-
ent character.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  evil  of
the  present  time  —  and  of  course  has  its  historic
conditions  —  that  the  State  as  such  is  compelled
to  exist  without  any  religious  foundation  and  that
it  believes  it  has  no  need  of  any.

But  the  complete  unity  of  the  State  in  religious
matters  also,  would  of  course  presuppose  that  two
hostile  parties  should  return  to  modesty  ;  —  namely,
that  theological  learning  on  the  one  side,  and  irre-
ligious natural  science  on  the  other,  should  not
assert  that  they  have  exact  knowledge  about  so
very  much  which  they  neither  do  know  nor  can
know;  it  would  therefore  presuppose  that,  in  the
recognition  of  divine  mysteries  which  are  left  to
the  interpretation  of  each  individual  believing  mind,
and of general ethical precepts concerning the


THE END OF CONTROVERSY.  1 55

meaning  of  which  moreover  there  exists  no  con-
troversy, the  religious  life  may  unfold  itself  in
accordance  with  the  motto  :  In  necessariis  imitas,
in  dubiis  libertas. in  omnibus  caritas.


INDEX.


INDEX.


Absolute,  the  One  Being,  32  f. ;  relation  of  Things  to,  33  f. ;  Determinations
of,  35  f. ;  Spinoza's  view  of,  38 ;  as  personal  Spirit,  43  f.,  55  f.(  68  ;  and
therefore  conscious,  66  f. ;  none  besides  God,  83  f. ;  course  of  the  world
related  to,  114  f.

Action,  between  elements,  25  f. ;  of  Things  on  each  other,  30  f.

Argument,  the  Ontological,  8  f. ;  the  Cosmological,  10 f. ;  the  Teleological.

Attributes,  of  God,  45  f.


Being,  God  as  the  Most  Perfect,  9  f . ;  as  the  necessary,  10  f. ;  and  uncon-
ditioned, 13  f.,  55  f. ;  intelligent,  21 ;  the  Absolute,  32  f. ;  Unity  of,  52  f.
Blessedness,  as  the  supreme  end,  118  f.


C.

Christ,  as  Son  of  God,  150  f. ;  relation  to  humanity,  150.

Churcb,  visible  and  invisible,  153 ;  relation  of,  to  State,  153.

Conscience,  function  of,  129  f. ;  development  of,  131  f.

Consciousness,  belongs  to  Personality,  56  f. ;  conception  of,  56;  origin  of,

57  f. ;  involves  self-identical  Ego,  59  f.,  62 ;  feeling  necessary  to,  60  f.
Contingent,  events,  as,  10  f.
Creation,  conception  of,  71  f. ;  Divine  will  in,  73  f. ;  not  necessarily  deed,

74  f.,  79  f. ;  "  out  of  Nothing,"  79 ;  no  process  of,  79  f.


D.

Design,  conscious  in  Nature,  17  f.

Development,  not  creation,  71  f.,  79.

Dogmas,  necessity  of,  143  f. ;  subscription  to,  145  ;  limits  of,  147.

Dualism,  in  philosophy,  39;  as  to  origin  of  evil,  124.


1 60  INDEX.


E.

Ego,  unites  elements,  30;  idea  of,  59  f.,  63,  64;  correlative  to  non-ego,  62  f.
End,  conformity  to  an,  16  f.,  18  f. ;  in  the  world's  history,  inf.,  114;  the

supreme,  115  f.,  118.
Eschatology,  not  a  matter  for  speculation,  152.

Ethics,  relation  of,  to  the  idea  of  value,  117;  and  of  expediency,  132  f.
Evil,  apologies  for,  121  f. ;  origin  of,  124,  126.


F.

Faith,  as  organ  of  Religion,  1  f.
Eall,  conception  of  a,  126  f.
Fanaticism,  origin  of,  144.

Feeling,  groups  of  the  religious,  sf. ;  necessary  to  self-consciousness,  60  f.
Fichte,  on  "  world-stuff,"  97.

Force,  conception  of,  in  Nature,  17^  20  f . ;  blind  and  unconscious,  40.
Freedom,  a condition  of  Government, 99; not  speculatively  defensible,
100  f.,  102,  106;  objections  to,  103.


G.

God,  proof  of  his  existence,  8  f . ;  ontological  argument  for,  8  f . ;  cosmo-
logical  argument  for,  10  f . ;  as  unconditioned,  13  f. ;  teleological  argu-
ment for,  15  f.,  22  f.,  24  f. ;  as  Supreme  Intelligence,  21 ;  Unity  of,  45  f. ;
Unchangeableness  of,  46  f.,  52  f. ;  Omnipresence  of,  47  f.  ;  Omnipotence
of,  49  f.,  86  f.,  88  ;  Eternity  of,  51  f. ;  Personality  of,  55  f.,  68  f. ;  as  Cre-
ator, 70,  79;  productive  will  of,  73  f.,  79  ft,  139;  no  Principle  antecedent
to,  82,  90;  relation  of  truth  to,  84  f.,  91  f. ;  government  of,  95  f.

Good,  idea  of  the  highest,  122,  133,  141;  as  compatible  with  Evil,  124;  rela-
tion to  the  Divine  Will,  138  f.

Government,  the  Divine,  95  f.;  conditions  of,  98  f.,  106;  distinguished
from  Preservation,  107  ;  by  intervention,  109  f.

I.

Intelligence,  in  Nature,  21 ;  inhering  in  Things,  24  f.


Law,  not  above  Things,  83  ;  nor  antecedent  to  God,  83  f.,  88  f.
Leibnitz,  best  possible  world  of,  123.


INDEX.  l6l


M.

Materialism,  its  account  of  self-consciousness,  57.

Matter,  contrasted  with  Spirit,  35  f.,  37,  38.

Metaphysic,  Postulates  derived  from,  30 f.,  52.

Miracle, the conception of,  107  f. ; abstract conceivableness of,  108  f.

extent  not  speculatively  determined,  nof.
Mysticism,  origin  of,  143.


N.

Nature,  elements  and  forces  of,  18  f. ;  blind  course  of,  21  f.,  47.
Necessary,  conception  of  the,  10,  12  f.


Omnipotence,  meaning  of  the  Divine,  49,  86f.,88;  never  in  the  abstract,

87  f. ;  modus  agendi  of,  122.
Ought,  idea  of  the,  135  f.


P.

Pantheism,  38.

Personality,  conception  of,  55  f. ;  of  the  Absolute,  55,  68  ;  a  self-conscious

ego,  59  f.,  62  f.,  64 ;  perfect  only  when  infinite  68  f.
Pessimism,  128.

Philosophy,  legitimate  place  of,  1  f.
Power,  conception  of,  87  f.

Preservation,  of  the  World,  81  f.,  92  f. ;  as  new  creation,  92  f.
Principle,  the  absolute,  35;  and  the  supreme,  149.
Providence,  in  organism,  22  f.


Eeason,  organ  of  Religion,  1  f. ;  necessarily  self-conscious,  39  f.

Redemption,  idea  of,  131  f.

Religion,  as  related  to  Reason,  if.,  6;  and  scientific  cognition,  4f. ;
involves  experience,  5 ;  feelings  of,  5  f. ;  relation  to  morals,  129  f. ;  first
principles  of,  137 ;  the  Christian,  140 ;  the  communion  of,  145.

Rigorism,  an  ethical,  116  f.


l62  INDEX.


S.

Schelling,  38.

Science,  nature  of  its  cognitions,  4.

Sensations,  origin  of,  36.

Sin,  origin  of,  in  a  Fall,  126  f.

Spinoza,  38.

Spirit,  contrasted with  Matter,  35  f.,  38; always  self-conscious,  39,  56  f . ;

and  personal,  41  f. ;  the  Infinite,  66;  finite  spirits,  67  f.,  96.
Spiritualism,  the  philosophical,  39.
Stoicism,  its  wise  man,  136.


Theology,  relation  to  philosophy,  148.

Things,  properties  of,  16  f . ;  as  intelligent,  24  f. ;  homogeneous  and  con-
nected, 29  f.,  31 ;  influence  of,  on  each  other,  30  f. ;  as  modifications  of
the  Absolute,  32  f.,  34,  67;  spiritual  susceptibility  of,  37;  cannot  have
unity,  53 ;  as  subject  to  law,  83.

Time,  not  self-subsisting  form,  51  f.

Trinity,  doctrine  of,  149.

Truth,  as  related  to  God,  84  f.,  91  f.


U.


Unconditioned,  conception  of  the,  13  f.
Universe,  origin  of,  17  f.,  28;  elements  of,  27  f.,  28  f.


W.

Will,  the Divine  in creation,  73  f. ; the human,  75,  104 ; modus  agendi

unknown,  jj  ;  the  free,  104  f.
World,  relation  of,  to  God,  70,  81,  94,  95.


OUTLINES OF METAPHYSIC.


The  dictated  portions  of  the  latest  Lectures  of  HERMANN  LOTZE  (at
Gottingen  and  Berlin).  Translated  and  Edited  by  GEORGE  T.  LADD,
Professor  of  Philosophy  in  Yale  College.


These  outlines  were  formulated  by  Lotze  himself,  recorded
in  the  notes  of  his  hearers,  and  subjected  to  the  most  competent
and  thorough  revision  of  Prof.  Rehnisch  of  Gottingen.  The
"Outlines"  give,  therefore,  a  mature  and  trustworthy  statement,
in  language  selected  by  this  teacher  of  philosophy  himself,  of
what  may  be  considered  as  his  final  opinions  upon  a  wide  range
of  subjects. They  have  met  with  no  little  favor  in  Germany.

There  is  scarcely  any  other  recent  writer  on  philosophical
subjects  whose  thoughts  are  so  stimulating  for  their  breadth,
penetration,  and  candor ;  or  with  whom  an  acquaintance  is  so
desirable  for  purposes  of  general  culture  through  the  philosophic
way  of  considering  life,  with  its  interests  in  not  merely  pure
thought,  but  also  in  morals,  religion,  and  art.

W.  T.  Harris,  Concord,  Mass. :  The  project  of  Prof.  Ladd  strikes  me
as  by  all  means  a  practical  one.  I  think  this  likely  to  be  the  most  suc-
cessful venture  in  philosophical  publication  that  I  have  heard  of  lately.

John  Bascom,  Pres.  of  Univ.  of  Wisconsin  :  The  publication  of  this
book,  and  of  the  promised  series,  is  very  desirable.  I  shall  be  glad  to  aid
in  the  circulation  of  such  books.

Noah.  K.  Davis,  Prof,  of  Moral  Phil,  Univ.  of  Virginia  :  I  have
desired  very  much  for  the  use  of  my  pupils,  who  do  not  all  read  German,
a  good  translation  of  Lotze's  "  Dictate  "  ever  since  they  began  to  appear.
The  present  translation  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired,  except  the  comple-
tion of  the  series.

W.  D.  Wilson,  Cornell  Univ.,  N.  Y. :  I  am  very  glad  to  see  the  work,

and  trust  that  this  plan  may  be  entirely  carried  out.  I  have  for  a  long
time  regarded  Lotze  as  the  soundest,  as  well  as  the  profoundest,  of  all  the
German  metaphysicians.


GEra, HEATH, &  CO.,  Publishers.

BOSTON, NEW  YORK, AND CHICAGO.


HEBREW LESSONS.


By  H.  G. MITCHELL,  Ph.D.,  of  Boston  University.


It  has  long  been  the  custom  to  introduce  the  beginner  to  some  of  the
languages  by  simple,  practical  lessons.  The  acquisition  of  French  and
German,  even  Greek  and  Latin,  has  thus  been  rendered  not  only  easy,  but
delightful.  Instructors  in  the  less  familiar  languages  have,  however,  for
some  reason,  been  slow  to  adopt  the  reasonable  method.  It  is  not  strange,
therefore,  that  a  text-book  for  elementary  instruction  in  Hebrew,  answering
the  wants  of  beginners,  should  still  be  considered  a  desideratum.

The  author  of  the  book  here  announced,  after  several  years  spent  in
instruction,  has  embodied  the  results  of  his  experience  in  a  series  of  lessons,
by  which,  as  has  been  abundantly  proven,  a  learner  can  in  a  few  weeks
obtain  a  good  foundation  for  the  study  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the
original.  The  possibility  of  this  result  will  appear  upon  a  glance  at  the
plan  of  these  lessons :

1.  They  are  confined  to  the  elements  of  the  language.

2.  They  are  arranged  in  logical  order.

3.  They  are  illustrated  and'  enforced  by  abundant  exercises  from  the
Bible.

4.  They  require  a  vocabulary  comprising  almost  all  the  most  common
words  of  the  language.

5.  They  are  supplemented  by  extended  selections  from  historical  books
of  the  Bible,  especially  adapted  to  reading  at  sight,  for  which,  however,
the  vocabulary  suffices.

It  is  clear  that  by  this  plan  the  student  is  as  quickly  as  possible  made
acquainted  with  the  language,  and  placed  in  a  position  with  comparative
ease  to  become  a  Hebrew  scholar.

Another  point,  hardly  less  important  for  beginners  in  Hebrew,  is  the
typographical  excellence  of  the  work.  It  is  printed  with  the  utmost  care
for  accuracy  and  distinctness,  from  very  large,  clear  type,  imported  expressly
for  the  purpose.

The  book  has  been  examined  and  cordially  endorsed  by  many  of  the
most  competent  judges,  and  is  already  in  extensive  use.


Retail  and  Mailing  Price,  $2.00.

GINN, HEATH, & CO., Publishers.

BOSTON.  NEW YORK.  CHICAGO.


PHILOSOPHY.


SEELYE'S-HICKOK'S EMPIRICAL PSYCHOLOGY; or, The  Human
Mind  as  Given  in  Consciousness. Mailing  Price,  $1.25.


SEELYE'S-HICKOK'S  MORAL SCIENCE. Mailing  Price,  $1.25.


HICKOK'S RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY; or, The Subjective  Idea  and
Objective  Law  of  all  Intelligence. Mailing  Price,  $1.95.


HICKOK'S CREATOR AND CREATION; or, The Knowledge  in the
Reason  of  God  and  His  Work. Mailing  Price,  #1.75.


HICKOK'S  LOGIC  OF  REASON, UNIVERSAL  AND  ETERNAL. Mailing
Price,  $1.60.

HICKOK'S  HUMANITY  IMMORTAL; or,  Man Tried, Fallen, and  Re-
deemed. Mailing  Price,  $1.75.


These  books  discuss  the  most  difficult  and  important  problems
of  human  thought.  Though  each  is  complete  in  itself,  they  pursue
the  following  order :

The  Empirical  Psychology  gives  the  basis  of  all  physical  and
logical  science.

The  Rational  Psychology  connects  all  science  with  philosophy.

The  Creator  and  Creation  gives  the  philosophy  of  all  mechan-
ical and  vital  forces.

The  Moral  Science  is  already  in  the  field  of  philosophy,  and
gives  the  basis  of  Esthetics,  Politics,  Ethics,  and  Theology.

The  Logic  of  Reason  frees  empiricism  from  all  scepticism  in
the  attainment  of  a  Being  absolutely  Universal  and  Eternal.

The  Humanity  Immortal  gives  the  Divine  history  of  human
experience  from  its  origination  to  its  consummation.


GINN, HEATH, & CO., Publishers.

BOSTON.  NEW  YORK.  CHICAGO.


THE  HAEVAED  EDITION

OF

SHAKESPEARE'S COMPLETE  WORKS.

By  HENRY  N.  HUDSON,  LL.D.,

Author  of  the  "  Life,  Art,  and  Characters  of  Shakespeare,"
Editor  of  "  School  Shakespeare,"  Etc.


In  Twenty  Volumes,  duodecimo,  two  plays  in  each  volume ;  also  in  Ten
Volumes,  of  four  plays  each.

Retail  Prices.

1 j... (cloth. . .$25.00 I  , .._ (cloth. . .$20.00

20-vol.  edition  <  ..r ir  „„ 10-vol.  edition  {  u ,, .t

I  halt -calf . 55.00 I  I  half-calf . 40.00

Hudson's  "  Life,  Art,  and  Characters  of  Shakespeare  "  (2  vols.)  are
uniform  in  size  and  binding  with  the  The  Harvard  Edition,  and  are
included  with  it  at  the  following  retail  prices  :  Cloth,  -$4.00  per  set ;
half  calf,  -$8.oo  per  set.

The  Harvard  Edition  has  been  undertaken  and  the  plan  of  it  shaped
with  a  special  view  to  making  the  Poet's  pages  pleasant  and  attractive  to
general  readers.  Within  the  last  thirty  years  great  advances  and  additions
have  been  made  in  the  way  of  preparation  for  such  a  work,  and  these
volumes  bring  the  whole  matter  of  Shakespeare  up  abreast  with  the  latest
researches.

The  first  volume  contains  "  the  Burbage  portrait,"  and  a  life  of  the  Poet.
A  history  of  each  play  is  given  in  its  appropriate  volume.  The  plays  are
arranged  in  three  distinct  series :  Comedies,  Histories,  and  Tragedies ;
and  the  plays  of  each  series  presented,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  in  the  chrono-
logical order  of  the  writing.

An  obvious  merit  of  this  edition  is,  that  each  volume  has  two  sets  of
notes,  —  one  mainly  devoted  to  explaining  the  text,  and  placed  at  the  foot
of  the  page  ;  the  other  mostly  occupied  with  matters  of  textual  comment
and  criticism,  and  printed  at  the  end  of  each  play.  The  edition  is  thus
admirably  suited  to  the  uses  both  of  the  general  reader  and  of  the  special
student.  The  foot-notes  supply  such  and  so  much  of  explanatory  comment
as  may  be  required  by  people  who  read  Shakespeare,  not  to  learn  philology
or  the  technicalities  of  the  scholiast,  but  to  learn  Shakespeare  himself ;  to
take  in  his  thought,  to  taste  his  wisdom,  and  to  feel  his  beauty.


GINN, HEATH, & CO., Publishers.

BOSTON.  NEW  YORK.  CHICAGO.


A  Study  of  the  Drink  Question,

ENTITLED

"THE  FOUNDATION  OF  DEATH."


By  Axel G-ustafson. 600 pp. 12mo. Retail and
Mailing  Price,  $2.00.


This  book  has  already  been  accepted  in  England  as  the  most  com-
plete work  on  the  subject  ever  published,  and  one  that  will  be  "  the
Bible  of  temperance  reformers  for  years  to  come."  It  is  pronounced
the  fairest,  most  exhaustive,  freshest,  and  most  original  of  all  the
literature  on  the  subject  that  has  yet  appeared.  It  is  impartial  and
careful  in  its  evidence,  fair  and  fearless  in  its  conclusions,  and  its
accuracy  is  vouched  for  by  the  best  physiologists  and  physicians.

In  preparation  for  this  work,  the  author  has  made  exhaustive  and
impartial  researches  in  the  alcohol  literature  of  nearly  all  countries,
having  examined,  in  the  various  languages,  some  three  thousand
works  on  alcohol  and  cognate  subjects,  from  a  large  proportion  of
which  carefully  selected  quotations  are  made.

The  scope  of  the  work,  as  to  the  variety  of  standpoints  from  which
it  is  treated,  is  indicated  in  the  following  list  of  chapters :  —
I. Drinking  among  the  Ancients.
II. The  History  of  the  Discovery  of  Distillation.

III.  Preliminaries  to  the  Study  of  Modern  Drinking.

IV.  Adulteration.

V. Physiological  Results;  or,  The Effects  of  Alcohol  on  the
Physical  Organs  and  Functions.
VI. Pathological  Results;  or,  Diseases  caused  by  Alcohol.
VII. Moral  Results.
VIII. Heredity;  or,  The  Curse  entailed  on  Descendants  by  Alcohol.
IX. Therapeutics;  or,  Alcohol  as  a  Medicine.
X. Social  Results.
XI. The  Origin  and  Causes  of  Alcoholism.
XII. Specious  Reasonings  concerning  the  Use  of  Alcohol.
XIII. What  can  be  done  ?

GSNN,  HEATH,  &  CO.,  Publishers.


FOR SALE BY

JANSEN McCLURG  &.  CO.,  Chicago,


LATIN  TEXT-BOOKS.


35


Cicero  De  Natura  Deorum.

Libri  Tres,  with  the  commentary  of  G.  F.  Schoemann,  translated  and
edited  by  Austin.  Stickney.  i2mo.  Cloth.  348  pages.  Mailing
Price,  $1.55  ;  Introduction,  $1.40.

The  text  of  this  edition  is  substantially  that  of  C.  F.  W-  Miiller.
The  Introductions,  Summaries,  and  Commentary  of  Schoemann  are
given  entire,  and  some  additions  have  been  made  by  the  editor.

This  essay  on  the  nature  of  the  gods  is  at  once  our  most  accessible
and  most  complete  original  authority  on  the  theology  of  the  ancients  ;
it  gives  us  a  complete  exposition  of  the  doctrines  of  those  schools
of  philosophy  which,  in  later  times,  included  the  greater  number  of
educated  people.

The  treatise  consists  of  four  parts :  first,  a  brief  sketch  of  the
most  noteworthy  opinions  on  the  subject,  from  the  beginning  of
philosophic  speculation  down  to  the  complete  development  of  the
Epicurean  and  the  Stoic  systems ;  second,  a  detailed  exposition  of
the  Epicurean ;  and  third,  of  the  Stoic  philosophy ;  fourth,  a  criti-
cism of  both  these  systems  from  the  standpoint  of  the  academic
scepticism.

Cicero  was  the  first  to  develop  the  Latin  language  so  as  to  make
it  fit  for  the  treatment  of  philosophical  subjects.  We  owe  to  him
an  acquaintance  with  many  portions  of  the  ancient  philosophy  of
which  we  should  otherwise  be  quite  ignorant ;  and  however  dispar-
aging the  judgment  of  many  people  nowadays,  no  one  can  deny  the
importance  of  these  works  for  the  history  of  philosophy.


Tracy  Peck,  Prof,  of  Latin,  Yale
Coll. :  The  value  of  Schoemann's
edition  has  long  been  known,  and  I
am  glad  that  so  careful  a  scholar
as  Prof.  Stickney  has  brought  it  to  the
easy  reach  of  American  students.  The
translator's  additions,  too,  seem  to  be
thoroughly  helpful  to  a  nicer  under-
standing of  the  thought  and  Latinity
of  the  original.

Minton  Warren,  Associate  Prof
of  Latin,  Johns  Hopkins  Univ. :  I  am
greatly  pleased  with  it.  The  work  of
translation  seems  to  have  been  very


carefully  done,  and  bespeaks  accurate
scholarship.  It  is  a  treatise  which  de-
serves to  be  mere  widely  read  in  Amer-
ican colleger.

W.  A.  Packard,  Prof  of  Latin,
Princeton  Coll. :  I  have  used  the  Ger-
man edition  with  my  classes,  and  ap-
preciate its  well-recognized  merits.
The  additions  made  to  the  notes,  which
I  have  examined,  add  to  their  value.
It  will  be  a  convenience  for  American
students  to  have  the  book  in  its  present
form,  and  will  stimulate  to  a  wider  use
of  it.


ftoss  of


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process.
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  Dec.  2004

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066
(724)779-2111
