gion may  be  discovered,  proved,  or  at  least  confirmed,  agreeably  to  reason."

III.  OUTLINES OF PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY. This  volume

discusses  Ethical  Principles,  Ethical  Ideals,  and  the  Freedom  of  the  Will;
it  also  applies  the  theory  to  the  Individual,  to  Marriage,  and  to  Society.

IV.  OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY. The  first  part  treats  of  Simple

Sensations,  the  Course  of  Ideas,  Intuitions  of  Objects  as  in  Space,  Errors
of  the  Senses,  etc.  The  second  part  discusses  the  nature,  place,  and
changeable  states  of  the  Soul,  and  the  reciprocal  action  of  Soul  and  Body.
V.  OUTLINES  OF  ESTHETICS.  This  volume  gives  Lotze's  theory  of
the  Beautiful  and  of  Phantasy.  Then  follow  brief  chapters  on  Music,
Architecture,  Plastic  Art,  Painting,  and  Poetry.
VI.  OUTLINES  OF  LOGIC.  The  Outlines  of  Logic  comprehends  both  the
pure  and  the  applied  science.  The  same  volume  contains  a  brief  treatise
on  the  Encyclopaedia  of  Philosophy.


v


OUTLINES


OF


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY


DICTATED  PORTIONS


LECTURES  OF  HERMANN  LOTZE


TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED  BY

GEORGE T.  LADD

PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY  IN  YALE  COLLEGE


BOSTON,  U.S.A.:
PUBLISHED  BY  GINN  &  COMPANY,


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1885,  by

GEORGE  T.  LADD,
in  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington


a/8?/


Typography  by  J.  S.  Cushing  &  Co.,  Boston,  U.S.A.
Presswork  by  Ginn  &  Co.,  Boston,  U.S.A.


EDITOR'S  PREFACE.


The  second  German  edition  of  the  *  Outlines  of
Practical  Philosophy,'  from  which  this  translation  has
been  prepared,  was  based  upon  the  Dictate  of  Lotze's
lectures  as  delivered  in  the  Summer-Semester  of
1878.  The  first  German  edition  had  followed  the
form  of  the  Dictate  as  given  in  the  same  course  for
the  Summer-Semester  of  1880.  A  comparison  of
the  two  editions  shows  that  considerable  has  been
gained  in  fulness,  and  nothing  lost  in  maturity,  of
thought  by  recurring  to  the  author's  earlier  treat-
ment of  applied  ethics.  Moreover,  the  second  edition
contains  two  interesting  chapters  on  i  Marriage  and
the  Family '  (chap,  v.),  and  on  '  the  Intercourse  of
Men'  (chap,  vi.),  which  are  not  found  in  the  first
edition.  These  reasons  have  seemed  to  me  to  justify
the  choice  for  translation  of  the  Dictate  of  the  date
of  1878.

The  following  pages  have  the  great  though  some-
what  melancholy  claim  to  interest  that  they  present  a
large  proportion  of  all  which  remains  of  Lotze's  think-
ing upon  a  most  important  subject. Nothing  else


vi


editor's  preface.


more  expanded  and  technically  exact  is  left  us  to
take  the  place  of  these  pages ;  and,  besides  a  brief
article  on  1  the  Principles  of  Ethics '  in  Nord  und
Süd,  and  certain  scattered  remarks  in  portions  of  the
Mikrokosmus,  there  is  nothing  to  supplement  them.
Yet  the  entire  philosophical  system  of  their  author  is
distinctively,  and  almost  in  a  unique  manner,  founded
upon  the  ethical  idea.  So  true  is  this  statement,
that  an  intelligent  apprehension  of  the  specific  points
of  view  taken  by  this  system  —  especially  as  pre-
sented in  its  Metaphysic  —  cannot  be  gained  at  all
without  recognition  of  their  ethical  character.  The
idea  of  Value  everywhere  dominates  and  makes
intelligible  those  conceptions  of  mechanism  with
which  it  is  the  business  of  all  science  to  deal.  But,
as  we  are  assured  (see  '  Outlines  of  Metaphysic,'
p.  151  f.)  the  morally  Good  is  to  be  united  with  'the
beautiful'  and  'the  blessed'  into  "one  complex  of  all
that  has  Value."  The  sole  genuine  Reality  in  the
world  is  this  Good.  And  all  the  mechanism  of  the
world  of  phenomena,  whether  in  the  realm  of  physi-
cal Things  or  of  finite  Mind,  exists  in  order  that
this  Highest  Good  may  become  for  the  spirit  an
object  of  enjoyment.  Even  those  so-called  a  priori
or  necessary  principles  with  which  the  Metaphysic
itself  deals,  are  declared  (p.  153)  to  be  only  "the
forms  which  must  be  assumed  by  a  world  that  de-


editor's  preface.


vii


pends  upon  the  principle  of  the  Good."  The  Highest
Good  is  "the  one  Real  Principle  on  which  the  validity
of  the  metaphysical  axioms  in  the  world  depends."

No  student  of  Lotze,  whether  favorably  or  unfavor-
ably disposed  toward  his  metaphysical  tenets,  can
fail  to  wish,  however,  that  he  had  left  in  more  com-
prehensive and  definite  form  his  views  on  theoretical
and  applied  ethics.  The  first  three  chapters  of  this
volume  do  indeed  suggest  the  answers  which  the
author  would  probably  have  given  to  some  of  those
questions  of  theory  that  are  of  so  much  interest  and
so  warmly  debated.  Yet  they  do  little  more  than
suggest  some  of  these  answers.  The  chapter  on  the
Freedom  of  the  Will  seems  to  me,  however,  pecu-
liarly rich  in  suggestiveness.  Indeed  it  will  be
found,  I  think,  to  touch  almost  every  important
point  in  that  discussion,  so  old  in  time,  so  deep  in
mystery,  and  so  fraught  with  vexatious  misunder-
standings. This  chapter  will  repay  a  careful  study
from  the  various  points  of  view  assumed  by  the
different  parties  in  the  debate  of  the  main  inquiry.

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  by  the  reader  that
Lotze  intends  to  distinguish  the  task  which  he  sets
before  himself  in  this  course  of  lectures  from  that
which  belongs  to  the  treatment  of  Morals  or  Ethics.
Ethics,  as  he  would  understand  the  term,  includes  a
collection  of  "those  general  propositions  according  to


viii


editor's  preface.


which  the  praiseworthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the
disposition  is  estimated"  (see  p.  2).  Practical  Phil-
osophy, on  the  other  hand,  includes,  besides  these
general  propositions,  "the  rules  of  that  prudence  of
life  which  secures  the  acquisition  of  different  forms
of  outward  good."  Accordingly  a  considerable  part
of  this  volume  is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  mat-
ters which  are  customarily  treated  under  the  head  of
applied  ethics.  It  is  distinctly  stated,  however,  that
such  particular  problems  are  subordinated  to  those
primary  problems  which  come  up  for  discussion
under  the  titles  of  Ethical  Principles  and  Moral
Ideals  (chapters  i.  and  ii.).

It  is,  of  course,  inevitable  that  the  difference  of
social  and  political  institutions,  which  obtains  among
the  different  highly  civilized  peoples,  should  influence
the  discussion  of  subjects  like  Marriage,  Society,  the
State,  etc.  The  yet  more  special  remarks  on  topics
subordinated  to  these  —  such  as  Divorce,  Trades
Unions,  Representative  Government,  etc.  —  will
doubtless  seem,  in  certain  regards,  foreign  to  the
customary  thoughts  of  some  who  read  them.  But
they  may  be  of  all  the  more  value  on  that  account.
The  precise  shaping  received  by  the  institutions  in
the  midst  of  which  we  are  living,  not  infrequently  is
first  seen  in  its  true  significance  when  we  aim  to
regard  it  with  other  and  philosophic  eyes,  as  it


editor's  preface.


ix


appears  in  its  particulars  amid  the  world  of  universal
ideas.

I  think  it  will  be  admitted  by  all  that  Lotze  shows
a  rare  and  delicate  tact  in  discerning  the  weak  places
in  the  extremes  of  Rigorism  and  Eudaemonism  in
morals.  How  far  he  himself  proposes  any  middle
ground  of  standing,  as  it  were,  is  another  question.
Probably  his  treatment  of  the  subject  will  not  be
thought  sufficiently  extended  and  definite  to  be  sat-
isfactory. It  is  perhaps  somewhat  characteristic  of
all  his  philosophical  writings  that  he  conscientiously
sacrifices  the  appearance  of  forming  a  consistent  sys-
tem, to  his  love  of  candor  and  his  desire  to  regard
every  subject  from  several  points  of  view.  But  it  is
just  this  in  large  measure  which  gives  his  writings
their  value  and  their  charm.

GEORGE  T.  LADD.

New  Haven,  June,  1885.


TABLE OF  CONTENTS.


Introduction

FIRST  PRINCIPAL  DIVISION.

Chapter I.  Investigation  of  Ethical  Principles .  .

Chapter  II.  The  Simple  Moral  Ideals

Chapter  III.  Concerning  the  Freedom  of  the  Will  .  .

SECOND  PRINCIPAL  DIVISION.

Transition

Chapter IV.  Of  the  Individual  Person

Chapter V.  Marriage  and  the  Family

Chapter VI.  Of  the  Intercourse  of  Men . . .  .

Chapter  VII.  Of  Society

Chapter  VIII.  Of  the  State


INTRODUCTION.


§  l.  The  conflict  of  our  needs,  in  part  with  the
course  of  nature  and  in  part  with  social  conditions  ;
the  frustrating  of  our  plans  in  life  ;  and,  finally,
regret  and  the  doubt  how  to  escape  from  our  own
self-condemnation,  —  such  are  the  inducements  which,
taken  together,  incite  us  to  inquire  :  How  are  we
to  conduct  ourselves  so  as  at  the  same  time  to
attain  outward  good  fortune  and  inward  peace?

This  very  inquiry  involves  the  supposition,  that
in  spite  of  the  infinitely  varied  situations  in  the
midst  of  which  individuals  are  placed,  there,  never-
theless, exist  certain  rules  for  the  attainment  of
this  object,  which  admit  of  being  expressed  in  uni-
versal form,  and  which  have  a  universal  validity.

It  is  the  problem  of  Practical  Philosophy  to  inves-
tigate these  rules,  and  to  combine  them  into  a
system.  On  the  contrary,  the  application  of  them
to  the  more  special  details  of  life  is  to  be  entrusted
to  practical  tact,  in  precisely  the  same  way  as,  for
instance,  the  application  of  the  general  laws  of
mechanics  to  the  circumstances  of  a  particular  case
requires  individual  sagacity  and  a  fortunate  knack.


2


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


§  2.  The  proper  scope  of  Practical  Philosophy,
therefore,  by  no  means  includes  merely  those  gen-
eral propositions  according  to  which  the  praise-
worthiness  or  blameworthiness  of  the  disposition  is
estimated,  and  a  collection  of  which  would  deserve
the  more  definite  title  of  Morals  or  of  Ethics.  It
rather  comprehends,  besides,  the  rules  of  that  pru-
dence of  life  which  secures  the  acquisition  of  dif-
ferent forms  of  outward  good.  Yet  the  simple
observation,  that  no  outward  good  would  satisfy  us
without  the  inward  good  of  self-approbation,  and,
further,  that  only  the  shaping  of  our  own  mind,
and  not  that  of  the  outward  world,  stands  directly
within  our  control,  determines  at  once  the  subor-
dinate rank  of  the  particular  problems.

In  the  first  place,  those  maxims  are  to  be  inves-
tigated by  the  observance  of  which  our  conduct
acquires  an  approbation  that  is  independent  of  all
consequences.  It  is  only  after  it  has  been  estab-
lished how  in  general  one  should  and  must  conduct
one's  self,  that  the  problem  arises  to  discover  those
forms  of  life  by  means  of  which  the  greatest  amount
of  external  good  can  be  realized  in  agreement  with
these  laws,  and  at  the  same  time  with  respect  to
the  definite  relations  of  the  earthly  life  of  man.
In  reference  to  this  matter,  philosophy  must,  of
course,  confine  itself  to  the  task  of  depicting  cer-


PROBLEMS OF  PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


7


tain  definite  ideals.  The  third  problem  which  still
remains  —  namely,  the  description  of  that  knack  by
which  success  in  realizing  those  ideals  according
to  circumstances,  as  far  as  possible,  is  gained  in
actual  life  —  can  only  be  incidentally  introduced,
while  its  full  solution  must  be  committed  to  actual
life.


First  Principal  Division.


/


First  Principal  Division.


chapter  I.

INVESTIGATION  OF  ETHICAL  PRINCIPLES.

§  3.  The  inquiry,  "  How  ought  we  to  conduct
ourselves  ? "  may  be  answered,  in  the  first  place,
by  an  analysis  of  the  subject  of  the  conduct,  that
is,  of  our  own  nature ;  and  by  attempting  to  deduce
from  this  subject  the  kinds  of  conduct  which  cor-
respond to  the  true  conception  of  it.

In  the  first  beginnings  of  all  culture  this  point
of  view  has  been  prevalent  in  a  very  unpropitious
fashion  :  indeed,  a  particular  kind  of  conduct  toward
a  second  person  has  been  prescribed  for  each  indi-
vidual, according  to  his  particular  position  in  society ;
and  such  conduct  might  depart  very  widely  from
that  which  was  due  from  some  third  person  to  a
fourth.  Thus,  for  example,  the  freeman  had  his
altogether  special  rights  and  duties  in  relation  to
the  slave,  the  friend  to  the  enemy,  the  member  of
a  certain  race  to  the  alien.  Nothing  but  the  great
pressure  which  arose  from  such  a  state  of  affairs,


8


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


turned  attention  little  by  little  to  the  fact  that
there  must  be  supreme  laws  of  moral  conduct  which
are  obligatory  upon  every  person  in  relation  to
every  other.

We  should,  accordingly,  be  compelled  to  deduce
the  aforesaid  laws  from  the  common  nature  of  man.
But  even  with  this  better  understanding  of  the
case  such  a  problem  is  not  solvable.  First  of  all,
even  if  it  were  solved,  it  would  only  bring  us  to
an  Ethics  which  would  be  binding  merely  upon
men  and  not  upon  spiritual  beings  of  another  kind.
But  concerning  the  supreme  laws  which  are  to
determine  our  conduct,  we  cannot  concede  that
other  laws  exist  beside  them,  without  working  injury
thereby  to  the  unconditioned  worth  and  majesty
which  we  desire  them  to  have.  But  besides  all
this :  even  if  we  at  present  possessed  an  accurate
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  man,  still  it  would  not
be  a  matter  to  take  for  granted  that  the  problem
of  morals  would  consist  in  adhering  to  this  nature,
and  in  forwarding  by  conduct  that  to  which  nature
of  itself  impels  us.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the
course  of  the  history  of  humanity  there  have  been
not  merely  tenets  of  the  school,  but  ascetic  frames
of  mind  in  certain  peoples  and  ages,  which  have
found  'the  Ethical,'  not  in  following,  but  in  indus-
triously striving  against  all  natural  impulses,  and


ADHERENCE  TO  NATURE.


9


which  have  sacrificed  all  the  good  things  of  life  to
this  conviction.

If  one  forms  the  purpose  to  harmonize  these
conflicting  opinions,  then  one  readily  discovers,
that  those  who  demand  adherence  to  nature  under-
stand by  this  'nature'  of  man,  not  merely  his  actual
(physical  and  spiritual)  constitution,  but  also  that
to  which  his  life  and  the  exercise  of  all  his  capaci-
ties ought  to  lead  ;  that  is  to  say,  by  '  nature '  they
understand  the  natural  destination.  Now,  however,
it  would  be  a  mere  tautology  to  say,  "man  ought
to  do  that  for  which  he  is  destined."  It  would
rather  be  required  of  us  to  express  with  complete
exhaustiveness  and  indubitable  certainty,  what  this
destination  is.

In  order  to  do  this  it  would  be  necessary  for  us
to  know  the  supreme  end  of  the  entire  course  of
the  world ;  and  further  to  be  able  accurately  to
fix  the  position  which  the  human  race  occupies  in
this  plan  of  the  whole,  as  well  as  the  perform-
ances which  are  incumbent  upon  it  on  this  account :
finally,  it  would  also  be  necessary  for  us  —  since  it
is  always  the  individual  man  who  is  the  subject
of  the  conduct  —  to  be  able  to  define  besides  the
particular  place  which  every  individual  person  occu-
pies within  the  human  race.

Now  it  would  follow  from  what  is  said  above,


10


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


that  the  content  of  the  supreme  moral  laws  could
be  discovered  only  by  means  of  an  immeasurable
task  upon  our  cognition,  —  such  as  we  all  concede
to  be  possible  of  accomplishment  at  all  by  human
powers,  only  with  a  slight  approximation.  But  —
quite  the  contrary  —  it  is  obvious  that  fundamental
ethical  laws,  if  they  are  to  have  any  value,  must
be  immediately  obvious  and  certain  to  the  indi-
vidual man.  That  is  to  say :  There  must  be  a
voice  of  conscience  which  gives  direction  in  par-
ticular cases  concerning  the  praiseworthiness  or
blameworthiness  of  an  action  presented  before  it.
In  what  manner  these  particular  actions  admit  of
being  combined  with  one  another,  in  order  to  pro-
duce a  collective  condition  of  humanity  which  is
harmoniously  inserted  in  the  plan  of  the  world,  —
this  may  continue  to  be  the  object  of  further  scien-
tific cognition  ;  but  no  investigation  into  this  ques-
tion can  even  begin  until  such  individual  judgments
of  conscience  are  first  established.

§  4.  Since  then  we  are  unable  to  deduce  our
obligations  to  certain  conduct  from  our  conception
of  the  '  subject  '  of  the  conduct,  we  make  the
same  attempt  with  the  predicate ;  that  is  to  say,
we  endeavor  some  how  or  other,  starting  from  the
conception  of  conduct  as  an  act,  to  determine  those
kinds  of  conduct  which  are  incumbent  upon  us.


THE  VIEW  OF  EUD/EMONISM.


I  I


Now  it  would  in  no  wise  further  our  pursuit  to
designate  the  good  actions  as  those  which  are  to
be  performed.  For,  in  general,  the  conceptions
of  'good'  and  'bad'  do  not  themselves  admit  of
any  definition  except  one  which  refers  back  to
the  statement  that  the  first  ought  to  be  performed
and  the  other  ought  not.  There  is,  therefore,
still  need  of  some  completely  and  immediately
obvious  characteristic  by  which  those  actions  are
made  known,  to  the  performance  of  which  we  are
obligated.

Eudaemonism  has  found  such  a  characteristic  in
the  conception  of  '  pleasure/  Every  other  end
may  be  called  in  question  ;  only  in  relation  to
pleasure  or  happiness  would  it  be  absurd  even  so
much  as  to  raise  the  question,  why  just  this  rather
than  its  opposite  should  be  realized.  In  this  way
is  pleasure  made  to  appear  as  the  only  absolutely
self-assertory  end  ;  and,  consequently,  the  conduct,
too,  which  seeks  to  fulfil  this  end,  is  made  to
appear  as  the  only  kind  in  itself  worthy  of  being
commended  and  obligatory.  But  important  as  the
connection  of  pleasure  with  the  principles  of  ethics
undoubtedly  is,  it  is  hardly  sufficiently  so  to  put
in  its  appearance  without  further  ceremony  as
chief  Principle.

It  is  only  the pleasure  of  a  definite  moment


12


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


which  is  perfectly  obvious  to  us.  On  the  contrary,
it  is  not  obvious  how,  in  the  connections  of  the
present  life,  our  conduct  must  be  shaped  so  that
one  pleasure  will  work  no  detriment  to  another,
and  the  greatest  collective  sum  of  possible  pleasure
be  realized.  He,  however,  who  finds  in  pleasure
the  principle  of  conduct  in  general,  must  by  con-
sequence direct  his  efforts  towards  such  greatest
sum  of  pleasure.  According  to  this  eudaemon-
istic  theory,  therefore,  the  rules  of  moral  conduct
would  have  to  be  discovered  by  the  experience  of
the  entire  human  race,  and  be  handed  down  by
tradition  as  the  rules  of  prudence,  the  keeping
of  which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  life,  realizes
on  the  average  the  greatest  quantity  of  happiness
enjoyable.

It  is  plain  to  everybody  that  such  rules  as
those  above  mentioned  would  only  be  rules  of
probability,  which  would  have  to  admit  of  excep-
tions. They  would  on  this  account  not  be  in
accord  with  the  absolute  worth  which  our  con-
science ascribes  to  the  ethical  maxims  that  are
recognized  as  such  by  us  ;  inasmuch  as  conscience
finds  the  effort  to  attain  pleasure  to  be  in  itself
without  blame  and  natural,  but  not  in  the  least
degree  meritorious.  The  rather  does  it  reserve
this  latter  ascription  of  value  for  other  forms  of


THE  RIGORISM  OF  KANT.


13


conduct  (still  to  be  sought  for),  which  arc  not
determined  by  the  end  of  personal  pleasure.

§  5.  In  complete  opposition  to  the  foregoing,  it
has  been  asserted  by  rigoristic  views  (in  modern
times  by  Kant)  that  moral  conduct  has  no  regard
whatever  to  pay  to  consequences ;  that  it  should
not  at  all  be  defined  by  means  of  an  object,  but
that  its  specific  nature  and  value  consist  simply  in
a  formal  construction.

The  formula  of  Kant  was  as  follows  :  "  Act  so
that  the  maxim  (that  followed  in  the  choice  thou
hast  resolved  upon)  of  thy  conduct  be  adapted  for
universal  legislation."  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  be
observed  that  this  formula  not  only  presupposes  a
work  of  theoretic  interpretation  by  which  in  each
case  the  definite  maxim,  in  accordance  with  which
the  resolution  is  to  be  apprehended,  has  first  to  be
discovered ;  but  also  that  it  is  altogether  an  illu-
sion to  believe  every  regard  for  resulting  conse-
quences, and  for  the  production  of  happiness,  to
be  excluded  by  the  aforesaid  axiom.  That  is  to
say  :  if  it  is  of  no  account  whatever  just  what
results  in  case  of  certain  conduct  of  ours,  then
there  is  no  maxim  of  any  sort  which  could  not
be  set  up  as  a  universal  law.  For  example,  in
that  case,  the maxim  that every  man  take  his


14


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


own  is  just  as  well  adapted  for  such  a  generaliza-
tion as  the  other  maxim  that  every  man  be  left
his  own.  The  first,  of  course,  leads  to  open  dis-
order and  unhappiness ;  the  other  alone  leads  to
order  and  happiness.  But  such  a  distinction  is
without  significance  unless  it  is  conceded  as  a
matter  of  course,  that  all  conduct  must  be  directed
toward  the  production  of  some  form  of  good,  and
of  its  enjoyment.

This  attempt  of  Kant,  therefore,  only  proves
that  not  even  morals  of  the  strictest  possible  in-
tention can  altogether  avoid  all  connection  with
the  dreaded  conception  of  pleasure.

§  6.  The  first  of  the  deficiencies  already  men-
tioned —  to  wit,  the  abstract  and  meaningless
character  of  the  ultimate  formula  —  is  avoided  by
Herbart.

In  opposition  to  the  effort  at  deducing  all  particu-
lars from  a  single  principle, — an  effort  which  has  a
certain  limited  validity  of  its  own  in  our  theoretic
cognition  of  the  structure  of  the  world,  —  Herbart
advances  the  view  that  the  ethical  axioms,  which
ought  to  determine  the  conduct  of  the  individual
man  at  the  particular  moment,  must  not  only  be
immediately  obvious  and  certain,  but  must  also  have
a  definite  content. What  is  required,  therefore,  is


THE VIEW  OF  HERBART.


15


to  enumerate  the  simplest  elementary  relations  of
one  will  to  another ;  such  as  can  be  propounded  in
general,  and  such  that  all  the  situations  of  life,  in
which  any  one  may  wish  to  have  a  rule  for  his  con-
duct, are  to  be  considered  as  modifications  or  com-
binations of  them.  Each  of  these  elementary
relations,  Herbart  holds,  is  to  be  proposed  to  our
conscience  for  its  judgment  thereupon  ;  and  the
answer  of  conscience  is  to  be  expected,  —  an  answer,
which  will  consist  in  an  unmistakable  approval  or
disapproval  of  this  or  that  definite  sort  of  the  will's
behavior.  In  this  way  are  a  plurality  of  ethical
primary  judgments,  or  'practical  ideas/  attained.
The  possibility  that  a  theoretic  consideration  may
perhaps  succeed  in  deducing  this  plurality  from  a
single  principle,  is  not  denied.  But,  if  it  does  suc-
ceed, it  is  our  knowledge  merely  that  has  won  some-
thing :  the  certainty,  worth,  and  obligatory  character
of  the  practical  ideas  themselves  would  have  won
nothing  thereby  ;  and  would  have  lost  nothing,  if
this  attempt  were  not  to  succeed.

§  7.  Granted  that  the  practical  life  does  not  attain
to  a  single  supreme  principle,  it  is  nevertheless  other-
wise with  Practical  Philosophy,  which,  as  science,  can-
not be  satisfied  with  what  suffices  as  an  immediate
rule  for  life  ;  but  which  also  requires  to  know  whether


i6


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


these  rules  must  indeed  hold  good  as  the  ultimate
thing  attainable  for  our  inspection,  or  whether  they
do  not  rather  require  supplementing.

Now  it  is  in  itself  quite  improbable  that,  in  a  world
which  we  would  fain  apprehend  as  a  coherent  totality,
the  spirits  that  are  summoned  to  conduct  should  be
controlled  by  a  plurality  of  incoherent  supreme  com-
mands. The  demand,  however,  to  seek  a  uniting
bond  for  this  multiplicity  originates  from  yet  another
quarter.

That  is  to  say,  we  cannot  accord  with  Herbart  on
this  point,  that  he  assumed  certain  forms  of  conduct,
which  in  themselves  considered,  and  irrespective  of
all  regard  for  any  consequences  arising  from  carrying
them  out,  possess  an  unconditioned  value  and  a  force
incontrovertibly  obligatory.  If  he  designates  the
revelations  of  conscience,  which  teach  us  to  recog-
nize these  forms,  as  aesthetic  judgments,  we  must
define  the  difference  which  exists  between  them  and
ordinary  theoretical  judgments  in  a  different  way
from  that  in  which  he  has  done  it.  The  aesthetic
judgments  of  approbation  or  disapprobation  —  such
as  "  this  pleases  "  and  "  that  displeases 99  —  are,
therefore,  judgments  or  propositions  merely  as  to
their  verbal  form  ;  but  what  is  expressed  by  them  is
in  no  case  an  act  of  thought  but  a  feeling  of  pleasure
or  displeasure. For  it  is  only  through  the  presence


CAPACITY  FOR  FEELING  NECESSARY.


17


of  these  feelings  that  what  we  call  1  approbation  9
and  '  disapprobation  '  is  distinguished  from  the  act
of  thought,  which  is  a  mere  holding  something  to
be  true  or  not  true.  We  can  therefore  say,  that
such  aesthetic  judgments  are  in  general  possible
only  in  a  spiritual  being  which  has  the  capacity  of
feeling  pleasure  and  pain.  An  altogether  perfect
intelligence,  which  were  lacking  in  this  capacity,
would  have  no  knowledge  at  all  as  to  what  inner
state  could  be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  appro-
bation from  the  mere  holding  of  something  to  be
true.

We  can  reach  the  same  conclusion  in  still  another
way.  Let  it  be  assumed  that  in  all  the  world  there
exist  only  such  beings  of  bare  intelligence  as  have
no  interest  whatever  in  anything.  There  is  ob-
viously in  such  a  case  no  longer  any  conceivable
reason  why,  instead  of  an  existing  state  a,  over
which  no  one  is  rejoiced  or  troubled,  another  state
b  would  have  to  be  brought  to  pass  by  certain  con-
duct,—  over  which  latter  state  in  like  manner  no  one
would  be  either  rejoiced  or  troubled.  Just  as  little
would  there  be  any  reason  why,  instead  of  b  another
state  c  or  d  or  any  other  state  you  please,  might
not  just  as  well  be  brought  to  pass.  That  is  to  say,
in  such  a  world  it  would  be  quite  incomprehensible
that  there  should  be  definite  rules  which  should


i8


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


obligate  spiritual  beings  to  any  one  definite  form
of  conduct,  and  forbid  them  another  form.  In  case
such  laws  are  to  exist,  there  must  be  somewhere  in
the  world  a  point  from  which  the  one  kind  of  con-
duct leads  to  an  increase  of  happiness  or  pleasure,
and  the  other  to  unhappiness  or  pain.

Whatever  may  be  the  more  intimate  mode  of  the
still  obscure  connection  between  the  ethical  laws
and  pleasure  and  pain,  this  much  is  at  this  stage  of
discussion  already  made  certain: — namely,  that  an
indissoluble  connection  exists,  and  that  all  talk  of
absolutely  obligatory  forms  of  conduct,  which  should
have  no  reference  at  all  to  the  resulting  consequences,
is  perhaps  very  nobly  meant,  but  is  a  formal  service
that  arises  from  a  complete  misunderstanding.

§  8.  The  dread  which  is  commonly  cherished  with
respect  to  every  union  of  pleasure  with  ethical  prin-
ciples, sometimes  leads  to  the  expression  :  "  What
is  good  is  pleasing  because  it  is  in  itself  good,  but
it  is  not  good  because  it  is  pleasing/'

We  hold  this  antithesis  to  be  false.  The  two
expressions,  'to  be  good'  and  'to  be  pleasing,'  —
or  similar  ones  which  might  be  substituted  for  these,
—  have  by  no  means  so  different  a  significance  that
the  one  could  serve  as  a  reason  for  the  other.  They
rather  designate  exactly  one  and  the  same  thing.


NO  PLEASURE  ABSOLUTELY.


'9


There  is  nothing  at  all  in  the  world,  which  would
have  any  value  until  it  has  produced  some  pleasure
in  some  being  or  other  capable  of  enjoyment.
Everything  antecedent  to  this  is  naught  but  an
indifferent  kind  of  fact,  to  which  a  value  of  its  own
can  be  ascribed  only  in  an  anticipatory  way,  and
with  reference  to  some  pleasure  that  is  to  originate
from  it.

On  the  other  side,  however,  it  must  be  considered
that  '  pleasure  absolutely 1  (in  the  generality  with
which  we  make  use  of  this  term  when  reflecting
upon  such  matters)  is  nothing  at  all  that  could  ever
become  actual  as  a  psychological  state ;  accordingly,
it  is  also  nothing  which  could  be  set  up  as  a  goal  for
our  conduct  in  general.  Just  as  there  is  no  '  motion
absolutely/  but  only  such  or  such  a  motion  of  defi-
nite velocity  and  direction  ;  and,  further,  just  as  we
do  not  see  '  color  in  general/  but,  only  red  or  green,
etc.:  so  there  is  never  any  'pleasure  absolutely/
which  were  merely  greater  or  less  ;  but  every  actual
pleasure  is  besides  distinguished  qualitatively  from
every  other, — just  as  green  is  from  red,  or  a  major
chord  from  a  minor  chord.

If  the  foregoing  fact  is  overlooked  and  neglected,
it  is  in  such  case  natural  to  keep  one's  eye  merely
on  that  of  the  pleasure  which  is  common  to  all  its
forms  ;  to  wit,  the  agreeable  impression  upon  the


20


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


feeling  of  the  subject  who  enjoys  it.  Now,  of  course,
our  conscience  speaks  clearly  enough  with  reference
to  this  matter;  and  it  condemns  the  egoism  which
uses  up  all  objects,  relations,  and  events,  with  a
complete  disregard  for  their  specific  content,  as
mere  means  for  satisfying  the  demand  of  personal
well-being,  —  very  much  as  both  common  and  costly
materials  may  be  consumed  as  fuel  in  order  to  pro-
duce from  both  the  same  kind  of  heat.

If  we,  on  the  other  hand,  consider  the  observa-
tions made  above,  the  pleasurable  feeling  of  the
subject  enjoying  it  can  also  in  turn  be  regarded  as
the  sole  means  by  which  the  specific  value  that  lies
in  the  things,  or  their  peculiar  beauty  and  excel-
lence, is  first  brought  to  its  true  realization,  —  as
light,  for  example,  must  illumine  things  in  order
that  their  different  colors,  which  they  do  not  have
in  the  darkness,  may  originate.

§  9.  Thus  far  we  have  only  endeavored  to  estab-
lish the  fact,  that  the  aforesaid  general  and  abstract
pleasure,  which  might  possibly  be  set  up  as  a  goal
for  conduct,  does  not  exist ;  and  that,  on  the  other
hand,  forms  of  conduct  which  should  have  no  rela-
tion whatever  to  such  a  goal,  could  quite  as  little
possess  the  character  of  a  worth  that  should  obligate
us. The  question  now  proposes  itself,  what  help


THE  DIFFERENT  KINDS OF GOOD.  2  1


this  consideration  can  render  toward  attaining  the
scientific  aims  of  practical  philosophy.

The  objection  that  the  conception  of  pleasure
is  not  fitted  to  be  the  principle  of  such  philosophy,
because  it  would  offer  no  basis  for  ranking  the
different  kinds  of  good  as  higher  and  lower,  is  a
very  ancient  one.  Now  it  is  true  that,  in  case
abstraction  is  once  made  of  the  characteristic  con-
tent of  the  good  enjoyed,  and  this  conception  of
pleasure  is,  in  a  one-sided  way,  made  synonymous
with  subjective  enjoyment,  then  merely  a  difference
of  more  or  less,  and  no  gradation  of  the  kinds  of  good
as  qualitatively  different,  is  possible.  But,  on  the
one  hand,  it  ought  to  be  admitted,  that  exactly  the
same  defect  adheres  to  all  the  other  fundamental
conceptions  of  ethics,  although  deemed  of  a  superior
order.  They  too,  in  truth,  admit  the  possibility  of
different  kinds  of  good  ;  but  in  case  they  come
under  the  necessity  of  having  to  compare  the  values
of  these  kinds,  they  too  follow  other  points  of  view,
which  have  no  further  connection  with  the  aforesaid
fundamental  conceptions.  On  the  other  hand,  how-
ever, since  we  never  once  forget  the  characteristic
content  of  the  different  actual  forms  of  pleasure,  we
can  leave  the  different  values  of  pleasure  also  to  be
immediately  revealed  to  us  by  the  voice  of  con-
science, precisely  as  we  learn  of  its  existence  in


22


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


general  only  from  experience ;  and  it  is  nothing
but  pedantry  to  be  unwilling  to  take  for  granted
this  knowledge  from  such  a  source,  and  demand
for  it  instead  some  origin  as  a  matter  of  method
more  profound.

Finally,  if  the  matter  were  as  simple  as  it  now
appears,  we  should  have  no  further  problem  to
solve ;  we  should  in  that  case  merely  have  to  follow
this  voice  of  conscience.  But  it  need  not  be  re-
marked at  any  length,  that  this  voice  speaks  unam-
biguously only  with  reference  to  the  simple  and  pure
relations  of  one  will  to  another.  The  most  of  the
demands  made  upon  us  for  any  kind  of  conduct  lie,
on  the  contrary,  in  involved  relations,  which  do  not
admit  of  being  brought  at  once  under  any  one  of
those  simple  cases,  pure  and  alone,  but  must  rather
be  brought  under  diverse  ones  ;  they  therefore  lead
to  a  conflict  of  opposite  decisions  from  conscience.
In  such  matters  the  final  decision  can  never  be  hit
upon  otherwise  than  as  a  result  of  practical  axioms,
which  the  conscience  itself  does  not  immediately
possess,  but  which  must  be  learned  from  the  ex-
perience of  life ;  and  it  is  these  maxims  that  specify
the  general  conditions  which  are  to  be  held  as
obligatory,  and  under  which  on  the  whole  the  great-
est possible  sum  of  good  may  be  actualized  in  human
life.


CHAPTER  II.


THE  SIMPLE  MORAL  IDEALS.


§  10,  We  do  not  at  first  enter  upon  the  con-
sideration of  the  many  forms  of  enjoyment  which
have  already  been  made  possible  by  our  organization
and  its  reciprocal  action  with  the  external  world.
Excluding  this  sensuous  pleasure,  which  it  is  natural
but  not  meritorious  to  strive  for,  we  confine  our-
selves to  the  investigation  of  those  simple  modes
of  conduct  that  are  productive  of  the  finer  and
spiritual  pleasure  of  an  unconditioned  approbation,
and  that  therefore  likewise  appear  as  demands  which
the  ethical  spirit  has  to  satisfy.

Nor  are  we  able  to  deduce  these  modes  of  con-
duct with  precise  logical  method  ;  on  the  contrary,
when  we  analyze  the  conception  of  conduct  irfto
its  particular  characteristics,  we  are  simply  con-j
structing  a  series  of  occasions  on  which  we  re-
mind ourselves  of  the  particular  utterances  of  the
conscience.

At  present  we  need  to  distinguish  conduct,  in  the
precise  meaning  of  the  word,  from  only  one  other
conception,  —  namely,  that  of  action.  On  doing  this
we  find  that  conduct  occurs  merely  in  cases  where  a


24


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


conscious  idea  of  what  is  to  be  attained  thereby  forms
the  point  of  starting  for  its  own  actualization  ;  op-
posed to  this  conception  is  the  '  blind  '  action  of  the
forces  of  nature.  But  mere  consciousness  does  not
suffice ;  neither  is  conduct  that  process  which  origi-
nates by  way  of  necessity  from  a  combination  of  ideas
within  us  in  accordance  with  certain  laws,  and  which
passes  over  to  the  body  and  there  becomes  an  exter-
nal motion.  On  the  contrary,  we  take  it  for  granted
that  the  aforesaid  ideas  also,  although  they  are
indispensable  for  the  originating  of  conduct,  do  not
themselves  produce  it ;  that  they  rather  only  serve  as
motives  for  the  will,  which  present  to  it  the  different
value  of  the  different  possible  forms  of  conduct,  but
commit  to  the  will  itself  the  choice  between  them.

The  many  difficulties,  which  are  involved  in  the
above-mentioned  thought,  we  reserve  for  subsequent
consideration :  for  the  present  we  simply  assert
that,  to  the  ordinary  view,  all  conduct  is  likewise
free  conduct ;  and,  therefore,  that  innumerable
so-called  deeds,  which  we  daily  accomplish,  do
not  belong  at  all  under  the  conception  of  conduct.
The  most  of  our  bodily  movements,  even  where
they  have  a  purpose,  —  for  example,  seek  to  attain
or  to  avoid  an  object,  —  are  nothing  more  than
perfectly  involuntary  secondary  effects,  that  are
neither  produced  by  a  will  nor  always  to  be  sup-


THE  ORIGIN  OF  CONDUCT.


25


pressed  by  it ;  that  are  attached  to  our  preceding
states  in  accordance  with  physiological  or  psycho-
logical laws  ;  and  that,  therefore,  happen  through
and  from  us,  but  are  not  wrought  by  us.

We  therefore  restrict  the  term  '  conduct  '  to
those  cases  in  which  an  idea  of  different  possible
modes  of  conduct,  further,  an  idea  of  their  differ-
ent value,  and,  finally,  a  decision  between  them,
have  preceded ;  the  last  of  which  we  attribute  —
no  matter  now  whether  rightly  or  wrongly  —  to  the
free  determination  of  our  will.

§  11.  If  we  are  mindful  of  the  fact  that  acts  called
'  conduct '  are  not  to  originate  from  a  basis  of  blind
action,  but  from  a  conscious  motive,  and,  in  fact,  from
an  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  mode  of  behavior
presented  before  us  in  idea ;  then  we  demand  —

I.  Sensibility  of  the  mind  to  motives  and  that
warmth  of  feeling  which,  at  every  moment,  enters
sympathetically  into  the  happiness  or  unhappiness
which  it  either  purposes  to  change  by  its  actions,
or  is  by  general  maxims  necessitated  to  change.
On  the  contrary,  that  incorruptible,  perfectly  cold,
machine-like  probity,  which  invariably  obeys  gen-
eral laws,  without  rejoicing  at  the  happiness  or
being  troubled  by  the  unhappiness  which  it  pro-
duces, although  it  may  be  in  actual  life at  the


26


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


right  place  a  very  useful  thing,  is  nevertheless  in
itself  considered  only  an  object  of  moral  disap-
probation.

Three  further  points  in  particular  must  be
alluded  to  in  order  more  precisely  to  define  this
sensibility  of  mind.

1.  Its  intensity  will  naturally  heighten  its  value.
But,  in  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  magnitude
of  sensibility,  we  demand  also  that  it  have  —

2.  Many-sidedness.  In  life  it  may  repeatedly
happen  that,  with  the  division  of  labor,  a  division
of  susceptibility  also  occurs  to  the  advantage  of  the
general  well-being  ;  since,  at  all  events,  one-sided-
ness  frequently  brings  perfection  in  relation  to  that
for  which  it  furnishes  the  impulse.  But  taken  by
itself,  every  such  limitation  is  morally  uncomely ;
for  by  it  our  conduct  is  degraded  to  a  similarity
with  the  wonderful  artistic  impulses  of  the  ani-
mals, which  are  likewise  lacking  in  free  activity
and  susceptibility  of  fancy  directed  towards  all  sides.

3.  Finally,  we  wish  the  sensibility  to  be  not
merely  many-sided  but  also  proportional  to  the
actual  value  of  the  things,  from  which  it  experi-
ences the  impression :  it  ought  to  urge  on  what
is  great  with  earnestness,  and  what  is  small  with
ease,  and  not  everything  with  the  same  solemnity
and  the  same  inflexibility.


THE VIRTUE  OF  RESIGNATION.


27


§  12.  II.  Motives,  however,  should  not  remain
mere  motives,  but  should  lead  to  effects  upon  the
external  world  ;  for  it  is  this  which  distinguishes
the  actions  called  conduct  from  mere  sentiments.
It  is  with  reference  to  this  fact  that  we  can  set
up  in  quite  universal  form  the  moral  precept  :
"Let  thy  conduct  be,  etc." — and  what  is  meant
by  it  is,  that  man  ought  by  no  means  to  wait  for
circumstances  to  compel  him  to  do  something  or
other ;  but  he  ought  with  ingenious  initiative  to
choose  for  himself  a  department  in  which  he  can
by  his  conduct  actualize  i  the  Goods '  of  beauty,  hap-
piness, or  righteousness.  All  merely  contemplative
life  needs  its  special  justification  in  every  individ-
ual case,  and  can  never  be  preferred,  as  a  rule,  to
active  life.  Besides,  this  latter  of  itself  creates
relations  which  form  a  worthy  object  of  contem-
plation.

The  general  utterance  made  above  may  be
divided  into  three  particulars  :

1.  Neither  ought  conduct  to  be  fruitlessly  directed
toward  what  is  in  itself  impossible,  nor  ought  a  con-
test to  be  waged  against  what  is  unavoidable.  This
is  the  thought  of  Resignation,  by  which  all  our
activity  is  limited  to  real  and  attainable  ends. But  —

2.  Those  plans,  the  accomplishment  of  which
is  possible,  one  ought  not  merely  to cherish  as


28


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


plans,  and  —  as  frequently  happens  —  shrink  from
the  common  toil  and  pains  which  alone  can  lead
to  their  realization.  This  is,  in  contrast  with  all
high-flying  extravagance,  the  demand  for  that
Energy  which  does  not  despise  even  the  small
for  the  sake  of  what  is  great.

3.  But,  finally,  there  may  be  forms  of  conduct
which  are  not  merely  possible,  but  which,  accord-
ing to  our  own  conviction,  are  absolutely  com-
manded. In  this  case  it  is  demanded  that  our
conduct  and  our  will  be  in  accord  with  our  con-
viction. This  is  the  demand  for  Conscientiousness,
—  by  which  however  we  must  signify  the  right
thing :  in  all  cases  where  we  know  that  there  are
diverse  convictions,  we  are  in  duty  bound  undis-
turbed to  follow  our  own,  only  in  case  we  are
compelled  to  act  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a
pernicious  principle  of  Fanaticism  to  wish  to  carry
through  our  own  convictions  even  in  cases  where
no  duty  to  act  lies  before  us.

§  13.  III.  All  conduct  must  either  alter  some
state  of  a  being  or  thing,  or  else  protect  it
against  threatening  alteration.  With  reference  to
this  content  of  conduct,  it  may  be  said,  —

1.  The  piety  is  everywhere  well-pleasing,  that
considerately allows every natural product  and


BENEVOLENCE AND  JUSTICE.


29


every  natural  event,  which  occupies  or  appears
to  occupy  the  place  in  the  plan  of  the  whole  to
which  it  is  entitled,  to  be  undisturbed  and  to
develop  itself ;  and  that  even  sustains  (so  far  as
this  is  possible)  the  development  of  such  prod-
uct or  event,  but  never  interferes  to  disturb  it
without  being  justified  in  doing  this  by  some  spe-
cial reason.  This  principle  condemns  every  aim-
less impulse  at  destruction  even  of  what  is
inanimate.  Such  piety  naturally  attains  its  larger
moral  value  in  the  relation  of  spirits  to  spirits,
and  in  this  case  forms  what  we  call  Benevolence.

2.  It  may  happen  that  two  efforts  of  different
spirits,  in  themselves  allowable,  encounter  each
other  in  one  and  the  same  object.  In  that  case
it  is  agreeable  to  conscience  if  neither  of  the  two
insists  on  its  exclusive  gratification,  but  if  both
so  far  withdraw  as  that  both  may  be  in  part  grati-
fied proportionably.  This  self-limitation  or  moder-
ation is  considered  by  Herbart  as  the  origin  of
Justice.

3.  Finally,  Retribution  is  agreeable  to  con-
science ;  that  is  to  say,  the  returning  of  a  cor-
responding measure  of  reward  or  of  punishment
to  a  will  which  has  occasioned  a  definite  measure
of  weal  or  woe.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,
that  while  we can  very  easily  deduce from  the


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


foregoing  the  moral  duty  of  gratitude,  we  cannot,
on  the  contrary,  by  any  means  so  immediately
deduce  our  right  to  execute  the  punishment  itself,
and  to  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  that  fate
which  would  satisfy  us  if  it  undertook  the  retri-
bution of  itself.

§  14.  IV.  Yet  a  fourth  feature  belongs  to  our
complete  conception  of  'conduct/  Concerning  the
animals  we  concede,  indeed,  that  they  '  do '  mani-
fold things ;  but  in  their  case  we  are  not  wont  to
speak  of  acts  as  'conduct.'  That  is  to  say,  we
assume  (no  matter  whether  rightly  or  wrongly)
that  the  animals  are  always  straightway  moved
by  the  excitation  of  the  instant  to  a  momentary
activity,  and  not  by  maxims  which  have  been
formed  through  the  elaboration  of  their  expe-
riences and  established  as  the  abiding  basis  of
all  their  actions.  In  a  word :  A  personality  as  a
subject  belongs  to  'conduct/ Accordingly  —

1.  Consistency  is  demanded  in  conduct  :  only
that  which  flows  from  such  a  constant  character
—  rather  than  inconsequent  ebullitions  of  fine  feel-
ing—  experiences  our  moral  approbation.  Then,
moreover,  —

2.  We  demand  that  every  single  action  be  not
at  all  times  dependent  on a hazardous  struggle


VALUE  OF  DIFFERENT  IDEALS.


.3'


between  this  character  and  the  impulse  of  the
moment.  Rather  does  the  moral  habit,  which
makes  the  correct  conduct  seem  like  a  second
nature,  appear  to  us  as  a  much  higher  ideal  of
morality  and  as  somewhat  toward  which,  among
other  things,  education  has  to  strive.  It  is  this
to  which  we  also  do  honor  under  the  name  of
'  Holiness/  even  in  cases  where  we  can  by  no
means  assume  any  earlier  antecedent  struggle.
Finally,  —

3.  It  positively  is  not  a  moral  command,  that
one  person  shall  be  and  act  precisely  like  another.
Rather  should  each  cultivate  morally  his  own  pecu-
liar individual  Character,  in  such  manner  as  thereby
to  produce  good  things,  or  himself  become  such  a
good  as  no  other  one  in  the  world  may  exhibit
with  exactly  the  same  coloring  and  peculiarities.

§  15.  The  different  ideals  which  we  have  thus
far  adduced  are  of  different  value.

The  first  group  (§  11)  may  be  designated  as
gifts  of  nature,  over  which  we  rejoice  if  they
exist,  and  the  total  lack  of  which  would  annul
completely  every  ethical  judgment ;  but  the  inten-
sity of  which  cannot  be  manufactured  at  will  by
the  living  spirit,  but  can  only  hover  before  it  as
a  goal  to  be  attained.


32


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


The  second  group  (§  12)  corresponds  essen-
tially to  what  Herbart  brought  together  under
the  title  of  the  one  idea  of  'perfectness ' ;  or
under  the  proposition,  that  everything  great  and
strong  is  agreeable  in  comparison  with  what  is
small  and  weak.  It  has  already  been  remarked
within  his  own  school  (Hartenstein)  that  this
agreeable  feeling  is  not  a  genuinely  ethical  appro-
bation;  and  that  this  '  perfectness '  itself  is  not
an  ethical  excellence,  but  only  a  formal  determi-
nation, which  indeed  of  itself  excites  interest  or
agreeable  feeling,  but  for  the  rest  is  applicable
in  like  degree  to  moral  and  to  immoral  conduct.
It  needed  in  this  connection  a  bare  allusion  ;  be-
cause without  it  moral  conduct  cannot  exist,  but
not  because  such  conduct  directly  consists  in  it.

The  fourth  group  also  (§  14),  which  concerns
the  personal  character,  stands  in  close  connection
with  the  foregoing :  it  comprises  forms  in  which
not  only  the  moral,  but  not  less  the  immoral  also,
attains  its  highest  cultivation.

It  is  only  the  third  group  (§  13)  which  com-
prises those  moral  ideals  that  of  themselves  excite
unconditioned  approbation.  But  even  among  the
three  members  of  this  group,  this  is  really  accurate
only  of  Benevolence.  That  is  to  say,  if  we  con-
ceive  of (touching the second member of  this


VIRTUE IMPLIES  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.


33


group)  a  '  strife '  between  two  forces  which  are
not  capable  of  experiencing  any  pain  whatever
from  it,  then  we  should  see  in  such  strife  an
absolutely  indifferent  fact,  which  would  be  of  no
less  value  than  the  other  case  of  a  harmonious
co-operation  of  forces  equally  blind.  The  1  strife '
is  disagreeable  and  its  peaceful  issue  agreeable,
merely  because  we  expect  from  the  former  the
origination  of  pain,  and  from  the  latter  a  diminu-
tion of  it.  Just  so  (passing  on  to  the  third
member)  retribution,  if  it  were  to  consist  in  a
mere  mechanical  distribution  of  states  which
work  weal  or  woe  to  nobody,  would  be  in  no
respect  better  than  any  disproportionateness  and
any  inequality.  It  has  an  expressly  ethical  content
only  in  so  far  as  it  unites  '  merit 9  and  '  reward,'
'guilt'  and  '  punishment ' ;  and  these  four  con-
ceptions would  be  devoid  of  all  specifiable  mean-
ing, if  no  element  of  the  world  could  experience
pleasure  or  pain.

We  therefore  return  to  the  quite  simple  and  fun-
damental thought  previously  propounded.  There
is  such  a  thing  as  moral  judgment  of  conduct  only
upon  the  assumption  that  this  conduct  leads  to
pleasure  or  pain.  But  to  this  conscience  joins  the
further  truth,  that  it  is  not  the  effort  after  our  own,
but  only  that  for  the  production  of  another's  felicity,


34


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


which  is  ethically  meritorious  ;  —  and,  accordingly,
that  the  idea  of  benevolence  must  give  us  the  sole
supreme  principle  of  all  moral  conduct.


CHAPTER  III.


CONCERNING  THE  FREEDOM OF  THE  WILL.

§16.  Moral  judgment  imputes  our  conduct  to  us
not  merely  as  having  perfectness  or  deficiency,  but
as  having  merit  and  guilt.  Both  these  conceptions
have  always  appeared  meaningless  to  the  ordinary
reflection,  unless  it  might  be  presupposed  that  the
conduct  which  has  occurred  could  just  as  well  have
been  left  unperformed  ;  and  that,  therefore,  it  is  not
the  necessary  consequence  of  our  spiritual  states,
but  has  originated  through  a  free  act  of  the  will.

We  have  now  to  pass  in  review  the  opinions
which  contend  over  this  4  freedom  of  will/

§  17.  That  quite  decided  form  of  Determinism,
which  makes  all  the  actions  of  animate  beings  pro-
ceed according  to  general  laws  from  their  inner
spiritual  states,  with  the  same  necessity  as  physical
effects  do  from  their  blind  causes,  is  in  itself  con-
sidered perfectly  clear  and  free  from  contradiction.

There  is  only  one  fact  which  can  bring  us  at  all
to  the  fancy,  that  the  case  stands  otherwise  with
human  conduct  than  with  such  effects  ;  —  and  that
is  the  feeling  of  penitence  and  self-condemnation.


36


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Accordingly,  then,  Determinism  explains  the  mat-
ter to  itself  in  such  a  way  as  to  see  in  this  feeling
nothing  but  a  condition  of  discomfort,  altogether
similar  to  that  discomfort  which  we  experience
concerning  ourselves  when  something  goes  wrong
with  us,  or  we  are  unable  to  solve  some  problem.
It  is  only  because  we  experience  unpleasant  effects
from  actions  which  have  proceeded  from  ourselves,
that  there  becomes  attached  to  the  aforesaid
feeling  the  illusion  of  supposing  the  actions,  which
have  not  been  conditioned  from  without  to  have
also  had  no  necessary  basis  within  us  ;  and  the
feeling  of  discomfort  which,  in  the  case  of  any-
thing going  wrong,  is  directed  against  the  external
hindrance  to  our  doing  somewhat,  falls  back  upon
ourselves  in  this  other  case  where  our  own  actions
give  us  trouble.  This  it  is  which  gives  to  the
feeling  of  repentance  the  peculiar  coloring,  by
means  of  which  it  is  distinguished  from  every
other  form  of  discontent.  But  our  drawing  a
conclusion  from  this  feeling  to  a  '  freedom  of  the
will/  is  due  to  an  error  which  we  commit  merely
because  we  do  not  see  through  the  mode  of  the
origin  of  this  feeling.

The  above-mentioned  view  admits  also  of  being
carried  out  in  a  practical  way.  Of  course,  we
could no  longer  impute merit  and  guilt  to  any


FATALISM  THEORETICALLY  POSSIBLE.


37


form  of  conduct,  but  would  have  to  consider  it
like  the  behavior  of  the  animals,  which  unavoid-
ably corresponds  to  their  nature.  But  just  as
naturally  should  we  discover,  that  the  behavior  of
one  excites  in  another  emotions  of  vengeance,
or  of  a  retribution  that,  in  such  case,  would  no
longer  be  regarded  as  ethical  punishment,  but
only  as  mechanical  reaction  against  impressions
received.

He  who  is  pleased  with  this  complete  trans-
mutation of  human  life  into  a  play  of  fatalistic
forces,  void  of  merit  and  blame,  is  not  to  be
confuted  on  speculative  grounds.  The  moving
reason  for  contradicting  such  views  lies  entirely
in  an  undemonstrable  but  strong  and  immediate
conviction  that  it  is  not  so,  and  that  the  conception
of  *  an  ought '  and  of  an  obligation,  which  finds  no
place  at  all  in  such  a  view,  has  nevertheless,  the
most  indubitable  and  incontrovertible  significance.

§  18.  There  have  been  manifold  attempts  to
reconcile  necessity  according  to  the  law  of  causa-
tion with  the  wished-for  freedom.

In  the  first  place,  however,  it  is  an  error  when
Herbart  thinks  to  reckon  an  action  moral  merely
on  the  ground  that  it  is  willed,  and  not  on  the
ground  of  the  way  in  which  this  will  itself  origi-


38


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


nated.  When  we  acquiesce  in  the  origin  of  conduct
from  a  will,  we  have  beyond  this  already  made  the
assumption  that  such  will  is  determined  by  no
cause.  On  the  other  hand,  we  should  not  acquiesce
in  the  aforesaid  origin,  if  the  will  were  expressly
defined  as  an  inner  movement  which  unavoidably
originates  from  previous  spiritual  states  in  accord-
ance with  general  laws.

It  is  further  quite  erroneous  to  say  that  "  true
freedom  is  identical  with  necessity."  We  may  in
every  case  honor  with  the  name  of  freedom  the
consistent  development  of  a  being  which,  without
any  external  compulsion,  simply  follows  its  own
nature.  But  this  arbitrary  name  in  such  a  case
signifies  absolutely  nothing  that  would  have  any
connection  with  the  moral  '  freedom  of  the  will '
which  we  desire.  For  this  latter  freedom  absolutely
requires  that  the  spirit  in  its  willing  and  acting
be  independent  not  merely  of  external  causes,  but
also  of  '  its  own  nature '  ;  that  it  must  execute  not
merely  that  which  is  consequent  upon  what  is
preformed  in  this  nature  of  its  own,  but  must  at
every  moment  be  able  to  turn  about,  step  out
of  this  path,  and  break  off  the  consecutiveness  of
its  development  with  an  entirely  new  beginning.

The  same  thing  holds  good  in  the  third  place,
against  Kant's  attempt  to  assume,  in  the  life  of  the


rant's  theory  of  freedom.


39


spirit  within  time,  the  complete  conditionating  of  all
subsequent  states  by  the  earlier,  and  therefore
a  perfect  '  //^freedom ' ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  to
ascribe  to  the  spirit  as  a  '  Thing-in-itself,  —  and
therefore,  as  it  were,  in  a  timeless  existence  which
lies  at  the  basis  of  the  life  in  time  —  a  quondam
freedom  of  self-determination,  by  which  it  has  created
for  itself  that  character  which  now  in  the  life
in  time  discharges  itself  forth  unalterably  into  its
consequences.  However  the  case  may  stand  with
the  metaphysical  satisfactoriness  of  this  view,  it
furnishes  us,  instead  of  that  in  which  we  take  an
interest,  something  else  which  is  a  matter  of  com-
plete indifference  to  us.  Unless  we  are  able  in
this  life  in  time,  which  is  the  only  one  that  we
know  of  and  are  actually  living,  to  repeat  at  every
moment  the  aforesaid  self-determination,  we  shall
not  be  consoled  for  such  a  loss  by  any  free  act
which  we  are  assumed  to  have  brought  to  pass
in  some  existence  altogether  unknown  to  us.

§  19.  The  attempt  to  justify  this  freedom  must
be  preceded  by  the  inquiry,  whether  it  be  not
forbidden  by  the  antecedent  certainty  of  the  law
of  causation,  which  holds  good  without  exception.
That  the  law  does  hold  good  may  itself  be  deduced
from  experience  or  from  a  priori  grounds.


40


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


As  far  as  the  first  position  is  concerned,  it
cannot  once  be  asserted  that  experience  alone
teaches  the  validity  of  the  law  of  causation  for  all
parts  of  the  course  of  nature.  For  many  regions
are  here  still  so  unknown  that  we  simply  carry
the  validity  of  this  law  over  to  them  also  from
those  well-known  regions  in  which  it  indubitably
holds  good.  We  do  not  deny  that  this  is  right-
fully done ;  but  we  do  not  deem  it  to  be  self-
evident  that  the  same  conformity  to  law  controls
also  all  parts  of  that  spiritual  life  so  totally  different
in  kind.

Nor  can  we  bring  empirical  proof  for  this  law
from  direct  self-observation.  If  we  believe  our-
selves able  to  demonstrate  in  many  cases  how  our
decision  has  been  determined  by  the  antecedent
spiritual  states,  still  in  just  as  numerous  other
cases  we  are  able  to  do  no  such  thing.  And  even
the  first  cases  are  ambiguous.  If  two  motives  a
and  b  have  been  weighed  in  the  mind,  and  there-
upon an  action  ß  is  executed,  which  corresponds  to
b,  then,  of  course,  afterwards  the  appearance
always  originates  for  our  point  of  view  as  though
ß  were  naturally  brought  about  by  b  and  its
ascendency  over  a,  with  a  strict  necessity.  But
for  the  intensities  of  the  motives  a  and  b  we
possess  no  measure  at  all,  by which we  might


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  STATISTICS.  4 1

be  able  to  measure  them  off  previous  to  the
occurrence  of  the  action.  That  b  has  been  the
stronger  of  the  two  is  a  bare  hypothesis,  which
we  make  ex  post  just  because  we  have  been  accus-
tomed to  deduce  effects  in  nature  from  such
preponderance  of  a  greater  force  over  the  less.  Tf,
on  the  contrary,  we  just  assume  that  there  has
been  an  act  of  free  will  which  decided  for  p,  then
everything  will  appear  exactly  the  same  in  the  pro-
cedure. In  that  case,  too,  we  shall  be  able  after-
wards to  consider  b  as  the  stronger  motive  ;  only
its  preponderance  in  that  case  will  simply  derive
its  origin  from  the  free  resolution  with  which  the
will  decides  for  it.

All  self-observations  are  therefore  ambiguous.
The  attempt  has  been  made  to  supplement  them
by  statistics,  which  cover  the  actions  of  whole
multitudes  of  people.  It  is  believed  that  the  dis-
covery has  been  made,  that  a  like  number  of  the
same  crimes  repeat  themselves  with  the  greatest
regularity  in  like  times  and  a  like  multitude  of
people.

Such  results  as  the  foregoing  depend  upon  very
untrustworthy  calculations.  Were  the  results
certain,  however,  their  significance  would  still  be
doubtful.  Were  there  some  secret  reason  or
other, compelling the existence of a  constant


42


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


relation  in  the  course  of  the  world  between  the
sum-total  of  the  good  and  bad  elements,  still  this
conformity  to  law  could  only  refer  to  the  intentions,
which  are  the  only  thing  really  good  and  bad  ;  it
could  not  refer  to  the  actions  that  reach  an  accom-
plishment, and  in  enumerating  which  the  most
different  degrees  of  the  badness  and  goodness,
that  have  led  to  actions  of  the  same  kind,  remain
unobserved;  —  just  as  unobserved  also  those  inner
agitations,  that  have  been  restrained  by  external
hindrances  from  the  committing  of  a  deed.  On
the  other  hand,  the  frivolous  assertion  —  a  definite
number  of  crimes  belongs  to  the  order  of  the
world,  whoever  commits  them  —  is  perfectly  absurd.

The  other  mode  also  of  representing  the  matter,
according  to  which  these  crimes  have  no  constant
number,  but  change  with  the  condition  of  circum-
stances, does  not  prove  the  existence  of  a  law
which  the  decisions  of  the  will  are  compelled  to
follow ;  on  the  contrary,  it  only  shows  that  the
sum-total  of  the  bad  (of  which  no  account  was  taken
above  but  which  is  always  really  present)  finds  some-
times more  and  sometimes  less  of  opportunity  for
passing  over  into  visible  deeds.

Finally ;  if  it  be  granted  that  a  constant  (as
first  claimed)  or  a  variable  (as  last  claimed)  appar-
ent '  conformity  to  law  '  actually  takes  place,  still


THE  A  PRIORI  VIEW  OF  CAUSATION.  43


it  is  an  altogether  arbitrary  thing  to  acknowledge
it  as  being  more  than  a  fact,  —  as  being,  that
is,  an  actual  effect  of  the  working  of  law.  If
every  act  of  will  were  in  fact  perfectly  and
unconditionally  free,  still  every  regular  or  irregular
expression  of  it  in  deeds  would  be  just  as  pos-
sible, and  just  as  little  mysterious,  as  every  other.
The  conjecture,  therefore,  that  such  a  determining
law  exists  in  the  multitudes  of  cases  observed,
is  itself  the  product  of  the  presupposition,  that
all  these  events  are  subject  to  conditioning  causes.
In  this  way,  accordingly,  no  proof  against  the
fact  of  freedom  can  be  found  ;  because  the  entire
consideration,  and  the  entire  reason  for  surprise
at  the  aforesaid  alleged  regularities  of  action,
depends  wholly  upon  the  prejudgment  that  all
events  are,  as  a  matter  of  course,  conditioned
events.

§  20.  Another  way  is  taken,  when  the  causal  con-
nection is  considered  to  hold  good  without  any
exception,  as  a  truth  that  is  inborn  to  our  spirit  and
self-evident,  such  as  makes  any  freedom  impossible.

Now,  however,  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  it  is
just  the  infinite  regressus  to  which  this  assumption
compels  us,  that  makes  us  suspect  the  absolute
validity  of the law of causation. The  natural


44


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


sciences,  for  example,  are  indeed  necessitated,  in
order  to  form  a  conception  of  the  world,  to  assume
not  only  a  great  number  of  different  elements  which
always  were  without  cause,  but  also  a  great  number
of  motions  which  take  place  between  them  in  defi-
nite directions.  Starting  from  a  multitude  of  ele-
ments absolutely  at  rest,  no  motion  can  be  produced.
Now  how  far  soever  we  pursue  a  still  further  deduc-
tion, it  nevertheless  invariably  presupposes  other
new  motions ;  we  are  compelled  to  admit,  that
motion  does  not  attain  to  actuality  as  the  result  of
any  cause  whatever,  but  it  is  motion,  without  cause
and  from  the  beginning.

And  now  if  this  must  be  once  for  all  admitted  as
an  existing  fact,  then  there  is  no  reason  why  per-
fectly new  beginnings  of  a  subsequent  origin,  that
have  no  foundation  in  what  is  prior,  should  not  also
show  themselves  within  the  course  of  things ;  but
after  they  have  once  taken  their  place  in  the  cohe-
rent system  of  things  actual,  they  bring  after  them
those  consequences  which  belong  to  them  in  their
present  combination  with  the  rest  of  the  world,
according  to  general  laws.

On  the  above-mentioned  grounds  it  is  self-evident,
that  every  such  *  new  beginning/  and  therefore
every  decision  of  a  free  will,  must  be  inexplicable
with respect  to the  way  in  which it comes  to


DETERMINISM AND  FREEDOM.


45


pass ;  for  to  '  explain '  means  nothing  more  than
to  show  that  a  definite  event  is  the  result  of  its
antecedents  in  accordance  with  general  rules.  The
incomprehensible  character  of  free  determination  is
therefore  no  reason  against  the  assumption  of  it,
but  is  a  consequence  of  its  very  conception.

§  21.  In  the  interest  of  methodology  it  is  cus-
tomary further  to  object,  that  it  is  an  unallowable
Dualism  to  permit  the  two  principles  of  Deter-
minism and  Freedom  to  prevail  side  by  side  in  the
world.

But  it  is  only  to  the  adherents  of  the  first  view
that  this  appears  as  a  '  dualism ' ;  for  if  we  start
from  the  conception  of  a  necessary  connection,  then
we  have  of  course  no  reason  for  arriving  at  the
conception  of  freedom.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we
take  the  existence  of  the  latter  for  granted,  then
it  is  found  that  freedom  itself,  in  order  that  it  may
be  even  thought  of  as  being  what  it  aims  at  being,
postulates  a  very  widely  extended  —  although  not
an  exclusive  —  prevalence  of  the  law  of  causation.
For  a  free  decision  can  never  come  to  actual  con-
duct, unless  there  is  a  system  of  things,  relations,
and  events,  which  infallibly  cohere  according  to
general  laws;  so  that  the  will,  if  it  has  attached  a
state  a  to  one  of  these  elements,  can  reckon  with


46


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


perfect  security  upon  its  being  followed  by  only  a,
and  not  by  another  state  p.  If,  on  the  contrary,  such
an  action  at  the  beginning  as  a,  could  be  followed
with  the  same  right  by  every  possible  ß,  7,  8,  etc.,
then  all  conduct  would  be  at  an  end ;  because  we
should  never  be  certain  of  reaching  a  definite  aim
by  means  of  the  chosen  beginning.

Consequently,  the  principle  of  Freedom  includes
the  other  principle  of  Determinism,  and  the  charge
of  Dualism  is  groundless.

§  22.  Another  question  is,  whether  a  will  thus
free  answers  to  our  ethical  demands.  The  opinion
is  frequently  expressed,  that  a  decision  so  blind,
which  does  not  do  what  is  good  for  the  good's  sake,
is  no  prerogative  of  man,  but  an  irrational  and
morally  worthless  capacity.

On  the  contrary,  our  reply  is  as  follows :  It  is
quite  incorrect  to  speak  of  a  1  blind '  will.  For
from  the  very  beginning  we  possess  will  not  as
an  isolated,  independently  existing  power,  but  only
as  a  movement  in  a  spirit  that  is  alive  throughout ;
and  therefore  as  considered  to  be  inseparable  from
consciousness  and  from  the  judgment  of  the  value
of  different  possible  forms  of  conduct.

But  this  also  appears  to  us  to  meet  the  case.  As
soon  as  the  knowledge  of  the  value  of  different


FREEDOM  AND  PSYCHICAL  MECHANISM.


47


forms  of  conduct  exists,  it  is  precisely  by  this  means
that  the  will  of  the  spirit  who  decides  for  the  one
form  or  the  other,  becomes  responsible.  We  are
on  no  account,  however,  to  assume,  in  addition  to  the
existence  of  this  knowledge,  a  mechanical  activity
on  its  part  by  means  of  which  it  determines  the
direction  of  the  will.  Perfectly  fruitless,  to  wit,
are  all  the  attempts,  which,  while  admitting,  for-
sooth !  such  an  activity,  nevertheless  try  to  distin-
guish it,  as  a  mere  '  invitation  '  or  '  inclination  '  of
the  will,  from  its  complete  determination.

Finally,  the  remark  must  be  added,  that  it  is  not
freedom  and,  therefore,  not  the  still  undecided  will,
which  is  the  object  of  moral  judgment.  This  free-
dom may  be  called  in  itself  perfectly  worthless  or
irrational ;  but  it  is  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  in
order  that  merit  or  fault  of  will  may  be  possible.
It  is  only  the  will  after  decision,  which  has  now
cancelled  its  freedom,  that  is  as  respects  its  content
bad  or  good ;  but  that  could  be  neither  of  the  two,
if  it  had  not  originated  in  the  aforesaid  manner.

§  23.  If  the  foregoing  claims  are  conceded,  so  far
as  freedom  in  itself  is  considered,  then  we  come
upon  new  difficulties,  still,  when  freedom  is  consid-
ered in  connection  with  the  mechanism  of  our
psychical  life,  into  which  it  must  necessarily  enter,
if  it  is  to  be  effective  at  all.


48


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


For  every  decision  of  the  free  will  finds  in  our
mind  certain  states  —  partly  ideas,  partly  feelings,
partly  efforts  —  which  it  must  either  change  or
guard  against  impending  changes.  Now  since  these
changes  are  all  without  doubt  connected  together
according  to  general  laws,  and  therefore  fall  under
the  conception  of  a  mechanism,  the  will,  in  order
to  be  able  to  achieve  aught  in  this  region,  would
be  obliged  each  time  to  transform  itself  into  a  defi-
nite power  of  definite  magnitude,  which  is  just
sufficient  to  produce  the  required  effect  in  accord-
ance with  the  laws  of  this  mechanism.

The  foregoing  peculiar  demand  might  be  avoided
with  the  assertion  ;  the  will  does  nothing  but  will.
Whether  what  it  wills  is  brought  to  pass  even  sim-
ply within  the  soul,  and  therefore  whether  the
passions  which  oppose  it  are  overcome  or  not,  does
not  depend  on  it :  rather  must  the  collective  state
of  the  mind  be  of  such  a  fortunate  sort,  that  the
effect  wished  for  by  the  will  results  from  the  mind,
as  it  were  of  itself ;  and  where  this  is  not  so,  the
good  will  is  inoperative.

We  are  conversant  with  the  above-mentioned
opinion  only  in  the  processes  of  religious  thought.
The  prayer,  for  example,  that  God  may  strengthen
our  weak  will,  does  not  mean  that  God  is  to  will
for  us  ;  that  we  rather  reserve  for  ourselves  to  do.


THE  EFFECTIVE  INTENSITY OF  WILL.


49


But  we  pray  that  efficient  energy  may  be  imparted
to  the  will,  such  as  it  does  not  have  of  itself ;  and
we  are  in  this  case  inclined  to  let  even  our  moral
judgment  rest  satisfied  with  bare  good  will,  and
put  off  the  lack  in  executing  it  upon  human  weak-
ness.

It  is  nevertheless  impossible  to  carry  out  such
a  view  as  the  one  just  stated.  If  we  define  it
sharply,  —  that  is  to  say,  if  we  make  the  will  not
merely  in  general  too  weak,  but  of  itself  perfectly
ineffective,  —  then  it  can  no  longer  be  told  by  what
means  the  will  is  still  to  be  distinguished  from  a
mere  theoretical  insight  into  the  praiseworthiness
or  badness  of  an  action.  Now  however  little  we
may  be  able  to  describe  in  yet  other  words  its
essential  nature,  it  is  none  the  less  certain,  that  we
are  speaking  of  the  will  only  in  case  there  exists
a  certain  amount  of  exertion  toward  its  actualization,
in  addition  to  the  aforesaid  insight.  That  is  to
say :  Every  act  of  the  will  must  have  some  degree
of  effective  intensity.

Now  if  freedom  is  to  be  at  the  same  time  main-
tained, such  degree  of  strength,  too,  could  not  be
conditioned  upon  anything  external  to  the  will ;
and  we  should  therefore  be  compelled  to  demand
that  a  perfect  freedom  determine,  not  merely  the
direction  which  the  will  is  to  take,  but  also  the


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


energy  with  which  it  projects  itself  in  this  direction.
If  therefore  our  good  will  has  at  any  time  been
1  too  weak '  to  withstand  our  passions,  this  is  no
excuse  for  us.  but  an  accusation  against  us.  And,
indeed,  we  are  wont  in  our  judgment  of  ourselves
to  make  use  of  that  expression  ('  too  weak ')  only  in
the  sense  of  a  reproach  to  ourselves.

With  this  remark  we  close  this  analysis,  which
could  only  be  directed  to  the  point  of  refuting  the
theoretical  objection  that  freedom  is  unthinkable,
or  that  it  is  inadmissible  in  the  totality  of  our  view
of  the  world ;  a  view,  however,  that  was  at  once
assumed  to  bring  forward  ideas  which  are  absolutely
paradoxical,  but  not  on  that  account  any  the  less
possible,  and  which  one  must  apprehend  if  one  is
resolved  to  recognize  this  theoretically  undemon-
strable  freedom  as  '  a  postulate  of  the  practical
reason.'


Second  Principal  Division.


Second  Principal  Division.


TRANSITION.

§  24.  The  ethical  ideals  previously  treated  of,  whose
focal  point  ultimately  is  the  Idea  of  Benevolence,
we  held  to  be  obligatory  upon  all  spirits,  however
in  other  regards  their  nature  may  be  constituted.
But  we  are,  of  course,  only  able  to  follow  out  the
realization  of  these  ideals  in  the  relations  of  our
earthly  life.

What  follows,  therefore,  appears  as  an  application
of  what  has  preceded  to  the  situation  of  the  world
of  men  ;  but  we  should  not  wish  this  to  be  under-
stood as  if  these  applications  were  only  examples  of
the  universal  ethical  ideas ;  —  examples,  that  is  to
say,  in  which  fundamentally  that  only  is  of  value
which  repeats  in  them  the  universal  factor,  while
their  special  peculiarities  would  be  worthless  supple-
ments, such  as  could  not  be  wanting  if  the  universal
factor  were  to  be  realized.

Our  view  is  rather  the  reverse.  It  is  in  these
particular  forms  which  the  universal  assumes  that
that  wealth  of value first makes  its  appearance


54


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


which  can  be  developed  from  the  universal,  but
which  is  not  developed  so  long  as  it  remains  uni-
versal. The  love  of  the  sexes,  the  love  of  parents
and  of  brothers  and  sisters,  friendship,  fellowship,
etc.,  are  special  forms  of  benevolence  induced  by
the  natural  relations  of  mankind,  each  of  which  in  its
living  characteristic  coloring  is  of  much  more  value
than  general  benevolence  of  itself.  And  just  so  are
other  definite  virtues,  which  are  possible  only  by
means  of  those  natural  conditions  of  human  life,
to  be  held  in  much  higher  esteem  than  as  though
they  were  mere  examples  to  be  subsumed  under
their  universal  concepts.

§  25.  The  arrangement  of  the  material  will  be
simple.  It  is  tolerably  useless,  and  a  mere  logical
entertainment,  to  investigate  the  question  whether
Practical  Philosophy  is  to  be  constructed  as  a  system
of  duties,  of  rights,  of  virtues,  or  of  kinds  of  good.
All  these  formal  conceptions  would  invariably  have
to  treat  of  nothing  but  the  same  content,  the
actualization  of  which  we  either  demand  of  our-
selves as  our  '  duty,'  or  of  others  toward  us  as  our
'  right '  ;  or  else  which  we  prize  and  honor  as  any-
body's mode  of  activity,  or  as  a  product  established
by  such  activity.

Not  a  single  one  of  these  general  notions,  how-


NATURAL  ETHICAL  RELATIONS.


55


ever,  would  of  itself  lead  to  the  particular  sub-
species sought  for,  until  we  should  have  learned  to
recognize  the  definite  particular  relations  with  ref-
erence to  which  these  so  general  claims  first
assume  a  definite  stamp.

That  is  to  say,  therefore,  we  should  be  compelled
even  in  such  a  case  to  take  our  start  from  the  con-
sideration of  those  points  of  application  which  are
given  to  our  moral  effort  by  the  natural  relations
under  which  we  live.

§  26.  The  above-mentioned  relations  themselves
we  do  not  bring  to  our  mind's  view  as  a  disorderly
heap ;  on  the  contrary,  we  of  course  follow  the
assumption  that  the  creative  power  which  has  dis-
posed us  in  the  midst  of  them  has  meant  something
by  them  ;  and  that  they  therefore  form  a  series  of
well-ordered  impulses,  by  means  of  which  our  moral
development  ought  to  be  conducted.

But  this  they  no  longer  do  in  the  form  of  such
impulses.  We  do  not  suppose  that  everything
which  nature  does  can  be  a  moral  pattern  for  us,
or  that  everything  unnatural  is  also  immoral.  The
rather  are  the  facts  of  nature  everywhere  to  be
apprehended  simply  as  admonitions  to  reflect  upon
this  question;  —  namely,  by  what  kind  of  conduct
the  greatest  possible  good  would  be  won  from  them.


56


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Finally,  we  do  not  raise  this  inquiry  for  the  first
time ;  but  as  long  as  the  race  of  men  has  existed,
it  has  been  busied  in  solving  it  in  the  way  of
action,  by  founding  the  great  ethical  institutions
which  have  maintained  themselves  through  all  the
vicissitudes  of  history  in  different  forms.

§  27.  If  now,  on  the  one  hand,  we  should  fail  of
attention  to  everything  which  must  be  the  subject  of
treatment  by  us,  were  it  not  for  this  preparatory
work  of  the  human  race  in  history  ;  still,  on  the
other  hand,  such  historical  effort  is  itself  never
wholly  concluded.

The  Practical  Philosophy  of  each  age  has,  there-
fore, the  problem  of  separating  from  human  insti-
tutions that  which,  according  to  the  experience  of
man  in  history  extending  up  to  this  age,  does  not
accord  so  well  in  its  further  results  and  consequences
with  ethical  demands  of  a  universal  character,  as  it
appeared  to  earlier  times  to  do.  Or,  to  express
the  same  thing  in  other  terms :  Practical  Philosophy
is  itself  a  part  of  this  practical  effort  of  humanity  to
win  the  greatest  possible  good  from  the  given  rela-
tions of  nature.

Starting  from  this  point  of  view  it  may  appear  —
especially  if  in  accordance  with  frequent  usage  we
designate  it  by  the  name  of  'natural  right' — to


METHOD  OF PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


57


stand  in  an  obscure  relation  to  what  is  called
'  right  '  in  the  narrower  meaning  of  the  word.
On  this  point  it  is  for  the  present  perfectly  suffi-
cient to  express  ourselves  as  follows  :  Practical
Philosophy  has  simply  to  point  out  those  aims,
after  the  realization  of  which  we  are  compelled  to
strive,  as  often  as  the  question  is  one  de  lege
ferenda  in  any  human  affair.  Their  claims  to  the
place  of  a  valid  and  obligatory  '  right '  can  only
arise  in  the  same  way  as  that  in  which  we  shall
subsequently  see  that  every  right  in  society
originates.


CHAPTER  IV.


OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  PERSON.

§  28.  The  individual  owes  his  existence,  as  well
as  the  possibility  of  its  continuance  and  of  all
moral  cultivation,  so  much  to  the  human  society
in  which  he  is  included,  that  we  can  make  him
the  object  of  our  first  reflections  only  in  case  we
assume  beforehand  the  existence  of  such  human
society ;  we  may  regard  it,  however,  simply  as  a
number  of  other  individuals  which  are  as  yet  not
connected  with  each  other  by  means  of  any
definite  institutions,  but  merely  by  the  possibility
of  some  kind  of  intercourse  with  one  another.

Under  the  aforesaid  assumption,  the  inquiry  may
be  raised :  In  what  do  the  moral  aim,  the  duty,
and  the  right  of  the  individual  person  consist  ?

§  29.  The  first  question  has  been  answered  dif-
ferently by  the  ancient  and  the  Christian  culture.

To  antiquity,  man  appeared  without  any  manifest
attachment  to  a  coherent  system  transcending  his
earthly  life,  pre-eminently  as  a  creature  of  nature,
whose  aim  —  not  so  much  moral,  as  altogether
natural  —  could  only  consist  in  bringing  all  the


THE  VICE  OF  EGOISM.


59


bodily  and  spiritual  capacities  with  which  he  is
endowed  by  nature,  to  the  most  intensive,  and  at
the  same  time  harmonious  cultivation.

It  is  not  necessary  to  make  prominent  the  cor-
rect view  on  this  point,  but  simply  to  remark  that
in  this  '  beautiful '  development  of  the  individual,
yet  a  trait  of  egoism  is  involved.  This  whole
culture  is  not  a  preparation  of  the  powers  for  a
work  to  be  accomplished ;  but  it  is  a  self-aim  to
such  an  extent  that  the  self-enjoyment  of  one's
own  fair  personality,  and  its  secure  tenure  against
all  attacks  from  without,  forms  the  sole  content  of
such  a  life.  On  this  account,  it  may  be  said  that
antiquity  was  very  susceptible  with  respect  to  all
the  aesthetic  and  formal  elements  which  the  moral
ideas  contain ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  very  little
so  with  respect  to  the  ultimate  principle,  benevo-
lence,—  that  is  to  say,  the  service  of  others,  —  which
constitutes  the  focal  point  of  ethical  ideas.

Just  the  opposite  of  this,  under  the  influence  of
Christianity,  the  conviction  is  formed  that,  strictly
speaking,  every  man  is  called  only  to  the  service  of
others ;  that  the  effort  to  concentrate  all  possible
excellences  in  one's  own  person  is,  at  bottom,  only
a  '  shining  vice ' ;  but  true  morality  consists  in
the  complete  surrender  of  one's  own  self,  and  in
self-sacrifice  for  others. Here,  too,  it  is  not  neces-


6o


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY


sary  to  make  prominent  the  correct  view ;  and
almost  as  little  necessary  to  observe  that  the
service  of  others  neither  excludes  that  aesthetic
culture,  nor  can  it  consist  altogether  in  an  uncon-
ditional self-sacrifice,  which,  if  it  were  exercised
by  all,  would  produce  no  assignable  result  what-
ever.

Nothing,  therefore,  remains  for  us  to  do  but  to
supplement  the  ancient  self-satisfaction,  without
surrendering  aesthetic  culture,  by  having  all  the
powers  acquired  by  such  culture  placed  at  com-
mand for  the  accomplishment  of  a  life-aim  in
accordance  with  motives  of  benevolence.

§  30.  On  endeavoring,  in  the  next  place,  to  define
such  a  life  of  action  in  relation  to  the  external
world,  we  reject  two  things  :  —

First,  every  ascetic  direction,  which  thinks  to
serve  moralitv  by  fleeing  from  every  natural  enjoy-
ment, and  which,  in  case  it  puts  in  the  place  of
enjoyment  nothing  else  but  renunciation  and  indif-
ference to  all  needs,  only  leads  to  the  impoverishing
of  life  and  hinders  the  originating  of  innumerable
good  things  of  beauty.

In  the  same  manner  do  we  reject  the  assertion
that  a  merely  contemplative  life  is  preferable  to  a
life  of  action. All  contemplation  finds  a  material


THE  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE.


6l


worthy  of  it,  only  in  remembrance  of  the  dilemmas
and  fatalities  of  actual  life.  Even  the  consideration
of  nature  awakens  thoughts  of  real  value  only  for
him  who  rediscovers  in  its  particulars,  symbols  for
the  complications  he  has  recognized,  and  solutions
of  that  real  life  which  in  pain  and  pleasure  lays
hold  on  the  entire  man.

Even  the  ancient  preference  for  knowledge  and
a  dianoetic  life,  we  are  compelled  to  reject.  The
maxim  that  the  i  truth '  should  be  sought  for  its  own
sake  and  without  other  immediate  motive  has,  of
course,  its  good  meaning  in  the  sum-total  of  our
culture.  Although  it  is  just  as  correct  to  say  that
the  problem  of  reproducing  over  again  in  conscious-
ness what  is  just  precisely  as  it  is,  has  not  of  itself
the  very  slightest  moral  value.  We  are  right  in
being  very  enthusiastic  for  science,  only  on  account
of  the  fact,  partly  that  we  discern  the  usefulness
of  its  impulse  for  the  sum-total  of  human  life  so
well  as  to  renounce  all  claim  to  see  a  special  appli-
cation for  every  individual  truth ;  and  partly  that
the  general  character  of  truth,  its  consistency,  and
the  manifoldness  of  the  consequences  that  follow
with  certainty  from  a  few  principles,  places  before
our  very  eyes  an  actualization  of  what  we  ought
to  attain  in  the  moral  world  by  our  own  conduct.
Certainly,  therefore,  nothing  but  the  practical  life


62


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


of  action  is  the  scene  which  we  ought  to  seek  for
the  exhibition  of  our  powers :  all  contemplation,
however,  and  all  asceticism  are  only  permissible  as
momentary  forms  of  life,  which  endeavor  to  make
what  experiences  are  here  had,  further  useful  for
subsequent  life,  or  for  other  persons.

§  31.  The  content  of  this  life  of  action  is  defined
for  us,  in  the  first  place,  by  our  natural  necessities.
The  maintenance  of  life,  the  increase  of  its  comfort,
the  warding  off  of  pain  from  ourselves,  and  participa-
tion in  those  sufferings  of  others  which  the  course  of
nature  unavoidably  induces,  —  these  things  constitute
the  occasions  which,  in  part,  produce  the  formal  vir-
tues, like  industry,  patience,  love  of  order,  and  con-
sistency, and  also  in  part,  invite  and  remind  us  to
exercise  benevolence.  This  they  do  so  much  the  more
manifoldly,  the  oftener  those  social  conflicts  which
summon  us  to  the  conservation  of  moral  sympathy
occur  in  the  larger  development  of  human  relations.

All  the  preceding  considerations  may  be  left  to
the  history  of  culture.  Only  one  thing  may  be
alluded  to,  —  namely,  that  it  is  just  in  connection
with  this  intricacy  of  relation  that  the  necessity
occurs  for  a  division  of  labor.

Labor  itself  is  simply  a  necessity  ;  and  its
achievement  of  itself  becomes  a  moral  deed  only


THE ETHICS  OF  LABOR.


63


by  its  being  recognized  as  a  necessary  condition
for  realizing  different  kinds  of  good,  and  on  this
account  not  being  shunned.  It,  at  all  events,  brings
into  being  the  formal  virtues  ;  it  teaches  us  at
once  to  respect  the  nature  of  another,  if  it  be  noth-
ing more  than  that  of  the  material  upon  which  the
labor  is  expended.  But  in  and  of  itself,  we  are
obliged  still  to  accord  with  the  ancient  view,  that
the  true  human  life  first  begins  in  the  leisure  that
follows  labor.

Now  the  division  of  labor  into  different  branches
has  for  us,  in  addition  to  the  well-known  advantages
which  the  theory  of  economics  considers,  the  yet
other  advantage,  that  the  new  moral  conception
of  a  calling  originates,  by  choosing  and  following
which  the  individual  within  the  society  in  which
he  lives  is  first  changed  from  a  mere  individual  into
a  person  ;  and  is  now  no  longer  merely  that  which
all  others  are,  too,  but  assumes  in  connection  with
them  a  place  that  belongs  to  him  alone.

§  32.  It  would  be  tolerably  useless  to  speak  fur-
ther of  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  individual  person
before  the  definite  relations  are  brought  into  con-
sideration, under  which  both  originate.

'  Rights '  are  not  thought  to  be  possessed  toward
the  forces  of  nature,  toward  the  elements  and  toward


64


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  wild  beasts.  They  are  merely  made  to  hold
good  toward  beings  who  understand  them  and  can
feel  themselves  obligated  by  their  own  conscience
to  observe  them.  It  is,  therefore,  altogether  unfit-
ting to  speak  first  of  the  '  rights '  which  one  has,
and  then  deduce  from  them  the  'duties  of  others
toward  us.'  It  is  rather  that  to  which  we  in  our
conscience  feel  ourselves  obligated  toward  others,
that  forms  the  '  right '  of  these  others  toward  us ;
and  that  now  becomes  our  '  right '  only  in  so  far
as  we  must  assume  in  these  others  the  same  feeling
of  obligation  toward  us.

To  speak  of  '  natural  rights '  which  belong  to
the  individual  person  is,  therefore,  in  itself  false.
By  '  nature '  man  has  merely  physical  and  spiritual
capacities  and  the  possibility  of  exercising  them ;
but  he  has  a  '  right '  to  the  last,  without  exception,
only  in  society,  and  indeed,  without  exception  also,
only  to  the  extent  to  which  the  latter  feels  itself
obligated  to  concede  such  exercise.

Every  '  right '  is  therefore  —  strictly  speaking  —
in  itself  a  definite  limitation  of  a  natural  capacity,
or  of  some  claim  made  by  us.  But  a  right  can  be
called  '  natural '  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  earned  by
special  title ;  —  that  is,  in  so  far  as  it  is  enough  to
be  a  man  among  men  in  order  to  know  that  others
are  obligated  to  its  observance.


THE  MORALITY  OF  SUICIDE,


65


§  33.  Duties  could  be  appropriately  spoken  of
in  this  connection  only  so  far  as  the  individual
person  might  be  holden  for  them,  not  to  others
but  to  himself.

All  these  so-called  '  duties  to  one's  self/  neverthe-
less, become  intelligible  and  appear  obligatory  only
in  case  we  assume  that  the  person  has  a  conviction
concerning  the  value  of  his  position  in  the  totality
of  the  world  at  large ;  and  this  takes  place  princi-
pally by  means  of  the  control  over  our  sentiments
by  a  religious  circle  of  thought.

It  is  on  the  foregoing  consideration,  for  example,
that  the  turn  which  our  judgment  shall  take  con-
cerning the  permissibility  of  suicide  depends.  By
antiquity,  which  saw  in  the  person  merely  a  product
of  nature  whose  intelligible  aim  must  be  to  unfold
itself  as  beautifully  and  as  happily  as  possible,  suicide
was  deemed  allowable  as  soon  as  these  two  aims
were  no  longer  attainable.  Christian  culture,  which
conceives  of  man  as  having  a  supermundane  —
although  not  demonstrable  —  calling,  and  a  task
allotted  to  him  on  earth  by  God,  naturally  finds
in  this  the  reason  for  regarding  as  wanton  wick-
edness every  wilful  abbreviation  of  such  testing  thus
imposed  upon  him.

According  to  influences  altogether  similar,  our
conceptions  of personal  honor  are  different  from


66


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


those  of  antiquity.  But  although  we  still  believe
so  much  to  be  due  to  our  honor,  the  significance  of
our  belief  nevertheless  is,  that  such  duties  are
owing,  not  to  us  as  definite  individual  persons,  but
to  that  conception  of  personality  in  general  which
has  a  living  expression  in  us  also,  and  to  its  value
in  the  connected  system  of  the  ordering  of  the
world.


CHAPTER  V.


MARRIAGE  AND  THE  FAMILY.

§  34.  The  first  fixed  moral  institution,  marriage,
is  founded  upon  a  fact  of  nature,  the  peculiar  neces-
sity and  significance  of  which  we  do  not  at  all
understand.  For,  in  fact,  it  is  not  possible  to  tell
exactly  why  the  contrast  of  the  sexes  must  exist,  —
a  contrast  which  extends  down  into  the  kingdom
of  plants ;  and  all  attempted  explanations  on  this
matter  issue  in  trifling.

But  the  above-mentioned  fact  does  no  harm.
The  problem  of  Practical  Philosophy  is  merely
this  ;  —  to  investigate  how  this  fact  of  nature  can
be  turned  to  best  account,  and  as  much  moral  good
as  possible  secured  from  it.

In  answering  the  foregoing  question,  observation
of  nature  assists  us  very  little.  The  animal  world
shows  us  on  every  hand  examples  of  polygamy  and
monogamy,  of  polyandry  and  polygyny ;  and  the
animals  all  get  along  well  with  it.  The  great  differ-
ence of  vital  force  in  the  different  ages  of  life
certainly  makes  marriage  between  parents  and  chil-
dren unnatural  ; but  that between brothers  and


68


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


sisters  appears  rather  to  be  quite  worthy  of  com-
mendation. Even  the  helplessness  of  children  is
a  motive  for  their  parents  to  live  together  merely
temporarily  for  bringing  them  up.  All  these  '  becks
of  nature '  have  actually  been  followed  at  different
times  and  amidst  different  forms  of  national  culture.

§  35.  The  principal  point  in  the  modern  view
concerning  the  ideal  of  marriage  lies  in  our  estimate
of  the  value  and  honor  of  personality.

Man  is,  indeed,  not  only  an  end  to  himself,  but
he  is  so  in  such  a  degree  that  he  can  never  be  used
entirely  as  means  for  other  ends.  Now  the  fulfilment
of  the  natural  end  of  propagation  brings  man  into
this  position  of  being  subjected  to  the  general  forces
of  nature,  and  of  serving  another  with  what  is  most
peculiar  to  his  personality,  —  namely,  his  body,  —
merely  as  a  means  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  end.

We  assert  —  following  Kant  as  predecessor  —
that  this  complete  surrender  works  no  detriment
to  personal  honor  only  in  case  it  is  returned  by  just
as  complete  and  unreserved  surrender  of  the  other
personality  in  relation  to  all  the  interests  of  life.

From  this  it  follows,  first,  that  marriage  must  be
no  temporary  union  but  a  fellowship  of  the  whole
life,  of  all  human  and  divine  interests  ;  further,  that
only  monogamy  corresponds  to  this  ideal,  because


THE MARRIAGE  CONTRACT.


69


continually  does  that  party,  which  enters  several
times  into  a  relation  of  this  kind  with  some  one
else,  lose  in  value  and  fall  back  toward  the  place
where  it  has  the  significance  of  a  useful  means.
It  follows,  finally,  that  the  essential  content  of  the
duties  which  are  to  be  assumed  by  those  espoused
in  marriage,  is  everywhere  a  perfectly  definite  one
according  to  national  custom,  and  cannot  be  newly
determined  according  to  the  preference  of  those
who  come  together.  Only  the  decision  to  enter
into  this  institution  of  marriage  depends  upon  a
free  contract  of  the  two  persons,  A  and  B ;  the
content  of  the  institution  itself  is  not  to  be  changed
by  contract.  This  corresponds  to  other  analogies  :
for  example,  service  in  war,  offices,  etc.,  can  be
of  free  will  sought  for  and  assumed,  but  the
prescripts  of  the  service  must  then  be  assumed
in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  of  themselves
established.

§  36.  The  perfect  moral  equivalence  of  the  two
partners  in  marriage  does  not  annul  the  necessity
that  a  single  will  must  decide  in  relation  to  the
externalities  of  the  conduct  of  life.  It  is,  there-
fore, a  matter  of  course  that  the  husband  bring
his  decisions  as  much  as  possible  into  accord  with
the  wishes  and  views  of  his  wife  ; but  in  such


7o


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


manner,  that,  in  case  of  a  permanent  difference  of
opinion,  the  control  over  such  affairs  —  and,  there-
fore, representing  the  family  out  of  doors,  the
choice  of  the  dwelling-place,  the  assuming  of  an
office,  the  decision  concerning  the  spending  of
property  —  belongs  to  him  alone  ;  while  to  the
wife  the  management  of  the  inner  household  affairs
falls  as  a  customary  thing,  and  the  rank  and  stand-
ing and  social  honor  of  her  husband  pass  over
upon  her  as  well.

§  37.  There  is  no  power  on  earth  which  should
be  able  to  make  or  rightly  to  compel  a  marriage
between  two  persons.  Its  only  origin  is  without
exception  the  voluntary  agreement  of  the  parties
themselves.

Nevertheless,  since  every  marriage  is  formed
within  a  society  from  which  it  demands  for  itself,
for  its  property  and  its  offspring,  respect  and  the
protection  of  rights,  such  society  has  a  right  to
require  a  solemn  publication  of  the  decision  that
has  been  made,  and  to  express  its  own  will  in  the
recognition  of  that  decision,  or  in  interposing  to
prevent  it.

The  purpose  of  recognizing  the  marriage,  which
includes  likewise  the  obligation  to  protect  the
rights  of  what  is  recognized,  is  the  one  pursued


STATE  CONTROL  OF  MARRIA^K


7'


by  all  those  civil  or  ecclesiastical  ceremonies  which
are  frequently  but  erroneously  designated  as  a
real  ' concluding'  of  the  marriage.

But  originally  all  interposition  can  take  place
in  the  interest  of  society  only,  and  for  the  defence
of  the  moral  spirit  which  it  wishes  to  maintain
in  power  in  its  own  midst.  Society  can,  therefore,
strictly  speaking,  only  proscribe  from  its  circle
those  who  will  not  adhere  to  its  customs ;  or  it  can
temporarily  suspend  the  exercise  of  the  recognized
right  to  conclude  the  marriage,  until  the  condi-
tions are  fulfilled  under  which  it  can  recognize  the
marriage  without  detriment  to  itself.  But  in  and
of  itself  society  has  no  right  to  execute  punishment
upon  forms  of  conduct  which  merely  contradict  its
ways  of  looking  at  things,  and  which  have  not  as
yet  gone  so  far  as  to  work  positive  harm  to  it.

Thus  the  forbidding  of  bigamy  and  of  marriage
between  brothers  and  sisters  and  very  near  rela-
tives, belongs  to  those  general  views  which  our
modern  society  seeks  to  maintain  in  force  at  any
price  ;  —  the  latter,  not  because  it  contradicts  any
(not  demonstrable)  'command  of  nature/  but  be-
cause a  correct  moral  insight  condemns  the  admix-
ture of  different  moral  relations,  each  of  which
can  unfold  its  peculiar  beauty  and  worth  only
when  it  does  so  purely  for  its  own  sake.


7^


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


§  38.  Society  has  no  justification  for  dissolving
an  existing  marriage  :  it  must  besides  assume  that
each  marriage  is  entered  into  with  the  intention
that  it  shall  be  indissoluble.

If  death  severs  the  marriage,  then  it  remains  a
matter  of  conscience  with  the  surviving  party  as  to
how  far  such  party  will  still  feel  itself  bound.
Society  cannot  refuse  to  recognize  a  second  mar-
riage ;  because,  with  all  the  high  value  that  marriage
has,  society  can  nevertheless  only  regard  it  as  an
earthly  institution,  and  one  in  its  exclusiveness
conditioned  by  a  natural  relation.

Questions  as  to  how  far  society  may  recog-
nize on  its  part  the  dissolution  wished  for  by  the
partners  in  marriage,  are  more  difficult.  It  is
useless  to  seek  for  any  decision  on  this  point  from
the  '  conception '  of  marriage.  For  this  concep-
tion is  itself  nothing  but  the  ideal  established  by
us  which  we  would  gladly  attain.  The  more  valu-
able, however,  an  ideal  is,  the  more  unwholesome
are  all  its  unsuccessful  realizations.  And  it  is  of
no  avail  to  be  always  opposing  to  these  latter  the
consequences  which  follow  from  the  ideal  itself.

Our  final  aim  cannot  be  that  of  lending  support
to  unfortunate  attempts  at  the  accomplishment  of
the  ideal  ;  but  only  that  of  annulling  the  unhappi-
ness  which  is  involved  in  these  unfortunate  marriages,
with  the  least  detriment  to  the  general  morality.


LAWS ON  DIVORCE.


73


All  laying  down  of  laws  upon  this  matter  there-
fore follows  two  points  of  view.  The  first  is  the
care  to  preserve  the  sanctity  of  marriage  ;  —  through
increasing  the  difficulty  of  severing  it  by  rightly
requiring  that,  where  once  love  is  held  to  be
the  uniting  element  and  likewise,  besides  the  en-
joyment of  life,  its  aim  is  held  to  be  reciprocal
moral  furtherance,  neither  sickness  nor  other  mis-
fortune, nor  diseased  fancy,  nor  even  crime  and
wanton  wickedness,  can  be  a  satisfactory  motive  for
desiring  its  severance.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
some  follow  the  thought  of  recognizing  the  separa-
tion in  cases  where  the  one  party  expressly  makes
impossible  the  ends  of  marriage,  either  by  criminal
neglect  or  by  personal  persecution  usurping  the
place  of  affection.  A  means  of  relief  in  case  of
these  difficulties,  which  accords  perfectly  with  the
fact,  is  the  recognition  of  an  actual  severance  of
the  marriage  tie ;  while  the  moral  bond  holds  good
as  undissolved,  and  for  the  parties  separated  to
enter  into  marriage  with  others  is  not  permitted.

§  39.  The  dual  number  of  the  parents  in  itself
makes  manifest  the  fact  that  the  child  is  not  their
work,  but  is  a  pledge  entrusted  to  them  by  the
general  ordering  of  the  world,  —  a  pledge,  toward
which,  on  account  of  their  mysterious  participation


74


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


in  its  production,  they  have  rights  and  duties  that,
taken  together,  depend  upon  this  thought :  The
child  is  a  being  destined  to  future  moral  indepen-
dence, whose  development  the  parents  have  to
further  to  this  end.

Nothing  but  the  ancient  depreciation  of  the
female  sex  could  lead  to  the  thought  of  a  patria
potestaSy  which  ascribed  to  the  father  the  uncon-
ditional right  over  the  child's  life  and  death,  to-
gether with  an  authority  over  his  subsequent  fate
that  never  admitted  of  degrees.

Modern  education,  on  the  contrary,  seeks  to
secure  the  subsequent  independence  of  the  child
and  to  make  possible  his  self-decision  concerning
his  coming  life,  —  the  choice  of  a  calling  and  of
such  like  matters.  Up  to  that  time  the  parents  owe
their  children  a  maintenance  suitable  to  their  rank
in  life,  and  cultivation.  The  latter,  on  the  other
hand,  cannot  demand  more  than  the  means  of  the
parents  allow ;  and  since  they  would  not  exist  at
all  otherwise  than  by  their  birth  in  this  family,
they  must  be  just  as  much  content  therewith  as
with  the  fate  of  being  born  in  this  rather  than
that  age,  and  in  a  particular  nation.

In  bringing  up  children  many  controversies  are  oc-
casioned by  the  actual  circumstances  which  do  not  by
any  means  correspond  to  the  conception  of  marriage.


RELIGIOUS  TRAINING  OF  CHILDREN.


75


It  is  indisputable,  for  example,  that  parents  are
under  no  obligation  to  renounce  their  own  religious
belief,  because  it  could  not  eventually  be  the  future
belief  of  their  children.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  not
correct  —  a  thing  which  is  frequently  asserted  and
practised  —  that  one  is  in  duty  bound,  from  early
life  onward  and  industriously,  to  fashion  quite  defi-
nitely and  to  limit  the  religious  and  moral  horizon
of  children.  The  reflection  that  even  the  most  cer-
tain subjective  belief  may  after  all  be  an  error,
must  induce  us,  while  setting  before  children  no
other  pattern  than  that  we  ourselves  approve,  to
refrain  for  the  rest  from  a  sovereign  control
of  their  spiritual  development.  But  a  difference
in  confession  of  faith  on  the  part  of  parents,  in
itself  considered,  contradicts  the  ideal  of  marriage.
It  is  therefore  not  possible  from  the  conception
of  this  ideal  to  give  universal  decisions,  for  ex-
ample, concerning  the  religious  confession  in  which
children  are  to  be  educated.  On  this  point  a
decision  cannot  be  reached,  except  either,  in  an
external  way,  by  enactment  of  law,  or  in  every
special  case  according  to  grounds  of  equity  and
opportunity.


CHAPTER  VI.


OF  THE INTERCOURSE  OF  MEN.

§  40.  The  family,  although  the  most  important  of
moral  institutions,  is  not  adapted  to  teach  the
most  general  moral  duties  and  rights  of  man  to-
ward man.  Since  a  bond  of  piety  everywhere  con-
trols in  it,  it  pardons  too  much  which  is  in  itself
wrong,  and  on  the  other  hand  demands  more  than
is  universal  duty.

The  same  thing  is  true  besides  of  the  patri-
archal culture  of  the  peoples  which,  without  en-
countering men  of  a  different  kind  of  culture  and
while  existing  in  a  uniform  mode  of  life,  have  elabo-
rated a  highly  specialized  ceremonial  code  that  con-
trols their  whole  life.  It  is  just  here  that  great
severity  in  determining  punishments  is  customarily
found.  Each  transgression  is,  as  a  rule,  avenged
as  though  it  were  a  revolt  against  this  sacred
body  of  custom,  without  reference  to  the  degree
of  value  which  belongs  to  the  different  items.

A  change  first  takes  place  in  all  this  when  the
encountering  of  other  peoples  teaches  the  fact,
that  other  customs  also  may  exist  which  lead  as


RISE  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  RIGHTS.


77


well  to  human  happiness  and  to  human  improve-
ment. Then  the  dawning  conception  of  a  universal
*  right '  confronts  the  conception  of  custom  :  its
content  is  obscured  in  places  where  special  bonds
of  piety  maintain  themselves,  and  it  is  only
clearly  recognized  in  places  where  men,  otherwise
foreigners,  encounter  each  other  in  intercourse  of
some  kind.

§  41.  The  most  original  duty  of  man  in  inter-
course is  that  of  leaving  every  other  unmolested
until  that  other  has  disclosed  his  purpose  to  enter
into  some  intercourse.

No  one  therefore  has  any  right  to  force  unsoli-
cited services  upon  another ;  although  each  one
has  at  the  same  time  the  duty  of  behaving  with
good  will  toward  the  intentions  of  every  other,  as
soon  as  they  are  made  known  to  him.  Every  act
of  providing  guardianship  for  another,  or  every  nego-
tiorum  gestio,  always  needs  a  peculiar  foundation  of
its  own  in  right ;  and  such  right  may  lie  either  in  the
special  relations  of  the  two  persons  (for  example,
parents  and  children),  or  in  previous  occurrences
(for  example,  services  rendered),  or  else,  with  re-
ference to  many  a  matter,  in  the  prevalent  cus-
tom of  society.  The  latter,  especially,  allows  of
much  which  must  be  expressly  refrained  from,  in


7«


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


case  one  discerns  therein  any  disturbance  of  the
personality.

From  this  maxim  of  personal  inviolability  mani-
fold duties  of  discretion  follow  in  ordinary  social
converse.  Nobody  may  make  another  the  object
of  his  investigation  and  of  his  curiosity.  Con-
versely, nobody  has  the  right,  in  case  he  once
enters  into  relation  with  another,  to  force  his
individual  originality  upon  the  other  ;  on  the  con-
trary, he  has  the  duty  of  submitting  himself  to
forms  of  social  converse  that  are  universally
available.  As  regards  the  action  which  any  one
has  committed,  and  which  now  no  longer  belongs
to  the  interior  of  his  own  personality  but  to  the
common  world,  in  which  all  men  live,  every  one
has  the  right  of  being  judged  with  praise  or
blame ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  incumbent  on
God  alone  to  measure  the  worth  or  worthlessness
of  the  entire  personality  from  which  an  action
sprung ;  and  it  is  an  offence  on  the  side  of  men,
which  is  of  course  felt  to  be  such  for  the  most
part  —  although  not  exclusively  —  only  in  case  it
consists  in  blame.

§  42.  The  original  right  of  freedom  —  that  is,
of  the  free  use  of  one's  own  powers  and  of  the
iree  choice  of  the  ends  to  which they  shall  be


THE  RESTRICTION  OF  FREEDOM.


79


directed  —  is  self-evident.  In  society  this  right,
like  every  other,  is  subject  to  restrictions,  whose
measure  is  fixed  by  the  following  conditions  :

1.  To  rob  one  of  freedom  without  a  motive  can
never  be  permissible;  but  —

2.  The  motives  must  refer  personally  to  the  one
to  be  restricted,  and  therefore  never  lie  in  his
descent  and  such  like  matters,  but  only  in  his  own
deeds  or  in  his  relations  to  society  or  in  regard
for  the  common  weal,  to  which  his  complete  free-
dom from  restriction  would  be  detrimental.

3.  Every  permissible  deprivation  of  freedom
must  be  only  temporary ;  one  extending  through
the  whole  life  would  abolish  all  difference  between
not  recognizing  freedom  in  principle,  and  the  bare
suspension  of  the  exercise  of  freedom  when  recog-
nized. Finally,  —

4.  The  deprivation  of  freedom  must  also  be
only  partial,  so  that  it  hinders  personal  self-control
only  in  certain  definite  directions,  but  does  not
bind  with  chains  the  entire  spiritual  and  bodily
life.  In  the  latter  case,  there  would  arise  a  con-
tradiction to  the  conception  of  a  person  ;  who  may
indeed  suffer  himself  in  many  regards  to  be  used
as  means  to  an  end,  but  must,  not  like  a  thing,
serve  wholly  for  the  satisfaction  of  ends  outside
himself.


8o


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


Actual  slavery  contradicts  all  the  foregoing  re-
quirements :  the  first  by  the  bare  force  of  the  origi-
nal act  of  imprisonment  without  any  ground  in
right ;  the  second  and  third  by  the  fact  that  it  is  a
matter  of  inheritance  and  lasts  for  life.  It  would
be  glad  effectually  to  contradict  the  fourth  ;  and  it
is  only  frustrated  by  the  fact  that  at  least  thoughts,
emotions,  and  dreams,  are  withdrawn  from  all  con-
trol by  another.

The  historical  reasons  for  ancient  slavery  make
its  psychological  origin  comprehensible,  without
justifying  it.  Taking  one  a  prisoner  in  war  ap-
peared like  a  free  gift  to  him  of  the  life  of  which
he  might  have  been  deprived  ;  and,  consequently,
this  life  appeared  as  the  property  of  the  victor.
The  act  of  sparing  it  —  constituting  as  it  did  a
debt  to  be  discharged  only  by  the  performance  of
labor  —  justified  the  detention  of  the  debtor  by  the
creditor  until  the  discharge  of  such  performance ;
but  it  did  not  justify  the  transferrence  of  this  per-
sonal claim  to  a  third  person,  —  and,  accordingly,
not  the  vendibleness  of  the  slave.

The  reasons  of  the  school  with  which  Aristotle
justified  the  slavery  of  his  time  are  altogether  un-
satisfactory ;  there  were,  he  thought,  royal  souls
which  are  born  to  rule,  and  others  which  do  not
understand  how  to  conduct  themselves. But  there


MODERN  SLAVERY.


Si


is  no  judge  who  would  have  the  right  to  decide  to
which  class  each  individual  soul  belongs.  And
even  if  the  reason  were  all  correct,  from  it  would
flow  duties  of  compassion  toward  those  in  their
minority,  as  it  were,  but  never  the  right  to  treat
them  as  things,  and  wholly  to  suppress  their  own
will.

Modern  slavery  has  at  least  the  advantage  of
being  founded  upon  distinctions  of  race  that  are
very  manifest  ;  and  from  which  with  but  doubtful
right  it  is  believed  that  a  witness  to  some  spirit-
ual incapacity  of  the  Negro  is  to  be  seen ;  from
which,  however,  it  is  certainly  not  right  to  deduce
the  aforesaid  improper  consequences  of  a  sovereign
control  over  this  lower  race.

§  43.  i  Freedom  '  signifies  merely  the  general
possibility  of  the  use  of  our  capacities.  But  even
of  every  single  action  it  is  true,  that  it  must  be
originally  respected  so  long  as  no  special  motives
for  the  contrary  exist ;  and  that  it  is,  therefore,
morally  unjust  to  hinder  it  as  well  as  also  to
deport  one's  self  as  though  it  had  not  happened
at  all.

From  the  foregoing  principle  there  follows,  in
the  first  place,  a  multitude  of  minor  rules  for  the
right  mode  of  living,  which  we  pass  unnoticed  ;


82


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


but,  in  the  next  place,  the  origin  of  our  concep-
tions of  property.

There  are  few  actions  conceivable  which  do  not
consist  in  the  transformation  or  using  of  external
objects  for  some  end  or  other.  Now  every  object,
to  which  no  one  has  an  earlier  claim,  is  with-
drawn from  the  disposal  of  all  other  persons  by
the  fact  that  a  will  possesses  itself  thereof  and
makes  it  a  means  for  carrying  out  its  designs.

Now  since  the  activity  of  man  can  pursue  ends
of  complicated  form,  which  cannot  be  attained  at
once  by  a  constant  activity,  it  follows  besides  that
even  during  the  pauses  of  action  the  design  of
the  will  once  expressed  must  be  respected,  and
the  object  remain  reserved  for  the  first  will  in
future  to  dispose  of  further.  In  this  way  the  pos-
session, which  consists  in  the  continuous  having
in  hand  or  using  of  an  object,  passes  over  into
the  right  of  property ;  and  this  right,  externally
invisible,  subsists  even  during  those  times  in  which
the  proprietor  perhaps  is  by  no  means  in  posses-
sion of  the  thing.

Since,  however,  we  found  the  entire  ground  of
this  right  in  the  moral  duty  of  not  hindering  the
will  of  a  person,  or  the  plan  which  this  will  is
pursuing,  in  relation  to  a  thing  ;  therefore,  the
right  of  property  (so  long  as  it  is  merely  a  matter


THE  GROUND  OF  PROPERTY.


«3


de  lege  ferenda)  would  dispense  with  its  basis  again
and  consequently  be  extinguished,  in  case  this  will  to
use  the  thing  gave  no  sign  whatever  of  its  con-
tinuance by  any  real  action,  during  a  time  suffi-
ciently great  to  serve  for  human  relations.  It  does
not  belong  in  this  connection,  but  to  the  special
enactment  of  law,  to  define  the  conditions  under
which  such  a  neglect  should  be  assumed  to  be
a  relinquishing  or  extinguishing  of  the  right  of
property.

It  is  further  self-evident  that  even  without  injus-
tice, the  property  of  one  person,  not  yet  surren-
dered, may  come  into  the  de  facto  possession  of
another.  In  such  a  case  the  legal  enactment  will
do  justice  if,  while  making  possible  the  prosecu-
tion of  the  earlier  claims,  it  nevertheless  for  the
time  being  recognizes  the  right  of  the  one  in
present  possession,  so  as  not  to  bring  all  relations
into  a  condition  of  doubt  and  vacillation.

§  44.  Our  first  ideas  concerning  the  right  of
inheritance  rest  upon  the  same  grounds  as  the
foregoing.

It  belongs  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  family
that  the  disposition  of  the  property  is  incumbent
on  the  master  of  the  house;  although  the  other
members  of  the  family  also  have  a  certain  right


84


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


in  it  as  a  common  possession,  —  a  right  which  is
manifest  as  soon  as  it  is  compared  with  the  com-
plete lack  of  all  claims  to  a  right  on  the  part  of
strangers.  This  already  existing  right  comes  into
efficiency  after  the  death  of  the  master  of  the
house,  by  whose  greater  right  it  was  kept  sus-
pended. The  more  precise  determinations  as  to
the  manner  and  apportionment  in  which  this
takes  place,  depend  in  great  measure  upon  the
customs  of  society.

Testamentary  directions  offer  greater  difficulties.
That  the  will  of  a  person  does  not  reach  beyond
his  own  life  is  the  truth  only  to  this  extent,  that
it  can  no  longer  carry  itself  out  by  means  of  phys-
ical force  or  action.  But  the  question  arises,
whether  it  is  not  just  the  recognition  of  the  testa-
mentary directions  that  is  the  supplementary  means
by  which  this  efficacy  of  the  will  is  established.

Now  it  is  quite  obvious  that  all  human  culture
depends  upon  the  after-effects  of  the  individual
being  preserved  even  subsequent  to  his  death,  and
upon  each  generation  not  beginning  again  from  the
start,  as  though  the  earlier  ones  had  not  existed.
This  general  thought,  therefore,  compels  us  to
approve  of  just  those  means  which  make  possible
such  a  continuity  of  human  industry.  It  is  a  part
of this thought  that  —  at  least in cases  where


TRUTH  IN  SOCIAL  INTERCOURSE.


85


already  existing  family  claims  are  not  at  hand,  and
under  certain  circumstances  even  with  the  abbre-
viation of  such  claims  —  the  living  person  has  a
right  to  make  over  the  means  for  carrying  out  his
work  to  that  one  in  whom  he  has  most  confidence.

On  the  other  hand,  the  later  generation  also
must  reserve  the  right  of  criticism  and  of  change.
Since  the  will  of  no  individual  is  joined  with
omniscience,  posterity  cannot  be  forever  bound  to
observe  directions  for  the  disposition  of  goods  of
which  a  better  use  is  possible,  when  the  directions
have  become  void  of  or  contrary  to  their  aim.

§  45.  The  main  part  of  intercourse  does  not
consist  in  actions  upon  external  objects  but  in  the
imparting  of  ideas.

In  this  relation,  the  general  proposition,  "  One
must  always  speak  the  truth,"  is,  in  the  first
place,  to  be  limited  by  the  condition,  —  "  in  case
one  has  the  right  and  duty  of  uttering  anything
whatever.,,  And  very  frequently  one  has  neither
of  the  two,  in  reference  to  truths  with  which  one
is  acquainted.

But  then  we  are  compelled  to  add  in  the  second
place :  No  one  has  a  right  absolutely  to  demand
truth  of  another ;  but  such  right  always  belongs
to  any  one,  either  merely  on  the  ground  of  quite


86


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


definite  relations  in  which  he  stands  to  the  one
questioned,  or  on  the  ground  of  the  general  custom
which  he  recognizes  as  well  as  does  the  other.

It  is  questionable  simply  whether,  in  case  this
right  is  wanting  to  the  demand  for  truth,  the
answer  may  contain  an  untruth.  If,  for  example,
under  threatening  of  the  life,  a  demand  is  made
for  information,  which  may  be  a  source  of  danger
to  the  one  questioned  or  to  others,  may  the  danger
in  such  a  case  be  averted  by  an  untruth  ?

The  valid  answer  to  the  foregoing  inquiry  must
at  least  not  be  held  to  be  dispatched  by  express-
ing abhorrence  at  the  well-known  maxim :  "  The
end  sanctifies  the  means."  For  it  is  quite  impossible
without  a  more  precise  definition  to  deprive  this
maxim  of  all  validity,  since  we  very  frequently  follow
it  in  education,  in  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  pun-
ishment, in  war,  etc.  ;  and  besides  we  are  accus-
tomed to  praise  the  divine  government  of  the
world  precisely  on  this  account,  because  it  leads
to  blessedness  through  the  deepest  distress.

The  last  case  gives  into  our  keeping  the  necessary
correction.  That  is  to  say,  the  end  good  in  itself
sanctifies  the  means  merely  for  that  person  who  other-
wise has  the  right  and  duty,  not  simply  of  wishing
this  end,  but  also  of  accomplishing  it,  and  thereby  of
employing  everything  else  as  means  for  its  execution.


THE  RIGHT  OF  DECEPTION.


8;


From  the  foregoing  it  would  follow  for  the  case
in  hand,  that  all  untruth  cannot  be  forbidden  to
the  educator,  to  whom  belongs  the  right  and  duty
of  guiding  another's  dependent  course  of  thought  ;
although  its  use  must  necessarily  be  very  much
restricted  by  the  final  purpose  of  education,  —
namely,  conducting  such  thought  to  independence.
It  is  impossible,  however,  that  the  teacher,  whose
duty  is  the  propagation  of  truth,  be  permitted  to
communicate  what  is  untrue.  Against  one's  enemy
toward  whom  one  is  in  the  condition  of  defending
imperilled  life,  one  has  the  right  of  deception  in
a  very  extended  measure,  etc.

But  all  such  permission  to  untruth  is  essentially
limited,  first,  by  the  fact  that  the  consequences
of  an  untruth  are  on  the  whole  much  more  difficult
to  calculate  than  those  of  the  truth  :  and  as  for
the  entire  human  life  only  the  latter  can  be  the
basis  of  cooperation,  so  for  particular  cases  also
the  truth  is  the  safer;  and  the  responsibility  for
the  results  of  a  self-fabricated  untruth  is  more
grave  than  for  those  of  the  truth  which  does  not
depend  upon  us.

Finally,  in  every  single  lie  there  is  involved  a
certain  shame  on  the  personality.  For,  either  in
order  to  excuse  itself,  or  to  ward  off  evil,  or  to
attain  other  ends,  it  sees  itself  incapable  of  living


88


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


on  good  terms  with  a  recognition  of  the  world  as
it  actually  is,  and  compelled  to  appeal  to  what
does  not  exist.  Those  characters  therefore  make
an  altogether  different  impression  who  do  not  lie
now  and  then,  but  who  by  stirring  up  false  ideas,
consistently  exercise  over  the  minds  of  men  an
influence  which,  formally  considered,  constitutes  a
kind  of  providence,  and  which  we  are  therefore
inclined  to  judge  merely  according  to  whether  the
ends  pursued  are  good  and  the  spirit  of  the  de-
ceiver powerful  enough  to  justify  him  in  such
claim  to  spiritual  lordship  over  others.

§  46.  Closely  connected  with  the  foregoing  prin-
ciples are  those  governing  contracts  ;  that  is  to
say,  moral  relations  of  a  special  kind,  which  need
not  exist  between  two  persons,  but  which  origi-
nate solely  by  means  of  their  concordant  will.
They  are,  of  course,  in  our  real  life  placed  under
the  protection  of  laws ;  but  these  laws  would  not
be  called  upon  to  protect  them,  unless  some
worthy  moral  element  lay  within  the  contracts
themselves.

Now  every  contract  amounts  to  this,  that,  by
promises  of  the  first  part  and  the  second  part,  ideas,
expectations,  and  actions  are  excited  in  both  which
fit  into  the  whole  plan  of  life  only  on  the  assump-


THE  OBLIGATION  OF  CONTRACTS.  89
*  1 —  . —

tion  that  what  has  been  promised  be  fulfilled.
The  moral  obligation  of  contracts  therefore  pre-
supposes that  neither  party  deceives  the  other
about  the  meaning  of  the  stipulated  transactions ;
while  it  is  the  duty  of  each  party  carefully  to
weigh  the  compatibility  of  the  same  with  his  own
circumstances  in  life.  A  contract  which  rests
upon  deception  is  therefore  invalid  ;  one  that  has
been  entered  into  thoughtlessly  remains  proximately
binding.

It  is  further  self-evident  that  he  who  has  com-
pelled it  has  no  right  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise
made  under  compulsion.  But  he  who  suffers  him-
self to  be  compelled  is  not  thereby  discharged  of
his  obligation.  If  the  content  of  the  promise  was
in  itself  criminal,  then  of  course  it  must  not  be
fulfilled.  But  the  matter  is  not  put  in  order  in
that  way.  The  rather  does  the  other  party  bear
the  reproach  of  having,  by  means  of  the  promise
compelled,  committed  a  fault  which  is  not  to  be
made  good  again  in  any  way ;  and,  starting  from
which,  the  only  means  of  coming  again  into  accord
with  the  moral  laws  is  by  the  second  transgres-
sion of  breaking  one's  word.  In  saying  this,  we
do  not  demand  that  everybody  withdraw  himself
from  all  compulsion  with  the  sacrifice  of  his  life ;
but  we  merely  recognize  the  human  powerlessness


9°


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


which  must  bear  its  fate  of  not  being  able  always
to  remain  free  from  reproach.

Another  question  is  closely  connected  with  the
foregoing.  All  contracts  have  reference  to  trans-
actions in  the  nearer  or  more  remote  future.  But
no  one  knows  this  future  beforehand.  It  may
shape  itself  so  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  contract
becomes  impossible,  or  an  excessive  burden  ;  or  so
that  the  previous  purpose  is  altered.  But  the
latter  alone  can  never  annul  the  contract ;  for  this
is  not  concluded  by  two  wills,  but  by  two  persons
willing.  Now  just  as  the  person  in  all  other
respects  deports  himself  as  the  permanent  subject,
to  whom  all  his  own  services  are  due,  so  must  the
person  also,  if  there  is  to  be  any  human  life  at  all
with  rational  ends,  be  security  for  the  identity  of
its  own  will.  In  the  first  two  cases  the  obligation
is,  indeed,  not  altogether  annulled ;  but  it  is  the
moral  duty  of  the  other  party  to  assist  in  bearing
a  mishap  that  is  unexpected  and  independent  of
the  will,  and  therefore  to  modify  the  contract.
This  will  take  place  in  the  easiest  manner  if  from
the  very  first  onward  the  permissibility  of  indem-
nification in  some  other  way  is  established,  —  for
example,  in  society  as  it  is  actually  constituted,
in  the  form  of  a  money  equivalent.

Finally,  every  contract  is  in  itself  limited  to  the


THE  LIMITATION  OF  CONTRACTS.


9'


persons  who  have  concluded  it ;  and  the  turning
aside  of  a  demand  which  A  has  on  B,  so  that  it
falls  on  a  third  person  C,  is  only  allowable  in
society,  in  individual  cases,  as  a  convenient  meas-
ure agreed  upon  for  the  abbreviation  of  business.


CHAPTER  VII.


OF  SOCIETY.

§  47.  The  political  totalities  of  states  have  origi-
nated historically  in  manifold  kinds,  partly  acci-
dental and  partly  unnatural,  and  have  set  limits
to  each  other.

The  lively  feeling  of  this  fact  induced  the  in-
quiry after  the  special  meaning  and  right  of  these
many  forms;  each  of  which  endeavors  to  maintain
itself  against  the  others,  and  it  thus  produced
the  modern  conception  of  'society'  as  of  a  multi-
plicity of  living  individuals  who  are  united  for  the
common  fulfilment  of  all  their  aims  in  life.  In
this  sense  the  conception  of  'society'  appeared  to
designate  the  really  true  moral  institution  to  which
the  political  form  of  the  '  State '  at  best  gave  a
definite  and,  under  certain  circumstances,  necessary
final  form.

Such  society,  accordingly,  has  at  present  no
existence  in  fact  outside  of  the  existing  states,
and  at  most,  its  claims  are  carried  into  effect  only
by  means  of  the  power  of  these  states.  Never-
theless, the  general  and  uniform  customs  of  com-


THE  AIMS  OF  SOCIETY.


93


merce,  which  are  now  spread  over  the  most  diverse
lands,  as  well  as  the  organization  of  the  Church,
or  even  the  security  with  which,  in  international
trade,  claims  established  by  usage  can  calculate
upon  being  satisfied,  —  all  nevertheless  show  that
even  without  any  really  political  form,  such  a
trustworthy  union  of  men  for  comprehensive  aims
is  possible.

What  flows  from  this  conception  of  a  1  society  '
may  therefore  be  considered  as  in  fact  the  prin-
cipal part  of  that  which  subsequently  the  i  state '
will  have  to  organize  and  to  protect.

§  48.  In  other  times  the  entire  human  life  was
esteemed  as  a  preparation  for  a  superearthly  life,
of  which  men  believed  themselves  to  have  knowl-
edge :  and  on  this  account  many  obligations  also,
which  had  no  purpose  and  no  immediate  signifi-
cance for  the  earthly  life,  have  passed  over  into
those  recognized  by  'society/

We  withdraw  attention  from  such  obligations  as
the  foregoing,  and  consider  society  merely,  on  the
one  hand,  as  it  is  bound  to  the  natural  relations
of  the  earth's  surface,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as
it  has  merely  striven  to  bring  the  freedom  of  each
individual  into  agreement  with  the  coexistence  of
the  freedom  of  all  others,  the  earthly  aims  in  the
life  of  one  with  those  of  all  the  others.


94


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


§  49.  In  the  same  manner  we  decline  to  con-
sider all  other  forms  of  a  '  Doctrinaireism/  which
demands  that  society  constitute  itself  after  a  pat-
tern discovered  somewhere  else  or  other.

Thus  it  is  altogether  useless  to  call  society  'the
universal/  and  to  subordinate  the  persons,  or  rather
their  efforts,  as  'particular.'  No  authority,  which
society  would  have  to  exercise  over  the  individu-
als, follows  in  the  least  degree  from  all  this.  For
a  general  notion  really  expresses  merely  for  our
thinking  in  a  brief  way,  what  its  particular  exam-
ples already  are  without  it.  That  the  general
notion,  m  on  the  contrary,  would  have  some  law-
giving power  by  means  of  which  it  could  make
these  particulars  to  be  what  they  are  assumed  to
be,  does,  not  follow  from  its  logical  nature  as  a
1  universal/  but  must  in  each  case  be  proved  from
the  nature  of  the  thing  in  a  special  way.  In  our
case,  society  as  '  the  universal '  will  have  this
authority  merely  so  far  as  it  is  recognized  as  such
a  law-giving  power  by  the  individual  persons  of
which  it  is  composed.

Moreover,  the  triflings  of  comparing  society  with
a  living  organism,  that  is  to  say,  that  of  man  or
of  an  animal ;  and  of  making  the  functions  of  the
latter  the  pattern  for  its  regulations,  are  alto-
gether fruitless. The  essential  difference  is  over-


SOCIETY  AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM.  95

looked,  that  every  living  '  organism  '  serves  a  single
individual  soul  with  very  many  wholly  impersonal
parts  ;  while  in  i  society '  many  individual  beings,
each  of  which  is  an  end  to  itself,  only  unite  them-
selves into  a  community  which  does  not  exist  apart
from  them  as  a  distinct  being.

We  therefore  insist  upon  this,  that  society  must
be  comprehended,  without  any  comparisons  of  it
to  something  else,  merely  from  its  own  occasions,
needs,  and  aims,  and  must  be  regulated  in  accord-
ance with  them.

§  50.  It  is  just  because  society  is  above  all
bound  to  leave  in  existence  the  freedom  of  individual
persons,  and  merely  make  it  compatible  with  that
of  all  other  persons,  that  its  first  duty  appears  to
us  to  be,  not  a  positive  regulation  which  shall  lead
to  a  definite  terminus,  but  the  removal  of  all  the
hinderances  from  each  other  which  are  experienced
by  the  different  kinds  of  efforts  of  the  individual
persons  in  their  life  together.

Society,  therefore,  interests  itself  first  of  all  in
the  universal  moral  commands  which  hold  good
for  all  the  intercourse  of  men,  and  endeavors  to
equalize  the  transgressions  and  the  consequences
of  the  transgressions  of  these  laws.  The  first
question  then  is,  on  what  does  that  power  of  pun-


96


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


ishment  depend,  which  society  imputes  to  itself  in
this  relation  ?

§  51.  If  acknowledgment  be  returned  to  a  good
will  for  beneficence  exercised,  and  to  an  evil  will
some  retributive  evil  in  the  onward  march  of
things,  then  we  are  satisfied  and  find  the  world's
course  to  be  in  order  ;  but  if  this  retribution  do
not  come  in  the  onward  march  of  things,  still  it
is  self-evident  that  we  should  discharge  our  debt
of  acknowledgment  for  the  good  deeds  done  us
by  similar  good  deeds.  On  the  other  hand  the
question  arises :  Whence  do  we  derive  the  right
to  supplement  the  order  of  the  world  by  stepping
into  its  place,  and  to  avenge  the  evil  by  the
production  of  new  evil,  —  namely,  by  the  evil  of
punishment  ?  Even  although  we  are  never  so  well
persuaded  of  the  fact  that  a  deed  deserves  such
punishment,  yet  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that
society  has  any  justification  at  all  for  executing
the  punishment.  It  still  remains,  therefore,  to
seek  for  the  origin  of  that  right  of  punishment
which  society  imputes  to  itself  and  denies  to
individuals.

That  this  right  sprung  immediately  from  God,  is
not  capable  of  historical  demonstration ;  and  it
remains  a  way  of  speaking  that  merely  asseverates


THE  RIGHT  OF  PUNISHMENT.


97


strongly  but  advances  no  proof  that  this  right
belongs  to  society.

Just  as  little  can  society  possess  this  right
under  the  merely  logical  titles  of  the  1  whole '  or
the  '  universal/  The  rather  does  the  question
always  recur,  why  such  a  right  and  such  a  duty
should  belong  to  it  as  being  this  determinate  '  whole  '
and  i  universal.'

The  endeavor  has  further  been  made  to  deduce
it  immediately  from  the  following  ethical  maxims  :
every  transgression  is  a  6  negation  of  the  right 9 ;  the
right  must  be  reestablished  by  a  '  second  negation  9 ;
ours,  however,  is  the  duty  to  execute  this  work  of
reestablishing.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  be  said
that  'negation  of  the  right*  would  really  be  only  an
affirmation  to  the  effect  that  the  right  does  not  hold
valid.  If,  however,  any  one  wishes  to  speak  of  an
action  which  runs  counter  to  the  right,  in  this  way,
still  the  '  second  negation  9  —  since  actions  that  have
happened  cannot  be  made  not  to  have  happened  —
is  simply  directed  toward  the  improvement  again  of
the  disturbed  condition,  in  a  manner  corresponding
to  the  right.

From  the  foregoing  would  ensue  forthwith  the
duty  of  indemnification  and  the  right  of  demanding
it.  If  we  further  assume  also  the  continued  exis-
tence of  the  bad  will  from  which  the  transgression


98


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


sprung,  then  there  may  follow  an  incentive  toward
the  improvement  of  the  transgressor,  through  whose
repentance  the  contradiction  to  the  '  idea  of  right '
would  completely  vanish.

Now  both  these  things  we  indeed  desire ;  but  over
and  above  this  it  is  our  belief  that  we  are  justified  in
a  punishment,  the  reason  for  which  obviously  could
not  be  derived  from  this  mere  act,  in  itself  consid-
ered, of  '  reestablishing  the  right.'  But  moreover  it
is  a  rather  barren  way  of  talking,  to  speak  of  a
'deranging  of  the  idea  of  right ':  this  idea  can  itself
suffer  nothing  ;  if  therefore  a  special  1  reestablish-
ing '  is  assumed  still  to  be  needed,  we  must  inquire
after  the  subjects  who  actually  suffer  through  the
alleged  violation  of  the  right.

§  52.  The  subjects  just  alluded  to  are  exclusively
individual  living  persons.  Were  these  persons  all  so
organized  that  they  were  incapable  of  feeling  pleasure
and  pain,  then  it  is  self-evident  that  there  would  no
longer  exist  in  such  a  world  any  right  of  punish-
ment ;  since  every  action  which  might  happen  would
be  just  as  indifferent  in  character  as  every  other.  It
is  only  the  unhappy  condition  of  feeling  which  takes
place  in  the  soul  of  the  injured  person  that  explains
and  forms  the  basis  for  new  actions  which  aim  to
obviate  the  same.


THE  RIGHT  OF  PUNISHMENT.


99


Now  one  is  not  psychologically  in  his  previous
condition  again,  if  the  injury  suffered  is  merely  com-
pensated for ;  but  the  recollection  of  a  hostile  attack
directed  against  our  personality  remains  ever  a  dis-
turbance of  the  feelings  until  the  offender,  by  an
act  of  vengeance,  is  made  sensible  of  the  injustice
of  his  attack.

To  this  basis  do  we  refer  ultimately  the  right  of
punishment ;  it  belongs  primarily  to  the  individual
and,  indeed,  on  account  of  an  infraction  of  his  per-
sonal rights.  Therefore  the  individual  has  also  the
rights  of  forgiveness,  —  a  thing  which  he  would  not
have  if  every  contradiction  to  a  universal  idea  of
right  were  directly  that  which  provoked  the  primitive
activity.  Nor  does  that  retribution  satisfy  the  nat-
ural sense,  which  the  offender  meets  with  through
another  (a  third  person)  ;  it  seems  necessary  to  retri-
bution that  the  injured  person  himself  inflict  the
punishment.  And  even  in  civilized  conditions  the
disinclination  has  maintained  itself  to  give  over
injuries  which  touch  personal  honor  to  retribution
by  means  of  a  general  tribunal.

Such  immediate  personal  impulse  toward  avenging
wrong  is  at  the  present  time  in  'society'  subordi-
nated to  the  common  judgment  and  will.  On  the
one  hand,  it  is  not  merely  the  one  directly  injured
but  also  the  whole  of  society  that  is  disturbed  in


IOO


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


respect  to  its  feeling  of  justice,  and  that  has  the
same  claim  to  take  part  in  this  avenging.  On  the
other  hand,  the  powerlessness  that  frequently  exists
ought  to  be  supplemented  by  the  force  of  the  whole
community.  It  is  chiefly,  however,  the  welfare  of
society,  as  well  as  its  own  consciousness  of  right,
which  stipulates  for  security  against  the  injustice  to
which  the  passion,  the  caprice,  the  perverted  excita-
bility, and  the  false  suspicion  of  the  injured  party
might  lead.  Hence  the  demand  to  surrender  the
right  of  avenging  and  helping  one's  self,  and  to  desire
only  that  satisfaction  which,  according  to  the  unpre-
judiced judgment  of  the  common  consciousness  of
right,  the  actual  matter  of  the  fact  of  injury  requires.

This  tempering  of  the  natural  impulse  to  ven-
geance seems  to  be  the  sole  title  of  right,  under
which  a  power  of  punishment  belongs  to  society ;
and,  of  course,  in  the  first  instance,  with  respect  to
those  who  have  already  subjected  themselves  to  its
laws.

§  53.  From  an  ethical  point  of  view,  the  object  of
punishment  will  appear,  primarily,  to  be  the  bad
disposition,  —  not  the  deed,  which  of  itself  is  a
merely  physical  event.

But  it  is  nevertheless  forthwith  to  be  observed,
that  to  pass  an  objective  and  thoroughly  just  judg-


LIMITS  OF  HUMAN  JUDGMENT.  IOI

ment  as  to  the  total  moral  worth  of  a  man,  is  never
an  affair  that  belongs  to  men,  but  is  to  be  committed
to  God  only.  Every  individual  may  have  such  a  judg-
ment as  his  subjective  opinion,  and  may  express  it  so
far  as  he  is  willing  to  bear  the  risk  as  to  how  his
expression  is  received.  On  the  contrary,  it  remains
an  unjustifiable  arrogance,  in  case  any  tribunal  what-
ever were  willing  to  proclaim  such  a  judgment  as
objective  truth.  Only  so  much  of  the  disposition  falls
under  the  province  of  human  judgment,  as  has  been
objectified,  in  unmistakable  manner,  in  some  deed.

In  the  same  connection,  however,  it  must  be
further  considered,  that  a  mitigation  of  the  judgment
quite  naturally  takes  place,  in  case  the  execution  of
the  deed  is  hindered  by  external  circumstances.  We
may  have  the  moral  conviction  that  the  bad  disposi-
tion would  have  brought  the  deed  to  an  accomplish-
ment :  but  we  never  know  this  certainly ;  and  this
fact  must  be  interpreted  in  favor  of  the  transgressor,
as  well  as  the  fact  on  the  other  side,  that  the  failure
of  the  actual  injury  diminishes  the  need  of  compen-
sation.

Further,  since  it  is  not  the  effects  of  a  blind
natural  force  but  only  the  actions  of  a  person  which
can  be  punished,  it  is  self-evident  that  regard
must  be  had  to  the  question,  whether  the  doer  has
been  in  a  responsible  state  of  mind. But  nothing


I02


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


less  than  the  proof  that  his  spiritual  functions  are
disturbed  to  the  degree  of  a  false  apprehension  of  the
most  ordinary  matter  of  fact,  would  securely  free  him
from  all  imputation.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  an
ill  applied  ingenuity  to  intermix  here  metaphysical
speculations  about  the  freedom  of  the  will,  and  to
hold  it  possible  to  get  an  objective  proof  upon  the
point  whether  a  certain  person  has  possessed  such
freedom,  and  to  what  degree  he  has  possessed  it.
The  judgment  of  men  does  not  at  all  depend  upon
the  answer  to  this  question.  It  has  merely  to  do
with  the  inquiry,  whether  such  a  person  has  been  in
that  condition  of  mind  in  which,  from  experience,  we
are  conscious  of  being,  when  we  easily  perpetrate
actions  of  which  we  do  not  ourselves  approve.  And
our  conviction  on  this  point  really  furnishes  nothing
more  than  a  practical  reason  for  ameliorating  our  judg-
ment,—  subject  as  it  is  to  error;  but  it  cannot  in
any  event  pretend  theoretically  to  establish  in  a
scientific  way  a  psychological  condition  of  mind,  or
to  decide  the  aforesaid  metaphysical  question.

The  other  view,  which  considers  every  transgres-
sion as  an  unfortunate  but  unavoidable  consequence
of  the  natural  disposition,  would  consistently  lead  only
to  this,  that  every  act  of  personal  vengeance  also,  or
every  mild  or  severe  punishment  whatever,  when
decreed  by  society,  must  just  as  much  be  regarded


THE  KINDS OF  PUNISHMENT.


I03


as  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  its  natural  dispo-
sition.

§  54.  Neither  the  kind  nor  the  degree  of  pun-
ishment admits,  as  mere  matter  of  fact,  of  being
determined  according  to  the  principle  of  a  requital
of  like  by  like  (the  'Jus  talionis ')  ;  and  even  as  a
rule  this  principle  is  false.  The  case  is  by  no  means
one  in  which  we  have  to  do  with  repairing  defi-
nite conditions,  if  they  have  suffered  destruction,  by
like  conditions ;  or  with  compensating  for  the  dis-
turbance of  one  condition  by  a  condition  exactly
opposite  of  like  kind.  The  ground  of  punishment  is
simply  the  discord  or  disturbance  of  society,  which
is  equalized  only  by  the  consciousness  of  some  ill
returned  upon  the  evil  doer.  It  is  in  itself,  however,
a  matter  of  indifference  by  what  means  this  evil  is
produced.  On  this  point  secondary  considerations
of  conformity  to  an  end  and  of  custom  are  decisive.

On  the  whole  three  kinds  of  punishment  in
all  are  at  our  disposal :  they  touch  either  the
property,  or  the  liberty,  or  the  corporal  life.

The  first  are  fitting  in  cases  where  we  have  to  do,
not  with  a  violation  of  ethical  principles,  but  of  a
legal  statute  or  a  conventional  arrangement.

Punishments  affecting  liberty  are  to  be  under-
stood, first,  as  measures  of  security  ;  and  as  such  can


104


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


really  be  only  temporary.  The  authority  to  exclude
any  one  from  free  human  intercourse,  and  to  limit
the  use  of  his  powers  for  a  life-time,  cannot  be  yield-
ed to  any  human  society  whatever;  and  least  of  all
on  any  other  than  the  foregoing  ground.  We  readily
overlook  the  doubtfulness  of  such  a  use  of  power
for  the  sole  reason  that  it  is  revocable  ;  and  we  there-
fore raise  a  special  contest  merely  over  the  legitimacy
of  the  punishment  of  death,  which  is  not  revocable.

All  the  opinions  that  are  set  up  touching  the
latter,  both  for  and  against,  appear  unwilling  to
concede  the  real  point  of  the  difficulty.  This  point
consists  in  the  fact  that  the  entire  right  of  society  to
punish  cannot  be  justified  from  any  ethical  princi-
ple or  any  alleged  divine  commission  whatever,
but  is  always  a  species  of  usurpation ;  it  is,  however,
such  an  usurpation,  of  course,  as  does  not  practically
admit  of  being  avoided,  —  it  admits  of  being  theo-
retically placed  on  a  good  basis,  or  not.  The  ques-
tion really  ought,  therefore,  to  be  not  at  all,  whether
we  possess  a  demonstrable  i right'  to  ordain  this  pun-
ishment, but  merely  the  following :  How  far  do  we
trust  ourselves  to  exercise  this  right  of  punishment
—  of  constantly  doubtful  origin  as  it  is  —  without
coming  too  much  into  contradiction  with  our  com-
mon moral  feeling.  It  is  obvious  that  the  abolition
of  the  death-penalty  is  always  a  worthy  object  of


SOCIETY  AS A  BONDAGE.


desire ;  but  whether  it  is  practicable,  —  on  that
point,  the  answers  will  constantly  vary  according  to
the  different  periods  of  time  and  their  culture.  For
they  depend,  as  was  said,  not  upon  theoretical  prin-
ciples of  invariable  validity,  but  only  upon  the  ruder
or  more  refined  conscience  and,  besides,  upon  the
greater  or  less  need  of  the  times.

§  55.  What  we  call  human  society,  as  was  previous-
ly observed,  has  not  existed  hitherto  solely  under
the  form  of  individual  states  that  have  had  an  histori-
cal origin  ;  nor  does  it  by  any  means  correspond  to
the  otherwise  well-known  conception  of  a  society
made  up  by  entering  into  it  voluntarily  and  for  alto-
gether definite  ends.  Every  individual  is  born  into
his  relations  in  life,  into  his  age,  and  his  nation,
without  assistance  and  consent  of  his  own  ;  and  he
finds  his  whole  subsequent  life  already  burdened  by
obligations  for  the  protection  and  education  of  his
childhood,  as  well  as  limited  by  the  rules  of  a  social
organism,  to  which  his  accord  is  not  asked  but  is
presumed  in  such  a  manner  that  the  expression  of
resistance  on  his  part  appears  at  once  as  a  crime.

Since  this  historical  enchainment  is  the  indispen-
sable basis  of  human  life,  it  can  only  be  said  that
the  conception  of  '  human  society '  is  an  ideal,  to
which  we,  where  it  is  a  matter  de  lege  ferenda,  must


io6


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


approximate  our  conditions  in  such  manner  that  the
willing  accord  of  the  individuals,  which  could  not
be  asked,  may  be  gained  for  the  conditions  at  least
in  a  supplementary  way.  But,  nevertheless,  in  cases
where  such  an  accord  cannot  be  attained,  he  who
is  persistently  of  a  different  mind  must  at  least  be
left  free  to  withdraw,  —  after  discharging  his  debt  for
the  good  deeds  of  which  he  has  received  his  share, —
and  so  to  emancipate  himself  from  the  fate  which
has  assigned  him  to  this  definite  historical  position.

§  56.  But  the  positive  tasks  which  society  must
set  before  itself  as  its  adduced  aim,  do  not  all  con-
sist merely  in  leaving  unimpaired  the  freedom  of
every  individual  so  far  as  it  is  compatible  with  that
of  the  rest ;  for  this  would  be  most  effectually  at-
tained in  case  one  were  to  abstract  from  all  inter-
course with  others.  The  impulse  which  leads  to
combination  lies  in  the  necessity  of  supplementing
the  force  of  the  individual  by  that  of  others,  without
which  the  aims  of  life  are  not  completely  attainable  :
and  here  belong  not  merely  the  conceivable  advan-
tages which  one  receives  from  another,  but  above  all
the  social  intercourse  itself,  without  which  a  really
human  development  is  inconceivable.

The  question  now  arises,  what  arrangement  so-
ciety must  hit  upon  for  this  end  ;  or,  still  previous


ORGANIZATION  OF  SOCIETY.


IO7


to  this  question  :  Must  society  proceed  at  all  in  this
matter,  and  not  be  satisfied  with  defining  more  pre-
cisely that  which  originates  of  itself  in  the  course  of
life  ?

Now  it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  no  theory,  which
should  not  have  learned  from  history  to  know  the
whole  compass  of  human  needs,  of  the  means  for
their  satisfaction,  as  well  as  of  the  actual  habits  and
sentiments  of  men,  would  sketch  a  priori  the  picture
of  a  satisfactory  organization  of  society.  Without
hesitation,  therefore,  we  accord  with  the  other  axiom,
that  the  free  impulse  of  every  individual  ought  to
seek  its  own  direction,  and  that  it  ought  to  be
left  entrusted  to  the  interest  which  the  impulse  itself
has  in  its  own  advancement,  to  find  a  place  in  so-
ciety by  its  own  achievements  ;  and,  further,  that
the  problem  of  the  latter  consists  simply  in  this,  —
to  construct  for  the  organization  thus  originated,  the
necessary  protection  and  exclusion  of  the  conflicts
that  arise  from  the  counter  striving  of  the  different
individuals  (compare  §  50).

Now  the  disadvantage  of  civilization,  which  is  con-
nected with  the  business  advantage  of  the  far-
reaching  division  of  industries,  is  not  to  be  denied  :
just  as  the  achievements  themselves  are  improved  by
limitation  to  a  quite  definite  branch  of  industry,  so
in  the  same  degree  does  the  breadth  of  the  spiritual


io8


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


horizon,  the  capacity  to  judge  of  the  world  and  to
have  the  enjoyment  possible  from  it,  decrease.  We
cannot  return  to  the  dream  of  a  '  state  of  nature.'
It  appears  dazzling  to  us  merely  in  case  we  for  a
time  think  ourselves  back  into  it ;  —  and  this,  while  in
the  possession  of  all  the  spiritual  culture,  all  the  reflec-
tion and  meditative  tenderness  of  feeling,  the  whole
of  which  we  bring  with  us  only  from  our  civilized  con-
dition. As  to  that  life  of  nature  in  itself  considered,
it  would  put  us  in  a  position  pretty  completely  like
that  of  the  animals.

The  only  thing  left,  therefore,  is  to  mitigate  the
aforesaid  unavoidable  dissimilarity  of  men.  This
cannot  take  place  in  such  manner  that  the  same
social  value  should  be  adjudged  to  all.  Unavoidably
will  greater  honor  be  attached  to  the  finer,  and  less
to  the  coarser,  form  of  labor.  A  difference  of  posi-
tions in  this  social  estimate  of  honors  is,  accordingly,
wholly  unavoidable.

So  much  the  more  must  care  be  taken  that  at
least  an  equality  of  rights  before  the  law  be  secured
to  all,  —  in  all  relations  which  concern  them  simply
as  men.

It  must,  in  the  second  place,  be  a  fundamental
principle  that  the  transition  from  each  class  of  society
into  a  higher,  shall  stand  open  to  every  one  who
believes  himself able to deserve it  by  his  own


INSTRUCTION AND  SUPPORT.


lOQ


achievements.  Everything  is  therefore  inadmissible
which  recalls  indestructible  distinctions  of  caste
that  belong  to  an  earlier  time.

Finally,  such  a  right  would  be  of  no  service,  if  it
could  not  be  used.  Now  just  because  the  division
of  labor  which  is  necessary  to  society,  depresses  the
spiritual  culture  of  particular  classes,  it  is  —  in  the
third  place  —  the  duty  of  society  to  mitigate  this
evil  condition  for  which  it  is  at  fault ;  and,  in  fact,
to  do  this  by  taking  care  to  offer  sufficient  instruc-
tion to  all,  and  by  arranging  this  compulsorily  as
in  duty  required,  in  order  to  protect  the  future
generation  against  the  unwisdom  of  its  ancestors  and
the  results  of  its  own  unwisdom.

§  57.  A  common  ethical  obligation  to  benevolence
rests  upon  every  individual  with  reference  to  every
other  (§  29)  ;  but  only  at  the  moment  of  a  threaten-
ing danger,  the  obligation  to  an  act  of  assistance,
which,  nevertheless,  as  a  matter  of  mere  right  can
never  be  raised  to  the  height  of  personal  self-sac-
rifice.

All  long-continued  support,  on  the  contrary,  ought  to
serve  only  as  an  incitement  to  self-help ;  and  society
is  obligated  to  such  support  only  in  so  far  as  the
needy  person  himself  has  made  himself  a  valid  mem-
ber of  society  by  the  position  which  he  assumes  in  it.


no


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


In  this  relation  complaint  is  to  be  made,  that  the
spirit  of  our  time  has  destroyed  all  those  organiza-
tions of  society  into  smaller  wholes,  which  were  in
former  times  the  natural  source  of  this  kind  of
obligations  and  claims.  Here  belongs  the  relation
of  domestics,  which  has  come  to  be  no  longer,  —  as
it  once  was,  —  a  connection  for  all  the  events  of  life,
but  (especially  through  the  fault  of  servants  them-
selves, who  prefer  for  each  single  piece  of  work  done
a  single  fee)  an  utterly  loose  relation,  from  which
no  claims  arise  to  a  lasting  partnership.

Here  belong,  further,  all  the  corporate  unions,  —
to  wit,  such  as  were  founded  upon  definite  occupa-
tions ;  guilds  and  fraternities,  which  held  to  an
honor  of  rank,  and  on  this  very  account  felt  the  nat-
ural duty  of  supporting  their  own  members ;  but
just  in  the  same  way  also  the  occupants  of  the
same  dwelling,  who,  united  with  each  other  by
common  home  and  memories,  were  the  natural
source  of  the  expected  support.

It  is  true  that  many  abuses,  and  especially  their
bigotted  exclusiveness  toward  others,  did  not  permit
these  corporate  arrangements  to  continue  longer  in
existence  unaltered  :  it  is  matter  of  complaint,  how-
ever, that  nothing  has  taken  their  place  ;  that  rather
every  element  of  society  has  become,  although  seem-
ingly independent,  yet  in  fact  at  the  same  time  iso-


THE BENEFICENCE  OF  SOCIETY.


I  I  I


lated  through  its  freedom  to  follow  any  craft  and  to
emigrate  without  paying  a  tax.  And  now  there  is
no  longer  any  place  from  which  help  might  be  hoped
for  except  the  great  whole  of  '  society.'  This,  to  be
sure,  sees  its  duty,  and  by  manifold  institutions  —
for  example,  all  possible  kinds  of  assurances,  sav-
ings-banks, and  similar  contrivances  —  in  a  business-
like way  and  on  a  large  scale  carries  on  the  works  of
a  benign  activity  ;  and,  accordingly,  earns  for  itself
a  right  also  to  require  that  it  shall  be  made  use  of,
in  order  not  to  be  compelled,  when  misfortune  arises,
to  render  in  a  fitful  way  assistance  that  is  sudden
and  difficult  to  furnish.

It  is  to  be  conceded  that  the  common  care
of  the  poor,  also  administered  in  such  business-
like fashion,  can  show  better  results  of  a  material
kind  than  private  beneficence ;  on  the  other
hand,  this  impulse  to  make  mechanical,  every-
thing to  which  we  are  morally  obligated,  and  to

care  for it  at third  or  fourth  hand,  cannot  pos-

t

sibly  serve  as  advantageous  to  the  culture  and
warmth  of  moral  character.

§  58.  All  men  have  a  like  claim,  not  to  the
enjoyment  of  life,  but  to  being  allowed  to  try
for  as  many  good  things  as  they  are  able  to  de-
serve. The  personal  limitations  of rights,  which


I  12


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


hinder  directly  such  free  striving,  have  almost
completely  ceased  to  exist ;  but  indirectly  bar-
riers still  remain,  which  make  burdensome  the
actual  use  of  the  rights  to  which  the  title  is
conceded.

These  barriers  lie  especially  in  the  preponderance
of  hereditary  capital,  and  have  in  recent  times
been  made  palpable  mainly  by  the  development  of
the  vast  industry,  which,  working  with  vast  means,
by  the  greater  uniformity,  precision  and  cheap-
ness of  its  massive  products,  curtails  the  ability
of  the  free  small  trades  to  yield  returns ;  and  so
compels  the  latter,  either  to  limit  themselves  to
the  work  of  accommodation,  or  else  to  enter  into
the  service  of  the  great  contractors  and  await
from  them  the  determination  of  life's  destiny.
The  evil  conditions  that  arise  from  this  are  well
known.  On  the  other  hand,  the  advantages  of
large  capital  and  large  enterprise  in  comparison
with  all  pigmy  economies  are  so  obvious,  that
attempts  at  improvement  should  in  any  event
not  recommend  a  return  to  the  latter  (perchance
in  the  form  of  a  senseless  division  of  all  the
means  disposable),  but  can  only  have  their  issue
in  holding  firmly  to  the  aforesaid  principle  of
large  enterprise,  while  seeking  another  subject
for  it,  —  instead  of private persons,  society  itself.


THE  GROUNDS OF  SOCIALISM.


113


The  above-mentioned  thought  —  which  is  at  least
debateable  —  of  a  genuine  and  yet  moderate  '  Social-
ism/ would  therefore  consist  in  this,  that  we  are  not
willing  to  let  society  shape  itself,  whether  well  or  ill,
out  of  the  mere  concurrence  of  perfectly  free  individ-
ual undertakings  in  a  purely  secondary  way ;  but
first  of  all  the  ordering  of  society  ought  to  be
established,  and  it  ought  to  offer  in  its  better
organization  a  suitable  place  to  every  individual.

§  59.  Let  it  be  assumed  that  the  question  does
not  concern  the  reshaping  of  present  conditions
into  the  new  form  of  society,  but  that  we  have
perfectly  free  range  to  establish  the  latter,  and
then  the  proposals,  which  are  perhaps  worthy  of
consideration,  would  be  as  follows  :

Private  property  in  land  does  not  exist,  but  all
rights  of  property  belong  to  society,  —  a  thought
which  merely  carries  further  what  has  taken  place
in  the  course  of  history ;  namely,  the  ever  increas-
ing limitation  of  the  arbitrary  disposal  of  property
in  land  without  regard  to,  and  to  the  injury  of,
the  whole.

The  cultivation  of  the  land  would  be  carried  on
by  society,  in  accordance  with  a  complete  plan
previously  prepared  by  its  directing  organs,  look-
ing toward  a  reward  of  labor. It  would  be  possible


ii4


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


in  this  case  to  fix  such  reward  firmly  and  equitably ;
because  exact  knowledge  of  every  requisite  in  that
direction  is  presupposed,  and  likewise  of  the  value
of  all  the  products  of  industry,  which,  together  with
the  original  production,  would  have  also  to  be  dis-
tributed according  to  a  general  plan  for  the  neces-
sities of  the  whole  community.

And  now  the  way  may  stand  open  to  the  indi-
vidual, to  choose  for  his  calling  one  of  these  different
tasks  of  the  society  ;  and  in  all  the  rest  of  his  life
which  he  does  not  devote  to  such  labor,  nothing
further  would  be  prescribed  to  his  individual  prefer-
ence.

We  then  further  conceive  of  common  harvests
and  of  their  conversion  into  money  in  the  interest
of  society  :  first,  division  of  the  necessary  support
for  life  among  all ;  then,  laying  by  in  store  of  what
is  necessary  for  the  common  ends  of  society  (ad-
ministration, instruction,  mental  enjoyments  of  every
kind),  and  of  what  is  necessary  as  reserve  fund ;
finally,  further  division  of  the  surplus  (which  it  is
customary  to  imagine  abundant)  as  the  free  prop-
erty of  individuals.

The  advantages,  which  are  conceived  of  as  coming
from  this  arrangement,  are  the  following :  the
abolition  of  the  dependence  of  one  individual  upon
the discernment and the humanity of  another


ALLEGED BENEFITS OF SOCIALISM.  I  I  5

individual ;  abolition  of  all  competition  which
is  essentially  speculation  in  the  inferior  knowledge
of  circumstances  had  by  others,  or  in  their
ignorance ;  abolition  of  the  inequality  between
production  and  need ;  securing  of  the  means  of
subsistence  for  the  individual.

For  it  is  to  be  conceded  that  the  outgrowths  which
we  condemn  at  the  present  time,  are  by  no  means  con-
nected with  the  aims  of  Socialism.  Neither  hatred
towards  religion,  nor  barbarity  of  customs,  insen-
sibility toward  all  beauty,  nor  envy  toward  every
advantage  belonging  to  some  one  else,  is  a  conse-
quence of  these  theories.  On  the  contrary,  they  very
frequently  in  their  programs  promise  to  care  for  all
possible  spiritual  interests,  out  of  the  property  of
such  a  society,  in  a  very  generous  way  ;  —  for  sup-
port and  instruction,  for  enjoyment  of  nature,  for
rewarding  inventions.  They  even,  for  the  rest,  do
not  intend  to  disturb  private  life  ;  but  (in  this  case,
too,  solely  by  means  of  the  large  business  of  the
society, — for  example,  by  'barracking'  in  all  man-
ner of  public  dwellings,  by  feeding  from  common
kitchens,  etc.)  they  suppose  they  will  be  able  to
alleviate  it.

§  60.  The  fundamental  thought  of  the  above-
mentioned proposals has already  been put  into


u6


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


execution  in  manifold  fashion ;  for  example,  in  co-
operative associations,  in  voluntary  trades  unions,
in  stock  enterprises.  But  in  all  these  cases  we  have
to  do  with  entering  into  such  combinations  in  a
voluntary  way,  and  retaining  freedom  to  withdraw ;
and  this,  too,  for  a  special  object,  while  in  other
regards  the  whole  conduct  of  life  remains  un-
disturbed thereby.

That  which  one  might  readily  find  pleasing  under
such  circumstances,  would  be  much  harder  to  endure,
if  the  whole  society,  into  which  one  is  born,  and
from  which  one  cannot  withdraw,  desired  to  exercise
such  authoritative  power  in  reference  to  all  the  rela-
tions of  life.  A  thorough-going  character  of  peda-
gogic officialism  would,  however,  mark  the  aforesaid
form  of  society,  and  in  the  soul  of  adults  would  expe-
rience from  the  beginning  onward  the  resistance  of
individuality.  It  is  moreover  doubtful  whether,  in
case  the  business  and  the  support  of  all  were
determined  on  the  part  of  the  whole,  the  fidelity  to
duty  on  which  hope  is  rested,  would  actually  occur.

§  61.  The  societies  which  were  similarly  consti-
tuted, so  far  as  they  have  actually  existed,  have
always  been  limited,  have  had  others  competing
with  them,  and  accordingly  some  spur  from  rivalry.
But  the  socialistic  projects  would  in  consistency


DIFFICULTIES OF  SOCIALISM.


117


extend  to  a  cosmopolitan  union  of  all  humanity;
and  since  this  is  in  effect  impracticable,  would  at
least  extend  to  large  communities  of  people,  within
which  the  individual  would  find  little  incentive  for
rivalry  with  other  societies  unknown  to  him,  and  on
the  contrary  much  temptation  to  rely  upon  the
industry  of  others.  And  against  this  Socialism
would  promise  no  easy  redress.

On  the  one  hand,  it  is  —  to  begin  with  —  very
difficult  to  determine  what  is  the  proportionate
and  equitable  (answering  to  equity)  reward  of
industry  for  what  is  done  in  different  crafts,  and
thoroughly  to  guard  against  the  mutual  envy  of
these  classes  of  employment.  Yet  more  difficult  is  it
within  the  same  calling,  suitably  to  reward  the  actual
work  accomplished.  In  society,  as  at  present  con-
stituted, the  judgment  concerning  the  worth  of  a
work  is  indirectly  expressed  by  eager  demands  for
it  or  by  lack  of  purchasers ;  and  it  is  on  this  account
not  offensive.  In  the  aforesaid  other  society,  it  is
counted  on  that  every  body  will  oversee  his  fellow  ;
and,  finally,  a  committee  to  decide  will  utter  an
official  judgment  concerning  the  behavior  and
achievement  of  the  different  laborers.  Such  an
official  censorship,  which  concerns  not  the  work  but
the  person  directly,  is  allowable  only  in  pedagogics  ;
but  wherever  it  has been actualized  in  society,


n8


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


as  composed  of  adults,  it  has  been  the  fruitful
source  of  discontent  and  revolt.

It  is  further  extremely  doubtful,  whether  the
somewhat  large  number  of  jurisdictions  engaged  in.
carrying  on  the  business,  of  which  it  would  be
necessary  to  make  use,  would  possess — even  though
they  should  be  selected  for  that  purpose  —  a  satis-
factory oversight,  the  necessary  probity,  prudence,
and  gift  of  invention,  which  in  such  a  case  is  the
more  necessary  for  the  well-being  of  the  whole,  the
less  free  play  is  left  to  individual  talent.  It  is  doubt-
ful, to  wit,  whether  such  a  society  would  take
pleasure  in  bearing  with  and  supporting  the  labors
of  an  inventive  genius,  which  are  so  frequently
employed  for  a  long  time  in  investigations  without
result,  and  then  all  at  once  significantly  make  speed
with  the  denouement.

Finally,  touching  other  things  —  for  example,
instruction,  nursing  the  sick,  the  general  culture  and
the  arts  —  we  should  really  have  hope  for  the
advantageous  things  which  Socialism  promises  in
this  regard,  only  in  case  there  existed  a  universal
magnanimity.  But  this,  if  it  were  to  come  to  pass,
would  be  able  to  produce  exactly  the  same  results,
too,  without  entrusting  to  society  such  a  complete
and  hazardous  transformation.

It  may  therefore  be  asserted  that  a  helpful  use  of


NECESSITY  FOR  THE  STATE.


these  principles  is  to  be  expected  only  to  a  limited
extent ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  a  complete  ordering  of
society  after  this  pattern,  which  really  proceeded
from  the  economic  care  for  support  in  itself  alone
considered,  would  even  in  the  most  favorable  case
not  lead  much  further  than  the  securing  of  this  end  ;
while  all  the  higher  problems  of  human  culture
always  require  the  powerful  interference  of  sig-
nificant individualities  ;  and,  besides,  for  the  restraint
of  the  bad  (a  matter  to  which  the  aforesaid  theory
pays  too  little  regard),  an  authority  is  quite  indispen-
sable, which  is  much  more  punitive,  which  has  had  an
historical  origin,  and  is  not  modifiable  according  to
every  passing  preference  of  society.  Such  authority
we  recognize  only  in  the  form  of  the  '  State.'


CHAPTER  VIII.


OF  THE  STATE.

§  62.  The  conception  of  society,  in  itself  consid-
ered, designates  merely  a  union  of  living  persons  for
mutual  protection  and  furtherance  of  their  well-being  ;
and  it  is  only  from  this  end  that  all  its  authority,  as
well  as  the  limitations  of  the  same,  are  derived.
Society  first  becomes  a  state  by  the  possession  of
a  fixed  territory,  not  merely  as  productive  capital
but  as  its  historical  home  ;  and,  further,  by  its  form-
ing one  people  which,  through  like  spiritual  endow-
ment, like  speech  and  like  traditions,  is  united  into  a
whole,  in  living  contrast  with  other  wholes ;  and,
finally,  by  feeling  itself  to  be,  not  merely  the  sum
of  the  living  persons,  and  rather  considering  the  past
and  future  members  of  the  race  as  constantly
belonging  to  it  in  company.  As  a  state,  therefore,
it  hits  upon  its  forms  of  organization,  not  barely  for
the  end  of  momentary  prosperity ;  and,  further,  not
as  such  that  they  could  be  altered  at  every  moment
to  meet  the  same  end.  It  rather  holds  itself  obli-
gated to  maintain  a  definite  form  of  spiritual  culture
in  coherence  with  the  past,  and  to  deliver  it  over  to
the  future. The  life  of  the  state,  accordingly,  de-


ORIGIN  OF  THE  MAGISTRACY.


121


pends  upon  very  many  cooperating  factors  ;  striving
for  prosperity,  filial  piety  towards  its  memories,  pride
of  present  culture,  and  self-surrender  to  a  definite
stamp  of  the  ideal.

§  63.  From  the  very  fact  that  in  the  state  the  real
subject  to  which  the  authority  of  shaping  the  entire
life  is  entrusted,  is  not  at  all  felt  to  consist  in  the  sum-
total  of  those  alive  at  the  time,  but  in  the  people  as
perpetuating  itself  through  various  generations,  it
follows  that  in  this  way  a  special  instrument  comes
into  the  possession  of  such  sum-total  of  living  per-
sons;—  an  instrument  which  is  destined  to  defend
the  permanent  historical  conception  of  this  definite
state  against  the  changeable  decrees  of  the  genera-
tions that  succeed  each  other.  Such  an  instrument
is  the  Magistracy.

In  a  mere  'society/  the  above-mentioned  conception
does  not  have,  at  least,  the  same  significance.  In  it
there  are  only  deputized  agents  of  the  common  will,
or  of  the  temporary  majority  ;  and  their  official  right,
as  well  as  the  rule  for  directing  their  behavior,  has
no  other  source  than  this  variable  will.  The  concep-
tion of  the  *  magistracy,'  on  the  other  hand,  is  signifi-
cant to  a  certain  extent  of  the  common  conscience  of
the  people,  which  is  made  thereby  to  confront  the
changeable  will  of  the  individuals,  precisely  as  within


122


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  spirit  of  the  individual  the  consciousness  of
moral  laws  that  are  universally  binding  confronts  the
momentary  frames  of  mind.  The  'magistracy'  is,
therefore,  not  a  deputy  of  the  people,  or  the  mere
manager  of  its  business  ;  but  in  contrast  with  it  lays
claim  to  a  higher  power  which  holds  its  authority
independently  of  every  individual  will.

What  is  said  above  is  true  of  the  conception  of  the
magistracy,  quite  apart  from  the  question,  in  what
way  the  changes  of  persons  who  are  to  represent
this  independent  authority  of  the  office  are  deter-
mined.

§  64.  We  consider  the  state  only  as  a  firmly  cir-
cumscribed final  form  which  a  national  '  folk-life '
must  assume  ;  —  a  form,  accordingly,  which  is  not
previously  established  in  abstracto  and  to  which  every
such  'folk-life'  must  subsequently  conform.  But  we
admit  as  a  matter  of  course  that,  in  the  general  simi-
larity of  all  human  life,  the  different  forms  of  the
state  also  must  permit  of  being  brought  under  certain
general  notions.

Of  the  varieties  that  are  well  known,  the  Democracy
stands  nearest  to  the  conception  of  a  mere  society.
The  living  community  is  here  the  completely  sovereign
agent  of  the  state,  which  esteems  itself  authorized  to
make  every  change  in  the  conditions  of  the  state.


LEGISLATION IN  DEMOCRACY.


123


In  good  examples  of  the  democracy,  it  is  really
only  the  laws  which  correspond  to  the  conception  of
magistracy  as  we  have  just  established  that  con-
ception ;  and  even  they  only  so  long  as  a  piety,  his-
torically perpetuated,  honors  them  as  the  genuine
expression  of  the  national  spirit.  Nevertheless,
since  laws  necessarily  require  changes  in  the  course
of  time,  the  danger  of  constant  innovation  is  so  much
the  more  imminent  for  democracy  according  as  the
existing  magistracies  are  valid  solely  as  deputies  of
the  collective  will,  and  possess  no  higher  authority
to  protect  the  content  of  the  permanent  thought
of  the  state  against  the  aforesaid  changeable  will.

This  relation,  that  the  state  nowhere  confronts  the
individual  citizens  as  a  self-existent  power  personified,
but  always  appears  merely  as  what  they  make  of  it,
is  really  more  characteristic  of  democracy  than  the
other  assertion,  that  in  it  "  the  people  makes  and
administers  its  own  laws."  Apart  from  the  fact,  that
the  female  sex  in  no  case,  and  adults  always  only
when  they  have  attained  a  limit  of  age  arbitrarily
fixed,  are  legally  entitled  to  citizenship,  there  has
also  uniformly  existed  beside  the  full  citizens  a  pro-
letariat incapable  of  having  a  voice  in  its  affairs.  It
is,  therefore,  not  'the  people'  which  rules  itself,  but
always  only  a  selected  portion  of  them,  which  most


124


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


contribute  to  the  consistence  of  society  and,  on  this
account,  appear  privileged  to  represent  it.

But  even  they,  in  matters  of  a  certain  degree  of
intricacy,  can  after  all  do  nothing  but  follow  the
demagogical  persuasions  of  individual  counsellors.
But  the  decision  which  they  reach  will  seldom  be
uniform  ;  it  will  rather  be  the  opinion  of  the  majority,
which  may  be  alike  pernicious,  in  case  it  is  led  in
different  affairs  by  different  principles,  or  in  the  tran-
sacting of  all  affairs  by  one  and  the  same  interest.

Still  the  before-mentioned  way  of  deciding  cases,
by  the  number  of  votes,  is  not  to  be  dispensed  with.
A  weighing  of  votes  would  presuppose  an  arbitrary
monarchical  censorship,  or  an  estimate  on  grounds  of
probability,  so  that  the  votes  of  certain  classes  of  citi-
zens would  be  less  esteemed  than  those  of  other  classes.
This  would  issue  in  a  favoring  of  single  classes  of
society  ;  and  such  a  thing  may  be  useful,  but  it  does
not  lie  in  the  mere  conception  of  a  '  Democracy.'

§  65.  In  connection  with  many  disadvantages,
democracy  contains  the  truth  that  the  state  can  in
no  event  be  anything  more  than  the  final  form  which
the  living  society  gives  to  itself;  and  that,  conse-
quently, its  organization  can  possess,  as  over  against
the  changeable  necessities,  no  absolutely  definitive,
unchangeable  authority.


TRUE  THOUGHT  OF  DEMOCRACY.


125


The  foregoing  view  must  be  maintained,  in  oppo-
sition to  the  doctrines  which  (compare  §  49)  seek
to  find  somewhere  or  other  mystical  types  for  the
organization  of  the  state,  such  as  lie  outside  of  the
earthly  life  and  its  necessities.  The  state  is  neither
an  image  of  the  Trinity,  nor  of  the  human  organism,
nor  an  exhibition  of  any  profound  relations  belonging
to  the  logical  concept ;  but  it  is  simply  a  practical
institution  for  earthly  prosperity,  and  for  that  kind
of  cultivation  of  which  our  race  can  have  experience
on  the  earth.  Every  institution  —  no  matter  how
magnificent  a  mystical  significance  it  might  have  —
would  still  be  of  indifferent  value,  if  it  were  of  no  use
in  life  ;  and  would  necessarily  have  to  be  transformed
as  soon  as  it  should  begin  to  work  injury.

In  so  far  is  this  fundamental  thought  of  democracy
—  that  the  state  must  take  its  directions  from  the
people  —  justified;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  de-
mocracy as  a  form  of  the  state  is  the  best  adapted  to
fulfil  the  thought.  It  has  need  for  its  continued
existence,  in  large  measure,  of  the  most  perfect  virtue
in  its  citizens  :  where  this  prerequisite  is  historically
wanting,  democracy  least  of  all  affords  a  pledge  for
an  equitable  development  of  society.

§  66.  The  complete  opposite  of  democracy  —  Mon-
archy—  does  not  consist  essentially  in  the  unity  of


1 26


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


the  ruling  power,  but  in  the  fact  that  this  power
rules  at  all,  —  that  is  to  say,  is  no  longer  a  mere
deputy  of  the  will  of  society,  but  derives  its  authority
from  a  higher  source  of  right.

Now,  as  far  as  natural  right  goes,  no  man  has  any
claim  to  lordship  over  others.  Only  antiquity  could
derive  this  claim  from  the  divine  descent  of  the  rul-
ing race.  Our  modern  form  of  apprehending  the
matter  is  founded  upon  the  conception  of  legitimacy  ;
—  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  assumption  that  a  right
which  does  not  exist  by  nature  can  be  gained  his-
torically, and  this  by  means  of  an  earlier  race,  whether
made  subject  by  force,  or  out  of  gratitude  for  benefits
received,  having  intrusted  its  leadership  to  a  certain
family  ;  and  upon  the  assumption  that  now,  since
society  does  not  make  itself  over  new  by  sudden
leaps,  later  generations  gradually  grow  up  into  these
relations,  involuntarily  owe  them  many  obligations,
and  on  this  account  even  without  renewed  express
recognition  sanction  the  ascendency  of  their  rulers.

Such  psychologically  comprehensible  events  would,
nevertheless,  not  make  the  esteem  for  monarchy  per-
fectly secure,  unless  there  also  lay  in  the  interest  of
the  community  composing  the  state,  some  need  to
which  this  historical  habitude  corresponds.

The  conviction  that  every  citizen  constantly  has
both  the  right  and  the  duty  of  concerning  himself


GROUNDS  FOR  THE  MONARCHY.


127


about  the  common  affairs,  was  an  intelligible  one  for
the  ancient  democracies,  which  rolled  off  all  the  labor
of  life  upon  the  slaves,  and  which  therefore  consti-
tuted substantially  a  tyrannical  lordship  of  a  select
society  over  many  unfortunates.  Among  modern
peoples  the  other  wish  must  predominate;  —  the  wish,
that  is,  to  avoid  the  large  amount  of  fruitless  or  perni-
cious labor  which,  among  a  population  that  must  be
supported  by  its  own  industry,  would  originate  from
participation  in  public  affairs  that  are  imperfectly
understood,  and  from  the  struggle  for  the  first  place.

This  first  place,  especially,  must  by  a  certain
natural  necessity  be  occupied  in  such  manner  that  it
can  never  be  the  object  of  ambition ;  and  the  primary
consideration  in  fact  is  simply  that  it  be  occupied
indubitably,  and  not  how  well  it  be  occupied.  That
the  most  worthy  should  always  rule,  is  a  pious  wish,
but  altogether  impracticable ;  because  it  would  either
impute  to  society  a  prophetic  gift  in  discovering  this
one  most  worthy,  or  the  patience  to  judge  of  the
matter  according  to  the  result,  and  therefore  to  put
up  with  the  strife  of  the  different  claimants,  to  the
prejudice  of  its  undisturbed  development,  until  a
decision  is  reached.

§  67.  It  is  only  as  '  representative  of  the  state '
that  we  have  considered  the  monarch  ;  and,  more


128


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


specifically,  as  is  obvious,  the  hereditary  monarch.
In  the  ancient  Oriental  despotisms, — a  fact  to  which
a  bare  allusion  is  here  made,  —  he  has  quite  another
appearance ;  as  absolute  master,  source  of  all  right
and  supreme  judge,  as  educator  and  prophet,  as  sole
possessor  of  all  property,  therefore  as  '  lord  of  the
manor '  in  the  most  unlimited  sense.

All  such  immoderate  claims  have  long  since  been
forgotten.  There  is  left  to  the  chief  head  of  the
state,  essentially,  nothing  more  than  a  great  number
of  honorary  prerogatives  which  are  primarily  with-
out practical  result,  and  are  valid  simply  as  the
4  state-idea ' ;  they  are,  however,  never  wholly  worth-
less, but  are  very  frequently  of  extreme  importance
as  soon  as  this  in  itself  empty  form  is  vitalized  by  the
personal  adherence  of  the  people.  But,  besides,
there  belong  to  the  chief  head  of  the  state  simply
the  right  and  duty  of  inciting  the  different  branches
of  the  state-life,  of  maintaining  them  in  mutual  com-
bination, and  of  nominating  the  organs  which  are
necessary  for  carrying  on  its  affairs  (§  79).

§  68.  In  a  complete  Despotism  the  irresponsible
and  changeable  will  of  an  individual  would  directly
constitute  the  power  of  the  state.  If  it  must  be,  for
reasons  easily  intelligible,  entrusted  to  a  number  of
substitutes  to  exercise,  then  these  are  either  mere


NEED  OF  STATE-MINISTERS.


129


executors  of  a  single  command,  or,  in  case  their  busi-
ness is  a  permanent  one,  the  same  all-sided  arbitrary
power  belongs  to  them  in  relation  to  a  definite  ter-
ritory as  to  the  supreme  lord  in  relation  to  the
whole.

From  such  a  kind  of  substitutionary  action  all  mod-
ern states  are  distinguished  by  the  fact,  that  they
recognize  an  independence  of  the  life  of  the  state
also,  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  sovereign,  and  a
division  —  grounded  in  reality — of  this  life  into  dif-
ferent branches,  each  of  which  follows  its  own  pecu-
liar appropriate  norms,  that  are  independent  of  the
will  as  well  of  the  chief  head  of  the  state  as  of  all
other  individuals.

Herein  alone  is  involved  the  conception  of  the
office  as  not  constituted  for  the  persons,  but  rather
as  that  for  which  the  persons  are  sought  and  placed
under  obligations.  Accordingly,  instead  of  the  afore-
said unlimited  alter-ego,  there  are  substituted  in  the
last  instance  the  different  ministers,  each  bound  to
the  right  of  his  office,  but  independent  in  pursuance
of  this  right  even  to  a  wide  extent.

§  69.  The  first  and  most  indispensable  part  of  the
administration  of  the  state  is  the  care  of  Justice.

It  is  necessary  on  this  point  to  recollect  that  mere
custom,  habit,  and  tradition,  perchance suffice  in


13°


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


order  to  determine  the  forms  of  intercourse  which
are  necessary  even  for  a  civilized  life.  But  they  do
not  suffice  to  settle  the  innumerable  cases  of  contest
over  the  possession  and  use  of  things  in  an  equitable
way.  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  historical  benefit,
that  the  modern  world  has  inherited  the  Roman
science  of  right :  —  that  is,  such  a  science  as,  without
being  prepossessed  by  religious,  poetic,  or  national
prejudices,  apprehends  the  intercourse  of  men  in
affairs  wholly  in  its  sober  meaning;  but  at  the  same
time  with  such  keen  reflection  that  the  evident  points
of  view  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the  affairs  are
gained,  according  to  which  the  decision  that  is  of
itself  equitable  may  be  discovered  wherever  the  occa-
sions arise,  and  quite  apart  from  all  the  regards  of  a
piety  that  does  not  strictly  belong  to  the  matter  in
hand.  It  is  not  the  single  propositions  about  rights,
but  the  science  of  rights,  which  it  produced  (and,
especially,  in  high  perfection  with  respect  to  private
justice)  that  has  been  of  advantage  for  the  discovery,
even  under  wholly  new  relations  of  life,  of  a  justice
which  corresponded  with  the  nature  of  these  relations
themselves,  and  which  was  independent  of  temporary
presuppositions,  of  the  then  prevalent  religious  and
social  sentiments.

In  itself  considered  every  proposition  about  rights,
although  it  be  indisputably  correct,  is  of  course


IDEA  OF  JUSTICE  PER  SB.


131


simply  a  scientific  truth  which  can  attain  validity  in
practical  life  only  in  case  it  is  either  itself  raised  to
the  position  of  a  law  by  a  definite  act  of  legislation,
or  else  the  scientific  whole  to  which  it  belongs  as  a
part  is  chosen  to  be  the  basis  of  rights.

Now  although  a  similarly  classical  science  is  want-
ing with  respect  to  criminal  and  civil  justice,  yet  the
modern  acts  of  legislation  even  on  these  points  are
indebted  to  the  science  of  rights  for  a  large  number
of  the  mitigations  of  that  justice  —  so  passionate  and
dependent  upon  momentary  frames  of  mind  —  which
was  exercised  in  earlier  times  in  these  domains  of
law.

At  any  rate,  the  conviction  belongs  to  the  modern
consciousness,  that  just  as  there  is  a  justice  which
holds  good  per  se,  so  also  the  care  of  justice  must  be
exercised  independently  of  the  will  of  the  ruling  head
as  well  as  of  that  of  different  parties.  Access  to  the
sources  of  justice  must,  accordingly,  remain  unpro-
hibited for  every  one.  Judges  should  be  deposed
only  by  means  of  judicial  judgment  itself  ;  no  one
should  be  withdrawn  from  the  jurisdiction  of  his
natural  judge,  —  that  is  to  say,  from  the  one  to  whom
the  constitution  of  the  land  has  once  assigned  him.
No  exceptional  courts  should  be  erected,  except  in
cases  where  danger  to  the  state  compels  the  temporary
substitution  of  speedy  and  energetic  measures  for  the


132


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


normal  administration,  —  and  then  without  retro-
active force.  Finally,  it  must  be  possible  for  the
individual  to  obtain  satisfaction,  even  against  the
state,  as  soon  as  he  is  injured  by  its  behavior.

§  70.  Now  the  essential  problem  of  the  state  is  not
barely  the  adjustment  of  injustice  when  committed,
but  the  establishment  of  the  positive  benefits  of
general  prosperity,  the  needs  of  which  are  changing
with  time,  but  likewise  changing  in  such  manner  that
most  frequently  the  desires  for  improvement  which
are  induced  thereby  are  conflicting,  or  at  least  not  in
harmony,  over  the  choice  of  the  means  for  their
fulfilment.

Now  it  is,  on  the  one  hand,  to  be  recognized  with-
out qualification  that  the  state  has  come  into  exist-
ence for  the  sake  of  men,  and  not  they  for  its  sake.
There  will  always  be  in  society,  therefore,  a  party  of
advance  which  demands  with  justice  the  abolition  of
conditions  that  have  become  out  of  place.  But  it  is
just  as  certain  that  the  state  as  such  should  not  seek
momentary  prosperity  at  the  sacrifice  of  historical
memories  and  obligations ;  that  it  has  rather  the  right
to  maintain  the  existing  condition  in  force  against  the
pressure  for  innovation.  The  whole  problem  would
therefore  resolve  itself  into  this,  —  not  to  allow  the
natural  conflict  of  opinions  and  parties  to  become


NO  THEORETICALLY *  BEST  STATE.


'33


uncontrollable,  but  to  discover  a  form  of  *  constitution  '
which  guarantees  to  both  parties  the  possibility  of
arranging  matters  with  each  other  by  way  of  a
righteous  agreement,  and  of  uniting  for  each  epoch
upon  the  proper  new  shaping  of  existing  relations.

The  principal  meaning  of  the  foregoing  statement
is,  that  it  is  quite  idle  and  foolish  to  wish  to  set  up
a  'best'  constitution  of  the  state,  such  as  must  hold
good  unchangeably  in  its  entire  organization  for  all
times.  The  ' best"  will  rather  be  just  that  one  which
contains  the  most  successful  regulations  for  con-
stantly introducing  in  correct  forms  the  permanent
alterations  which  existing  relations  call  for,  without
sudden  leap  or  concussion.

§  71.  A  certain  accomplishment  of  the  task
aforesaid  may  without  doubt  take  place  at  each
moment  by  means  of  the  spirit  of  individuals.
Nevertheless,  since  such  historical  good-fortune  is
not  to  be  counted  upon,  the  collective  intelligence
of  the  people  must  be  made  serviceable  in  carrying
out  the  end  of  the  state.

Three  formal  conditions,  without  which  a  constitu-
tion is  scarcely  conceivable,  belong  to  this  matter  :
free  communication  of  thoughts  (only  of  late  suffi-
ciently possible  by  means  of  the  press),  in  order,
previous  to  all  attempt  at  deeds,  to  call  forth  a  com-


134


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


parison,  correction,  and  specializing  of  opinions  ;  next,
a  right  of  assembly,  in  order  that  a  decision  also  may
result  from  like  opinions  ;  finally,  an  unobstructed
(also  collective)  right  of  petition,  in  order  to  bring
about  the  accomplishment  of  the  conclusions  arrived
at  by  way  of  a  righteous  decision.

But  these  three  formal  concessions  would  be  worth
less  without  certain  real  preconditions  necessary  to
their  useful  employment.  Such  preconditions  lie
principally  in  the  formation  of  political  parties.

§  72.  We  distinguish  parties  from  factions  (confed-
erations for  either  unfair  or,  at  any  rate,  egotistic
ends,  that  frequently  border  on  the  form  of  con-
spiracy) as  being  such  combinations  as  desire  a  defi-
nite form  of  change  in  the  life  of  the  state,  of  which
they  are  persuaded  that  the  general  welfare  of  the
whole  stands  in  need,  or  will  be  secured  by  means
of  it.

Every  party,  therefore,  must  possess  a  definite  and
well  recognized  program.  Its  organization  can  be
based  on  nothing  else  than  on  the  free  concord  of  its
constituent  members  ;  and  it  is  only  a  useful  and
comprehensible  tactics,  but  not  an  obligatory  duty
on  its  part,  to  sacrifice  convictions  upon  insignificant
points  to  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  essential
aims  of  the  party. Its  coherence  as  a  party  at  all,


NEED OF POLITICAL  PARTIES.


135


and  a  certain  measure  of  discipline,  is  however  to  be
preferred  to  the  bare  uniformity  in  conviction  of  dis-
connected individuals  ;  since  this  latter  of  itself  does
not  reach  the  point  of  undertaking  the  execution  of
anything,  or  perhaps  is  hurried  away  without  prep-
aration into  such  an  undertaking.

Since  such  parties  are  in  general  possible  only
among  a  people  whose  influence  upon  the  life  of
the  state  is  permitted  as  a  matter  of  principle,
they  are  also  under  the  obligation,  in  case  their  views
triumph  in  a  legal  way,  of  taking  the  control  of
affairs  into  their  own  hands.  On  the  contrary,
a  continuous  opposition  toward  the  government,
irrespective  of  what  the  direction  of  the  latter  is,
is  just  as  senseless  as  it  is  wanton ;  but  the  senti-
ment, that  "  the  government  itself  must  stand  above
the  parties,"  is  an  unprofitable  way  of  speaking ;
the  rather  is  it  obvious  that  the  government  must
always  rely  for  support  on  the  victorious  party,  or
must  entrust  the  administration  to  it  for  testing
the  practicability  of  its  views.

It  would  for  the  rest  be  impossible  to  distinguish
certain  parties  which  must  exist  in  all  state  life.
One  reason  for  their  formation  exists  only  where
there  is  a  deficiency  which  they  help  to  remedy,  or
a  greater  good  which  they  wish  to  attain.  Without
such  inducement  no  state  naturally  needs  parties.


136


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


It  is  further  comprehensible  on  psychological
grounds,  that  there  will  always  be  a  distinction  of
conservatives  from  those  pressing  for  advance.  But
as  long  as  the  objects  are  not  defined  which  it  is
proposed  to  retain  or  to  require,  this  is  really
nothing  but  a  distinction  ,of  temperament  ;  and  it
is  an  evil  for  it  to  be  held  a  matter  of  political
significance,  and  therefore  believed  to  be  of  service
to  the  state,  either  in  the  maintenance  of  every
existing  institution  or  in  its  aimless  negation.

A  more  formal  distinction,  which  concerns  the
manner  of  the  treatment  of  state  problems,  is  that
between  the  doctrinaire  and  the  politician.  The  first
lives  on  the  error  of  treating  the  state  as  a  scien-
tific problem,  in  which  above  all  consistency  in  the
subordination  of  all  particulars  under  one  thorough-
going 6  principle  '  is  to  be  striven  after.  The  others
rightly  recognize  that  in  such  a  changeable  process
as  is  the  life  of  different  peoples,  the  question
can  never  be  anything  but  a  matter  of  measures
momentarily  fitting,  —  of  attaining  those  ends  of
public  welfare,  which  in  general  admit  no  doubt,
each  time  under  the  definite  conditions  of  the
moment,  and  consequently  without  laying  any
claim  to  uninterrupted  consistency  in  the  measures
of  administration.


THE  TWO  ASSEMBLIES.


137


§  73.  The  practical  execution  of  such  a  partici-
pation of  the  people  in  the  life  of  the  state  always
leads  eventually,  under  modern  relations,  to  oral
discussion  by  their  representatives.

For  larger  civil  wholes  one  assembly  has  been
held  to  be  insufficient,  and  the  co-operation  of  two
is  required  :  the  first  of  these  is  to  form  the  con-
servative or  moderating  force  which  represents  the
existing  condition,  the  historical  traditions  and
higher  problems  of  the  state,  —  in  contrast  to  the
second,  which,  moved  principally  by  the  evil  con^
ditions  of  the  situation  of  the  moment,  impels  to
swift  redress,  and  without  the  counterpoise  of  the
first  might  be  inclined  to  sacrifice  the  future,  and
even  the  political  honor  of  the  state,  to  its  tem-
porary prosperity.

For  this  first  house  of  representatives,  it  is  not
those  that  are  actually  most  worthy  who  may  be
chosen,  but  only  those  whose  external  circumstances
as  a  matter  of  common  repute,  justify  their  being
entrusted  with  this  conservative  disposition.

Accordingly  large  holders  in  land,  which  are  most
interested  in  the  stability  of  existing  relations,  —
the  '  high  nobility,'  as  a  preferred  social  station,
in  which  a  people  can  never  be  quite  deficient,  so
long  as  there  is  actually  to  be  a  many-sided,  noble
human cultivation,  distinction of  disposition,  and


138


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


worth  of  social  forms ;  further  representatives  of
the  arts  and  sciences ;  and,  finally  such  of  the  large
communities  or  principal  cities  as,  by  the  peculiar
stamp  of  their  form  of  living,  are  of  special  influ-
ence upon  the  prosperity  and  the  political  destinies
of  the  whole ;  —  these  have  therefore  been  invariably
designated  as  members  of  this  house.  And  it  is
indeed  allowable  that  the  principle  of  inheritance
should  apply  to  these  representatives,  so  far  as  this
is  compatible  with  the  interests  represented.

§  74.  The  second  house  of  representatives  would
have  its  place  in  serving  the  sum-total  of  endeavors
that  arise  from  moment  to  moment  in  the  state.

If  the  question  here  were  still  one  de  lege  ferenda,
then  we  should  be  compelled  to  wish  that  no  one,
as  a  so-called  'citizen  of  the  state,'  should  forth-
with succeed  in  gaining  a  direct  relation  to  the
state  and  a  title  to  co-operate  in  the  conduct  of
its  affairs,  who  should  not  previously  belong  to  a
definite  vocation,  to  some  station,  or  else  to  some
restricted  and  well-recognized  community.  As  a
member  of  such  community  he  might  first  begin  to
be  reckoned  as  part  of  the  state,  and  then  afterwards
be  called  to  represent  in  the  large  whole  the  to
him  well-known  interests  of  the  smaller  com-
munity. In  this  manner  we  should  have  had  some


THE  CONCEPTION OF REPRESENTATION. 1 39


security  that  the  entire  organization  of  the  branches
of  industry  and  vocation  would  have  been  repre-
sented  in  general,  and  that  by  experts  ;  and,  besides,
it  would  have  been  possible  to  hope  that  general
political  questions,  so  far  as  they  were  weighty
and  palpable  to  the  collective  life,  would  have  been
treated  with  some  harmony.  Such  arrangements  have
vanished  without  hope  of  their  re-establishment.
The  new  theory  of  abstract  citizenship  in  the  state
admits,  essentially,  of  nothing  more  than  a  repre-
sentation of  just  the  general  political  questions
which  the  time  calls  forth.

Now  in  itself  considered  this,  too,  is  a  correct
thought,  that  the  sum  of  individuals,  quite  apart
from  their  vocation,  ought  to  be  represented.  But,
nevertheless,  to  carry  it  out  is  fraught  with  such
practical  difficulties,  that  this  whole  constitutional
mechanism  may  in  fact  be  regarded  as  the  only
expedient  possible  in  our  time,  and  yet  as  in  itself
by  no  means  a  venerable  ideal.

§  75.  If  we  apprehend  theoretically  the  concep-
tion of  '  representation,'  and  likewise  keep  in  view
the  purpose  which  it  ought  to  fulfil  politically,  then
it  cannot  amount  simply  to  meaning  in  general
that  every  will  (however  changeable)  be  represented ;
but  must  with  this  include  the  degree  of  insight


140


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


also,  and  the  degree  of  the  force  of  character
with  which  such  insight  should  be  actualized  by
each.

The  direct  absolute  right  of  choice  represents
merely  a  number  of  wills,  and  this  not  completely.
For  if  it  belongs  quite  naturally  to  the  conception  of  a
'  universal  representation  9  that  minorities  also  should
not  be  made  '  dead  in  law/  then  it  would  be  theoret-
ically necessary  that  every  individual  should  have  a
choice  of  as  many  delegates  as  there  are  to  be  in  all.
He  would  then  have  the  possibility  of  finding  differ-
ent representatives  for  his  different  interests  ;  since
it  is  hardly  likely  that  even  a  single  one  will  accord
with  him  altogether  and  in  every  respect.  This  is
obviously  impracticable  ;  not  merely  on  account  of
the  intricacy,  but  also  on  account  of  the  impossibility
of  finding  for  all  the  individuals  the  requisite  number
of  trustworthy  persons  in  some  good  degree  of  har-
mony with  the  rest.

But  now  it  comes  to  this,  that,  after  corporate  rep-
resentation has  once  been  admitted,  local  electoral
districts  have  become  necessary.  It  is  a  simple  mat-
ter for  logical  calculation,  that  the  breaking  up  of  a
large  number  into  a  number  of  groups,  each  of  which
then  makes  its  decision  by  the  majority  of  the  indi-
viduals composing  it,  does  not  by  any  means  surely
lead  to  a  correspondence  of  the  result  with  the  will


FAILURES IN  REPRESENTATION.


I4I


of  the  collective  majority.  It  may  rather  be,  even  if
the  groups  are  of  the  same  size,  that  the  final  conclu-
sion, in  the  worst  case,  corresponds  only  to  the  fourth
part  of  the  total  number.

This  result,  in  itself  very  possible,  may  moreover
be  still  further  facilitated  by  special  arrangement  of
the  electoral  districts,  and  then  by  the  influence  of  the
agitations  which  are  introduced  by  the  '  candidatures  '
that  as  a  matter  of  fact  have  become  unavoidable.

Merely  actual  majorities  therefore  find,  at  least  in
reference  to  particular  questions,  no  sure  representa-
tion :  but  still  less  do  the  oftentimes  significant
minorities  ;  and  the  effort  after  '  representation  '  is
transformed  into  a  conflict  of  choice  between  parties
which  seek  to  exclude  each  other  from  representation.
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  may  be  in  particular
cases  of  use  for  the  political  life  of  the  whole  people  ;
but  it  is  surprisingly  strange  as  the  result  of  a  theory
which  is  directed  precisely  toward  'representation!

All  these  evil  conditions  naturally  (but  taken  all
in  all,  in  praxi  scarcely  to  any  great  extent)  concern
even  the  indirect  representation  through  deputies
which  are  chosen  by  electors.

In  a  quite  special  way,  however,  does  the  latter
arrangement  induce  also  the  raising  of  the  further
question,  as  to  how  far  a  representative  is  bound  by
the  will  of  his  constituency. Theoretically  considered


142


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


he  is  so  without  doubt.  Since,  however,  the  will  of
those  who  chose  him  cannot  be  itself  despatched,
but  must  be  represented  by  a  living  person  who,  on
the  one  hand,  does  not  offer  himself  as  the  mere
annunciator  of  a  foreign  will,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
must  have  freedom  to  cast  a  vote  according  to  the
circumstances  of  the  moment ;  a  measure  of  con-
fidence which  does  not  admit  of  being  limited  pre-
cisely, is  certainly  necessary  :  but  on  the  other  side
every  such  deputy  is  obviously  under  obligations  to
lay  down  his  commission  as  soon  as  he  sees  himself
to  be  in  permanent  contradiction  with  the  will  of  his
constituents.

§  76.  The  forms  of  parliamentary  procedure  are  in
some  degree  shaped  to  compensate  for  such  deficien-
cies. Under  this  head,  in  the  first  place,  belongs
the  fact  that  every  citizen  is  entitled,  in  reference  to
observed  evil  conditions  that  would  otherwise  not
come  up  for  cognition  and  treatment  in  the  assem-
bly, to  address  petitions  to  them,  and  to  induce  them,
where  it  is  necessary,  to  obtain  from  the  government
legal  proposals  to  remedy  the  evil.

Under  the  same  head  belongs  also  the  custom  of
having  matters  of  detail  that  belong  together
prepared  by  smaller  commissions  in  which  those
specially  expert  can  be  combined.


PARLIAMENTARY  LOGIC.


143


The  remaining  forms  of  procedure  have  their  evil
conditions.  These  chiefly  consist,  apart  from  the
human  frivolity  and  the  endless  babbling,  in  the
difficulty  of  assisting  —  in  a  large  assembly  and  in
the  case  of  very  complicated  questions  —  the  will  of
individuals  to  its  undisturbed  expression.

It  is  well  known  that  a  special  ' parliamentary
logic '  has  been  framed,  which  does  not  indeed  solve
the  insoluble  problem,  how  it  is  to  be  brought  about
that,  in  the  case  of  projects  which  cross  each  other,
and  when  in  fact  the  adoption  of  one  excludes  the
taking  of  a  vote  on  the  succeeding  ones,  every
individual  can,  without  concern  for  the  consequences,
vote  for  that  which  seems  to  him  the  best;  —  and
after  the  rejection  of  that,  for  the  next  best.  But,
on  the  contrary,  this  logic  has  taught  the  artifice
of  being  able — in  consideration  of  the  uncertainty  of
individuals,  concerning  the  opinions  of  others  and
concerning  the  issue  of  taking  a  vote  —  to  arrange
the  order  of  questions  in  such  a  way  that  certain
disagreeable  opinions  cannot  gain  any  open  expres-
sion whatever.  A  very  useful  art  is  this  oftentimes,
no  doubt ;  but  still  the  most  surprising  result  of  a
theory  which  is  directed  straight  toward  the  rep-
resentation of  opinions.

Besides  all  this,  a  large  assembly,  when  locally  shut
off  by  itself,  even  in  a  large  city,  easily  loses  the


144


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


feeling  of  sympathy  with  the  actual  temper  of  the
people.  '  Doctrinaire '  party  interests  are  formed,
which  are  strengthened  by  being  constantly  re-
echoed within  the  same  circle ;  and  "  I  and  my  politi-
cal friends  "  as  the  decisive  electors  step  into  the
position  of  the  constituency  to  be  represented.

In  fine,  that  which  may  be  theoretically  inspiriting
in  the  thought  of  a  '  representation  of  the  people,'
is  in  praxi  subjected  to  such  a  large  abatement  that,
as  history  shows,  the  destiny  of  the  people  is
not  secured  against  a  selfish  struggle  of  parties,
even  under  such  a  constitution  of  the  state.  The
custom  of  choosing  the  popular  house  for  only  a
short  time,  furnishes  some  hope  of  the  correction  of
past  mistakes  by  better  choices.  But  instability  in
the  life  of  the  state,  and  unproductive  political
agitation,  are  of  themselves  a  misfortune.

§  77.  The  making  of  laws  and  the  granting  of
taxes  form  the  principal  objects  for  framing  public
measures.

To  establish  general  laws  as  truths  of  right  is  an
affair  of  science.  The  political  problem  of  a  repre-
sentative assembly  is  —  such  truths  being  taken  for
granted  —  to  designate  those  general  maxims  which
are  to  be  maintained  in  the  shape  of  executive  ordi-
nances with  reference  to  a  definite  question.


CODIFICATION OF  LAWS.


'45


We  are  therefore  to  guard  ourselves  against
setting  up  highly  generalized  principles  (for  example,
the  favorite  rights  of  men)  in  the  fashion  of  the
doctrinaire,  as  well  as  against  specializing  that
which,  within  the  sphere  of  valid  maxims,  must  be
differently  arranged  according  to  time  and  place,
—  a  specializing  that  abounds  in  paragraphs  and
claims  a  universal  validity.  Most  legislative  assem-
blies, however,  have  a  great  inclination  for  detailed
systematizing.  To  be  sure  they  do  not  formulate
the  laws  themselves,  but  endeavor  to  gain  by
importunity  concessions  from  the  government ;  they
are  not  satisfied,  however,  unless  they  bring  about
this  harmful  completeness,  and  that  very  promptly.

Coherent  books  of  law  are  least  of  all  adapted  for
such  councils,  since  they  are  wont  —  alas !  after  the
composition  of  their  first  draught  to  remain  withdrawn
from  discussion  through  the  press,  then  suddenly
to  be  laid  before  the  assembly  for  hasty  advice,  and
not  seldom  left  loaded  down  by  them  with  inner
contradictions  through  their  propositions  to  amend.

The  other  matter  —  the  granting  of  taxes,  as  well
direct  as  indirect  —  also  belongs  historically  to  the
most  important  rights  of  the  people,  and  in  fact  in
earlier  times  belonged  to  them,  as  the  other  party  over
against  the  prince ;  while  at  present  it  is,  strictly
speaking,  still  the  'state'  and  therefore  the  people


146


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


itself  in  another  form,  which  of  itself  raises  the
means  for  satisfying  its  own  needs  as  a  state.
The  only  question,  therefore,  which  can  be  raised
is,  whether  the  administration  and  expenditure  of
this  means  seems  to  be  in  the  right  hands.  It  may,
therefore,  be  understood  as  a  matter  of  course,  that
the  demands  of  a  ministry  whose  maxims  of  admin-
istration are  disapproved,  will  be  denied  even  in
relation  to  those  parts  of  the  undertakings  planned
by  it  which  are  not  disapproved,  if  only  to  compel  the
government  to  entrust  this  part  of  its  business  into
other  hands.  But  to  injure  the  carrying  out  of  the
economics  of  the  state  in  general  by  withdrawing  all
the  customary  taxes,  and  thereby  to  produce  greater
evil  than  it  is  designed  to  avoid,  is  by  no  means
justifiable.  Without  doubt  the  government  has  in
such  a  case  a  better  right  to  maintain  the  status  quo
in  existence  even  by  force,  as  long  as  no  agreement
is  arrived  at  concerning  its  further  alteration.

§  78.  In  order  that  a  resolution  when  framed  may
become  lawy  the  constitutional  theory  has  required
the  accordance  of  both  the  representative  bodies ;  —
with  manifold  modifications  of  procedure  to  bring  it
about,  and  always  with  the  design  of  moderating
excessive  haste  in  the  lower  house  by  the  conser-
vative disposition  of  the  upper  house.


THE  RIGHTS OF  SOVEREIGNTY.


'47


If  both  houses  agree,  then  it  remains  as  the  part  of
the  government,  by  its  approval  and  the  proclamation
which  it  is  to  issue,  to  make  the  resolution  into  a
law,  or  by  contradiction  of  it  to  annul  it  provisionally.
This  right  of  'veto,'  which  has  been  in  history  so
much  contested,  can  have  no  other  significance  than
that  of  hindering  a  temporary  opinion  in  the  interest
of  an  historical  right,  of  traditional  stability,  and  of
the  better  understood  welfare  of  the  state.  If  this
opinion  persists,  then  it  indeed  scarcely  needs
conversion  into  a  'merely  suspensory  veto/  in  order
to  give  a  legal  form  to  that  yielding  of  the  govern-
ment which  must  occur  as  a  matter  of  fact.

§  79.  Besides  the  aforesaid  supreme  right  of  giv-
ing its  sanction,  few  other  uncontested  rights  are  left
to  the  government  as  'rights  of  sovereignty*:  such
are  the  representation  of  the  state  in  foreign  transac-
tions and  in  embassages,  although  the  products  of
the  first,  in  part  at  least  (for  example,  all  treaties
which  concern  trade,  commerce,  and  business  rela-
tions) are  claimed  by  the  representative  assemblies
as  subjects  of  their  jurisdiction  ;  further  the  right  of
declaring  war  and  concluding  peace,  —  a  right  which
probably  is  not  perfectly  well  kept  in  anybody's
hands,  but  least  of  all  should  be  entrusted  to  a  rep-
resentative  assembly  in  the  form  in  which  they


148


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


actually  exist.  Where,  however,  complete  agree-
ment is  actually  arrived  at  in  an  entire  nation,  an
opposite  decision  on  the  part  of  the  government  is
practically  so  difficult  of  execution,  that  a  contradic-
tion between  the  two  will  seldom  come  to  pass.

A  much  more  general  and  always  operative  right
of  sovereignty  consists  in  the  appointment  of  those
in  office,  whose  whole  organization  in  the  modern
state  is  a  sort  of  personal  representation  of  the
interior  ordering  of  the  state,  and  of  its  thought
as  independent  of  the  momentary  will  of  the  people.
This  way  of  looking  at  the  matter  was  wanting  to
antiquity  in  so  far  as,  although  (in  Rome  at  least)
the  independent  worth  of  the  office  was  respected,
the  bearer  of  it  was  nevertheless  commission^
immediately  by  the  people.  The  most  recent  times
have  without  doubt  shared  in  the  view  rather  too
plentifully ;  since  the  preference  has  been  to  con-
sider even  the  most  insignificant  authorities,  which
only  represent  communal  interests,  as  emanations  of
the  power  of  the  state.

The  real  office-bearers  of  the  state,  however,  are
with  right  appointed  by  the  government  from  the
number  of  those  who,  by  means  of  a  fixed  and  legally
prescribed  preparation,  have  devoted  themselves  to
definite  branches  of  the  service,  and  of  whom  it  is
to  be  expected  that  they  will,  with  full  knowledge


THE GOVERNMENT  OFFICES.


149


and  in  an  unpartisan  way,  represent  only  the
demands  of  the  laws  and  not  special  social  interests.
The  danger  of  doing  the  latter  is  imminent  where
important  offices  are  given  over  to  a  candidate  not  a
member  of  the  guild,  as  it  were ;  and  who,  besides  his
position  as  an  officer  of  the  government,  has  widely
ramifying  social  interests  of  a  still  different  kind.

It  is  only  for  the  highest  offices  of  the  state  that
the  government  lays  hold  of  the  requisite  capacities
where  it  can  find  them,  without  connecting  their  fit-
ness with  any  other  test  than  that  of  such  authenti-
cating as  has  already  resulted  in  the  practical  life.
But  such  —  namely,  the  ministers  of  state — are  also
not  obligated  in  the  same  sense  as  the  other  office-
he*^*  s  to  adhere  to  a  permanent  order;  but  they
are  the  confidential  persons  with  whom  the  govern-
ment believes  that  it  can  at  definite  times  satisfy
both  the  constant  necessities  of  the  state  and  also
the  new  demands  of  the  time ;  and  whom  it  lets  go
as  soon  as  changed  circumstances  render  it  no
longer  possible  for  the  same  persons  to  reconcile  the
"new  demands  with  their  convictions."  The  other
functionaries  remain  merely  acquainted  in  an  intelli-
gent way,  with  such  a  change  as  a  matter  of  fact,
—  not  untouched  by  the  supreme  conduct  of  state
affairs,  but  having  in  trust  the'  administration  of  their
special  province.


PRACTICAL  PHILOSOPHY.


§  80.  If  all  the  attempts  at  mediation  alluded  to
above  are  in  vain,  and  the  conflict  between  govern-
ment, representatives,  and  people  continues,  then
the  further  vexed  question  is  wont  to  be  raised,
whether  in  such  a  case  '  a  right  of  revolution '  exists
or  not.

To  this  question  the  reply  seems  to  be  simply  as
follows  :  If  the  trouble  has  once  been  taken  to  estab-
lish a  system  of  forms  of  right  within  which  human
life  is  to  go  on,  then  it  is  inconsistent  and  perfectly
superfluous  afterward  to  add  yet  another  form  for
the  abolition  of  these  conditions  of  right,  as  though
it  were  equally  legitimate  with  them.  Where  such
an  unadjusted  dissension  exists,  as  that  we  have
alluded  to,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  exhort  the
people  to  suffer  on  permanently,  and  yet  quite  super-
fluous to  adduce  an  additional  right  of  revolution.

'  Right/  the  rather,  stops  at  this  point,  since  no-
body is  willing  to  adhere  to  it ;  and  the  historical
course  of  affairs  begins,  —  in  the  manner  in  which
it  is  now  impelled  simply  by  psychological  motives.
Just  as  we  do  not  inquire  of  a  storm  of  wind,
whether  it  has  the  '  right '  to  blow,  but  blame  or
bless  it  according  to  its  effects;  so  will  revolutions
simply  happen,  and  be  judged  historically  merely
according  to  their  good  or  bad  results.


INDEX.


INDEX,


A

Aristotle,  his  view  of  slavery,  80.
Asceticism,  to  be  shunned,  60  f.

B.

Benevolence,  29 ;  excites  unconditioned  approbation,  32  f. ;  the  focal  idea,
53 ;  Christian  estimate  of,  590

C.

Causation,  law  of,  39  f.,  45 ;  infinite  regressus  in,  43 ;  new  beginnings  in,  44.

Character,  individual,  31.

Children,  relation  of  parents  to,  73  f.,  75.

Christianity,  estimate  of  individual  character,  59  f.

Conduct,  subject  of,  10;  distinguished  from  action,  23  f.;  never  blind,  24;

always  free,  24  f. ;  moral  qualities  of,  25  f. ;  ethical  forms  of,  28  f.
Conscience,  function  of,  10,  22 ;  condemns  egoism,  20.
Conscientiousness,  28.
Consistency,  demanded  in  conduct,  30.

Contracts,  meaning  of,  88;  rights  of,  88  f.; obligation  of,  89 f.;  limits
of,  90  f.

D.

Democracy,  conception  of,  122  f. ;  disadvantages  of,  123  f. ;  truth  of,  124  f.
Despotism,  conception  of,  128.

Determinism,  views  of,  35  f.,  45  f.;  compatibility  of,  with  freedom,  45 f.;

and  psychical  mechanism,  47.
Divorce,  relation  of  society  toward,  72  f.
Dualism,  unallowable,  45  f.
Duties,  of  the  individual,  65 ;  social,  77  f.


1 54


INDEX.


E.

Egoism,  condemned  by  conscience,  20 ;  of  ancient  culture,  59.

Ethics,  relations  of,  to  practical  philosophy,  2;  sources  of,  3f. ;  Kant's

view  of,  13  f. ;  Herbart's  view  of,  14  f.
Eudsemonism,  ethics  of,  11  f.

F.

Fanaticism,  nature  of,  28.
Feelings,  the  ethical,  16  f.

Freedom,  necessary  to  conduct,  24  f. ;  of  will,  35  f.,  81 ;  relation  to  necessity,
38;  to  the  law  of  causation,  39 f.;  includes  determinism,  45 f.;  and
psychical  mechanism,  47  ;  right  of,  78  f. ;  significance  of,  81.

G.

Government,  forms  of,  122  f.,  125  f.

H.

Herbart,  his  view  of  the  ethical  axioms,  14  f. ;  and  of  conduct,  16  f. ;  of

justice,  29 ;  of  perfectness,  32 ;  of  moral  action,  37  f.
Holiness,  31.

I.

Ideals,  the  ethical,  23  f.,  53.

Individual,  the  duties  of,  58  f.,  62;  relations  of,  to  society,  105  f.,  109.

j-

Justice,  Herbart's  view  of,  29 ;  care  of,  by  the  state,  129,  132 ;  science  of,

130;  valid  per  se,  131;  courts  of,  131.
Jus  Talionis,  injustice  of,  103.

K.

Kant,  rigoristic  views  of,  13  f. ;  formula  for  conduct,  13,  27 ;  view  of  ^free-
dom, 39 ;  of  marriage,  68  f.

L.

Labor,  division  of,  63 ;  107  f.

Laws,  in  a  Democracy,  123  f.;  the  making  of,  144  f.,  146;  codification
of,  146.

Liberty,  right  to  restrict,  103  f.

Life,  the  ascetic,  60  ;  the  reflective,  60  f. ;  the  active,  62  f.


INDEX.


1.55


M.

Magistracy,  conception  of,  122.
Man,  as  an  end  to  himself,  68.

Marriage,  natural  basis  of,  67  f. ;  example  of  animals,  67  f. ;  ideal  of,  68 ;  as
a  contract,  69 ;  partners  in,  69  f. ;  recognized  by  society,  70  f. ;  between
relatives,  71  f.

Monarch,  prerogatives  of,  127  f.

Monarchy,  nature  of,  125  f.

Motives,  comparison  of,  40 f.;  preponderance  of,  41^,47;  relation  of,  to
will,  47.

N.

Nature,  following  of,  as  ethical,  55  f.,  67  f. ;  state  of,  a  dream,  108.

P.

Parties,  origin  of,  132  f. ;  distinguished  from  factions,  134 ;  tactics  of,  134  f. ;
reasons  for,  136  f.

Person,  the  individual,  58;  difference  in  ancient  and  Christian  culture,

58  f. ;  freedom  necessary  to,  79.
Personality,  necessary  to  conduct,  30.

Pleasure,  principle  of  Eudsemonism,  11  f.,  21  f. ;  relation  of,  to  ethical  prin-
ciples, 18,  33  f. ;  never  absolute,  19  f.

Practical  Philosophy,  problems  of,  1  f.,  56  f. ;  scope  of,  2 ;  as  a  science,
15  f. ;  method  of,  54  f.

Property,  rights  of,  81  f. ;  inheritance  of,  83  f.

Punishment,  right  of,  96  f.,  99,  104;  nature  of,  97,  99;  origin  of,  99;  object
of,  100  f. ;  kinds  of,  103  f. ;  of  death,  104.

R.

Representation,  conception  of,  137,  139 f.;  houses  of,  137 f. ;  minorities  in,

140  f. ;  corporate,  140  f. ;  defeat  of,  143  f.
Resignation,  27.

Retribution,  demanded  by  conscience,  29  f.
Revolution,  the  right  of,  150.

Rights,  not  possessed  toward  nature,  63  f. ;  natural,  64  f. ;  origin  of  the  idea
of,  76  f.;  of  property,  81  f.;  of  intercourse  in  truth,  86  f.;  of  contracts,
88 f.;  of  punishment,  96 f.;  limitations  of,  inf.;  science  of,  130;  of
sovereignty,  147  f. ;  of  revolution,  150.

Rigorism,  of  Kant,  13  f.

Rome,  laws  of,  130  f.,  148.


i56


INDEX.


S.

Sensibility,  necessary  to  conduct,  25  f. ;  particulars  of,  26.

Slavery,  violates  human  rights,  80 ;  Aristotle's  view  of,  80  f. ;  the  modern,  81.

Socialism,  nature  of,  113;  plans  of,  113 f.;  practice  of,  16;  dangers  of,

116  f. ;  fallacy  of,  118  f.
Society,  necessary  to  rights,  64  f. ;  relation  of,  to  marriage,  70  f. ;  to  freedom

of  the  individual,  79,  95  f.,  105;  conception  of,  92  f.,  94,  121;  right  of,

to  punish,  99  f.,  103  f. ;  tasks  of,  106  f.,  no  f.
State,  authority  of,  119,  126;  conception  of,  120 f.;  as  related  to  society,

122;  false  analogies  for,  125;  parties  in,  132;  constitution  of,  134;

officers  of,  148.
Statistics,  relation  of,  to  question  of  freedom,  40  f.
Suicide,  morals  of,  65  f.

T.

Trades  Unions,  no  f.,  116  f.;  advantages  of,  no;  abuses  of,  nof.
Truth,  duty  of  uttering,  85  f. ;  right  to  demand,  85  f. ;  how  far  inviolable,
86  f. ;  educator's  use  of,  87.

V.

Veto,  government  right  of,  148.

W.

Will,  freedom  of,  35  f.,  40  f. ;  statistics  of,  40  f. ;  cannot  be  blind,  46 ;  weak-
ness of,  blameworthy,  48  f. ;  implies  effective  intensity,  49  f. ;  relation  to
right  of  property,  82  f.


ADVERTISEMENTS.


PHILOSOPHY.


Empirical  Psychology ;

or,  The  Human  Mind  as  Given  in  Consciousness.

By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.  Revised  with  the  co-operation  ol
Julius  H.  Seelye,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  President  of  Amherst  College.  12mo.
300  pages.  Mailing  Price,  $1.25;  Introduction,  $1.12;  Allowance,  40
cents.

rfIHE  publishers  believe  that  this  book  will  be  found  to  be  re-
markably comprehensive,  and  at  the  same  time  compact  and
clear. It  gives  a  complete  outline  of  the  science,  concisely  pre-
sented, and  in  precise  and  plain  terms.

It  has  proved  of  special  value  to  teachers,  as  is  evidenced  by  its
recent  adoption  for  several  Reading  Circles.


John  Bascom,  Pres.  of  University
of  Wisconsin,  Madison :  It  is  an  ex-
cellent book.  It  has  done  much  good
service,  and,  as  revised  by  President
Seelye,  is  prepared  to  do  much  more.
(Feb.  3,  1882.)

I.  W.  Andrews,  Prof,  of  Intellec-


tual Philosophy,  Marietta  College,
0. :  This  new  edition  may  be  confi-
dently recommended  as  presenting  a
delineation  of  the  mental  faculties  so
clear  and  accurate  that  the  careful
student  will  hardly  fail  to  recognize
its  truth  in  his  own  experience.
(April  6,  1882.)


HickoWs  Moral  Science.

By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.  Revised  with  the  co-operation  of
Julius  H.  Seelye,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  President  of  Amherst  College.  12mo.
Cloth.  288  pages.  Mailing  Price,  $1.25;  Introduction,  $1.12;  Allowance,
40  cents.

A  S  revised  by  Dr.  Seelye,  it  is  believed  that  this  work  will  be
found  unsurpassed  in  systematic  rigor  and  scientific  precision,
and  at  the  same  time  remarkably  clear  and  simple  in  style.


G.  P.  Fisher,  Prof,  of  Church  His-
tory, Yale  College :  The  style  is  so
perspicuous,  and  at  the  same  time  so
concise,  that  the  work  is  eminently


adapted  to  serve  as  a  text-book  in
colleges  and  higher  schools.  In  mat-
ter and  manner  it  is  a  capital  book,
and  I  wish  it  God  speed.


PHILOSOPHY.


127


Lotze's  Philosophical  Outlines.


Dictated  Portions  of  the  Latest  Lectures  (at  Göttingen  and  Berlin)  of
Hermann  Lotze.  Translated  and  edited  by  George  T.  Ladd,  Pro-
fessor of  Philosophy  in  Yale  College.  12mo.  Cloth.  About  180  pages
in  each  volume. Mailing  Price  per  volume,  $1.00;  Introduction  Price,


rpHE  German  from  which  the  translations  are  made  consists  of
the  dictated  portions  of  his  latest  lectures  (at  Göttingen,  and
for  a  few  months  at  Berlin)  as  formulated  by  Lotze  himself,
recorded  in  the  notes  of  his  hearers,  and  subjected  to  the  most
competent  and  thorough  revision  of  Professor  Rehnisch  of  Göt-
tingen. The  Outlines  give,  therefore,  a  mature  and  trustworthy
statement,  in  language  selected  by  this  teacher  of  philosophy  him-
self, of  what  may  be  considered  as  his  final  opinions  upon  a
wide  range  of  subjects.  They  have  met  with  no  little  favor  in
Germany.

These  translations  have  been  undertaken  with  the  kind  permis*
sion  of  the  German  publisher,  Herr  S.  Hirzel,  of  Leipsic.

Outlines  of  Metaphysic.

rpHIS  contains  the  scientific  treatment  of  those  assumptions
which  enter  into  all  our  cognition  of  Reality.  It  consists  of
three  parts,  —  Ontology,  Cosmology,  Phenomenology.  The  first
part  contains  chapters  on  the  Conception  of  Being,  the  Content  of
the  Existent,  Reality,  Change,  and  Causation ;  the  second  treats
of  Space,  Time,  Motion,  Matter,  and  the  Coherency  of  Natural
Events  ;  the  third,  of  the  Subjectivity  and  Objectivity  of  Cog-
nition. The  Metaphysic  of  Lotze  gives  the  key  to  his  entire
philosophical  system.

Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Religion.

T  OTZE  here  seeks  "  to  ascertain  how  much  of  the  Content  of


Religion  may  be  discovered,  proved,  or  at  least  confirmed,
agreeably  to  reason."  He  discusses  the  Proof  for  the  Existence  of
God,  the  Attributes  and  Personality  of  the  Absolute,  the  Concep-
tions of  the  Creation,  the  Preservation,  and  the  Government,  of  the
World,  and  of  the  World-time.  The  book  closes  with  brief  discus
sions  of  Religion  and  Morality,  and  Dogmas  and  Confessions.


80  cents.


128


PHILOSOPHY.


Outlines  of  Practical  Philosophy.

rpHIS  contains  a  discussion  of  Ethical  Principles,  Moral  [deals,
and  the  Freedom  of  the  Will,  and  then  an  application  of  the
theory  to  the  Individual,  to  Marriage,  to  Society,  and  to  the  State.
Many  interesting  remarks  on  Divorce,  Socialism,  llepresentative
Government,  etc.,  abound  throughout  the  volume.  Its  style  is
more  popular  than  that  of  the  other  works  of  Lotze,  and  it  will
doubtless  be  widely  read.

Outlines  of  Psychology.

rpHE  Outlines  of  Psychology  treats  of  Simple  Sensations,  the
Course  of  Representative  Ideas,  of  Attention  and  Inference,
of  Intuitions,  of  Objects  as  in  Space,  of  the  Apprehension  of  the
External  World  by  the  Senses,  of  Errors  of  the  Senses,  of  Feelings,
and  of  Bodily  Motions.  Its  second  part  is  "  theoretical,"  and  dis-
cusses the  nature,  position,  and  changeable  states  of  the  Soul,  its
relations  to  time,  and  the  reciprocal  action  of  Soul  and  Body.
It  closes  with  a  chapter  on  the  "Kingdom  of  Souls."  Lotze  is
peculiarly  rich  and  suggestive  in  the  discussion  of  Psychology.

Outlines  of  Esthetics.

rpHE  Outlines  of  ^Esthetics  treats  of  the  theory  of  the  Beautiful


and  of  Phantasy,  and  of  the  Realization  and  Different  Species
of  the  Beautiful.  Then  follow  brief  chapters  on  Music,  Architec-
ture, Plastic  Art,  Painting,  and  Poetry.  This,  like  the  other  vol-
umes, has  a  full  index.

Outlines  of  Logic.

rpHIS  discusses  both  pure  and  applied  Logic.  The  Logic  is
followed  by  a  brief  treatise  on  the  Encyclopaedia  of  Phi-
losophy, in  which  are  set  forth  the  definition  and  method  of
Theoretical  Philosophy,  of  Practical  Philosophy,  and  of  the  Phi-
losophy of  Religion.  This  volume  is  about  one-fifth  larger  than
the  others,  and  makes  an  admirable  brief  text-book  in  Logic.


Mind,  London,  Eng. :  No  words
are  needed  to  commend  such  an  en-
terprise, now  that  Lotze's  importance


as  a  thinker  is  so  well  understood.
The  translation  is  careful  and  pains-
taking.


PHILOSOPHY.  129

A  Brief  History  of  Greek  Philosophy.

By  B.  C.  Burt,  M.A.,  formerly  Fellow  and  Fellow  by  Courtesy  in  the
Johns  Hopkins  University.  12mo.  Cloth,  xiv  +  296  pages.  Mailing
Price,  $1.25  ;  for  Introduction,  $1.12.

rjpmS  work  attempts  to  give  a  concise  but  comprehensive  account
of  Greek  Philosophy  on  its  native  soil  and  in  Rome.  It  is
critical  and  interpretative,  as  well  as  purely  historical,  its  para-
graphs of  criticism  and  interpretation,  however,  being,  as  a  rule,
distinct  from  those  devoted  to  biography  and  exposition.  The
wants  of  the  reader  or  student  who  desires  to  comprehend,  rather
than  merely  to  inform  himself,  have  particularly  been  in  the  mind
of  the  author,  whose  aim  has  been  to  let  the  subject  unfold  itself
as  far  as  possible.  The  volume  contains  a  full  topical  table  of  con-
tents, a  brief  bibliography  of  the  subject  it  treats,  and  numerous
foot-notes  embracing  references  to  original  authorities  and  assist-
ing the  student  towards  a  real  contact  with  the  Greek  thinkers
themselves.

Wisconsin  Journal  of  Education :

It  fills,  and  we  believe  it  fills  admi-
rably, a  want  which  has  long  been
felt,  —  of  a  brief,  clear,  connected
and  suggestive  guide  to  the  history
of  Greek  philosophy.

The  Philosophical  System  of  Antonio-Rosmini-

Serbati.

Translated,  with  a  Sketch  of  the  Author's  Life,  Bibliography,  Introduc-
tion, and  Notes.  By  Thomas  Davidson,  M.A.  8vo.  Cloth,  cvii  +  396
pages. Mailing  Price,  $2.75.

Hickok's  Philosophical  Works.

By  Laurens  P.  Hickok,  D.D.,  LL.D.
Rational  Psychology.

543  pages. 8vo. Mailing  Price,  $1.95 ;  Introduction,  $1.80.

Creator  and  Creation.

360  pages.  8vo.  Mailing  Price,  $1.75  ;  Introduction,  $1.60.
The  Logic  of  Reason,  Universal  and  Eternal.

192  pages.  8vo.  Mailing  Price,  $1.60  ;  Introduction,  $1.44.
Humanity  Immortal.

362  pages. 8vo. Mailing  Price,  $1.75  ;  Introduction,  $1.60.


The  Independent,  Nevj  York  :  We
consider  it  a  work  highly  creditable
to  American  scholarship.


BOOKS  IN  HIGHER  ENGLISH.


Intro.  Price

Alexander: Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Browning . . .  $1.00

Allen :  Reader's  Guide  to  English  History  25

Arnold :  English  Literature  1.50

Bancroft : A  Method  of  English  Composition  60

Browne :  Shakspere's  Versification  25

Cook :  Sidney's  Defense  of  Poesy

Shelley's  Defense  of  Poesy

Fulton  &  Trueblood :  Choice  Readings  1.50

Chart  Illustrating  Principles  of  Vocal  Expression .  2.00
Garnett :  English  Prose  from  Elizabeth  to  Victoria  .

Genung :  Handbook  of  Rhetorical  Analysis  1.12

Practical  Elements  of  Rhetoric  1.25

Gilmore :  Outlines  of  the  Art  of  Expression  60

Ginn:  Scott's  Lady  of  the  Lake . . Bds.,  .35;  Cloth,  .50

Scott's  Tales  of  a  Grandfather . Bds.,  .40 ;  Cloth,  .50
Selections  from  Ruskin  . . . Bds.,  .30 ;  Cloth,  .40
Goldsmith : Vicar  of  Wakefield  .... Bds.,  .30 ;  Cloth,  .50
Grote  &  Segur :  The  Two  Great  Retreats  of  History,  Bds.,  .40 ;  Cloth,  .50

Gummere : Handbook  of  Poetics  1.00

Hudson:  Harvard  Shakespeare :  —20  Vol. Edition.  Cloth, retail,  25.00

"  "  10  Vol.  Edition.  Cloth,  retail,  20.00

New  School  Shakespeare.  Each  Play,  Pa.  .30 ;  cloth,  .45
Essays  on  Education,  English  Studies,  etc.  .  .  .25
Text-Book  of  Poetry  and  of  Prose.  Each  .  .  .  1.25
Pamphlet  Selections,  Prose  and  Poetry. Each  . .  .15

Classical  English  Reader  1.00

Johnson :  Rasselas  Bds.,  .30 ;  Cloth,  .40

Lamb :  Adventures  of  Ulysses . . .  Bds.,  .25 ;  Cloth,  .35

Tales  from  Shakespeare  . . .  Bds.,  .40 ;  Cloth,  .50

Lockwood : Lessons  in  English  1.12

Bryant's  Thanatopsis  and  Other  Favorite  Poems .  .10

Minto :  Characteristics  of  English  Poets  1.50

Manual  of  English  Prose  Literature ....  1.50

Montgomery : Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress

Heroic  Ballads .... Bds.,  .40;  Cloth,  .50

Rolfe :  Craik's  English  of  Shakespeare  90

Scott :  Guy  Mannering,  Ivanhoe,  and  Rob  Roy.

Each  Bds.,  .60;  Cloth,  .75

Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.  .  .  Bds.,  .30 ;  Cloth,  .40
Quentin  Durward ....  Bds.,  .40 ;  Cloth,  .50

Talisman  Bds.,  .50;  Cloth,  .60

Sprague : Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  and  Lycidas  45

Irving's  Sketch-Book  (Selections) . Bds.,  .25 ;  Cloth,  .35

Thayer:  The  Best  Elizabethan  Plays 1.25

Thorn :  Shakespeare  and  Chaucer  Examinations . . .  1.00

AND  OTHER  VALUABLE  WORKS.


GINN  &  COMPANY,  Publishers,

Boston,  New  York,  and  Chicago.


MODERN  LANGUAGES,  Etc.


MODERN  LANGUAGES.

_^  „ _  _  .  ,  INTRO.  PRICE.

Becker  &  Mora:  Spanish  Idioms $1.80

Collar : Eysenbach's  German  Lessons 1^20

English  into  German ^25

Cook: Table  of  German  Prefixes  and  Suffixes /)5

Doriot :  Illustrated  Beginners'  Book  in  French  (Comp.),  $0.80;  Pt.II.  .50

Illustrated  Beginners'  Book  in  German  80

Knapp:  Modern  French  Readings  80

Modern  Spanish  Grammar 1.50

Spanish  Readings 1.50

Lernly  :  New  System  of  Written  Spanish  Accentuation  10

Smith: Gramätica  Practica  de  la  Lengua  Castellana .60

Spiers: French-English  General  Dictionary 4.50

English-French  General  Dictionary 4.50

Stein : German  Exercises .40

Sumichrast :  Les  Trois  Mousquetaires  70

Van  Daell:  Memoires  de  Saint-Simon  64

PHILOSOPHICAL  SCIENCE.

Burt : Brief  History  of  Greek  Philosophy 1.12

Davidson:  Rosmini's  Philosophical  System 2.50

Hickok  :  Rational  Psychology,  $  1.80;  Creator  and  Creation 1.60

Humanity  Immortal,  $1.60;  Logic  of  Reason 1.44

Ladd  : Lotze's  Philosophical  Works.

Metaphysic;  Philosophy  of  Religion;  Practical  Phil-
osophy; Psychology;  ^Esthetics;  Logic  each  .80

Seelye  :  Hickok's  Mental  Science  (Empirical  Psychology) 1.12

Hickok's  Moral  Science 1.12

POLITICAL  SCIENCE.

Burgess :  Political  Science  and  Comparative  Constitutional  Law,

2  vols  (retail)  5.00

Calkins  :  Sharing  the  Profits  25

Clark: Philosophy  of  Wealth 1.00

Clark  &  Giddings  :  The  Modern  Distributive  Process  (retail)  .75

Macy : Our  Government  (revised  edition)  70

Political  Science  Quarterly  (per  vol.)  3.00

Rupert :  Guide  to  the  Study  of  the  History  and  Constitution  of  the

United  States  70

Seligman :  Railway  Tariffs  and  the  Interstate  Law  (retail)  .75

SANSKRIT.

Arrowsmith :  Kaegi's  Rigveda  {translation) 1.50

El  well :  Nine  Jatakas  (Pali)  ,  • . .  .60

Geldner :  Avesta 4.50

Jackson :  A  Hymn  of  Zoroaster  70

Lanman :  Sanskrit  Reader,  $1.80;  Text  only,  $0.75;  Notes  to  Reader  .75

Perry: Sanskrit  Primer 1-50

Whitney :  Sanskrit  Grammar  (revised  edition} 3.00

Supplement  to  Sanskrit  Grammar 1.80

Copies  sent  to  Teachers  for  Examination,  with  a  view  to  Introduction,
on  receipt  of  Introduction  Price.


GINN  &  COMPANY,  Publishers,

Boston,  New  York,  and  Chicago.


!

09
O

iH

•H

H

ica

I

-p
o

<D

fcri

u

Ä

o

O

CO

<D

•H

rH

oT

tS3

3

-P


CO

c


rH  .H


LO

00


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket

Under  Pat.  "Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
